LANCEL. ANDRE EPISCOPus ELYENSIS E^ REVERENDISSIMUS ET DOCTISS: DOMIN^
These LINEAMENTS of Art, have well set forth
Some outward features (though no inward worth)
But to these LINES his WRITINGS added, cann
Make up the fair resemblance of a MAN
For as the BODY'S form is figurd here
So there the beautyes of his SOUL appear;
WHICH I had praised; but that in THIS place
To praise THEM, were to praise Him to his FACE.
Ge: Wi:


THE MORAL LAW EXPOVNDED, 1. Largely, 2. Learnedly, 3. Orthodoxly.


THAT IS, The long-expected, and much-desired Work of Bishop ANDREWS, upon
THE TEN COMMANDMENTS: Being his Lectures many years since in Pembroch-Hall
Chapel, in Cambridge, which have ever since passed from hand to hand in
Manuscripts, and been accounted one of the greatest Treasures of private
Libraries, but never before this, published in Print.

Whereunto is annexed nineteen Sermons of His, upon Prayer in General, and
upon the Lords Prayer, in Particular.

Also seven Sermons upon our Saviors Tentations, in the WILDERNESS.

Both which Two latter Treatises, though before Printed, yet being much worn
out of Press, were thought fit for diverse reasons to be added to this Work.

LONDON, Printed for Michael Spark, Robert Milbourne, Richard Cotes, and
Andrew Crook. 1642.

TO THE HIGH COURT OF PARLIAMENT, BOTH LORDS AND COMMONS: More particularly to
the Worthy Speakers of both Houses: The Right Honorable Edward, Lord
Littleton, Lord Keeper of the Great-Seale of England* and the Right Worshipful
William Lenthall, Esquire.
My Lords, and Gentlemen,
TO ask whether Light be pleasant, is a blind man's question; and whether
knowledge be sweet, is an ignorant man's question; and whether Divine Light and
knowledge (in regard of which all other is but as a Glow-worme of the Brain)
be most pleasant, and most sweet, is a profane man's question.

This Book challenges an eminent Dedication of it self both ex congruo and
condigno in diverse regards. For first, the origirall Theme, which bears the
burden of the whole Discourse, and Tractate is the ten Commandments of
Almighty God, which are the ten Predicaments of all those virtues and vices,
which render men either acceptable or odious to their Maker; the Scripture of
Scripture, as being prerogatived above the whole Bible, in this respect, that
in issuing them forth to the sons of men, God was pleased to become his own
Amanuensis; The whole Scripture is 2 Timothy 3.16.
inspired by God, but only 1. Pet. 1.21.
holy men of God spoke and wrote them as they were inspired by the Holy Ghost,
but here God both indicted and spoke and wrote, not only the mind and mouth,
but the Exodus 8.19.
Finger of God was here.

Secondly, the Author of this Book is enough praised in naming of him, it was
Dr. Andrews, the late Bishop of Winchester, a man both at home and abroad of
great fame, for his Clerk, ship, and of a good fame for his regular and strict
life: of whom the less is said, the more is said, for that to fetch luster to
his name from a mean style or tongue, is to go Northward for heat.

Thirdly, the work it self is such, as in those days when it was Preached,
he was scarce reputed a pretender to learning and piety then in Cambridge, who
made not himself a disciple of Mr. Andrews by diligent resorting to his
Lectures: nor he a pretender to the study of Divinity, who did not transcribe
his notes, and ever since they have in many hundreds of Copies passed from hand
to hand, and have been esteemed a very Library to young Divines, and an Oracle
to consult at, to Laureat and grave Divines: in all which several regards,
they are more fit to sweeten, and even to sanctify the Press, from the
pollutions and prophanations of it, which of late it has been defiled
withal, by those many lying and scandalous pamphlets, which have been Printed
to the dishonor of God, the shame of ours, and just distaste of other Nations,
to the prejudice of truth and charity, and to the particular wrong of that
excellent Art of Printing, which being rightly used is of such avail to all
Christian both Churches and Commonwealths.

And that the publisher hereof makes such a bold and ambitious access unto
your Honors, as to Nuncupate and present it to so high and eminent persons,
this is to be said, that as the work in it self is so worthy, as it may
justly be thought to merit the wing and patronage of the greatest Christian
Prince in the world, so can it now no where be laid so properly as at the feet
of the Parliament.

First, because hereby the Law of God, which is both the best rule of making
humane Laws, and the best enforcement to yield obedience unto them being made,
is in you virtually, and by way of representation, expounded to the whole
Nation.

Nextly, not only Kings, but, according to their Latitude, all Magistrates and
Civil powers ordained of God (whereof yours is the chief) are Custodes
utriusque tabulae. And also, because here are two strong and sinewy Tractates,
the one about Idolatry in handling the second Commandment: and the other about
observation of the Sabbath, under the fourth; which will both notably redargue
the late heterodox insinuations of both doctrine and practice in some, anent
those things, and concur with you in propugning the Orthodox tenets of both
those points.

Lastly, because Preachers are public Orators, and like winds upon seas,
have great influence upon the people, therefore here they have presidented
before them, that which in due time will fall under your Considerations to call
them unto, to wit, the right Art of Sermoning and salvificall Preaching, which
consists not in State invectives, or popular declamations, to sway multitudes
and tumults, either one way or other, (wherein they Preach themselves, and not
Christ) but in revealing the whole Counsel of God, and showing their auditors
how to decline the unfortunate Jslands of sin and hell, and to thrust into the
fair havens of grace and glory. God Almighty of his great mercy so bless your
Counsels, as that truth may empire over error in the Church: Peace triumph
over division in the Commonwealth: Plenty over famine in the Country: Riches
over poverty in the City: Learning over barbarism in the Universities, etc. To
which end this Work is most humbly Dedicated to your Honors, both for
protection and direction, by

Your Honors most humble, and most faithful Servant, in the things of God,
and of Christ, JOHN JACKSON.

A PREFACE Concerning Catechism.
CLemens Alexandrinus, writing of instruction or Catechizing, in his three
Books, entitled his Paedagogus, has his (...), an exhortatory Introduction.
Cyrill, Bishop of Jerusalem, before his twenty four Catechismes, has another
Book, which makes up the twenty five, called of him (...), or (...); that is,
an entrance to the Catechism. Both ground themselves upon the example of
David: who being to comprise Religion into a short sum, makes his entrance,
(...), Psalm 34.11. Come children, hearken unto me, I will teach you the fear
of the Lord. Then for introduction, as they, Three things observable in
Catechism:
so we may gather these three points:

1. That it is a thing not only pleasing the Lord, but also commanded by him,
that children be taught in the fear of God. 2. The manner how they should be
taught; i. by measure, in this word (...). The Chatechumeni were these who were
to be Catechized. 3. What the Catechumeni are to perform, that this
instruction may be profitable unto them, (...), Come ye, hearken unto me.
For the first, There is a sort, both among the Heathen, 1. Catechizing
commanded, etc.
as also in the Scripture mentioned; who think that religion is not to come so
low, as to be taught to children: but that they be brought up in all boldness,
and liberty, that we may see what is in them: And after when they come to riper
years, to be instructed in religion. The Heathen they tell us of that, The
heathen opinion concerning Catechizing.
which is in the beginning of the Philosophers morals; (...), a young man is
not a fit hearer of the morals. As also the counsel of the Orator in his
defense for Caelius, that it is a point of policy and wisdom, to let youth
have his course, till all were sodden; quoad deferbuerit: until it cease from
seething. But whatsoever they say, this exercise of catechizing was used among
the Gentiles also. The practice of the Heathen in Catechizing.
We read in Porphyrius, his question upon Homer is, (...). Since we were boys,
we knew this, by means of our catechizing. And Solons verses, called (...)
sacred remembrancings, in Aeschines his oration, show that it was usual among
the Athenians for youth to be instructed. As also the history of the Heathen
declare, that their children were taught. For it was a custom among them not
to poll their children, before they were instructed (...), in the Holy
remembrancings, and then were they suffered to poll themselves, and burn their
hair, and dedicate it to Apollo: signifying thereby, that they were able to
carry Tapers into his Temple: and then were they called (...), Taperbearers.
One also says, (...), it behooves those that are to be catechized to learn
good things; but the best manner of confuting, is to confute them by
themselves. Arist. An answer to the former opinions.
as his interpretors say, meant potius de facto, quam de eo quod fieri debet.
Else were he to be called to his Polit. 7. ub 17. cap. (...), fit it is, that
that age should be restrained both from hearing and seeing of things unlawful.
And again, (...), for all things whereof they are capable, it is better even
from their childhood, to accustom them thereunto but by little and little. And
we may appeal from the Orator, pleading at the Bar, for a lewd young man, to
his books, De divinatione, and de officiis. Ea aetas maxim arcenda est a
voluptatibus, exercend^que laboribus; that age especially is to be kept in from
pleasures, and to be exercised in labors. Thus much for reason incorrupt.

Scripture example against Catechism.
For ^^vinity and Scriptures, Exodus 10.11. Pharao being requested, that the
Israelites with their children, might go into the Wilderness, makes a skoffe
of it, that their children should go worship, as if religion pertayned not to
them, Matthew. 19.13. When children were brought unto Christ, to be blessed of
him, his Disciples forbad, and rebuked them that brought them. But for the
first, Moses opposes himself against Pharaoh, and answers, that howsoever
it was not the manner of the Gods of Egypt, An answer to the example.
yet it was expedient that their children should go with them, for that they
honored the living God. For the second, Christ opposed himself against his
Disciples, granting children safe conduct unto him, and pronouncing a curse
against them that kept them from him. This is manifest both in the Law, This
appears in the Law.
and in the Gospel. In the Law Psa 119.9. The Lord in giving forth his Laws,
had an eye, not only to the elder sort, but to the younger; and therefore as
the Jews note, there is thrice made mention of children in the Law; 1. And
visit the sins of the fathers upon the children, etc. But if that be denied,
yet in the fourth Commandment it is manifest, Thou and thy son, and thy
daughter. Again, Exodus 12.26. When the children would be too busy and curious
in asking their parents, what means the slaying of the Lambs? The Lord is so
far from accusing them for this curiosity, that he lays a charge on their
parents to declare it them. Exodus 12.26. When your children ask you, what
service is this you keep? 27. Then ye shall say, Its the sacrifice of the
Lords passover, when he passed over the houses of the children of Israel in
Egypt, and smote the Egypti^ns and preserved our houses. And whereas many hold
it is not material what children do, and that they are not to be censured by
their doings; yet they are confuted by Solomon, Prove. 20.11. A child also is
known by his doings, whether his works be true and right. they shall be
judged by their steps. As the blessing of God is on them that give themselves
to wisdom, as in Psalm. 127. and 128. in that in the one, an house full of
such children is compared to a Quiver full of good arrows: and in the other to
Olive branches full of Olives; and elsewhere to plants. So are they not free,
though children, (if they commit wickedness) from the curse of God; as
appears by 2. Kin. 2.24. though children, that scoffed at Elisha, yet were
they devovred by the Shee-Beares. The Rabbinicall proverb in regard of death
is, that in Golgotha are skuls of all sizes, and Revel. 20.12. John says, that
he saw (...), the dead great and small, waiting for their judgment.

In the Gospel. Omnis Christi actio, nostra est instructio. Christ's actions
are our instructions. Non minus placet Deo Hosanna puerorum, quam Halleluiah
virorum. The childrens Hosanna please no less then the men's Halleluiah. Matthew.
2.16. Dedit praeceptum, qui exemplum probavit. Who has allowed example, has
given precept.
In (Christ) our Savior yet more extraordinary things: 1. That being a child of
twelve years, ut Luke 2.52. he grew in wisdom, i. the fear of God ( ut Job
28.28. And unto man he said, behold the fear of the Lord is wisdom, and to
depart from evil is understanding.) and knowledge both with God and man, i.
both divine and humane. 2. He allowed of Hosanna, that the children sang unto
him; insomuch that when the High Priests and Scribes spoke to him to rebuke
them for it; he alleged for them out of Psalm 8.2. out of the mouths of babes
and sucklings have thou ordained to set forth thy praise. 3. Matthew. 18.6.
(...). Christ's curse is on them that hinder little children to come unto him;
(though at that time it pleased him to bear with his Disciples, and to show
mercy to them; yet even after a curse is pronounced:) and in the same place,
Matthew. 18.14. when his Disciples forbad them to come to him, he says, It is
not the will of our Father which is in Heaven, that one of these little ones
should perish. Perish they must unless they come to him; and Christ's curse is
on all that seek to lay a stumblingblock before them. And they have a
stumblingblock laid before them; yet that shall be taken away by admonitions:
and if they will not hear, when they are forewarned, they shall perish: for we
may say that the Lord has purposed their destruction, as 1. Sam. 2.25.
Notwithstanding they obeyed not unto the voice of their father. because the
Lord would slay them: Speaking of the sons of Eli. 4. Christ being ready to
be taken up into Heaven, his charge to Peter, and so in him to all the
Apostles, and in them to all their successors, which was his last charge, as
Augustine notes, 1. Feed my Lambs.
pasce agnos nieos. 2. Pasce oves meas. 2. Feed my Sheep*
For the prospering of the Lords sheepfold depends upon the good feeding of
the Lambs. And thus you see that children are to be brought up in the fear of
the Lord.


The reason: Prove. 6.4. When a man has made a promise unto the Lord, he is not
to rest until he has performed it. For though the natural order be as Christ
bids, Matthew. 28.19. first teach, and then baptize, yet in singular mercy to
the children of the faithful he has granted this privilege, In primi^ annis
dantur nobis magistri, ut in nobis generent timorem Dei. In our first years
Tutors are given unto us, that they may beget in us the fear of the Lord.
Piut. Sumptio virilis tagae, non est (...), sed (...), The taking of the robe
of a man is not a casting away of the groundworke, but a change. 2. Pers.
first to be baptized, therefore though we begin never so soon, yet we do it
not in that order that it should be done. Of this Nazianzen says well, let us
not set that in no place, because the Lord has set it in the second place,
which should have been in the first.

2. And Augustine, he says, Quare adhibetur magister extrinsecus? nisi ut sit
magister intus? Wherefore is there given unto us an outward teacher, but that
there may be an inward teacher? But when we come to be men, we cannot have this
outward teacher: ergo, we are to endeavor as soon as may be, to establish the
inward teacher, that is, to direct us all our life long.

3. For as much as the light of nature does lead us thus far, that there is
an aptness in children to vice: ergo, it is requisite that we take the
advantage, and apply their aptness to goodness: for he that is able to say to
Elizeus, bald-pate, is able to say to Christ Hosanna.

(...), and I will instruct or catechize you: Arg. A nomine probat tenuiter,
declarat concinne, he proves it from the name barely, declares it properly:
English and Latin follows the Greek (...), catechizing, which seems to
come of the Hebrew word (...) which signifies repetere, acuere, to rehearse,
to sharpen: in which two is contained the office of the Catechist, and the
catechized. And as in the one, so in (...), there is included an iteration of a
sound, from whence our echo comes, for (...) is to sound the last syllable;
(...), to sound the whole speech after another. Clemens defines catechizing to
be (...), What Catechizing is.
an abridgement of Christian doctrine to be delivered to the youth. The
difference of catechizing from preaching, The differences betwixt catechizing
and preaching.
is in three things.

1. Preaching is the dilating of one member of Religion: catechizing is a
contraction of the whole. 2. Catechizing is to be delivered to the young and
ignorant: preaching to all. 3. Preaching exacteth no repetition; catechizing
requires repetition. Whether the Scriptures may be abbreviated? They may,
first from Christ's example. Abbreviating of Scriptures taught us of God. 2.
From Solomon.

Concerning that it is a sum, here is a doubt, whether such sums or
epitomes may be made? They may; For proof whereof, see Matthew. 22.37. where
Christ draws the whole Law into two Heads: and John 3.16. Christ catechizing
Nicodemus, contracteth the sum of the Gospel into one verse, God so loved
the world, that he gave his only, etc.

2. Likewise also Eccles. 12.13. Solomon compriseth all that he had said
before, in these two heads; First, fear God. Secondly, and keep his
Commandments; for this is the whole duty of man.


3. Practice of the Church. It has been the use of the Church in all ages,
that it be not only delivered to them, but also required of them again.
3. Hebr. 6.2. The whole sum of Religion is drawn into repentance from dead
works, and faith in Christ. This is also seen in other Sciences. Physicians
have their principles; 1. Aphorism, commonly delivered in parva art, in the
short or brief art. 2. Lawyers in their institutions, their maximae.
Philosophers, in their introductions, their (...), chief sentences. One
calls this sepes legis, the fence of the law; Clemens, (...), fundamentum,
vel basis, a foundation or pillar. The fruit of this. It is a limit to the
whole Scriptures. It teaches us how to range our studies into method and
order; 4. The same in other sciences. The fruit of catechizing.
to what head we are to refer all our readings: (...), thanks be unto the
blessed God, who has made these things that are necessary, short and easy to
be understood, and things not concise, not necessary, and difficult. Seeing
therefore things are drawn into such a narrow compass, they are (...),
without excuse, that will not frame themselves to the knowledge of God, being
so easy and compendious. In these places, Catechizing, a short Gospel.
2 Pet. 3.18. 1 Cor. 14.20. Ephesians. 14.13. We are to proceed continually. For as
there are places where every Lamb may wade over; so there are places also,
where Elephants may swim. For we shall never be free from Scrutamini
Scripturas, search the Scriptures. 2. For teaching them as they are now taught;
This is warranted us before the flood, Genes. 4.3.4. Cain and Abel sacrificing
must needs have learned of their Father this duty: and a good argument, that
the Scripture was yet (...), non (...); though some think that there can but
probable conjectures be made before the flood: ergo, they reason probably, that
say, that the worship of God could not have continued.

2. After the flood to Abraham's time there was no other way of propagating
Religion, then by the delivery of the parents to their children: though some
think that Sybils verses were nothing else but the sum of those doctrines
which the parents delivered to their children.

Vsque adeo placuit Deo catechesis Abrahae, ut ei revelata sit and legis and
Evangelii summa. So was God pleased with Abraham's catechizing, that the sum
both of Law and Gospel was revealed to him.
3. In Abraham, that the Scripture bears him witness, that he taught his
family in the ways of the Lord, Genesis 18.17.19. Shall I hide from my servant
Abraham that thing which I do? 19. For I know that he will command his family
and his household after him, that they keep the ways of the Lord, to do
righteousness and judgment; that the Lord might bring upon Abraham that which
he has spoken unto him. What he taught, it is evident by the sum of the Law
delivered unto him by God, Genesis 17.1. Ambula coram me, and esto integer, walk
before me, and be thou perfect. As by the sum also of the Gospel, Genesis
18.18. as also Genesis 22.18. And in thy seed shall all the Nations, etc. be
blessed; because thou have obeyed my voice.

The effect of Abraham's catechizing.
The fruit and effect of his catechizing: 1. In his son Isaac, Genesis 24.63. And
Isaac went out to pray in the fields toward the Evening. 2. In his servant. 1.
He begins with prayer before his business, Genesis 24.12. 2. He ends in
prayer and thanksgiving, for having good success in his business, Genesis 24.27.
3. His care and faithfulness in performing his Masters business, Verse. 33. in
that he would not eat before he had showed his message.
And thus it was before the Law was written.


4. In the Law, Deuteronomy. 6.7. So soon as the Law was given, God commanded that
they should teach it their children. In the same place, four duties mentioned;
writing, speaking, sharpening binding: of which, this often rehearseing or
sharpning is the chiefest. The special lecture of the Law. According to the
Rabbis.
And among the Rabbis, this is the special lecture of all the five Books of
the Law, Number. 15. Deuteronomy. 11.19. The practice of this commandment in David,
Psalm. 34.11. And as Solomon testifies, Prove. 4.4. that he was his fathers
son, tenderly beloved of his mother, and absolutely catechized of David his
father, 1. Chron. 28.9. and 19. David before all the people directs his son
Solomon. Solomon in his nine first Chapters of his Proverbes instructs his
son Rehoboam, 2. King. 12.2. Joash the young King, instructed by Iehoiadah.
After the captivity, because there are no monuments in the Scriptures, we must
rely to Josephus, and his writings. Yet in the third verse of the story of
Susanna, she is said to have been taught of her parents, in the Law of Moses.
Josephus testifies, that between Christ and Antiochus time, and the restoring
of the captivity, there was never under four hundred houses of catechisings;
of expounding the Law, called in the Talmud (...) places for the Law.

5. In the Book of antiquities of the Jews is recorded; that there was an act
made at Jerusalem, that when their children were thirteen years old, they
should be sent to catechizing; to which Paul seems to have some relation,
Romans 2.18. (...) being instructed out of the Law.

6. In the Christian Church, it is commanded, Ephesians. 6.4. that parents should not
only enter their children, (...), to bring them up in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord. 1 Cor. 14.19. (...), that I might teach others.

(...) The party to be catechized.
For the (...), or persons to be catechized, we have warrant in three notable
persons: 1. Theophilus, Luke 1.4. (...), wherein thou have been instructed. 2.
In Apollos, Acts 18.25. (...), this man was instructed in the way of the Lord,
and being fervent in the spirit. 3. Timothy, 2. Tim. 3.15. (...), etc. and that
from a child thou have known the holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee
wise unto salvation.
Galat. 6.6. mention made both of the Catechiste and Catechumenos, (...), Let
him that is taught in the word, communicate unto him that teaches in all good
things.

After the Apostles time, the first of any fame was the Evangelist Mark
Catechist at Alexandria; after him Palemus; after him Clemens Alexandrinus;
after him Origin; after him Cyrill of Jerusalem; then Gregory Nicen his
Catechism; Athanasii synopsis sanctae scripturae; his inventory of the sacred
Scriptures; Fulgentius. Augustines book de rudibus catechisandis, of
catechizing the ignorant; De gratia Dei, of the grace of God; four books de
symbolo, the Creed, De fide ad Petrum diaconum; of faith to Peter the Deacon.

In the Fathers time, it may appear by the sixth Canon of the Council of
Neocesarea; by the sixth and seventh Canon of the Council holden at Toledo in
Spain, 2. The Council of Braccharie. i. of the fourth of Toledo, 24. Canon.
As it appears in the council of Cullen, Synod of Osburge. 8. chapter 24. sect.
of the council of Trent, 6. chapter
No more mention of this till the time of Luther; which because it did greatly
further religion, the papists renewed, and commended the effect and fruit.

Egesippus testifies, that by the diligent instructing of the Church, there
was no known common wealth in any part of the world inhabited; but within 40.
years after Christ's passion received a great shaking off heathenish religion.
The same may be seen in the most wicked Julian the Apostat, the subtillest
enemy that ever the Church had; who the easier to root out religion,
suppressed all Christian schools, places of catechizing, etc. and if he had
not been as a cloud, that soon passes away; it had been to be feared, lest
within a short time he had over-shadowed all religion. Now when catechizing
was taken from the Church, it was all overspread with ignorance. The papists
acknowledge all the advantage the protestants have gotten of them, to come, for
that they began sooner to catechize. And it is to be feared, that if ever they
get advantage of us, it will be by reason of their exacter catechizing then
ours.

The Reasons of the continuing of catechizing.
1. The reasons why it has been thus continued; illud Christi, Reddes
rationem; that of Christ, Thou shall give an account: and every one will give
more ^ttention to that, which he knows he shall after give account for, (...).

2. Because we are all bound to give account of our faith, 1 Pet. 3.15. (...),
Ready always to give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the
hope that is in you. Oportet reddere (...), non stultam and vanam and inanem
opinionem; you must render a reason, not a foolish and vain opinion.
Therefore, it is best to render a reason before Agrippa our Countreyman, before
we come to Caesar. Forasmuch as Christ is become not only our King and Priest,
We must be Prophets. Our prophesying in four things.
but also our Prophet; we must become Prophets. Our prophesying must stand in
these four things:

1. In examining the doctrine that we hear, 1 John. 4. 2. In examining our
selves before the word and Sacraments, 1 Cor. 11.28. 2 Cor. 13.5. 3. In
admonishing our brethren; which we cannot do without catechizing, Romans 15.14.
and able to admonish one another. 4. Forasmuch as when we are children, we do
imbibere errores, drink in errors. We must learn to put them off, while we
are children, and have truth in their place.


that those hours which we bestow on this exercise, we b^stow them on a thing
most pleasing to God. Veniendum ergo alacriter, and cum venerimus, ita nos
gerere oportet, ut decet: scilicet ut arrectis auribus, intentis animis
auscultemus; We must therefore come cheerfully, and when we come, so behave our
selves as it becomes, namely we must hear with attentive ears, and earnest
hearts.

Paul asks the Romans some fruit of their former life.
Paul, Romans 6.21. (...); What fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are
now ashamed? and secondly, in the 22 verse, he sets the fruit down to be
holiness of life; (...), unto holiness. And the heathen wishes us in all our
actions to ask this question, Cui bono, to what good; admonishing us to
enquire what good comes to us by our exercises. Even that which Paul sets
down, 1 Timothy 4.8. (...). For bodily exercise profits little, but godliness
is profitable unto all things, having promise of the life that now is, and of
that which is to come. In this life, the fruit length of days; as Deuteronomy. 11.21.
In the life to come, John 17.3. (...), eternal life. Having seen the fruit,
we are to take care that those hours which we spend in this exercise, we
mispend not, least we be deprived thereof. For as in natural philosophy, it is
a great absurdity, ut quid frustrafiat; that any thing be in vain: and in
moral, ut sit (...), vain desire: In divine things much more; Ne frustra
audiamus. Let us not hear in vain.
1 Cor. 15.14. Paul uses no other argument to prove that Christ is risen, then
that, else his preaching and their hearing should be in vain. Gal. 2.2. (...).
I went up by revelation, and communicated unto them that Gospel which I preach
among the Gentiles, but severally to them which were of reputation. Ratio, the
reason, (...), lest by any means I should run, or had run in vain, 2 Cor.
6.1. as he desired the Corinthians that they received not the grace of God in
vain: so we are to look that we hear nothing in vain; least we be like
those ( Ier. 6.29.) that let the bellows burn, and the lead consume in the
fire, and the founder melt in vain. The word of God not in vain, in respect
of it self.
The word of the Lord is not in vain, either in respect 1. of it self; 2.
Preacher; 3. hearer.

In respect of it self, it cannot be in vain, Esa. 55.10, 11. As the rain
and snow comes from Heaven, and returns not again, but waters the Earth,
and makes it to bring forth and bud; that it may give seed to the sower, and
bread to him that eats. 11. So shall my word be that goes out of my mouth;
it shall not return to me void, but it shall accomplish that which I will; and
shall prosper in the thing whereto I send it: therefore by every hearing we are
either bettered, or hardened. 2. Neither in regard of the preacher.
And as the word in respect of it self cannot be in vain; so neither in
regard of the preacher, Esaias 49.4. I have labored in vain; I have spent my
strength for nothing: but my judgment and work is with the Lord. It is also
warranted, Luke 10.6. If the son of peace be there, your peace shall be upon
him; if not, it shall return to you again. More plain, 2 Cor. 2.15. (...),
we are unto God a sweet savor of Christ, in them that are saved, and in them
that perish. Great care then is to be taken how we behave our selves in hearing.

3. Pars. The third part.
Venite and auscultate; come and hearken. Its the manner of the holy Ghost, to
comprise many things in one word. In the first, required presence, to come; the
beginning of Christ's obedience, Psalm. 40.7, 8. Then said I, lo, I come, etc.
The action, Psalm. 122.1. I rejoiced when they said unto me, we will go into
the house of the Lord. Esaias 2.2, 3. And many people shall say, come let us go
up to the house of the Lord, etc. And the Hebrew proverb is, Blessed is he
that dusteth himself with the dust of the temple; alleging the Psalm. 84.10.
For a day in thy Courts is better then 1000 otherwhere.

The cause of our coming. Because it is to be feared, lest we concur with
those, Esaias 29.23. that came rather for fear of disfavour or mulct, then for
any godly respect: to such the Word shall be as a sealed book, that shall not
be opened. Therefore though all men's censure were removed, and it were free for
us to come, or not to come, yet are we so to be affected, seeing the Lord has
said venite, come, in respect of God. The Centurion, Matthew. 8.9. says, that
they which were under him, when he called them, came, etc. Therefore it is but
a small service which we do to the Lord in coming. The people made three
days journey after Christ into the wilderness, Act. 20. Paul prolonged his
speech till midnight; but our coming and attention is but small to these,
Psalm. 105.31. and 34. Grasshoppers, Flies, Lice, Caterpillars, come at the
commandment of the Lord; therefore if we come behind these unreasonable
creatures, we shall not need to have sentence pronounced against us; for our
own consciences will condemn us.

For coming. 2. Assiduity.
Because in the second place we see by Act. 17.21. an humor in the Athenians,
whiles Paul's doctrine was, they came gladly as Luke 23.8. Herod rejoiced when
Christ came to him, hoping to see some miracle wrought by him.

Augustine calls the three days journey of the people, monstrum diligentiae,
the wonder of diligence: therefore as they Acts 2.46. daily continued and
resorted together, etc. and Pro. 8.33. Waiting daily at my doors, and giving
attendance at the posts of my doors; so are we to do the like: and never to
intermit this exercise. Cyrill, Villa non est peccatum: sed si impediat, est
peccatum. The Farm is no sin, but if it hinder, that is a sin. Excuses
ordinary. Not to be admitted. 1. Business. 2. Play.
Math. 20.6. He reprehended them that stood in the market idle.
Non sunt istae institutiones, sicut homiliae; these institutions are not as
Homilies: for if we miss a Sermon, we may redeem it; if we once miss this
exercise, we cannot have a perfect building; Comparatur enim aedificio: si vel
una desit pars, totum sit imperfectum aedisicium necesse est; it is compared to
a building, in it if one part be wanting, then of force the whole Fabric is
imperfect. Therefore we are to follow the Apostles counsel, Ephesians. 5.16.
Redeeming the time, because the days are evil. Then are we not to excuse our
selves, whether it be by excuse or business, as Matthew. 22.5. for though the
things of themselves be lawful and good: yet where they come to hinder the
knowledge of God, they become sin. Or by play, Genesis 25.27. no other reason
given of Esaus idleness, then that he was a man of the field, and loved his
pastime and gaming. Or by Idleness, Exodus 32.16. The people sat them down to
eat and drink, and rose up to play. Or by a spirit of unlustinesse, as Esaias
29.10. The Lord has covered you with the spirit of slumber, and has shut up
your eyes. Ergo deponenda quaelibet impedimenta; therefore all impediments must
be laid aside. Yet if sickness, or any other impediment hinder us; then are we
to follow the counsel of the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.16. of redeeming the time.

3. Forasmuch as we see by Matthew. 22.11. that every commer is not welcome, 3.
Idleness.
but he that has his wedding garment and comes prepared as he ought, 4.
Spirit of unlustinesse. Videndum quomodo audiamus, Take heed how we hear.
Bona, been, good things, well.
2 Chronicles. 29.34. the Priests being too few (adhuc imperfecta existente
religione) to slay all the burnt-offerings, their brethren the Levites helped
them, till they had done the work, and other Priests were sanctified; for the
Levites were more upright in heart to sanctify themselves, then the Priests.
And seeing 1 Chronicles. 29.18. when David had taken as good order as he could, he
directed his prayer to God, that it would please him to prepare the hearts of
the people. And for the Gospel, Matthew. 3.3. the office of John was, to prepare
the way of the Lord, and to make straight his paths. Therefore we are to be
prepared as the Lord requires; which though it be so manifold, that the wise
men of Israel have set down 48. things, to be used: yet may they be reduced to
two. First, Wherein our preparation to hearing does consist. 1. The purpose of
the heart.
that which the light of nature has set down, (...), vel (...), the purpose
of our heart, to frame our lives accordingly, Act. 11.23. Barnabas his first
exhortation, (...), with purpose of heart to cleave unto the Lord. And this is
the first: whosoever will hear, must hear with this condition, that he
convert it to his life, and put it in practice; quia hic finis est, for this is
the end. Psalm. 119.9. A young man must rule his life according to the word; to
this end to cleanse his ways: Ergo, he that practices not that which he
hears, fails in this first point. Luke 12.1. Christ calls the doctrine of
the Pharisees there leaven; Sic and dici potest doctrina Christi, fermentum
Christi; so the doctrine of Christ may be called the leaven of Christ: whose
property is, as 1 Cor. 5.6. to turn the whole lump into the property of it
self. So if we hear the doctrine of Christ, it must be leaven to us. But the
leaven turns the taste of the lump into the taste of it self. To this
purpose, a most fearful place, Deuteronomy. 29.18. That there be not among you, man
or woman, nor family, nor Tribe, which should turn his heart this day from the
Lord our God, to serve the gods of these Nations, and that there be not any
root among you that brings forth gall or wormwood.

The second thing is prayer. ^. Prayer.
Because as David says, Psalm. 10.19. when the Lord has prepared ones heart,
then he bends his ears to his prayers. Again, the fear of God is wisdom:
wisdom cannot be got, except it be asked for of God; as James 1.5. If any one
lack wisdom, let him ask it of God, etc. Practice whereof in Solomon, 1
King. 3.9. praying to the Lord for wisdom; and the Lords approbation, that he
required wisdom, in the same place, verse. 10. Matthew. 21.13. Domus mea, domus
orationis vocabitur; My house shall be called the house of prayer. These short
prayers are those the fathers call ejaculationes. Of such is the Psalm. 119.
full; as verse. 18. Open thou mine eyes, that I may see the wondrous things of
thy Law. And in the midst, when he feels himself dull, verse. 37. he says,
O turn away mine eyes, lest they behold vanity; and quicken thou me in the
way. And in the same place concludes with thankesgiving, saying, I will thank
thee with an unfeigned heart, when I shall have learned the judgments of thy
righteousness. By these and such like we must seek to be upholden.

Effect of our prayer preparing to the catechism.
For the effect of our request, that forasmuch as Eccles. 12.11. the words of
the Lord are likened to goades, and nails, as on the contrary, Psalm. 19.10. to
Honey-combes, we are to pray that it would please the Lord that we may as well
feel the nails of his threatenings, as the Honey-combes of his mercy. Thus
must we believe that there be such things in the word, though we have no
feeling of them: yet the Saints of God have felt them. If this might also be in
us, it would prick us forward, as Genes. 32.11. Jacob prays to be delivered
from the hands of his brother Esau: but contrariwise, If we might feel the
sweetness and delight of this Honey-combe, so that we might have a love to
them; the diligence would necessarily follow; for Delectatio, dilectio and
diligentia, ex se pendent, Dilectio, delectatio, diligentia sese mutuo and
necessario consequuntur. Love, delight, diligence, do mutually and necessarily
follow each other.
seque necessario consequuntur. Delight, love, and diligence do mutually and
necessarily follow one another.

2. Pars. Auscultate mihi. The second part. Hearken unto me. Newness of life,
Esaias 29.13. This people come near to me with their mouth, and honor me with
their lips, but their hearts they have removed far from me; and their fear
toward me was taught by the precepts of men. As also, Mark 7.6. (...)* This
people honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me: which
the heathen man declares by that which they call praesens, absens; present,
absent. Therefore in this respect it is required that we be so present, as that
we give ear, and have our hearts so near as our bodies, i. (...), to listen
unto, to obey; Psalm. 40.8. Sacrifices and offerings did thou not require; but
mine ears have thou opened, Esaias 22.3. the Lord to Esaias, The eyes of them that
see, shall not be shut, and the ears of them that hear, shall hearken, Exodus
5.17. Pharao of this opinion, that religion is an idle man's exercise. The
heathen thinks that all the duty lies on the speaker. But Christ makes it a
great matter to hear well, Luke 8.18. (...). Take heed how ye hear. He adds
his reason; (...) for to every one that has, to him shall be given; and
whosoever has not, from him shall be taken even that which he seems to have.
Because he that hears well, the spirit will reveal more unto him; and from
him that hears not well, Plutarch. lib. de auditione, p. 168.5. soloecismes
in hea^ing.
shall be taken away that little which he had before. And the Gentiles set
down, (...), that one may as well (...), commit soloecismes in hearing, as to
commit a soloecisme in speaking. There be five soloecismes in hearing, 1.
(...), contraria (...): 1. (...) A looking like one that is goggleeyed.
the straying of the eye; contrary to those, Luke 4.20. (...) And the eyes of
all them that were in the synagogue were fastened on him. 2. (...). The hanging
down of the countenance; (...). A casting down of the countenance.
contrary to that, 2 Cor. 9.7. (...). Not grudgingly, or of necessity, for God
loves a cheerful giver. Col. 3.23. (...), And whatsoever ye do, do it
heartily as to the Lord, and not unto men. 3. (...), the variation of the body,
which argues a weariness in hearing. (...). The altering or change of the
body.
4. (...), sleepy yawnings, gasping; clean contrary to auscultation, which
argues a desire to sleep: (...). Sleepy yawnings.
for which Christ, Matthew. 26 40. rebukes his disciples. (...); What cold ye
not watch with me one hour? 5. Smiling one upon another, whispering in the
ear, beckning one to another, etc. Smiling, nodding, whispering, beckning, etc.

The heathen, before their mysteries, and ministering of their sacrifices; had
some one, that stood up in the midst of them, and cried aloud, Hoc agite,
attend to this; (...). It is an easy thing to hear, a hard thing to obey.
Esaias. 32.3.

James 1.23. If any man hears the word and does it not, he is like to a man,
that beholds his natural face in a glass; for when he has considered
himself, he goes his way and forgets immediately, what manner of one he
was. So also may we say of them; that though they hear attentively, yet lay
not up those words that they hear, in their hearts. A Rabbin compares such
kind of ears to an houre-glasse. When the one glass is full of sand, it is
turned; and the sand runs out again into the other glass. These kind of
ears are the worst, and not worthy to participate the mysteries of God. 3.
Sign, that we give our mind to it.
There must not only be a laying up in memory, but in our hearts also; so
long, 2 Pet. 1.19. (...). Until the day dawne, and the day star arise in
your hearts. Amongst the Schoolmen, Axioma: Quod cor non facit, non sit.
there is this Axiom, Quod cor non facit, non sit: what is not done with the
heart, is not done. Else shall we be like Pharao, Exodus 7.23. Pharao returned,
and went again to his house, neither entered it into his heart. Therefore the
precept is set down, Deuteronomy. 6.6. And these words which I command thee this day
shall be in thy heart. And again, this order of catechizing there briefly set
down; Deuteronomy. 6.6. 1. Write them. 2. Bind them, that we remember them. 3. Speak
of it to work thereafter. Pro. 4.21. Let them not depart from thine eyes; but
keep them in the midst of thine heart. Pro. 3.1. Let thy heart, etc. 3. upon
the table of thy heart. 5. with all thy heart.


The talking of these must be to this end, that they may work more knowledge
in us. We are for the most part in these days content with the (...). Prove.
1.4. To give to the simple sharpness of wit; to give to the children,
knowledge and discretion: A learned man says, That he learned much of his
Master; more, of his fellows; most, of them whom he taught. Prove. 2.10.11.
When wisdom enters into thine heart, and knowledge delights thy soul,
then shall counsel preserve thee, and understanding shall keep thee.
Therefore the writing, 2. This practice is the fruit.
committing to memory, and talking of them, is to this end, that they may work
deeper knowledge in our hearts. Concerning them therefore; that we may not
only be able to entreat of them, but also to practice them: we have these 3.
rules. 1. (...), probatio; examination. 2. (...), meditation. 3. (...), dilatio
vel potius (...) communicatio, conference.
Because the Lord would have us to be called to his word, he commands us to
search the Scriptures. 1. Rule, (...) examination.
For (...), ^^iall; John 5.39. (...), Search the Scriptures. Esaias 8.19, etc.
When they shall say unto you, inquire of them that have the spirit of
Divination, etc. Revel. 2.2. (...), etc. Thou have tried them, which say they
are Apostles, etc. Acts 17.11. (...), searching the Scriptures. 2. (...), care,
meditation. 2. (...). meditation.
Besides the manifold iteration, Psalm. 119. Abraham's servant, Genesis 24.33. Most
plain, 1 Timothy 4.15. (...), Meditate upon these things, give thy self wholly
to them, that thy profiting may appear to all. 3. (...), conference, Gal. 2.2.
3. (...). Conference.
(...), I went up by revelation, and communicated unto them. Luke 24.17. (...);
What manner of communications are these that ye have one to another? Mal.
3.16.17. Then spoke they that feared the Lord, every one to his neighbor, etc.
Though they say that experience is the mother of knowledge; yet (...),
conversation, is the grandmother; for it begets the experience; and in our
own reason, the practice is all, and fruit of all, Esaias 27.9. hic est omnis
fructus, ut auferatur omne peccatum; this is all the fruit, to take away his
sin. As in diseases there are bastard fevers, which have (...) febrium
verarum, tokens of true fevers: Sic and spuria est pietas, so is there a
counterfeit piety. Thus for these two points, Venite and auscultate, Come and
hearken.

The Apostle says, 1 Cor. 13.8. (...). Whether there be prophecies, they shall
fail; whether there be tongues, they shall cease; whether there be knowledge,
it shall vanish away. But Christ says, Luke 10.42. Mary has chosen the good
part, which shall not be taken from her. 2. Prove. 1.28. Then shall they call
upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not
find me. Therefore God will not hear them, because they heard not him. 3. 1 Samuel 2.25. They hearkened not unto the voice of their father, because the Lord
would slay them. Ideo non audiunt, quia Deus interficiet cos. Therefore men
hear not, because God will slay them. 4. Labor for knowledge, Phil. 2.16.
Holding forth the word of life, that I may rejoice in the day of Christ, that I
have not run in vain, nor labored in vain.
That it may be with us, as with the Romans, of whom the Apostle says, (...),
etc. Romans 6.17. But God be thanked, that ye were the servants of sin; but ye
have obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine which was delivered you. Thus
we conclude, as Cyrill did, Meum est docere; vestrum auscultare: Dei perficere.
It is my part to teach, yours diligently to hear, Gods to perfect.

Religion a building; the principles, the foundation. In teaching religion,
where we are to begin.
The course of Religion which we are to entreat of, is compared to a building,
Matthew. 7.24. and 26. (...), etc. Has built his house upon a Rock, etc. the
teacher to a builder, 1 Cor. 3.10. (...). As a wise Builder. The principles of
Religion, to a foundation, Heb. 6.1. (...), Not laying again the foundation of
repentance from dead works, and of faith toward God. Col. 3.23. (...). Do it
heartily.

In a building, the chiefest thing is, that the foundation be laid deep
enough. Our warrant out of Luke 6.48. (Non super arenam) Not upon sands. (...),
etc. but as it is in the same place, He dug deep, and laid the foundation,
etc. This is spoken ^o this end; for that the builders in our age dig not
deep enough, till they come to the hard rock. 1. If any ground of Religion be
set down: it is asked how we know that it is true? 2. How we know that these
Scriptures are the words of God. And if they be, how we can prove ipsum
propositum, the purpose or aim it self, by the Scriptures.
Lastly, how we know that there is a God: and if, what is the regard of him
toward man; whether such, as that he would afford him his word, and what is
the regard of God. But they without further examination, presuppose these
booke^ to be true and the Word of God: and dig, to build, no further then the
earth, leaving advantage for the undermyner. And we know that many have
undermined the very foundation, and have flatly denied that there is a God: and
so when the devil shall bring with him his (...), inundations and floods, He
will shake the foundation of Religion; as heretofore, he has plunged the
dearest of Gods children. 4 questions that we way come to the rock it self.
These are taken for granted by Catechists without any examination.
Therefore that we may begin at the hard rock, we will add these four
questions. 1. Whether there is a God? against the Atheists. 2. Whether he has
a care of man: and such, as that he would deliver his word unto him: against
the Semi-atheists, Epicures. 3. Whether the Scriptures we use, be his word, and
true: against the Turks and Pagans. 4. Whether this being the Word of God, our
religion be truly grounded on it: against the Jews, Papists, and other
heretics.


1. Whether there be a God?
For the first, our warrant, Heb. 11.6. wherein the two first are set down,
(...). He that comes unto God, Heb. 6.11. handled. Three things to be
observed in Heb. 11.6.
must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently
seek him. Wherein these three things are to be noted: 1. the fruit of
Religion, of all our doings and our life, i. (...), to come unto God. 2. The
means to attain this fruit. i. by believing. 3. What we are to believe? 1.
That there is a God. 2. That he is a rewarder of good to the good, and evil to
the evil.

Or, first the end of our journey. 2. The way it self. 3. The two stations. In
the first is contained the short sum of the felicity of man, able to stir
him up to give care. 2. The snatching of the people at that which they suppose
it to be. 3. The great breaking of the brains of men, about the seeking out of
it.

1. The fruit of religion, or the sum of man's felicity.
That this happiness is God, every man's desire sufficiently testifies it. And
David says, Psalm. 4.6. Who will show us any good? Augustine alleges out of
Varro, 288. several opinions of Philosophers, concerning this felicity.
August. de civit. Dei, lib. 19. cap. 1. from Varro out of his book De
philosophia. First then, that man is not happy in his own estate, it is too
plain, by the Epithetes that the heathen give to man: Nudus, miser, (...).
Naked, wretched, a most weak creature, A pattern of imbecility. Therefore
seeing that it is not in man himself, it must be in coming to another thing,
(...), to come. This phrase also of coming, is used in the vulgar tongue;
coming to wealth, honor, learning, etc. The opinion therefore of Christian
wisdom is this, That whilst man kept Gods Commandment, and submitted his
wisdom to him: he was partaker of Gods goodness, and was in happiness;
after desiring to depart from God, fell into extreme misery; 1. Into sin. 2.
Into shame. 3. Fear. 4. Travel, care, vexation of body and mind.
Lastly, into death. So by coming to God, we shall have all these redeemed,
and become happy again. The opinion of others, that think a man may have his
felicity here, and of himself, may be reduced to these five heads. 1. Wealth,
5. Diverse opinions concerning man's felicity. Particular exceptions.
worldlings. 2. Honor politickes. 3. Pleasure, Epicures. 4. Virtue, Stoics.
5. Contemplation, Idea, Plato, etc.


1. Against riches, that felicity does not consist in them. Goods, goods,
apparel, etc. prefer not a man to a higher place, but keeps his nature
from decaying; but felicity makes a man higher then he was.
Against these short exceptions: and 1. against wealth. 1. Wealth, in things
artificial is not for it self; neither is wealth natural for it self: but
only supplying the wants of nature; but cannot bring us to an higher estate.
2. The end of man is better then man himself; but these, worse than man: for a
man for his life, would give the whole world: therefore 3. a modo retorquendi
Stoicorum, From the Stoics manner of retorting.
It is a strange thing that that should be optimum bonum, the chief good,
which has been doubted since the world stood, whether it be good or evil.
Seneca, semper eguerunt interpret; always needed an interpreter. 1. That they
make not a man good. 2. That God and the celestial natures have them not, yet
happy. 3. That is not good, which may sometimes profit, but that which always
profits. 4. The inconveniences that should come hereby; 1. then men should
not be esteemed, by that they are; but by that they have: so his leather bag
full of money, should be better then himself. None esteems a sword by the
scabbard, nor the horse by his trappings. 5. The good that comes from wealth
is in spending it, and parting from it. Sic esset summa felicitas, abscedere a
felicitate: quod omnium absurdissimum. So chief felicity should consist in
parting from felicity, which is most absurd.


2. Nor does humane felicity consist in honor, this is but a sign of virtue,
and the sign is always deterior to the thing signified.
2. Honor. 1. They bring themselves from this; in saying that honos est
virtutis umbra; honor is but the shadow of virtue: for who knows not that we
must leave the shadow, and follow the body? therefore potius statuenda est
virtus felicitas, we must rather determine virtue to be felicity. 2. Seeing
there must be honourers, and honored, therefore there must be many to make one
happy; quod felicitatis non est; which pertaines not to felicity. 3. As they
may have honourers, so they may have dishonourers: sic partim erunt felices,
partim infelices; so they shall be in part happy, in part unhappy. But they
leave that which is the greatest; Honor dignunt esse quod virtutis est, to be
worthy of honor, which belongs to virtue. 4. Quia honor est bonum sine omni
stabilitate, for honor is a good without any stability; and hangs on other
men's mouths. Therefore we shall fall into that absurdity, that we should make
felicity most mutable, like a Vane or Weathercocke. Christ triumphed royally
riding into Jerusalem, after three or four days he was accused of the same
people that would before have made him their King; in so much that they cried,
crucifige eum, etc. crucify him.


As for pleasure, 3. Nor does it consist in pleasure. Our body receives pain
by every part, by the pricking of a pin in the skin.
the very mould of our body does reclaim against it. For there are but two
parts and conditions whereby pleasure is commended to us; and for the one, the
Epicures themselves have wished themselves to be like Cranes; for the other
like Sparrowes. 2. Cum homo sit spiritualis, and intellectualis; voluptas
sensibilis, seeing a man is spiritual, and intellectual, but pleasure
sensible; Therefore by coming to pleasure, he comes to a thing inferior to
himself; but felicity must be above him. And Seneca wishes himself never to
have been botne, if he had been borne to this end. s. Sapere cibum, Vinum
potare; to taste meat, to drink wine.

3. We should be more miserable then the boasts, if pleasure were our end; for
they use their pleasures openly and at liberty. man in his most lawful
pleasures, is ashamed to do them openly; apage felicitatem, quae latebras
quaerit; away with that felicity which seeks corners 2. They do it without
remorse of conscience, man after he has done it, is pricked in his conscience;
and feels pain in himself. In voluptate humana, elsi vel maxim legitima,
1. verecund^a. 2. successio morsus conscientiae.
In humane pleasure, even the most lawful, there is 1. a bashfulnesse. 2. a
succeeding of a biting conscience.


Quicquid bonum est, ex hypothesi, e se bonum non est: sed eo quod dat illi
conditionem illam.
4. By their own confession it is not good, unless it be moderated; so that it
has the goodness from that, which gives moderation to it. If pleasure should
be felicity, then should the virtues of temperance, continence,
shamefac'dnesse, etc. have been lost. 3. Temperantia est abstinentia a
voluptatibus, Temperance is an abstinence from pleasures. Therefore felicitas
esset in abstinentia a selicitate, Happiness should be a restraining from
happiness.

5. We say, that he is continent that abstaines from pleasures. Shall we say
also, that he is continent that abstaineth from felicity, or that he is
praiseworthy?

6. Plutarch. If an Epicure, had but an hour to live, and for that hour, it
were put to his choice, whether for that hour he would sport himself in
greatest pleasures, and make a sumptuous banquet; or work some noble exploit
to get him a perpetual fame? I know says he, he would rather choose some
noble act, then to enjoy such a momentanie pleasure, and so would condemn his
own opinion.

Moral virtues are only to pacify the troublesome parts of the mind, i. the
affections. The pacifying of our affections, Nor consists felicity in virtue.
to bring an easiness to our actions. Omnis autem actio est proper finem,
every action is for some end. Therefore sunt alii ultra hunc fines, there are
other ends beyond this. There is of every virtue a several use; as of Justice,
to maintain Peace. Of Fortitude, to procure Peace: therefore these have a
further end then themselves. 3. This principal virtue. s. prudencie: (est enim
forma virtutum omnium, for it is the form of all virtues,) is defined to be
nothing else, but a direction to an end: prudentia est scientia eorum quae
aguntur propter finem. prudence is a knowledge of those things which are done
for the end. 4. Quidam habent peratiam jaculandi, tollunt autem scopum: some
have skill in shooting, but take away the mark: which they declare by (...),
etc. Appetere, metam attingere, Nor does happiness consist in contemplation.
Axio. Phys.
a scopo ab^rrare, considerare, to desire greatly, to reach the mark, to miss
the mark, to consider, etc. It is an absurd thing in nature, Vt esset longum
in generatione, quod breve in fruitione and duratione: si autem contemplatio
esset felicitas, that that should be long in generation, which is short in
fruition and duration: but if contemplation were felicity, a man should be all
days of his life in getting of it; and keep it but a year or two. 2. Our
understanding is only in power; and to be happy, is duci in actum, to be
brought into act. But to say that this perfect power may Be brought to a
perfect act is most absurd; for there is no man that can say, there is nothing
but I know it. 3. By their own confession we know not the essential form, no
not of the most vile creature: and we are ignorant in most familiar things to
us: quanto igitur major sutura caecutientia est, and cognitionis impersectio,
cum ad diviniores naturas perventum fuerit, adeoque ipsum Deum? de quo nihil
cognoscimus, nisi per privationem, se* infinitus, incomprehensibilis. How much
more then will our blindness be, and the darkness of our understanding, when
we shall come to more divine natures, and so to God himself? of whom we know
nothing, but by way of privation: as that he is infinite, incomprehensible. 4.
And they themselves testify that they know nothing: Socrates, Hoc unum scio,
me nihil scire; this one thing I know, that I know nothing. Augustine
confesses, he had (...) in contemplandis entibus coelestibus; Gray or
sky-colored eyes in contemplating of celestial beings. Simonides, the more
time he had to meditate of Gods essence, the farther off he confessed himself
to be. Democritus, In prosundo est, It is in the deep; I cannot sound it.
Maxima pars eorum quae seimus, est minima pars eorum quae ignoramus; The
greatest part of these things we know, is the least part of these we know not.
2 Demonstrative arguments to prove there is no happiness but in God.
Hitherto for particular exceptions. Now generally to conclude against them all
demonstratively, that to come to any thing besides God, is not happiness. They
set down two things in their felicity; 1. Terminus appetitus, or (...) the
bound or limit of the desire, or a mind contented with its own lot. 2.
Perpetuity.

But to come to any thing but to God, non facit terminum appetitui, does not
satisfy the desire; for God only gives rest to the appetite. Vt enim ponatur
terminus appetitui; for to satisfy the desire, there must be first
contentatio, hoc esse non potest sine satisfactione. Appetitui nihil potest
satisfacere, nisi Deus unicus; contentation this cannot be without
satisfaction. Nothing can satisfy the appetite save God alone. The reason,
because the appetite of man was ordained to receive God. That which is ordained
to receive God, all the world is too little to fill it; and without God there
is no universal good: and therefore there is some want, and therefore desire,
and therefore labor to come to it, and therefore unquietness, and therefore
no felicity. Facilius appareat in speciali examplo, this more easily may
appear in particular example; as of riches. (...), i. ardere. A word that
comes from a verb which signifies to burn. Sive ardens appetitus, a
burning or unbridled desire. But if a man should heap never so much wood on
the fire, though at the first it might seem to keep it down, and put it out;
yet by little and little the fire will wax bigger and bigger, etc. and so in
riches, the more matter is ministered, the less it is quenched; and so this
desire waxes infinite. Quid cius sitim restinguet, cujus sitis e potu crescit?
what can quench his thirst, whose thirst increases by drinking? There is no
worldly thing to satisfy the appetite of man: riches were not made to fill a
man's mind, no more then a bag to be filled with learning; or one to stand
all day gaping in the wind, thinking to be filled therewith. 3. Though it would
receive them, yet is it not put to the soul of man: contrary to that
principle, Oportet apponi desideratum desideranti; that the thing desired must
be set before him that desires it. 4. Granting all this to be; yet when one
has all that he desired to have, he may have a new appetite; and so after he
has filled one bag, he may desire to fill another; after one barn, another.
Here they are compared, Prove. 30.15. to Horseleeches, give, give: and to the
greedy Mastiffe, that swalloweth whole morsels, as fast as they are cast to
him. Id apparet in Alexandro planissime, this appears in Alexander the great,
plainly; that shed many tears after he had conquered all the World, for that
there were no more worlds. Theocritus, and every one will wish, Mill meis
errent in montibus agni; and sic denuo ascendet gradatim eorum appetitus, that
they had a thousand sheep feeding on the Mountains, and so their desire will
increase by degrees; until they may say, pauperis est numerare pecus, it is for
a poor man to tell his cattle. As Abraham, Genesis 18. descended, in his
intercession for Sodom from fifty to ten, so will they descend. Therefore we
may conclude, that all these ways are unnatural; and this desire unnatural.
If an appetite be natural, it has his end: else if it has not his end, it is
unnatural. Therefore they are not out of the way; Via enim eunti terminus est;
for the way is the bound to him that goes; therefore it is not possible to
have an end, but of God: but they, when they are filled, cease not; Quia non ex
vacuitate, sed ex abundantia eorum appetitus oritur: quod natural est,
expletum cessat, quia ex vacuitate. Naturalis appetitus non naturalis ex
abundantia; ut in hydrope, and morbo lupino, cum quis laborat veracitate
lupina: because their desire proceeds not from emptiness, but from fullness:
that which is natural being filled cease, because natural appetite comes of
want, but that which is not natural from abundance; as in the Hydropsie, and
in the woolfe sickness, when one is sick of a woolfish gluttony.

The 2. thing perpetuity. Where this wants, there is uncertainty, Perpetuity.
and therefore fear, or expectation of loss; and so, unquietness: therefore
no felicity. But this perpetuity is in none but in God: for though we continue,
they shall pass: as Job 1. and though they continue, we shall pass; as Luke
12.20. of the rich man: and when we have obtained them, and peradventure shall
not get them without much labor, they may, ( Esaias 59.5.) be as a spiders web
to us, that may suddenly be swept away. They are uncertain, 1. money, for
thieves. 2. merchandise for the winds. 3. building for fire. 4. possessions for
unrighteous Judges: and all these for the bands of the Sabees; that is, our
enemies.
Or as a Cockatrices egg, which he that eats of, dies: and that which is
trodden upon, breaks into a serpent. Augustine, Habent, si non sinem suum,
finem tuum: habent, si non finem tuum, finem suum: quisquis est contemptor
vitae suae, est dominus tuae. They have, if not their own end, yet thy end:
they have, if not thy end, yet their own end: whosoever is a despiser of his
own life is Lord of thine. 1. The uncertainty of many in danger of the seas,
winds, storms; of unrighteous Judges, the bands of the enemy; Man's life has
300. diseases and odd. A little poison overcommeth it: if one care not to be
hanged, he will not care to kill thee. Augustine proves that a man is brickle
in respect of them, by his great grandfathers glass, that lasted three or
four men's ages. Divintiae autem fragillimae; ergo in his nulla faelicitas: but
riches are most brickle, therefore in them is no felicity. But in coming to
God, there is both (...), full contentment, and perfection. Stability, ergo and
felicitas summa and unica; therefore both chief and only felicity. For as
Christ said to the woman of Samaria, if thou will have the water of life, you
must go to God, the fountain of all goodness; God is universale bonum, John
4.14.
primum bonum: fons boni, primum ens: fons essentiae: aeterna men's. God is the
universal good: the first good, the fountain of goodness, the first being:
the fountain of being: the eternal mind.

Experience of the true ways of coming to God; 3. Ab experientia. From
experience.
in David Psalm. 16.12. In thy presence is the fullness of joy; and at thy right
hand there is pleasure forevermore. Experience of the false ways of coming to
God; in Solomon, who through the whole book of the Preacher, confessed that in
the whole world he found, 1. inanity, 2. vanity.


4. Confessed also by the heathen before Christ's time: 4. The confession of the
heathen.
in Sybils oracles, and (...), to be happy, to live happily, declares the
felicity of man to be the union to God. Pythagoras his (...), golden sayings,
Plato 10. of the rep. and in his phaedo. Hermes, Plutarch, Simplicius upon
Epictetus. Iamblichus of the Egyptian mysteries. Cyrill against Julian. No
felicity but in coming to God. Thus is has been proved, 1. By particular
exceptions. 2. by demonstrative arguments. 3. by experience. 4. by the
confession of the heathen. Augustine in his meditations says, Domine creasti
nos ad te; nunquam ergo quietum erit cor, donec pervenerit ad te.
O Lord thou have created us to thy self, the heart therefore will never be at
rest till it shall come unto thee. To come, velest in itinere, vel in appulsu,
is either 1. in the journey, or 2. in the arriving.
The last step is commonly adventus, the advent or coming. There is duplex
felicitas, a twofold happiness, Viae, vitae, of the way, of the life: of the
way which is penultimus finis, the penult end; and of the life, which is finis
ultimus, the last end, Walking and going in the way of his commandments. Or as
the Rabbis, there is felicitas atrii, and triclinii, the happiness of the
porch, and of the parlour. In respect of these two felicities, 1. in itinere.
2. in appulsu; 1. in the journey, 2. in the approach,
No perfect felicity in this life.
Ratio: nil ab omni part beatum; neque quicquam ab omni part miserum. The
reason; there is nothing absolutely happy, nor is there any thing in every
respect miserable. Children are accounted free men, quia spe liberi, because
free through hope; we in this life are happy quia spe felices, because happy
through hope. The reason, quia vita quam sic vivimus, non est vita nostra,
sedvia ad vitam, caetera habent hic vitam suam. Because the life we thus live,
is not our life, but the way to life; all others have here their own life. 2.
It is not possible to come to felicity in this life. Heb. 6.19. the state of
man is compared to a ship, felicity to an anchor, hope to a cable.

The way to come to God.
Now the way to come to God, is (...), to believe. Coming to any thing is a
motion; Omnis motio est ab appetitu: ut moveatur appetitus, cognoscenda ipsa
via. Ignoti enim nulla cupido: Every motion is from the appetite; that the
appetite be moved the way must be known, for there is no desire of a thing
unknown. Therefore the way must be known; Via ad Deum accedendi duplex; the
way to come to God is twofold. 1. By reach of man's reason. 2 By believing.


The Manichees (according to S. Augustine) in a bravery against the Christians,
The heresy of the Manichees next to Atheism.
held that error, that men were to come to God by reason, not by belief,
Atque adeo dicere solitisunt, Christianos imponere jugum credendi, non autem
aperire fontem sciendi. And so they were wont to say, that Christians did
impose the yoke of believing, but did not open the fountain of knowing. This
way, because it best pleased man, did most and longest prevail; atque adeo hi
haeretici apud omnes omnium aetatum homines valuerunt plurimum, and ubique
floruerunt. And indeed the Heretics prevailed exceeding much amongst all men
of all ages, and flourished every where. In so much that if any Philosophers
had associated themselves to religion, they were first Manichees. This also is
manifest from this; for that Faustus his error was most dangerous, and of
longest continuance. The like sect is in our days, The way of belief the best
way to come to God, of reason worst.
Quaeristae, querists, who will have a reason of every thing; and so far as
you can go with them by reason, so far will they go with you, no further.
Then we must prove that the way of belief, is most convenient and necessary:
of reason, most inconvenient and worst.

1. If we come to God by reason, then should none but excellent wits be saved;
because none beside them are capable of demonstrative reason. But that way is
inconvenient, which but few can go in: Such is the way of reason, of says
contrariwise, if this were it were all one: as if a company should take a
journey; and because some of the company could leap over hedges and ditches,
they should still make a high way through hedges and ditches. Deus antem habet
viam suam regiam. God has his own high way.

2. Besides the goodness of wit pains are necessarily required; and diverse
are commonly of such weak natures, Gods way is so easy, that as well the weak,
^s the strong, may walk in it.
that they cannot take such pains. Many also cannot intend such pains,
because their callings are not for it, but are busied otherwise: so that the
most part should be excluded from this way. But that way is inconvenient, which
lies through many inconveniences.

3. We see by daily experience, before we come to Divinity, how many years we
spend: so that all, who are cut off before they come to these years, should be
debarred this felicity. But God has set down his way, a short way; so that we
need no more but believe, and assecuti sumus, and we have attained. Porphyri^s
his objection against says.
But they use to object one thing against faith, which Porphyrie against the
Christians of his time. That it is a sign of simplicity to be too credulous,
and that was a stop to many at that time, that they would not come to God by
belief, lest they should be misliked. But the Philosopher can tell them, that
none is too credulous, Nisi qui aut stulto, The solution.
aut improbo credit; but he that believes either a foolish or a wicked man.
But these two necessarily are excluded from God; Deus enim ipsa veritas falsum
dicere non potest: Deus ipsa prudentia, neque fallere, neque falli potest. Ide^
perfectae veritati perfecta sapientia, perfectae honestati perfect a conjuncta
est justitia: nullus ergo incredulitati locus. For God who is truth it self
cannot lie; God who is wisdom it self, can neither deceive, nor be deceived;
therefore to perfect truth is joined perfect wisdom, to perfect honor
perfect justice; no place therefore is left for incredulity.

That the way of belief is firm and grounded upon Gods Word, ^s proved from
four effects.
Now that this way of believing is sure, and that this whereon it is grounded is
the Word of God, though set forth by men, it may appea^^ by t^ese four effects
or circumstances; (as Origin against Celsus) 1. healing of incurable diseases;
as leprosy, dropsy, palsy, men possessed with foul spirits, such as
physic durst never attempt to cure. 2. They raised diverse from death. 3. They
shook the powers of Heaven. 4. Simple and unskilful men proved wonderful and
skillful in one day of all tongues.
Therefore there must needs have been in them a Divine power that wrought
these things in them. Therefore we see it in the certainety of the effect,
though not in the certainety of the cause.

Credulity more in reason, then in faith.
This suspicion of credulity, is more in the way of reason, then of belief,
three reasons.

1. There being 288. sects of philosophy, and every one having his reasons for
his opinion: therefore in that way there must needs be many crosse-waies, Cum
veritatis via sit simplex and unica; since the way of truth is simple and one;
therefore impossible it is, that a man seeing such diversity of opinions,
should not be but in greatest uncertainty and doubt, Adeoque in incredulitatem
labatur vel maximam; and so fall into great incredulity. 2. Arist. 1. Demonstr.
That there is no necessary thing without the mixtion of contingency in it;
therefore no absolute demonstration. Therefore nothing but is subject both to
knowledge and contingency: ubi hoc, where this is, there is uncertainety.
Therefore nothing but may have diversity of opinions, by reason of our
memories, and the confusion of our notions. 3. And chiefly, in cognoscendis
primis causis, In knowing the first causes, they themselves confess, that they
are in the dark; both in respect of the object, quia immaterialia, because
immateriall; and in respect of the fountain and cause of our knowledge: quia
principia rationis meae a sensibus ducuntur: Deus and coelestia sensibus non
subjiciuntur; The memory is able to retain distinct notions.
because the principles of my reason are drawn from sense, but God and divine
things are not subject to sense, as the Philosopher says in his metaphysics.
God is a thing above reason, God above nature and sense. Sense can give no
rules of God, and celestial natures. For our reasons and understanding are
confounded: illa autem simplicia and inconfusa, but they are simple and
unconfounded. Therefore we cannot come to him by reason; therefore there must
be some other way.
Now that it is necessary that there can be no other way, then belief. If they
should take away belief, Without belief no humane society.
there should be an overthrow of all things: and so they should neither be
friends to any, nor any to them. If any one were to report any thing to
another, that was not at the sight of that thing, and he to whom this thing
were reported should not believe them, unless they brought their proofs for
the least circumstance: non adigeret eos ad insaniam? would it not make them
mad?

2. August. in his book to Honoratus, August.
cap. 10. de utilitate credendi, of the utility of believing. If one should
come to me, and say to me, Augustine, show me the true way by reason; then I
say to him, you come to me in dissimulation and hypocrisy, not in any good
meaning: then will he protest his good meaning, and bolster it out with words
as much as he can; Faith which they deny in words, they prove by their acts.
then will I say, I believe you, yet you cannot persuade me by reason: now
therefore seeing you will have me to believe you in this; is it not equity,
that you believe me? seeing the profit of your belief does not redound to me,
but to you?

3. None of them all dare once call in question the words of a Prince: and God
being at least as good as a Prince, ipsius verbo non credendum existimare,
quanta impietas? to think hat this word is not to be believed, what impiety?

4. Arg. apertum and manifestum de actu (quem vocant patres) explicito, it is
plain and manifest concerning the act (which the fathers call) explicit.
There is none of them all but does believe, and ought to believe: therefore the
way of belief is not altogether to be rejected.

The necessity of believing.
There are certain matters which are to be known, that cannot be demonstrated
by reason or sense, etc. but must necessarily be believed: as, whither he whom
he calls his father, be his father, etc. Istiusmodi quotidie creduntur, quia
ratio ea persuade^e non potest. Such are daily believed, because reason is not
able to persuade them; in these we can say no more, but that we believe them.
Among which, is the coming to a place. We therefore making God the end of our
journey, must believe that he is, Si quis peregre profectus vidisset procul a
patria desertam regionem, and de ea apud alios referret aliquan^o, n^que ei
crederetur; quid afferre poss^t, nisi a testibus vel historia pr^be^?
impossible est ejus detur demonstrativa ratio. Atque haec de necessi. ate
credendi. I^ any man traveling into far countries had seen far from his
country a desert region, and should afterward make mention of it to others,
and they should not bel^eve him, what could he bring unless he could prove it
by witness or history? It is impossible a demonstrative reason should be given
of it. And thus far of the necessity of believing.

In faith four things to be noced.
Now for this word Belief, note 4. things, 1. The heathen themselves have set
down in every art, oportet discentem credere, a le^rner must believe; and
whatsoever we first receive, we receive it from our teachers. This principle
has his ground, Actio perfect, in imperfecto recipitur, primo imperfecte tum
perfect, the action o^ one perfect is received in one imperfect, 1.
imperfectly, 2. perfectly* Wood 1. warmeth, and tum habet imperfectum and
alienum calorem, then it has an imperfect and strange heat; then it burns,
habetque prorium: sie discentes prius ab aliena recip^unt ^ide, quam ipsi ad
perfectio^em aspirent cognitionem; and it has its own proper heat: so
learners first receive from the faith of others, which they themselves bring to
a more perfect knowledge. Confirmed by Esaias 7.9. Nisi credideritis, non
stabiliemini. If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be established.

2. After we have received by belief, then may we seek for it by
demonstrations, aut a priori, aut a posteriore, either from the former, or from
the latter, to confirm our belief: Ratio, quia ut artium reliquarum, ita and
religionis principia nobis innata habemus; the reason is, because as of other
arts, so have we also the principles of religion naturally bred in us. The
principles of Divinity always agree with true reason: truth disagreeth not
with truth: the principles of religion are not contrary: for if we should never
come to any certainety or knowledge. Warrant, that reason agrees with
religion, Acts 17.24. etc. The true worship of God proved by natural reason.
True reason, an help to faith, and faith to it, the incorrupt judgment of man
choaketh not religion, Romans 1.19. By the principles of nature we may come to
that which may be known of God, Acts 17.24. etc.
(...), etc. That which may be known of God is manifest in them. For the
invisible things of him from the creation of the world are clearly seen,
being understood by the things that are made; even his eternal power and
Godhead, etc. 1. De partibus animalium, (...), if though in a small measure we
attain to the knowledge of the Gods; that knowledge is worth all other
knowledges. If God had made contrariety, it had then been unpossible we should
come to an end.

3. When we have yielded our selves to belief, and have strengthened it by
reason; yet we must look for an higher teacher, and though faith be an
unperfect way, and we unperfect; yet may we walk in it. We are therefore to
pray to God, that by the inspiration of his spirit, he would keep us in this
way. Now this (...) divine inspiration is given to those in whom religion is
sealed. Arist. in his metaph. De iis quae supranaturam sunt, soli Deo
credendum, and (...) concerning those things which are above nature, we must
believe God above, and his divine inspiration is to be sought with sacrificings.

4. The means of contemning order in these three.
4. Because this inspiration comes not at the first, we must wax perfect by
little and little; and be sure that we build on the rule: and stay, till it
please him that will send it. Festina lent. Hasten leasurely.

No greater enemy to knowledge, then to be a hasty believer.
The avoiding of praepropera consilia, overhastie counsels, does agree with Esaias
28.16. qui crediderit, ne festinet, he that believes shall not make have. A
man therefore is not to ground of presumptions, and presupposings; but by
little and little go forward till he come to the rock. Therefore this part is
spent, 1. in receiving it, (i. belief.) 2. in seeking to strengthen it. 3. in
expecting of an higher teacher. 4. that we be sure to proceed by little and
little, sed certo tramite, but in a sure path.


The first days station. Four degrees of Satan's tentations, what they be, and
how they depend each on other. (...). Selfe-deity.
The third part. 1. The first days journey, or the first station that a man is
to go, is to believe that there is a God. For preparation to this point, note
four things, (they are Satan's proceedings.) 1. Heresy, (...), selfe-deity:
when as man was in the state of his first perfection, it was impossible to
persuade that either himself was God, or to worship any creature as God, or to
believe that there were no God: or to worship the devil as God. Therefore the
devil sought to put into man's mind, that he himself was God. Therefore he
persuaded Adam that his eyes should be opened, and that he should be like unto
God. Therefore as man departed from God by unbelief and presumption, so was he
to come to him by belief and humiliation; but this opinion he left the same
day; for he was confuted so soon as he had eaten of the apple, and after by
hiding himself behind the bush: Alexandri excepto in obsidione vulnere, hic
sanguis hominem esse denotat. Claudii, qui sibi se Deum esse persuasisset,
quoad audito tonitruin tentorium consugiens, dixisset, hic Deus est, Claudius
autem non est Deus. That of Alexander is observable: at a besieging having
received a wound, this blood says he, shows me to be a man. And of Claudius
who persuaded himself he was a God, till hearing the thunder he fled into his
tent and said: This is God, Satan's way of bringing man to the ignorance of the
true God.
Claudius is not God. So you see that these who were given to this Heresy are
soon confuted, as Adam was. 2. Because God, ( Genes. 4.) was an helper to man
after his fall, as in making him garments; the devil by a false conversion
struck this into the minds of his posterity, that whatsoever did them good,
was to be worshipped as God: ut ille, (...), 2. (...) A conceit of many Gods.
whatsoever nourishes me that I count a God. By this confounding the profit
that came of the instrument, with that which is of the principal: and so were
brought unto a great company of Gods, into a great company of men. 2 Into
celestial bodies. 3. Into those beasts that did any good to the Egyptians, 1.
canes, ibides, crocodiles; dogs, snypes, crocodiles; and so brought in (...)
plurality of Gods, after they came to worship, as Juvenal. Quorum nascuntur in
hortis Numina, their Garden-gods, or those things that grew in their gardens,
for Gods. 3. (...). Atheism.
Then 3. was it an easy matter to bring in a doubt whether there was a God:
And this was the cause, as some think, why Diagoras Theodorus brought in this
doubt, 4. (...) Antitheisine. Omnes diaboli actiones ed tendunt, ut ipse
colatur tanquam Deus: at que adeo ut persuadeat hominibus, se Deum esse. All
the devils actions tend to this, that he may be worshipped as God, and so may
persuade men that he i^ God. Examples of Antichrist, these esteem the worship
of the devil the rule of their life. The second point, wherein four things.
whether there were a God; and by a soolish argument they brought in that there
was no God. 4. When the Devil had brought them to Atheism, it was impossible
that they should stay long time in it, therefore comes in fresh upon them,
showing them some of his lying wonders, and prophecies, and strange signs: and
so brings them again to religion: and so by these wonderful signs bringing
himself into admiration with them, makes them to follow his religion, and to
worship him as God. Apollonius Thyanaeus, Iamblichus, Julian the Apostata,
first they were of no religion, after they fell to worship the devil; and
proved necromancers, conjurers, sorcerers. The same succession in the
East Indies, to whom the Gospel was preached by Thomas; after falling into
contentions about religion, they grewat the length to the worshipping of his
ugly image; and worship him till this day.

The second point, the confutation of their opinion that held with Atheism, 1.
The causes of it. 2. Their reasons that they were led by to it. 3. That those
things that were put for Gods, were not Gods; viz. that nature, fortune, etc.
is not governor of the world. 4. Ipsa quaestio, the question it self.


For he that will come to God, must believe that there is a God. In general of
those five false opinions and orders of them, how they hang one on the other.

1. That there was a time, when there was no society among men, but were (...),
companions of beasts, and wandered like beasts. 2. By the devise of some
excellent man they were brought into one political body. 3. Cum non possent
homines in suis contineri officiis, when men could not be contained in their
duties, they began to enact laws. 4. When laws were not able to bridle them,
but that in secret they would not stick to commit great offenses, as murder,
etc.
When this would not serve, then wise men intended this, to work this
persuasion in men's minds, that there was another oculus eye, and invisible
essence, that did see also these things that they did in secret: and would
punish them for their sins, if not in this life, yet in the life to come, and
that most severely both in body and soul. This they say, and prove nothing;
yet are these they that will believe nothing, unless great proofs be alleged
for it; therefore they condemn themselves by their own, Cities came of
inhabaed tamilies, not of wandering wildmen.
seeing they can neither allege reason nor authority, but all their ground
false.

1 If there were first (...), wild men; it was degenerando, non generando, by
degenerating, not by generating. For either they were outlawed or sequestered
themselves from company, for committing of some notable offense.

2. That they came into a society e Nomadibus, beastly savages, it is
manifestly false: homo enim a primo instituto est animal politicum, for man
even from the first institution is a politic creature. For these political
societies came first of houses; familiae in vicos excreverunt, vici in
civitates, fa milies grew up into streets or Villages, and these into Cities.

3. Laws were after religion, Vt poetae testantur Ethniet, as the Heathen
Poets testify. No Laws in Homers time, yet religion; the stories of the
Heathen do testify, that laws began almost a thousand years after religion.
Its impossible that religion is a devise of man. Reasons hereof. 1. The
universality of religion.
For when religion was too weak, because men became so brutish, laws were
made, to be as it were snaffles and bridles for such Horses and Mules.

The universality of the persuasion of the worship of God, not only written in
the heart of every man, but also in the consent of all Nations; therefore
impossible to be a devise of man. Within these hundred years, the Spaniards
and Portugals found out Nations in the Antarticke part of the World, both in
the South and West parts, that had no dealing with any other Nation, because
they were with out apparel, marriage, etc. that had no laws, no governments,
that were most necessary things, yet were they not without religion; and they
had some things which they called their Gods, and worshipped them as God
indeed. Therefore seeing there is no Nation without religion, and yet some have
been known to have no dealing with other Nations; it cannot be a devise of
man, or a devise of propagation: But religion is not of propagation. Object.
Solu. 2. The diversity of religions, without any analogy of the one to the
other.
But if it be objected, that those Nations had it of their borderers: This may
be another argument against them; for they are so far from taking religion
one of another, that there is as great a variety herein as may be possible,
without any proportion of one religion to another. Diversitas simillimarum
gentium, the diversity of like Nations; (but all devises that come of any
devise, will have some analogy with it.) For some as the Jews, worship an
invisible thing. i. God himself; all the Gentiles, visible: as, Heavens,
Stars, Planets, Elements, Birds, Beasts, Snailes, Plants, as Garlic and
Onions: some a piece of red cloth hanged upon a pole; some the first thing that
they met, that they worshipped as God all that day; manifestum ergo religionem
e propagatione non esse ortam, adeoque neque ab humano instituto, It is
manifest therefore that religion came not of propagation, and therefore neither
of humane institution.

3. Falsehood can claim no kindred but of time; for only truth is without all
time. Opinionum commenta delet dies; naturae judicium confirmat, time
vanquishes the inventions of opinions, but confirms the judgment of nature.
Therefore every thing besides truth, brought in by man's inventions, or by any
other thing whatsoever, wears out; but religion was and shall be perpetually,
religion wears not, there is no antiquity but religion is beyond it; no
posterity but it is in it. If they object that the necessity makes it continue
so long, Obj. Sol.
it may be a fourth argument against them; for falsehood and truth can never
agree. And they dare not say that policy is fained thing, 4. The necessity of
religion. Religion stands very well with policy, nay it is the backbone of
policy.
nor the common wealth. Therefore in saying thus, they say that a thing of
truth is upholden by a thing of falsehood. The Gentiles call Religion the
backbone of the common wealth; therefore religion can be no devise, because it
agrees with truth. 2. Because it upholdeth truth. Quorum neutrum falsitati
competit, neither of which appertains to falsehood, for truth needs not
falsehood to sustain it. That religion upholdeth the common wealth, it may
appear by these three things: 1. If faith were taken from the dealings of men,
one would not trust another, neither should there be any dealings at all. 2. It
no preaching of the word, there would be no outward restrainer of the
concupiscence of man to bridle it; then would not so many be poor, so few
rich. 3. Without religion there would be no submission to government.
A whole country would (not) obey one Prince. But for Atheism, we can show the
persons, Atheism began 3701. or 3702. years ago.
time and place of forging it. It began in Egypt of Cham, the youngest son of
Noe, whom the Gentiles call Cambyses. Cato in his Origines, Cameses, Berosus
Agosthenes, etc. Cham as it is in Josephus in the year of the world, 1950.
being cursed of God and his father, If Atheism were a truth it were impossible
it should work to the destruction of a truth.
and so out of the favor of them both, 1. out of a stomach against then both,
began to teach that men were not beholding to God, but one to another. Being by
this curse deprived of all joys in the world to come; whiles he lived in this
world, gave himself to all brutish pleasures, and at length taught that there
was no God, and fell to worshipping the devil: hence was he called Zoroastes
the great Magitian. Therefore we see in him both the causes of Atheism, 1.
stomach, desire of revenge. 2. sensuality. Which two are from the two filthy
parts of the mind. 1. (...). 2. (...), 1. a stout stomach. 2. a desire of
revenge.


For stomach, we may see in Diagoras, which was on this occasion (as Diodorus
Siculus affirms) having made a book in verse, that pleased him well, either by
negligence lost it, or by subtilty of another had it stolen from him, before he
could set it forth in print. This person that had it, being brought before the
Senate of Athens about it, swear that he had it not; and so by this oath was set
free. After the same party set them out in print, and got all the commendation
of the work. Now because Diagoras saw that this wickedness was not punished
presently with a thunderbolt from Heaven, but that he prospered and got all the
praise; he on a stomach affirmed that there was no religion, no God. The
reasons of his book are very frivolous, and such as in that great confuting
world, none would vouchsafe to answer his book. For thus he reasoned, Jupiter,
Saturn, etc. were no Gods: therefore there were no Gods. As if one should say,
many who seem to be good Scholars, are not: therefore there are none. As in
Diagoras, so Nicephorus testifies of Porphyrie, and Lucian; who first were
Christians, after receiving injuries, one of words, Porphyrie, the greatest
enemy the Church had for writing.
the other of blows in the Church; when they saw that they that wronged them,
had not punishment of the Church to their mind; to do the Church a spite, on a
stomach became plain Atheists, though they termed themselves but Apostataes.

Epicurus and his followers, fell first into Atheism, affirming there was no
God.
2. For sensuality; the Epicure and his followers, as Lucretius, say, that they
have an excellent and great benefit to become brutish in their pleasures; and
at first held Diagoras his opinion, that there was no God. This came of that,
that they thought they should not live after this world, and the soul of man
was not immortal: but the very Heathen at that time confuted them
sufficiently. 2. Into semi-Atheisme, affirming God had no care of man. The best
foundation of sensuality, to have care of things present.
1. In things that together are corrupted, corruption takes hold of both at
once: but in senectute, in old age, when the body is most weak, the soul is
most strong. 2. The perfection of the soul is the abstracting it from the
body, and the more it is abstracted from the body, the perfecter it is. 3.
Augustine says, that the soul is the subject of truth; but no subject of
truth decays, else should truth decay: but truth is immortal. 4. Corruption
is by contraries: and nothing is corrupted, but where there is a contrary: but
the soul, when it hears an evil thing, turns it to good, and a good thing
to good or evil; and receives contrary things, and yet receives no harm.
Therefore. Then they fell to the denying of Gods providence over man, (...),
give me this day, take to morrow to thy self: after they took the easiest way
they could for their pleasures; and as Arcesilas, the chief of the
Academickes, seeing with what difficulty men came to knowledge, and with what
great pains they attained to small learning, took a very short course to
himself, and held that there was no knowledge at all: so the Epicures, seeing
a restrayning of Religion, and that circumstances limited every action, they
brought in a short course and held, that there was no God; the rather for that
they saw it was a hard thing to live godly: and as the thief desires to have
the Candle put out, that he might be in the dark, that his treachery may not be
seen; least if he were in the light, every one might check him: So they,
having a light in them, that would not suffer them to walk in the darkness of
their brutish pleasures, would have this light put out, that their conscience
might no more check them. And because conscience will not check them without
religion and knowledge of God; therefore they extinguished all light,
forgetting that there was any God, and putting away the biting of their
conscience by little and little; as Marius having a convulsion in his thigh,
had every day a cicuta, a kind of Hemlocke put to his leg, and a piece of
flesh pulled from him: at length fell into Atheism. Quamdiu in nobis insunt
conscientiae stimuli, non patientur nos corporis obvolutare voluptatibus, so
long as the pricks of conscience are in us, they will not suffer us to wallow
in the pleasures of the body.

The point it self, that God is.
Now the affirmative part, that God is, by incorrupt reasons to confirm us in
our belief; the reasons of the heathen. 1. There is a first cause, a first
mover in all things; which if they can prove, they go no further. They were
brought to the first cause, thus: The reasons. First from the cause. The first
cause, the first mover is God.
If we grant not a first cause, a first mover; then before every cause, before
every mover, there is another cause or mover, in infinitum, to infinite:
therefore there should be infinite causes, tum haec sequentur absurda, these
absurdi^ies will follow. Infinite causes must have infinite time to bring forth
infinite effects. 2. Or infinite time. 3. Therefore all shall be isntrumental
causes, no principal; Et quia omnis inferior causa operatur in virtute
principalis, nulla existenti principali, nullum erit effectum, and because
every inferior cause works in the virtue of the principal, now if there be
no principal, then there will be no effect. 2. There is a devil, 2. From
spiritual natures.
therefore there is a spirit in the world set on mischief, seeking to endamage
men in their goods, and as far as might be, to bring all mankind to
destruction, as is plain by sorcerers and witches: And as he is bent to the
utter ruin of mankind, so out of doubt he would long ere this, have brought it
to pass, had there not been a superior power to restrain this his fury.
Therefore they were forced to believe that there was a devil, postea, esse
Deum, qui istius resisteret, and quasi jura daret tyrannidi, and afterward
that there was a God, who might resist and set bounds to his tyranny,
especially he being far mightier then we, and we not able to withstand him.
3. The frame of the world. 3. From the frame of the World.
There is a beginner of the World, Sic apud Poetas veteres, (...). So we read
in the ancient Poets, of the Prince of the World, the maker of the World, the
World has both a beginner, and beginning. As a tree, though we find not the
root of it, yet we know a root it has; though we cannot find the fountain
whence the river comes, yet we do know it has one: So, though we cannot come
to know how the world had his beginning, yet sure are we that it had a
beginning. Men make a controversy of that, in the picture whereof they will
not stand in controversy. 4. Damascene. 4. Whatsoever is concluded of the
properties of things, is also concluded of the natures.
That which is (...), in the manner of being, is also (...), in the being; so
we seeing all things in the World had their (...), conversion; We may well
conclude that they had their beginning.

2. Where there are diverse natures most discrepant, and these are brought into
an harmony and concord, it must necessarily be argued, that there was one that
accorded them, that tuned them; as in a Lute tuned: so the World being full of
varieties of natures, yet they agreeing in a wonderful sympathy, there must
needs be a tuner of this so great an harmony.

3. Whereas it is evident, that celestial bodies have no other use, but to
make fruit come out of the earth; and all inferior bodies were made for the use
of man: and whatsoever is in man, is of knowledge of these things, and of every
thing that is in the World, the inventor, the age, the time, etc. may be
assigned when they began: as laws, learning in Jury, arts, etc. And Pliny,
though he write of the invention and inventors of things, yet about the
beginning of the World he writes very suspitiously. Obj. Sol.
And for that they say, Ex nihilo nihil fit: Responsio: Alia conditio est rei
dum fit, alia cum facta est. Nutritur quisque in conceptu per umbilicum, post
conceptum per os. That nothing comes of nothing, I answer: there is one
condition of a thing when it is in making, another when it is made. In the
belly every one is nourished by the navell, but after he is borne by the mouth.
Object.
And for that they say, they know not whether moveri or motum esse, to be done,
in fieri, in the doing, and to be done in facto, in the deed done, be the
first; Ergo mundi nullum principium: Sol.
Sol. In pulsu cordis est (...)and (...) nescitur uira p^ior: Therefore the
world had no beginning, I answer: In the heart beating there is both
contraction, and dilatation, it is unknown whether be former: yet we know that
the heart had a beginning, ejusque pulsus, Object.
and its beating. And for that they say against invention of things; it is
possible that there have been many deluges: and though the beginning of Arts,
etc. may be alleged after the deluge, yet not before the former deluges. Now
seeing there was a beginning, it must proceed either from chance, (...), made
of it self; The beginning of the world, whence. 1. Not from chance.
or nature, or will and counsel, or from God. 1. Not from chance. If a man
should come into a desert Wilderness, and see a cottage erected, his
conscience would give him that it came not by chance, but built up by some one.
If Aristippus came to see a circle, triangle, drawn on the shore, he will
straight imagine that some drew them; therefore we must not ascribe the
beginning of the world to fortune, especially seeing the whole generation of
man ascribes not rerum generationem fortunae, sed interitum the generation of
things to fortune, but (...) destruction. As we say, it chanced that such a
house was burnt with fire; it chanced that such a thing happened to such a
thing. Rerum autem inventionem, generationem, correctionem, tribuimus arti vel
consilio, But we atttibute the invention, generation, and amendment of things
to art and counsel. In Apollonii argonauticis, the poor Countreyman seeing
the first Ship that arrived at Colchos, could say, (...); is any within to
guide it?

2. In fortuitis, chanceable things, there is no order that can be observed; no
more than in the Dice, but confusion: but in the world there is a most
excellent order in all things, but in the actions of man disordered by his fall.

3. Chance and purpose can never agree. Fortuitum enim definitur esse praeter
propositum A changeable thing is defined to be a thing beside the purpose; but
of the world there is a manifest purpose: for there is an eye, that eye has
his object, that his line, that his medium, middle, that a species, a vision;
and so a counsel, and a mutual distinction.

2. Not from nature.
Secondly, not by nature, which is the course that all the world shall continue
by: if nature were the first cause, then they should reduce all things to it,
and bring a reason of every thing from it. Hoc autem fieri non potest, but this
cannot be done. For they themselves cannot give a reason of the ebbing and
flowing of the sea: the color of the Rainebow: the strength of the nether
chappe, which is able to snap a sunder iron, yet has a very weak upholder.
The heat of the stomach, why it consumes any meat, that hurts not it self,
nor the next parts. And even in virtues, they make another kind of virtue,
(...), divine, heroical.

3. If nature were the first cause, then seeing nothing can go against the
chief cause, there should be nothing against nature. But we see the Sun
stood at the commandment of Joshua, the Suns eclyps in the full of the Moon
against nature, at Christ's passion; the Comet against nature in the
constellation of Cassiopeia, with the watery signs.

No natural reasons prophesying that Cyrus should d^l ver and restore Is^ael.
3. Prophesying and foretelling things to come in plain names, Esaias 44 28. A
prophecy of Cyrus, 100 years before he was borne, 1 Kings 13.2. Of Josias 300.
before his birth. Josh. 6.26. Of Hiel 500 years before his time almost; that
he should ^u^ld Ierico, and lay the foundation of it in his eldest son Abiram
and set up the gates thereof, in his youngest son Segub. Id quodevenit, that
which cam^ to pass. 1 Kin. 16.34. Ergo a Deo, qui est agens voluntarium,
Therefore from God who is a voluntary agent, prophecy of necessity must be
referred to a superior cause.

God so sensibly proved to us in his creatures, that we may as it were (...),
touch or handle him.
4. The order of the creatures, the wonderful framing of them, the hidden power
in them, and the great art in the searching out of them; insomuch that the
ordinary and contemptible things have wrought to the astonishment of all men.
Pliny marvelleth at the Gnat, at the trunk of it, where with she makes a
noise; and says, that wit^ out a power above nature that thing could not be
created; As also the Butterflies, and infinite others. Galene, de usu partium,
blasphemously entreating of the parts of man: when he comes to one of least
account, he is in admiration of it, and is constrained to name God and says,
he has described Hymnum Domino, a Hymn or song ^o the Lord, in describing the
use of that part.

And as we learn by those things that are without us, that there is a God, so
may we learn the same by things in us. We have a soul endued with reason and
understanding immortal; then this must either be the cause of it self, or
else have it of some other Of it self it is not, for it knows not it self;
no not the body, but by anatomy; but every cause knows his effect, not only
post quam productum fuerit, sed etiam antequam producatur, and quibus quasi
gradibus producitur, after it is brought forth, but even before the production,
and as it were by what means it is produced.

The cause must know its effect.
2. Our parents, our father in begetting us, our mother in conceiving knew not
what should be begotten: ad causam autem nec^ssario requiritur ut cognoseat
suum effectum antequam existat: and dum est in producendo. For to the cause it
is necessarily required that it know its effect before it be, and while it is
in producing.

The cause must command the effect.
3. And after we be brought forth, we cannot command every part of us; as the
beating of the Arteries in the heart; therefore from our selves we proceed not.
Therefore we must necessarily have our cause aliunde, from some other. And
there is no cause in the world partaker of man's understanding, but man. For no
unreasonable thing: and none is above reason, but God. And Arist. 9. ad
Eudemum, (...). Reason is not the cause of reason, but reason comes of a
better thing then reason; The cause is better than the effects.
Aratus alleged, Acts 17.28. (...), We are also his offspring. Romans 1.19.
(...), that which may be known of God, is manifest in them.

4. Within our soul are certain sparks of the light of nature, ^i.
principles of infallible and undoubted truth; as to honor our parents and
superiors, to do as we would be done to: to defend our selves, to keep
promise, to hurt no man without a cause, etc. at the first hearing whereof we
assent. And if these were not, we were all naught, and the overthrow of all
sciences, nature and society should follow: All natural notions, infallible
truths.
among which, this is one, that there is a God, and that he is to be
worshipped: and howsoever all other fails, yet this never fails; all other
principles yield to this. A sign that it is deeper printed in us then the
rest, insomuch that the pride of man's nature which will yield to nothing else,
is contented miserably to submit it self to a piece of red cloth, (...),
self-love.
rather then there should be no religion. This notion therefore the chief, and
will not be plucked out, Object.
unless the heart go also. If exception be here taken: If this notion be
universal, how then be there so many Atheists? We will answer them with
Seneca: Sol. 1.
Mentiuntur, qui aiunt se non sentire esse Deum: affirmant tibi, non sibi:
affirmant interdiu, non noctu: and evelli non potest e cord cor ipsum
evellendum est. They lie, who affirm that they perceive not that there is a
God; they who say so, they say it to thee, but not to themselves; they affirm
it in the day time, but not in the night: and it cannot be plucked out of the
heart, the heart it self must first be plucked out. But better thus: A man may
proceed to great hardness of heart, Sol. 2.
and blinding of himself; yet must we hold that rule, 1. Polit. 1. Specimen
naturae cujuslibet, e natura optima sumendum est, the proof of the nature of
any one, is to be taken from the best nature. and Cic. de not. deorum. If we
will know what notion is most universal in man, we must take our argument from
the best. But they say there is an universal notion. For the other, which are
sick of the world and the flesh, and the pleasures of them both: as we cannot
from a sick man reason of taste; so we are not to judge by these men, what is
naturally in man: for they are a loose sort, dissolute in life, and having no
leisure to think a good thing, having their hearts fat; yet though he be as
fat as the Horse or a Mule, yet if the Lord put his bit into their mouths,
these natural sparks will break forth, and darkness shall not be able to
comprehend the light. And it is even in the worst natures: if at any time they
be straighted by afflictions, as in Aeschylus (...), when the Persians being
put to flight at the lake Strimon, When danger comes, then the light breaks
forth.
must needs go on the Ise thawing, by the heat of the Sun; then every one
that before said there was no God, fell on his knees, and prayed God that the
Ise might bear them. So Dion Boristhenes, as the Italian Histories report,
Antonius Vrceus Codrus, when the Lord attached them of age; Cephalus, (1. Plat.
de rep.) says to Hippocrates, while I was a young man, when they told me of
Styx, Acheron, I could think that there was none, and I scoffed at them: but
now in my old age, when I am to depart, I begin to doubt, how if there be such.
So we see danger, sickness, and age will show us that there is a God.

The maine argument.
The major. The notions natural in us, are universally true. The minor. Of the
essence of God, we have a notion. Conclusion, therefore, we must believe that
there is a God. (...), God has revealed them.

Argument 2.
Ab altera animi notione, a reali sc. distinctione boni and mali, contra
Pyrrhonem; from the other notion of the mind: namely from the real distinction
of good and evil, against Pyrrho; that said, That nothing was simply good or
evil. We see, Gen 9.22. though Cham was such an ungodly person; Genes. 9.22.
yet he sees this, that it was an uncomly thing to lie as his father did.
Therefore in him a power to distinguish between decorum and non decorum, that
which is comely, and not comely. Genes. 14.21. the most wicked Sodomites knew,
Genes. 14.21.
that good was to be requited to Abraham. Genesis 27.41. Esau would kill his
brother Jacob, yet not whilst his father lived. 2. Sam. 19.17. Absalom though
in Arms against his father, yet sees this wickedness in Hushai his fathers
friend, and rebukes it. Math. 26.48. Judas, though he would betray his Master,
yet he would not do it in open manner; but gave them a privy token;
Whomsoever I shall kiss, etc.

The ground of real distinction between good and evil.
So then seeing the most evil would seem good; and deny evil in themselves,
and reprehend it in others; this is really to distinguish between good and
evil. The ground of this distinction, either the consent of men between
themselves, as Pyrrho says, which cannot be; for then every thing at man's
appointment should be good or evil. Or from a nature above man: and so it
leads us to God an unchangeable nature. Genesis 3.11. (...) Who told thee? etc.
From a manifest part of the soul, sc. conscientia, the conscience, which is
Gods Deputy. That is also a demonstration against those that think that
religion is a devise. Conscientia 3.
3. Those that committed any offense, are always troubled, and never in quiet.
If any object, least they should be revealed to the Law. Then give them
security; let them do it in the wilderness in the dark, Object. Sol.
where and when none shall see them: yet shall they never be quiet. (...), the
conscience shall smite the soul. They shall have their surda verbera, deaf
strokes: yea they themselves will be constrained to tell it in their sleep, or
in their madness; or as Plutarch says of Bessus, he shall think that the
Birds of the air will tell it. Then is not religion a devise of man (as they
say) nor shall be, Of Gods fearful vengeance.
as long as they have the Vicegerent of God in them. And Christ uses this to
condemn them; out of Esaias 66.24. Vermis eorum non moritur, their worm dies
not.

4. To conclude this point. They that have denied it in their life's, their
deaths have proved it for them, Genes. 7. the overwhelming of the Flood, the
punishing of Sodom with utter destruction. Pharaoh. And whereas the Lord uses
in all sins to punish them most severely at the beginning, and after to
suffer them: yet in this sin he has taken another course; to confute the
Atheists lives, by their death; to confute them by the end of their days.
Pherecides the Syrian never almost durst come into company; yet once at a
banquet amongst his friends, being merrily disposed, says, that he had lived a
long time, yet never done sacrifice, nor offered up prayer to any God. And
within few days after, he was eaten up with lie^.

So Diagoras was the cause of his proscription at Athens, and of the sacking
and destruction of his whole Country, in revenge of that wicked opinion of his.
Julian the Apostata, being overcome of Necromates in battle, The horrible
death of Atheists.
pulled out his own guts, and cast his blood into the air, and so died with
miserable yelling. Lucian, keeping for recreation a kennell of hounds, leaving
them fast bound and safe when he went out to supper; at that supper, having
spoke much against the truth of God, as he came home, his dogs ran mad, and
breaking loose, fell upon him and tare him in pieces.

Appion (against whom Josephus writes) scoffing against the old Testament, but
especially at the point of circumcision; the Lord in that very same place
struck him with ulcers, so that he made him a spectacle to all that came after
him. Machiavels end, was in the prison of Florence, rotting in pieces.
Therefore for a conclusion, as the heathen men write upon Zenacharibs tomb,
(...), whosoever looks upon me, let him learn to be godly: so may we
conclude, (...), Whosoever looks upon these, let him learn to be godly. The
second station is, that God is a rewarder of them that seek him: The second
station. Gods providence. God in regard of his essence is as a stranger to us
in a far Country. Four false opinions. 1. No providence.
therefore we must not only acknowledge his essence, but also his providence:
for denying of his providence is semiatheisme, and the Epicures erred in this.
For though they were by reason compelled to confess that there was a God, yet
they said, Non curare eum nos, that he has no care of us. Then of the
providence of God, 1. what God is to us; (the knowledge whereof must be joined
with his essence) there be four branches of opinions: 1. That God at no hand
medleth, but that he has drawn the Heavens betwixt him and us, 2. That God
had providence and government in the beginning of the world, but after set his
Deputy to rule the world.
that we should not see what he does, nor he what we do. 2. That there is a
providence, but of general things; a general providence, rewarder to two
causes, but not to every particular individuum, individual. 3. Grant both
these; esse etiam individuorum providentiam, that there is a providence of
individuals: Yet that its such, that if any one should look upon a stage play,
3. That there has always been a providence, but a general providence; not
meddling with rewarding or punishing.
when any thing is ill meant, to laugh at it; when well to praise: but not to
meddle with rewarding or punishing. 4. As he has a providence in general and
particular things and causes; so does he not only behold, but also reward and
punish: and this is true, for we must join his essence and providence together.
Concerning the former. i. his essence: little glory returns to him, and
less profit to us; but we must know what he is to us: therefore this is to be
joined, that he will and ought to be sought: and though (ut quidam site) we
are Domini vernae, the Lords bondmen, and bound to seek him; yet is there a
reward quaerentibus ipsum, to them that seek him.

The reasons of the first opinion, that there is no providence.
For the first, the especial reasons why they altogether excluded the
providenc^ of God. 1. The adversity of the good men, and the prosperity of the
wicked. For say they, if there were any providence, Bonis been esset, malis
male, it would be well for good men, and ill for bad men; but sense teaches
plainly the contrary: 2. When he alleged, that though diverse abuse the gifts
of God, yet he deals unto all so, that he is not to be blamed: They say, that
he might as well have given the use of the gift, as the gift; Ergo verisimile
nullam esse providentiam, it would therefore seem that there is no providence.
3. The manifold defects in natural and moral things, exclude his providence.


For the first, if any man be perfectly good, Sol.
no adversity can bend him; if perfectly evil, no prosperity: but none in the
world is either perfectly good or evil. But it stands with the justice of
God, that evil that is in the good, to punish it in this life: that good that
is in the evil, to reward it in this life; ut eorum malum puniat in vita
futura, that he may punish their evil in the life to come. And the punishment
in this life is a great benefit. Hence Aug. Domine hic seca, hic ure modo ibi
pa^cas, O Lord, here in this life cut me, burn me, Sol. 2.
so that in the life to come thou spare me. 2. Con. We know what the devil
said concerning Job, Does Job serve God for naught? God to stop the mouths of
the wicked and Satan, punishes the godly. Hence the devil, if good men live
in prosperity, is ready to object, They live in hypocrisy, that they serve
God, because God serves them. Therefore God to make manifest, Virtue is not
mercenary, but free.
that the godly serve him not for temporal commodities, and that virtue is not
mercenary, but gratuita, free, he often lays afflictions upon his: and this
affliction his children willingly embrace. 2. Con. The same with the former.
The devil, Job can do no other but serve God; Conclus. 2.
he is not left to his own choice. Sol. There is no commendation, and
therefore no reward, if a man do that, which he must needs do. Sol.
Now if God shall have left men in this cause, he could not have rewarded them:
and what commendation is it for the fire to burn? Cum ejus sic ferat natura,
since that is its nature. For the three first, its necessary that God has no
part in the evil doing, or with the doer. Sol. 3. A good thing will not permit
evil.
God no cause of evil. Omnis actio omnisque motio a Deo: actionis imperfectio
non a Deo, sed a male se habente instrumento. Every action, and every motion is
from God, but the obliquity or imperfection of the action is not from God, but
from the perverseness or weakness of the instrument. In the creeples, the
motion is from the soul; the deformity of the motion, a distortione membri,
from the crookedness of the member: moving and hal^ing unum per accidens,
(alterum per se) the one, by accident, the other by it self, therefore the
action whatsoever, it is from God; but if it halt, the deformity is of the
crookedness of the instrument. Secondly, he permits evil, The Lords will
is to make a Theater of his goodness.
non nisi per privationem gratiae suae, not but by privation of his grace. For
the permission; the reasons first being granted, that the defect of every thing
from his goodness, is his evil; evil has no part with God. If there had
been no defect in the variety and multitude of things in the world, Gods
goodness could not so fully have been expressed: neither should there have
been any resemblance of God. Where is no defect, there is no mean. There is a
like affection in none, therefore much less in the Lords creatures.
But God willing to show his goodness in all degrees, and to have a
resemblance of himself in things, has made a defect in things. 2. If no
defect, there had been but one good thing. Excellency is a property of God: if
there were no defect in things, there could be no excellence, the resemblance
of God: but in some creature there is some resemblance of the Creator. 3. No
order; for unless there be a prior and posterior, there can be no order.
Again, sundry virtues had been superfluous, justice, temperance, etc.

Thirdly, because it is necessary that good should be loved in the highest
degree, and we cannot be brought to love good more then by the want of it: The
Lord drew the greatest benefit that ever we had, our redemption out of the
greatest evil.
and suffering the evil and defect being the way to the want of it, therefore
this permission would he never have granted, unless more good might be had by
the permission of it, then by the not having of it. The greatest evil that
ever was, was the betraying of Christ: out of this the Lord drew the greatest
benefit that ever was; our redemption.

That there is a providence. (...) properly is that affection of love which the
parents bear to their children, and the children to their parents. (...) is
the want of it.
Now that there is providence, 1. general. 2. in singular things, not only by
the ordinary course of second causes, but also by the direction of God himself.
For the first: Its natural to every thing to be careful to preserve that
which he has brought forth: and and that is (...), natural affection. And as
(...) natural affection is a great virtue, and the having of it is Gods gift;
so is (...), the want of natural affection, a great infamy and vice. If (...),
the want of natural affection, be a vice and reprehensible; no doubt it cannot
fall in Deum, upon God; therefore we must give him his (...), affection over
his creatures. 2. No workman will give over his work till he has brought his
work unto perfection. But generation of things is not yet complete; and every
day he brings forth some new thing: therefore yet God has not given over his
providence. Dilucidius apparebit in singularibus, this will more clearly
appear in particulars. 1. Arist. de motu animalium, argues of the providence
of God; the Sea being higher then the Land, and the waters far above the
brimmes of the earth; and no Philosopher being able to give a reason why it
should not overflow the earth, especially seeing the nature of it is to
overflow; it must needs be of Gods providence, which does limit its bounds,
that it cannot pass. 2. Plotinus from plants. They, without any direction, if
they stand between two soyles, the one dry and barren, the other moist and
fruitful, they will shoot their root from the dry and barren, to the moist
and good ground. 3. From the Flowers, that shut themselves in the night, lest
they should receive corrupt and evil moystures: in the day they open
themselves, for to receive the heat of the sun. Psalm. 147.9.
4. In the Birds. The young Ravens (says David) cry unto the Lord, and he
feeds them, being as yet scarce covered with the white moss, and forsaken of
the old Raven: from their dung there ingendereth a worm, that creeps up to
their bill, and so are fed. 5. Arist. that the little fish Pimotheca, enters
league with the Seacrabbe, and taking a stone in his mouth, when the Oyster
opens it self against the sun, swimmeth in with the stone in her mouth, so
that the Oyster cannot shut again; so the Crabbe pulls forth the meat, and
they both fall to their prey. 6. In Beasts.
The wild beasts are not so fruitful and generative as the tame: least all
things should be overrunne with them, therefore there is something that takes
their fruitfulness from them, namely God. 2. Whereas their natures are to
pray; therefore by all likelihood, they should love those places that are
fittest to pray in; yet they love desert places, dens. 3. Psalm. 104. When man
is to go forth to his work, all the day time they lie in their dens: at
night when man is to take his rest, they go forth to seek their prey.
Generally in all, the discerning the places of nourishment, and the means how
to get nourishment out of it, the knowing of the motions of the musculs without
a teacher. 2. When a man of great experience and knowledge, may easily be
confounded and deceived in a great company of sheep, in seeking every Lambs
ewe, the Lamb in the thickest of them will find out her own ewe. 3. In
discerning of hurtful things; at the voice of a Kite, the Chicken: at the
smell of a Woolfe, the Lamb will fly, though they never had experience of any
hurt by them. 4. The (...), affection of the parents toward misshapen children,
though to every one else most odious, yet no less loved of their parents then
if they had all the gifts of nature perfect. 5. The sudden cry of every
creature affrighted with any grief: by all men's confession it cannot be
voluntary: no reason can be given of it: and it has made the heathen confess,
that it was Vox naturae, vel amantis dominum naturae; the voice of nature or of
one loving the Lord of nature. So we see that there is a providence, both by
argument, and also by practice, in the Sea, Plants, Flowers, Fishes,
Wild-beasts, etc. Theodoret Bishop of Sirus has taken pains about this point
in his ten Sermons de providentia, concerning providence.

The second opinion.
The second point. To that imagination that grants providence, but such only,
as is in a Clock, the plummets weighing down by little and little; so that
the providence is in the second causes. 1. The means work nothing; but as the
Prophets say, there is beside the bread, the staff of bread, Ezech. 4.16. and
5.16. and 14.13. Matthew 4.4. Psalm. 17.14. Hag. 1.6.
which Christ calls the World of God, David, Gods hidden treasure, which if
it be not, we shall (as Haggai says) put money into a bottomless purse. The
means always works not, because there is not a thing added to the means,
that gives strength. The Philosophers have acknowledged it; and called it the
infusion of strength and efficacy into the creatures. This is the first cause;
not of the secondary causes; that if without means diverse things have been
brought to pass, not only, Genes. 1. because men should not think that the
sun is cause of light, he made the light before the sun; nor think that
the seed is cause of fruit, therefore he made with the seed, fruit: but also in
these days we see preferment cast on them, that never sought for it. Second
causes withstanding, yet the effects are brought forth. Christ used clay to
open eyes, which is rather a means to put them out. Helias put Salt into Salt
water, to make it fresh and sweet. John 9.6. 2 Reg. 2.20. Genesis 40. and 41.
Jason Phereus healed by a sword thrust into his belly, Joseph's imprisonment
the means of his preferment, the first bringing in of the Christian faith does
most firmly show this. Then by want of learning, They had not only no means,
but also means against them.
great learning confounded; by weakness, strength; by nothing, something. 2.
Fortunes commission it is not, issue of war: of which though many profane
mouths have given forth this, that Sors Domini campi, fortune is Lady of the
field; yet there never was any, but before he entered battle, vowed; and after
paid his vow. So in drawing of lots, which a man would think especially to be
of chance: Jonah 1.7. etc. 5.16. etc.
yet the Mariners in the ship with Jonas, used this as being of the
providence of God. Cassena in Plutarch. 3. Ihado: when the Heathen could not
find out any thing, but was in doubt, used to fall to lots, as if God would
answer them in their doubtful lots. 3. From chance medly, Herodotus. Cambyses
lighting off his horse, his sword falling out of the Scabbard, ran him into
the groyne: and he ascribes this to providence, for his evil behavior in
Egypt. Lastly, the Philosopher concludes: That casual things are nothing else,
but effects of causes far off removed; if of these, much more the things
concurring near together are referred to providence. That is a greater
argument of providence, to join things far asunder, then those that be
near. But (that which proves all fully) Prophecy cannot be brought to pass
withal the plummets; but that is of the providence of God.


Having showed, that there is a providence of God in general. 2. That it
deals her self, and has her own hand in bringing things to pass. Both
Philosophy and humane reason show that there is a singular providence.
3. Now that this providence reaches it self to every singular man, this by
Philosophy and man's reason proved. Yea Philosophy making providence a part of
prudence, and prudence a practical virtue; and practical virtues having their
objects in singularibus, in particulars; Therefore secondly it is sure, that
the power of God reaches to every thing, Quia virtutis est maximae pertingere
vel remotissima, for supreme virtue can reach things most remote. But his
goodness and will to do good, is no shorter then his power: all good
qualities and of equal longitude and latitude; and where there is power and
providence, there can be no hinderance.

3. There are none, but will confess, that it is a more commendation to
provide for every particular thing, then for the whole in general. Mithridates
is highly commended for that having many thousands in his Army, could speak
familiarly to every one: and call him by his name. Then si quod melius non
agatur, if that which is better be not done, it is of some defect in the doer:
but in God there is no defect.

Now from the rest of creatures to man: (ut Christus) If God has a care of
Heaven, which has no use of his own light or motion; but is only to make the
inferior things fruitful, and Cattle have the use of green things, and man
of Cattle, and all other things; and the Philosopher telling, that that which
has the use of all things is principal of all; man having the use of all
things, must needs be principal. Si sit providentia Dei in reliquas creaturas,
and in principalem se extendat necesse est, If Gods providence reach to the
other creatures, then much more must it extend it self to the principal.
Psalm. 8. David considers the great glory of the Heavens; then the eternity of
them: and he wondreth how God could pass by them a most glorious body; and put
the soul of man, a most excellent creature, into a vile lump of clay and
earth.

3. Man was the inteded end of all other creatures: for they know not their
own gifts; Equus, si vires suas nosceret, non reciperet sessorem suum, The
Horse if he knew his own strength, would not receive his Rider. Therefore this
occultation of the gift from that that has it, and the manifestation of it to
man that has it not, is an argument that man is Gods County Palantine of the
whole world. This is that that Chrysostom in a godly anger, being displeased
with mankind, says, Appende te homo, ponder thy self, O man, art thou not
better then all other creatures? yet is Gods providence over the basest of
them. And as from all other creatures to man; so from men, to good men. For if
he have a providence of those, who have only the Image of God, in them, by
nature; then where there are two Images of God, 1. of Nature, 2. of grace
through Christ, multo magis, much more, The Philosophers similitude is, magnes
amoris amor, love is the loadstone of love.
If he care for all mankind, then much more for them that hate themselves to
love him; that lose themselves, to find him; that perish, The third station,
that God will be sought.
to live with him.

There are yet two things. 1. That God will be sought. 2. That he will reward
them that seek him. 1. Facientis finis est ipsemet, the end of the doer is
himself. Therefore bringing this to God, and by 2. necessity, because God has
no end; quia finis est supra efficientem, the end is above the efficient; and
God having nothing above himself, ipse sui finis, therefore he himself is his
own end.

And being his own end, it must needs be that he created all things either for
his own profit, pleasure, or honor. But neither for profit, (for no profit
can redound from us to him; nor for pleasure, therefore for honor: and this
honor is the seeking of God. 2. Where there are two relatives, there is
grounded a mutual duty between them: between a father and a son,
obedience: between a servant and a master, service: between the husband and
the wife, mutual love: between the creature and the Creator, cultus. i. The
fourth station, God is the rewarder.
honor. 1. Therefore he being sought, (for sure it is, that though we be but
vernae Domini, the Lords bondmen; and that possit esse Dei diplomata condere,
God may make Charters, or Letters Pattents;) as of Kings that give Laws, and
yet give no rewards to the keepers of them, but punish the breakers of them;
yet he will reward both the keepers, and breakers of his laws. And that he
will reward, there can be no better argument, then that he rewards some: and
he says, (...), I will give unto this last, even as unto thee, Matthew. 20.14.
But in the eyes of the world we see, that he rewards some; and it cannot
stand with the justice of God, that he should reward some, and not othersome:
therefore there shall be a place where these all shall be rewarded. And if we
see not the multitude of rewards as we would; let us ascribe it to this, that
God is not sought for as he should be: small service; for doctrine, in
examining controversies; for life, in examining our actions. This, to this end;
that religion being divided into these two parts: into Christianity, and in
Christianity; The body of christianity, which is the true part, having such
little seeking of God; there being no doubting in doctrine, none in men's
actions; he so seldom rewarding.

After the Counsel of Trent, when the league was made by mutual marriage, of
the Emperor, King of Spain, King of France, having then taken their oath for
the rooting out of us and our religion, the Lord at that time disappointed them
by the death of their corpses: and within half a year, they fell together by
the ears. 2. The wounding of the Spaniard Ieroego; who was shot thorough the
head, and no faculty hurt. In the delivery of Rochel, when the King of Spain
withal his power laid siege to it, and famind it; There was a great multitude
of shell-fishes brought to the City, that never was seen before, nor never
after; and by that means was the City saved. In the siege of Harlam, by Duke
de Alva, the reward of them that seek not God. Reward of them that seek not
God. Examples.
The King of Sweveland, deposed of his own subjects, for incest. For murder,
the last King of France died miserably; the blood gushing out of as many places
of his body, as could come forth; and that presently upon that great slaughter
of the Saints. Deuteronomy. 28.1. Levit. 26.3.
For breach of faith: The Venetians making league against the Turk, and after
joining themselves with the Turk, were punished by the loss of the best I Will
in all their Country, Cyprus. In Portugal the Lord overthrew Stukeley, made
King of Ireland by the Pope.

Four stations already handled in the way that we are to walk in: that we are
to come to God, and not to rest in any thing beside, and lean to religion,
leaving the world, and wandering without an end. 2. We have declined from the
way of reason, to the way of belief. 3. We have passed through the dangerous
paths of Atheism. 4. We have searched them that call into question the
general and particular providence of God; being in this way, seeking to find
God, we come into another quadrivium, or way that has four turnings, the
four principal religions of the world, whereby the diversities of Nations
have persuaded themselves that they have sought God.

Concerning these, 1 Cor. 8.5, 6. the Apostle foresaw this division of ways,
and has given us warning of them. 1. The Heathen in most parts in America, and
in the East Isles, and in a great part of Tartary, worshipped creatures in all
ages, and the dead, as did the Gentiles. 2. That which the Jews as yet
scattered here and there, hold. 3. Of the Turks and Saracens in all Asia, a
great part of Africa and Europe. 4. Is Christianity, professed of us.
Concerning these; sure it is, that there can be but one true: and if we go into
three of them, we shall err. Therefore that we might be sure, Concerning
religion, the way to seek God, which is the true religion.
and not be led by a prejudicate religion, wherein we are brought up, and to
shake off the temptations of the Adversary; it remains that we show, which is
the true and right religion. The Emperors Ambassador being at Constantinople
with the great Turk, saw wrought in cloth of estate in manner of an Emblem,
four Candlestickes, and four Candles in them, and three of them turned upside
down: and as it were, but one only burning; and it had this inscription in
Arabicke, This is the true light. The Ambassador asking of the meaning of this
inscription; they expounded, that they betokened the four Religions in the
World, whereof three were false, the other true; and that it was their
Religion. Therefore we are to show that those three of theirs are false, and no
true lights; and the Christian the true light. And to begin with Heathen
religion, Heathen religion or paganism.
or Paganism, which once spread it self over all the earth, saving a corner
in Syria: It cannot be denied but that the chiefest wits concerning the
knowledge of Arts and policy, have been in them, and among them: and in
Philosophy, their light has shined most brightly; and we have all lighted our
Candles at their light: and yet as the wisest of us may wonder at them for
nature and humane knowledge, so may the simplest of us laugh at them for the
worship of God: so dim has their light burned in the worship of God.

Reasons against the idolatry of the heathen.
The first reason against them is the Apostles in this place. They went amiss,
because they worshipped and had many Gods, and many Lords. Aug. lib. 4. De
civit. Dei, and Varro, lib. 1. de rebus divinis, making an Inventory of the
Gods of the Heathen; found 30000. Gods: 300. were Jupiters; beside a great
number of Dii majorum gentium and minorum: tutelares, medioximi, patellares,
penates, etc. of Gods of greater and lesser Nations, tutelar, small, petty
Gods, household Gods, etc. Whether they may be many or one, there is no
question: here it is said, (...), in whom are all things, by whom are all
things. The reason is: The inferior causes are resemblances of the superior,
and they of the highest. But we see in all the inferior causes, that many
branches come from one root: many parts ruled by one head; many veins by one
master vein; many channels from one fountain. So in superior causes, many
lights from one light; many motions from one motion: therefore in the highest
cause, this unity must be after the most perfect sort. (...), In whom are all
things. i. the mutual order of all things in nature, that all things are one
for another: Mutuus or do in se invicem, est propter conjunci um ordinem in
uno, the mutual order toward themselves is for the conjunct order in one. And
as all things flow from one, so they return to one again. But their own
reasons are sufficient against them. Pythagoras says, that in God there must
be (...), It is the nature of the effect not to receive a greater thing then
the effect.
an infinite or unlimited power. Else should the understanding of man. i. the
effect (because he is able to conceive an infinite power) exceed his cause.
Because it is able to conceive a greater thing then his cause. If the power be
infinite, the nature must be infinite; quia accidentis capacitas non excedit
capacitatem subjecti, the capacity of the accident does not exceed the capacity
of the subject. If the nature be infinite, then it is one: the reason; If one
grant two infinites, then there must be a line to part them: and on that part
that the line is of, they must be both finite. Therefore if we grant two
infinites, we must also grant they have two several forces: Virtus unita
fortior. United forces stronger.
and being divided, they cannot be so perfect as if they were joined together.
Therefore they having truly respect to it which could be, God were unperfect:
but no imperfectnesse with God. Vt sit Deus imperfect us, est in natura
monstrum, that God should be imperfect, is a monster in nature; but if they be
both perfect, then are they both all one, for nothing makes them differ.
Lactantius. 2. Because God ought to be omnipotent, either they must be of
equal force, or of unequal: if of equal, either they agree, or disagree. If
both equal and agree; then one superfluous: but superfluity excluded out of
the deity: and every thing in nature must be done after the best manner. That
which may be done in nature, must be done after the best manner.
Let them disagree, then there will not be the same course of things. If of
unequal power and disagree, then the greater will swallow up the less; and so
bring all to one. And howsoever the Heathen outwardly and in the face of the
Commonwealth durst not but hold Polytheisme; yet privily among their friends,
and in their writings, they condemned it (...), a having many Princes or
Rulers, is counted an inconvenience every where. (...). It is not good there be
many Lords, let there be one Lord.
Therefore the heathen have made one of their Gods a Father, the rest as his
children; one a King, the rest as his subjects. Pythagoras his advise to his
scholars was, to search (...), the unity. Arist. his drift was always, as in
every thing, to seek for prima, the first things: So being in any prima,
especially to seek ante omnia primum, that which was first before all. Flato
in his Epistles to Dionysius, signifies unto him that those Epistles that
contain sound matters, and that he would have him believe, he begins with
(...), God, or with Gods help in the singular: those that he would not have
him to believe, and that contain doubtful matter, with (...), Gods, or with
the help of the gods in the plural: making God the note of truth, Seneca.
Varro. Cic. de not. deorum.
and gods the note of falsehood. Zeno would say to his scholars, Dicite plures,
discite unum, say many, learn one. Sophocles, (...), in the truths there is
one God. Thus among themselves they muttered the truth, howsoever for fear of
punishment, or because they would not trouble the Commonwealth, they thought
this error of the multitude of gods very expedient to be suffered. But because
(as Aug. 24. de civit. Dei 4.) in the latter days in the Primitive Church, the
Philosophers were ashamed of the multitude of their gods; and therefore said
that they in the old time would never be so absurd as to worship diverse gods;
but that those names were given in respect of the diverse powers: therefore we
must go farther with these: Porphyrie. No similitude can be made, which can
represent God.
1. The Heathen did appoint diversity of gods. 2. That they commanded the
images to be made like to themselves;
if they showed their images, then they were circumscript: therefore no Gods,
but men. For God is infinite, neither can be resembled by images.

Secondly, Aug.
the whole course of the religion of the Heathen seeks no farther then the
eye can lead them: strikes no further then the skin. i. only to the outward
action. They could not search into the raines; no remedy they had for the
restraining of the heart, and mind, as hypocrisy. But nothing is more familiar
in ours, then the forbidding of concupiscence, and restrayning of the heart. 4.
There is not one of them but does require honor to be done unto him, only in
respect of every particular benefit; Origin cont. C^llum. But is content to
have his honor in respect of some particular benefit.
Deus autem universale bonum; but God is an universal good, as the Scriptures
themselves testisie; whereas none of their gods can do so much to him. Again,
(whereas Cyrill against Julian, which made him almost stagger;) whereas the
Heathen also confess, that by the sin of the body, the soul also is
polluted, at que adeo together to be punished; there must needs be something to
purge the soul as well as to cure the body; the heart and mind is first to be
purged, then the ^ody: and that religion that takes away the pollution of the
soul, is not found in their religion: for it cannot be purged by any expiation
in all their liturgies. Purgatio non potest perspici, nisi per principium; not
by Frankincense, for purging cannot be plainly understood, but by the
beginning: nothing polluted before it be purged, can recover its first
happiness. It is demanded, If then their Gods were no Gods, it would be known
what they were? I ans. 1. They were men. 2. Wicked and beastly men.
That they were men: Heathen gods. but men.
There is none of their gods, but his father and mother may be assigned, and
his kindred, in Poets: as in Hesiods (...), pedigree of the gods. In
Philosophy, as Tullie de not. deorum. Cyrill against Julian, Aug. de Civ. Dei.
Eusebius. de prepar. Evang. but best by Euemerus Missenius, Cypr. de vanitate
idolorum, of the vanity of Idols. Cyprian out of Haecataeus. Alex. the great
entering in private conference with Leo High Priest of Egypt, received of him
thus much, as a great secret. That the gods of the Grecians and other Nations
came out of Egypt: and all the Grecians gods and their religion came by
Cecrops, that brought all things he had from Egypt: and by Cadmus, a Phenician.
Phaenices autem Aegypti is omnia sua dona accepta referunt, the Phenicians
acknowledge to have received all their gifts from the Egyptians. The Romans
had all theirs from the Grecians by Numa Pompilius: he from Dard^nus and
Aeneas. Aeneas out of Syria, and the gods of the Egyptians were but men, and
that they of those days could assign their progenies: Vt Hermes Trismegistus
to Aesclepius, had his pedigree from Vranus, and Mercurius his great
grandfather, which was accounted one of the Heathen gods. Heathens gods wicked
men.
That they were wicked men. For religion is nothing else but a faculty, to make
us one perfectly in the life to come; and in this life to frame our selves to
Gods action in similitude. But their Gods were full of rapes, adulteries, etc.
Concerning this matter, you may read Eusebius. de praepa. Evangel. Cyrillus,
Josephus cont. Appian. Athanasius.

Origin. Tertullian. in apologetico. Lactantius in his two first books. If
they were men, how came they to be worshipped divinis honoribus, How the
Heathen gods, being but men, came to be worshipped with divine honors.
with divine honors, at all? How came the beasts to be worshipped as Gods? The
ways are many; but they may be reduced to these three: two of the deifying of
men, one of beasts. After the flood, a general revolting from religion: and
that that did them good, they worshipped as God. Now by reason of the slymes
and mud, there grew many Serpents and many monsters; at the last the beasts
greatly multiplied. And thirdly, there increased a sort of beastly men, given
to Epicurisine. Against these three, those that opposed themselves, both in
regard of the good received by them, and to stir up others to do the like;
they worshipped them with divine honors. Another way was this. Porphyrie says
that Ninus in honor of Belus his father, having obtained the Monarchy, erected
an Image for his love of the dead. This Image, because he would have it no
less esteemed of others then of himself, made it a sanctuary: so that if any
malefactor, or any that was in debt, had fled to it, he was safe, and freed
from his debt. So by this, diverse having received benefit; partly to be
thankful for their benefit received, partly to do Ninus a pleasure, then
living and bearing rule, they solemnized it with hymns, and with feasts,
instituted certain days for the solemnising of it; hanged it about with
garlands: baecque virtutis ergo facta sunt, and celebrandae illustrium hominum
mortuorum, and incitandae posterorum; these things were done for virtues sake,
to extol famous men dead, and to the encouragement of the posterity. After,
the cause of this celebration being forgot, they began to make prayers unto it;
first in verse, accounting it a light thing to sing Hymns unto it in verse,
after in prose. And this was that Bell in the Scriptures, which the broader
dialect of the Hebrews call Baal.

Deifying of beasts, how it came first.
For the deifying of beasts, Plutarch in his Isis and Osyris, says that Osiris
King of Egypt, (whom Porphyrie proves to be the Bacchus of the Gentiles)
dividing his Kingdom into certain Provinces, and to every Province giving a
certain sign or cognizance, agreeable to the nature of that, that most
abounded in that Province; as to the part most arable, an Ox; that had most
woods, a dog; to the part most full of meadows, a clod with a little green
grass on the top of it; where most waters were, a Crocodile; the posterity
coming after him, not knowing his purpose, conceived of them, as of some
divine natures; and every one worshipped that, by which he had his living most
especially: as they that lived by tillage, the Ox, calling it Apis; they which
followed their hunting, the Dog, calling it Anubito; they that lived by their
meadows, their Clod, i. Isis: and this was the beginning of idolatry.

How miracles and Oracles came among the Heathen. Difference between good and
bad miracles.
3. How then came their miracles and Oracles? For their miracles: 1. This is the
difference between a good miracle and a bad miracle. The good tends to the
profit of mankind; as the raising from the dead, the curing of incurable
diseases, the feeding of many thousands with a few Loaves and Fishes, etc. The
other have but a show of vanity, altogether frivolous; as it is reported of
Simon Magus, that he made an hill seem to move. Accius Manius did cut a
Whetstone with a Razor. And it is sure that Apollonius Thyanaeus had done as
great miracles as all the Oracles at Delos, they being but witches and
sorcerers: he was but three or four degrees from Mercurius. 2. The Christian
miracles are not expressible by Magic.


For the Oracles, the Heathen themselves against them. Auguslin out of
Porphyrie concerning the vanity of idols, shows: 1. The ambiguity. 2. The
vanity. 3. The contrariety of oracles. 4. That most part came not to proof.

For their Oracles. Porphyry says of the Oracles of the Gentiles, that as great
things were done by the Magitians in his time, as by any of them. Hermes to
Asclepius professed, that he through his magic brought certain spirits to
possess the image of his grandfather and others. Suidas at the word (...),
Phylis, reports that the chief idol of the Egyptians, being asked what he
was; answered that he was an under-spirit, and that his name was Serapion. i.
in the holy tongue, an Angel. Zoroastes, Cham, and the ancient Fathers are of
opinion, that the devil fell out of the company of Angels, called Seraphim.
Iamblychus declares how the devils would be allured to come into images, by
anointing the image with wormwood; at the length that they came most
willingly, though they would seem to be forced with outward means. Eusebius.
lib. 4. de praepar. Evang his confession of the Oracles is, that commonly they
were ambiguous, vain, and frivolous. 2. And sometime contrary one to another.
3. and most came not to proof. 4. and if they came to proof, they might
either have been done by Astronomy, or by some wise and politic man. And it
is most certain, that they delighted to have men sacrificed to them, whereas
God made man his special workmanship. 1. Therefore if they were Gods, they
would rather seek to preserve man, Herodotus, Livius.
then to seek his utter ruin; whereas they did covet their bloodshedding:
and that afterward of good men, of virgins, babes, and young men, etc. as the
Carthaginians. 2. The same Gods, when they were more gentle, they took this
course.
When they delivered them from any war, or from any other danger, Improved by
Scipio, Nasica and Scevola.
they required the institutions of Stage-plaies, and spectacles of Fencers; and
by that means also was killing: as also kinds of Circenses. Aug. 8. de Civit.
Dei. If their gods did so highly accept of Stage-plaies, then should the
Stage Players be in most price among the Heathen, as the especial servants of
their gods: but the Commonwealths of Greece and and Rome banished them, made
no account of them, yea they made a decree, that they should die intestate. Ita
dum tollunt pestem corporum, inducunt pestem animorum, so while they take away
the plague of the body, they bring in the plague of souls.

(...), Styx the terror of the gods.
3: Lastly for the proof of this, it is common not only in Homer and Virgil,
but also in the Philos. concerning their gods, if they named but Styx and
Cocytus, etc. they would tremble and be afraid, the images would be all on a
sweat, Iuratote per Stygem, deorum terrorem, swear ye by Styx the terror of
the gods. But we know that no Prince would be afraid of his own prison; much
less God of his prison: for these causes, though they misliked the whole
course of their religion; yet not being able to come to a greater perfection,
Rather looking to quietness, then to truth. Socra^es in apolog.
in his st^terunt, they persisted in these. But one went beyond them all. i.
that said, that one might as well swear by an Onion or a Leeke, as by Jupiter;
and was wont to swear by the basest and vilest things, and inveighed much
against the Athenian gods, and said that they were no gods: and for these and
such articles was arraigned. But as Lacrtius testifies, not long after his
death, there happened such a plague, as was never the like before or ever
since: Prytanc^m was the place where those that had well deserved of the
Commonwealth were kept. 1 Cor. 8.5, 6.
and asking counsel of the Oracle, they had no other answer, then that it was
for the death of the innocent: so afterward then erected him an image in
Prytanco: so in ascribing honor to him that dishonored their Gods, they
condemned both themselves and their gods.

The concession being twofold: 1. That there is one God to us. 2. That there is
one Christ.
The controversy between these of the heathen in religion, was concerning the
first part. The state of the Jews and Saracens is concerning the second part.
As the Jews utterly deny Christ to be the Messiah, and that he is not yet
come: so the Turks substitute another in his place. Between the Jews and us,
The opinions of the Jews concerning the Messia.
the wise man: Affirmations and negations change not the natures of things.
They acknowledge the old Testament, as well as we; therefore the proofs shall
be from it, and the authors of most account among them. The positions that
they hold are three) First, that the Messiah shall have an earthly Kingdom,
and his seat shall be at Jerusalem. Secondly, that our Christ is not the
Messiah. Thirdly, that he is yet to come. The first. If they would give credit
to their Chaldean paraphrast, or to Jonathan, or to Rabbi Shim^on the son of
Ishai, or to Rabbi Moses the son of Nichar; or to Rabbi Haccodesh, Whether
Christ should be an earthly Monarch.
and to all the ancient Rabbis that lived before the coming of Christ, then
were the matter at an end. But they give more credit to the latter Rabbis,
which all were moved with envy against Christ, Rabbi Solomon Nizahon. For the
first, whether the Messiah coming should be an earthly Kingdom. See Esaias
53.2. but especially verse 6. Esaias 53.6, 8.
The Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of us all. But they shift this off
and say, Its meant of the whole people. But after he says, He shall die for
his people. And it were absurd to say, the people shall die for the people;
neither could they die. Psalm. 22.16.18. They pierced my hands and my feet,
Psalm. 22, 16, 17, 18.
they parted my garments among them, and cast lots upon my vesture; which
cannot be understood by David. Zach. 9.9.
Zach. 9.9. The King of Zion shall come to thee poor and kumble, sitting on an
Ass: most plainly, Dan. 9.26. And after 62. weeks Messiah shall be slain,
Daniel 9.26.
etc. This the elder Jews could not conceive; and Philo Iudaeus understands
it of the sanctification of the high Priest. But he might easily gather that
this place was meant of the Messiah, by John the Baptist that sent two of his
Disciples, to know whether he were that Christ or no: but especially that place
of Daniel troubles them: insomuch that Nizahon falls into these blasphemous
words, that the Prophet was deceived and over-seene. Reason against the Jews.
1. Haggai 2.8. That the Messiah of the world, should be the expectation of the
Gentiles. How should it be a comfort to the Gentiles, Reasons against the Jews.
to have a stranger reign over them? which is forbidden the Jews, Deuteronomy.
17.15, 16. There shall not be a stranger to reign over them. 2. For as much as
it is plain, that the Messiah should be that that gives felicity to all the
world; I would know of them how Abraham, Isaac and Jacob could be saved, by an
earthly Prince and temporal; they being dead many hundred years before his
time? This they shake off so weakly, that they are feign to say, It shall be
(as they say) no bigger then it was before: as also the City. God will not call
the Saints from the fell-city that they have with him, to an earthly banquet.
Whether Christ be the Messiah.
that they and all the true Jews shall return to life again. But that is
absurder than the first. For first, they do themselves injury to think, that
the Land of Jury, as also their Temple, can hold all the Jews that ever were.
2. They are utterly injurious to the Heavenly souls, to call them out of an
heavenly paradise, out of Abraham's bosom, to come into an earthly paradise.
The third is common. By this, there should be no purgation of the souls from
sin: for this earthly Kingdom cannot purge the soul: it belongs only to
the body.

The second part, That Christ is not the Messiah. 1. Genesis 49.10. That the
Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet;
till Shiloh come. It was sure that before the captivity, it was altogether in
Judah, till the leading of the captivity continued. In the captivity they had
it by one of their brethren, that was called the King of captivity. And after
the captivity it continued, till it fell between Aristobulus and Hircanus;
(...) Rex multitudinis deportatae.
who striving for it, were both dispossessed, and Herod an Idumaean placed in
their room; and then was the time of Christ. Now if they shift this off and
say: that the Macchabees were not of the Tribe of Judah, Object.
but of Levi; and so deny the prophecy. Sol. The prophecy is divided, Sol.
that either a King or a Lawgiver should be of the Tribe of Judah. And that
there was a Lawgiver even till Christ was borne, its manifest, for they
confess that Simeon Iustus, Note.
whose song we have in our Liturgy, was the last of them; and ever since the
whole company of their Sanedrim dispersed. The third answer. Object.
They say that in the prophecy (...) The Scepter shall not depart from Judah.
The word (...) signifies not a Scepter, but a Tribe: so that it is meant, that
Judah should be a Tribe, till Shiloah come. Even that way they are confounded.
For ever since that time, Sol.
all the Tribes have been promiscuae, confused; and the Emperors presently
after that they had heard, that In Iudaea nascetur orbis dominus, the Lord of
the World should be borne in Iudaea; sought to root out the Jews, and
especially that Tribe that Christ should come of; and so it made them to
confound their Genealogies.

2. Dan. 9.25. Daniel receives this Oracle from the Angel, that from that
time to Messiah, etc. What these seven weeks are, its showed in the Gospel;
that they stand for years: so counting for every week seven years; 49. And
so long was the Temple in building: for three years they were in building the
walls, and gathering themselves together; the other 46. in building the
Temple, as the Jews said to our Savior, from that time to the coming of the
Messiah, 490. years.

3. Hag. 2.10. The glory of the last house, shall be greater then the first.
But in the first Temple, there was the Ark of the Lord, the pot of Manna,
Aarons rod, the shewbread, etc. the second Temple had none of these: but the
Prophet says the second Temple should be more glorious. This glory they cannot
find, unless it be in the time of Christ; for forty years after his death it
was destroyed: so they make this no prophecy. Petrus Galatinus de ar^^^is. Two
Famous companies among the Jews: the scholars of Rabbi Shamma. 2. Of R.
Hillel: but the latter, the more famous.
Petrus Galatinus out of the third of their Talmud, that the scholars of Rabbi
Hillel, considering th^se three prophecies, Daniel, Haggai, Esaias, though they
lived 50 years before his time, hoped that he should be borne in those days:
being thereto induced by the end of the 60. chapter of Esaias, That God would
hasten his coming. In the same chapter of the Talmud, on that place, Esaias 9.7.
(...) is written with (...) finale. in all copi^s in that place only, against
the nature of the letter. Whereupon Rabbi Thalumma does hold it is an Oracle:
s^. that i^ is the number of the years between Esaias and Christ his coming. i
600. years. 3. They say, This a principle among the Jews, that the veil
should not open, not the voice of the Lord fail, till the coming of the
Messiah.
that the prophecy of the second Temple, should not cease: (which was nothing
else but a small still voice coming from the Lord:) nor the Temple open, till
the Messiah came, etc. And they confessed that this voice ceased in Christ's
time, and in Herod's days, and that the veil of the Temple rent in two pieces,
and never since came it together. Besides these three, other three or four.
The continual sending to and fro, as of John Baptist, does argue, that they
wholly did look for his coming then: the Disciples to Christ. Some, that thou
art Elias; some, Jeremias; some, one of the Prophets. 2. About that time there
were so many false and counterfeit Messiahs, as never were before, nor never
after. For there were then either eight or ten, Seven or eight
as Josephus in the 18, 19, 20. books of antiquities. Beside Herod, of whom
came the Herodians: Judas the son of Marbaeus, Acts 5.36, 37. by Gamaliel.
Th^udas, Arthronges, Barchosba, the elder and the younger. But especially the
younger was in such reputation, that all the Rabbis did acknowledge him for the
Messiah. These upstarts d^e argue that there was a great expectation among the
people; for never since then, durst any be so bold, as to call himself the
Messiah, save one. 3. Suidas in the word (...) Jesus, says that it was
reported to Justinian the Emperor, by Philip a Merchant of Constantinople,
that had received it by the report of one Theodosius a I^w, that in the
catalogue of Priests was found (...), In the Temple for a while. At the same
time that Christ was crucified, there was the first breach made into the City,
in the same time of the year. Am^s 6.14. Zach. 11.12.13. The siege of
Jerusalem most miserable.
Jesus the Son of God and of Mary, and that he was admitted into the company
of the twenty two Priests. It should therefore seem, that he was a Priest,
else could he not have preached; because he was of the Tribe of Judah. And for
this cause some think that he was permitted to preach at Capernaum. Beside
these, one more. The prophecy of Christ, Luke 19.43. of the destruction of the
second temple. They confessing that after Malachy, there should no Prophet
arise, but it should be Messiah, Amos 6.14. from the entering of Hamath to the
river of the wilderness, Zach. 11.12, 13. The siege of the City so strange and
wonderful as never was the like: that the very heathen did see and confess
that the hand of the Lord was against them, when they could not besiege it long
for water, there was a little brook Siloh, which in former years was so dried
up, that men might go over it dry-foote. That did so swell suddenly, without
any natural cause, that it served all the armies of the Romans. 2. Titus did
labor by all means possible to offer them peace: yea he granted them to set
down what condition of peace they would; so they would yield themselves to the
Romans: yet they were so wilful, that they would suffer no condition of
peace. There was such a great plague, beside many millions slain, that the
ground could not contain the dead bodies, but were feign to cast them over the
walls: such a famine, that they were feign to eat their own children, etc.
The first breach that the enemy made into the City, was at the brook Cedron,
where they took Christ; and on the same day that Christ was taken, was the
City taken; on the same feast day at the same time of the year. The Emperor
commanded them to be whipped there, where they had whipped Christ. 30. Jews
were sold for a penny, as they sold Christ for thirty pence. There is a
prophecy, Amos 2.6.
Amos 2.6. For three transgressions of Judah, and for four, I will not turn
to it; because they sold the innocent for silver, and the poor for shoes.
Righteous.
They being urged to tell of whom the Prophet meant in this place: knowing not
how to shift it off, are feign to say, that it is of Joseph, that was sold of
the Patriarchs for silver: and for that cause, that they suffered that misery.
And never since had they any relief, but have lien these 1500. years,
scattered over all the world, hated of all, scoffed at of all, and now they are
become common bondslaves to all the world: and whereas before they were wont to
feed their Rabbines, now they are feign to feed the people, least they should
be forsaken of them.

Whether Christ be come.
That the Messiah is not come. Beside the confounding of the Tribes, they all
confess, Mich. 5.2. That he shall be borne in Bethlehem. There is now no
Bethlehem, nor any place where Bethlehem stood, for him to be borne. This they
are driven to answer thus: that he was borne indeed, before the building of the
second Temple; but ever since he has lurked in some corner or other, they know
not where; but he will at the length come. But Paulus Berosus and Augustine
answer this. Ammianus Marcellinus. Julian to work despite to the Christians,
gave them leave to build their Temple again, sought to gather them together.
Being come together, and having laid the foundation thereof: there brast a fire
out of the earth that burned their timber, cast down their stones: and though
the Emperout often times encouraged them to their work, and gave them great
sums to the building of it; yet yould the flames come out of the ground, and
overthrow their building. There was one since, that took upon him to gather
them together, that called himself Moses Cretensis; he would needs with four
hundred divide the sea, and go through it dry-shod. But the waves straggling
against their course and nature, suddenly coming upon them, they were all
drowned; and their friends that stood all along the seashore were not able to
save one of them.

Again, there were often prefixed times by the Rabbis, when Christ should
come, and yet all deceived. Rabbi Shahadiah appoints 1200. years. Rabbi
Solomon, Rabbi Jehuda, 1390. Rabbi Elias, 4230. Rabbi Moses ben Maymon, 4474.
and his time that appointed last, was expired 300. years ago: and yet their
Messiah is not come; and they are ashamed to appoint any more time, but forbid
under pain of death, Vt sint in spiritu vertiginis, that they may be in the
spirit of giddiness; having their eyes open, and will not see.

Mahomet. Seven points to prove that their religion cannot be the truth. 1.
Because it is forbidden throughout all his Dominions, to call it into question.
And to him that shall at any time call it into question, it is present death.
But the truth delights in nothing more then in sifting, and fears it shall
never be sufficiently sifted. They give us money, and say it is good, but will
not suffer us to weigh it. 2. If ever there were mulierum fabulae, old wives
fables, 2. It is fabulous.
it is very like they are in the Alkoran: its full of untruths. Andreas Maurus,
not only a Saracen, but also a Bishop of theirs, has set down 900. untruths
out of the Alkoran; whereof these be two: first, 15. chap. Eluiraim, that
Abraham was the son of Lazarus a beggar; whereas it is certain, that there
are about 3000. years between them. Secondly, 18. section. That Mary the
mother of Christ was Moses sister: whereas there are 1600.

years betwixt. 3. Doctrine, the manner of it, it came of the will of man,
that was captivated wholly to his sense, and could go no further.
Thirdly, their doctrine foolish, vulgar, carnal, altogether belonging to the
body; there is nothing in it but is visible, sensible, etc. 16. section,
Mahomet says he was in Heaven, and saw God as an (...), having the form of a
man: but his face he could not see; but he felt his hand, and that was seven
times colder then the Ise. Of the Angels, that they have bodies, and many
heads; and some of them 70000. heads. Of the devils, that they were
circumcised, and being circumcised must needs have bodies. Of the Stars,
chap. 23. that they are nothing else but Candles in a round Glass, hanging
down by chains. And this is the manner of his doctrine.

4. The promises of this religion brutish wicked.
4. His Promises, chap. 35.52.54. His Paradise after this life, he makes of
those brutish pleasures, of gluttony, of leachery, etc.

5. His doctrine or precepts, 65. chap. A plain indulgencie for swearing and
perjury. 5. the precepts satanicall.
And there for a small matter they will swear and forswear: for revenge and
murder, chap. 41. non ulcisci injuriam, impium; it is impious not to revenge an
injury. For Polygamie and divorcing. 3. chap. the practice does confirm it,
and the precept is plain. And for Adultery, chap. 23. none may accuse one,
without four witnesses. Every man has four wives; fifteen Concubines he may
have. 41. chap. they may couple themselves with beasts; and those that do
this, are counted the holiest men among them: for spoil, whatsoever they can
get in Via Dei, Polygamy has almost made all the country robbers, because
otherwise, they are not able to maintain their own wives. 6. The miracles
false, and without witnesses.
in the way of God, (as they call it) is their own. 16. chap. And that is the
cause, why there goes none into their dominions, unless they be well
furnished: who nevertheless are then commonly spoiled.

6. For his miracles, there are some set down, but all without witnesses. 92
chapter When he was a child, being sent into the fields with Cattle (for he was a
driver of Asses) he met with the Angel Gabriel, which ripped his belly, took
out his heart, cut it in two, out of the midst of it took a lump of black
blood, which (as he said) makes men to sin, and is the beginner of
temptation in man: after closed up his heart, and did put it into his place
again. First, there is no such lump, say all the Anatomists. Secondly, there
cannot be a natural cause of temptation, which is spiritual. Secondly, being
with one of his kinsmen in a fair Moone-shine night, his kinsman required this
of him, that he would cause the Moon to come down, and break it self into
two halfes: and that the one part might come into one of his sleeves, and the
other into the other sleeve; and come out whole at his breast, and so go up
into her place again, and so it did. But its marvel that the Astronomers did
never miss her out of Heaven, and one would think it impossible for such a
great body to come into such a slender body, seeing they have noted the very
least Eclyps; it was a close miracle between him and his cosen.

7. Its propagation by force.
Lastly, by what means the propagation of his Kingdom came, 9. chap. That God
delivered him a sword to compel men to his religion, if they would not
otherwise be brought to it: but (as before is said) unnatural means for
truth. And so it has been his practice always. At the first he was of very
base condition, subject to the falling sickness, and troubled with devils.
First, he was a servant; but afterward by the bigness and comeliness of his
body, after his Masters death married with his Mistress, whom he served
before, whom he entised by sorcery; after was banished by the men of the same
City for his evil demeanor. Machah his wife, and his 15. concubins.
After that by the help of his wifes friends, and his parents, recovered the
City; got the rule of the City; warred against the King of Scythia, to whom
they were then in subjection; having overcome him, by means of the negligence
of the Emperor Heraclius, entering a league of peace with the Emperor, and
after breaking it, got all the Emperors Dominions. It prevailed when the world
was at the worst; when religion was clean worn out; when there were fewest
learned men: it has never taken hold of any excellent man, The Turk himself
stands in awe of the robbers, so that he is feign to feed them with money,
that they might not be troublesome to him.
either for the gifts of nature, art, or grace.

It agrees not with the proceedings of Christian religion: the manner of the
proceeding of Christian faith was not by killing, but by being killed. The
effects of their religion in perjury, in swearing, in murder, in sheading of
blood of their children, and kinsfolks. Some have slain 17. of their kindred,
to convey the succession of the Empire to one of their own: in divorces their
spoiling about Arabia deserta. Last, they live in a most servile estate: for
they can convey nothing to their successors; but after their death, all is the
Turks. Mancipia sunt sui imperatoris. 2. Pet. 1.19. (...). We have a more sure
word of prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, How we know that
those Scriptures are the true words of God. Men in old time spoke as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost. Religion is the coupling of relations between God the
Creator, and man the creature: God is provider, and man that is the provided
for. Quod propter aliud, p^sterius est eo, propter quod est. That which is for
some other thing then for it self, is posterior to that for which it is.
as unto a light that shines in a dark place until the day dawne, and the
day star arise in your hearts. Now the fourth is ours. That it is to take
place, before in the other three, (...), by way of confutation, or negatively.
Now in the fourth (...), positively. But because the fourth principal question
is so nearly joined with the proofs of Christ's Religion, as except in one or
two points, they cannot be severed: Therefore it is not amiss, to handle both
under one. 1. The effect of the meaning of the Apostle here is, that we have a
most sure word from the Prophets, and of all those, from whose hands we have
received the Scriptures. This is most sure. And albeit there is but a small
portion come immediately from God; yet being delivered by the ministry of man,
the ministry of man prevailed no farther, then that it agreed with the word
immediately coming from God. 1. Seeing that man is to come to God some way,
and religion is this way; we necessarily gather, that this way is as ancient as
man himself: else should there be a time wherein man was out of this way, and
so consequently frustrated of his end. 2. Tertullian. de praescript. adversus
haeret: Quod primum, verum, what is first is true. It holds in religion, and
in any other thing. The Philos. Entia maxim vera, being chiefly true.
Reasons: because as the truth is an affection of that which is; so falsehood an
affection of that which is not. Therefore falsehood non potest consistere in
suo, sed in alieno, cannot consist in it self, but in another. Therefore
falsehood is after truth. (Assum.) But the religion of the Christians is more
ancient; for the Jewish and Christian religion are both one. The Law is nothing
else but the old Gospel, the Gospel nothing else but the new Law. The Law
Evangelium absconditum, a hidden Gospel. The Gospel Lex revelata, a revealed
Law. So that they agree with us till the coming of Christ, and there they
leave us.

As for the Heathen religion, a great part of their stories is fabulous; and
part true. For that part which is fabulous, it began with their Gods: for
further then their Gods they cannot do. Now their Gods (as Orpheus and Homer
that write upon them) they cannot be but the age before the Trojane war:
forasmuch as Hercules, Aeneas, and the rest of their children lived at that
war, which war was 3030. years after the Chronology of the Bible. And
between Orpheus his writing, which was their ancientest Poet, and Moses, are
at least 800. years. As Strabo, Plutarch, Diodor. Siculus, do testify. If
their fabulous part comes so short of our religion, then must the true part
come far shorter. Varro says (who was in Tullies time) that that truth which
the Gentiles hold could not be much ancienter then 700. years before his time.
And it is sure, that the ancientest records of their truth, come from the seven
wise men, of whom Solon is the chief and ancientest: The restoring of the
captivity by Cyrus, in Esdras time.
he was in Croesus time; Croesus with Cyrus. Cyrus and Esdras of a time. Esdras
is the last of the Canons of the old Testament. Therefore the whole Bible was
before any writer or recorder of the true part of the Heathen stories. Their
ancientest Historiographer is Herodotus; yet he presently after the beginning
of his book, enters into the History of Croesus: By the which we plainly see
that the Christian religion is far more ancient then the Heathen. So may
another consequent be gathered: that whatsoever God or truth was of the
heathens religion, they had it from the Jews religion. Rome called Magna
G^aecia: the Romans had their letters from H^^m^tinus ^ph^sus. These 2.
countries Egypt and Phenicea, with the Mediterraneum sea do compass in Jury.
The Druidae among the French men; and the Bardi and offspring of the Druidae,
fetch all these monuments out of Greece. The Romans, they thank the Grecians
for all that they had; both for their letters, laws, and religion: for they
had them from Numa Pompilius a Grecian. The Grecians refer all that they have
to Cecrops an Egyptian. Affrique, Lybie, Cataphrygians, Indians, they in Arabia
petrea, to Cadmus, a Phenician. Now Phenicea bordereth Northward upon Jury,
Egypt Southward, the Medeterranean Sea Westward. Now if we enquire from whence
the Phenicians and the Egyptians had their knowledge, we shall see that it came
from the Jews. The wise men among the Grecians asking counsel at their Gods
how they might get wisdom, and from whence the knowledge of arts where to be
had received this answer: That it was to be had among the Chaldees. (...). The
only wise men are the Chaldeans, and happily the Hebrews; which (...),
declarative or expositive, and notes some one part of the Chaldees. i. the
Jews. So Orpheus says, All knowledge referred to one Chaldean, to one
stranger. Ios^phu^ lib. 2. cont. Appiooem: out of Manetho. Origin lib. 4. cont.
Celsum. For the knowledge of Philosophy: for the Egyptians were perfect in
philosophy, the Grecians but children for manners, ^^ocyllides his verses out
of Numb. Deuteronomy. and Exodus All Solons wisdom from an Egyptian. Pythagoras from a
Jew.
that God after the fall of man, being angry with mankind, destroyed all; and
had revealed all knowledge and wisdom Vni Chaldaeo, to one Chaldean the
eighth person: and Plato in Epimenide, refers all learning uni Barbaro, to
one Barbarian or stranger. Who this 8. Chaldean and 8. Barbare is, is now to be
enquired. The Egyptians, they confess they had all from one they call Theuth.
The Phenicians call him Thaath, not much unlike the former. Theuth in Caldee
signifies a stranger. This stranger, by all likelihood must be Abraham, who
was a stranger. And Eusebius out of Manetho does witness, that Abraham was so
greatly esteemed of in those Countries, and honored with so honorable
remembrance, and so many: that it is very plain, that he was that stranger;
their chiefest exorcismes used to be done through the God of Abraham. And
Manetho alleges, that in many places of the Country, his name was written or
engraven, etc. in sundry Temples, etc. i. Phocyllides. For manners, living in
the 59. Olympiade, his verses are so evident, that one may see, that they be
word for word taken out of Moses his law: and that one may easily point forth,
that this and that verse is taken out of this and that place of Deuter ^nomy
Numbers, and Exodus, etc. But we will deal with their own records Plutarch
says that Solon fetches all his wisdom from Egypt, from one Souchedis. Plato
all his from Caldaea of one Semuthis. Strabo lib. 16. says that Pythagoras had
daily conference in the mount Carmel; and that in that mountain were
ambulachra Pythagorae, Pythagoras his walks. And some of the Heathen said,
that he was cicumcised. Eusebius. lib. 4. de praepar. Euangel. out of Clearchus a
peripatetik, affirms, that Aristotle never went into Egypt, but yet he had
daily conference with an Egyptian, or a Jew. Demetrius reported to Ptolomey
that gathered together the great Library; that he had heard Aristotle's
scholars say, that sundry of the Philosophers and Poets would have translated
the old Testament into Greek; and yet in the same book, in the Epistle of
Aristobulus it is said, that part of it was translated before the Empire of the
Persians was begun; long before it came to be translated of the 70. But it
appears that it has pleased God, in most strange manner, in every Nation to
leave some Register or Chronicle of this; as among the Egyptians Manetho: among
the Phenicians, Sanchoniatho: among the Chaldees, Berosus: in Asia minor,
Abidenus: among the Persians, Metasthenes: among the Gentiles, Histaspis,
Hecataeus, Euemerus, Alexander polyhistor.

In the second book of Herodotus, we shall find that notable miracle that God
wrought on Senacherib, though somewhat corrupted: the edict of Cyrus, almost
the whole prophecy of Daniel. 11. book of Josephus, (as Augustine lib. 8. de
civit. Dei.) Alexander being in Babylon and purposing to build an Image to
Belus; and certain of the scattered Jews, which were then the cunningest
workmen, refusing to build an Image to any Idol of the Heathen, vowed to
root out clean all the Nations of the Jews: but he was soon appeased by
Iaddus the High Priest: for he hearing of the Kings vow, met him in peaceable
manner, in Aarons attire; whom, as soon as Alexander saw, he fell down before
him and worshipped him, and presently gave over his purpose. And being demanded
the cause of so sudden change of his purpose; answered, that Hiaddus appeared
unto him in the same likeness of that God which appeared to him, bidding him
to conquer the whole world; in the very same attire that that man ware. After
those days, by the means of Ptolomey and his Embassage to Aristobulus, and
his great Library in Alexandria, the Jews religion was dispersed. La^rtius in
the life of Epimenides, which agrees with Act. 17. The Athenians being visited
with a strange plague, and asking counsel of the Oracle how to rid themselves
of it; the Oracle sent them to Epimenides. He told them that they were not to
seek to their own God, but to another God: for it was another, above all
their Gods, that sent them this plague; and it was only to be driven away by
Sacrifice. They making offer to discharge themselves of this, offered
Sacrifice: the plague nevertheless continuing, they were feign to send to
Epimenides the second time, to know in what manner they should sacrifice, and
where? he counseled them to let the beasts go whither they would, and in that
place where they should stand still, there to sacrifice them to that God, that
had sent them that plague. The beasts went on with the Sacrifice on their
back, until they came to Mars his street; and coming to a fair plat, there
stayed: where they built an Altar, and dedicated it (...), Acts 17.
to the unknown God. The like is in the Roman histories: the Romans having
got a great victory over their enemies, after built a Temple, and consecrated
it to peace: and demanding of their Oracle, how long it should continue; word
was given them that it should endure, quoad virgo peperit, till a Virgin should
bear a child: which, because they thought it would never be; they set this
inscription upon the door, Templum pacis aeternum. The everlasting Temple of
peace. And about the time that Christ was borne, in the shutting, on an evening
it fell down to the ground, without any help. Thus much for the Antiquity,
both by them whose writings yet remain, and fathers: as also by the Heathen
themselves, that proposition always holding, Quod primum, verum. What is most
ancient is true.

2. Argument. The continuance of it.
The second argument, from the continuance of preservation of it, most
miraculously. as that the religion that comes from man or any false God,
cannot have the like: whereas we see the Jews continued in captivities under
other nations, more then any: as under the Philistines, Moabites, Amorites,
Persians, Romans, Egyptians: and yet in all these it has continued. So also
the people round about them, Especially the victorers nature being to turn the
religion and laws of the conquered to his own.
bearing a deadly hate to them and their religion: And Antiochus bending
himself wholly to destroy all the copies of the Law; and yet has it been so
wonderfully preserved, as not one jot of it has at any time perished. We see
that the chiefest men in Philosophy, Physic, Law, etc. have left their
scholars behind them to ren^w their writing: their works have been
countenanced of mighty men as much as could be; all means in the world has
been used for the preservation of them, yet most of their writings have been
lost; some have come to the posterity unperfect, or very corrupt. On the other
side, there has been extreme contempt of the Jews, their enemies intent
always to subvert them, and their religion: as also a purposed malice of the
Jews themselves against their own religion. All means possible used to the
subverting of it, yet as yet, it has continued. So that there is not a
material point that fears the sifting, either concerning manners or faith:
so that we may say, Hic Dei digitus, here is the finger of God; for time
leaves her marks in humane things. And though there be differences in the
diverse taking of things: and in the diverse form of words: yet they tend all to
one end. There is no material difference about any material point: so that it
mattereth not which of all the ways it be taken.

The like may be said concerning the whole manner of their religion. They never
changed their religion, customs or laws, being in captivity in diverse strange
Lands: whereas any other Nation, being instituted in a strange religion,
strange customs and Laws, uses to alter her own, and give her self to that
other religi^n.

3. The certainty of Christian religion.
The third thing, the certainty. That whereas other writings are brought into
question, or are imperfect, or not authentical, but counterfeits, The
perfectest of all man's writings falls into one of these. In it 1. no
imperfection. Impossible that man should take away the least part in the
Christian religion, without the destruction of the whole. 2. No contradiction.
or include contradictions: but this religion can fall into none of these.
Therefore this religion must needs be the religion of God. 1. For imperfection.
It is a certain note, that when any thing comes from man, it grows by
little and little, until it come to perfection, no such thing in this. For in
the delivery of the Law all was delivered at once most absolutely, in the 10.
Commandments, under which there is no duty, but may be sensibly contained: to
which nothing has been or could be added; nothing be detracted, without the
clean overthrow of the whole, only writers have explained them. which,
because man cannot do in his writings, it must needs be from God.

2. For contradictions, Paul, 2. Cor. 1. The words of man are sealed with etiam
and non, yea and no: but the writings of the Prophets are etiam and amen, yea
and amen. In this behalf we are to rely our selves to the fathers writings,
that say, that all the contradictions, that are in the Scripturs, may be
reconciled by the 7. rules of Logic.

For the 3. others, seeking for fear of reprehension to hord up their writings
among a few; 3. No corruption.
the best of them have had some corruption. And that has often been taken
under the name of diverse authors, that was not the authors own: and often
supposititia have had such resemblance to the authors style, and to the rest
of his works, Platonis Axia. Arist. de plantis, etc.
that one could hardly, or not at all, discern them from the rest. But God
takes a contrary order for his law: he will have a copy of it in the side of
the Arc: another for the Prince, another for the high Priest: for every Priest
one, a copy for every Tribe. He commanded the people of Israel to have it in
their hangings, The diversity of ways to preserve Gods Law without corruption.
in their frontlets and fringes of their garments; in the eyes of all men. That
what evil soever had betyded them, it might not one with be empaired; and that
no corruption might take hold of it. And the Jews knew very well the days of
Antiochus, that those worthy men died for the maintaining of it, would not have
ventured their life for a counterfeit Law.

4. No Prophet has corrected any Prophet that went before him, or that was of
the same time with him. Theophrastus corrected Aristotle his master.
4. In all other writings, there have been some things, that their successors
have amended. Some they have abrogated, or have put to of their own; no such
thing here. No Prophet that has been since Moses, has at any time gone about
to correct Moses, or to correct any thing that he has, or to put in; but has
yielded to that as true, and sought more to confirm it, etc. but for the
manner of the first religion, that none shall dispute of; God requires no such
thing of us; but commands the contrary, Deuteronomy. 4. (...), try all things.

Fourth thing. The end, whereto all these books drive. Whatsoever man brings
forth, it must needs have proprias hominis passiones, man's proper passions. The
proper passions of man, will seek to make man (at least in part) their end. An
unregenerate man's actions, That religion which attributes all honor to God,
is the true.
full of affections. So that when any religion does either take all to it, or
the chiefest part; it refers all the honor, or the chiefest part, to her
end. The end of religion, the honor of God; his glory wholly only: now, he
cannot be brought out of conceit of himself, but Religion brings him. As God
is the author of all essence, so also of all good; therefore the end of all
good: therefore all honor wholly to be given to him, none to have any part
with him; all honor must be given to him, that gives all other their
attributes: but this does not any religion, but the Christian religion. Every
victory, all honor of it goes to God, nothing to man: whereas all the other
seek man's honor, either in the whole, or in part.

The Poets and Philosophers have greatly stood on man's freewill: they will give
him his igniculi and semina naturae, sparks and seeds of nature to goodness.
And by these, with exercise they will make him author of his own perfection.
But our religion acknowledges nothing, but that it came from God, and to be
referred to God. In God there must be an unity: therefore that religion naught,
that acknowledges any more then one God. 6. Deuteron. True religion
acknowledges but one God.
Diodorus Siculus alleges that Moses departure out of Egypt was of no other
occasion, but that he would not worship many Gods. We have but one God: the
Jews (no) more; and though the Turks seem to hold that there is but one God
in essence: yet when it comes to the point, that there is but one God, that
does good, they will have many mediators to that God; and so consequently, many
Gods: but we have but only one Mediator.

5. Arg. That religion that commands all good, and forbids all evil, is
true.
5. Arg. The precepts or doctrine. i. Because we hold that there is darkness in
every man, not regenerated. Therefore in the religion of man it cannot be, that
all good should be commanded, or all evil restrained: but some lawful things
are restrained, and some unlawful permitted. No sect clean of this. Among the
Athenians it was counted so small a thing, the keeping of a man's faith, or the
breaking of it, that of them came this proverb, Graeca fides, small truth.
Theft permitted among the Spartans. Among the Romans, Lupercalia, Floralia,
Bacchanalia, solemn Sacrifices and plays dedicated to Pan, Flora, Bacchus. To
the first state, they knew but one Commandment. i. the seventh, and that was
not kept. The first Commandment openly broken: the second broken, or
shamefully abused; as the rest, either broken, or never heard of. Beside
actual sin, they knew none; they knew not that concupiscence is a sin: of
the lusts of the flesh they counted nothing; but affections indifferent, etc.
But some restrained the use of marriage: some the use of meats.

6. Arg. Another note.
As unlawful things are forbidden, so are they forbidden to all alike; but the
Heathen have no such exact Law, but there may be a dispensation for it: no such
straight punishment for any offense, but it may be restrained by the person
time, etc. As the Magi said of the King of Persia; indeed we find that it is
not lawful for a man to marry his sister: yet we find by another Law, that a
King may do what he list. But the Saints of God would have said flatly with
John the Baptist, non licet tibi, etc. Math. 14.^.
it is not lawful for thee to have her; though they had lost their head for it.



8. The Scriptures exceed man's understanding.
Another Argument. It is a necessary argument, that that which cannot come from
man, comes from God. But there are sundry things in our Scriptures, that are
metaphysickes indeed: and pass the capacity of man: as that Jehovah should be
Elohim, that is, three persons in one God, the Trinity in Unity; that God
should become man: that God should take the guiltiness of man, by suffering
for him his punishment: that God could ordain a world, and out of it gather a
Church to himself; They exceed man's will and appetite. C^aque natural est,
sua peccata, patriae, and suorum, quantum fiori potest tegere.
and all of nothing. So for a man to come to this, that he will not conceal his
fathers, mothers, or friends faults: to speak against his own country and
countrymen: yea against himself, is against the nature of man, and cannot be
wrought in man, but by a supernatural cause. This we see the holy men in the
Scriptures did; It is natural to every man so far as he can, to cover his
own faults, and the faults of his Country and friends. Moses, when no
necessity bound him, confessed that he came of a cursed stock: spared not his
brother Aarons fault in making the Calfe, but committed it to writing; spared
not his sister Miriam in the cause of murmuring: no not his own fault, in
murmuring against the Lord at the waters of strife; Numb. 11.11.
dispossessed his own children, and would not have them to succeed him in the
Magistracy (a very unnatural thing) but preferred Joshua; yea he put by his
own Tribe, and the Tribe of Judah, and preferred Ephraim. This is not able to
agree with the natural man, but must come from an higher cause. Therefore the
writers of these books must be inspired by God.



Against the Jews.
The next point, as God is a Spirit, so must his worship be spiritual: so we
find in the Scriptures, not only forbidding of images and shadows; but also
a flat negative. And as in the case of Gods unity, though false religion may
agree with the true in the first point, yet not in the second: so in this
regard, howsoever they exclude images; yet they fault in this, that all their
worship is ceremonial; bodily, and rituall, consisting in matters of ablution
and outward types. And though there be types in the old Testament, yet he
proclaymeth every where, that he abhors them: for he will have a contrite
heart, and only the circumcision of the heart. Therefore as man is bodily, and
his notions fall into the compass of the body; so as that worship that comes
from him, is bodily: whereas the worship that comes from God is spiritual.

2. To this may be added that of Miracles and Oracles, to confirm this
religion, as the other did in confirming their religion. They were not done in
corners, but in the sight of Pharao, in the midst of all his servants. 2.
Again, they were not frivolous, but they that have felt them, have got good by
them. 3. They are not imitable nor expressible by the art of man: as the
dividing of the red Sea; the causing the Sun to stand still in Ioshuahs time;
the making of Ahaz Dial to go back 10. degrees; both which Areopageta says
are in the Persian Oracles. The raining of Manna from Heaven, Iannes and
Iambres were not able to imitate Moses.

For Oracles of the Gentiles, they did (...), philippise; Oracles.
speak as King Philip would have them: and that they were very ambiguous, and
needed Delio natatore, the Swimmer, the Interpreter Apollo to expound them.
Therefore Porphyry said that their Oracles commonly had Posticum, a backe-dore.
These do not (...), philippise, are not doubtful, need no Delius natator, the
Swimmer, the Interpreter Apollo.

Last, most of the heathens Oracles came not to pass: but in the Scriptures,
they came all to pass: some three hundred years before; some 500. some a
thousand, some three thousand, as the dilatation of Iapheth, which happened not
before the calling of the Gentiles. And this for confirmation both of the old
and new Testament, common to the Jews as well as to us; those that follow, are
proper to Christian religion. 1. Aug. 23. de eivitate Dei; out of Porphyrie, de
regressu animae, of the regresse of the soul, the greatest enemy that ever the
Church had, That it is no true religion that does not yield a sufficient
purgation to the soul of man. Moreover he adds there that the Platonists
received from the Chaldees, that the purgation of the soul of man, cannot be
nisi per principia: but by the principles; we know that Plato his principles
were (...) the father, the mind, love: an enignaticall speech of our Trinity.
But this. i. the purgation of the soul of man, no religion teaches but ours;
for it teaches that (...), the word took upon him sinful flesh, to purge
away the sins of man; therefore ours the true, all the rest are merely bodily;
for all their exorcismes and sacrifices are bodily, and not spiritual: and so
withal, the God of the Christians, is not like to the heathen gods; for he is
(...), one who loves man. i. he delights not in cutting men's throats, or
burning them to afhes; as their devils, had virgins, babes, old men, young men,
good men offered up to them. And the sacrifices of beasts in the old law, were
only used for two respects. 1. That they might be types of those things that
are in the Gospel. 2. To be an admonition to men, to show them that they have
deserved to be thus killed and sacrificed.
God was so far from having men to be sacrificed to him, that he himself
came down to give himself a Sacrifice for our sins. And what greater love
can be, then for a man to give his life for that he loves for his friend;
therefore no greater (...), love to man then this. In a witness, two things
required: 1. Skill. 2. Honesty. 1. Ioh. 1.1.

Now for the Gospel. 1. For the witnesses. In a witness, two things required.
1. Skill. 2. Honesty. First, for the skill. There is never a one of them, but
can say, we write and say, (...). Which we have heard, which we have seen with
our eyes, which we have looked upon, and which our hands have handled. Not as
Homer, Plato, and the rest, that had their things from other, and by report:
And withal, the writers of the Scriptures, writing them when the world bare
greatest hatred against them; and yet never any durst write any book against
Moses in his time, or against the Gospel in these days. And de probitate
testis, concerning the honesty of a witness; The honesty of a witness.
there can be no better reason given, then that Tacitus gives: That they
testify best, quibus nullum est mendacii pretium; that have nothing for their
labor: and so here, the Prophets and the Apostles had nothing for their
pains; whereas if this religion were false, he had reaped perpetual ignominy
and shame, For the credit of the story, eternal testimonies.
he had in vain deprived himself, of all pleasure, wealth, and preferment:
For the credit of the story, concerning first the nativity of Christ: secondly,
his death. For his birth, we know the Oracles of the Sybillae were in greatest
account among the heathen, and held as true of all men: and if those be they
which we have, there is nothing which can more plainly set forth the birth of
Christ; his life, his death. For there we may see every action set down, and
almost every circumstance. That they be the same, first those two verses that
Lactantius cites, we find in these. Secondly, those that the heathen cite, as
Tully, one says that they were the very speculum Historiarum, the mirror of
Histories. And we read that many of the learned men in these latter days, as
Marcellinus and Secundanus, were converted to the Christian religion, only by
reading those verses, Cic. 1. epist. to Lentulus. There is much ado who shall
bring Ptolomy the last into his Kingdom again? Lentulus makes great suit;
his reason was, because that it was the Oracles of Sybillae, that presently
upon the reducing of Ptolomee, Prodiret dominus orbis, The Lord of the world
should appear. 2. Of divination. Vocandus nobis Rex, ex quo salvi simus, He is
to be called of us a King, of whom we may be saved.

Tacitus and Suetonius say, that in the time of the Gentiles, especially in the
time of Vespasian, it was said throughout the whole world, that the King of the
world should come out of Jury: and therefore his flatterers went about to
persuade him, that it was meant by him. Therefore we shall find, that Augustus
Tiberius, and the other Emperors, did labor to root out the Nation of the
Jews; and especially that Tribe, that the King of the world should come out
of. Rodiginus and Voluteran, leave this on their credit, in their writings,
That among the monuments of Egypt, they found an Altar of Isis, dedicated
Virgini pariturae, to the Virgin that is to bring forth. And like to that de
Templo pacis, of the Temple of peace, that it should stand, quoad virgo
peperit, until a virgin has brought forth a child. So Postellus witnesses
from the Druidae, that they had an Altar with this superscription, ara
primogenito Dei, an Altar to the first begotten Son of God. Suetonius says,
that about the annunciation of Mary, the year before his incarnation, as it
were on a fair day, in a great assembly of the people at Rome, there appeared
a Rainbow about the Sun, of a golden color, almost of the same brightness
with the Sun, save that the color of it was more yellow. And the Augures
being asked a reason of it, they answered, that God would invisere humanum
genus, visit mankind. When Christ was borne, the same day, were seen three
Suns in the firmament; (not three parelii) Images of the Sun, Sueton. in
the life of Vespatian. Virg. 4. eglog. Tacit. 21. of his story.
that after met and went into one; which cannot be in a meteor; for that it is
in a fixed cloud: so that 3. parelii, Images of the Sun, cannot come into
one: to which the Augures answered, that he was then borne, whom both Augustus,
and the people, and all the world should worship; this was a sign of the
mystery of the Trinity: therefore it is said, that at the next meeting of the
Senate, Augustus gave over his title, Dominus orbis, Lord of the world; and
would no more be called so. And it is reported that on the same day there ran
out of a shop in Rome, for the space of a day, as it were a river of Oil,
which some take for a sign of his spiritual annoynting. But the chiefest is
of a Star that appeared, mentioned in the Scripture, as also of the Heathen,
that confessed it was stella maxim salutaris, Virg. eclog. 4*
the luckiest Star that ever appeared for mankind. 2. Pliny 25. chap. calls
it stella crinita, sine crine; a blazing Star without crest. And many by
cogitation of this Star, have been converted to the truth: as Charaemon,
among the Stoickes; Caladius among the Platonists, upon the inquiry of the
estate of that star, went into Jury, and became a Jew. For his death, Signs
for his death.
we find that the ancient wise among the Egyptians, using not to write by
letters, but by characters, when they would express vitam aeternam, eternal
life, it should be done per signum crucis, by the sign of the Cross; whereby
they showed a badge, that should necessarily concur with the action that
should be the salvation of the world. Math. 27.45. Mark. 15.33.
Concerning the two things that the Holy Ghost has set down. i. the
universal eclypse of the Sun, and the universal earthquake; so often and so
much cast into the teeth of the heathen, that they are ashamed to deny it. Of
the earthquake, Pliny 2.25. chapter of both Phlegon, Trallianus, 13. lib. Chron.
testified of all the Heathen, not to have come by any natural cause. For the
earthquake, there can be no universal motion in any thing: for in nature,
every thing that is moved, must have (...) its own stay; but this earthquake
went throughout the world; for the universal eclypse of the Sun, many were
converted by the strangeness of it, as Dionysius and Apollophanes: For first,
the Suns eclypses are all particular; this was universal. 2. It was at the
feast of the Passover, which was 14. day of the Moon, when the Moon was just
at the full, flat oppositly, contrary to the rules of Astronomy, and the reason
of man. 3. In the Emperor Tiberius his reign it is said that presently upon
the eclypse, there was an universal defect of Oracles: of which argument,
Plutarch has a whole Treatise: M. A^reli^s. 3. Chinades in^ulae. ^ Cyclades*
wherein he says, that one Epithe ses, one that was in great credit with the
Emperor, sailing by Cyclades, heard a voice as it were coming out of one of
the Islands, with great yelling as they thought or could conceives of spirits,
to make report, that the great God (...) Pan was dead. The Emperor afterward
hearing of this, called together all the wise men and Magitians. But none could
tell, Niceph. lib. 1. cap. 17. (...). An Hebrew child, who commands the
blessed Gods enjoynes me to leave this house, and straightwaies to go hence
into hell: therefore thou being silent, depart hence from our Altars.
what this great God Pan should mean. Nicephorus says, that the Emperors
from Augustus to Adrian, did not only enquire the cause of this defect, from
wisemen; but also caused them to raise up the spirits themselves. One asking
the Oracle at Delos, why it was put to silence; answer was made, because of
(...), the Hebrew child. Trophonius his cave, the Oracle there, the Oracle
Delos Jupiter; and Jupiter Dodonaeus all put to silence.

Saint Ambrose, Tertullian, Justin Martyr testify, that by Pilates Epistle to
the Emperor Tiberius, they were confirmed. Egesippus in (...), the brief
heads of Christ; of his innocent death, godly life, and his resurrection; Ad
Senatum de Jesu in Deorum numerum referendo, cum vocis suae praerogativa
retulit. He propounded to the Senate with the consent of his voice, to bring in
Jesus into the number of the Gods. But the Council refused to do it; quia
author ipse consilii non fuer at, because the motion did not first of all
proceed from the Senate it self. And the chiefest that was against it, was
Sejanus who afterward came to a most miserable end.

The next and chiefest argument is the proceedings of this religion. i. Whereas
nature and reason teaches us to get apt instruments to work with, and that
the matter must be disposed and well fitted before we work. But there were no
means wrought to propagate this religion. For the instruments, they cannot be
devised more unfit, of no nobility, of no power, of no learning, etc. but
barbarous, rude, handicrafts men: for the matter to work upon, they had it
altogether unprepared, nay clean against them. They had the Jews in hatred
against them; in as deadly hatred, as possibly could be. The heathen also at
the first continued this hatred against them, after were converted by them; but
afterward returned to their former hatred. The learned men have been against
it. Vlpian, the greatest Lawyer, who wrote 460. books against the Christians.
Gallen the greatest physician; Plotinus the greatest Platonist. Porphyry, the
greatest Aristotelian: Libanius, a great writer in the Grecian tongue: Julian
the greatest forcerer: Lucian, the greatest scoffer. For persecutions. The ten
strangest and bloodiest persecutions were against them. The strangest torments
that could be devised, were executed upon them: nothing there was, that could
be done by force, but it was done. Great and huge heaps of Christians,
suffering every where, every day for their faith. For craft and policy. Julian
used all the means that could be wrought, by putting down schools of
catechizing, and schools of the Prophets; by breaking godly meetings, by
making Dialogues between Christ and Pilate, against Christ, etc. causing them
to be instead of catechizing to abalienate the childrens minds from Christian
religion by all means possible. Yet at length form prevailed, the matter
being never so ill disposed.

Man cannot away with this happiness.
6. The Commandments and precepts in no wise agreeable to flesh and blood. For
revenge: we must love them; Love them that hate us, speak good of them that
persecute us. Happy shall you be when men revile you and persecute you. For
lust: we may not look after a woman with our eye, to lust after her. For
covetousness: we must be ready to part with all. For truth: we must not only
confess, and also profess it, when any one asks of our faith: here is no
plausiblenesse in the world.

The means. s. promises 7. the next way to make a man forsake, and to terrify
him from it. Math. 10.17. John 21.18. Math. 10.38.
7. The promises. Others, as Turks, Epicures, etc. their religions set them
great promises, either in this life, or in the life to come: or in both; as
wealth, preferment, etc. in the world to come, ablutions. This, for this life.
Fl^gellabunt vos in Synagogis suis, they will scourge you in their Synagogues
Christ to Peter. They shall bind thee, and lead thee whither thou would not;
they shall stone thee, etc. to forsake that they have, and take up the Cross
and follow Christ. He that forsakes not father, mother, friends, house, all,
his own soul, cannot be my Disciple, etc. You shall not have so much as a
breathing time in your persecutions, he that cannot be content to part with all
he has, yea with himself, for Christ his cause, he is not worthy of Christ.
This is not the next way for sequimini me, follow me; but discedite a me,
depart from me. Here is a very resemblance of the creation: as in the creation
something was made of nothing; so here, nothing is set to confound something:
that we may plainly say, and see that it is the finger of God, that works
here. Here is strength confounded by weakness, something by nothing, death by
death. What is this, but a divine religion.

Mahometisme could never take any hold of any learned man.
When Mahometisme first began, the Emperor gave himself to pleasure; the
people to idleness: so that there was nothing but idleness and palpable
ignorance; religion freezed; very few learned men: But in the time when this
began, the world was full of eyes; never so great industry: then it pleased the
Lord to show forth his weakness, in the greatest strength of the world; and by
his most simple means to convert the learned men that then lived; as Pantenus,
Clemens, Origin, B^sil, Augustine, Ambrose. For the conversion; Paul having a
testimony from the counsel, to bind all such as he found professors of
Christ's name, and to imprison them; being in the highest way to preferment, a
man of special account among the Jews (so that Porphyrie says, it is pity,
that so excellent a man for the gifts of learning, so near preferment, should
have been converted to the Christian religion;) yet then suddenly he was
content to turn to many sharp showers, whippings, perils by Sea and by Land,
shipwracks, etc. he had no great pleasure, 2. Cor. 12.2.
for he had no time to breath in his afflictions; when he should come to
honor; and the people of Lycaonia came to sacrifice to him, and Barnabas: they
rent their clothes, beat their breasts, ran in the midst of them, and told
them that they were but men as they were; so that they were not vainglorious.
Origin was the fairest for preferment that any man could be. Ammonius was his
master; always preferred before Plotinus, who afterward came to great
preferment in the common wealth. Yet he was content to leave all, and betake
himself to be a poor catechist in Alexandria, where he was every minute, in
danger of his life: After they were converted, after they were not converted to
any sect, etc. never the like examples of manners and all kind of virtues, as
in these; of fasting, of abstinence, of continence, of liberality, of justice,
in all things, and with all men: of fortitude, ( Plotinus one of their great
enemies says of the^) omnis Christianus mortis contemptor, every Christian is
a despiser of death. For life most innocent and simple. Longinianus the
Philosopher in his Epistle to Augustine: I reason thus with my self, The
heathen men had it cast into their heads, that Christ wrought not by the finger
of God, but by magic. Perfecation by sword, by books.
They say that your Savior wrought by magike, and that he learned it in Egypt;
but I can hardly be brought to believe it. For if he were such a one, and
wrought by inferior spirits, non triumpharet de diis he could not triumph over
the Gods, for he has confounded all our Gods, and put them to silence. If he
wrought by such means, no doubt neither he, nor his followers, would exhort
others to such austerity of life and manners; and forbid all such unlawful
means. Pliny 2. testifies of the Christians, that they were the innocentest
people that ever lived: and gives the Emperor counsel, that if they were
accused of any, that the Law might take hold of them; otherwise, that he should
not once enquire of them.

The next, their constancy in suffering death; not only in men of strength,
but also in silly old men, maids, children, with their parents etc. And that
after so ambitious desire of death, that they would offer themselves to die; as
the woman with the child in her arms, that crossed the Proconsulls horse, and
being asked the cause why she did so; answered that she feared lest she should
come too late to suffer with the other Christians, that had their names in his
bill to be executed; for she said that she also was a Christian.

Tertullian in his apo^ogy. Omne malum, aut timore, aut pudore natura
perfundit: malefici denique gestiunt latere* devitant apparere, trepidant
deprehensi, negant accusati, ne torti quidem facile aut semper confitentur,
certe damnati moerent, dementati in semetipsis, mentis malae impetus vel fato,
vel astris imputant* nolunt esse suum, quia malum agnoscunt: Christianis vero
quid simile? neminem pudet, neminem poenitet, nisi plane jam antea non fursse:
si quis denotatur, gloriatur. Every sin nature besprinkles it either with
fear or shame; the wicked they desire gladly to lie hid, they shun to be
seen, being taken tardy they tremble, being accused they deny, though tortured
scarce ever doc they freely confess, being condemned they are pensive; they
wax foolish in themselves, the vehement rage of their evil heart, they impute
either to fate, or to the stars. They will not have it to be theirs, because
they know it is evil: but to Christians what is like? none is ashamed of it,
none forethinkes it, unless that he was not such sooner: if any be marked, he
glories. Si accusatur, non defendit: interrogatus, velultro consitetur,
damnatus, gratias agit: Quid hoc mali, quid non habet mali; timorem, pudorem,
tergiversationem; poenitentiam, deplorationem? Quid hoc maliest, cujus reus
gaudet, cujus accusativo votum; cujus poena, felicitas, etc. If any be accused,
he defends not; being asked, he confesses freely, being condemned, he gives
thanks: what evil is this? what wickedness has it not, fear, shame,
hasting, despising, bewailing. But what evil can this be, whereof the party
accused rejoices, whereof to be accused, is their desire, for which to suffer
punishment they account felicity. There is never a sect of all the
Philosophers, but one edict put forth of the common wealth, that it should be
present death to be maintainers of it, would dash it, as it did Pyrrho and his
followers. But no edict ever could, or has put this to silence, no
persecutions either by sword or by books, etc. but the Christians tired their
persecutors. Where there is a mutation, there must be an agent to work; but
these were only the patients, and by suffering did weary the agents.

For the manner of the departure of their persecutors. From the persecution
under Claudius, to the last of the ten; all the Emperors, and all that had set
to their hand to any Bill, in those ten persecutions of the Christians, came to
a fearful end: only Libanius escaped, that presently went to Basil and
became a Christian. All the rest came to a miserable end, as Judas, Herod,
Pilat, etc. Sejanus, So that one cries out to an Emperors, parce nobis; si
non nobis, parce tibi; si non tibi, parce Carthagini: pity us; if not us, yet
pity thy self; if not thy self, yet pity the City Carthage.

Last, the devils testimony. For it is a point in Law, that how ill soever any
witness is otherwise disposed, yet his witness may be taken, Cum confitetur
in dedecus suum, when he confesses to his own reproach. Eusebius says, that
Julian the Apostata being in Antioch, and being desirous to deal with
enchanting the spirits, having made his circle upon the place, where Babylas a
martyr was buried, and adjuring after his manner, the devil to come up; the
devil confesses, that he by all his cunnings and adjurings could make him
come up there, before he had dug up Babylas his ashes.

Tertullian challenges the Emperor and his Religion. Let me come, says he,
into your Temples, and let me talk with any of the spirits in your Images. If
I make not, or any Christian, the feind to confess as much, as the foul
spirits in the Gospel, to come out of the image: then let your religion
prevail, and ours take the foil: And surely his great offer had been taken,
had not the Emperor feared the overthrow.

Last, Plotinus, Apollonius, Thyanaeus, and other of the heathen assayed diverse
times to bring up the Images of Jupiter, Mars, etc. and brought them up; but
they all confessed this, that when they came to bring up the Image of Christ,
they and the Spirits were confounnded; ergo there can be no power to represent
him. That also may be added, that their God was afraid of Styx; now we have
found him, whom Styx it self stands in fear of, yea of the ashes of a
Christian.

Being entered into this way, we fall once more into another division. For as
we know, Christian faith stands on two sorts: so that each part pleads the
possession of it, as well as other: and each takes the other to be wrong. Now
therefore to know, whether of these we are to betake our selves to: And it is
no difficulty, if we take the marks of true religion. 1. That the worship of
God is spiritual. 2. That it restrains the concupiscence; in particular
hereafter it shall be resolved.
Now in general: because they build on the Word of God as well as we, so that
each plead their interest in it, but after a diverse meaning: that we may take a
right course, for the right interpretation of the Scripture: The maine question.
the question lies thus, between us and the Chruch of Rome; how that certain
and infallible interpretation of the Word of God may be had? They say it may be
had of the Fathers, Councels, Church, or the chief Father in the Church. i.
the Pope. We in another sort: this their opinion may be resolved, 2. Pet. 1.20.
that it is not (...), of any private interpretation. 1. We both hold out of
Acts 8.31. that the Scriptures cannot be understood (...), without a guide. And
if the Eunuch, a man not of the vulgar sort, was not otherwise able to do; 2.
This being set down, we add this also: That there is a certain
interpretation, whereto a man may safely commit himself: For else, it is well
known, that we cannot build on the rock, but be blown down at every blast
of contrary doctrine. 3. As we affirm it out of Peter, i. that one may not
interpret them after his own fancy. i. as 2. Pet. 3.16. (...), ^ Pet. 3.16.
to wrest the Scriptures: but as Hilary says, Refer sensum e Scripturis, non
auferre e Scripturis: to utter the sense out of Scriptures, not to take it away
from the Scriptures.
Therefore we hold this, 1. Cor. 12.10.
1. Cor. 12.10. that God has given the gift of interpretation; which gift, as
we acknowledge, not to be given out of the Chruch: as, 1 Cor. 2.14. (...). The
natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God. i. a man, only as
he is a man, cannot interpret aright. So neither we hold, that it is given to
the common people, whom as Augustine says, Non vivacitas intelligendi, sed
simplicitas credendi salvos reddit. Not liveliness of understanding, but
simplicity of faith saves them. But to the learned, and to those of the
learned, that have the gift of interpretation. Now forasmuch as, 1 Cor. 12.11.
God does divide these gifts, singulis prout vult, to every one as he pleases.
Therefore it is hard restraining of it to the succession of Bishops: as the
grosser Papists do. Stapleton lib. 10. Of controversy, cap. 7. when he had
done all he could, yet at the length the truth prevails with him, that he
says, that it is not so tied to the succession of Bishops; but that God may
work it in other extraordinarily; that as well to Amos a Heardman, as to
Jeremy a Priest, the gift of Prophecy was given. And those of the sounder sort
of them, as Andradius, leans flat to the contrary part: that the
interpretations of the Bishops, gathered together, may be taken, though it be
flat contrary to the Scriptures.

Now for the sense of the Scriptures, they say well in Law, that Apices juris,
non sunt jus, Extremity of law, is not law: so of the Scriptures, The book is
not the Scripture, not the draught of words, but the meaning. And for the
meaning of them, Aquinas says, that to prove any matter of faith or manners,
no sense must be taken, but the literal sense. 2. But if we come to exhorting
and instructing; then we may use tropologicall sense (as the Fathers, for the
most part every where.) 3. That the literal sense can be but one, in one
place, albeit a man may draw sundry consequences, a contrariis, similibus, etc.
from contraries, from likes, etc. by the rules and places of Logic, yet the
literal sense of the author is but one. 4. That is the literal sense of
every place, which the construction does show, if it lead not to an absurdity:
then must it needs be a trope, or figure.

Thirdly, seeing then there must be an interpretation, and it must come from
the letter, unless it bring us to an absurdity: 3. follows the examination
of the sense. And first, against all Stapletons issues of arguments, That if
these be the means, there is always left a place for wrangling; but it is no
inconvenience. For he that will wrangle, may as well wrangle upon the
interpretations of the Fathers, Councels, etc. We must not look to bring an
adversary so far, that he can say nothing; for what is it, that the devil
cannot say against it? All the inconveniences, that an heretic may be brought
to are two. The first, Tit. 3.11. to drive them so far, till they condemn
themselves, in their own facts, Tit. 3.11. that after two or three disputings,
we may give them over, (...), being condemned of themselves. 2. Seeing the
devil so blinds the understanding of some, that they will not perceive
reason; therefore as it is, 2. Tim. 3.9.
2 Timothy 3.9. so long we may reason with them till their (...), their folly be
manifest to all men. One may set down conclusions in half an hour that may
trouble all the learned men half a year to confute them.

2. We must know, that as in other sciences, The judgment to be taken from the
principles.
so in Divinity, the judgment of every part is to be taken ex principiis, from
the principles; and examined by them: For these principles, Aug. de doct.
Christiana. 2.9. In iis quae aperte posita sunt, inveniuntur illa omnia, quae
pertinent ad fidem, moresque vivendi, in these things which are plainly set
down, all things are found which belong either to faith or manners. Chrysostom. in
2 These. 2. ho. 3. manifesta sunt, quae sunt ad mores, aut ad fidem necessaria,
these things which are necessary to faith or manners, are manifest. And again,
quae tam indoctis, quam doctis patent, which are manifest as well to the
unlearned, as to the learned. Canus a great man among the Papists.
Canus 3.2. chapter of places theological; says, that there are diverse places,
that none can give any other sense of, then the literal; nor can write the^,
unless he will needs wrangle. Irenaeus 2. against heresies, 46, 47. ch That
all those plain places make our principles; and that all those places of
doubtful understanding, must be judged by these plain places. And the next
way for agreement of those parties were, first that learned men agreed, what
those plain places were. Now of the means how to find out the true sense of
Scripture: they are many, but may be brought to six.

Means to find out the true sens of Scripture.
The first is that, wherein they agree with us, sc. Pietas and diligentia, piety
and diligence. Prayer must go first. Aug. Oration postulet. lectio inquirat,
meditatio inveniat, contemplatio degustet and digerat. Let prayer desire,
reading search, meditation find, contemplation feel and digest. So Christ,
Luke 24.13. opened their eyes, prepared their hearts. The 2,3,4, are for the
phrase of speech.

2. Conference of places warranted by August. de doct. Christian. lib. 2. cap.
8. The less plain places in the Scripture are to be referred to the more
plain, and the less in number. And it seems to be the course of the Holy
ghost, Act. 17.11.

3. Inspectio fontium, a viewing or considering of the fountains. i. for the
opening of diverse significations of the word, the consulting with the two
original tongues: for the old Testament, with the Hebrew; for the new, with
the Greek. Aug. 2. de doct. Christiana. cap. II.

4. The knowledge of the holy Ghosts phrase, i. idiome, dialect, or style: For
the Holy Ghost uses diverse idiomes, that are not to be found in other writers;
as the crucifying of a man's flesh, the mortifying of his concupiscence, etc.
Therefore we must be perfect in these: and as Heb. 5. v. last. Habere (...)
Have our senses exercised, that we may know the Holy Ghost when he speaks.
Often we shall meet with (...), this is being interpreted, the Holy ghost in
Greek refers us to the Holy ghost in Hebrew. And these are the remedies for
the right understanding of the words. There are two others for whole sentences
or Chapters.

5. Is that the Fathers call Oculus ad scopum, the eye to the mark. As what
was Gods intent in setting down the Law, in giving a prophecy, in doing a
miracle, etc. As Paul to Timothy, against those that made an evil use of the
Law, reasoned from the end of the Law. So says Hilary, E causis dictorum
sumenda est intelligentia dictorum. From the causes of things that are spoken,
the understanding of them is to be taken.

6. That which the wise men of the Jews say, We must look all about us;
before us, behind us, beside us, etc. i. the diligent weighing of the
antecedentia and consequentia, antecedents and consequents; and every other
circumstance. To these six circumstances may be referred the rules of Irenaeus,
lib. 2. chapter 46,47. Aug. 2.2. and 3. chapter That every one of these means serve
not for every thing; but to diverse things, diverse instruments are applied.

And here, against Stapletons errors, who takes some one thing which would be
resolved by some one of these; and objecteth it to another of them whereby it
cannot be resolved. Because one of these are not necessary to such a thing,
therefore not necessary at all. 2. That we attribute not the interpretation of
the true sense to each one of these; Naught, not for that he thinks them
simply naught but insufficient.
but to all together. Whereas Stapleton concludes them all to be naught,
because sverally they will not suffice; naught, not for that he thinks them
simply naught, but insufficient.

His second argument. To every one of these, there is a place left ad
contradicendum, for contradiction. 2. Being used singularly, they will not
suffice. But we know the first argument to be none. And 2. that every one of
these, has his peculiar office.

The means that Papists use to understand the Scriptures.
Now they, beside Prayer, set down these means; the interpretation of Fathers,
of Councels, the practice of the Church; the definitive sentence of the Pope.
They say, all these are true, infallible and sufficient. For the assertions of
the Fathers, and Councels; as a doubt may be found in the Scriptures, so in
their exposition upon the Scriptures. For the practice of the Church, and
sentence of the Pope: A question may be made whether the Church is the true
Church; and so there is yet place for doubting. For the second inconvenience,
as we unfeinedly acknowledge, that all their means are commendable; as they
include the use of our former means. If ever they did well, it was by using
our means: on the contrary, If ever they erred, they erred in one of these.
But take their means all together, without the other, they will miss. For the
Fathers; They will have all the Fathers meet in one exposition of one place:
which is a vain speculation of theirs. For there is not one place of an
hundred, that all the Fathers expound.

2. In expounding, they keep not lightly the literal sense, except it be in
the controversies that were in their times: but in their Homilies and writings
followed sensum Tropologicum, the Tropologicall sense; drawing out diverse
doctrines and applications necessary for manners. So says Augustine against
Julian. That in controversies, that fell not in their time, the Fathers
loquebantur obscure, controversia nondum mot in caeteris loquebantur secure,
controversi nondum not spoke obscurely, the controversy not yet moved; in the
rest they spoke securely, the controversy not yet known. Basil. epist. 14.
says of Dionysius a Father; multa loquebatur (...), he spoke many things
controversally; in his vehemence of disputation against the heretics of his
time, quae non defenderet (...), which he would not defend determinatively. And
in sundry things the Fathers must be taken to have spoken per modum
contradicendi, non docendi, in way of contraedicting, not of teaching. But they
themselves are at strife among themselves; Cardinal Cajetan says in the
second Council at Tent, that if he knew a good and true exposition of any
place in the Scripture, and that might be drawn out of the place, he would
hold it contra torrentem, against the current of all the Doctors and Bishops:
so also Andradius; and they themselves use to deny Fathers in their schools.

Non (...) at honest, dispensatio, sed (...) dissimulatio. Hicron. It was not a
true dispensation, but a dissimulation.
But now they lean to that, which the most part do say. Augustine in epist. II.
There is a question between him and Jerome, whether Paul in reproving Peter,
did mean sincerely? i. reprooved him indeed, or did dissemble? Jerome holds
that he did dissemble; Augustine that he meant simply: And though Jerome
oppressed him with diverse Fathers authority; yet he regarded them not at all;
but thought that he reprehended him indeed; ut ad Calat. 2. and we know
Augustines part carries it away. And Jerome in the expounding of the Psalms,
says, That he had set down diverse things, that were not holden in those
days, Augustine refuses Cyprian an ancient Father his opinion, and preferred
Tironius a Donatists opinion upon a place of Scripture; because he knew it was
the sounder. And he has set seven rules out of him de doct. Christiana,
against that of Stapleton, that would have us to regard, non quid dicatur, sed
quis dicat, not what is spoken, but who speaks. 2. In the exposition of these
words, Tu es Petrus, and suprahanc Petram, thou art Peter, and upon this Rock;
almost every one of the Fathers, at least, most part of them, and best, expound
it of Peter's faith: yet the Papists understand it, Non de side, sed de persons
Petri, not of the faith, but of the person of Peter. Here they disagree
themselves from the Fathers: And Stapleton says, it was lapsus humanus, a
humane failing. In the division of the Law, they go clean contrary to the
greatest part of the Fathers: for whereas the Fathers divide the Commandments
as we do; the Papists make the two first, one; and the tenth, two. 2. They
have no Father to countenance them in this, but Augustine.

2. For the practice of the Church, great doubtfulnesse. i. in the cause of the
primacy: all the Christians of the East-Church have refused it; only the West
Churches held with it: so that here is half the Church against it. And if the
practice of the Church were to be urged; all Christendom were once Arrians,
saving three or four Bishops. So that here is ambiguity with great peril.
Basil. 27. de Spiritu Sancto; de immersione trina in Baptismo, of the Holy
Ghost, of thrice dipping in baptism: that first the children were but once
dipped into the water; after thrice: at this day it is but once, and the other
abrogated.

3. For Councels; they are divided into Action and Canon: for the Action, it is
either intolerable or shameless; or they must confess infinite writings: so
that they confess, the action may err. For the Canon, there is not one place
among a thousand that has the indefinite sentence of the Fathers. 2. There
have been Canons directly contrary one to the other. The general Council of
Constance and of Basil, both general, both allowed. 1. by Pope Martin the
fist. 2. By Pope Eugenius the fourth; and their Bills be at them, one opposite
to the other. One says, The Council can err, not the Pope. The other, the
Pope, not the Council. The Canon of the Council of Ferrara, contrary to the
Canon of the Council of Florence; the one, that the Pope was above the
Council; the other that the Council was above the Pope. Decretum de 4.
conclusionibus, the decree of the four conclusions.

4. For the Pope; Jerome says, that Damasus a Pope did consent ad
subscriptionem haereseos, to the subscription of heresy. Liberius (as Ambrose)
though for a while he was constant, and a great enemy against the Arrians; yet
being put by his Bishopric, and banished; after revolted, and upon his
revolting was restored to his Bishopric, and in an Arrian Council, did
subscribere haeresi, subscribe to heresy. 1. That Christ in respect of his
Godhead, was not equal with his Father. 2. To the heresy of the Monothelites:
that Christ in respect that he was both God and man, had but one will; and
therefore but one nature.


Honorius was condemned in seven Canons, and seven actions, by the sixth
general Council of Constantinople; propter subversionem fidei. for subverting
the faith: and accursed by the 7. and 8. general Council of Nice. So that
they are feign to say, these Councels were corrupt; and so, not only they, but
also the writings of Beda shall be corrupt: so that we see, these severally to
be false rules. Now to show that they fail, being taken altogether. In the
ministering of the Communion or Supper to infants. 1. Augustine defends it
against Julian. 2. Aurelius, and indeed all the Fathers, interpreting, John
6.53. Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, you
have no life in you;) of the Sacrament; whereas it is de re Sacramentis i. de
invisibili gratia, of the matter of the Sacrament; that is, of the invisible
grace. It has been confirmed by the Council at Milevitanum, where Augustine,
Aurelius, etc. subscribed; Aug. 2. Canon against Pelagians.
it has been the practice of the Church: and Innocentius Pope of Rome, in his
letter confirmed it: Qui parvulis definivit, ut Augustinus, lib. de
Sacramentis; has limited little children, as Augustine in his book of the
Sacraments; grounding on that place of John. They being brought to this, that
they see, that every interpretation is not good, Against Julian
because it is given; but because it is according to rules: and there is no
rules but ours: if they make the rule to hang on the personal exposition, not
on the real, as Stapleton, lib. 10. cap. 11. then they must have his thirteen
cautions. Who in the end is brought to an infinite absurdity, that he is feign
to say, that the interpretation of a Bishop, though unlearned, is to be
preferred before the interpretation of a learned Divine. Andradius. We believe
the Fathers, not whatsoever they say, nor because they say it; but because
their saying is according to the rules. Hitherto the Preface to Religion.

Now we must handle the sum of Christian religion it self in it self. The
whole Christian religion has two parts, Delege, Of the Law
the Law and the Gospel.

If we have the sum of both these, we may assure our selves that we are
grounded as much as is for our salvation. The sums of them are principles
simply necessary to our salvation. The warrant for these is out of John 1.17.
For the Law was given by Moses, but grace and truth comes by Jesus Christ.
Seeing these be the parts, we must know first, whether is first to be handled?
The Church of Rome, as it is in the Treatise of D. Hessel, Canisius, but
especially in the last Councels Catechism at Trident, perverteth the order,
and teaches the Gospel before the Law. Which stands against the order both
of time and nature. For these reasons. 1. For these are nothing else but two
covenants, which God made with mankind: 1. Of the Law. 2. Of the Gospel.
The old and new Testament, not as they are in our books, for so they are
confounded: and as Saint Augustine says, the Law is nothing else but
Enangelium occultatum, a Gospel hid. The Gospel, Lex revelata, a revealed
Law. But taking them for Covenants: as in a Will or Testament, there are two
parties; the Testator, and the party to whom the legacy is made. So in each
Covenant, there were two parties: in the first, God and Adam: The Covenant on
Gods side, eternal felicity, both in this life, and in the life to come: on
Adams, perfect obedience. Therefore it is called the Covenant of obedience.
This perfect obedience man received stength to perform; but abusing his
strength, and setting it against God, justly incurred the forfeiture. i. of his
felicity: and the penalty. i. eternal death, and hell, opposite to Paradise,
to which his strength should have kept him. sc. morte morieris, namely, that
thou shall die the death. By this means the first Covenant being broken and
made void, yet not in regard of the forfeiture, but of the penalty it pleased
God to make a new covenant; in which are two bonds. 1. Between God and Christ.
2. Between Christ and us.
On Gods side, felicity; or the conveyance of his eternal right to Christ's. On
Christ's, satisfaction to God: to us, to restore all to us that we have lost. On
our side, faith unfeigned. As man fell, and by his fall, lost all that he had;
so if he would recover that he lost, he was to make satisfaction: and beside,
if he could fulfill the Law, he had promise of eternal felicity. Christ
undertook this perfect satisfaction for man: suffered all, that man should
have suffered; and so took away the penalty: satisfied the forfeiture; and so
restored all that man had lost: and so came to two rights; one of inheritance,
another of purchasement. The right of inheritance, which he had by nature, in
that he was the Son of God, he reteineth himself: the other of purchacement,
he gives to all them that lay hold of him, fide non ficta, with faith
unfeigned; and that not of our own strength, but in Christ: and therefore its
called the covenant of faith, and that with no loss; for if a thing be taken
away, and a recompense be made by a better thing, there is no taking away. The
reason of this second covenant is, that if the first covenant had stood, and
Adam had remained in his own strength, he must needs have had some part of the
honor for using it well; and not abusing it when he might: therefore that God
might have the whole glory, he suffered the first to be broken; for God in
creating required only honor. Therefore man fell. For his fall he was to make
satisfaction; this was not to be performed but in Gods strength; the grace of
God preventing us, and making us of unwilling, willing; and of unable, able: in
that measure that God will require at their hands: we have all our strength
from God. So that the first covenant. i. Moses his Law, being weak and
unperfect, standing on a promise in figure, and curse without figure: in truth
the figure was performed in Christ; the curse taken away by his death: then,
when perfecta, things perfect came, imperfect a abiere, things imperfect were
done away; one Covenant of God makes not any bond but only in part: that is,
the curse taken away by grace: the ceremony by the truth of Christ's: and that
which is fulfilled shall be taken in the Court of Grace, not pleaded in the
Court of Moses: that is, in the sincerity of faith, not in perfection of the
Law.

2. The first Covenant (...) was given, the Law is said to be given by Moses,
but we had not hearts to receive it. But this. i. the Gospel not only (...)
was given, but also (...) per Christum, was made by Christ. The Law is changed,
The use of the Law not taken away by Christ his coming, Math. 5.17. (...).
Think not that I am come to destroy the Law and the Prophets: I am not come to
destroy, but to fulfill. The order observed, 1. By God himself with Adam.
nothing but only the ceremonies are taken away by Christ his truth: and the
curse by grace: So that the bond and observing of the Law is not taken away by
Christ his coming; but, as he himself confesses, fulfilled. as it is in
Math. chapter 28. verse ult. (...), Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I
have commanded you. Therefore doubtless, humbling comes first, which is by
the Law. The natural order of the covenants, the second brought in on the
first.

This course of teaching by humiliation, in letting us see what we are, has
been used from the beginning of the world: from the practice not only of the
Apostles, but also of the Prophets, and of God himself. 1. Gods own
proceedings on the violation of the first covenant. After the transgression,
Adam remained till the evening in the experience or fear of the Law, by hiding
himself: then first began the Law to go upon him, Vbi es? Where art thou?
After he had told God what he had done, Gods sentence proceeded, Edisti igitur,
Thou have eaten therefore, presently after came the promise, semen mulieris
conteret caput serpentis; the seed of the woman shall break the head of the
Serpent. So you see, first he called him forth. 2. Man confesses his
transgression. 3. Judgment of death passes on him. 4. After Christ's is
taught. Secondly, the same order took God after the flood; when he taught
Abraham, Genes. 17.1. 2. By God after the flood.
Ambula mecum. and esto integer. Walk with me, and be thou perfect. Integrity
is the whole scope of the Law; after is the Gospel taught. So did God to the
Patriarchs. Moses in Deuter. i. In Lege iterata, Genes. 22.18. Acts 3.25.
in repetition of the Law; after the three first chapters, in the fourth he
begins to teach the sum of the Law, unto the eighteenth. There he tells
them, that God would raise a Prophet among their brethren, etc. and so goes on
in delivery of the Gospel, the same does Stephen, Acts 7.37. As in Moses, so
in the Prophets, especially in Esaias, in his 39. first chapters he shows in
gross: 3. By the Prophets.
(though there be certain promises intermingled) the whole sum of the Law;
then the sum of the Gospel. But more plainly in his first chapter from the
beginning to verse. 18. there is a bitter invective of the curse of the Law;
from thence to the end; is the Gospel. Come then, if thy sins, etc. In the
Psalms, Psalm. 1. nothing else but a recapitulation of the Law, 4. In the
Psalms.
with the promises and curses thereto adjoined. The second Psalm of the
coming of Christ, and the Gospel. 5. John Baptist, Matthew. 3. (...), etc.
Generation of vipers, who has forewarned you. Matthew. 3.10. (...), etc. The Axe
now is put to the root of the trees. The Law. Verse. 11. (...). etc. I indeed
baptize you with water. The Gospel. 6. Christ his own order; whose method is
our instruction, 6. By Christ.
Math. 23.12. (...), Whosoever shall exalt himself shall be abased; and he
that shall humble himself shall be exalted. Legis est humiliare, the Law
humbles. 7. By the Apostles.
First, humiliation; then exaltation. There is no humbling, but by the law; and
therefore it is called the humiliator. 7. The practice of the Apostles, as of
Paul, in his Epistle to the Romans; which is said to be the sum of all
religion. After the prooemium or salutation, in the 17. first verses, from the
18. verse of the first Chapter, to the 25. verse of the 7. chapter, he speaks
of the Law, that all are condemned, 1. Gentiles. 2. Jews. 3. Unregenerate. 4.
Regenerate; and includes himself in.
From the first verse of the 8. chapter, he delivers the sum of the
Gospel: showing in what covenant we are to look to be saved. This is for the
warrant of practice.


In the form of instructing, the pattern of it is in Heb. 6. first repentance
from dead works. 2. Faith in Christ. And thus stands the order. 1.
Repentance from dead works. 1. The Law. Now the Law teaches us three things:
1. Praeceptum, the Commandment. i. what is required; Lex tria docet.
hoc fac, and vives, This do and live. 2. The transgression from the precept,
delict a quis intelligit, who can understand his errors? i. How far we are
gone from that which is required of us. Psalm. 19.12.
3. Morte morieris, Thou shall die the death: the punishment; what we are to
look for.
The Gospel likewise teaches us other three things. Euangelium 3. ^^^et.
1. Ecce agnus Dei, Behold the Lamb of God. How we are delivered from the
curse of the Law. 2. Pet. 1.10. How we may be sure that this deliverance
pertains to us: 3. Quid retribuam? what we are to perform? i. true
obedience: not secundum (...), jus plectorium: secundum jus praetorium, (...),
not according to the extremity of the Law, the Law punishing, but according to
praeter Law, equity and right, in Christ.
Now for the Law natural, we learned in the general prooemium, or preface,
that we depend of Gods providence; and therefore we must think of God, as of a
King. For so it is Revel. 19.16. and therefore as he has rewards from us,
Revel. 19.16. (...). The King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. In every law, four
things are required. 1. The work. 2. The manner. 3. The reward. 4. The
punishment.

so he has (...), his work house to try us in, and this is the world. Then
we, being in a work house, must have our agenda, things we are to do: and the
Law being defined doctrina agendorum, the doctrine of things which are to be
done, it is our agenda, thing we are to do. And as there are four things in
every Law in mundo, in the world; so does this, which is Lex creatoris mundi,
the law of the Creator of the world, contain them all. 1. The work; this you
must do. 2. The manner, thus you shall do. 3. Reward in palatio, in Court. 4.
Carcer, the prison; punishment in the prison.
All these are in every law; and so are they in Gods law. In the law of Moses,
who has set down in the decalogue a perfect pandect of all the works and
duties, that God requires at our hands. These are the true Ethica Christiana,
Christian Ethickes, passing all others Ethickes. In this thing are they of the
Church of Rome to be commended; that teaching their youth Logic, Physic,
and Metaphysicke, three years: because they are not compleately to be found in
these books; refer them to these books for Ethiks, propter regulam morum,
for the rule of manners. For this is the just square of all our actions: it
ought neither to be longer or shorter then this. This law was given by Moses,
says he here. Gods Law is the rule of our life; in regard of the first of the
four things, it is called our agenda, or things to be done. In respect of the
other, the rule, or cubit of the Sanctuary.

Here may a doubt arise: Seeing that the law was not given till 2600: years
after the creation: it might seem that men might as well live still without the
Law. But to show how the world was governed by the law; and that which is, Romans
2.14. The Gentiles both before and after, doing the things that belong to the
law, are (...), a Law to themselves; not to do what they list, but to do the
works of the Law: how that can be; it is thus: that they had (...), i. they
had the effect of the law (written) in their heart, which was equivalent to the
law it self. This he proves, because they had (...) or (...), the accusing or
excusing of their thoughts; and that they had their conscience for a witness
to them both. Genesis 3. Man is the image of God. Col. 1.10. The Image of God is
(...), the knowledge of God. And therefore Augustine, of the Trinity; Ioh. 1.5.
(...). And the light shines in darkness and the darkness comprehended it
not. Psalm. 119.142. Thy Law is from everlasting, as concerning thy testimonies,
I have known long since, that thou have grounded than forever. Effectumlegis
praestitum esse ante legis traditionem. Gen 31.53. Laban swear by the God of
Abraham, and Nahor, and of their fathers; but Jacob swear by the fear of his
father Isaac.
lib. 14. chapter 14. says, That every man had it in his heart; which must be
understood after the fall. For before it was all perfection. Mali multa recte
laudant, recte reprehendunt. Quibus regulis hoc faciunt? ubi habent hoc, quod
homines sic vivere debent, cum ipsi sic non vivant? hae regulae sunt justae,
mentes little injustae: hae regulae immutabiles, mentes eorum mutabiles. Evil
men praise many things rightly, and reprehend rightly; upon what ground do
they this? where have they this, that men ought thus to live? and yet they
themselves live not so; these rules are just, their minds unjust; these rules
unchangeable, their minds changeable: then he concludes, Vident eas in libro
lucis, they see them in the book of truth; which truth, being in God as a
seal, makes a print in the mind of man; and yet keeps it it self; which
print they can never pluck out: and so by this means, all men have the effect
of the Law in them. To prove that this effect was performed before the giving
of the Law: For the first Commandment; not so manifest, Genesis 11.13. by the
departure of Terah with Abraham, Sarah and Lot out of Vr of the Chaldees, from
their idolatry into Canaan, Genesis 35.2. Jacob said to his household, and to all
that were with him; put away the strange Gods that are among you, and cleanse
your selves, and change your garments. For the second, ibidem verse 5. where
Jacob buried the idols under an Oak: More plain, Genesis 31.34. Rachel hid her
fathers idols in the Camels straw. For the third, Genesis 24 3. Abraham made his
eldest servant to put his hand under his thigh, and swear by the Lord God of
Heaven and earth, that he should not take a wife to his son, of the daughters
of the Canaanites among whom he dwelt. Genesis 31.53. The solemn oath between
Laban and Jacob. For the fourth, Genesis 2.2. God hallowed the seventh day 2600.
years before the delivery of the Law* God uses not to sanctify a thing so
long before, when there shall be no use of it. Gen, 16.23. Tomorrow is the rest
of the holy Sabbath unto the Lord: bake that to day, which ye will bake; and
sees that ye will sees: and all that remains, lay it up to keep till the
morning for you. Genesis 2.2. For in the seventh day, God ended his work which he
had made, and in the seventh day he rested from all his works that he had
made. For the fifth. Genesis 27.28. Esaus howling and crying for his fathers
blessing. Verse 41. He stood in aw of his father, though otherwise profane.
For so long as his father lived, he would not kill Jacob. For the sixth, a
plain precept, Genesis 9.6. Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be
shed. For the seventh, Genesis 38.24. Of Th^mar, whom Judah would have burned for
playing the whore. Genesis 34.31. The answer of Simeon and Levi, that had put a
whole City to the sword for their sister; Should they abuse our sister, as a
whore? For the eighth. Genes. 44.7. The putting of the cup into the Sack, was
enough to clap them into prison. For the ninth. Genesis 38.23. Because Judah
promised to send the whore a Kid, he was as good as his promise. For the tenth.
Genesis 20.3. There was no act, no purpose of Abimelech against Sarah; yet he was
punished by God. No punishment preventeth a fault. The Law, what it was, and
how it consisted, This is the first principle in nature.
dictum est, is spoken. The sum is, Ambula mecum; walk with me, or before me.

The means to do this, Amos 3.3. Can two walk together, if they be not in
love? Now to love Christ, John 14.15. is to keep his Commandments. Therefore
we must be integri, perfect both in body and soul. There is no love, but
between likes. The sum of the Law contains two things: 1. Flying from
evil. 2. Doing of good. Psalm. 34.13. Esaias 1.16. Take away the evils of your
works from before mine eyes;
cease to do evil, learn to do good. In flying the evil, against the law,
which is peccatum commissionis, sin of commission: in respect of the other,
is peccatum omissionis, sin of omission. In respect of the first, we are said
militare Deo, to war for God: In respect of the second we are called his
operarii, laborers. Of the first, we are called innocents, innocents. Of the
second, boni and justi, good and just: both go together. In good works, both
facere, and abstinere, to do and abstain must concur: if we could keep the
second, we should not so much offend in the first. For the Jews were very
diligent in offering sacrifice to God; yet because they burned in lust, and
every one neighed after his neighbors wife, their Sacrifices were not accepted
with God. Contra, If we be never so innocent, yet because we do not pascere,
feed, nor vestire, clothes we sin.

Doing good is set down, Titus 2.12. In living, Pie, godly toward God. Just,
erga proximum, righteously toward our neighbors. Sobrie, soberly toward our
selves.


For these three, Augustine sets down two natural principles. 1. Deterius
subjiciendum praestantiori, the worser is to be postposed to the more
excellent. For Pie, godly; Subde Deo, quod habes commune cum Angelis, Subject
to God, what thou have commune with the Angels. For sobrie, soberly; Subde
rationi, quod habes commune cum brutis. Subject to reason, what thou have
common with brutes. For just, righteously; Fac, quod vis pati, do what thou
would suffer. The corruption of these, is the corruption and transgression
of the whole Law. The corruption of the first. Ipse cognoscito bonum and malum.
2. Quod libet, licet. Know thou good and evil. The corruption of the second,
what likes is lawful. The temper to the sons of men; Videte and nubite, see
and cover. Let your lust be your law. The corruption of the third, is that
principle of Machiavel. Bonum praestantioris bonum communitatis. (...) Quod
potes, exige. The benefit of the superior is the quietness of society, the
good of him that is more excellent, is just. Exact what thou can.


Of the four things required in the law; the second is the means to this. This
manner is by learned men wonderfully dilated. To the means three things: 1.
Toti. 2. Totum. 3. Toto tempore. 1. That all do it. 2. That we do the whole.
3. And that at all times. 3. Poena, the punishment.
To this are required three things. For we must do it: 1. Toti, all of us. 2.
Totum, all, the whole. That we with whole soul and body commit our selves to
the observation of it. 2. Totum. Genesis 7.5. Noah did according to all that God
had commanded him. 3. Toto tempore, at all times.
That we continue in it, all the days of our life, Genesis 6.9. Noah was a just,
and upright man in his time, (...). Abraham's old age, like his youth. 3. For
the reward of punishment; it stands on this ground, that it is impossible,
though a man break one part of the law, he should escape the whole. Therefore
God has taken order for this; that though they overreach the law in one part,
in contemning of it: yet on the other part, punishment shall overreach them.
This was known before the giving of the law, Exodus 9.27. That God was
righteous, but his people wicked. So says Augustine, Aut faciendum quod
debemus, aut patiendum quod debemus, Either we must do what we ought, or we
must suffer what we ought. Both in Genesis 4.7. God to Cain, If thou do well,
shall thou not be accepted; if thou do ill, sin lies at thy door, like a
wild Bear, or like a Mastife dog, so long as thou art within doors, ( i. ut
Patres exponunt, as the Fathers expound it) so long as thou art in this life,
thou may happily escape punishment for thy sin: but when thou departest,
vae, woe, etc. more distinctly, this reward is to them that do well. 1.
temporal benefits. Genesis 39.3. of Joseph, Genes. 39.3. And his Master saw that
the Lord was with him, and that the Lord made all that he did to prosper in his
hands. That the commandments were known of the Gentiles.
because he trusted in God, all prospered under his hand, that his Master
committed to him. Here felicity in this life. 2. For felicity and eternal
benefits, Genesis 5.24. Enoch for walking with God, was translated. Here
everlasting life. 2. In the law of nature, to them that do evil, temporal
punishment, consequently in the estate of Adam, Cain, and Eve: Joseph's
punishment: but especially the confession of Pharao. Exodus 9.27. I have now
sinned: the Lord is righteous; but I and my people are sinners. For the
punishment in the life to come, 1 Pet. 3.19. to the spirits of unbelief, and
are now, kept in chains; and to the sinners that refused the voice of Noah.
And thus we see that this law has all those, that any other law has. But the
heathen which were before the coming of Christ, which did not use these;
because they are not mentioned in the Bible, think themselves not to be
included herein. To show therefore these four points in them: and first for
the ten Commandments. Though they had not the inward part of the law, yet they
had the outward.
For 6. it is very plain, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. for the other four, namely, 1, 2,
4, 10. they are somewhat dark in the writings of the Gentiles. For the third,
Diodorus Siculus says, that it was death among the Egyptians; Perjurii poena:
capite plectuntur, fustibus caeduntur; The punishment of perjury, they lose the
life, they are beat with cudgels. So 12. Tab. (...). Swear not rashly. For
the fifth, Homer. Il. (...), brevi tempore durans erat vita, quia parentibus
nutritionis praemia non retribuit; his life was short, because he returned not
food and nourishment to his parents. So says one to this, and (...), sic, ut
satis sit vives; thou shall live long Among Charondas his lawe^, there was one,
(...), summum esto scelus, senum contemptus, let it be accounted an heinous
crime, the neglect of venerable old men. For the sixth, it is a canon of the
common law, homicida, quod fecit expectet; the murderer, what he has done,
let him expect. For the seventh, Stephan out of Nicostratus, (...), whosoever
would live in this City, and not be fleyed, let the very name of Adultery be
feared. For theft, Demosthenes against Timocrates repeateth Solons law, very
close joined with the words in this law. For the ninth, tab. 12. Qui falsum
testimonium dixerit, Tarpeio sane dejiciatur, whosoever shall give a false
testimony, let him be thrown down from Tarpeius, a great high rock in Rome.

For the other four: which are now more dark with them. For the first: though
we find them for the most part speaking in the plural number, (...), to
worship the Gods, or to fear the Gods: yet the thing was notoriously well
known to the Philosophers, and especially to Pythagoras, If any man say he is
a God, beside one, that made all things, let him make another World, etc. So
Sophocles, (...), in his truth, there is one God: and they could dispute in
their schools, that there was but one God. For the second, that which Socrates
in Platonis repub. he would have us worship (...), as he himself thinks best
And so the Heathen altogether thought it meet; and this is the very ground of
the second Commandment. But for the thing it self, Augustine 8. de civitate
Dei, cap. 31. ex Varrone, That Varro's allowance of the Jewish religion was
great, because it excluded Images; and says, that if all had used it, it had
been a great means to have taken away much trifling.

For the fourth, but very little to be found: yet they had this common among
them, that numerus septenarius est numerus quietis, the number of seven is the
number of rest: and that 7. betokens rest: and that numerus septenarius est
Deo gratissimus, the number of seven is most acceptable to God. Out of these,
they might have gathered a conclusion; that God would have his rest on that
day, etc. The practice of this, in the finishing of their exequiae, burials,
seven days after the birth: in many funerals, seven days after any man's
death. So did they allow Saturn, Jupiter, and Apollo, etc. the seventh day.
One of the Pythagoreans mysteries was in numero Septenario, in the number of
seven. For the ten, Menander. (...), O Divine, covet not at any time so much as
another man's needle. They must not desire so much as another man's Pin or
Button; as some say, (...), not to covet another man's, is the top and pitch of
justice. And indeed, though in their laws they never touched this, yet the
very scope of their laws, though they thought no such thing, did drive them to
this: (...), not to covet: therefore we may conclude with Paul, Rom 1.20. that
they were inexcusable. Now to show that they had the grounds and the rules of
these laws. They had written on the door of Apollo's Temple, at Delphos, in
the uppermost place, the Greek (...), if, to signify, that if any one would
ask counsel at that Oracle; if God once say it, he should do it. (...), if.
(...), if, the rule of godliness* (...), know thy self, the rule of
soberness. (...), nothing too much, a rule of justice.
And that was Subde Deo, quod habes commune cum Angelis, subdue to God what
thou have commune with Angels. Under the one leaf of the door (...), know thy
self; that a man should acknowledge how far he is better then the beasts;
and the mind, then the body: and so by this knowledge should Subdere appetitum
rationi, quod habet commune cum brutis; and corpus animae, etc. To subdue the
appetite, which he has commune with bruites, to reason; and the body to the
soul. On the other leaf was (...). i. fac quod vis pati, nothing too much,
that is, do that which thou would suffer. Covetousness the root of all
evil. Sobriety the ground of justice.
That no man should desire more then he should, against covetousness. And
though they had not had this, yet they had their (...), aequale repensum, due
recompense. Nemo facit injuriam quin velit idem sibi fieri; no man does an
injury, who would the same to be done to him. As soon as ever Severus the
Emperor heard this sentence, he ever after used it in every punishment. Quod
tibi fieri non vis, alieri ne feceris, that which thou would not to be done
to thy self, see that thou do it not to another; 2. Modus, the manner.
and caused it to be graven in his plate: And thus they had rules for actions;
and for the substance of obedience. 2. The manner. 1. for doing it, toti, totis
viribus, animi and corporis; the whole man, with the whole strength of soul
and body: they had this among them, (...), either all, or not at all. We must
do, with all our mind, (...). Either we must eat sea snailes whole, or not
eat of them.
with all our scope, affection, strength, heart, or not at all. Plutarch
compares our duties to a kind of fish; if we eat niggardly of it, it will do
us no good, and withal, will be troublesome to us: but if we eat it whole, it
is not only wholesome, but also medicinable. 2. For doing the whole duty,
totum. They found fault with Euripides the Philosopher, and Caesar, that used
this sentence, (...). The sum is: We must keep justice in all, but only in
the way to obtain a Kingdom. So the adulterer: And man must keep justice;
only for pleasure he may break it, etc. Therefore justice must not be broken
for any thing. 3. Toto tempore, and the days of our life, continually: there
must be in a good man, the resemblance of a tetragonisme, on all sides alike,
as a die. Always like himself, never like a Camaeleon, sometime good, sometime
bad: For reward and punishment, we see what they hold; (...) Jupiters parchment.
that god Jupiter had (...), a sheet or parchment, made of the skin of the
Goat that nourished him: wherein he wrote all men's deeds, what they had done in
this life: and that those that had done well, he had the 3. Gratiae, (...),
Graces, for them in this life: and Elysii campi, the Elysian or pleasant fields
in the life to come; to the square of the paradise in the Scriptures. For those
that had done evil, he had 3. Erinnyes, Furies, to punish them in this life;
and Tartarus, Styx, and Cocytus, etc. a place of trouble, and lamentation. Hell
according to Tophet or Gehenna in the Scriptures, Esaias 30.33. Matthew. 5.22. Now
then, for the law of Moses, Object.
this question may be made. If that they had the law written in their hearts
before: what need God have delivered it in tables of stone? Answ. Because the
former law, it was but in shards, being whole in paradise; Answ.
for Adams fall broke it in pieces. So after, these shards were broken smaller
and smaller. i. the light of nature grew dimmer and dimmer; The fathers compare
the breaking of the first table, to the breaking of nature.
so that these shards could hardly be put together again. Therefore because
writing in the heart would not serve, but decayed; it was necessary it should
be written in tables of stone, and set before our eyes, that they seeing, it
might again be brought to their hearts. Now then we are to see how it came to
be thus; that this first law. i. the law of nature, became to be dimmer and
dimmer. The reasons be three: 1. that men did themselves what they could to
blot it out. Noluerunt intelligere rationem, they would not understand
counsel. How the law of nature came to be dimmer and dimmer. They had (...).
Because they had done evil, and consulted with their hearts, and their hearts
told them they did evil, they would no more consult with their hearts; facti
sunt homines fugitivi a cord suo, They were made fugitive, from their own
heart. Saint Augustine says, quisque malus, est fugitivus cordis sui; that
every wicked man was a fly-away from his own heart. Therefore it was
expedient, that flying from their hearts, it might run into their eyes, that
so they might be brought to their hearts again, unde fugerunt, from whence
they had fled. 2. Because as Christ says, there ran a superseminator, a
sower-over-againe. i. The devil he was very busy to sow his tares in their
hearts. i. false principles, as Vos ipsi agnoscite, and eritis dii. Know ye
your selves, and ye shall be as Gods, and such like. So that this Cockle
overgrew the wheat, and choked it up clean. Therefore it was good this seed
should be sown again, and so that it should not corrupt. i. that it should be
delivered in tables. 3. The punishment of God, because he would punish them
with blin^nesse, August 1. Confess. 18. Lege infatigabili spargit deus poenales
caecitates super illicitas cupiditates, God by an infatigable law poures out
penal blindness upon unlawful lusts.
Therefore when men would not cherish their light, it pleased God to send on
them the spirit of giddiness and slumber. What knowledge they had an^edictum
est, is said before. For their practice, first in respect of God. T^is is a
great thing that moved them to take sharp revenge of God. Whatsoever they
found out, or understood, they attributed it to their own industry. Romans 1.22.
(...), they professed themselves to be wise. And therefore (...), they became
fools, not acknowledging that all came from God. i. That little light they
had, they attributed to themselves: and yet, The planter is nothing, nor the
waterer; but God that gives the increase. 2. In respect of God: whereas it is
sure, that every actions goodness is from the end: All their good deeds were
either to an evil end, or to no end at all. As the Epicures would have all
things to be done for pleasure: the Platonists, Propter praxin politicam, for
politic or civil action: the Stoics, Officium propter officium, or propter
virtutem omnia^non propter gratiam Dei, duty for duty, or all for virtue; not
for the glory of God. But we know that officium is propter quiddam altius
officio, duty is for somewhat more sublime then duty; namely, the glory of
God: and God says, Gloriam me im alteri non dabo, my glory will I give to no
other; and they robbed God of hi^ glory. 3. In respect of God. Whereas God is
no less offended with the breach of the first table, then of the second, yea
sometimes more; they set down great punishments for adultery, theft, etc. such
offenses as are committed against them: but when they came to blasphemy, and
Gods injuries; there is either no punishment, or very little: for they thought
that it did not touch them, which they should have set most by: namely, Gods
honor.

2. In regard of men.
2. In respect of men. For the second table, the duties of parents and children:
men grew so unnatural, that they sacrificed their own sons and daughters to
devils; children undutifull unto parents; and they had their Corban for it;
that a man might neglect his duty to his parents, if he bestowed a gift upon
the Church: For stealth, it was no robbery in Sparta; the law bare them out in
it Tu quoque fac simile, thou also do the like. For adultery, they had their
vagae libidines, wandering lusts; and their abominable feasts and stews.

3. In regard of themselves.
3. In respect of themselves, they had their (...) and (...) their drinkings and
drunkennesses (...) drunkennesses even after they had sacrificed: so much, that
as Augustine says, they did bibere mensuras sine mensura, drink measures
without measure. And it was a commendable thing among them: therefore no
marvel that God so plagued them with darkness, since they so abused the
light: therefore man's heart being an evil custos keeper of the law, Ignorantia
poena peccati subsecuta est; Ignorantia poena peccati. Ignorance a punishment
of sin.
ignorance the punishment of sin followed after: an^ they cannot defend
themselves, si interrogentur a cogitationibus suis, if their own thoughts
should accuse them.

Then came in Moses his law, Exodus 3.18. the first tables were wholly Gods
work, written with his own finger, which bears a sign of the law of
nature: but after it was broken into fragments, Necesse fuit legem dari quo
temp^re dabatur. It was necessary the Law should be given at that time it was
given.
Moses made it new; hewed out the stone: wrote them himself, and ever since
delivered by the ministry of man.

It was necessary that the law should be given at that time, that it was given,
for two respects. 1. Si nunquam caruissemus, if we had never wanted it, we
should have been (...), dicentes, boasting creatures. 2. If it had been given
to all Nations, Quo quis nunquam caruit, ^d fibi attribuit. What a man ever
had, never wanted, that he ascribes to himself.
of common things we have the like thoughts.
Later it could not conveniently have been given; for then it could not have
been over the World before the coming of Christ; and then men might have
pleaded ignorance, being no time for the divulging of it. To show that in this
written law of Moses be those four parts, that are in all laws. 1. Psalm.
19.7. The Law of God is a perfect rule for all duties, and actions, verse. 11.
The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul: the testimony of the Lord
is sure, and gives wisdom unto the simple. 2. The manners, 1. that we may be
whole observers of it: 1. Toti. All, the whole, of all men.
we must do it with all our whole soul and body. For we consist but of two
parts, of a soul, and body. The soul has but two parts, mind and heart; God
must be scopus perfectus metae, the perfect scope we aim at. There must be
plena intentio Dei, a full intention of God. The heart, the will must be tota
inflammata, wholly inflamed. For the body, with all the strength; every member
must be an instrument of righteousness, Deuteronomy. 6.5. And thou shall love the
Lord thy God, 2. Totum. The whole Law.
with all thy heart, soul and might. 2. For all the law, it is the wish of
God, Deuteronomy. 5.29. Oh that there were such an heart in them to fear me, and to
keep all my Commandments always, that it might go well with them, and with
their children for ever. And the contrary were very absurd: for whereas God is
perfectly wise, if some of his precepts were needless, then might God be
arraigned of folly, in not leaving out that which is superfluous: as also Gods
wisdom is impeached, if any thing beside the law were to be kept: then that
added to the law would make the whole, which we should do: and the law it
self should be but part of our Agenda things to be done; and so imperfect: and
the Lord should be an unwise Lawgiver, but this is impossible. Therefore does
the Lord justly say, Whatsoever I command you, take heed you do it: thou shall
put nothing thereto, nor take ought therefrom, 3. Toti tempore. at all times.
Deuteronomy. 12.32. 3. For continuance, tota vita, always, all the days of our
life, Deuteronomy. 12.32. And though the place includes not the time, yet the time
includes the place: always, without dispensation. If this law be perfect, 3.
Pramium. The reward. (...)
it carries with it a reward, 1. Tim. 4.8. There are two rewards; of this life
(and that to come:) Deuteronomy. 28. a verse 3. to 9. in the soul, from the 9. to the
11. Levit. 26. a verse. 3: For the life to come, Levit. 26.3. expounded, Dan.
12. some to everlasting life, etc. Christ, John 5.29. says, (...). They shall
come forth, that have done good, to the resurrection of life; but they that
have done evil, unto the resurrection of condemnation. Acts 26.6, 7.
Paul answered before Agrippa, that he rested in the expectation of the just:
and the opinion of the Sadduces was very odious among the Jews. 4. P^na. The
punishment.
Again on the contrary, if they be not kept; or not after this manner, 1.
Toti, not wholly, but (...) in a double heart, Jer. 48.10. Cursed be he that
does the work of the Lord negligently, and that keeps back his sword from
blood. And so for the whole law, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Cursed be he that confirms not
all the words of this Law, to do them; and all the people shall say, Amen. For
the other, that continues not in every part of the law, he is cursed. This
curse of the Lord was pronounced by the Priest: and all the people said, Amen.
These curses, are Gods curses; and when he says been, well, it will be well
indeed. And there is a full blessing to them that can keep it; so the fullness
of his wrath is to the breakers of it. A curse without blessing, and a blessing
without curse. In this life, Deuteronomy. 28.15. But if thou will not obey the voice
of the Lord, to keep and to do all his Command^ments, and Ordinances which I
command thee this day, then all those curses shall light on thee, and overtake
thee. Levit. 26.14. But if ye will not obey me, nor do all these
Commandments, etc. In the life to come, Psalm. 21.9. Their houses are
peaceable, without fear, and the rod of God is not on them. Esaias 66.24. For
their worm shall not die, nor their fire be quenched, and they shall be an
abomination to all flesh. So that this law of Moses in sum agrees with that
of nature. And as the Proconsull said in the Acts, so say we: This law is open,
the good universal, and without end; whereof the one takes away fear, the
other fills the desire. The law is open, any man that will, may lay claim to
it. But Paul, Gods Attorney, from Romans 1.18. to Romans 7.13. lays his
accusation. 1. To the Gentiles. 2. To the Jews;
proves both to have forfeited; after he excludes the regenerate, and
withal, himself: for though the spirit were willing, yet the law of his
members was disobedient; children guilty by reason of original sin, as
cockatrise eggs. All men guilty of prevarication, and doing against their own
knowledge. But Paul's own argument is sufficient: because the stipend of sin
has taken hold on all: and the stipend of sin is death; God being just:
therefore sin also must needs take hold on all. David confessed this, Delict
a quis intelligit, Who can understand his faults? Solomon confessed he could
lay no clame to it. What then? If all offend, it should seem God commanded an
impossible thing to be kept; It is sure that God is just. Therefore we must
think, that there is no injustice in the dealings of God; though the matter be
never so untoward, yet the rule must be straight, not as a Lesbian leaden rule.
2. It cannot be otherwise; for God being perfectly just, his rule also must be
perfectly just. Why then were we not made to it; Adam received strength to
fulfill it in that perfection that was required: but he was like the evil
servant, who receiving money of his master to accomplish his business;
spends it, and so makes his excuse, that he has no money to lay out; or
being sent about his masters business, in the way is drunken, and so is not
able to discharge that business, that is justly required at his hands. And
thus of the law generally.

A preparation to the exposition of the Law.
PSalm. 119.144. The Law of the Lord is from everlasting. Genes. 1.26. Let us
make man according to our Image and likeness. Colos. 3.10. The likeness of
God is said to be in all knowledge. And have put on the new man, which is
renewed in knowledge, after the Image of him that created him. A preparation to
the hearing of the Law, grounded on Exodus 19. and for the hearing of the
Gospel. John 3. Two days a preparation to Christ's passion.
And albeit, John 1.5. darkness could not comprehend light, yet the light
shone in darkness. Now the exposition of the law. But before the particular
exposition of the law, there must be a preparation. There is no benefit of God
to be received of us, before we are prepared for it, Exodus 19. A preparation of
the people before the receiving of the law. The hearing of the Gospel, no
less plain by John the Baptist, Parate vias Domini, etc. Prepare ye the ways
of the Lord. Proportionable to these, prepared the Church her Vespera Sabbathi,
the evening of the Sabbath; and for their holy days, and also for there
solemn feast days, at the first instituted for a good end, after there grew a
superstition of it, and was abused. Observe two things. First, forasmuch as the
Sacrament is but appendix verbi, a dependent of the word, and the seal of it;
surely we cannot be justified for our doings, that prepare our selves for the
one, and not to the other. Secondly, that we may know that a preparation is
required necessarily of the hearer, as of the speaker; according to that,
Preach. 4.17. Take heed to thy foot, when thou enterest into the house of God,
and be more near to hear then to give the sacrifice of fools: for they know
not that they do evil. The preparation of the law has his ground in Exodus
19.4. Ye have seen what I did to the Egyptians, and how I carried you on
Eagles wings, and brought you to me. 10. More over the Lord said to Moses, go
to the people, and sanctify them, to morrow, and let them wash their clothes.
12. And thou shall set marks, to the people round about, saying, Take heed to
your selves, that ye go not up to the Mount, nor touch the border of it;
whosoever touches the mount, shall surely die. Three means are set down by
God directly to be practiced three days before the publishing of the law: and
the fourth may be added, drawn out of a circumstance. i. Thus shall thou say
to the house of Jacob, and tell the children of Israel; in every action, 1.
Voluntatem promovere, To move forward the will. A man must as well number as
value the benefits of God innumerable.
the will is to go first: the first therefore is to make the Israelites
willing to hear and receive the message that should come. Therefore, first he
makes a Catalogue of the benefits and goodness of God. So that the ordinary
means to stir up a will in us, to embrace the Law of God, is, that we enter
into a mediation with our selves concerning the benefits that our country,
parents, friends, kinsfolks, have received; that either respect us, or them
that touch us. The Lord by that right interest he has in us by virtue of
creation, that we are as pots in his hands, to be either made or broken, as he
will: and that we are as sons, and as born subjects, he may command us to do
this, and need not to reward the doers of it: as Dan. 3. Nebuchadnezzar, his
subjects had nothing for doing his commandment; but if they did it not, the
Oven should be heated seven times hotter: yea we are Deivernae, Gods bondmen;
and as the Poet says, A fourefold consideration of the mercies of God.
Quis praemia vernae, who gives a reward to his slave? We are bought. In the
law nothing so humbles. No matter that a man may sooner fall into, then the
consideration of the Lords benefits. This is a large and great sea: Psalm. 148.
the dragons, winds, storms, snow, hail, etc. are bound to praise him: so that
if it pleased the Lord to make us wind or hailestones, yet in that respect
also, we ought to praise the Lord. How much more then, for giving us a living
soul. Augustine says, Quisque optat cum sana mente perpetuo lamentari, quam
cum insana ridere, each man had rather be in perpetual sorrow, with a sound
mind, then in joy with an outrageous. But the fourth swalloweth up all the
rest: namely, if we consider the goodness and glory of all things, Moses, to
suffer afflictions with the people of God, then to be called Pharaohs daughters
son.

Now afterward he divides his benefits into, 1. Past. 2. To come.
The benefits past, are either the taking away of evil; or giving of good.
Those that are past, he subdivideth into, 1. Deliverance. 2. Eagles wings.
In the deliverance, it is either general to us with many more, in this is the
spiritual deliverance, besides a temporal; in this general, either of the
Commonwealth, or of the Church. Particular to every one, either in regard of
himself, or of those that be near him, by the bond of blood, or of duty, or
of love, or of league or friendship. For deliverance, we need to take no other
argument, then that which God here uses. You have seen what I did to the
Egyptians, and how I carried, etc. And going to the Egypt spiritual, how we
are delivered from the Kingdom of sin and of Satan, from the shadow of
death, from Gods judgments; which do incomparably pass Pharaoh and his
servants, Psalm 91.3. Surely he will deliver thee from the snare of the hunter,
and from the noisome pestilence by the day, etc. And though the hunter did set
a snare, yet the Lord has delivered us from all his snares, a terrore nocturno
liberavit, and asagitta diurna; He has delivered us from the terror by night,
and from the arrow that flies by day. On our right hand thousands have fallen,
and on our left, ten thousands; and yet the danger never came near us, Multi
undiquaque ceciderunt, nos autem stamus, many have fallen on each side, but we
stand. Eagles wings, Revel. 12.14. (...), etc. And to the woman were given two
wings of a great Eagle, etc. God says to the woman, that is, the Church, that
he will give her two wings, even the wings of a great Eagle. These two wings by
the interpretation of the learned, are, 1. the providence of God. 2. His
especial grace, Dei providentia in hoc seculo, ala una: gratia Deispecialis
ala Ecclesiae altera, The providence of God in this world, is the one wing; his
special grace the other wing of the Church.
As in a wing, there is an infinite number of feathers, so in each of Gods
wings, infinite number of particular benefits; but especially these three. 1.
Gods care over us; whereby he abaseth himself to number the hairs of our
head; to our dough, bread, etc. 2. The use of all his creatures, both for
necessity, and pleasure. 3. The guard of his Angels, for us, base matter,
worms, compassed about with sin.
His providence is thus considered. He being a God, infinite and eternal, yet
he considers to look upon every particular little thing of ours, Levit. 26.
and Deuteronomy. 28. to our dough, our bread, Psalm. 41. to the turning and making of
our bed. In the Gospel, the number of the hairs of our head, which we never
do. Last of all, he has allotted to us poor worms, an handful, the most
excellent guard of his Angels, Heb. 1.14. (...); Are they not all ministering
spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation? He
has commanded them to wait on us. Yea he has made this goodly Theater, and
all creatures; and has given them for our use. Adeo ut sit inexhaustus fons
divinae bonitatis, so that the fountain of the goodness of God is
inexhaustible. For his special grace, in vouchsafing his son to redeem the
world by his death. 2. A measure of sanctification and virtue to do well. 3.
The outward ministry of his Word and Sacraments, are as seals of his
promises. 4. Revel. 3.20. (...), Behold, I stand at the door, and knock: if
any man will hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and
will suppe with him, and he with me. Pulsationes spiritus, good motions to do
well. General grace is, first preventing. 2. Following. God bestows his
benefits on us, before we look for them; they are acceptable, and accepted, by
the following. The use of his means, his Word, Sacraments, and motions of the
Spirit, the judgments of God. Particular grace. In particular, the good gifts
of nature, of grace, of those among whom we live; of whom we have benefit.
Beside these, if we come in particular to weigh every man by himself; Gods
particular graces, 1. by bond of nature, 2. of charge, 3. of friendship:
in these graces particular, we are to consider, 1. that God, seeing he has
done thus much for us, must needs love us. 2. That loving us, he will command
us no other thing, then that which is good and profitable for us.
But add to those benefits that are promised, the promises that are to come,
Prae his, illa nihil sunt, in comparison of these, those are nothing; namely,
beneficia futura, in futuro seculo, benefits to come, in the World to come. The
Prophet Esaias 64.4. valueth them by the eye, ear, heart; and he denies that
eye has seen, or ear has heard, or that it has entered into the heart of
man, to understand those joys that are for them, which seek him. For since
the beginning of the World, they have not heard nor understood with the ears,
neither has the eye seen another God, beside thee, which does so to him that
waits for him. The eye may see much: for Christ saw all the world, 1. Cor.
2.9. The place of Esaias recited, (...). Eye has not seen, nor ear heard,
neither has entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared
for them that love him. The ear can hear many things, but the heart can
conceive infinite things. Therefore the joys of the World to come must pass
infinite, being compassed about with the flesh, when as yet it was never seen,
heard, nor conceived of any. And this is that name, which is said, Revel. 2.17.
No man knows it, but he that receives it. Revel. 2.17. (...). To him that
overcommeth will I give to eat of the hidden Manna, and will give him a new
name written, which no man knows, but he that receives it. No knowledge of
it, till we receive it. But for some taste of it: whereas this Earth and this
Heaven is too good for us; yet he promises that he will make a new Heaven: and
indeed, the uttermost of his power will he show, in heaping joys, and creating
anew, for those that seek him: so it is proved by manifest demonstration, that
he will show the uttermost of his power in increasing our pleasures. Therefore
this is it that we conceive of it, that it is more then we can conceive. So
that this shall be more then excellent or over-excellent; because we are not
able to conceive it. All this tends to this end, to stir up in us a love;
and if that come, we shall find ease and delight: these, will, diligence and
continuance follow. And there are but three things to move us to love: 1.
Pulchritudo, the beauty of that we are to love. 2. Consanguinitas, neerenesse
of kindred. 3. Beneficentia, benefits; these make the most savage beasts to
love.
For the excellency of the beauty of the Lord, and his house; his creatures,
and the sparks we have by nature, will sufficiently show us. 2. For the
neerenesse, what greater can be then between creature and Creator; and then by
the second bond of adoption, we shall be his sons. 1 Samuel 18.18. What am I, and
what is my life, that I should be son in law to the King! David makes it a
wonderful great matter to be son in law to the King; much more to God. 3.
For Benefits, The Ass knows the Masters Cribbe, and the Ox the Stall: he
has not only bestowed on those that were before rehearsed; but his love was
such to mankind, that he was feign to have his only begotten son, to come
down and die for us: And if this move us not, then let Jeremies saying take
place, Obstupescat coelum, and terra, let Heaven and Earth be astonished. And
thus much to make us willing.

The second point is in the 10. verse. Moreover the Lord said to Moses, 2. Point.
go to the people and sanctify them to day and to morrow; and let them wash
their clothes: and let them be ready on the third day. For the third day the
Lord will come down in the sight of all the people, upon Mount Sinai. As the
first was to make us willing; so the second is to make us able, and gives us
ability. Before in the preface was said, Sacta sanctis, and munda mundis; holy
things, to them that are holy; and clean things, to them that are clean: so
here, Sanctis, sancta, To them that are holy, holy things. Therefore we must
sanctify our selves, or else we are not capable: the reasons are, 1. The
receiving of a clean thing into an unclean; makes the clean, unclean. 2.
Out of Luke 5.37.
(...). No man puts new Wine into old Bottles; else the new wine will burst
the Bottels, and be spilled, and the Bottles shall perish. Keep not a
proportion between the Bottles and Wine, they will both be lost: so if there
be not a proportion between the hearer, and the thing that is heard, it shall
be both the condemnation of the hearer, and frustration of the word. Every man
is not able, though willing, unless he be prepared, every bottle is not for
new Wine. Tempus praeparationis. The time of praeparation.
The time to prepare here is, two days; Sanctify them to day, and to morrow;
that they may be ready the third day. 1 Samuel 14.18. And Saul said to Ahiah,
bring hither the Ark of God: for the Ark of God at that time was with the
children of Israel: and while Saul talked with the Priest, the noise that was
in the host of the Philistines, spread further abroad and increased: therefore
Saul said to the Priest withdraw thine hand. Saul here being to encounter with
his enemies, took the Ephod, and would fall to prayers before the battle: but
verse. 19. hearing that his enemies were at hand, straight laid aside the Ephod,
left off praying, and fell to set his people in array; fearing least he should
lose time in praying: so his preparation was in vain. But it appeared
afterward, that he played the fool for doing so. For that time that is
bestowed in prayer, is never lost: yea it is the best time that can be
bestowed. And this care must be in us always; so it is Gods will we should
do, Deuteronomy. 5.29. O that there were such a heart in them, to fear me, and keep
all my Commandments always, that it might go well with them, and with their
children for ever. The Lords wish is, that the people had such an heart always
to fear him, etc. This sanctification here to them, was in a ceremony, 1 Cor.
10.11. (...). Now all these things happened unto them for ensamples: and they
are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the World are come. And
there is no ceremony, but it has his (...), equity, to the which we are all
bound. The garments of the old Testament, or Law, were Vestimentum and stola:
id est, the inward garment, and the outward. To this seems John to have an
allusion, Revel. 7.14. (...). These are they which came out of great
tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white, in the blood of
the Lamb. And Paul, 2 Cor. 7.1. (...). Let us cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of the flesh and spirit. We must make us clean both in the flesh
and in the spirit. We shall best see how to make our selves clean, by knowing
how we came foul; that when we are once washed, we may keep our selves clean
still. And the means be two: The first, principal. Secondly, an under means.
As in a garment, there is either the internal pollution, namely, the moth; or
the external, namely, spots and aspersiones, and besprinklings: so in us: 1.
If a man touch a dead body, or any one that has an issue, by the very touch he
is unclean, Levit. 15. Wholly of that matter, de pollutione; as de intrinseca,
Levit. 13. (...) propria.
Levit. 15. Haec est pollutio carnis, externa, ab extrinseco, a societate
aliorum. This is that pollution we receive of the world, of evil example, of
evil company; pollution external. Levit. 13.2. If a man has an issue of his
own flesh. Haec est pollutio Spiritus interna a fluxu proprio. This is that
uncleanness that is within us; that is, concupiscence. The knowledge being
blind, and leading the will to corruption, had need of washing both defile us,
2 Cor. 6.16. (...). Sumus templa Spiritus, We are the temples of the spirit.
Augustine on that place says, Quisque Christianus Templum est in Templo,
templum in domo, templum domi, foris, ubique and semper, templum ambulans.
Every Christian is a Temple in a Temple, a Temple in the house, a Temple at
home, a Temple abroad, in every place, at all times, a walking Temple. And
Revel. 21.27. Nihil inquinatum ingredietur in illud, etc. (...). And there
shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles, neither whatsoever
works abomination, or makes a lie: but they which are written in the Lambs
book of life. Therefore we must make us clean, that other things may be
clean unto us. Sic munda, sed mundis. So things are clean, but to the clean.
But if we be once clean, we must take heed least we after touch pitch again.
Syrach. He that washes himself, after he has touched a dead course, and
touches it again, is defiled. We must not be like the dog that returns to
his vomit; nor the Sow, that walloweth again in the mire: Modus purgandi, The
manner of purging: 1. By the blood of Christ.
Therefore we must be continual clensers of our selves. But how may we wash
our selves? Mundamur primo per baptismum flaminis, we are cleansed first by the
baptism of fire, that is, the spirit. August. Balneum autem nobis erectum,
balneum sanguinis sui. Now a bath is prepared for us, even the bath of his
blood. We are bathed in the blood of Christ. And this is that whereby our
aspersions and blemishes are washed away: of this bath the water in Baptism is
a representation. And not only that, but baptismus flaminis, the baptism of
fire goes with it, Baptismus aquae, flaminis.
that will purge clear. i. the Spirit of God, which remains with us to the
Worlds end, Baptism of water, of fire.
and wherewith we are every day baptized. So does the Spirit of God abridge our
concupiscences daily. There is another means set down, yet all one with this:
(for you may purge either with Nitre or with the Fullers earth. John 15.3.
(...). Mundi estis, propter sermonem, quem audivistis. 2. By the word.
Now ye are clean through the word which I have spoken unto you. The daily
hearing of God, by the mouth of man; If we will compare it with water, it is
like the Fullers earth, wherewith the Spirit scoureth us, correcting us, and
comforting us. By the outward washing, they mean the washing of the body; and
he that cleanses not that, is not only beneath a Scribe or Pharisee; for he
makes clean the outside of the Platter; but is worse also, then the heathen.
2. And for the inward parts, the cleansing of the heart reaches especially to
Christians; because from it comes all uncleanness out. Non concupisces, Thou
shall not covet: no issue at all. 15. verse here; Be ready on the third day,
and come not at your wifes. This may seem to be an addition of Moses to the
Commandment of God: This an advise of Moses, ever after imitated of all the
learned Jews.
The Jews report, that besides the Law of God, the ancientest saying among
them, and such as they called dictum sapientum, was this, facite
circumscriptionem legi, make ye a border to the Law. And they expound it thus:
God commands in Deuteronomy. 7.21. the Israelites, not to enter, or make any league
or covenant with the Gentiles and unbeleevers. Therefore because they (will) be
sure to make no league with them, they set themselves a border on this side
that law, and would not the company of an unbeleever, nor drink with them. Job
31.1. I made a covenant with mine eyes, why then should I think on a maid?
Whereas the Commandment was, not to covet another man's wife, he made a
covenant with his eyes, not to look on a maid. So Paul in his Chapter of
expediency, so called, because the Church stood in persecutions, Conjugium
honorabile, Marriage is honorable. 1 Cor. 7.8. (...). I say therefore to the
unmarried and widows, it is good for them, if they abide even as I. But if
they cannot contain, let them marry. It is lawful to marry; yet its better
not to marry: abridging himself of a lawful thing, that he might not fall
into an unlawful thing. It is lawful to marry, to drink with the heathen, to
look on a maid; but it teaches us a good point of wisdom, not to come near
the pit, for so shall we be sure not to fall in. It is better to take somewhat
shorter of the goal, then to keep close unto it. Oportet facere sepem. We
must make a fence. 3. Polluendi modus. The manner of defiling.
These be their counsels; so is it Moses his counsel here. The ground of the
equity of this Commandment, brings a third thing to make us need washing. A
thing is not only defiled by unclean things; but every thing that is not of
an equal nature to it, that is as good as it: as an holy thing, touched by any
thing not so good as it, is unhallowed. Hagg. 2.13.6. If one bear holy flesh
in the skirt of his garment, and with his skirt do touch bread, pottage, wine,
oil, or any meat, shall it be holier? Esaias 1.22. Thy Silver is become dross,
thy wine is mixed with water. Here mention is made of a double pollution: 1.
That their silver is become dross. Secondly, that their wine was mixed with
water. The dross defiles the silver, because it is naught; but water defiles
wine, because it is not so good as it. And this is a pollution mixed with
inferior things, though lawful. In what respect it comes to defile, the
Apostle, Heb. 12.1. (...). Let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which
does so easily beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set
before us. He makes a division: we must forbear, 1. (...). 2. (...). Not
only sin, but the weight of sin also, that presses down and hinders.
The weight is no sin; but because it is an impediment, it must be washed
away, 1 Cor. 6.12. (...). All things are lawful unto me, but all things are not
expedient: all things are lawful for me, but I will not be brought under the
power of any. And again, 10.23. (...). All things are lawful for me, but all
things are not expedient: all things are lawful for me, but all things edify
not. We may not use all lawful things; si non expediat. If lawful things
begin once to be inexpedient, they are not to be used of a Christian man; but
eschewed. Lawful things, if they hinder our swiftness and our nimblenesse,
are to be eschewed. It is a lawful thing: but every lawful thing does not
edify. By the use of things indifferent, we come to be brought to their power.
We must come so far in using them, that we may forbear them when we will,
and use them when we will. We must use indifferent things so far as they
profit, no further: For the devil as well insinuates himself to us by the
creatures of God, by Gods graces, by good means, as by evil means. And we
are no less to take heed of him, in indifferent things, as in evil things,
Psalm. 69.23. Let their table be made a snare to take themselves withal: and
let the things that should have been for their wealth, be unto them an occasion
of falling. Their tables are snares to them. Matthew. 6.2. their alms and prayer
into sin. These things are spoken to this end, that those things that are
lawful, if any man find himself more slow in the course of God, by them, and
that they wax heavy and troublesome to him, let him follow the counsel of
Moses.

3. Point. This 3. point shows a foolish affection in our nature, that we
desire superfluous things and novelties. As it argues curiosity, so a
mavelous stream of curiosity.
3. Point in the preparation, is verse 12. And thou shall set marks to the
people, round about, saying, take heed to your selves, that you go not up to
the mount, nor touch the border of it; whosoever touches the mount, shall
surely die. To set marks, about the mount, which they should not pass. And
because the same matter is in the 21. verse, (Go down, charge the people that
they break not their bounds, to go up to the Lord to gaze, lest many of them
perish.) We may count it certain. (For sure it is, that in the Scriptures
there is no vain repetition.) As Joseph's dreams, Genes. 37.7, 9. and
Pharaohs, Genes. 41.1, 7. Now as the first made us willing, the second able; so
this sets us marks, that we should not pass; and so the other willing:
this shows us one foolish affection that is in us, that we will be desirous
of superfluous things, and novelties, not only with the hazard of things
necessary, but even also with a manifest contempt and breach of the Lords
Commandments, Genes. 3. The devil will have us know, that Cur vetuit vos
Deus, was a great mote in the Serpents eye, and a great mean to tempt the
woman: the devil would have themselves to know good and evil. Exodus 16.19.
Commandment was given by Moses, that none should reserve Manna till the next
morning, yet in the 20. verse, they itched to try conclusions, and saved it
till the morrow: the fruit they had of their labor, it was full of worms, and
stanke. Verse. 26, They were charged not to go forth the Sabbath day, With
curiosity of our nature, we may seek, and find naught.
for they should find none; yet verse 27. they would needs go out to seek,
and found none. This is a curious inclination of our nature; it cleaves fast
to us, 1. Sam. 6.19. The men of Beth-shemesh would needs know what was in the
Arc; but they paid well for it. 50070. men of them were slain for that one
action: so here God enacted, that none should touch the mountain: and that for
the beast, much more for man. Numb. 14.45. the people of Israel that would
enter into the Land contrary to Gods Will, are soon slain. Verse 44. yet they
presumed obstinately, to go up to the top of the mount: But the Arc of the
Covenant of the Lord, and Moses departed not out of the Camp. 45. Then the
Amalekites, and the Canaanites which dwelt in that mountain, came down and
smote them, Two things: 1. To go up into the mount. 2. To touch the mount. Its
not the law that these men have desire to know, its but to go up into the
mount, to gaze: which was altogether unprofitable.
They have omitted the thing, and searched for the times and places.
and consumed them to Hormach.) It was no necessary thing, for the people to
ascend the mountain; yet the people itched after it: and when they should come
there, they would not be so hasty to know, as to gaze; so that the knowledge
was not so much sought of them, as the place; therefore it was an idle thing
and odious to God. We see the very same has reigned among the sons of men.
Acts 1.6. Lord will thou at this time restore the Kingdom to Israel? Matthew.
24.3. Tellus. when shall these things be, and what sign shall be of thy
coming, and of the end of the World? But as Christ answers them there; Its
not for you to know the times and the seasons, which my heavenly Father has
put into his own power. So Moses here, Its not for you to touch or ascend into
the mountain; it pertains not to you. This then must be our wisdom, as it
is Deuteronomy. 29.29. Hidd^n things belong to God, and those that are manifest, to
us, We must say to our selves, as Moses said to the people, Its not for you to
ascend up into the mountain. More excellently, Romans 12.3. Not to be wise above
that we ought, but to be wise unto sobriety. We must therefore keep our selves
in the limits, which the Holy Ghost sets down. As temporal death, or
punishment here is for trangressors, and those that be overcurious in seeking
out quiddities: so Pro. 25.27. Qui scrutator est majestatis divinae, opprimetur
a gloria. The curious inquirer after divine Majesty, shall be overwhelmed of
glory. Those that are overcurious in seeking things unnecessary, shall seek
with ignorance, and lose the knowledge they had of necessary things, 1 Timothy
6.4. they shall (...), languish, they shall be sick with foolish questions,
deceiving others, and themselves to. They shall be always a learning, but
never know any thing. A fearful example of Solomon, Preach 1 17. I gave my
heart to know wisdom and knowledge, madness and foolishness I knew also
that this is a vexation of the Spirit. August. Qui inventa veritote, aliud
quaerit mendacium quaerit. He that having found the truth, seeks any thing
else, seeks a lie. This overmuch curiosity made Solomon subject to the
grievous points of Idolatry. We are then to know our bars about the law, unum
est necessarium One thing is needful.

Fourth point, of the del very or the law.
There is added of the learned, another point, not as a point of preparation,
but as a necessary motive in the delivery of the Law; necessary meditation of
the law, gathered out of the delivery of it: and it may be comprehended in the
points of the delivery of the law, Heb. 12. a v. 17. to the end; whatsoever
terrible thing there was, the Lord caused them to concur at the delivery of
the law. verse. 9.16. first, in a thick cloud: secondly, with thunderings, and
thirdly lightnings; fourthly, the sound of a Trumpet sounding exceeding loud;
18. fifthly, Mount Sinai on fire, and a vapor of smoke: sixthly, the quaking
of the mount; and as David, Psalm. 20.8. The voice of the Lord made the
wilderness to tremble, the wilderness of Cades. All these, as they are
fearful sights, and objects of the cogitation of man; so it was the purpose
of God to show his law in terrible things, to terrisie them withal. And we see
it took effect: For first the mountains and rocks trembled; in the next
chapter the people fled, and desired Moses, that they might hear God speak no
more to them. And Moses himself, Heb. 12.21. (...), So terrible was the sight,
that Moses cried out and said, (...), I exceedingly fear and quake. This
fourth point is a circumstance of the manner of delivery; which though it be
not of requiring the preparation, yet Heb. 12. the Apostle uses it, as a great
argument to stir us up effectually. For whatsoever thing is terrible, either to
the eye, to behold, or to the heart, to think, (18. v. 31. Mount Sinai was all
on a smoke, because the Lord came down upon it in fire, and the smoke thereof
ascended as the smoke of a furnace, and all the mount trembled exceedingly.) So
that this wrought such a requisite reverence in the people, that the Lord said,
Deuteronomy. 5.29. O that my people had always such an heart to fear me, etc. These
sights and sounds, because they are past, affect us not. But yet that argument
of the Apostle, Heb. 12.25, 26. may affect us. If the delivery of the law be so
terrible; if the law ( Act. 7.53. (...). Who have received the Law by the
disposition of Angels, and have not kept it.) being delivered by the hands of
Angels, be so dreadful; when God in the power of his Majesty shall come to
require it, how dreadful shall it be? And this shall more plainly appear, by
the conference of circumstances of the delivery of the law, and of the day of
judgment. 1. The delivery of the law was done by Angels, A collation of
circumstances in the delivery of the Law and in the day of judgment. 1. By
Angels. 2. Darkness.
the requiry shall be by God himself. 2. Here is mention made of a thick and
dark cloud. Amos 5.18. that it shall be a dark and gloomy day, that there
shall be darkness and no light.
Woe to you that desire the day of the Lord; what have you to do with it? the
day of the Lord, is darkness, and not light. 19. As if a man did fly from a
Lion, and a Bear met him: or went into the house, and leaned his hand on the
wall, and a Serpent bit him. 20. Shall not the day of the Lord be darkness,
and not light, even darkness, and no light in it? Jude v. 13. says, that then
shall be blackness of darkness: and that because, as it is in Joel 3.15. The
Sun and the Moon shall be darkened, and the Stars shall loose their light.
For the third, namely, 3. Thunderclaps.
Thunderclaps, 2. Pet. 3.10. (...). But the day of the Lord will come as a
Thief in the night, in the which the Heavens shall pass away with a great
noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also and the
works that are therein shall be burnt up. The beams of the earth shall crack
in pieces. And no doubt, the noise of the Heavens passing away, of the elements
melting, of the earth burning; must needs be greater then a thunderclap. That
spectacle both to the eye and ear must needs be much more fearful then this.
The effect of this last day, not temporal; for the other, 4. Fire.
they had a remedy, but for this they had none at all. 4. For fire. It was then
but on one simple mountain Sinai, but here it shall be on all the earth: this
fire was but as the fire in the bush, the bush was not a whit consumed by it;
no more was Sinai by it. But our God, Heb. 12. v. last. is himself a consuming
fire: and such, Revel. 19.3. (...). And her smoke rose up for ever and ever. As
it shall inflict on us pains for ever, so the smoke of it shall ascend
forever, 5. Earthquake.
and the flame never be quenched. 5. For the shaking of the earth; this shall
pass that: there, one mountain quaked; but here, both Heaven and Earth shall
shake. Heb. 12.26, 27. Whose voice then shook the earth; but now he has
promised, saying, yet once more I shake not the earth only, but also heaven,
etc. So as that there shall be a manifest moving of them. Hag. 2.7. Yet a
little while, and I will shake the Heavens and the Earth, the Sea, and dry
Land. Whereas this hill stands still as it did before, 6. Sound of Trumpet.
in the wilderness. 6. For the sound of the Trumpet, that pierced the ears of
the living, this shall raise up the dead also. Here shall be the Trump of the
Archangell: That removed not the mount, nor the wilderness, but here shall be
such a sound, that it shall raise the dead. And as we compare the circumstances
of both, so may we compare the effects of both. The giving made Moses to shake
and tremble; but at the requiring again of it, as it is, 1 Pet. 4.18. (...);
And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner
appear? There shall be a like trembling of all. For Justus vix servabitur, the
righteous scarce shall be saved. And as for the unjust, they shall smite their
knees together, and shall cry to the mountains (though in vain, for they
cannot be heard) to fall on them, and to cover them, from the face of the just
judge. Apoc. 6.16. (...). And they said to the mountains, and rocks, fall on
us, and hide us from the face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the
wrath of the Lamb. So that thus we see by way of comparison, that the delivery
did in some part answer the requiring of it: but the terriblenesse of that day
cannot be expressed. Let us therefore say, as the people to Moses: Lord let us
hear the ministry of man, Hebr. 12.28. (...). Wherefore, we receiving a
Kingdom which cannot be moved, Let us have grace whereby we may serve God with
reverence, and godliness, for Deuteronomy. 33.2. The Lord came from Sinai, and rose
up from Seir unto them; and appeared clearly from mount Paran, and he came
with 10000. of Saints: and at his right hand a fiery law for them. No doubt
when Christ comes from Heaven, he shall bring with him a fiery law, executed
with fire and brimstone. And thus much for the preparation.

The use and end of the Law.
4. Circumstance.
THere is yet one thing to be considered; namely, the use or end of the law:
which shall be explained out of the circumstances of a proposition of the
giving of the law. The proposition is, Heb. 7.19.
Heb. 7.19. (...). For the law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a
better hope, by the which we draw nigh unto God. The end of the law brings
two uses: 1. It brings us to know perfection it self. 2. It leads us to a
better thing, it is our schoolmaster to Christ.


1. For the first, though it be a law that carries with it the mark of the
Lawgiver, (as Solons laws a mark of their giver; to wit, mildness; and
Dracoes laws, cruelty and stubbornness.) And that it is Mandatum sanctum, a
holy commandment, in respect of the duties to God; Justum, just, in respect of
the duties to other men; bonum, good, in respect of our selves, Romans 7.12.
(...). Wherefore the Law is holy, and the Commandment holy, and just, and
good; yet by occasion of transgression, and infection, it brings no
perfection with it, as may be showed out of the circumstances. 1. Of the place;
a waste and barren Wilderness, that yielded no fruit; which signifies that
the law should be so barren, that it should not yield so much as one soul to
God.

Legem non perficere: e circumstantiis legis, cum traderetur. 1. a loco. That
the law brings no perfection, appears from the circumstances of the law,
when it was delivered. 1. From the place.
Secondly, this Agar, Galat. 4.25. stands in Arabia: therefore it holds of
Ishmael, the son of Agar the bondwoman. And the effect and right of bondmen
is to be cast out with their children, and not to receive the inheritance due
to Isaac: so those that think to bring forth fruit of their own
righteousness; they are as Ishmael, which was borne by nature, and not by
promise: not as Isaac, whose birth was supernatural, not consisting in the
likeness of the parents, but in the promise; and the inheritance is by
promise: therefore the children of the law, because they cannot be perfected by
it, are to be cast out with their mother. Those that seek to bring forth fruit
by their own nature, must be cast forth: for the inheritance is not by nature,
but by promise.

3. Again, this mountain, (namely Sinai,) none might ascend into, none might
touch it; but the condition of the Gospel is contrary. Sion the hill of grace,
must be gone up to; and many have ascended it. Esaias 2.3. And many people shall
go and say, come and let us go up into the mountain of the Lord, to the
house of the God of Jacob: and he will teach us his ways, and we will walk in
his paths. For the law shall go forth of Sion, and the Word of the Lord from
Jerusalem. Salvation is from Sion, the Law unperfect before it was perfectly
delivered.

2. A persona. From the person.
2. From the person. 1. From Moses: if any man should have received perfection
by it, no doubt he that gave it. But of Moses we find, Numb. 20.12. Again the
Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, because ye believed me not, to sanctify me in
the presence of the children of Israel, therefore ye shall not bring this
congregation into the Land which I have given them. He was a transgressor of
the law before he received it. 2. And he that delivered the law, was not
partaker of the least promise of the law. i. to enter into the promsed Land. 3.
His whole ministry was destructive; his signs and miracles that he wrought in
Egypt, were plagues of Lice, Caterpillars, death, etc. and therefore he showed
himself the minister of Gods justice and wrath: whereas the ministry of grace
raised the dead out of their graves, healed the sick, The ministry of the
law, a destroying ministry: the ministry of grace, a saving ministry.
cast out devils, etc. showing plainly that it was a saving spirit. 4. Exodus
34.35. The children of Israel saw the face of Moses, how the skin of Moses face
shone bright, therefore Moses put the covering on his face, till he went to
speak with God. 2 Cor. 3.13. (...). And not as Moses which put a veil over
his face, that the children of Israel could not stedf^stly look to the end of
that which is abolished. Moses, when he had left talking with the Lord, and had
come down from the mount, the skin of his face shone so, that without a
veil put over his face, there was no talking with him: so that the perfection
of the law is to blind and dasill their eyes that view it, rather then to
clear and enlighten them. But the Gospel shows us the face of God clearly.

^^^b ip^a lege, ^^om the law (...) self.
3. From the law it self: from the tables, that were broken before the law
could be delivered: which is, in the judgment of the fathers, that that
covenant should be made void. 2. And in that very time that the people should
have received the law, they were in the greatest trangression of it, that could
be; namely, idolatry, worshipping the golden Calfe. So the law to increase
sin, offense between God and man, made sin to superabound, Romans 7.

4. A modo, From the manner. The Gospel was delivered, not with a fearful
sound of any warlike Instrument, sounding defiance: but with a song of Angels.
2. Part. Lex paedagog ad Christium, The Law a schoolmaster to Christ.
Last, from the manner. With the blast of a Trumpet, that terrified the people,
that was delivered with terror, showing that that was a law of terror, and
that it should exact terrible things at our hands. But the delivery of the
Gospel was contrary; for that was delivered with the comfortable songs of
Angels, Luke 2.14. (...). Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good
will toward men.

The second part, Gal. 3.18. That the law is Paedagogus a Schoolmaster to
Christ; which likewise may be showed by the cricumstances of the law. 1. That
it was delivered by the disposition of Angels in the hand of a mediator, Galat.
3.19. (...). Ordained by Angels in the hand of a mediator; namely, Christ.
Galat. 3.24. (...). Wherefore the law was our Schoolmaster to Christ, that we
might be justified by faith. Now a mediator has full authority and power to
end the matter as he list, either to establish the law, or to abbrogate it. So
Christ, because for our health he could not do otherwise, took order in his
own person to abrogate the old Covenant, and to make a new. 2. Another: a
charge given to Moses, that the Tables should be put into the Arc of the
Testimony, And thou shall put the mercy Seat above upon the Arc, and in the
Arc thou shall put the Testimony which I will give thee. Which was a sign of
Gods presence with us; the presence of God with us is only in Christ, per
Emanuelem nostrum, by our Emanuel. 3. Another. Of the veil of Moses; which was
a ceremony of the mitigation of the brightness of the law. That the veil is
now removed, and we see Christ, The ceremonial law is made now spiritual.
(...). 2. Cor. 3.18. (...). But we all with open face, beholding as in a
glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image, from glory to
glory* even as by the Spirit of the Lord. The veil is nothing else, but the
ceremonies of the law: these nothing else but Christ, and to lead us to him.
Between Moses and us, Christ is as a veil. 4. Another. Of the time of the
delivery of the law. It was the fiftieth day after the celebration of the
Passover; the time of the first fruits. An argument between the day of the
delivery of the law, and the day of the descending of the Holy Ghost.
At the very same time, in the very same day, the fi^tieth from the Passover
of Christ's resurrection, came the holy Ghost in the Gospel. And though we
cannot fulfill all that we should; yet because these fifty days are the time
of first fruits, though we cannot offer up every action, we may offer our first
fruits; to wit, in hoatam obedientiam, a begun obedience, received by Christ:
Christ performing that which was required at our hands; though not at the bar
of judgment, yet at the bar of grace. This inchoatam obedientiam, begun
obedience, we shall have, when we shall have new hearts, not of stone, but of
flesh, Ezekiel. 36.26. A new heart also will I give you, Ezekiel. 36.26.
and a new spirit will I put within you; and I will take away the stony heart,
out of your body, and I will give you an heart of flesh; to wit, 2 Cor. 3 3.
His new Testament being written in the fleshly tables of our hearts, whereby we
shall offer our first fruits. Last, Number 21.5 They protest that they will hear
neither God, nor Moses; Numb. 21.5, 6, 7, 8.
a plain desolation of the law: presently upon this, came the sign of Hell. 6.
The Lord sent fiery serpents, among the people, which stung them; so that many
of the people died. 7. Their humiliation. The people came to Moses and said, We
have sinned, for we have spoken against the Lord, and against thee: pray to the
Lord to take away the serpents from us. 8. v. A declaration of the Gospel, and
of the coming of Christ. And the Lord said to Moses, make thee a fiery
serpent, and set it up for a sign, that as many as are bitten may look on it
and live. Which brazen serpent, Christ ( John 3.14.) applies to himself. 1
Cor. 10.2, 3, 4. The Fathers, 1 Cor. 10.2, 3, 4.
as they had their Cloud, they passing through the Sea, their Manna, the water
out of the Rock; so they had also the signs of the Gospel. Their being under
the Cloud, and passing through the Sea, like to our baptism; Manna to Christ
his body; the water out of the rock to his blood.


The order of the uses of the law. Opo^tet vocare ad calculum. We must c^ll to
an account. 1. Use of the law.
Yet two necessary points. That where there is no perfection in the law, through
the imperfection of nature, yet it is ^aedagogus ad Christum, a schoolmaster to
Christ. To make this more plain: Christ's wise dome must be ours. That a man
must often call himself to accounts how he has used his talent. Matthew. 25.14.
God is compared to a Householder, that will take account of his servants, of
those talents that he delivered to them at his departure. We must vocare
talenta nostra ad calculum, call our talents to account; and not do as the
wicked and foolish servant, that is noted of great folly, for hiding his talent
in the ground. Then for the first use of the law, it is our Tabula
supputationum, table of accounts. It contains our credita and debita, what
things are owen to thee, and what thou owe; its the table, that we must cast
our accounts by; it shows us where we are, and tells us our accounts: est
remedium ignorantiae, a remedy of ignorance. Now because it shows us that our
debt is much greater then we are able to pay, and that it shows us the
strength of sin, 1 Cor. 15.56. that it is so strong, that it brings us to
that, Revel. 2.5. Memor esto unde excideris, remember whence thou art fallen,
showing us our miserable estate; the image of God, from whence we are fallen,
and hell into which we shall fall: whereof the one will work in us a grief,
the other a horror: the law is, that if our debt be greater then we are able
to pay, our goods, children, and our selves, must be sold, and payment made. 4.
When it has once gotten us to this, that we may be condemned in the whole
sum, Secundus legis usu^, ducit nos ad Christum, ducit nos ad aeneum
serpentem. 2. Use of the law leads us to the brazen serpent Christ. The
covenant of faith being entered into us, then have we this use of the law. 1.
It puts us in mind of the great deliverance of Christ from the law. 2. It
grants grace in that measure that is required in this life. The law shows
the finne and the remedy. Exodus 20.1. etc.
when sin and we have reckoned, it has her minister and Scrivener, the
conscience to subscribe and set seal to this great debt. And thus will the 3.
use of the Law come, that it will be humiliator, an humbler. And so as it is,
Gal. 3.23. It shuts us up in the dungeon, and imprisoneth us; and this is a
remedium super^iae, a remedy of pride.

Then comes in the second use of the law. That forasmuch as we see our
condemnation is just, and that we can never discharge so great an account, it
makes us seek for a surety to defray the whole sum for us. It does (...),
drive us to think of a surety; namely, to the brazen Serpent, as Moses did the
Jews, that is, Christ. And of these two uses, two other uses will follow. 1.
It serves us as an Arrow shot into us, to put us in remembrance of our great
deliverance, and guides us over the bills of accounts; that we seeing that
much is forgiven us, might love much. The other, Psalm. 119.59. to teach, Quid
retribuam Domino? What shall I render to the Lord? to turn our selves into his
paths, and to draw no more debt upon Christ, then needs.

The preface of the Law.
ANd God spoke all these words and said, etc. till the 18. verse. The sum of
all these words, and in effect, the body of the law contains two parts. The
style, verse 2. I am the Lord thy God, etc. 2. The charge, which receives the
whole ten precepts. In every law, according to the positions in man's law, is
required: 1. Wisdom. 2. Authority.
For the wisdom of God, Deuteronomy. 4.8. And what Nation is so great a Nation, that
has Ordinances and Laws so righteous, as all this law, which I set before you
this day. Moses challenges all the laws and the Nations of the World. The
wisdom of a law is best seen and tried by the sufficiency of it. For his
authority, it is rerum agendarum telum: This is always the preface of every
law; and is here in the second verse. In every edict and Proclamation, the
beginning is with the style of the Prince; whereby he challenges by his
prerogative Royal, to do what he list. For this authority is the common
reason of the whole charge of the law; and is annexed to every Commandment
that has a reason; as to the 2, Where there is a reason given, it is from h^s
authority.
3, 4. For I the Lord thy God, etc. For the Lord will not hold him guiltless.
For in six days the Lord made Heaven, and Earth, etc. And if it be true, that
men need not a reason to persuade them to a benefit; then surely not to this:
because it is a benefit and a privilege; as Psalm. 147. v. last, He has not
dealt so with any Nation, neither have the Heathen knowledge of his laws. Yet
it pleases God to add his reason, from his own person; though indeed profit
be a sufficient Orator. Chap. 19: v. 2, 3, 4, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 25, 28, 30,
31, 32, 34, 37. Chap. 20. v. 7, 24, 26. Chap. 21. of Leviticus, v. 8, 12, 15,
23. The reason of the new Testament annexed, Romans 14.11. and Phil. 2.10. (...).
For it is written, as I live says the Lord, every knee shall bow unto me, of
things in Heaven, and things in Earth, and things under the Earth, and every
tongue shall confess to God. The parts of the preface.
In this style or authority, are three parts, according to three titles. The
first title, of his Name Jehovah. Secondly, the title of his jurisdiction, Thy
God. Thirdly, the title of that notable act he did last; Which brought thee out
of the Land of Egypt, etc. Such prefaces, in their Edicts and Statutes do
earthly Princes use. 1. Is the name of the Prince, Caius Caesar. 2. The
jurisdiction, Emperor or King of such a Country. 3. The last noble act he
did: as when the Romans had overcome Germany, every Caesar was called
Germanicus: or when they had overcome Africa, Scipio Affricanus, Scipio the
conqueror of Africa.
And always the last triumph did drive out all the former.

For the Name first, Jehovah: I Jehovah, not I am Jehovah. It argues his
nature, power, and benefits. Thou art Lord. The name of his nature it cannot be
denied, ( Psalm. 83.18. That they may know that thou whose Name is Jehovah.) it
is communicable to no other then to God. Concerning this word, it is
tetragrammaton, a word of four letters, much written of, and much spoken of,
and diverse speculations gathered out of it: as namely, that there are three
letters, according to the number of the three Persons in the Trinity; and and
that of those three letters, the first signifies Power, the proper adjunct of
the Father. The second, wisdom and knowledge, the proper adjunct of the
Son. The third, love, the proper adjunct of the Holy Ghost. And that the
second letter is doubled, to teach us, that the Second Person should take on
him two natures, of God and Man.

The diminution of Jehovah in Jah, that (...) signifies Deum diminutum God in
the Diminutive, (...) Praise ye Iah, whereof there is such manifold use in the
Psalms. But plainly this may be sufficient for us, that it is a name taken
from Being; as (...) vel (...) esse, to BE. The effect of it is expounded, Romans
11.36. (...). For of him, and through him and to him are all things: to whom be
glory for ever. That he is from none, for none, by none; but all things for
him, by him, and from him: and as his being is most, so is his power. Therefore
he has no promise in his title, no commission, as to be commanded of any, (as
all earthly Princes have:) because his power is highest. For earthly Princes
fetch all their power from him, Omnes Reges terrae ab a^to suam habent
potestatem. All the Kings of the Earth have their power from an other.
as by Commission: as our Prince has in his title, Dei gratia Angliae etc. By
the Grace of God, of England, etc. Therefore he is ab aliquo, from some other;
only God has no commission, but is in himself, without a supreme. He only
may command simply: he has no dependence of any, either of Being or Power; but
all things depend on him. The force of the reason is, Psalm 104. v. 29.30. When
thou hidest thy face, they are troubled: when thou take away their breath,
they die; and turn again to their dust. When thou let thy breath go
forth, they shall be made, and thou shall renew the face of the earth. And when
he looks not on us, but turns away his face, yea when he breaths not on
us, we come to nothing. There the Prophet says, that streams proceed from his
countenance, as beams to every creature; and if any of them be stopped, that
creature that it should come to, dies. And verse 30. that he is the only
breath of all the world, and that his breathing on the creatures, gives life:
and at the drawing in of his breath, all perish. Now if we would imagine of any
man in the world, that with his looking on us, could preserve our lives, and
looking off us, could destroy, that had our life at such an advantage;
certainly we must be mavelous ready to please him: And yet such is our
dependence on God.

(...) He was.
The word (...) he was, as it has two significations, so it has two uses, in
Scriptures significations. First, essence. 2. The effect thereof. 1. Use for
his essence. 2. To give effect; to wit, is essence. Exodus 3.14: I am has sent
me to you.
He calls himself, I am. Ero, I shall be, sent this. And howsoever there be
comparisons of him in time, in respect of us; yet in regard of his enduring, he
is for ever without all time; he is always Ero, shall be. Revel. 1.8. (...). I
am Alpha, and Omega, the beginning and the ending, says the Lord; which is,
and which was, and which is to come, The Almighty. The eternity of his essence,
even I am a, Alpha, and o, Omega; the beginning, and the ending; which is,
which was which shall be. Heb. 13.8. (...). The same yesterday, to day, and the
same for ever. And this takes from us the hope that we may have of earthly
Princes. A man if he has offended against an earthly Prince, either he may
escape by going out of his Dominions, or by out-living him; but there is no
hope of escaping out of the Lords Dominion, Psalm. 34 7. The Angel of the Lord
is round about them that fear him, and delivers them. He pitcheth his Tent
round about us: he compasses us as in a circle. If we run from one end of
the world to the other, we are still in his Dominion: he can fetch us from any
place. So in respect of God, we can be in no place, but he will be with us,
Amos 9.2. Though they dig into hell, thence shall mine hand fet them; though
they climb up into Heaven, thence will I bring them down; and though they
hide themselves in the top of Carmel, I will search, and take them out thence:
And though they hide themselves from my sight in the bottom of the Sea, thence
will I command the Serpent, and I will bite them Obadiah verse. 4. If we should
fly up as high as the Eagle, and build our nest among the Stars, etc. for
height: for depth, Amos, in the depth of the Sea; nay if they should dig to
hell, Psalm. 139.7. Secondly, Psalm. 139.7.
to last longer then the Prince. So, in respect of Gods being, we cannot
outlast him. The time is infinite; for his Name is Ero shall be: and he shall
always be Ero, shall be, in time. Therefore we must needs obey. Secondly, of
his truth, in bringing to effect, that which he promises us. Exodus 6.3. God
said, that Abraham and the Patriarchs knew him by the Name of Almighty, not by
that Name of Jehovah as yet. i. One that is as good as his word. Yet then shall
my night be turned to day. It is plain, Genes. 15.6. that Abraham believed,
(...) in Jehovah, and it was counted to him for righteousness. And God says,
verse. 7. I am Jehovah, that brought thee out of Vr, etc. Yet God says to
Moses, that the Patriarchs knew him not by Jehovah, but by Almighty. To
reconcile these places, we must understand, that by Jehovah is meant here, the
bringing to effect this general promise. So long as God makes a promise, so
long is he (...) my Lord, or (...), God, etc. but when he has brought it to
pass, then he is Jehovah. So the Patriarchs knew him Jehovah, by some
particular promise: as Abraham, in the birth of Isaac; Noah, in the delivery
from the deluge; Lot, in the delivery from the destruction of Sodom: but they
never knew him by the Name of Jehovah, in bringing to pass the greatest and
general promise of Canaan. In this sense, Ezekiel. 5.13. Thus shall mine anger be
accomplished, and I will cause my wrath to cease in them, and I will be
comforted; and they shall know that I the Lord have spoken it in my zeal, when
I have accomplished my wrath in them. Thou shall bring thy judgment upon them,
and they shall know that thou art Jehovah.

2. Title, Thy God.
(...) Thy God. This is the title of his jurisdiction: to which title he has
claim in a double respect: 1. General. 2. Particular. General, Psalm. 148.5,
6. For he spoke the word, and they were made; he commanded, and they were
created. He has made them fast for ever and ever, he has given them a Law
which shall not be broken. So this jurisdiction is over every thing, as it is a
creature. The creatures, as they have their law; so we see, 2 Pet. 3. verse.
last. (...). To him be glory, both now, and for ever. All the creatures have
their rule from him. Esaias 1.2. Hear, O Heavens, and hearken O Earth, for the
Lord has said, I have nourished and brought up children* but they have
rebelled against me. Deuteronomy. 32.1. Hearken O Heavens, and I will speak, and let
the Earth hear my words. The creatures of the Lord are called to bear
witness against Israel, that they were breakers of the Law of God. But that
law or jurisdiction being broken, it gave occasion to the second, namely, the
particular, which is conditional. 1. God is our Jehovah by covenant. Deuteronomy. 5.
Hear, O Israel, the Laws and Ordinances which I propose to you this day, that
you may learn them, and take heed to observe them. Audis, sum Deus; non audis
non sum Deus, hear thou, I am God; hear thou not, I am not God. Hereupon
says a Father, Audias, Deus sum; ne audias, Deus non sum. If thou hear, I
am God; Ierem. 31.33.
if thou do not hear, I am not God. Ierem. 31.33. I will be their God, and
they shall be my people. Meum and tuum are relatives. But this shall be the
covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days, says the
Lord, I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts,
and will be their God, and they shall be my people. He is ours, and we are his
so long as we keep his Commandments, Deuteronomy. 10.14. Behold Heaven, and the
Heaven of Heavens is the Lords, thy Gods; and the Earth with all that therein
is. 15. Yet the Lord has set his delight in thy fathers, to love them; and did
choose their seed after them, even you above all people, as appears this day.
In which words Moses tells the children of Israel a strange thing. Behold,
says he, the Heavens, and the Heavens of Heavens is the Lords; and the Earth,
with all therein: and yet has he separated thee from the rest, even an
handful (for so is the Church) to make a covenant with thee. And this is a
mavelous strange mercy of God; that when he will be described, he will
condescend to come into our description. He rejects all his excellent titles,
that he might have of his most excellent creatures; as, the God of Heaven, of
Earth, etc. only to have this his jurisdiction, being so vile in nature, and
so wicked in our works; which is a great argument of his goodness to us ward.
Heb. 11.16. (...). But now they desire a better Country, that is, an heavenly;
wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God: for he has prepared for
them a City. God was not ashamed to be called their God. And as one says very
well, Conjunxit utilitatem tuam cum gloria sua. He has joined thy commodity
with his own glory. So he might better have said, Conjunxit gloriam suam cum
gloria tua. He has joined his own glory with thy glory. So will that be
verified, Psalm. 144.15. Happy are the people that be in such a case, yea
blessed are the people that have the Lord for their God. Blessed are the people
that have the Lord for their God.

3. Which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, 3. Title.
etc. A title from the last act he did: but yet it serves for a proof of both
the former, in two points. 1. By their estate in the house of thraldom. Their
estate was miserable, they were servants in the servilest work that could be;
they were put to the Furnace to make Brick. Exodus 5. They were in servitude
unto their enemies, yea to cruel enemies: yea in servitude not to be rewarded,
but to be punished daily. They were compelled to work, and yet they had no
instrument provided for them for their work; they were feign also to gather
their own straw, By his contemptible creatures that the delivery might be more
strange.
and yet nothing of their tale of Brick that they made before, when they had
their straw gathered them, was diminished. They had their children drowned
before their eyes, every day. 2. The delivery with a mighty hand, and
stretched-out arm out of Egypt, most strange; in drowning Pharaoh, and all his
host, by a most contemptible creature, in the red Sea. His two first titles
have always stood: this last, in respect of his last noble act; it has
always been altered.
First, after the work of his creation, he was called God the Creator of
Heaven and Earth. Secondly, after the flood, he was called Iah paean: ( i. as
was among the heathen, Io paean.) Dominus dispersor aquarum. The Lord that
scatereth about (commands) the waters. To the days of Abraham. 3. Genes.
15.7. I am the Lord, that brought thee out of Vr of the Chaldees: to the time
of Moses. In his time, Exodus 3.6. The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; till
the delivery out of Egypt: here, The Lord thy God, which brought thee out of
the Land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Ierem. 16.14. When God should
deliver them from the captivity of the North, it is said, that the other title
should perish: and it should be said, The Lord that delivered us out of the
captivity of Babylon: and this lasted till the days of Christ. The last is
prophesied of Ierem. c. 23. v. 6. Jehovah justitia nostra, God our
righteousness. 1 Cor. 1.30. For Christ is become to us righteousness. Gal.
1.8. The Father of Christ. Now this great benefit being not full six weeks
before the delivery of the law, it must needs stick greatly in their minds;
and now they being in the wilderness, where they were wholly to depend on the
safeguard of God: so that in regard of Memoria recentis beneficii, and spe^
jamjam futuri, the memory of a new received mercy, and the hope of a future; as
also the place where they could rest nothing on themselves: that was both a fit
time and place to give the law in. So that, seeing the Law could not well be
given in Egypt, for they had evil will to go thence: nor in Canaan, for there
they murmured against God; it was most fitly given here. For their delivery was
not, that they should be masters, but that they should serve. The former two,
and indeed the third, they all pertain to us. For though it be true, that Non
obligamur legi propter Sinai, sed propter Paradisum, We are not tied to the law
for Sinai, but for Paradise: and so to all the sons of Adam. And though God
gave, Romans 11.11. to one Nation his law, to provoke all other Nations to
emulate them; as also the Jews themselves to emulation: yet this also is true,
that there is not one of these titles, but in far more deep title pertains
to us, which have a better performance; Tituli in pr^^^io legis ad nos
pertinent. The titles in the Preface of the Law belong to us.
and therefore are grounded on a better promise.

First, Jehovah: As the excellency of his Name is in respect of the performance
of a new covenant: So Heb. 8.6. The Gospel. i. the new covenant, says Paul,
is the better covenant; because it has better promises: and it is better to
say, In semine tuo benedicentur omnes gentes, in thy seed all Nations shall be
blessed: then to say, semini tuo dabo omnem terram Canaan, unto thy seed will I
give all the Land of Canaan. Ours is far better then theirs; namely, the
covenant of obedience, sanctification and glory.

For the second, Thy God. We are included with them in the first, and in the
second also we have a part; but the third perfecter, the Covenant in mercy and
redemption. They had but two, creation and obedience

Thirdly, for the deliverance. How many more dangers we are delivered from,
then they; from the sting of conscience, from sin, from death: how much more
the devil and all his Angels pass Pharaoh and his Ta^k-masters: Hell and
Gehenna, the Lime-kils, the torments without number pass the tale of Brickes
with number; so much our deliverance passes theirs. Colos. 1.13. (...) Who
has delivered us from the power of darkness, and has translated us into the
Kingdom of the son of his love. 2 Timothy 1.10. In this world from errors,
that most part of the world fall into: in the world to come, 1. 1. Thou
Jehovah; we vile creatures
From the justice of God. 2. From the law. 3. From the sting of conscience. 4.
From sin. 5. From death. 6. From Hell. 7 From the devil and his angels. 2. I
thy God: we thy servants.
8. From the spiritual Egypt. 9. From the Egypt of the world.
i. Antichrist. Now as God has his titles, so are we to have ours. 3. Which
have delivered thee, we delivered, etc.
1. We, most vile creatures. 2. We, thy miserable servants. 3. We that have
been delivered from sin, etc. from a thousand dangers.


Audi Israel, Hear Israel, Speak Lord, thy servants hear thee. Let us
therefore hear him and be his servants; least we be hi^ servants that are
spoken of, 2 Chronicles. 12.8. Servants to our worldly desires. Nevertheless they
shall be his servants, so shall they know my service, and the service of the
Kingdoms of the earth.

The law being divided into the style in Exodus 20.2. that has been handled,
and into the charge. Now of the charge, which is nothing else but the ten
words, commonly called the ten Commandments. The number is set down, Deuteronomy.
10.4. as well to take away man's presumption of adding any thing: in which
respect, Exodus 32.15. God wrote both the sides of the Tables full; that nothing
might be added to them. 2. As also to take away excuse from man; for that they
may be easily kept in memory, because they are so few; whereas those of the
heathen are infinite. These for better order, and memory, receive a division
from the subject. First, Deuteronomy. 6.4. divided according to the two Tables; which
Christ, Matthew. 22.40. Mark 12.30. warranteth: speaking to a Scribe, he
divides them according to two objects: 1. God. 2. Man. And this is not his
own, but it is warranted in the Scriptures of the law. The duty toward God,
Deuteronomy. 6.5. Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, soul might.
Duty to man, Love thy Neighbor, as thy self. Levit. 19.18. from whence Christ
has it. So that this division according to the tables and contents of them, is
Christ's division, 1 Timothy 1.5. because (...) love, is so often repeated in the
Law, Paul makes (...) and (...), the sum and end of the Law to be love. To.
13.9. The whole law is recapitulated into this sum: Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self. For our love proceeding and ascending up to God; when
we descend and come to our neighbor, it is but a reverberation of the love we
have toward God: and every reverberation praesupposeth a direct beam: so that
every man has God first in his direct motion.

The division of the ten Commandments into two Tables.
NOw these ten precepts must be sorted into these two Tables of God; and in the
sorting of them there may arise some doubt: The first is between the Jews and
the Christians: the second between the Christians themselves. 1. Doubt,
The Jews make an even division, five in one Table, and five in the other.
Their warrant, as they think, is Psalm. 82.6. I have said, ye are Gods,
therefore the fifth Commandment to be referred to the first Table. Answer.
Solution.
But because in the Commandment are also included inferiors, and they are no
Gods: we must seclude it out of the first Table; because it pertains not to
God directly, but to man.

Secondly, between the Christians themselves. The Church of Rome, they make
the two first, one: and the last Commandment they stretch and make two of it.
Wherein they follow not the greatest number of Fathers, as they say they do in
their interpretations: but divide this Commandment, into non concupisces
vitam, non concupisces famam. Thou shall not covet the life, thou shall not
covet the name.

That it cannot be theirs, 1. The desire Non concupisces vitam proximi tui,
thou shall not covet the life of thy neighbor; which is the desire of the 6.
Commandment; and non concupises famam proximi tui, thou shall not covet the
name of thy neighbor; which is the desire of the ninth, might as well make two
Commandments, as these two; and better too. But common sense tells us, that
to make laws of particulars, is the greatest folly that may be. Much less
Gods law, which is exceedingly general. And we see that of concupiscence, set
down here in general, there are two branches of it: and when they interpret
of it in their comments, they say they find some little difference between
them: and indeed they find such inconvenience, that commonly they include them
both into one. 2. No wise man would imagine, that a Lawgiver, that would give
ten Commandments, could give two of them at one breath, at one period; yea in
one verse: and the other in distinct periods. 3. A greater witness then these
are, Romans 7.7. makes but one, non concupisces, thou shall not covet, for all.
4. The whole course of the Church of God, Jews and Christians have consented
to this division; and all disallow theirs, only Augustine excepted.
As Josephus lib. 3. of the Commandments, that the two first, which they make
but one, are two: and the two last are but one. Philo Iudaeus, de decalogo, of
the decalogue. Aben Ezra, Rab. Solomon, upon Exodus 20. Christians, Clemens 6.
(...). of his Strom. The tenth word or Commandment concerning all the
affections and lusts. Chrysostom on Matthew. Athanasius de sacris Scripturis,
concerning the holy Scriptures. Ambrose and Jerome on Ephesians. 6. Nazianzen in
his verses. Only Augustine de december praeceptis, of the ten Commandments,
allows of theirs. Yet himself, veteris and novi testamenti quaest. septima,
in the seventh question of the old and new Testament, divides them plainly
thus. And the reason that moved him to the contrary, was but weak, and a bare
conjecture; that he would have but three Commandments in the first Table,
because there are but three persons in the Trinity. By the same reason we might
add the fourth, for the unity in the Trinity. Canisius has an argument of
great force with them; that is, he says the reason of the Law must always be
annexed to the first Commandment; but according to our division, it is in the
second: (For I the Lord thy God am a jealous God.) therefore all that is but
the first. Answer. But we say, that the reason went before the charge, was not
annexed to any of the Commandments.

Our duty to God. perpetual, inward, in heart and mind, Commandment 1.
outward, in gesture, Commandment 2. speech, Commandment 3.

temporal, seventh day, Commandment 4.
our neighbor: in deed or intent, particular, Comm. 5. his body, Command. 6.
his wife, Command. 7. his goods, Command. 8. his good name, Com. 9.
general, concerning,
the restraint of the first motions, C. 10.



For the division of the four Commandments of the first table, 1. the table
of holiness, which takes order (for the worship of God: this order is, 1.
Perpetual. 2. Temporal.
Perpetual, either inward in heart and mind, Commandment first: or outward;
and this, either in gesture; the outward worship, Commandment second: or in
speech and communication, Commandment third. The temporal, with the
Congregation, Commandment fourth. Or thus: into the manner and means of Gods
worship, Commandment second. And the scope, Commandment third.

The second table, the table of righteousness: either for truth in the inward
parts, or the actions, as they are committed before God, or man; as our
neighbors. Either respective, Commandment fifth, because there is only a
relation: or absolute, either to touch his neighbors person in his life,
Commandment sixth: or his own flesh, Commandment seventh; or his gifts,
substance, wisdom, Commandment eight; or his good name, Commandment ninth. Or
else this table restrains the first motions, Commandment tenth.

The interpretation of the Law.
FOr the interpretation of them as they lie: The Commandments, they must needs
be interpreted. For if the Law of God be perfect, Psalm. 19. then it commands
all things that we are to do, and forbids all that we are not to do.
Which, if it be interpreted by the letter only, we shall not find the
thousandth part of those things that are to be commanded or forbidden;
therefore there must be interpretation. A conclusion. Every law stands on a
Synecdoche: the reason is, because the law being to take order for actions; the
actions of man being infinite, both for variety and number, because the
circumstances, and the degrees of the circumstances are infinite; the rules
also should be infinite, and so exceed the memory of man; which cannot be:
therefore God taking another course, has set down general rules; and so does
man after his example. And these general are to receive interpretation, and to
be applied to particulars. Quest. 1. Answ.
If it be asked where this interpretation is to be had? I answer, Deuteronomy. 17.9.
Mal. 2.7. If a matter of controversy arise, it must go to the Levites, to the
Priests, and Ministers of God. Here may a question arise, Quest. 2.
Whether every thing that they deliver, be good; and that the interpretation
which they deliver, be always true and good? I answer: It is not. Answ. As
there be rules in giving an interpretation: so there may be rules to examine
it, and to judge of it.
But there are rules in examining the interpretation, and judging of it: and
unless it be done according to those rules, it is not good. For Christ, Matthew.
5. reprehended the Lawyers for not giving them according to the Rules.

The condition of the law standing in a more particular respect, there must
also be more particular rules, then the bare sentence gives. The
interpretation must be but to show the compass of the law, how far it
extends, where it may be excepted. Fines mandatorum sunt observandi. The
bounds of the Commandments must be observed. And they are but two: 1.
Ampliatio praecepti, an enlargement of the Commandment. 2. Limitatio
praecepti, a bounding of the precept.
The later writers call them, the extent, and the exception of the precept: so
that these two are a complete division of the interpretation of any law. How
these two are to be done in the law of God; they may be known generally by
that rule, Oculus ad scopum, the eye to the mark: because the law is not
(...), the word spoken; but (...) the meaning of the law; Certum est, quod is
committit inlegem, qui legis verba observat, sed contra mentem legislatoris
facit. For intentio legislatoris voluntas legis. It is certain, that he
trespasseth against the law, who observes the words of the law, but does
contrary to the mind of the giver of the law. For the intention of the
Lawgiver is the will of the law: or, the purpose of the law is best known, by
the intent of the Lawgiver. For as the law is regula actionis, the rule of
action: The intent of the Law giver is the meaning of the law: we must
therefore will what God wills.
it a men's legislatoris regula legis, so is the mind of the Lawgiver, the rule
of the law. The intent of the Lawgiver, is best known by his end. It is a
moral axiom. As bonitas ethice, Moral goodness, it a bonitas theologica
pendet a fine so theological goodness depends on the end. The end of God is,
Esaias 42.8. Gloriam meam alteri non dabo, My glory will I give to no other. 2.
Subordinately the end, 1 Timothy, 2.4. Vult homines servari, he wills men to be
saved. But more particularly to know this end and direction, these two,
limitation and extension, be the best.

Rules for exextension of precepts. 1. Rule.
First for extension: the Jews have set down thirteen, which the Christians
also have observed; and may be reduced to these six: First, as the Jews say in
every Commandment there is praeceptum faciens, an affirmative precept, and
praeceptum non faciens, a precept negative: if the Commandment be affirmative,
it implies also his negative, and contrarily; according to the rule of
Logic, a contrariis, taken from contraries. Si hoc sit faciendum, ejus
contrarium fugiendum, if this be to be done, then his contrary is to be
shunned. Psalm. 34.14. Fuge malum, and fac bonum, Eschew evil, and do good;
the practice of this rule. The affirmatives of the law are but two: namely, the
fourth and fifth Commandments. These the Rabbis find in the books of Moses,
dilated into 248. Commandments affirmative, which they call (...), Precepts
commanding, to the number of joints in a man's body: And the negatives in the
same five books of Moses, into 365* negative Commandments, which they call
(...), precepts forbidding; to the number of the days in the year: both added
together, make 613. according to the letters of the ten Commandments.

2. That wheresoever a thing is either forbidden or commanded, 2. Rule.
there all the homogenea, of the same kind to it, are commanded or forbidden.
The same may be seen in man's law. A law is extended, vel specifice, vel per
aequipollens, specifically, or by a thing of like force, and value.
Specifically, Cum quid sit ejusdem naturae, circumstantiis diversum, when a
thing is set down, that is of the same kind, but by circumstance is diverse.
2. By equipollent. The Rabbis call it by two names: 1. Where the balances
hang equal, the Logicians call it, a pari, from the like. As in the
Commandment of theft; to set a man's house on fire, is as evil as to steal.
2. Where one is either lighter or heavier; from the less to the greater. If a
man be bound to honor his superior, then much more to preserve him.


The third is peculiar to the law of God. To. 7.14. (...), 3. Rule.
the law is spiritual, etc. When you have extended this specifice and per
aequipollens, specifically and by equipollent, they must be extended to the
spirit. Lex humana ligat manum and linguam: divina vero comprimit animam. The
Law of man ties the hand and the tongue: but the law of God presses the soul.
John 4.23. the true worship of God, (...), in spirit and truth. And the reason
is good; for the heart is the fountain for all evil; e cord cogitationes
malae, out of the heart come evil thoughts. This appeared in the heathen, by
the dream of Polydorus in Plutarch, de sera numinis vindicta, of the grievous
punishment of God: that dreamed in the night, that his heart came to him and
said, Ego tibi horum omnium malorum sum author, I am unto thee the author of
all these evils. The heart therefore is first to be cleansed, by truly
planting the fear of God in it, and the knowledge of him. Plutarch said, that
the heathen, if they could, they would have restrained the heart; but because
they could not come to it, they forbear it. The law of man, by reason of it,
cease two ways: 1. For want of knowledge; because they know not the heart.
2. For want of power; as where the number of the offenders is so great, or the
power so great, that there is no standing against the^.
And upon these must needs come both tolerations in the Church and
Commonwealth. For want of knowledge, as when things are so subtly and slily
conveyed, that one cannot tell where the fault is, or how it may be remedied.
But in Gods law neither of these holds: and therefore there is no fault
tolerable with him. For his power, Jerem. 17.9. Cor hominis pravum and
inscrutabile, quis cognoscit idem? the heart of man is wicked, and
unsearchable, who knows it? And in the next verse ( scio, I know) he shows
that there is a quis, who? and who it is that knows it. Ego dominus scrutans
renes, and corda, I the Lord who search the reins, and the hearts. There is no
defect of knowledge in God, for he is (...) the knower of hearts. August. If
the Candle burn, videt te, he sees thee; if it be out, videt te, he sees
thee: he sees all thy faults both present and past, and thy thoughts too. 7
Degrees in sin before we come to the act. A desire to look on it a little
longer.
Therefore in this point its justly said, that the law is spiritual. Now for
the thought, it may be divided into seven branches or stations. 1. Cogitatio
ascendens, the thought ascending: the very suggestion. 2. Inclinatio
voluntatis, the inclination of the will, to give entertainment to that thought.
3. Mora, a delay in the thought. 4. A delight, which comes of the conceiving
of it. 5. The desire of the feeling in outward act; of the inward pleasure,
agreeable to the outward act. 6. The consent of the heart to the practice. 7.
The deliberation, of many means, and the choosing of some one to bring it to
pass.
The law of God takes hold of all these though man's law does not.

The fourth rule of extension is, 4. Rule.
that which the law of man has made. Cum quid prohibetur, prohibentur illa
omnia, per quae pervenitur ad illud; and contra, when any thing is prohibited,
all things which lead thereunto are also prohibited: and on the other part. The
Jews say, ambulandum est in praeceptis, we must walk in the Commandments;
not by any out-path, but via regia, by the Kings high way: that is, by those
means and instruments, that God has commanded: the reason is, Bonum pendet a
fine. A good thing depends upon the end.
The goodness of a way or motion depends of the end. So that if these, or
these means bring to an evil end, they are evil; and so consequently, are
not to be used in good things: neither are we in them to seek God. Psalm. 1.
Nor stood in the way of sinners. The way is the means. So with the act we
conclude the means. So if the thing be good; the omission of it, as also of
the means, is evil. Bonae legis est non solum tollere vitia, sed etiam
occasiones vitiorum, and contrariwise: Good laws do not only prevent vices,
but the occasions of vices.

The fifth rule, is a rule also of man. Cum quid prohibetur, 5. Rule.
vel jubetur; prohibentur, vel jubentur illa omnia, quae consequuntur ex illo.
When any thing is prohibited, or commanded; then all the consequences thereof,
are prohibited or commanded. That is, the signs and outward notes of things: (
ante before) namely, where the good thing is commanded, there is also the sign
of it commanded. And contrariwise, when it pleases the Holy Ghost to condemn
pride, Psalm. 101. and 131. he condemeth a proud and high stomach. Esaias 3.16.
He condemns the walking with the neck stretched forth; and with a foolish
strange gate, 1 Timothy 2.9. 1 Pet. 3.3. (...), the frizeling of the hair.
Oversumptuous aparrell, plates, etc. Zeph. i. 8: strange apparel: because
they are not the signs of Gods gifts, and rather are of pride, then of
decency: ye ought not to seem that, which ye are not: Sarahs modest looks,
modest apparel commended by the Apostle: Sarah went modestly, so should you.
God will have the sign to go with the thing signified.

The sixth rule, 6. Rule.
the rule of man's laws. Accessorium sequitur naturam principalis. Agentes and
consentientes, pari poena plectuntur. The accessory follows the nature of the
principal: doers, and consenters, suffer or are punished alike. The reason,
Quia lex non solum observanda, sed etiam conservanda. We must see, that not
only our selves be observers of the law; but that others also observe it. We
must understand that God will have glory from us, and not for us; and from
others, by us. Sic luceat lux vestra: sicut ego, sicut tu; ego sicut tu, and tu
sient ego. So let your light shine, etc. for, as I, as thou; I am as thou, and
thou as I: not that you might be glorified, but that men seeing your good
works, may glorify your Father which is in Heaven. Therefore there must be in
us a care that God might be glorified both in our selves, and in others: and
consequenly we must not be accessory to any evil, nor command any, whereby
other men's sins may become ours. This sin, it is committed either in things
lawful or unlawful: unlawful is called peccatum alienum, Quot modis rei
fimus peccati alieni. How many ways we become guilty of another man's sin. 1.
Iussio. In commanding men sin. 1. By ungodly statute. 2. Without statute, by
word of mouth. 3. Commandment of one present. 4. Absent by writing.
A man may commit sin being far of.
a strange sin: lawful is called scandalum, offense.

1. In unlawful things. For which they set down nine ways; which may be
brought to six: whereof the two first concern Magistrates; the other four
concern all men alike. In them this sin is extended, if they command any
thing that is evil, either in manner of a law, Esaias 10.1. Woe to them that
decree wicked decrees, and write grievous things* etc. Dan. 3.4, 5, 6.
Nebuchadnezar made the law for idolatry, the people are commanded by an Herald,
at the sound of a Trumpet, etc. to go fall down and worship the golden image
that he had set up. 2. 1 Samuel 22 18. Saul himself draws not the sword, and
falls on the Priests, yet for commanding Doeg, the murder became his. Though
the murder of the Priests was committed by Doeg, yet the offense rested on Saul
for commanding Doeg. Acts 23.2, 3. Though Ananias rose not out of his seat to
strike Paul, yet because he was stricken at his commandment, Paul calls him
painted wall for it, and denounceeth the judgment of God against him. This
blow was extended to Ananias. 3. If we write, as David wrote, 2 Samuel 11.15.
David did not put Vriah in the forefront of the strength of the battle, but
Joab; but because he wrote to Joab to put him in the forefront, the murder of
Vriah is attributed to him by Nathan. 1 King. 21.10. Jezebel was far off when
Naboth was stoned: but because she wrote to the Elders of Israel to proclaim a
fast, and to set Naboth among the chief of the people, and to set wicked men
to witness against him, and so to put him to death; she was made guilty of his
death.
The second, removens, prohibens, the removing of that which should be an
impediment. 2. Petmissio, conniventia. Permission, connivence.
This is a mover to a second sin: namely, the sin of permission, or of
winking at faults. When a man is in authority, though he command not an evil
thing, yet because he is in authority, and so has power to restrain evil
doers; if he do not, he is in fault. Levit. 20.4, 5. If the people of the land
hide their eyes, and wink at that man, when he gives his children to Moloch,
and kill him not. 5. Then will I set my face against that man, and against his
family; and will cut him off, etc. That is, if the people in whom it lay to
redress the fault, neglected to do it, and suffered the malefactor to live,
the fault should have been on their heads, and yet the malefactors should not
escape unpunished. August. Man has the sword committed into his hands, ut
malus, si non demittat voluntatem, amittat facultatem peccandi, if a wicked man
lay not aside the will, let him want the power and faculty of sinning. Of the
civil Magistrate in a Common wealth, Romans 13.4. the Apostle describing the
civil Magistrate, he says, that he bears not the sword for naught: and
tells the end wherefore he bears it; namely, to take vengeance of the evil
doers. 2. The Ecclesiastical Magistrate in the Church. 1 Cor. 5.2. There is a
rule for Ecclesiastical Magistrates. For he inveyeth against them of Corinth,
for not executing Ecclesiastical punishment upon an open offender, but
suffered him to be in the Church. 3. Domestical censure of the father on his
children, 1 Samuel 3.13. And I have told him, that I will judge his house for
ever, for the iniquity which he knows. Quia vidit filios indigne agere, and
non prohibuit, For his sons ran into a slander, and he stayed them not, was
Elies offense; for which God told him, that he would judge his house for ever.
So also, 1 Kings 20.42. Thus says the Lord, because thou have let go out of
thy hands, a man whom I had appointed to die, thy life shall go for his life,
and thy people for his people. The punishment that should have lighted on
Benhadad for his sin, lighted on Ahab, for suffering him to escape. He that
suffers an offender to escape unpunished, the state of that party shall be as
the state of the party permitted. John 19.16. John 19, 16. Matthew. ^7.37. Mark.
15.^1. Luke. 23.26.
For a perpetual opprobrie of Pilate, there is set down, that he delivered
Christ to the Jews to be crucified. What a fair show made he? what a do kept
he, in washing his hands before all the people, in protesting his innocence of
Christ's death? yet because he was the chief of the Province, and had authority
to withhold the Jews from killing Christ, he was guilty of the death of
Christ. 1 Kings 1.6. Adoniahs wantonness and riot came on this occasion;
because his father David was loath to displease him from his childhood, nor
would so much as say, why do thou thus? What this permission will work in
the end, Adoniah by permission in his youth, after became ambitious and
traiterous. And it pleases the Holy Ghost, throughout the whole course of the
Books of Samuel and the Kings, to leave this as a blemish for wicked Kings.
Quia non, etc. That they took not away the groves and high places, etc. that
they permitted the high places to stand. Therefore Augustine says very well,
Tu imple personam tuam, alioqui Deus and de te, and de illo implebit suam,
Perform thou thy part, otherwise God will perform his, both upon thee, and
upon him. Thou shall be punished with the offender; and its better ut sentiam
lenitatem patrie, quam severitatem judicis, that I feel the lenity of a
father, then the severity of a Judge. 3. Provocation.
The other go before action. 3. Provocation, provoking to sin Provocation is
by two means: whether it be of a superior or inferior. 1. By daring: as Jobs
wife, Job 2.9. Do thou continue in thine uprightness? blaspheme God and die.
Or as when men be provoked to swear, to anger, etc. 2. To provoke by alluring
means. 1 Kings 21.25. Iezebel. Ahab sold himself to do evil, whom Iezebel
his wife provoked. And Job if he had been tempted, no doubt his wife had been
guilty of it. And God is so far from provoking, that he takes it clean from
the superiors to their inferiors. Ephesians. 6.4. Fathers, provoke not your
children, but bring them up in the fear of God. Generally, Galat. 5.26. Lets
not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one another, 4. Malum consilium.
Evil counsel.
envying one another. 4. Evil counsel or advice, Psalm. 1.1. Blessed is the
man, that has not walked in the counsel of the ungodly. Genes. 49.6. Jacob
lying in his deathbed, and calling his sons together to bless them, says:
Simeon and Levi, into their secret let not my soul come; my glory, be not thou
joined with their assembly. For in their wrath they slew a man, and in their
self-will they dug down a wall. The same prayer makes Job 21.16. Lo
their wealth is not in their hand; therefore let the counsel of the wicked be
far from me. Ezra c. 4. v. 5. Privy Counselors hired to hinder the building
of the Temple. 2 Samuel 16.21. Absolon committed the incest with dis fathers
concubines: but the incest is laid to Ahitophel, that did put the counsel into
his head. Mark 6.24. Herod's wifes daughter, asked John Baptists head in a
platter, but Herodias the mother counseled her to ask it: and the blood of
that godly man is laid to her charge. John 11.49, 50. The sin of the Jews in
desiring Christ to be crucified, came upon Caiphas his head, that gave them the advice. Acts 19.25. The uproare against Paul is laid to Demetrius the
Silversmith; that counseled the rest of the handicrafts men, etc. These by
extension are also condemned. 5. Consensus. Consent. Consensus interpretativus.
Consent by interpretation.
These two go before. 5. The fault of consent. Consilium est instar agentis
principalioris, consensus instar instrumenti, Counsel, is like the principal
agent; consent like the instrument. Romans 1.32. (...). Who knowing the judgment
of God, (that they which commit such things, are worthy of death) not only do
the same, but consent with them that do them. Consensu peccatur, men sin by
consent; whether it be as the Lawyers say, consensu directo vel vero; vel
interpretativo: by plain consent, or consent by interpretation. 1 Timothy 5.22.
(...). Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other men's sins:
keep thy self pure. Consent by interpretation, is, when a man is instrument
of an evil deed by his action, though in words he mislike it. 2 Samuel 11.16.
Ioab is an instrument of evil: namely, David's instrument to kill Vriah. 2. And
not only that, but approbation also. Acts 8.1. Saul is said to have been
consenting to Stephens death, by only keeping their clothes that stoned
Stephen. Number. 16.26. Moses makes all consenters to the rebellion of Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram, which stood by and would not depart from their tents. 3.
Taking part in the gain Ps^. 50.18. When thou saw a Thief thou consentedst
to him, and have been partaker with the adulterers. 4. Casting of lots, Prove.
1.14. Cast in thy lot among us, we will have all one purse. 5. Another is
consensus silentii, consent by silence. When a man is bound to withstand
another man's sins, and does it not, be does after a sort consent to it. That
he is bound to it, Levit. 19.17. a flat precept. This is commonest of all; the
reason why this consent by silence is a sin, is this: Augustine, ut malus
sermo inducit in peccatum; sic malum silentium relinquit in peccato: as evil
counsel leads men into sin; so evil silence leaves men in sin. 6. Is no
doubt a kind by consent by interpretation; but its so special, 6 Defending*
etc.
that it may be a kind of it self: namely, a defending, commending, flattering
of other in their sins, excusing of them when they are done, etc. Pro 24.24.
He that says to the wicked, thou art righteous, him shall the people curse;
and the multitude shall abhor him, Prove. 16.29. Lactant amicos suos, and
ducunt per viam non bonam, with fair words they deceive their friends, and
lead them by a way which is not good. This lactatio peccatorum, this deceiving
of sinners, is the way that leads to destruction, Ps. 55.22. Habent verba
butyrina, they have words as smooth as Butter, but war in their hearts. Their
words were softer to him then Oil, yet very swords. Let not their sweet words
break my head, but rather let the godly reprove me friendly, Romans 16.18.
(...), By good words and fair speeches they deceive the hearts of the simple.
A woe pronounced against them, Esaias 5.20. Woe to them that speak good of
evil, and evil of good; which put darkness for light, and light for
darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter. And Ezekiel. 13.10.
they are said to be dawbers up of other men's sins, (And therefore because they
have deceived my people, saying, peace, when there is no peace: and one built
up a wall, and behold the other dawbed it with untempered mortar:) and in the
18. verse, they are called sowers of pillowes under other men's elbowes. We have
example of this, 1 Kings 22. in Ahabs false Prophets, verse 6. Go up, for the
Lord shall deliver it into the hands of the King. And especially in Zidkiah
verse 11. that made himself horns of Iron, saying, Thus says the Lord, with
these shall thou push at the Aramites until thou have consumed them. And
because Micaiah stood against him, he was smitten on the face, and sent away to
prison. The reason, why this sin is so grievous, when a man comes to
commend sin, its a sign that his judgment and conscience are corrupt. Non
autem semper corrupta est men's male operantis. At semper corrupta male
defendentis. The mind of him that works evil, is not always corrupt; but
the mind of him that defends evil, is ever corrupt.

Scandalum. Scandal or offense.
For scandalum, sic de eo statuendum, scandal or offense, thus we must
determine of it. In a thing indifferent, if it be not de praecepto, of the
precept. And if we know that by the omitting of it we shall do good, and by
the doing of it we shall do hurt, peccatum est, si fiat, it is a sin, if it
be done. If it be commanded, potius scandalum admittatur, quam veritas
deseratur, let rather a scandal be suffered, then the truth should be
deserted. If it be not de praecepto, of the precept; or in praecepto, in the
precept, and the manner of the doing of it be commanded, and I know that will
offend my brother; I am yet bound not to do it; but to stay, and no longer
then I can inform the party that is offended, that it is a lawful means,
that I use. But if after sufficient information, the party will still be
offended, then it is scandalum acceptum, non datum, an offense taken, not
given; and we may do it.

The second part.
The rules of restraint. The second part: to make the restraint as narrow as may
be. The Hebrews said that there be universal precepts of the Scriptures,
which we would judge like to particulars, but bear a larger interpretation,
are all enlarged as generals, either in the signification of the words, or in
their derivations. This practice of enlarging and restrayning; the one has
been a token of good interpreters, the other a mark of evil interpretors.
August. de mendacio of a lie, says, that the question still lies about the
assumptions, Non ex regula veritatis, sed ex propria cupiditate; non quod ille
fugiendum judicat, sed quod ipse magis horrescit. Not from the rule of truth,
but from ones own desire. Not that this man judges it a thing to be avoided,
but that another does more detest it. As men in their private actions, so in
interpretations wicked interpretors keep them to this rule, Math. 5. examples
of both. The Pharisees rules be narrow, though their phylacteries be abroad. The
commandment, Non jurabis, they restrain to either, Non pejerabis, vel non
jurabis per nomen Jehovae, Thou shall not forswear, or swear by the name of
Jehovah. But our Savior by the first rule shows, that they are not to swear
at all, but that their conversation should be yea, yea, and nay, nay. Vt and
amplificat etiam ab intention Dei, as he does also amplify it, from the
intention of God. He shows them that God would have his name, an end of all
weighty controversies, but not of every foolish controversy; and so does
confound both theirs. Non occides, Thou shall not kill. They restrain it to
innocent men only; but a man might revenge an injury offered to him. But
Christ by the third rule of extention does make anger and wrath, murder;
because its the seed of greater offense; and commands us to love our enemies.
For the breach of wedlock, Non moechaberis, Thou shall not commit adultery:
For the occasions they accounted not; but yet that was strange, that they might
make as many divorcements as they would; and that they might marry as many as
they would. But Christ by the fourth rule of extention, does exclude even the
occasions, Luke 10.25. The parable of the Samaritan, an expounder of the Law,
and Christ rest on this term Neighbor; which they restrained only to them
that dwelt near them: but Christ by the rule of aequipollens, extends it to
every man. So Christ's interpretings warrant extensions: Though it be true that
the Rabbis say, that its necessary to extend and to restrain; but more
necessary the first: The rules of restraint less necessary, then the rules for
extending.
yet rules must be set down of restraint also. A rule. Consuetudo est optima
legum interpres, Custom is the best interpreter of the law, in man's judgment;
but in the interpretation of Gods Law its most false; its the worst
interpretor. In civil law, communis error facit jus, common error makes a
law, Consuetudo est optima legum humanarum interpres, divinaru^ pessima.
Custom is the best expounder of hum ne laws, but of divine laws the worst.
say they: but in Gods Law, its no rule. Consuetudo cedat authoritati divinae,
custom must yield to divine authority. These rules have no place in the ten
Commandments, there is no error can plead custom, or so common, ut faciat
jus, it make a law. If this could have been, its no question but the
interpretation of the seventh Commandment would have been good of polygamy;
for it had prevailed amongst them 3000. years. But its condemned by Malac. 2.
and of Christ out of him. The like is of divorce; which was an ordinary custom
from Moses to Christ, his days. If Iehos^phat walk not after Gods law, but
after the custom of Israel, he is blamed: if he leave not Ahabs society, he is
of the same society. The reason why custom is to give place to Gods laws. In
the positive law of man, its necessary to sever in every law jus positivum, and
naturae: ut necessario consequatur repetitio: and repetitio arguit and
praesupponit deliberationem, The positive law, and the law of nature: and
necessarily must follow a reherasing: now this repetition argues and
presupposes a deliberation. And oftentimes (...). This is their custom, the
afterwit is better then the former. But the law of God was set down at the
first so wisely, that it cannot come into the forge of man: no afterwit can be
better then this way in the law of God. Howsoever it goes with man's law, yet
in Gods laws usus authoritati cedat. Per principium in lege Dei omnia
examinanda, Let custom give place to authority. In the Law of God all things
are to be tried by the principle.

How many ways we may find, where a commandment holds not. 3. Rules. 1.
That which every Prince challenges to himself, a prerogative royal to
dispense with his own positive law. It comes a dispensando, from dispensing;
which is nothing else, but to do as a Steward of a family does. Dispensatio
continua est privilegium. A continued dispensation is a privilege.
Superveniente causa princeps habet potestatem dispensandi legem. Upon just
cause the Prince may dispense with the law. Tertullians answer to the Heathen.
The Stewards office is to allot to every man his portion of meat in due
season, either more or less, as he sees that every man needs. This if it be
continual, is called a privilege. This being granted to earthly Princes, with
a greater right it may be granted to God. For their dispensations commonly
proceed from their will, which may be corrupt: but Gods will is the rule of all
justice: there can be no danger in his dispensations. This is their rule. Quod
licitum est, mutatur exsuperveniente causa, what is lawful, is changed by the
accession of a new cause. So in some cases God has restrained his law, but
very seldom dispensed; such a thing is in the Law of God, though not so
common. The warrant of this is either first by his word, the image of the
brazen serpent, against the second Commandment. Or secondly, by ratifying by
signs, blessing them by extraordinary gifts, above the course of mankind For
these dispensations or exemptions from the common law, because they be
privileges, they are to be restrained to the persons, to whom they were
granted; as in the doings of the Prophets, these warrants now cease. Quae
exorbitant a jure communi, non sunt trahenda in consequentiam, vel argumento
argumenti, vel exemplo. This is a maxim. These things which swerve from common
right, are not to be drawn into consequence, either for proof of an argument,
or for example. Though we be willing to make many restraints, yet there are but
few: and if we make more, great injury is done to God. Its a commendation of a
law, to have fewest privileges, (for where there are fewest dispensations,
there is most equity,) as he said of Rome, that all the good Emperors might be
graven on the one side of a penny: and therefore great injury done to God in
it, granting they were. Therefore in Gods, they should be, and are fewest. The
slaughter of Phineas, the marriage of Oseah, the robbery of the Egyptians, are
not restraints: for this is certain, that though they were, yet they are not
for us: they are not for our times, neither have we the sign of the voice of
God for them. And it may be proved substantially, that many things in the old
Testament, which are thought to be restraints, were not, but kept to the
uttermost. This is to stop the mouth of vain persons, that cannot uphold
themselves but with the distinction of ordinary and extraordinary: and indeed,
all the stir now adays is about the limiting of ordinary and extraordinary.
The conclusion is, we have but little use of this rule.

2. Rule. Natura praecepti The nature of the precept.
2. Rule. By the nature of a precept, that in sundry cases it gives a
restraint: the nature of the fifth Commandment, to honor superiors, Princes
having none upon earth, are exempted. The nature of the fourth Commandment,
one day in seven: And this restraint troubles them, that fancy a perfecter
righteousness. The continual practice of an affirmative, is part of a
precept. The rule of the affirmative precept, Semper tenemur bonum facere: sed
non tenemur bonum facere semper. Affirmat: tenet semper; negat: tenet semper
and ad semper. We are bound always to do good, but we are not bound to work
always. The affirmative precept must needs be restrained, the negative not so.
Some think themselves bound to think on nothing but God. The negative indeed
holds at all times; the affirmative does not. Augustine, Miro modo homo etiam
ex amore Dei, ^on cogitat de Deo, After an unspeakable manner, a man even from
the love of God, thinks not of God. Even as a man from the use of reason,
cease from the use of reason, this is plain by a familiar example, as in
sleep. So in abstaining from a good work, he does a good work. Quemadmodum
homo ex usu rationis caret, vel cessat ab usu rationis; sic ex amore Dei,
abstinet ab amore Dei. The reason is, the nature of doing a good thing well,
stands thus: that there must be a concurring of all due cases and
circumstances belonging thereto. Malum ex singularium defectu oritur, bonum e
causa integra, Evil arises from the defect of any one cause, but good springs
from a whole and entire cause. Now all these circumstances cannot always
concur, and so consequently cannot always be kept. Therefore in respect of
the affirmative part we are exempted by the nature of it. And secondly, the
ardour of affection that is required in doing good, shows that it cannot
continue in a perpetuity. This also is not of so great use.

The third rule is of greatest use. ^. Rule.
This by sundry occasions receives sundry judgments, (...) A conflict of
laws.
and yet they may be reduced to one rule. The case is called (...), a conflict
of two laws. The Jews say, when two Commandments make one another a liar,
till a third comes and makes them agree; by restraining one of them. This
therefore is for a rule, Nemo unquam ita perplexus est inter duo peccata, quin
illi pateat exitus sine tertio, No man is so perplexed betwixt two sins, but
that a way out lies open without a third. And if it were not so, it should
argue a great want of knowledge in God. 2. How we shall be able to rid our
selves out of both sine tertio peccato, without a third sin. Either the 2.
precepts may be compounded and reconciled, or not reconciled. If they may be
agreed upon, then there is no necessity that a third come: but we may dimittere
erroneam opinionem, let go the erroneous opinion. As in Herod, If he had let
go his oath, his perpetuity had been none. After his promises and oath, he was
in such a perplexity, that he imagined, that he must either break his oath, or
put John Baptist to death: he should let go his opinion, and let John Baptists
head stand still. For if he had let go his oath, he had committed no more
sin, then before.

If they cannot be agreed upon, Tum agat id, ad quod est magis obligatus, then
let him do that, to which he is more bound. Whose end is superior, Cantic. 2.
Dominus or dinavit in nobis charitatem, his banner over us was love. He has
set one law above another: all must not come together. The rule in reason and
judgment, Vbi est principium, ibi digerendae sunt res ad illud principium,
Where a principle is, there, things are to be directed to that principle. The
chief end is Gods glory. 2. The soul and health of man; the health of every
man. 3. The like care of our brethren. In respect of the glory of God, the
health of man must fall to the ground, Vt misericordia pateat, that mercy may
be manifested. That God might have the glory, and he purchase to himself
mercy. But that the justice of God may have his glory, salvation must be denied
to other, our health before our brethren, we may not commit sin to deliver
them from sin. Therefore a man must have special regard of himself. The
first Table does bind more then the second. The health of our own souls to be
preferred before our brethrens. The reason is, because none can deliver his
brother from sin, Sed corpus non praeferendum, but the body is not to be
preferred. We must hazard this life for our brothers soul. This being set
down, we see the end of the first Table, being Gods glory, the second the
health of our selves and our brethren, here is an order: we are more bound to
the first, then to the second Table: but that as Augustine says in the love of
God, this poison of the love of temporal commodity, and fear of temporal
displeasure, blinds our eyes: so many times the conflict of the first
Commandment, and the fifth, Obey God, and obey your Rulers: When this (...)
conflict of the laws falls out, its easy to determine it. The second precept
obedience, which is nothing else but to be moved at the commandment of a
superior; and common sense may tell us, that if a stronger arm hold me, then
that which should raise or remove me, I shall never rise, nor be removed. But
Gods authority, whose Proconsuls on earth are Magistrates, is more then their
authority. His arm is stronger to hold me in his obedience.

This is a rule in reason, Modus impeditur, ubi fortior vis detinet. Motion is
hindered, when a stronger force holds us back. And this is one case, wherein
superiors are not to be obeyed. Another is, whereas nothing is to move, ultra
speciem suam, beyond his own bonds, as if a fire be made to heat only, it
must not dry too: so, quando excedunt regula^ dominationis suae, when they
exceed the limits of their authority, (as if a Captain should send forth his
soldiers out of the Camp into the field to feed sheep: its more then he can
do, and the soldier is not bound to do it.) God has limited their
authority, he has shortened their arm: therefore there needs to be no
perplexity in this. There is a maxim in our Common Law, Iuris interpretatio non
debet laedere jus regium. The interpretation of the Law, ought not to wrong the
Royal right, the Kings prerogative. And if there be not a restraint of Obedite
praeposit is vestris, Obey those that are set over you, we shall prejudice Gods
authority royal: and what is this else, but laedere jus regium, to wrong
royal authority. For they are but (...) servants and Ministers. Base terms
go not. Papinian an heathen man, but one which for the testimony of justice
was content to leave his life (his grave may beseem Christians) his rule was,
whereby he interpreted all his laws, Potior semper sit ea ratio, quae pro
religione facit, let that reason ever be preferred, which makes for religion.

Now after that we have compared both the Tables, and showed the conflict
between them, we are to show the conflict in both severally. In the first
Table, three Commandments are perpetual, one temporal; cedat temporale
aeterno, let the temporal give place to the eternal. Therefore the fourth in
the first: if it come in comparison with any of the other, it may be violated:
the rest of the Sabbath may be broken, that Gods Name may be sanctified: In the
second Table, Non occides, Thou shall not kill; Therefore that being the Table
of justice; and we know that the nature of justice is, Vt cuivis detur debitum,
nulli fiat indebitum, that due be given to every one; what is not due, be done
to none. An innocent man may not be slain, but he that deserves it, Si non
lingua demittat voluntatem peccandi, amittat potestatem, If the tongue let not
go the will to sin, let it lose the power. Either he is to fulfill the Law
faciendo quod debet, or patiendo quod debet, by doing what he ought, or by
suffering what he ought. Or the Magistrate in Gods right is to punish him. If
any of the other come in comparison with the fifth Commandment, its to give
place; because that is de communi bono, of the common good: the other de
privato, of the private: and commune privato praeferendum, common is to be
preferred before private; general before particular. Order in the first Table:
1. Commandment, est cultu^ animae. 2. Totius corporis. 3. Partis praecipuae,
is of the worship of the soul. The second, of the whole body. The third, of
the chief part. Order in the second Table; that which is common before that
which is private: in the state of a damage, damage of life before damage of
chastity; in chastity, before in goods; in goods, before fame. For goods a real
thing, but fame nothing else but a depravation of the opinion of other men,
grounded on a natural reason. Cujus finis superior, illud praeferatur. Whose
end is superior, let that be preferred.

We are more restrained in actions, then in word; and in word, more then in
thought. life is more precious then chastity, chastity then substance,
substance then fame; there can be no better order then that which God has set
down, Ordinavit Deus charitatem, God has appointed love.

There remains a third case, and that is this: A Commandment is doubtful,
either by obscurity in the chief sentence; or by a word of ambiguity, that may
bear two senses or more: or by controversy, when there is an hearing on both
sides, so that men cannot agree; for it pleased certain wits to bring in
controversies that need not. We must have a direction for this: Augustine,
writing on Romans 14. In nullo debet opinio vacillare, Opinion ought to waver in
nothing. He says, if that be true, how shall many do, that though in words
they be very resolute, yet inwardly may vacillare, waver; and no man sees, but
God sees, and consequently no man restrains them? There is no other way,
says he, then tene rectum, dimitte incertum, hold the right; let go the
doubtful: the counsel is good, whatsoever a man does, let him do it with
full confidence. How shall we do it? quicquid non est cum recta ratione,
poenale est: whatsoever is not done with a full settled persuasion, is sin. 1.
Obscurity; 1. Obscurity.
when both parts confess, that they cannot tell what to make of such a word,
or phrase in the sentence, or of such a place. In those places that are
mystical and have allegories, the safest way is, that men be not too bold, but
rather to take of the less, then of the more. A rule, In obscuris minimum.
That is, if we be not certain how much he meant, it is best to take it with
the lowest; for if he meant the most, sure it is that he meant the least: not
on the contrary. We must be as sober as we may in mysteries. 2. Ambiguity. 2.
Ambiguity.
Where there is a word that will bear two senses; Christian wisdom will do
best, if we include both senses; least happily the Holy Ghosts sense be not
that which we lean to. Example of it, 1 Pet. 5.2. (...) Feed the Flock that is
among you. He includes both senses. 3. For controversies. When both think very
plain and great reason may be brought on both sides; in controversiis maximum.
3. Controversies.
Its best to take it at the farthest, to follow that part that includes most:
as in the question of Usury; some think it is altogether unlawful: some
think it unlawful in some case. A man shall be safest, Its the nature of man
to run over a minute long, and then his hand to be shortened.
if he lay not out his money at all to Usury. That will make his heart
lightest, when the sorrows of death will make it most heavy. Its the nature of
a minute long to run over. A man is a niggard of his hand, and prodigal of his
tongue. Its best therefore, and Christian wisdom, to do with the most, and
speak with the least. These our common restrainers count but little things.
And for doing with the most, we must be sure to follow the rule of the wise
man, Non negligere minima, not to neglect the least. God says, Qui minima
spernit, paulatim decidit, A father: Non put are minimum, non negigere minima.
Not to suppose the least not to neglect the least. 3^ In queque praecepto
observanda. Three things observable in every Commandment.
he that despises the least, decays by little and little. If thy eye cause or
occasion thee to do evil, cut it out. Instandum in minimis, we must be
instant in the least. To avoid the occasions of evil, our safest way is, to
beware of the Serpents counsel, and to command Eve, and our concupiscence not
to look upon the tree. This is to be done in cases of controversy.

Three special points to be observed, through the whole course of the
Commandments. 1. The three first, and the five last Commandments, they run
in the second person singular, Thou shall not do this or that, etc. Gods style
is not like the style of the laws of the heathen; that runs in the third
person plural, Deos adeunto cast, etc. let them approach the Gods chastely. 2.
That for the most part they run in the negative (only two excepted) the
three first, and the five last.


3. They run in the future tense, the fourth and the fifth excepted, eight of
them. For the first, we see in Deuteronomy. 5. God begins and speaks to Israel,
as to one man: Audi Israel, Non h^bebis Deos alienos coram me, Hear Israel,
thou shall not have strange Gods before me. He speaks to all, and to all
alike: as to the basest of the army, so to Moses and Aaron. Its an argument of
equality in respect of the bond of observing the law of God: none is more
accepted for it than another: therefore by virtue of that Non moechaberis, Thou
shall not commit adultery, Nathan said to David, Tu es homo. Thou art the man.
And John Baptist to Herod, though he were a King, Non licet tibi, etc. It is
not lawful for thee. So on the other side it leaves us not in a generality,
that we may slip our necks: but its in the second person; which whosoever
hears or reads, its as forcible, as if there were so man y Tu's, as there
are persons that hear it. So for application its best, because every man
hearing it spoken in the second person, applies it straight to himself, and
is as forcible, as if he applied his speech to every particular thing that
every man had done.

2. The negative: and therein we have a confirmation of the contrary: of the
negative its said in Logic, ad plura se extendit negatio, quam affirmatio,
The negative extends farther then the affirmative. It was Gods purpose to have
his Commandments beaten out so far, as the rules of extention used by
Christ, would suffer: and though ad negationem non sequitur affirmatio
oppositi, unto a negative, the affirming of the contrary does not follow; yet
the rule in Logic holds only in bare affirmations and negations; not in
commanding and forbidding: for in laws, qui prohibet impedimentum, praecipit
adjumentum. His intent is to have a thing done, when he will have the
impediments taken away. Qui negat prohibens, jubet promovens. He commands the
help, who takes away the impediment.

2. Its an admonition to us, to show us how full of impediments we are by
nature, that we must hear of many lets, before we can come to hear what is
commanded. A no, before a yea. How full of weeds our nature is; that it is not
capable of a Commandment, but of a countermand. We are not capable of God
before we are weeded of that which is evil. The future tense, i. that as its
(...), a secret sign of our transgressions past: so that for the times to
come, its uncertain what we will be. But for the times past, we know what we
have been; grievous offenders. A warning concerning the inclineablenesse of
our nature in time to come, that even then we are as ready to do wickedly, as
before we were. For as there is one that will say, Non facies, Thou shall not
do; so there is another that will say as fast, facies, thou shall do. Evil
suggestion, evil example, our own corrupt nature and satan, will egg us
forward: therefore we must keep a diligent watch, abridge our selves of things
lawful, we must fly from the smoke, from all appearance of evil, that the
body of sin may not reign in us. So in the second, it argues a continual
keeping of the law, so long as we live. A future tense not restrained, binds
a man for ever. it is for to morrow, and so to our lives end. Therefore our
warfare against sin must be to blood, and to death: and before that we are
not discharged of the law, as says the Apostle to the Hebrews.

Mandatum primum. The first Commandment.
(...). The end of the law is, to make a man good. Here two things: 1. As far
as may be, the impediments must be removed, that we may keep the law: as when
a building is to be made up, or in ministering cure, or in casting seed into the
ground. If there be a tree that stands where the building should be reared
up, it must first be cut down: or if the ground be not dry and steady, its not
meet for a building: so where the whole body is corrupt, or some member has
nothing but dead flesh; as in bodily, so in spiritual physic, there is first
a cutting a way of the dead flesh, then the curing. So Jer. 4.4. there is a
laying fallow the ground. For this God has provided in his Law, that the
Commandments they run negatively; and that in the very beginning, there is a
removing, Non habebis, thou shall not have. 2. The second thing follows,
Prima primo, that that be done first, which is in order first: as in a
building, the foundation is first; in the natural generation of the members,
the heart. This also is done, the first being, Thou shall have no other Gods
before me.


Scopus primi mandati. The scope of the first Commandment.
Then to observe our former rules: Its said, Fines mandatorum sunt diligenter
observandi, the end of the Commandments are diligently to be observed. We must
first know what intent God had in giving this Commandment. The end of the law,
(...), to beget good. Its said that the general end of this Commandment, 1
Cor. 10.31. is the glory of God; of the first table, godliness, holiness, or
religion. Religion being an action, must needs proceed from something: and so
it does. For that that it comes from, is the soul of man; and principally
from the spirit of it. In that regard it is compared, Matthew. 12.35. Luke 6.45.
to a treasure-house, out of which good men bring good things; evil men, evil
things: for that as the furniture of any part of the house comes from thence;
so in like state is it of outward worship of the tongue, the hand, the eye; it
comes de bon^ thesauro cordis, out of the good treasure of the heart; if it
be good, our worship will be good: as mala de malo, Mat. 15.19. The breaches of
it comes from thence, (...), For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts,
murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witness, blasphemies.

This then we see, in as much as this is principal, 1. Regard must be had of
his spiritual worship: and its the scope of the first Commandment. Its said,
that according to the superior end, the Commandment is esteemed: quo prior
finis, eo prior necessitas, the more principal the end is, the more prime the
necessity. The first table, before the second, Mar. 2.27. man was made the end
of the Sabbath, not the Sabbath the end of man: therefore the breach of the
outward part of the Sabbath must yield to the health of man. This is general;
the higher the end, the nearer the necessity. Therefore this precept is primae
necessitatis, of chief necessity. This was never dispensed with, nor ever
shall be.

Now we come to the second. Which is the first rule in extension to the
affirmative part of the Commandment. Thou shall have none other Gods. The
affirmative part is set down, Matthew. 4.10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy
God, and him only shall thou serve. And in his allegation out of Deuteronomy.
6.13.10.20. Thou shall worship one God; or to answer the negative, Thou shall
have me alone for thy God. This is done in the third rule, which is the drawing
of it into particular branches. The second rule herein is best. First, to
follow the plain order, and to see how many propositions will naturally arise
out of it; and they be three: First, we must have a God. Secondly, we must have
him for our God. Thirdly, we must have him alone for our God. So you see, The
affirmative as a proposition, compounded of three propositions.

Propositiones primi mandati. The Propositions of the first Commandment.
First, that we should have a God; the meaning of this, that we should not be
our selves Gods: (which was the beginning of all mischief:) judging of good
and evil by our own choice: but to knowledge a superior nature, and of him
to take our rules, to follow God and abstain from evil, and not to stand to
our own mind. 2. That this nature thus teaching us what is good and evil, and
promising to bring us to the full fruition of all good things: by the contrary,
we should acknowledge him, and tie our selves to him. This acknowledging or
tying our selves to him, is to have a religion; and so consequently, that we
should worship him, and have our religion from him.

2. The second. That we must have him for our God. The meaning of it is this:
that the gods of the Nations are nothing but Idols, and no Gods; and
consequently, that their services are false. But Jehovah our God, who has
showed himself to be a true God, he is the God indeed; and his religion is the
true religion: and therefore that we should give over them, and their religion:
and consecrate our selves to him and his worship; and here is commanded true
religion.

3. That we should have him alone. The meaning is, that there is not one of
those Gods, and indeed none besides God, that has revealed or can perform
eternal blessedness to us; or that can join with him, and help him in
performance: but he alone is able and willing; and consequently as he alone
does, and will do it, so he will only have all the glory to himself; he will
have none to be joined with him in it.

Profaneness. Peccata contraria virtutibus mandati. Sins contrary to the
virtues of the Commandments.
1. The sin of the first of these, of not having a God, but following our own
mind, is called profaneness; when a man will have his own liking in every
thing, so that he will do that only that seems good in his own eyes, when
he will have no yoke, no cords, no bonds, but will break them; giving credit
to nothing but that which his own reason, his God, persuades him unto: and
pursuing nothing but that his will stands well affected unto. And do nothing
but by his own direction.

2. The sin of the second is false worship, or whatsoever false religion it
be, it pleases the Holy Ghost here to call it other gods. 2. Cultus
peregrinus. Strange worship.
As in the Scriptures he calls all evil by the name of strange: as strange
flesh, an harlot: strange worship, idolatry: strange gods, false gods. This is
secondly forbidden.

3. Idolatry, Samaritanisme.
3. The sin of the third. That which Elias found such fault with: namely,
halting on both sides, mingling Gods religion with others; following both God
and Baal, as the Samaritans did, having an Altar on the one side of the Temple,
and the image of an idol on the other: joining God together with other Gods
and idols.

These are three special things that the devil shoots at; and has helps
in our nature to bring his purpose to pass; when he took upon him first, the
name of (Belus) Belial (which is being without the yoke) that he would lay no
yoke upon any, he would force him to nothing then that he was willing to follow
himself: and therefore this was his way in his first tentation, that Adam was
now yoked, that he must be underaw, and that he needed a director; whereas if
he would but taste of the Apple, he should be a guide to himself, and should
do whatsoever he thought good, and that he should appoint good and evil
himself. This vain licentiousness, wherein men according to their corrupt
nature, delight dissolutely to follow their concupiscence, and in all things to
sit Judges, to define good and evil, is the greatest way to transgression, and
a degree of profaneness and Atheism.

So in the second place, there is a mavelous desire in us of coveting
newness; change for our eye; stolen bread, privy matters, strange flesh: and
this he takes hold of, and strengthens as much as he can: and where
profaneness prevails, he fails not of bringing them to a curious desire
to seek beyond the truth, till at the last they find a lie instead of it,
such as he brought Solomon to: who having the knowledge of true religion, as
much as any man had, was not content with that, but fell to seeking after
strange religions abroad: Salomonis idololatria curiositate oriunda. Salomons
Idolatry proceeded from curiosity.
And there was never any error sown, but it grew upon a misliking of the
truth in that point; and an inordinate desire of seeking after new mysteries
and conceits.

In the third, there is also in us a great desire to reconcile God and mammon:
and though our Savior said flatly, that it was impossible to serve both; yet
we seek to the attaining of temporal commodities, to have a Paradise here,
and elsewhere. There is a desire in us, to make our selves common to all, and
to use a freeness or friendlinesse to all, A desire to make our selves common
to as many as can be, and so to be loved of all.
good and bad: thinking that while we are in the world, the world will do us
good; and when we come into Heaven, God will do us good also. This the devil
misliketh not; for he runs not on soli, vel tantum, to himself alone, or
only; for when he tempted Christ, and had promised to give him all the
Kingdoms of the earth if he would fall down and worship; his desire was not
that he only should be worshipped, but that he might be joined to God, and
have part of the service with him.

Now the reasons whereby these are forbidden: 1. We must confess, Contra ha^
duae rations. Against these two reasons.
that the nature of man has received a great wound, insomuch as none can be
partaker of his hearts desire, as other creatures have in some state. And
therefore the heathen with us confess a maime in man's nature. But we know the
cause of it, (being informed by the history of the Bible, what befell to man:)
namely, that it is by dealing with the tree, by being our own choosers: and
therefore this choosing of ours must be left, and we are to tie our selves to
the will and choice of our superior nature, that knows best what is best for
us. 2. Of the second, the reason is evident; that when we have a God, we should
desire to have the true God: no man would err, even they that bend themselves
to deceive others, cannot abide to be deceived themselves. None would think
that to be, that is not; or that not to be, that is. 3. The reason of the third
is, that there be sundry things that a man cannot have but alone: in which
number is a master. God therefore is to be had alone, else not. God so
comparing himself, to a master, Mala. 1.6. No man can serve two masters: the
service to a master, must be alone, or else not. Oseah 2.20. where he makes
God to say, Sponsabo te mihi in fide, I will marry thee unto me in
faithfulness. As also, 2. Cor. 11.2. that he had espoused the faithful to one
husband Christ. A master and husband must be had alone.
This is a 2. consideration; for an husband also must be had alone. So the
having of God is of like nature: either we must have him alone, or none at all.
God in jealousy, in the second Commandment, has a relation to this. If a
farther reason be required; that will be sure to serve, and that is, that the
joining of any thing with God, must needs abase him and his worship. For he
being the excellentest nature in the world, all inferior things, if they be
joined with him, abase him, and he will not be abased. Therefore this worship
must be kept pure, without mingling it with any other worship. Whatsoever being
of a nobler substance, if it be joined with any viler thing, it is adultery.
This for the three propositions.

Propositio prima. Habebis Deum. The first proposition. Thou shall have a God.
Object. A doubt how we can be without God.
Now the consideration of the first proposition, 1. Habebis Deum, 1 Cor. 8.4.
(...), For an idol is nothing in the world. Its said, that an idol is
nothing, and we know it. And consequently, if he be God, and an idol nothing,
there can be no other God but he: and therefore it cannot be a God, and so not
joined with him. Therefore this must needs be strange, to command us that we
must needs have a God, a true and alone God. We must learn to distinguish of
the word (have) and so we come unto the particular precept, non facies, Thou
shall not make. As we say, though a man take Arms against his Prince, yet she
is his Prince still, and he has none other: and this having is in regard of
the superiority; yet he himself has her not, or at the least will not have
her, because he accounts her not his Prince. The like is between God and us:
In regard of the superior, it is ferrea frons vel lex, an iron law; we must
needs have him: and therefore it were best for us to have him. Yet in as much
as we would exempt our selves from his service and obedience; they that rise up
against him in the breach of any of these three propositions, with those that
acknowledge him not, or would not have him, they have him not. Its the course
of the Holy Ghost, to use this phrase in the Prophets, They had Baalim and
Astaroth: Not that they were Gods, or any thing, but that in their account they
had them for Gods, in the superior part.

We are said to have a thing, when we have it and acknowledge it not; or when
we have it and acknowledge it.
We are said to have a thing (says the Philosopher) if it be known to be had.
For if a man have treasure dug in his ground, or in his Cellar, and know not
of it; he has it not. So the Nations that know not God, are said not to have
had God. 2. That a man has not that which a man accounts not of: as a man
has rushes and cobwebs in his house, yet he is not to be said to have the^; or
because he cares not whether he have them or no. Into these two parts, all the
breaches of this fall.

Thou shall have a God. i. First thou shall worship a God. Worship, in Mat.
4.10. does expound, have, in this place. It was said that the spiritual
worship of God, or having of God, is the end and scope of this Commandment.
The worship of the spirit or soul is divided as the soul is divided, and that
also falls into the division of having.

The parts of the soul, as God makes them, Deuteronomy. 6.5. are reason or
understanding, called the soul. 2. The affection or will, called the Heart.
Therefore they are foolish schoolmen, that expound by the heart, the body of
man. So the duty of the mind being to know, (as is abovesaid in the treatise)
of the heart and appetite to regard: love falls right to this. But under the
division, for the well expounding of the parts; we must labor for the true
sense of this. Therefore as we know the parts of the mind, so we must know that
these parts have their order. Vires animae sunt ordinatae, the powers of the
soul are set in order, says the Philosopher. The order is this; that we must
know it before we can regard it and love it. For ignoti nulla cupido, there is
no love of that we know not, the Philosopher. That invisa possumus cupere,
incognita nequaquam, we may covet things unseene, but never things unknown,
Augustine. Therefore they say well, where two things be in order, if the first
be taken away, the second shall never be fulfilled. So if ignorance be brought
in, God shall never be desired, nor loved: and so not had.

The first kowledge: He must be known: and that stands first, the duty of
the mind, and understanding part. 2. Love, he must be loved, esteemed; the duty
of the second part, the heart or will.

Now the end of knowledge, is but the fullness of persuasion, a settled belief,
which we call faith; both the means and end of knowledge. And therefore
comprehended in the first part: as the fullness of regard and love is nothing
else but obedience. But to make it more plain: let the mind begin, that we may
first know God: knowledge must have its object, and that is God. He cannot be
known a priore, in himself; therefore we must seek to know him a posteriore:
and that is, by his attributes and effects.

For his Attributes, they are those ten set down Exodus 34.6, 7. His Majesty,
Truth, Unchangeableness, Will, Justice, Mercy, Knowledge, Power, Vbiquity,
Eternity. Of these, two especially are called principal, and concern us most,
his Justice and Mercy; the other 8. are called communiter ad dno, common to
two; because they fall into these two alike. So knowledge in fullness, 1.
proceeding to faith, apprehends, 1. the Justice of God. 2. his Mercy: and
believes them both. Add the other 8. to his Justice, that he is of infinite
majesty, infallibly true, etc. and they make it more perfect, and consequently
more fearful: add them also to his Mercy, that he that loves us, is King of
eternal life, etc. and it makes his Mercy more, and consequently far more
to be beloved. Out of this faith or knowledge* proceeding of his justice, there
proceeds fear; and out of it humility. These out of Justice, the first part;
and out of the knowledge and faith of mercy, with the other 8. proceed two
duties more: one hope, who would not hope? 2. Fructus spei invocatio, and
precatio est interpres spei. The fruit of hope, invocation, prayer is the
interpreter of hope. By prayer or thankesgiving, i. to acknowledge from whom we
have received it.

Love has his effect and fruit. Love is full in obedience: which is a
conforming of our selves and our will, to the Will of God. Or a bearing
willingly of whatsoever it pleases God to lay on us, for not conforming our
selves to him in this life: and that is called patience, obedientia crucis, the
obedience of the Cross. In these the having of God does wholly consist: and
there can be no other duty added to them.

We must understand this, that it pleases the Holy Ghost in the Scriptures, by
the figure Synecdoche, for shortness of speech, sundry times to name one of
these, and thereby to mean and comprehend the whole worship of God. As John
17.3. all is given to knowledge. This is life eternal, that they know thee,
etc. In another place all to fear. And in another place, all to hope, etc. In
the rest under the name of one synecdochicall to comprehend all the other.
Virtutes 2. and 3. propos^tionis. Virtues of the second and th^rd propositions.
(...) shall not be, must be perpetual.
And not without good reason: for they have a very good dependence one of the
other.

Now to these we must add the duty of the second proposition. 1. true
religion: and out of the third proposition, pure religion: against joining it
with other worship. And beside these, out of the word (...) shall be, which is
the future tense: to consent to it in our life, till this non erit, (...) shall
not be, devour our erit, (...) shall be. It includes the verture of
perseverance, through all the Commandments. And coram facie mea, before my
face; includes sincerity and singlenes of heart: for our heart is as well
before his eyes, as our other parts: and contrariwise condemns hypocrisy.
These make up the manner of his worship.

In the resolution of the first Commandment, the first thing in it, Knowledge.
is knowledge: of which in regard of the excellency and dignity of it, John
writes thus, chapter 17. v. 3. (...), etc. This is eternal life, that they know
thee. In the handling of these several virtues, as before in the explication
of the Commandment, we must follow those rules, that we have set down. Vsus
and necessitas cognitionis Dei. The use and necessity of the knowledge of God.
The first thing concerning knowledge, is the use of it: and thence the
necessity of it. The necessity out of this place; that knowing, we must attain
everlasting life. And forasmuch as life everlasting is so much worth to us, and
without this knowledge we lost it; but we are dull by our own nature,
therefore we are to seek a further provocation. We must therefore add that
Ier. 9.24. where God plucketh from us all our Peacock feathers; as gifts of
nature, as wisdom, gentry, riches, strength, etc. and charge not to rejoice
in them, but in that we know God. But let him that glories, glory in this,
that he understands and knows me. And herein only must we glory. But as we
said, it is not the excellency that can so strike into us, our dull hearts; but
they cannot desire to be excellent. But because we cannot be without it, when
we come to show that we must needs have it, that is, ferrea ratio, a hard
reason. If he find us ignorant, that we cannot do agendum, i. the law being
our agend; and no action can be without moving, and no moving without the will;
and no will, without desire; and no desire, without a thing known: therefore
take away knowledge, and take away all; and so nothing shall be done, and
consequently we shall become idle. Not but that we shall do; for evil men are
practical. But our knowledge being deprived of the true end, we must needs
err in false ends and ways, and so wander and never come to the right end;
but to another end; and so consequently end in darkness, deprived of the
fruit, for which we came into the world. So that Romans 10.14. it is true, that
without hearing there can be no knowledge; (and therefore is hearing called the
sense of knowledge.) without knowledge, no belief; without belief, Auditus
scientiae sensus. Hearing the sense of knowledge.
no love; without love, no obedience: and therefore that knowledge is necessary
to obedience. (...); How shall they call on him in whom they have not believed?
and how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall
they hear without a preacher? Romans 10.14.

2. There is in all these virtues, an inchoation in this life, and a perfecting
in the life to come. The schoolmen call them by the name of first and second
perfection: so our knowledge in this life is but praelibatio, a taste of that
which shall be blessed in the life to come. And as the Apostle makes two
resurrections, the first and the second: and blessed is he that has his part
in the first, for he shall have it also in the last* so there are two
knowledges; the first fides faith, the second visio Dei, vel vita aeterna, the
vision of God, or eternal life; and blessed is he that has his part in the
first: so that as in the second resurrection none shall have part, but those
that have had in the first: so in the second knowledge, none can have their
portion, but they that have had it in the first. And as none can be partaker of
the second, unless he has been partaker of the first; so the first avails
nothing without the second.

3. The great witness of this, is Christ, Luke 10.42. Martha troubled herself
about many things, and no doubt necessary, in entertaining of Christ
honorably: yet we see what Christ said, unum est necessarium, one thing is
needful, and that is this, that Mary had chosen to sit down at Christ his
feet, and learn his will. A necessary practice of knowledge in Mary: whereas
great provision was made by Martha, for the entertainment of Christ, Christ
restrains the necessary part into one point; so the learning of the Will of
God is only necessary. If this only be necessary, and seeing the end, that
without it there is no process, then we have done with the first part; the
first part must needs be from knowledge. And thus we see both the excellency
and necessity of it.

2. Part. How to come to knowledge. There must be a finding. All knowledge is
either of our own invention, or we learn it of others.
In the second is this. That if knowledge be so necessary, how shall we come by
it? In knowledge, there is a teacher, and one that is taught. We must either
find it out of our selves, or learn it of others For finding it of our selves,
Ier. 10.14. has taught us a lesson: Every man is a beast by his own
direction: if he has none to direct him but his own natural knowledge, he
shall come to more grossness and absurdities, then the very beasts.

We are all destitute of the knowledge of God by nature. So having no hope to
find it our selves, and being not like to learn it of others, because all are
thus affected, We must seek to an higher teacher, that has higher knowledge
then we have: and he is set down to us, 1. Sam. 2.3. Deus scientiae Dominus,
For the Lord is a God of knowledge, and by him enterprises are established. So
then he can teach us, and of his will we be very sure. He has knowledge to
teach us, and others: we must not look for it elsewhere. Esaias 54.13. Erunt
omnes docti a Deo, And all the children shall be taught of the Lord. Psalm.
36.9. For with thee is the well of life, and in thy light shall we see light.
Though we are all blind, and have no light in any of our selves; yet in his
light we shall see light. And therefore he can teach; and that he is willing we
have seen before. The next thing is, that seeing we know where we must have
our knowledge, to see, 1. whether we are willing to be taught: which cannot but
be, seeing the necessity of it. 2. Whether God be willing to teach us. Gods
willingness in Job is testified, that he has written understanding in the
reins of man. So he began it in Adam, he preserved it in the Patriarks: and
then it decaying, he taught it by traditions: after that, they being corrupted,
and knowledge more decaying; he wrote the law: If there prove no sufficient
knowledge, it is either on the teachers part, or on his that is taught.
being so written, it was broken at the foot of the Mount: when that was
broken, he took order for a new writing: and in Deuteronomy. he takes order for
continual practice of it, that they should continue in the hearing of it.
Nehem. 8.8. he gave it to the Levites to interpret it to the people, and make
them to understand it; and they read in the book of the Law of God distinctly,
and gave the sense, and caused them to understand the reading. When they
failed, and false interpretations came, he raised up Prophets, to give the true
sense of the law. And when this was not sufficient, as its Heb. 1. He sent his
only Son, the last expounder of the law: and he going up to glory, And as he
has done th^s in his word: so has he done it in his ministry Philip, Peter.
to his Father, gave of the gifts that he had received, unto men. As Ephesians.
4.11. (...), etc. And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, etc. and 1 Cor. 12.28.

And whereas in Gods knowledge there are required two things: 1. The outward
means of the Minister. 2. The inward means of the holy Ghost:
For the outward means, we have in Act. 8.29. the Eunuch sitting in his
Chariot, and reading a place of Esaias, desirous to know the meaning of the
place. God provided him a Minister, that is Philip, to expound it to him. And
so in Act. 10.30. Cornelius, continuing in fasting from the fourth hour to the
ninth hour, and on the ninth hour falling to prayer, etc. was provided for by
Peter.

For the inward means, the holy Ghost; Christ, Luke 11.13. gives forth, that
his Father will send down his holy Spirit, etc. So that the outward means
being diligently performed on our part, we may be persuaded he will perform
the other, which is in Ioh. 5.39. Christ persuades the Pharisees to search the
Scriptures, and so persuades us in them to come to life. Search the Scriptures,
for in them, etc. That that remains* which is, 1 Ioh. 2.27. that God will
supply the inward anointing, (...), But the anointing, which ye have received
of him, abides in you: and ye need not that any man teach you; but as the same
annoynting teaches you in all things, and is truth, and is no lie. So there
shall be no defect on his part: we must look to our own duty, whether we be
willing or no; and it appears by the Commandment laid upon us, that we are
not willing: for a good man that is willing is a law to himself: but we have a
Commandment to provoke us to knowledge. In which, as in every Commandment, we
consider, 1. That that is commanded. 2. That that is forbidden.
The affirmative, and the negative. The affirmative, there is first commanded
knowledge: and not every knowledge, Quia hic praecipiatur. What here commanded.
but that which is Col. 3.16. a plentiful and rich knowledge, (...). A rich
measure, so great as we can attain unto for our vocation. Non solum scire,
sedetiam been scire. Not only to know, but to know well. Neg. 2. things
forbidden. The rule in divinity is, Peccatum est non tantum appetitus malorum,
sedetiam desertio meliorum. Sin is not only a desire of evil things, but also
a forsaking of better. Ignorantia. Ignorance. The common accusation of the
papists is, Ignorance is the mother of devotion. Rations contra ignorantiam.
Reasons against ignorance.
So where fullness is commanded, we must not only not be empty, but full also:
not only emptiness is forbidden, but also scarsity. Therefore, 1. ignorance is
forbidden. 2. A light knowledge, (...), a fleeting knowledge, a superficial
skill.
For ignorance, the Church of Rome is charged for justifying of it, though it
cannot be found that they are patrons of ignorance, but only faulty in the 2.
part. If any think ignorance justifiable, let this persuade him to the
contrary. 1. A sin it must needs be, else as it is, Levit. 4.2. there should
not have been a sacrifice for it, yet there, if any had offended through
ignorance, a sacrifice was commanded to be made for him. And Psalm. 79.6. If it
had been a light offense, David had made a very uncharitable prayer to God,
that he would power out his vengeance on them that know not his Name. Power out
thine indignation on the heathen that have not known thee, and upon the
Kingdoms that have not called on thy Name.

Its not only sin, but also the cause of sin, and cause of punishment for sin.
1. Its cause of sin, as Hose. 4.1. he says that the Lord had a controversy
with the inhabitants of the Land, for that there was no mercy: and the reason
of that was, because there was no true dealing; and the reason of both these
was, because there was no knowledge of God. And straight after he tells them
of their destruction for it. So To. 3.17. when he had showed all the enormities
of the heathen, his conclusion is, because the way of peace (...) they have not
known. 2. Its the cause of punishment for sin, as Esa. 5.13. he says, that the
captivity of Babylon was, because they wanted the knowledge of God. And its not
the cause of punishment, but as its the cause of sin; and that is set forth to
us in Pro. 14.22. Do not they err that imagine evil? There is no sin but
there is an error: therefore planting of perfect knowledge would be a cutting
away of many sins, and Aug. says, Non erratur, nisi ignorantia. There is no
sinning, but through ignorance. Does not Solomon say, Do they not all err that
work wickedness? Therefore that sin may be diminished, knowledge must needs be
planted. Ignorance is by the learned made threefold: 1. That which they excuse,
Ignorantia, 3^. Ignorance threefold.
and think God regards it not, Act. 17.30. That God did wink at the times of
ignorance, i. marked them not. They use to call it an invincible ignorance; and
its first in children, before they have the use of reason. And 2. in those that
want the use of reason, that are borne and continue so. And 3. in those that by
disease, or any such thing, are bereft of the use of it; and that ignorance,
they say, is not imputed to them. They add a fourth also. i. where the means
cannot be had. But if a man having the love of God in the heart, set himself
to seek, he shall be sure to find them. God has even by revelations made them
known, even to those men that have made a conscience of keeping the rules of
nature. The other kinds are faulty.

2. The 2. is affected ignorance. David says, Ps. 36.3. Noluerunt intelligere
ut been agerent. They would not understand that they might do good. And its in
those specially that are skillful, that know that they are in a sin, and are
not willing to come out of it. They do quasi nectere sibi quaestiones, they
draw one question in the neck of another, that they do not know a definition
of it. Aug. says well of them. Vbi non est dolus in inquisitione, ibi non est
peccatum in inventione. Where there is no deceit in the inquisition, there is
there no fault in the invention. Many would come to him and ask him many
questions, and tell him that they could not find any reason in that that he
affirmed, to have no darkness at all, nor hardness in it: and he would say,
dolose quaerebas, dolose inveniebas, you did inquire deceitfully, ye did find
deceitfully. This is the conclusion, when a thing is made plain unto us, and we
will not have it plain, and so not see it, we fall into this kind of ignorance.

The 3. they call supina ignorantia, retchlesse and careless ignorance, the
common fault in these days. This is, when a man habet a quo discat, and non
vult discere, has from whom he may learn, and will not learn. And as in these
times, when almost the whole Land are guilty of it, if they be ignorant: so if
it be in the springs of knowledge, it is most retchlesse ignorance. Its in
those that either through negligence or slothfulness to know, or through
shamefastnes to enquire, will not know. And this for ignorance. 2. The other is
light knowledge. Light knowledge
Which is full now in our days contrary to that rule of the Apostle, To. 12.3.
God has dealt to every man the measure of faith. And that measure of faith is
expressed, Col. 3.16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all
wisdom. Not only the whole absence but the absence of the measure of faith is
condemned. When a thing is commended to us in a measure, not only the not
having of it at all, but also the not having of the measure is a fault. And not
only that, but its also required, that according to our years, our gifts, and
our measure, our knowledge should wax greater. In 1 Cor. 14.20. he says, Be
ye children, if ye will, for malice, but not for knowledge, (...). Brethren, be
not children, etc. Esa. 28.9. he goes lower, and calls it, a sucking
knowledge. Therefore he says, he will teach them no more, because they will
not grow in knowledge, but are still as if they had the pap in their mouths,
v. 10. for says he, Precept must be upon precept, precept upon precept, line
unto line, line unto line; here a little. and there a little. But as it is 1 Timothy
4.7 They are ever learning, and yet never come to knowledge. And it is that which
the Apostle, Heb. 5.12. inveigheth against in the Hebrew Christians, that they
were not as yet come to the Christian faith, having spent so much time, and
profited no better, but as yet needed to be catechized in the first principles,
(...) etc. For when for the time ye ought to be teachers, ye have need that one
teach you again which be the first principles of the Oracles of God, etc. For
the time before Christ, in Dan. 12.3. And they that be wise, shall shine as the
brightness of the firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness, shall
shine as the stars for ever. And also Joel 2.28. And afterward I will pour
out of my Spirit on all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy,
etc. In Esa. 54.13. And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord, and much
peace shall be to thy children. What floods of knowledge did the Prophets
foresee should be in our times, Esa. 9.2? The people that walked in darkness,
have seen a great light. They that dwelt in the land of the shadow of death,
upon them has the light shined. And we have proofs of it in the Primitive
Church. For the time of Christ, its a common and ordinary phrase with Christ,
Non legistis? non audiistis? have ye not read? have ye not heard? This were
strange now, for he knows, they know it not. It was a question then; but now a
man needs not ask the question; for he may be sure, that they neither read,
nor knew. The Apostle sets down commonly a question and an (...) shame, if they
know not, as 1 Cor. 15.29. Else what do they which are baptized over the dead,
etc. And a little after, For some have not the knowledge of God, I speak this
to your shame. And this is not only in light matters, but even as (1 Cor. 6.2,
3.) in high mysteries. Know ye not, which was heretofore known? know ye not,
that the Saints shall judge the world? And if the world shall be judged by you,
are ye unworthy to judge the least things? do ye not know, that ye shall judge
the Angels? (...), how much more things which belong to this life? And v. 5.
(...). I speak to your shame. So in the primitive Church it was their use,
without collation of chapter, or place, or Author to allege: and we see
oftentimes in the Scriptures and in the Fathers, diverse places alleged without
quoting: therefore if there had not been greater skill in them, then now, there
had been but small edifying; but they knew that they knew the places. So we
read, 1 Cor. 14.34 that the Corinthians were so forward in religion, that the
women thought themselves able to teach, and to dispute about weighty points in
religion, so that the Apostle was feign to make a prohibition, not to speak in
the congregation, (Your women, etc.) which argues, though too great boldness,
yet great knowledge in them So Act. 18.3. Aquila and Priscilla being makers of
Tents, Aquila afterward attained much knowledge, so that he was a pillar of the
Church. And Severus, as the ecclesiastical story makes mention, was a
wool-winder; yet afterward for his knowledge, was chosen Bishop, and a Bishop
of a great See. If we confer these, and see how careful they were for the
avoiding of light knowledge, we shall think it odious (to be in the number of
them.) And if that will not move us in Hos 8.12. ( I have written to them great
things of mylaw, but they are counted as a strange thing. That we count it
strange: yet that Heb. 5.12. should prevail, whereas we should be far past
principles, we have not the measure of knowledge that is required. And for the
measure that the common people should have, If I should speak to the people
that dig not after knowledge, I would not appoint them that measure that the
Church of Rome does. But seeing in knowledge there must be a discerning, to
know quid verum what is true; and in that quare verum, a giving of a reason:
therefore that in the 1 These. 5.21. I would require ( omnia probate, try all
things) that they be able to prove what they say, i. that they be able to prove
that they hear. Or that in Io. 10.5. That they know their own shep-heard and
his voice, and a stranger they will not follow. Or at the least wise, that
which is 1 Pet. 3.15. (...), etc. that they can give a reason of that they
believe and hope for. But that our scioli, smatterers in knowledge, should
enter to debate of controversies, which is not theirs, as discussing of hard
and great questions; but Timothy's office, i. the Ministers, that they should
do this it cannot be allowed. And it will be found that which the papists say,
that sancta simplicitas est virtus laicorum, holy simplicity is the virtue of
the laics. Yet not ignorance, but knowledge is required. He that said, that
time to be evil, that labored of both extremes, must now more say it. That
either they are ignorant, be cause as it is Ps 82.5. They will not be learned
nor understand, but walk still in darkness; or because they are out of course,
that are the foundations of the earth, i. the teachers: and as Chrysostom
says, Jerome.
if darkness be on the tops of high mountains, its no marvel that there is a
mist in the valleys; and where there is knowledge, it fills the mouth of the
adversary. They will check and control their teachers, The 2. Rule of our
knowledge is to no further end, but to worship God aright. Objectum scientiae
dr^i^ae The obj^ct of divine knowledge. S^ much knowledge as suffices for Gods
worship, is sufficient for (...).
which is now done in our times. So in the 2. rule we see what is forbidden.
Wherein is included both the Species and Aequipollens. Of the 3. rule of
extension, we have no use in the first Commandment, because it is wholly
spiritual. To the 4. rule, belong the means of knowledge. But before we
entreat of the means, we must first know the object, which is one of the
circumstances; and that is here, God the Father, and he whom he has sent,
Jesus Christ, Joh. 17.3. Of God the Father, and the Deity, we read, 1 Timothy
6.16. that no man hathever seen him. And Moses could see but his back-parts,
and when he saw them, he was afraid, and did hide his face. Therefore it is
sufficient for us to know them. For as much as our knowledge is to be referred
to our worship, we must labor for no more then must serve for his worship. i.
things revealed to us in the Scriptures.

The I. Commandment.
Thou shall have no other, etc.
COncerning God, for the Unity of his Essence, and Trinity in Persons; and so
what he is to us, we are bound to know. And that is set down, Exodus 29.46. The
rule of our knowledge.
Then shall they know that I am the Lord their God, that brought them out of
the Land of Egypt, that I might dwell among them; I am the Lord their God. The
Scripture does not only set down what he is in himself, but what he is in
relation to us: So in Exodus 34.6. God makes Proclamation of his own
Attributes, The Lord, There be in the Scripture certain things set down,
concerning his nature, also concerning his attributes; we are also to know his
actions: then besides, what the goodwill of God, for us to be directed, whether
in general as we are Christians, or in particular as we are every man in our
several vocations.
the Lord; strong, merciful, and gracious; slow to anger, and abundant in
goodness and truth; reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and
transgression of sin: not making the wicked innocent, visiting the iniquity
of the fathers upon the children, and upon childrens children, unto the third
and fourth generation.

Besides these that God has done for us, what we are to do for him: namely,
the knowledge of his will, both in regard of the general, what all are to do;
and in regard of the particular calling, which every one has, what we are to
do.

Now the means whereby we come to this. It is well said of the Heathen,
Ponenti finem, ponenda media; he that would attain unto the end must use the
means. In them the order must be thus.

1. To remove the impediments, removenda impedimenta. 2. That must be first
placed which is first, primo prima.
1. For the first, In Pro. 1.16. is set down, there is a company, that will
not stick to draw evil upon evil; Prove. 1.16. My son if sinners intiee the
consent not, etc.
such as will lactare hominem, entice a man unto evil, it is called Evil
counsel: or as it is, Pro. 19.27. my son, (if thou will remove the
impediment) hear no more the instruction that causes thee to err from the
words of knowledge. The instructions that cause us to err, Instructions
causing us to err.
or the impediments to be removed, be threefold; either 1. In our selves; or,
2. Without our selves.

1. 1. Our own reason.
Within us, our own reason: That which is set down, Deuteronomy. 12.8. ye shall not
do after all these things that we do here this day, that is, every man
whatsoever seems good in his own eyes: And Ephesians. 4.17. in the vanity of our
own reason: This therefore I say and witness in the Lord, that ye walk not
henceforth as other Gentiles walk, We must give over our reason, for that was
the error of the Gentiles.
(...), in the vanities of their mind, 2 Cor. 10.5. for heavenly knowledge all
our strong holds, all our mountains of reason must be cast away, or thrown
down and brought into captivity, (...), etc. and every thing that exalts it
self against the knowledge of God: There is (...) a pulling down of strong
holds, and (...) and a bringing into Captivity. Where it does resist, we must
cast it down; as in the mystery of the Trinity; where it striveth with us, it
must be brought into captivity.

Pet. 1.18. (...), 2. Tradition of Elders.
tradition of our Elders; least we take Religion by inheritance: a great
impediment. Such as our Fathers have taught us, we will do. Our rule must be
Scrutamini Scripturas, Search the Scripture: and we must receive nothing by
tradition, so far as it stands not with this rule.

Chron. 17.4. of Jehosaphat: But sought to the Lord God of his Father, 3. The
fashion of the world.
and walked in his Commandments, and not after the trade of Israel, to do as
they do now adays, and after the manner of the place. The common trade of the
World must be no rule for us; unless it agree with our rule, it must be
removed: for this (...), the fashion of the people, and (...) (whereof has
been spoken before) and a sharp wit to do whatsoever our reason will tell
us,) are the rules of man's wisdom, these must be cast away, 1 Cor. 3.18. If
any man will be wise, let him be a fool in this world, let him give over the
rules of man's wisdom, (...), This was Luthers rule, Si quis vult were sapiens
esse in Aristotele, stultisicetur in Christo, and the rules of worldly wisdom
must be received so far forth, as they be equal to the foolish rules: for if
we become not little ones in our own wisdom, and fools in regard of man's
wisdom, Christ will not account us among them that he speaks of, Mat.
11.25. for whom he thanketh God, that he has revealed his mysteries unto them,
and not to the wise of the world, Romans 1.22. this (...), this professing
themselves to be wise was the cause why the wise men of the world (...) became
such fools.

means themselves; they were partly before handled: Therefore we will be
shorter in them. But if any desire a direction for this part, first we must be
perswadad thus of Gods knowledge: We must have the persuasion of the necessity
of it, Luke 10.42. (...), it is the one needful thing; and that no vocation
can be more necessary. Though civility will not let men say, that they spend
more time in that that shall not profit; and less upon that which is
necessary, because they think good to spend some times in it, yet they show
that this in respect of other things is but (...) a by-worke, they are mere
Scepticks in this one needful thing; their study is a studying for pride, or
discoursing at table; they read Authors, as the Butterfly suckes the flowers,
to paint her wings; but this must not be so spent on the tongue.

No other knowledge shall prosper without this.
Christ's counsel, Mat. 6.33. that this must first be sought, and then other
things will follow. Primum quaerite Regnum, etc. First seek the Kingome of God;
for we have no warrant that our other studies shall be sanctified, unless this
be first, that shall after sanctify the other: So that it is necessary in all
things. For this attaining of knowledge, as it must have his course, so it must
have a space of time, and diligence withal; the one without the other is
nothing. Time, Psalm. 46.10. vacate and videte, To attain knowledge, 1. time,
2. d^l^gence must be used.

be still (or take time) and know that I am God. They must be at leisure, that
they may know. It will not be had at certain times, 1 Cor. 7.5. his counsel
is to the man and wife, not to come together for a time, that they might (...),
give themselves, 1 Time. To leave the use of the bed, that they might vacate
mel^ori, attend better things.
(or be at leisure) to prayer and fasting: and by an argument a majore, if we
should abstain from indifferent things, then from other things, that are not
indifferent. This Act. 17.21. of the Athenians, howsoever other business fell
out, that they did (...), spend their time; which is more then (...), to be
vacant, to tell or hear of novelties: then we may be ashamed that this has
not wrought that in us, which it did in them.

For Diligence, Augustines rule for this is strange; 2 Diligence.
but it may be the rule till a better come: Satis reputatur quis facere, cum
tantum facit pro Deo, quantum facit pro mundo, Ier. 4.22. For my people is
foolish: they have not known me, they are foolish children, and have no
understanding; they are wise to do evil, but to do good they have no
knowledge. Media cognitionis adipiscendae.
we then discharge our duty to Godward, when we are as industrious in his
service as we are for the world. If we bestowed but as much diligence on Gods
statutes, as we do in the penal statutes of a Prince; as 6. Micah 16. (for
the statutes of Omri are kept, and all the manners of the house of Ahab, ye
walk in their counsels) then we might come to some knowledge: Jer. 4.22. if
that pain that we take to do evil and to deceive, we would take to study the
Law, and to learn the Commandments of God, he would not complain of us as he
does, that we perish for want of knowledge.

Now to the point; the necessary means: First, there is required prayer;
wisdom and knowledge ( Jam. 1.5.) must be asked of God; in the 8. Wisd. v. 21.
Solomon makes it a point of wisdom, first to know how to come by wisdom, and
c. 9. he makes his prayer to God for it, as also, 1. King. 3.6. Solomon's prayer
for wisdom is set, and 10. v. that which is more, that God took great
pleasure to be desired it: and this is the first means.

Secondly, the other are set down, Deuteronomy. 6.6.7.8.9. (i.) first that we should
bring it into the heart, which is past the brain: for this.

First, thou shall whet them, (i.) our catechizing, or the first principles
must be had perfectly. How we shall come by it, it is set down, Romans 10.17.
an ordinary means, hearing and repeating.

Talking of it, which signifies to conserre.

Writing, and in that included, reading; which are fruitful with other, and
alone.

A binding of them before our eyes, and upon our hands, not now used; but the
fathers interpret the having before the eyes, Meditation, which does as it were
put it before the eyes, and for the binding it on their hands, as in Physic
there is a rule, per brachium fit judicium de cord, that the straints and
veins come from the heart to the hand; so it is in divinity; by the arm is
practice and exercise meant: and this is to bind it on the arms: it is a good
way to make aconscience of the practice of that we know. Quod datur oranti,
quodaperitur quaerenti, id exerce, see that thou exercise and put in practice
those gifts and graces which thy prayers have obtained of God, Bernard. But the
contrary practicing brings forth poenales caecitates for illicitas
cupiditates, penal blindness for unlawful desires. No knowledge to the
knowledge of practice.
The heathen man says, that he that has an habit of justice, shall be able to
say more of it, then he that has the perfect speculation of the Ethics: so
the poorest man that has practiced his knowledge, and is well practiced in
faith, shall say more of the fear of God, and of faith, then the learnedest
Doctor, that has not practiced: and so in all other things, exercitium is
signum potentiae, and so signum scientiae, Exercise is a sign of knowledge as
well as of strentgh.

The signs of knowledge. 3. Humility.
The next rule is of the signs of knowledge; they are four.

That is true, that of the consequent, the best rule is by the antecedent. If
fear want, there can be no love, if love want, there can be no obedience. The
want of humility is a sign of no knowledge.
But specially that of humility. Augustines prayer, Domine Deus noverim te,
noverim me: he adds, they know not God, if they know not themselves. Vera
scientia non facit hominem exultantem, sed lamentantem, True knowledge begets
not pride, but tears. So the Heathen man says, Quod faciunt alii de aliis, id
ipse de se facit apud se. Et inter sapiences sapientior, qui humilior est, That
which other men would have others to do, that he exacted of himself. And he
is wiser then others, that is more humble then others. He that has a conceit
of himself, can never come to knowledge.

2. That which the Heathen give forth: 2. Order.
and it is Aristotle's in his Metaphysics, Scientis est ordinare, he is a wise
man that can order his doings, to prefer eternal things, before temporal,
etc. But we do contrary: it is a common order, to put private profit against
common profit; and to prefer temporal things before eternal. Therefore this
is a sign that we have no knowledge.

3. In the 1 Cor. 14.26. we must not be like those, 3. Constan^ie. 1 Cor. 15.58.
that be children in knowledge, that be carried away with every wind of vain
Doctrine; and as Joel says, They are empty clouds, carried with the wind,
and like the waves carried with the tide. In our days there are more turning
tempests, by reason of the want of knowledge.

4. That which was before alleged, 4. Practice.
No man does against his certain knowledge, then if we knew God, If we
practice not we have but a foolish knowledge.
our actions would witness it. If our knowledge were in heavenly things, as it
is in sensible, we would not do against it; but now we have but a pretty
opinion in Divinity, and therefore it does not stay us.

5. Lastly, That we hinder not knowledge in others, whether it be by authority,
and that by Commandment, Permission;
or by counsel; provoking others to seek after knowledge, and to increase it
in others, as much as we can: for our knowledge must be to help others; for
there are three uses of it: First, to teach them that are ignorant. Secondly,
to resolve them that are in doubt, and to strengthen them that waver. Thirdly,
to comfort them that are in distress, and the afflicted conscience. And thus
much for knowledge, which is the first duty of the mind.

Now perfect understanding brings in the second dutic of the mind, that is,
Belief; for fullness of knowledge is scire ut credas, Belief.
so to know that thou may believe. Belief adds two things. The first which
is in John 6.69. the manner, (...) etc. and we believe and a ssuredly know that
thou art Christ, etc. Secondly, the measure, that is, the fullness of
persuasion, which in Ephesians. 3.12. is called (...), boldness. And Heb. 10.12.
(...), the full assurance of faith: and it is often used in the translated
sense. To make it plainer, there is in every proposition a double part; a
contradiction: sometimes a man holds neither part, because he sees equal
reasons may be brought on both sides; and it is called doubting, as Luke 12.29.
(...), 1. Dubitatio, Doubting.
and seek not ye what ye shall eat, or what yeeshall drink, neither be ye of
a doutfull mind; or be ye not like Meteors, puffed up and ready to be carried
away with every blast. If he incline to one part, yet so, 2. Opinio, Opinion.
as he fears lest the reasons of the other part should convince him, then it
is an opinion: as Acts 26.28. Agrippa was persuaded (...) almost to be a
Christian, 3. Scientia, Knowledge.
but yet he rejected it: (...), almost thou perswadest me to be a Christian.
Genesis 45.27.


3. When we fully consent to one part, it is called knowledge, beyond both the
other, an evidence and assurance of the true part.

Knowledge is in three manners. First, it is either of sense. Secondly, or by
discourse of Ratio, why neither of the former knowledges be so sure as the 3d.
and that in faith there is choice made of this especially, 1. in the knowledge
by sense, if the object be absent, there is straight a knowledge by faith. 2.
in knowledge by discourse, if the object be of too great excellency, straight
comes in the knowledge by revelation.

reason. Thirdly, or by relation of other men; and that is properly the
knowledge of faith.

1. Knowledge by sense; such was the knowledge of Joseph's brethren that had
seen him in Egypt, and therefore knew him. 2. Knowledge by discourse; such
was Jacobs, when he saw the Charets, he gathered straight that his son Joseph
was alive. 3. By relation of others, as Jacob knew that his son yet lived,
when his sons told him. When a thing cannot be present to the sense, then
must we rely our selves wholly to the third, as 1. Kings 10.6. the Queen of
Sheba must first hear of Solomon's wisdom, in her own Land, before she can
come to him and hear him her self.
For matters of reason, there is nothing absent from it: but the absence of our
understanding is said then to be, as John 3.9. when a thing exceeds the
capacity of him, that should understand; as that of so great a Rabin in Israel:
therefore we must rely our selves in this also to the third means, 1 Cor. 2.9.
for the first, no eye has seen, no ear has heard, which can certify us of
the things which God has prepared for them that love him: and for the second,
he adds, it has not at any time ascended into the heart of man, that is, it
exceeds the reason of man to think of them: Therefore the third must
necessarily be brought in, Job 36.26. Behold God is excellent; and we know him
not, neither can the number of his years be searched out.

Our other knowledge of Sense and Discourse are bounded within the limits of
natural causes, but God is supernatural: therefore this is plain, which is
Esaias 7.9. Nisi credideritis, non stabiliemini, if ye believe not, surely ye
shall not be established. Not that but after we have believed, we may seek a
reason, that we may be able reddere rationem, A difference between the
knowledge by discourse und by religion; in the knowledge by discourse, 1.
comes a thought, 'then an establishing of the thought: and then when we see
it evidently, comes the consent: but in faith, its first consented to, then
conceived, 1. Pet. 3.15. the means of this, because in the action of belief,
will bears the greatest sway, the will being moved with her object, (i.)
blessedness, annexed to it. Ratio, because great honor is given to him by it,
therefore it is evident that this is the certainest and best way of knowledge.
as it is 1 Pet. 3.15. (...), etc. Be ready always to give an answer to every
man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you, because grace does not
make void nature: but as it is 2 Cor. 10.5. we must use the means as the
hand-maide (because it holds in captivity the understanding of man;) and still,
as it is Acts 4.31. look for the Holy Ghost to teach us those things that our
nature is not able to bear. For Faith then, it thus differs from Science: In
science, first, there goes an inquiring thought, and then follows the
assent: but in faith there is the assent first, and then the conceiving of that
we have consented to. Psalm. 18.45. As soon as they bear of me they shall obey
me. It is conceptus cum assensione, a conceiving with an assent: because the
object of the understanding does not constrain us to believe; but the will
holds it prisoner, and keeps it captive, Romans 10.10. Belief being an act
of the understanding, should first come a mente, from the intellect; but he
there says, we must cord credere, believe with the heart: and the will has a
special act in it. The reason why it pleased God thus to institute the powers
of the mind, is, that if reason could first have conceiveed the things that
pertain to God, little or no glory at all had come to God by it.

Again, this is ratio scientisica, the profound means of the wisdom of the
flesh; we see how God does confound and cast them down; and in Religion the
ground of it is contrary to that of Philosophy (...), Not to believe; is the
way of Philosophy, (...), To believe; of Divinity: and Lucian he scoffed at it.

For warrant of it, somewhat has been spoken before, I will therefore add a
little now; Cyrill in his fifth Catechism; and Cyprian in his Exposition upon
Saint Matthew. And Chrysostom and other of the ancient Fathers hold this
against the Philosophers, that Quiequid fit, Audit^ an^ is.
fide fit, whatsoever is done, it is faith that does it; but there faith is not
fully that, which it is here: But a faith which is civil; as the husbandmans
faith is a civil faith; he seeing unkindly weather, etc. makes himself ready
every year to sow and till his ground; and to bestow great cost and pains on
it, though he have no demonstrative knowledge, whether he shall reap any
commodity of it that year. So it is in Merchandise, the Merchants see storms
arise very often, yet they hazard their goods upon a civil faith. So in
Marriage, some are unfruitful; yet they marry in hope to have Children: So in
Warfare, the Soldier makes himself ready for the battle in hope of victory.

The Schoolmen that came after them, they go a subtiller way to work; and
they hold, that quicquid scitur, fide scitur: that even in those things that we
know, we do believe. For our senses, understanding, we know, and they are our
witnesses; our reason conceiving we know, and it bears us witness; and they
themselves confess that both the witnesses are very deceitful: For they eye,
which is the best of outward senses, and certainest (because it apprehends
more differences, and apprehends his object after a more special manner.)
The Optics reckon up twenty ways how it may be deceived; and a great
imperfection in it, 1 Cor. 13.11. When we are children, we speak as children,
The perfectness of the faculty of seeing, stands but in degrees.
conceive and reason as children. They at the Plough cannot judge of the
formal causes of things, because they cannot see them; but tell them of
labor, and that they see: Therefore in respect of a superior understanding
they are far short; therefore we may be deceived in things above us; so there
may a relation be made.

Locus a testimonio. The unperfectnesse of the knowledge of science comes of
the unperfectnesse of the knowledge by faith. There is no certainer way then
this.
Now to the place of Testimony, it has his imperfection only from the
imperfection of Science. It has but two exceptions. First, want of skill:
Secondly, want of faithfulness. Now if the party want skill and cannot, or if
he can, but is not honest, and will not; his testimony is not to be taken.
Whereas the knowledge of faith, and grounds of Divinity are laid upon such
witnesses, as want neither skill, nor faithfulness, but for their skill, can;
and for their faithfulness will, deliver the truth: Therefore it has a fuller
resolution then the other: for as it is 2 Timothy 1.12. We believe not whom we
know; but scio cui credo. (...), Though we may not say, Sclo quod sca^, yet
we may say, Scio cui credidi.
We know him whom we believe: we know that he is Amen, and as it is Revel. 1.5.
(...), The faithful witness, and as it is, Rev. 3.14. (...), These things
says the faithful, and true witness the beginning of the creation of God.
Tit. 1.2. such a one as cannot lie.

Now for the manner of giving his testimony: The terms in the Scripture are
Dictum Jehovae, dixit Dominus; Thus says the Lord, 1. There is his saying: and
because a man's stipulation and promise is certainer then his bare saying, and
will be better believed and sooner taken: therefore Romans 1.2. it is (...),
which he had promised before by his Prophets in the holy Scriptures, and Tit.
1.2. (...), In hope of eternal life which God that cannot lie promised before
the World began: 2. he has made a promise, and 3. Heb. 6.17, 18. for our
greater comfort and assurance, he has also sworn (...), etc. Wherein, God
willing more abundantly to show unto us the heirs of Promise, the immutability
of his counsel, confirmed it with an oath, etc. and because if we have a man's
hand set to in writing, we will believe him yet more: 4. We have his
handwriting, in Exodus 32.33, 34. written with his own finger, wherein he has
set down that he will show mercy, on whom he will show mercy; and take
vengeance, on whom he will take vengeance. 5. For confirmation of his hand
writing, Romans 4.11. he has set his handwriting, under a seal (...), etc. a
seal of the righteousness of the faith, etc. And lastly, which is the
furthest degree a man can go; he has given us a pledge an earnest penny, 2
Cor. 1.22. Who also has sealed us, (...), and given us the earnest of the
Spirit in our hearts, 2 Cor. 5.5. (...), Now he that has wrought us for the
self same thing is God, who also has given unto us the earnest of the Spirit.

The exception that may be taken against this, Object.
is, that the voice of God is not daily heard among us; and that which we
hear, is entitled to other; as to Moses, Esaias, Jeremie, Matthew, etc.

Answ.
2 Pet. 1.21. To this we answer as in the proeme.
Yea, but though men did it, yet they were such men, as did nothing of
themselves, nor followed their own interpretations, but as they were moved by
the inspiration of the Holy Ghost. For our Prince will not speak to us by her
own mouth; but by Proclamations, we must allow, as to our Prince, (...), his
ambassadors and his writs: So the Holy Ghost to speak unto us in the
Scripture by the mouth of his Prophets and Apostles, is as much as if we heard
God himself speaking viva voce from Heaven unto us.

How know I that this is true that they are the messengers of God? Object.


As the Scepter of the Kingdom delivered to them that bring it, Answ.
is a witness among us, that they come from and for the Prince; so the scepter
of Gods extraordinary power was committed to these men; and is a witness unto
them.

John 6.30. the Jews require of Christ but that he would show them a sign,
which was this Scepter: And Christ, John 10.38. would desire no more of the
Jews, then that if they would not believe him for his Word, yet for his
Works: (...), etc. if I do then, though ye believe not me, believe the
works, etc. John. 15.24. he says that if he had not done such things, nor
wrought such miracles among them, they might have had excuses: (...), etc. if I
had not done works among them which no other man did, The mutual proof
dictum supra naturam by factum supra natural and contra.
etc. Augustine upon that, that they were done; says, that either we must
grant that these miracles were done, or else that without any miracles all the
world was converted, and became Christians; which is a greater miracle then any
of the other: so grant we must a miracle, whether we will or no. Such were the
Prophets and Apostles; for they wrought such works, as no man else could
work, seeing they came from God. These warrant us that these men, that is, the
Prophets and Apostles they came from God, and God has spoken to us by them.

Now whether we be able to perform these things; Luke 1.37. with God nothing
is impossible (...), (...), both for his knowledge, power, and will.
for so he says, Mat. 19.26. (...), with men this is unpossible, but with God
all things are possible; and the reason is, if it were not so, there must needs
be a want in his knowledge, for every impotency, it is for want of ability of
knowledge; but for his knowledge, Heb. 4.15. all things are naked to him,
(...), etc. neither is there any creature which is not manifest in his sight,
but all things are naked and open unto his eyes: For his Power, Esaias 59.1. his
hand is not shortened, it is able to reach to all: and that we may see out of
Numb: 11.23. where God promising flesh enough for all the Host: We see Moses
his unbelief, insomuch as he said, Shall all the Fish of the Sea be gathered
together, or all the Beasts of the Field come together: and God says, ver. 23.
Is the Lords hand shortened? thou shall see now whether my words shall come to
pass or no, to thee!

The order.
Lastly, for his Will, that in Lament. 3.25. The Lord is good to them that trust
in him, and to the soul that seeks him: A Father, Scioposse, scio scire,
cuperem velle, I am persuaded of the Power and Knowledge of God, but it is his
Will I stick at.

1. Faith, Heb. 11.1. is called (...), the substance of those things that are
hoped for; and the ground, evidence, (...).
or demonstration of those things that are not seen. Both words argue the
great necessity of the Order of it. If it be a substance, it is to be handled
first; or if it be not the whole substance, but the first part yet it comes
first to be handled. For in totis ordinatis, in all things where there is
Order: (as Religion has an order) the first part dicitur substantia
reliquarum, is said to be the substance of the rest; as the substance of an
house, is in the foundation: of a ship, in the stern: of a tree, in the root:
Col. 1.23. it is compared to a Foundation: (...), if ye continue grounded in
the faith: Col. 1.23, to a root, (...), rooted in the faith: and there is a
Shipwreck of our faith, as 1 Timothy 1.19. and consequently it is compared to the
stern of Ship.

(...).
Argumentum or (...), is the first Principle, Romans 4.14. if the Law stand still
in effect, then faith is void; and then the principle of Religion is denied
(...), etc. 1 Cor. 15.17. If Christ be not risen, then is your faith vain;
making faith the first Principle. And this for the Order.

Necessitas fidei.
There is a further thing to be considered in Faith, that is, the necessity of
it. That is necessary, without which nothing can be done of a Christian man:
Faith is a diffused thing, every where, a Cor. 1.24. if we stand, it is by
Faith, (...), for by faith ye stand. 2 Cor. 5.7. if we walk, we walk by
faith, (...), for we walk by faith and not by sight, 1 Cor. 7.37. if we sit,
it is our seat; (...), etc. he that stands firm in his heart, etc. or Romans
14.23. whatsoever we do, if we have not faith, it is sin; and in this
respect, Faith is called matter obedientiae, the mother of obedience; because
all duties arise out of it: at every thing that it apprehends, it brings
forth a new Virtue. Luther has a saying, and if it be taken in a good sense,
it is true: That in Faith, all the Law is fulfilled before we have fulfilled
any part thereof, or work of it in act. And therefore (in regard of this great
necessity) it pleased God to cast away the great names of the jolly wise men of
the world, and Philosophers: (1 Cor. 1.19, 20.) (...), etc. for seeing the
world knew not God in the wisdom of God, it has pleased God by the
foolishness of Preaching to save them that believe: Prima ^^x christians,
credo.
and to entitle his flock only by the name of Faithful. And Eusebius
Emissenus has a good reason for it, for the first word of a Christian is
Credo, I believe; which makes a Christian. If we be not faithful, we are
unbeleevers; and God gives us no other name then that he is contented to take
to himself; 2 Cor. 1.18. Fidelis Deus, God is faithful: and his son, Heb.
12.2. is in no other sense called Author fidei, and finitor fidei, the author
and finisher of our Faith, 1. Tim. 3.1. and 4.9. his word is called Sermo
fidelis, a true or faithful saying; This inchoatio visionis is begun in this
life, and performed by faith.
and in the same place, 1 Timothy 4.6. Sermo fidei, and Romans 10.8. Verbum fidei,
the word of Faith; Gal. 6.10. the Church is called the Household of Faith, Jam.
5.15. Prayer is called the Prayer of Faith, Romans 4.11. the Sacraments are
called the Seals of Faith. The kingdom of Heaven being compared to a marriage.
So we see it goes clean through all duties.

Every good duty in this life, is an inchoation of the blessedness in the life
to come.
And not only this, but also that which was said in knowledge, may be said of
Faith: (for knowledge is for faith) That it is the beginning of our
blessedness, John 20.29. the faith without sight, blessed are they that see
not, The necessity of the Negative. The reason of the necessity, why it should
be so punished: for else woe make God a liar.
and yet believe, Hosea 2.20. there is a fit similitude to express this. God
likening the knowledge that we shall have to a Marriage, and the knowledge that
we have now, to Espousing; as the inchoation and certainty of marriage is in
sponsalibus, in true espousals: When hands are given; so our sponsalia,
espousals, are in fide, in Faith: therefore it is said, Mar. 16.16. that qui
non crediderit, condemnabitur, he that will not believe shall be damned: And as
it is, John 3.18. it is not differred, but the sentence is gone on him; Et
quanto major, tanto migis expetit, the greater any one is, the more tender is
he of his word.
he is already condemned. Then we may conclude with that, Heb. 11.6. that
without faith it is impossible to please God.

And the reason why God deals thus streitly with them, that believe not (for
there is no man, but desires this to be credited: To argue, that the Princes
word must be so steadfast, as if that no other disgrace or damage might come to
him, but the breaking of his word, yet in that respect he is to stand to his
word. The honorable man thinks the venturing of his honor sufficient for his
credit: the Prince, his word: if there be such majesty in an earthly Prince,
then much more in the word of God; not only giving his word, but also swea^ing,
writing, sealing, pledging, etc. as you have heard before.


) and the greater person he is, the more he desires it; as a private man would
be credited upon his honesty; a man of greater state upon his Worship or
Honor, the Prince upon his own word, Test me ipso, witness my self; and if
on any of these offers, credit were denied to any of these, they would think
great discourtesie offered them.

If there be a God, he must set himself higher then a Prince, and consequently
he may with greater right say, test meipso, witness my self; because he is
above all. Job says, none dare say to a wicked Prince, Impius es, much less
to a good Prince; and least of all, can any say it to God. Especially seeing he
ads on his part that it is true.

1 John 3.33. If ye believe, signastis quod Deus est verus, you have set to
your seal that God is true; and on the contrary, 1 John 5.10. Qui non
crediderit, facit Deum mendacem, he that believes not God has made him a
liar; and there can be nothing more to Gods disgrace, then to say that he is a
liar. Bernard upon that, sine fide impossible est placere Deo, without faith
it is impossible to please God: Quomodo potest placere Deo, cui non placet
Deus? how can he please God (says he) that is not pleased with God, that likes
not of him. And this is for the necessity and end of Faith.

Unbelief forbidden.
Now we come to our Rules: As we have seen the Affirmative, and what is
commanded; so we must see the Negative, and what is forbidden: Here is
forbidden first Unbelief, Ephesians. 5.1. it is a note of the reprobate, to be the
children of unbelief; whether it be a proud imagination of our own reason, as
Habac. 1. ver. 5. says, or in contempt, or any other wretchedness, that
notwithstanding the forbidding of it, yet in carelessness the world is like to
grow to be Scepticks, and to come to this that Machiavell holds, God
punishes unbelief by it self.
Non curandum quid boni credat, sed quid faciat, it matters not what our
belief is, if our actions be good: And it is thus punished, 2 These. 2.11.
(...), and for this cause God shall send them strong delusions that they should
believe a lie. If thou any way reject the truth, thou shall be given over, and
believe a lie. Because they believed not Christ, when he came in his Fathers
name, one shall come in his own name, and shall prevail, and they shall
believe him. So in our age, those that would not cleave to the truth, shall be
given over to untruths in this World; and for the world to come, And so the
promises of God, they shall see them performed in this life, albeit in the life
to come thy shall have no communication.
that punishment shall befall them, which is 2 King 7.19. when the Prince, on
whose hand the King leaned, would not believe the Prophet prophesying of great
plenty of victuals, though the Lord should make windows in Heaven; the Prophet
said to him, Videbis, sed non gustabis, thou shall see it, but shall not taste
of it: So they shall see the glory of God, and their children after them; but
they shall have no taste of it.

2. A scanty measure of faith forbidden.
And as unbelief is forbidden, so also a scant measure of faith is forbidden,
when a man does partly believe, but it is mingled with many doubts, Romans 12.3.
there is mention of a measure of faith, and if we want that, we are not of the
faithful, Mat. 8.10. verily I say to you, I have not found so great faith, no
not in Israel, Mat. 15.28. (...), We must pray for faith, and I (...): when ^is
settled, ad (...) then bring it to the measure.
O woman great is thy faith: there is a great faith, and Mat. 14.31. Christ to
Peter, (...), O thou of little faith wherefore did thou doubt: here is a
little faith, Luke 17.5. there is a prayer made by the Apostles to the Lord for
the increase of Faith, (...), Lord increase our faith: and this is, if we have
faith; if we have it not, then in Mark 9.24. Credo Domine, adjuva
incredulitatem meam, Lord I believe, help my unbeleife. We must first pray to
God to help it; Secondly, to increase it. The reason of the quantity, why it
must come to a measure. If it be not in some measure, it will not be able to
hold fast; as Heb. 11. the quantity we see, is not great; no greater then a
grain of Mustardseed, Luke 17.6. It is, Roman. 14.5. (...), let every one have
a full assurance, a full resolution. The Interpreters think it is a metaphor
taken from a Ship, This is our power and our strength: 1. against Satan. 2.
against the world.
that comes with full sails. Our strength it is of God, Ephesians. 6.16. there
is commended unto us a special defense against the Devil and his fiery darts;
scutum fidei, the shield of faith: against the World, 1 John 5.4. This is your
victory wherewith ye overcome the World; Fides vestra, even your faith:
Against the Flesh, 1 These. 5.8. the Apostle wills us to be sober, and to put
on loricam fidei, the breast plate of Faith.

And no marvel that faith is a thing of so great might, and has such
strength; seeing the Apostle makes the strength of the Sacraments to come by
Faith ((...), etc. who through faith subdued Kingdoms, Heb. 11.33.
etc. beside that which we see, Matthew. 14.29. It prevails with things above
nature, as also in things natural. Peter's faith made his body so light, and
brought it to such a temper, that he walked on the sea and sunk not, and that
Mark. 6.5. that except faith be, his power is restrained, not but that he can
work miracles, but that he has so compounded it; and as this was to prove the
concurrence of Faith with the mercy of God, so he ascribes the strength of all
the Sacraments to Faith. Christ could not work any more miracles, because of
their unbelief: so that it seems by Gods own ordinance, that he must have
help of our faith, or else he can do nothing among us. And Mark 9.23. Sipotes
credere, if thou can beleexe, it may be done: for to faith and to him that
believes all things are possible; that is given to God before, Mat. 17. Christ
he had given power and commission to his Disciples to cast forth Devils, they
could not; they ask him why they could not? he answers them, because they
wanted faith: and yet more strange, for Luke 8.44, 45. We see no mention of any
word, that Christ spoke; but as if it were without his will, the Woman only
conceiving, that if she should touch the hemme of his garment, she should
presently be healed, Christ not ware of it. Her faith (as Origin presently be
healed, Origin compares faith to a Loadstone, and to Naphtah. The strength of
faith.
says) vim attulit Christo, did as it were force our Savior: as the Loadstone
by a certain hidden nature and force in it, draws Iron to it, and Napthtah
pitch: sure so faith has a commanding power whereby it prevails over the
creature. And no marvel of all this: for it prevails also with God himself:
For the Angel Genesis 32.28. when he saw that Jacob, by his Faith would not let
him go, till he had blessed him, and that he could not prevail against him;
faith, that he shall no more be called Jacob, If we be Israel, (i.) if we
prevail with God, we shall be Jacob, (^.) we shall prevail with men. If it
prevail thus with God; then much more with other things.
but Israel, because, as it is said, thou have prevailed with God, and have
overcome him: and because thou have prevailed with God, thou shall also
prevail with men: and in Mat. 15.28. Christ, he was feign to take the foil of
the woman of Cyrophanissa, in Canaan: O woman great is thy Faith, Be it unto
thee as thou will. And faith is so wonderful, that it becomes wonderful to
him, to whom nothing is wonderful: For Mat. 8.10. Christ himself marveiled at
such faith of the Centurion, and accordingly rewarded it with an ut credidisti
fiat tibi, as thou have believed, so be it done unto thee. This then is the
reason of the degrees and increase in Faith.

To avoid error, we must be admonished, that in Divinity there are three sorts
of faith, Three kinds of faith. The degrees in the means, these.
1. General. 2. Legal. 3. Evangelicall, and Justifying.
but the most of these, that we have spoken of, has not been of the third, of
the justifying faith. For the general stands in believing that God is; and
it is only of these, As our life is, 1. In Paradise. 2. Under the Law. 3.
Under the Gospel, so our faith.

Heb. 11.6. he that comes to God, must believe that God is, and that he will
find means to bring his to felicity. And that was the faith of Adam in
Paradise; and he believed this, that God would show the way how he would be
sought, and in what manner he would be worshipped: and on the other side, that
he would reward him if he did seek him.

Legal, it is certain it stands upon the believing of the Law, and the
promise thereof, (that is) punishment and reward. We must not confound the
covenants. Jonah 3.5. The Ninivites, they believed, though but at the ministry
of threatening, John 5.46. If ye had believed Moses, ye would also have believed
me; for he wrote of me. There is a Faith of the Law; and that as it
apprehends the punishment, so also the reward of the Law, as in the second
Commandment. And showing mercy unto thousands, etc.

Gospel, upon the promise of Christ's death; which does not pertain to the
Law, nor to this place. It is here commanded, because it is a mean, by which
Gods spirit is continued in us.


Then there is commended unto us the faith of the Law; by which we consent that
the punishments and rewards contained therein are true and just.

The object of Fait^. So this faith is commanded that it may be a means in us
to maintain Gods spirit in us, Luk 12.49. out of Mat. 3.11. where he compares
fire with the Holy Ghost. Now fire must have light and heat; the object of it,
Heb. 4.2. must be a thing mixed of faith, and the word of God: now the word of
God and faith coming together, it raises us and quickneth us; and
consequently where the word is heard, it is as a spark that falls into any
dire combustable matter which presently is inflamed. And God seteth this faith
fovere ignem, to cherish and hold fresh the word. The means of belief. 1. If
we have no experience our selves, we must believe them that have had, ere we
try our selves. 2. When we have experience, we believe in regard of our own
experience: our experience is in regard of things belonging to this life.
The object it self is the word of God.
The object of it is the Word, as Heb. 4.2. things prospered not with the Jews
in respect of Salvation, because the Word was not mingled with Faith: Therefore
there must be a mixture of our Faith and the Word of God; for the Word and
Faith continue the Spirit of God in us: as it is Luke 12. (that his coming
was, to put fire in the earth;) compared to a fire, Mat. 3.11. the baptism of
fire, the baptism of the Holy Ghost, 1 These. 5.19. Quench not the spirit; and
that which nourishes it, is in verse. 20. despise not prophecyings: Lampas
fidei, the oil of faith, the spirit of prophecy, and the word, which is the
matter, if it come into a man, it is but an oil, which flameth for a time; so
in the sundry hearers, it but as a little blaze, when the word is not mingled
with faith, it bideth but a brunt of godliness, if this nutrition be wanting,
it wants in the wicked. Austens reason, Non quia dicitur, sed quia creditur,
the word saves thee not because it is preached to thee but because it is
believed of thee: And thus they grow together with the light of grace, Sicut
credis, ita sit tibi, according to thy faith be it unto thee: Non est semen
immortale, nisi credis esse a Deo, qui solus est immortalis, the seed of the
Word is not immortal unless thou beleevest that it is from God who only is
immortal. And this is the necessary use of faith.

The third Rule has no use in this commandment.

The fourth Rule. The means to believe. About them we need not much to labor,
because it is sure, that the means of believing, is first by the report of
others; as 1 King. 10.6. the Queen of Sheba must hear of the report of King
Solomon in her own country, before she can come and hear his wisdom her
self: And therefore the reports of Saints which have reposed their whole
confidence in God, may be able to persuade us; because we may not think that
all Patriarchs and Prophets were either Unwise, or Unhonest; and that their
faith was in vain: But as they felt themselves by experience, so they left
their experience to the Posterity.

2. So there is none of us, but will say as the Samaritans, John 4.42. Now we
believe, not because of thy report, for we our selves have heard him, and do
know that this is the Christ, the Savior of the World: and this we have by our
own experience, that God has been with us, and it may now teach us, that
they which trusted in God, were never deceived.

Now our own experience is in regard of things belonging to this life; and if
we can have experience of these, we shall have an easier experience of the rest.

3. So beyond both these, the proper and especial means is the very object,
the Word of God, and that, Roman. 10.17. Preached; and after that, we must
return to the same course, that we held in knowledge: for the word by often
repetition, we must acquaint our selves with it, we must read it, speak of it,
hear it, Deuter. 6. and use the whole practice, as we said before.

Our experience must teach us sense. F^des (...), the belief of earthly
things. A mean and way Ad fidem (...), unto the belief of heavenly.
But because Christ, Luke 16.10. says, that he that is not faithful in a
little, will not be faithful in much: and John 3.10. if we believe not
earthly things, we shall come far short in the belief of Heavenly things;
therefore it has pleased the learned, both ancient and late, to distinguish
Faith into (...) (...), (...).
a belief of Heavenly, Earthly,
things. And the one (that is) the latter of these, a means or way to the
other.

An argument; it is a way of preparation, and therefore specially to be
handled, which is a special part of faith and most effectual, and is rather
to be called Confidentia quam fides, Confidence then belief. It pleases God
thus to prepare us to faith, that a man must repose himself wholly upon God,
and he that can be brought to this etiam vacuo penu, when there is no hope of
any good, and he altogether unfurnished of earthly means, that man will also
be able to bestow his confidence on God in heavenly things.

Now when the Storehouse of means (that is) faith in these earthly things is
empty, we cannot attain to heavenly things. So both are here enjoined us, that
whether we have the means, or have them not, we should believe. The trust in
God two ways, either when it pleases him to give the means, or when we are
destitute of them: when we have the means, because it pleases God to order
that these should be instruments, of our actions, we are to use them.
This faith, or rather confidence in God is considered two ways, first, either
the man that has it, has the means also: or secondly, he that has it, is
utterly without the means: If we have them, as we are willed, we are to use
them, because it pleased God to ordain them as ordinary instruments to work
with; as Genesis 30.30. a good care in Jacob to provide for his own Family. Thou
know what service I have done thee, and in what case the cattle has been
under my hand; for the little thou had before I came, is increased into a
multitude, and the Lord has blessed thee by my coming: But now when shall I
provide for mine own Family. As also Genesis 22.8. Abraham to Isaac, Isaac
speaks to his Father, here is wood, and fire, and the knife, but where is the
Sacrifice? And Abraham answers, God will provide us the rest, my son, he
will provide a Sacrifice; if we will do our parts, God will perform the rest.
Therefore we must not do as ( Mat 4.6.) the Tempter would have Christ to do;
to cast himself down from the pinnacle of the Temple, when there was an
ordinary way to come down. For this were to neglect the means, and to seek
extraordinary means.

And as we are commanded to use them, and not presume without them: So on the
other side, we are forbidden to trust in them. Whether they be private to the
Art we are in, which Habac. 1.16. expresses by a Net, if we sacrifice to our
Net, that is, ascribe that we have, to that within us; that is there noted as a
fault and folly. If we ascribe all to our Wealth, and to that our hands get; as
Job 31.24. If I made gold my hope, or have said to the wedge of gold, thou art
my confidence. verse. 25. If I rejoiced because my substance was great, or
because my hand had gotten much. Or if we trust to great personages, as Jer.
17.5. He that says to flesh, that is, to great men, great personages, thou art
mine arm, there shall a curse follow, and fall upon him: and not only to
great Personages, but even to Commonwealths, and the strength of them, Psalm.
20.7. Some put their trust in Charriots, and some in Horses; but we will
remember the name of the Lord our God; and to the Church, as Jer. 7.4. if we
trust that we are of the Church trust not in lying words, saying, Templum
Domini, Templum Domini, Templum Domini hoc est: Though we hear diligently yet
it is not enough unless we have a found judgment withal to judge of them.
Means destitute of Gods grace, be nothing, for their natural force works by
his blessing. The means have a force given to them naturally, but the
blessing, the lord keeps it to himself.
or as it is, Ezekiel. 33.30. ordinary comers to Ezekiels Sermons, to hear the
word of the Lord, and to jest at it: and to seek in their hearts after
covetousness, diligent hearers, not looking to an higher power to bless the
means; all shall be made sin to us, and here is our means to our
destruction. Therefore this is a special thing to regard in them, as to use
them well, so not to trust in them. Which may be done two ways. First, by
having a right judgment concerning them. Secondly, by using them aright; so as
we show that we do not think that for the good using of them, we shall be
blessed.

For right judgment, Deuteronomy. 8.3. God says, it is not bread that a man lives
by, but his Word; that his eternal decree in nature is that bread that should
nourish us: but when he gives his staff, it is that, that a man lives by;
and Psalm. 42.6. the Prophet he looked on his Bow and on his Sword, and he saw
that they could not help him, (for I will not trust in my Bow, it is not my
Sword, that shall help me) and Psalm. 127.1.2. If the Lord add not his
building, to our building; and his watching, to our watching; neither our
building, nor our watching shall prosper: The Lord must give us the Staff of
building, watching, nourishing, etc. or else all our means will be used in
vain; nothing can be without his blessing. Therefore we are to look on bread,
as on a stone; knowing that it is not that, but the word of the Lord that
nourishes: and this must be our judgment of them.

For the second, the using of them aright, because this is true, that they are
of no more force without a blessing annexed to them; Rectus usus causarum
secundarum, the right use of secundary causes. God must sanctify them, else
there is nothing in them. If we do not sanctify Gods creatures, with
thanksgiving, they will return to our greater condemnation.
therefore we are to seek for a further thing, that may give force and
strength to them: and that is procured, and God shall give his infusion, 1 Timothy
4.4, 5. if Prayer go before, and hearty thanksgiving, which sanctify them;
and withal, that be provided, that our thanksgiving be not of course, a form
of words, and sometimes begun and ended, before it should have been begun:
This hollow hearty thanks was that that Job feared in his sons: for he knew,
that by reason of his good and careful education of them, that they did not
omit prayer and thanksgiving any day; but he feared least it came not from
their heart, and their understanding and heart went not together: and therefore
every morning he offered burnt offerings according to the number of them. And
doing thus, we come into the number of the Saints, concerning whom we shall
read in the Scriptures, that they have used the same: as Genesis 32.9. Jacob
using all the means that could be, in sending messengers before to his
brother, to tell him of his coming, thereby to know how his brothers mind was
yet affected to him, and telling what they should say unto his brother, and how
to demean themselves, and using great policy in separating his wives and
servants, etc. that were with him, and the Sheep and the Oxen and the Camels,
into two companies, and providing a gift for every one, and setting them in
order, that if his brother came to one company to smite the^, the other company
might fly and escape: yet we see, that in the same place he gives himself to
prayer, thinking that all his means could not prevail, nor should be blessed,
unless God did add to his arm. So Exodus 17.11. all furniture for the war is
provided for the Israelites; Joshua is their Captain, all things are in order;
but knowing that all this is not availeable, Moses goes up into the Mount,
with Aaron and Hur, to pray, with the rod of God in his hand, and Moses is no
longer praying, nor his hands are up, then the Israelites prosper and are
victorious; and the Israelites are no longer victorious, then Moses is praying,
and his hands are lifted up.

How to know if our trust be in God, or in the means he givethus. Quid primum
in mentem veniat cogitandum, observe thy first thoughts.
We find in the Fathers two means, whereby a man may certify himself, whether
his trust be in the means, more then in the commandment, or no.

First, when thou have any thing to do; comes thy Net first into thy mind, or
thy money, or thy Chariot or Horse, or thy Arm of flesh! or comes he that
has the prerogative of these, and of all first! For that that first offers
it self to the mind, tries it, and tries it to it self for the most part,
and all the other be but secondary means; 1. is there first a calling of the
mind to God? great hazard it is, but that is the means of our confidence.

Quid postremum in mentem veniat cogit andum, observe what comes last into thy
mind. If the effect will not return to the glory of God, non fac^^ndum, do
it not. God is our first and our last object. Our nature leans to this that
so long as the means prevail so long we trust in them; and if not, then we
give them over, and God too.
Secondly, what we set down last in our minds; this is a common practice: The
Wise man says ( Prove. 10.15.) that the riches of a rich man are his Tower or
strong City: and they all expound it thus, that when the justice and goodness
of his cause, when God and good men, and all things else shall forsake him;
then will that stick to him, and help him in his need: and is thus persuaded
in his mind; that argento respondent omnia, pecuniae omnia obediunt money
answers all things: therefore if a man in the plenty of means, can say, as 2
Cor. 13.8. for we cannot do any thing (...), against the truth but for the
truth. With all my wisdom, friends, goods; and all the means I can make, I
can do nothing against a good cause, but for it; and there is my strength and
my trust: We must not be like to them, Mich. 2.1. that give their minds to do
wicked things, and devise them in their beds, and will notwithstanding execute
them in the day, because their hand has strength.

So when a man is so rich, that he is poor to do evil; or a man is so wise,
that he is foolish in evil; that man has a good warrant that flesh is not his
arm, and that his trust is not in his Means, but in GOD, though his means
be many.

2. The other is, when we can trust in God, though there be no means; the
Greeks Proverb is, (...), while their pot seetheth, their trust seetheth: And
contrary, while the means hold, we can be content to hold forth, and no
farther. And this is that provokes God in his just judgment, God gives
means without his blessing, and a blessing without means.
as to give the means, without the blessing of them; so to bring many things to
pass, without any means. For as where the blessing of God is, there it
falls, as Psalm. 17.14. that men's bellies are silled with hidden treasure;
there is thriving and growing, no man can tell by what means: So, where he
curses the means, as Hag. 1.6. they eat and drink, and yet they have a
privy hunger and thirst; they earne money, and yet decay; and as it were, put
it into a bag without a bottom; they add means to means, and yet prosper
not: So we see in 2 Chronicles. 16.4. albeit Physic be the ordinary means to
recover a man's health: yet Asa the King, for seeking first to the Physicians,
and after to Gods help; his Physic is cursed, and he pineth away. Now for the
common estate, 2 Samuel 17.14. that Oracle of wisdom and policy Achitophell,
he gives wise counsel, God withdrawing his blessing from his counsel.
but because the Lord cursed it, and determined to destroy his good counsel,
Hushai the Archites counsel was preferred before his, and we see what befell
him presently upon it; when he saw that his counsel was not followed, he
sadled his Ass, and went home and hanged himself, after he had set his house
in order. The means of the wise men brought to naught.
More plain in Esaias 19.11. the means of the wisemen are brought to naught,
the wise counselors of Egypt, the Lord in fatuavit eos, the Lord has made
them give foolish counsel; and Psalm. 20.7, 8. Some put their trust in
Charriots, and some in Horses; but we will remember the name of the Lord our
God. They have stumbled and are fallen, but we are risen and stand upright.

And as here are cursed by God the ordinary means, as cloth, food, Physic,
wisdom, etc. So God to show how little he depends on his secondary causes;
does often times bring his purpose to pass without means: There is no defect of
virtue in the Lord though there be a defect of means in nature.
Yea, and sometimes contrary to the nature of the means; as Josh. 6.20. in the
fall of the Walls of Jericho: it is attributed to the blast of Rams horns.
The like is Judge. 3.13. by the tale of a dream of a Barley loaf, tumbling from
above into the host of Madian, and overthrowing one of the Tents, and the
exposition thereof, Gedeon with three hundred men, with Trumpets in their
hands, and empty pitchers, and lamps within their pitchers (very unfit weapons
for the wars) put to flight all the Madianites, and made them to run upon
themselves: so 2 Kings 7.6. the whole host of the King of Syria was put to
flight, none pursuing them; but a pannicus terror, a pannick terror came upon
them on the sudden; which was by a certain imagination, that they thought they
heard a noise of Chariots and Horses, and a noise of a great army, that the
Hittites and the Egyptians came against them to help Israel. And seeing then
God gives means when he will, and works without them when he will: we must
trust in him, whether we have the means or no: A Protestation of the Prophet
David.
and therefore that we should be like affected as David was, Psalm. 3.6. though
he were in the midst of 10000. men of war, compassed about with them on every
side, yet he would not fear: but as it is in the end of the 4. Psalm. lay him
down and sleep, trusting in the safety of the Lord, How the children of God
ar^ to stand affected, when they have no means.
and as Exodus 14.13. Moses counsels the children of Israel, when the
Egyptians pursued them with their Chariots: though their enemies were behind
them, and the Red sea on the one side, and the Wilderness on the other, that
there was no way for them to escape: yet to stand still, and to put their trust
in the Lord, and they should see the power of the Lord, as they did. So Romans
4.19.20.21. the Apostle being to show a pattern of true faith, sets down
before us Abraham, that had no means either in his wife or in himself; his
wife was barren, 1. by nature, and 2. by age;
himself 100. years old, past the age of getting children, yet neither
considering the deadness of Sarahs Womb, nor of his own body, held fast by
faith the promise of God, nothing doubting of the same: which God took not
from him: therefore he received the blessing in Isaac.

The natural man, if once his means begin to fail, either he falls into
despair, or else flies to indirect and evil means.
And as we must thus trust in God, when we see no means, so must we be sure
to be far from the way of the wicked. Who, if God once fail, then do they
not only lose their hope they have in his means: but cast him away too: and
berake themselves to his enemy; and his evil means. Such means are of
those, who in despair of their health, leave God and his lawful means: and
fly to Sorcerers, etc. Esa. 8.19. it is showed there, There is a restraint for
seeking means at sorcerers hands.
that it is condemned: and 1. Chron. 10.13. the casting away of Saul out of his
kingdom, and out of the favor of God, and his damnation, both in body and
soul, is ascribed to that, that he sought and asked counsel of a Familiar.

Beside these; if any do that which Esaias says ( Esa. 29.15.) of them that
turn Devises, and dig deep their counsels, that men may not see them: but
they know that it is but a turn, and a wrong Devise, and therefore Woe is
pronounced against them: and God knows the deep fetches of policy of such
men, as think they deceive God, as they deceive men: Over reachers in
bargaining this is common.
so Esa. 8.12. there is another means, confederacy; a suppressing of those
that have gifts, and that is their strength for bringing to pass of lewd
things: an unlawful means and condemned. Another, to make vantage of a man's
oversight: as the money that many can get by that means, when they have once
got it, it is their own: we must rather harken to his counsel, 1. These. 4.6.
(...), that no man go beyond and desraud his brother in any matter; to be able
to circumvent a man in dealing, it is condemned. And when none of these means
will serve: then our last refuge is, that Jer. 18.18. come, this Jeremie
troubles us; we must have a devise against him; and that is this: let us
smite him with our tongues, that is, let us raise up some slanderous reports of
him, let us slander him; and so he shall not be better thought off, then we:
and so none will give ear to his words. But there is a bitter prayer of the
Prophet against them: which God, no doubt heard, verse. 19. to the end of the
Chapter.

(...), Belief in healy things. If in compassing of earthly things, we can
bear, we shall also bear in the compassing of heavenly things: whether the
means be with us, or not with us.
We return now to that we said in the beginning; hereby we shall know if it
please God to bless us with that (...), faith in heavenly matters, (i.e.) if
in the compassing of earthly things, and in our earthly dealings, we can put
our trust in the Lord: we must not be Leo in villa: Prove. 22.13. and think
that our horns can cast down much: and so consequently that we need not
means: but if the means be with us, we can trust in the Lord: so if we have
them not, yet to put our trust in God.

Another thing is, they can be without them themselves: in respect of
themselves, they are very confident; but if it once come to semen nostrum;
either flesh, or profit; there is a distrust: and it is to be feared, that many
that might have been saved in the state of single life, have fallen from God,
and hazarded their own salvation by mistrusting that God will not as well
provide for their children, Many for their children have brought themselves
into hazard of their salvation.
as he has done heretofore for them: whereas God says, Genesis 17.7. Ero deus
tui and seminis tui, (i.e.) I will be thy God and the God of thy seed after
thee: and Esaiah adds to it, and says, and seminis seminis tui, yea of thy
seeds seed. Yet men cannot believe that he will be so. Ambrose, plausibilis
excusatio est, liberi: praetexatis illos: sed dic mihi o homo! an unquam
petiisti a deo ut patier fieres an illud etiam petiisti, da liberos, ut
ammittam deum? da liberos, ut peccem propter liberos? It is a plausible excuse
to cry alas my children, I must provide for them, but tell me o man, (says he)
did thou ever pray that God would make thee a father of children, and did
thou put in that! o Lord give me children that I may part with thee for them,
give me children that I may sin for my children? I am sure says he, you
never said so: and yet this is the common practice, 1. King. 5.22. Gehazi, when
he saw that his master would take no reward at Naamans hands, ran speedily
after him: said not that his master Elisha needed the talent, and two changes
of raiment; but he told him that there were two children of the Prophets, come
from Mount Ephraim, that needed them. But surely, as Elisha told Gehazi, v. 26.
if it were not a time for him to take rewards, then it was no time for the
children of the Prophets to take them: and it was not convenient, that Naaman
an Heathen should be beneficial to the Prophet of the Lord: therefore we must
trust in the Lord as well for our children, as for our selves, and Abraham,
Genesis 17.18. has his blemish for loving Ishmael so much (oh that Ishmael might
live in thy sight) Ishmael must be forgotten of Abraham.

Now the fifth; The signs of faith: though this be a great sign not to rely
too much upon the means, though every one be ready to say, Credo in Deum, I
believe in God: yet that is true, 2. These. 3.2. non omnium est sides, all men
have not faith; therefore that must be added, 1. Pet. 1.7. that (...), the
trial of faith; is more precious then gold.

(...), not to seek excuses.
The first sign, ( Chrysostom upon Romans 4.19.) is when a man is not witty,
ingeniosus ad causas, ready to seek causes, quarells and excuses not to
believe. What a sort of causes and exceptions might Abraham have alleged, He
did not (...): but wholly gave over himself to believe that which nature and
reason could not be persuaded off.
that it was impossible for him ever to have a Son! yet we see true faith
prevailed with him, so that he excepted not, either by Sarahs barrenness, or
by his own weakness; but credidit, He believed. But amongst the rest, there
was one especial exception, to believe a great while, and nothing comes.
Abraham having no children all the time before, there was no hope for him to
have any child in his old age. And so do they conclude, Mal. 3.14. that there
is no fruit to be had by serving of God, and therefore they would serve him no
more. Against these, is that saying of Esa. 28.16. Qui credit, ne festinet, he
that believes must not make have; have and impatiencie of the spirit are unfit
companions for faith: he that will see in have, his faith is in vain, and
therefore we must not give over our faith, if we cannot see the blessing come
upon us in haste: but, as was said before, we must believe, though there be a
wrestling for it, Genesis 23.28. the Angel of the Lord wrestled with Jacob; and
as he wrestled, gave him a blow on the hollow of his thigh: and such a blow,
that he halted of it; which was an evil preparative, for a blessing: yet would
he not let him go, till he had got a blessing of him, Mat. 15.28. Three
repulses were abidden of the woman of Canaan (1. verse. 23.12. verse. 24.13.
verse. 26.) yet not making have, she confirmed her faith to be true, and
received the reward of a true faith.

(...), not to run a madding after worldly preferment.
The second also is by him set down, and his ground is out of the great
Scripture of faith, Heb. 11.13.25. (...), not to run a madding after wordly
preferment: and this he takes to be a most infallible note of true faith. This
scraping together of worldly wealth, so that every man seeks to have his
portion in this life, is an argument that we are borne Citizens of this world:
not as the godly men and Saints of God, that showed themselves to be as
Pilgrims in this world, and that they sought another country, an heavenly
country; and so God was not ashamed to be called their God. But a more
particular example of faith, and more special for choice is, verse. 25. Moses
being in great possibility to be a Prince; (for he should have been the only
son to Pharaohs daughter) yet we see his coldness was such, to the world
and the preferment thereof, that he refused it, and chose rather to suffer
affliction with his brethren the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of
sin (for so he accounted of the preferment of the world) for a time.

The third sign is taken out of Heb. 11.1. from the definition of faith, faith
is called, (...), a subsistence; therefore the faithful, they are called,
(...). Now we know that (...), it betokens such a thing, as is able to
receive a great mass of great weight, falling from above, and never shrink,
nor be crushed together, nor broken in pieces; such are the servants of God,
Psalm. 46.2. we see how (...) the Prophet is. Therefore will we not fear
though the earth be moved, and though the hills he carried into the mids of the
Sea, though the waters thereof rage and swell, and though the Mountains shake
at the tempest of the same, etc. yet the Lord of hosts is with us, the God of
Jacob is our refuge, so Psalm. 112.6. the Prophet gathers together all the
words, that signify in the Hebrew, to withstand and to suffer and bear a
burden, etc. speaking of the faithful. And contrary is the condition of him
that wants faith, or is wanting in faith, Mat. 14.30. come there but a gale
of wind, and Peter sinks, but Job. 13.15. we see the very fullness of the
(...) of faith in Job, though he kill me, yet will I trust in him; though God
should show his heavy wrath upon him, yet he would not let go his hold: These
are the signs of perfect faith.

Signs of a young and tender faith.
There be signs also of a young and tender faith; and the Holy ghost does no
less with signs of a young and tender faith then of a perfect.

4. A good faith estabisheth it self by the works of the law; if it be not a
working faith, it is cadaver fidei, but the carcass of faith.
But the fourth is that which is, Romans 3.31. a sign also of the faith of the
Law, a sign of a naughty faith, if it make void the Law: true faith does
establish the Law, first, if it be a faith that does not strengthen it self,
2. Pet. 1.10. (...), by good works; (...), wherefore the rather brethren give
diligence to make your calling and election sure, for if ye do these things
ye shall never fall, For if it do not, then ( Jam. 2.26.) it is putridum
cadaver, a rotten carcass; Faith is an action proper to the mind.
and not faith. That which is, Romans 10.10. (...), etc. that a man believes
with his heart; we know that it belongs to the mind, and so in Deuteronomy. 6.5.
we must love God with the mind; but that is not proper to the mind, If it be
once in the heart, it will come out and show it self it speech, in actions,
etc.
but to the heart: yet if it come not into the heart, and kindle it also, from
whence Prove. 4.23. come the springs of life, and all the actions and opinions
of a man: there shall be no action, and consequently no true faith. If the
heart be once possessed* then 2 Cor. 4.13. we shall believe, and therefore we
must needs speak, Psalm. 116.10. I believed, therefore will I speak: and as it
is Psalm. 35.10. not only the tongue shall speak, but all the bones, (i.e.)
every member that we have, Psalm. 10. All my bones shall say, Lord who is like
thee? The physicians have a saying, that judicium a cord fit per brachium, the
heart will give a pulse to every part by the veins: but it may be sensibly
perceived by the arm, and by that pulse they know the disease of the heart
they use a remedy for the diseases of the heart; so in the Gospel it has a
present remedy; so if faith be once in the heart it will spread it self
throughout the whole man, but it does especially declare it self by the arm,
(id est) in the operations and working of it, and this is not by little and
little, or seven years after; but as it is commonly said; when any believed in
Christ, cadem hora sanatus est, he was made whole the same hour. This faith
must appear in life, and not in death only, for so every man, even the wicked
will crust in God in death: because he (...) not otherwise choose.
Esa. 66.8. Who has heard such a thing? who has seen such things! shall the
earth be brought forth in one day! or shall a nation be borne at once! for as
soon as Sion travailed, she brought forth her children: the Prophet he
wondreth at it, yet that is the sign of true faith, therefore nothing like to
them, that have not the fruits of their faith seen till they die; for then
they must trust in God whether they will or no, not all their life they will
not, but at their death; but then there is no remedy: yet it is not said in the
Scriptures, that justus moritur ex side, but vivit ex fide, the just man dies,
but the just man lives by faith: his faith must live, and not die. I will not
pray with Balaam, let my soul die with the righteous; I will rather pray the
contrary, and it is the duty of a Christian so to pray, Let my soul live with
the faithful.

For the sixth precept, of the affirmative, 6. Rule, our a^^na co^mu^^^atio
fide, to communicate our faith to others. There is no mercy to be showed to any
of these.
we are willed to entangle others with the means, and use them to others
profit, as well as to our own: this sixth precept of the affirmative the
Apostle Paul observes, Romans 1.11.12. he desires, though strong in faith, that
he might be strengthened and comforted by their faith; as on the other side,
the contrary is not only forbidden, but a punishment also enjoined, Deuteronomy. 13.
If any entice thee to follow strange Gods, if he be a Prophet, if he be thy
brother, if he be a dreamer of dreams, if thine own son, or thy daughter,
or thy wife, or thy friend, thou art commanded not to consent to him, nor pity
him, nor show mercy, but shall put them all to the sword, and he that is
seduced, his hand shall be first on the seducer. And doing thus, in extending
thus our faith to the good of others; we shall receive the end of our faith,
the salvation of our souls, Cred^ndo quod non videmus, videbimus quod non
videmu^-Timor Dei, the fear of God. Faith never accepted with God, before it
come into the heart; it comes thither if we stir up the affections. Cor seeds
affectionum, the heart is the fear of the affections. When it comes into the
heart, it stirs. Species affectionum in cor de nostro, the several
affections of the heart.
1. Pet. 1.9. and shall receive this answer with the Centurion, Mat. 8.13.
Vade, and secundum fidem tuam fiet tibi, go thy way, and as thou have believed
so be it done unto thee; this Gods answer will be to us: and merces fidei est
visio Dei, the reward of faith is the vision of God; for in rebus supra
naturam, idem est videre and habere, in supernatural things to see and enjoy
is all one; so we shall have him: credendo quod non videmus, videbimus quod
credimus, by believing what we see not, we shall at length see what now we
believe. And thus of the duty of the mind.

Now to the worship of the heart; Romans 10.10. it is said, that faith must come
into the heart, and the heart must believe; else there can be no righteousness.
For there must be a mutual affection of the mind and the heart; for if the
heart love not, the mind will not long believe, and if the mind believe not,
the heart will not love long.

Now the heart is the place of affections, and being the place of affections,
we shall know that it comes into the heart, if it stir up the affections
that are in that part, to the worship of God.

The affections are partly such as are agreeable to our nature, and such as we
wish for; partly such as we wish to be far from us: of the former kind are,
love, hope, joy, etc. of the other, sear, grief, hatred.

Finis and usus affectionum in cord, the end and use of the affections in the
heart.
God has ordained them both to a double use; for grief, hatred, fear, and
those that are of the two sorts, are first either reins to keep us from
evil, or secondly after evil committed, they are our tormentors to punish us.
So of the other three, are two uses also, for first either they are spurs and
provocations to do good, and secondly if we do good, to be our comforters, to
cherish the thoughts, of the heart, so there is a beginning of bliss here.

Fear toward God; the reason, because the word of God being the object of
faith. Timor inter affectiones prima, the prime affection is fear. Because the
affections have their prius and posterius, their first and last. Look what
object is first, that affection is first; according to this, conclude, because
Gods justice was first proclaimed, therefore fear first to be handled. There
is a faith in Moses (i. e.) the knowledge of Gods justice. 1. Moses his fear.
And these 2. are properly attributed to fear. Why God set justice first to be
apprehended.
Whether we take it whole and in gross; or the five books of Moses before the
four Gospells, or in the very beginning; we see our faith apprehends in the
order of the word; that, in what day soever thou shall eat of the fruit of the
tree, thou shall die; before the other, the seed of the woman shall bruise the
Serpents head.

So the Justice of God offers it self first to be handled, which justice,
the knowledge that is by faith apprehending, armed with the other eight
attributes, to make it seem more fearful; considering it with them; and the
conscience telling us, that man has taken of the forbidden fruit, necessary it
is that fear come out of this consideration, and consequently be in us for our
transgressions. It is that which before was said, Joh. 3.^6. si crederetis
Moysi, crederetis and mihi, if ye believed Moses ye would believe me; first
Moses must be believed, and then Christ.

The first is a faith in Gods justice. There is a most manifest example of
this, Jonah 3.5. crediderunt Deo, and timuerunt, they believed God and feared,
which is nothing else but a faith in Gods justice. They of the later writers,
giving to faith 6. motives; make the two first and especial these, 2.
contritionem, a grinding to powder by fear, by that knowledge the law being
apprehended, Psalm. 119.120. the Prophet tells us, what is the true object of
fear; My flesh trembles for fear of the O Lord, I am humbly afraid of thy
judgments: this effect is of faith in the justice of God.

The reason why it pleased God to set justice first to be apprehended, and
fear, is that before any matter be brought to pass, that that hinders must
be taken away. Have God we cannot, because Esa. 59.2. there is a separation
between him and us, and as it is said, Ephesians. 2.14. there is a great partition
wall betwixt; therefore we cannot have him. Causae prohi^entes and expellentes
p^^catum, The causes which hinder the growth of sin are, 1. Timor, fear.
Now as we should look for him that should break down; so if we will have
it broken down, it is expedient that we should not build it higher, therefore
we must cease to heap sin upon sin, and look for Christ to break down
that which is already built.

That that causes us to cease from sin, is the fear of God, Prove. ^.13.
expulsor peccati. timor domini, the fear of the Lord teaches us to hate
evil: not saying as it is, Romans 6.1. (...), What shall we say then? shall we
continue in sin that grace may abound? therefore this is the reason why God
commands fear, because it makes to leave sin.

There are besides this, two other reasons, and two other affections: but it
pleased God to make choice of this here; for not only fear, but shame, and
grief, or pain, cause men to leave an evil thing; but they that are moved
neither with shame nor grief, with fear are moved. For shame, Psalm. 83.16.
the Prophets prayer is, Fill their faces O Lord, with shame; 2. Pudor, shame
that they may seek thy name: for grief, Esa. 28.19. vexatio dabit
intellectum, if a man smart for it, experience will teach him understanding. 3.
Dolor, grief. Puder tollitur multitudine peccantium dolorem tollit, aut certe
mitigat volup^^ terrena.
But we know, that in multitude of offenders there is no place for shame:
therefore that cannot prevail, seeing the world is full of offenders: and for
pain, we have terrenas consolatiunculas, some few worldly pleasures to beat
it out, or at the least to season it: but fear, which it pleases God here to
require at our hands, is that, when these fail, it fails not, as we see it
has prevailed in evil men, yea in beasts. Genesis 3.10. Adam walked up and down
in Paradise with comfort enough, though he had Fig Leaves, and was naked: his
humbling came not to any perfection, till he heard the voice of the Lord
coming toward him. Acts 24.25. Felix the Deputy being a very ill man, and an
Heathen; we see he fell into a trembling on a discourse of Paul's concerning
justice and temperance, and other virtues, and especially of the judgments of
God. This were somewhat, but that it moves beasts also: and that beast, in
which there is most brutishness: Numb. 22.23.25, 27. Balaams Ass being in
fear of the Angel of the Lord, that stood in the way, while there was room
enough on both sides, ran aside out of the way: when there was no room,
(...) that one might pass by another, he rubs the Prophets foot against the
wall: and when there was no way at all to escape the Angel of the Lord, he
falls down flat under him: and though he were sore beaten, yet he could not
be made to run upon the Angels sword: no stripes can drive an Ass where he
sees danger to be; to run into that danger, but he will be sooner killed
with stripes, then move. Yet beyond these, as that Iam. 2.19. that howsoever
all other things are not brought forth out of the Devils; yet fear comes of
their faith, Daemones credunt, and contremiscunt, the Devils believe and
tremble: therefore this must needs be a most forcible means: and he is far
gone, and in a very fearful case, that fears not. You will happily say, but
God speaks much of love: that were a better way to be brought by love, to
obedience and belief. Objection.
Responded: It is true, It is a far better way: but the case is so, that love
will not prevail with us; for he that does love a good thing, Solution.
must have a knowledge of it, and by his knowledge, a taste of it: and if his
taste be infected, as in a Fever, they that are troubled with it, are delighted
with nothing, but that which seems good to the corrupted state; and if
wholesome meat be offered them, yet they love it not, If the love be infected,
there is no love of that which is profitable.
unless it agree with their corrupted taste: and consequently cannot be
brought by love to taste of the wholesome meat; yet this reason will be
forcible enough to persuade them to take it; that if they take it not, their
fit will be sharp, or their life shorter: so fear works in them, in whom love
prevails not. In the same state are natural men; spiritual joys, if they
could be tasted, We have such a disease of sin, that let one talk of the joys
of the Saints that they have in heaven, an evil taste cannot ta^^ it, and
consequently cannot love it.
fear were superfluous: but we with vain delights of earthly pleasures, and
ease, and evil company, have cloyed our selves, and brought our souls to an
evil taste, so that we are come to that, that we cannot desire that which is
to be desired: and that which is not to be desired, we desire: only now
because we see, that course that we have taken, it will bring us into sharper
fits, or bereave us of our spiritual life; the fear of losing this, that may
prevail with us; therefore necessary it is that fear should be.

Yet we may add this, that to this love we are brought by fear. An Heathen
man says, odium peccandi oportet facias, non metum, man should hate, By fear
we abstain from evil.
not fear sin: and this odium peccandi, hatred of sin comes from fear.
For fear makes us to abstain from sin: abstinence from sin, brings a
good life: having a good life, we begin to have a good conscience: beginning
to have a good conscience, we shall be without fear, and have peace of
conscience: and then it begins to love, and to taste of God and godliness.
A timore, bona vita; a bona vita, bona conscientia; a bona conscientia, amor:
therefore love and fear in this respect are compared to a needle and a thread
the needle, that is not to tarry, but to bring the thread through: so fear
comes not to stay in the heart, but to bring mutual love: therefore we must
fear first, before we can come to love. Discat timere, qui non vult timere;
discat ad tempus esse solicitus, Finis and usus timeris, the end and use of
fear, Time ne timeas, fear that thou may not fear.
qui vult esse securus, Let him learn to fear, that would live without fear;
let him learn to be solicitous for a time here, that would be secure for ever
hereafter: So the use of fear is, restraint of evil, and causing of love.

Now to the Objection.

The common definition of fear is Expectatio mali, an expectation of evil:
Quomodo Deus sum bonus timeri potest, how can God be said to be feared; which
is the chiefest good?
here now, may be some doubt to them that have not the deeper skill in
Divinity, how one can be said to fear God, seeing in him there is no evil:
for he is wholly goodness it self: and the Fountain of all goodness: and
consequently there is no evil in him; and therefore cannot be said to be
feared.

To this we say, that God is not first and principally to be feared; but (as
before has been said) his judgments: Deus ut objectum timoris. How God is
the object of fear.
that is, the effect of Gods justice, that is first feared, and God
secundarily: the reason why it is principally feared, because in it concur
all the affections and qualities, that can by any means move fear: which the
Philosopher calls (...), things full of fear: and that is indeed objectum
formidabile, an object altogether fearful, in three respects: malum futurum,
propinquum, vires excedens; First, it is an evil which is not yet past.
Secondly, it is nigh at hand. Thirdly, it is unsupportable.

1. It is to come, malum futurum: therefore Christ, Matthew. 24.6. after he had
reckoned up many calamities that should happen, he adds, But the end comes
not yet, the greatest is behind. Whatsoever we shall suffer in this world, yet
the end is to come. Nearenesse in two respects, 1. in respect that all things
are his, 2. wheresoever we come, there he is also: Deus ubique, God is every
where.
2. It is propinquum, near at hand, the armies of God are always round about
us: wheresoever we are, God is with us, and we are in the midst of his host,
as was said before: all his creatures be armed to the destruction of the
wicked. 3. It must be a matter of great difficulty, that it may exceed our
power: which is the natural course of fear, that there be defectus potentiae,
a defect of power to resist: this also is necessarily included in Gods
judgments. Psalm. 130.3. If thou will be extreme O Lord, to mark what is done
amiss, O Lord, who may abide it? 1 Cor. 10.22. Do we provoke the Lord to
anger? are we stronger then he? i. our strength is as stubble before him,
nothing to resist: and we are not (as Job says) of brass or stone.
In this arduum or difficulty are comprehended four degrees of increase: 1.
that it be a punishment, malum poenae: there is a bar erected, and an
arraignment: 2 Cor. 5.10. for we must all appear before the tribunal, etc.
Abel is elected, and Caine rejected. 2. It must be insolitum, strange, without
example: Heb. 10.31. horrendum est incidere in manus Dei, it is a horrible
thing to fall into the hands of God. 3. It must be malum subitum, or
repentinum: 1 These. 5.3. it shall come always suddenly, upon them that fear
not. Prove. 29.1. A man that hardneth his neck when he is rebuked, shall
suddenly be destroyed, and cannot be cured. 4. If it be without remedy
incurable: and that is in two respects, as before was showed: so is the
judgment of God especially in the life to come: for as God will show the
uttermost of his power in providing rewards for his chosen: When God comes to
be considered, sub ratione personae, as a person, he comes to be considered
under those person; that ar^ most ^cr^ible to us. God compares himself to a
King, and therefore he challenges this fear to him. In eo qui timetur, tria
consideranda, consider there are three things considerable in him whom we fear.
1. Authoritas, his authority.
so he will surely show it to the uttermost in providing punishments for them
that will not fear, and the wicked. So this is the object of fear, and this
is it, that faith must look for.


Now secondly, as it is said in Philosophy, etiam timetur ille, qui potest
malum infligere, we are said to fear him properly who is able to punish us;
and so come to say, God is feared. In the party that is to be feared, there are
three things to be considered. 1. Authority: though a child be a King, and a
woman bear rule over us, which of themselves are weak, yet in regard of their
authority, they become very terrible unto us, Mal. 1.6. A son honors his
father, etc. If I be a father, where is mine honor? if I be your Master, where
is my fear? and he may by best right challenge it: for his authority is
highest, and above all. Esa. 49.24. Shall the prey be taken from the mighty? or
the lawful captive be delivered? but thus says the Lord, even the captives of
the mighty shall be taken away, and the prey of the tyrant shall be delivered,
etc. And not only a King, but as it is Revel. 4.10. such a one, as all the
celestial powers and principalities shall fall on their faces before him, and
cast their Crowns at his feet, and say: Thou O Lord art only worthy to
receive all power, glory, honor, and authority.

2. Potestas pu^uend^, his power to punish. The course and nature of might.
2. Though he have no authority, yet if he have power, if he be a mighty enemy,
and not only that, but a furious person; he is to be feared: might is
fearful, but especially the might of God, which as it exceeds the course and
nature of all other might, so it has provoked them that were farthest of, to
fear: as Dan. 3.26. Nebuchadnezzar, when he saw that by Gods power working
above nature, the three men walked in the fiery Oven without any him, either to
their body or garments: it so terrified him, that he made a contrary Decree to
his former, and caused it to be published throughout all his Countries, and
Regions, that whosoever blasphemed the God of Sidrach, etc. should be drawn in
pieces with horses, and his house made a jakes. Dan. 6.26. When King Darius saw
how wonderfully Daniel was delivered from the Lions, he was stricken with such
a fear, that he caused his accusers to be cast into the Den: and to make a
Decree throughout all his Dominions, that they should fear and tremble before
the God of Daniel. So we read often in the Gospel, obstupuerunt, they were
astonished at his power.

3. Fault. 1. Conscientientia in pa^iente delictorum nostro^um. In that he is
privy to the offenses we commit against him.
3. That we lean upon him, in respect of some sin we have done, to which he
is privy. Exodus 2.14. Moses, when he saw no man nigh, was bold enough to kill
the Egyptian; but when he perceived that some were privy to his fact, he fell
into a fear, and fled, Heb. 4.13. There is no creature, but is bare in Gods
sight; all our transgressions are naked before him: therefore to be feared, as
privy to our transgressions: therefore our fear must be fixed on him also.
Differentia inter timorem Dei and hommum. The difference between the fear of
God and the fear of men.
And this puts a difference between the fear of God, and the fear of men,
which they call malum diuturnitatis custodem, an ill preserver of diuturnity:
for the fear of God is bonus custos diuturnitatis, the best preserver of it,
because there may be no means used to put away Gods wrath, or to escape his
jurisdiction: whereas there may be means devised, that man; power might be
resisted: or at the least to avoid his jurisdiction: therefore Jerome says,
Rule 1. Quid hic praecipitur. What is here commanded. Timor se^^orum initialis:
filiorum, gratuitus. A fear of servants, at their entering: of children, free.
Timor servilis non pro^sus rejiciendus. A servile sear is not altogether to be
rejected.
Ubi timor Domini est possessor animae, where the fear of the Lord possesses
the soul, there no hope to escape: and no fear, but it shall be with
diuturnity.

Now to our Rules, what is commanded, and forbidden: 1. what is commanded: 1.
here is commanded both fears. The Schoolmen they divide it into two other
kinds, (which is not so necessary) the 1. they call timorem servorum, a fear
of slaves, which is a good fear, though some unskilful men condemn it now
adays: yet is the one better then the other. It is true, Romans 8.15. to them
that are come to a grouth in Christ, that they have not received (...), the
spirit of bondage to fear again: therefore it is a thing to be received: It
is inferior to the spirit of adoption: but yet this spirit is better then the
spirit of Belial, and that of slumber, Esa. 29.10. which is either a
dissoluteness of life, and contempt of God; which possesses the most part of
the world, or a blockishnesse in sin, which is more diffused then the other.
Actio perfecta non accipitur, nisi imperfecte primo, perfect Actions are at the
first received with some imperfection. It is a good thing to be a son: but
yet it is better to be a servant, and as it is, Psalm. 84.11. to be a
doore-keeper in the house of God, then to dwell in the tents of ungodliness,
and to be with Gods enemies; and to say with the prodigal son, Luke 15.19. I
am no more worthy to be called thy son, make me as one of thy hired servants.
It is good being in Canaan, the land of promise: but yet it is better to be in
the Wilderness, then in Egypt. Aug. writing on Luke 12.4. has this saying:
You will say, Timeo gehennam, quid dicam ego? male times, vane times; video
Dominum sustulisse unum timorem, posuisse alterum; porsus time. I am afraid of
Hell; what shall I say? that thy fear is naught and vain? No, I see the Lord
has denied thee one kind of fear, and left thee the other; fear and spare
not: And in another place, he says: fac si nondum potes amore justitiae, at
timore poenae, If thou can not do it for the love of righteousness, yet do
it for the fear of punishment: and his ground is out of Deuteronomy. 5.29. nothing
brought the Jews to the Law of God, but the terror they conceived of the
strange sights they saw: and yet God wished that his people might have such an
heart always: yet that was but a servile fear, for it came of these fearful
sights and noyses, that did concur at the delivery of the Law. The Clouds,
Earthquake, and Thunder, nothing else but to work fear.
It pleased God to annex to his Law the Proclamation of his justice, to the end
it might stir up fear in the hearers; which is the proper effect of the Law.

Timor filiorum. Filial fear. The former fear is of a defect of our selves,
the latter of love.
The other they call timor filiorum, a filial fear: they use to make example
of this in the son of the poor man, that has a reverend fear to offend his
Father, though he know that he will do him no good, nor can do him any hurt:
this is not that, that was before, it may be called reverence: the other
comes of the fear of the Law, this of love. This is that fear, Psalm. 19.9.
that endures for ever, and Phil. 2.12. he charge them to make an end of
their salvation with fear and trembling.

Cum Dewn amamus, timere debemus, ratio ^^iplex. Our love to God is mixed with
fear for a threefold reason. 1. Reason. The doctrine of fear shows plain,
that it is vain. 2. Reason.

The reason why it pleased God, when love comes to command fear, is
threefold, 1. that the vain dream of many spirits of error, dreaming of a
perfection in this life, might be overthrown. Prove. 28.14. Beatus qui semper
pavidus. If any have perfection in this life, he cannot fall: if he cannot
fall, fear is superstuous: but because we might know that during this life
there is an unperfect perfectness therefore this fear is always necessary.
2. The children of God feel always in themselves how feeble their faith, how
doubtful their hope, how cold and unsavory their prayers, how slack their
repentance, and how all the rest of the duties are weakened in them: in some
more, in some less; as the Spirit in measure more or less communicates to
them, as they did in David: yet if fear remain, we shall recover our selves
to God again: and he that loses it not, Prove. 28.14. his heart shall never be
hardened: there is a good preservative for the heart. Though all other duties
be failing, yet if this tarry, there shall come no despair. Bernard says, In
veritate comperi, that he knows the truth of it by experience: that for the
keeping, recovering, assuring of the virtues and duties that God has
commanded, there is not a more profitable rule then to fear, while the grace
of God is present with us; The Fathers, Custos omnium virtutum est timor. Fear
is the guard of all other virtues.
and when that is once departed, then there is nothing left but to fear, and
never rest, till we have made our selves fit for the receiving of it again:
knowing this, quia si deficit illa, deficis and tu; if once thy fear decay,
thou decayest with it: and when we have recovered it, then to fear lest we
should lose it again: for fear of relapse will make us more circumspect.
Jerome calls it Custodem omnium virtutum, the preserver of all other virtues.
3 That this excellent duty love, 3. Reason.
the effect of this fear, might not wax carclesse: Cant. 3.1. Love fell
asleep with her beloved in her arms: and her beloved was gone: so if there be
not a mixture of fear with our love, it falls asleep, and waxes secure:
and so it loses her beloved: therefore that we may be sure we keep love in
our arms, and keep her waking, there must be a mixture of fear with it. So
in these three Reasons, fear is necessary, even in our perfect estate. And
withal, this we see, how that Solomon, Prove. 1.7. as also David, Psalm.
111.10. how they call it the beginning of wisdom: As fear is the first, so
it is the last work, and thus is timor castus, Col haadam. This filial fear,
the whole man, or the sum of all. The Negative part.
and Col haadam, the whole man. In the end of the Preacher the conclusion of
all things, Fear God, and keep his Commandments; Prove. 14.27. it is called,
fons vitae, the fear of the Lord, is a wellspring of life, etc.


Faith is the beginning of Christian religion, as principles of sciences: so
fear is the beginning, as the first work: so the other, the reverent fear,
that is the conclusion of all things.

There is forbidden here, first want of fear: the effect whereof is, hardness
of heart: and that is of two sorts, and the first is a way to the second.

The first comes of a false erroneous persuasion, Eccles. 8.11. Because
sentence against those, that set their heart on evil, is not speedily
executed; the children of men they harden their hearts: there goes away fear:
and the conclusion of this is, Psalm. 50.21. they will say to us, God is like to
us, that will suffer men to do wickedly, and let them go unpunished; whereas,
Romans 2.4. they ought to have reasoned, that God does delay his punishment, that
we should not delay, but be brought to repentance Prove. 29.1. If we delay, and
profit not by it, his destruction will be sudden upon us. By this means
comes it to pass, which the Prophet says Psalm. 36.1. that his heart gives
him, that there is no fear of God before the eyes of the ungodly: Genesis 20.11.
as Abraham said, there is no fear of God in this place: therefore no care of
the Commandments of God, no care of duty.

According as thou art feared, so is thy displeasure.
2. So secondly, because there must be still a proportion between the object,
and the power apprehending, Psalm. 90.11. our fear, if it be not according to
the power of Gods wrath, we shall not have so reverend an esteem of his
judgments as we ought, not that we can fear God as much as he ought to be
feared: Si contereremur usque ad pulverem, though we grind our selves to
powder, though we should tremble, till one bone fell from another; yet there is
a measure: Our fear must go far beyond man's tradition.
Esa 29.13. when a man is sure he fears God beyond men's precepts, Mat. 15.2.
that he abstaineth from such things, as man's law forbids not, nor punishes:
if he go no further then man's law, his fear is short. This then is the trial
of our fear, if we make the like conscience of doing those things which man's
law does not forbid, as of those which both Gods and man's law do take hold of.

This fear is in respect of an object that is not to be feared, it pleases
God to punish the fear of man 2. ways. 1. In this life, Psalm. 53.6. 2 Prove.
10.24. that whereas they give over the fear of God, that which they most
fear, shall fall on them, as Exodus 1. and 1 King. 12.11.
Again, as want of fear is forbidden, so on the contrary, to fear that we
should not fear; Psalm. 53. the reprobates have this for their punishment; v.
2. Corrupt are they, and become abominable in their doings. v. 6. They were
afraid where no fear was, etc. Trepidaverunt timore, ubi not erat causa
timoris. So we see, where superstition, and the religion of God are mixed;
there is small account made of Gods fear that he has set down: and of the
other, what man has invented, there is great fear of conscience. So likewise,
Luke 12.4. the fear of man is forbidden. Revel. 21.8. the fearful, that for
fear have transgressed, their portion shall be with the unbeleevers. We have
examples: Pharaoh was afraid of the growing of the Israelites into too great a
number, and made edicts to kill the male children of the Israelites: 1 King.
12.27. Jeroboam feared the heart of the people would return to their Lord
Rehoboam, if they should go up and do sacrifice in the house of the Lord at
Jerusalem, and therefore he made two calves of gold, and so brought the people
to Idolatry: Mat. 2. Herod was afraid that he should lose his Kingdom,
therefore he commanded all the male children that were in Bethlehem, and in all
the coasts thereof, to be killed, from two years old and under: Joh. 11.47.
the Jews were afraid, that if they suffered Christ's doctrine so to prevail,
all would believe in it, and the Romans would come and take away the Kingdom
from them.

2. Punishment Prove. 10.24.
The second, the punishment: Prove. 10.24. Quod timet impius, accidet illi, the
fear of the wicked it shall come upon him: so that thing that these four most
feared, that happened to them: the Romans came, and the Jews lost their
Kingdom: Herod mist of his purpose, and lost his Kingdom: Jeroboam was put
out in the next generation: and the Israelites increased, and prevailed against
Pharaoh and the Egyptians.

4. Rule. Media timoris means to beget fear.
The means. Seeing how vehement a mover fear is, beside that that has been
spoken before, the first way or motive to fear is, the weighing of such
Scriptures as contain matter, that may give occasion of meditation of Gods
judgments: Heb. 6.4. as that to fall into Gods hands, how terrible a thing it
is. And if God mark what is done amiss, no flesh can be righteous in his
eyes. Esaias 66.2. And to him will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a
contrite spirit, and that trembles at my words. There must be a trembling at
his Words, else his spirit comes not.

2 The consideration of the judgments of God, and examples in former ages, 1
Cor. 10.11. (...) etc. All these things (having named many) are examples for
us, they are our monitors. Quot habetis historias judicii Dei, in Bibliis, tot
habetis conciones: so many examples of divine justice as thou meetest withal
in the holy Bible, they are as so many Sermons of Gods justice, and severity,
unto thee: to move you to fear God, and to be modest when we see his justice
on his Angels, on man and his posterity, on the whole world in the deluge, on
the Egyptians, on the Jews, on his own Church Jerusalem: and last of all, on
his own Son, Such was the bitterness of sin, that was executed on Christ.
it pursuing him to the fullness of bitterness, insomuch, that one of the
Fathers says, Magna fuit amaritude propter quam tanta sustinenda fuit
amaritudo: deadly was the bitterness of sin, which could not be cured, but
by the bloodshed passion of the Son of God. [And because the judgments
aforetime move not every one has a great store of judgments in himself.]

1 Inhaerentia.
3 So the present judgments in our age; and they are three. 1 Those that it
pleases God we should feel in some measure: as fear, sickness in our
bowels, 2 Impendentia.
hunger, cross; etc. 2 Those that are near us, 3 Excubantia.
that we see not, yet they are hanging over our heads. 3 Kind, which they call,
Excubans pro foribus, the horror of a guilty and wounded conscience, which as
God said to Caine, lies at our door, it shall grind them to powder.


Tria novissima; 1 the meditation of the day of ones death: 2 Of the day of
judgment. 3 The horror of the torments following.

So the other three, which they call, tria novissima; which shall be at the
representing of our death: Psalm. 90.12. O teach us to number our days, that we
may apply our hearts unto wisdom. The Prophet makes the special means to
bring us to wisdom, or fear of the Lord, to number our days. 2 The
consideration of the judgment of God, and what account we are to give, and
that we are never able to make account if God assist it not: 2 Cor. 5.10. We
must all appear before the judgment seat, etc. 3 The terror of the torments
which follow the impenitent. Esa 66.24. Their worm shall never die, but be
always gnawing upon their consciences, the fire that shall never be quenched,
the weeping, wayling, and gnashing of teeth after sentence of eternal death,
shall pass on them, 5 Rule.
this made the Saints to pass in fear. Reg. There was never any apparition of
any thing above nature, but presently a fear came upon them: Luke 1.30. Then
the Angel said unto her, Fear not Mary, etc. Act. 10.4. But when he looked on
him, he was afraid, etc.

The signs: there are so many questions and cavills of duties, as its an
evident sign there is no fear among us.

1 The Heathen man says, Timor est credulus, fear is lazy of belief, Deuteronomy.
5.27. that is, a true sign of fear, giving credit to that is taught by them,
The true sign is to credit that which is taught
that have authority and knowledge to give it: not studying after questions,
and frivolous distinctions, and cavils: for this questioning is a sign that we
have no fear.

2 An evil sign is negligence: 2 Diligence.
Wisd. 7.19. Qui timet Dominum, nihil negligit, He that fears the Lord
neglects nothing. Fear is the diligentest that can be. Genesis 32. Jacob being
in fear of his brother, could not rest all the night before, but would be
either sending messengers before to his brother, or ordering his household, and
his goods, or praying to the Lord, etc.

3 Humility.
3 That we must raise out of fear Humility, Genesis 33.3. Jacob he falls seven
times to the ground, before he comes to his brother. For (as the Philosopher
says) Timor contrahit, non extendit: Fear it shrinkes (not swells) the heart.
Prove. 3.7. There is a plain medicine for pride: (Be not wise in thine own
eyes, but fear the Lord, and depart from evil) Nothing so bold as ignorance,
but knowledge is very fearful, as the Prophets etc. (that having more
knowledge; and less cause to fear) yet feared most. He that has more
knowledge, and less cause to fear, he most commonly fears more. When the
governor of the ship, or mariner fears, then the passenger must needs fear.

4 The fear of sin.
4 The surest sign is the fear of sin: and that is all one with the fear of
God. Psalm. 34.11. Come ye children and hearken to me; I will teach you the
fear of the Lord. They join fear of sins, with the fear of God Job 1.1.
Job was an upright and just man, one that feared God, and eschewed evil. Job
28.28. The fear of the Lord is wisdom, and to depart from evil is
understanding.

5 To fly from sin.
5 Timor est fugitivus, ergo non potest armari, fear bids us not resist, but
flee, though he put on never so much armor on his back. A thief being taken
in the manner, runs away: and if he be chased after, he will, dimittere
furtum, drop the thing that he has stolen, in the way, so when God comes,
we must be sure not to have that, that thing will be to our condemnation with
us: i. not to have sin about us; if we do hold it still, our furtum, we are
very bold thieves: therefore it is a sure sign of fear, when we take heed of
this, at least, ne eapiamur de furto, not to be taken in the very manner and
act of sinning.

6 Rule to be accessory.
6 For the sixth and last rule, Deuteronomy. 10.12. And now Israel what does the Lord
thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and
with all thy soul? And Psalm. 33.8. we must wish with the Prophet there, that
all the Earth may fear the Lord [Let all the earth fear the Lord, stand in
awe of him, all ye that dwell in the world] So asso a special regard must be
had, that we do not strengthen the arm of the wicked; Ezekiel. 13.22. Not to
discourage him from his wickedness, but to embolden and make him stronger, is
there condemned. (Because with your lies ye have made the heart of the
righteous sad, whom I have not made sad, and strengthened the hand of the
wicked, that he should not return from his wicked ways, etc.) Therefore that
sin by us, may be discouraged in others.

Thus then we see that fear is the end of the Law. 2 It is the property of him
that fears to shrink down: therefore Humility arises out of fear. 1 Pet.
5.6. The Apostle writing, that we should humble our selves under the hand of
God; one of the Fathers says, Tanquam securi venienti loquitur. the Apostle
speaks as if Gods hand were lift up with his axe ready, and we should
shrink down: such a casting down of our selves, is the first effect of that
fear, Psalm. 119.120. My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of
thy judgments. So that is before by the example of Good men: 1 Casting down of
our selves.
Jacob, Genesis 33.3. bowed and humbled himself seven times for fear of Esau.
So of the wicked: 1 King. 20.23. Then they girded sackcloth about their loins,
and put ropes about their necks, etc. Benhadad, and his noble men were smitten
with the fear of Ahab. Such is the force of the fear of Gods justice, that we
should be by it humiles, thrown down to the ground, until we can say with the
Prophet, Psalm. 119.25. adhaesit anima mea pavimento, and pulveri: My soul
cleaves to the very dust: and still remember, that the Glory of God is the end
of our Creation, and Redemption, and we shall never make this our end, until
man be clean void of glory and made even to to the ground, which is at the
lowest that can be, and it is that that David wishes to be counted the basest
thing of all, that his honor might become as the most vile and contemptible
things, and no better then that that every man treads upon; Psalm. 7.5. yea let
him tread my life down upon the earth, and lay mine honor in the dust. So
that when we come to this case, that in truth we have that, which the
Patriarchs, and Prophets bad in resemblance and figure, in forbearing meats and
drinks, and putting on of sackcloth, as judging themselves not worthy to be
clothed: in throwing dust and ash^s on their heads, thereby even condemning
themselves, and thinking so basely of themselves, that they were worthy to be
cast under the earth, and not to tread on the ground: when we are thus humbled,
and have given God all the glory, and our selves none, then our exaltation will
assuredly follow.

Ad tangenda inferna. God never leaves us, till he have brought us to the pit
of hell.
2 The second point, 1 Exaltation: for when he has brought us to the nethermost
pit, and as it were to deaths, and hels door, that is, at the very botrome of
humility, that we can go no lower, then we are low enough for a foundation to
build upon: and we may begin to build: ( Luke 14.11. (...), for whosoever
exalts himself shall be abased, and he that humbles himself shall be
exalted. And we shall cometruly to be humbled, by truly fearing: and truly
humbling our selves, not by comparing our selves to that we have been, or
with the Publicans about us, but with the the Tables of Moses, Gods justice;
this is the true (...), selfe-knowledg of every Christian, as the rule is to be
commended in a true sense: so as the Heathen took it, it could not be
commendable: for this was their (...), that a man should know the excellency
of his own soul, and so it served to puff up, but ours serves for humility,
and to know our wants.

Pride never arises, but either through want of knowledge, or through false
knowledge. Therefore the considering of the nobility, and excellency of man in
the heathen, and a false consideration of Gods justice, it was it that made
them fall into that, 1 Cor. 1.13. that the Preaching of Christ crucified became
an offense to the Jews, and foolishness to the Gentiles; and it brought them
to that case, that when Christ came to exalt and to heal them, they were high
enough, and sound enough: therefore Aug. Superbis Pharisaeis viluit Christus,
the Pharisees pride made them vilely esteem of Christ.

The true way to know our selves, 1. there is humilitas memis: and of the
understanding part: when a man in his mind considers the infinite
excellency of God, and his own baseness: the belief in the mind must raise a
quality in the heart the 2. therefore is humilitas cordis, voluntatis,
affectuum, etc. that he imagines he is not worthy apparel, not to be above the
ground a base mind, a base heart. Therefore this appetite be restrained, that
seeing there is no excellency in him, he should not seek for any excellency:
Psalm. 131.1. O Lord, I am not high minded, I have no proud looks, etc. It is
necessary that the appetite of every man should be measured by that which is in
him.


Not but that the nature of man is most excellent, but remembering withal that
which was said before, The more excellent a thing is, the mose base and vile it
is, if it degenerate: therefore seeing our state, and it has pleased God to
vouchsafe us a more wise way: we are to take it, and not to go against our
own nature: and so we come to our humiliation. Then we see the end and use of
humility, to bring a man out of conceit with himself, and make him resign all
his glory to God, and so the building may begin: for, as the Heathen man has
well said, Superbus miser indignus est misericordia, a proud wretch deserves no
pity: Ezekiel. 17.24. the course that God protests he will take; Bring down the
high trees, and exalt the low trees: make dry the green trees, and make the
dry trees to flourish: for this cause, Matthew. 18.3. Christ says, except men be
humble, and have no more spirits of pride in them, then babes, there is no
entrance for them into Heaven: for if any thing else were granted them, yet
Gloriam suam dabit alteri, could not be granted, Esa. 42.8. no part of his
glory shall go from him: therefore we must utterly be emptied, that his grace
might fill us. And this of the nature of humiliation.

1. Rule. The thing commanded.
The thing commanded here is, the making of our selves low in our own eyes.
They define it to be an opinion or conceit of a man proceeding out of true
knowledge, qua quisque sibi vilescit, which makes a man vile in his own eyes.
And to be made thus low, has this privilege, it cannot fall; rise it may: It
cannot fall; for there is nothing under it. If a man stood upright, he might
happily fall: but this makes him to fall down flat on the ground; therefore
all the words of destruction, in the tongue of the holy Ghost, are casting
down, hewing down, cutting down; which are so often mentioned: But when a
man is thus, he need not fear God and his judgment, to cast him down, for
he casts himself down enough: he may look for exalting.

Humilia^^on has a promi^^e of exaltation.
A further privilege it has, that God has added a promise of exaltation: it
is the course of God in all things. God, as he has made all things of nothing,
and light to come out of darkness; so here, (as Basil says) he has made
(...), humility the way to exaltation. As it was agreeable to Gods working to
make ex nihilo aliquid: so is it agreeable to the manner of his working, by
making low, to make high.

And in this humiliation, they comprehend three things.

1. Humilitas cordis, humility of the heart.
1. Not only a base conceit of our own nature, that goes no further then the
brain, the object whereof is the Majesty of God: but also ( Matthew. 11.29.)
humilitas cordis, in heart: the humbling of the heart through fear, taking his
effect there where his cause is, a desire of no glory for our selves; but that
God may have all, and Luke 15.19. to say with the prodigal son, confessing
that we are not worthy to be called his sons: make us as thy hired servants.
2. A restraint of our appetites from the degrees of excellency: for our
degrees must be proportionable to our gifts; if there be no proportion, there
is no measure: and if no measure, there is no reason: so that our degree must
be answerable to our gifts.
2. Besides this, it comprehends in regard of our selves, a restraining of our
appetite from that good in this life, that is above us, and to which the gift
of God has bestowed on us, is not proportionable; for our degrees must be
proportionable to our gifts: and every man should desire that place, that is
answerable to his gift: but now there is nothing more common in the world, then
to aspire, and account our selves worthy of high callings, and as Bernard
says, quod adepti sunt nummis, meritis attribuere, what preferment they buy
for money, they would be thought to have attained unto by desert: and as this
belongs to the second, so that in Psalm. 131.1. Domine non est exaltatum cor
meum, neque elati sunt oculi mei, neque ambulavi in magnis supra me, neque in
mirabilibus supra me: Lord, my heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty,
neither have I walked in great matters, and hid from me, Psalm. 131.1. But this
is not proper to this place. 3. So the third is not properly pertaining to the
first Commandment, whereby we submit our selves to our brethren: Phil. 2.3.
(...), etc. That nothing be done through contention and vainglory, but in
meekness of mind, so that every one should think better of others, then of
himself. And in the first of these, because that especially is proper to this
place: as in fear, there is a fear that begins, and a fear that
continues, and ends: so is there an humility that begins, and another
that perfecteth. The beginning humility, that we shall commonly see in the
Saints of God: there never was any, that in regard of any excellent thing, that
God did work by him, but he did first prepare him by humiliation: as Joseph
was sold, first to the Ismaelites, then to Potiphar: and Moses was 40. years
in Egypt, and 40. years after in the land of Madian, before that those
excellent signs and wonders were wrought by him: so we read of David and
others. This goes before the beginning of Gods delivery; whether in regard of
this life, or of that to come, as a preparative to make us more sensible of our
future condition.
The other is following; example and rules we have, that there must be an
humility even to the end; as fear is continual, so must humility be
continual. If not, then as Noah was preserved by his fear, in the midst of
a wicked generation, in the general flood: but when the flood dried up, after
growing into a carelessness, he remitted his watch: and being void of his
former humility, and fear, fell so grossly, that he was scorned of his own
son: So we see the like in Lot; so long as he was in Sodom, and in danger, he
had a low mind to the Lord: but after, when he came into the mountain,
thought himself to be saved there, and so fell into Incest with both his
daughters. So David was free from all crime, during the time of his persecution
under Saul, and his dwelling in the Tents: but coming to prosperity, and to
dwell in his Palace, shortly after he falls into two grievous sins, adultery
and murder: and therefore Gregory says, when we have got our virtues, perit
omne quod acquiritur, si non humilitate custoditur, the virtues are soon lost
which humility keeps not: and Christ in his prayer (placing, and lead us not
into temptation, immediately after the fifth petition, and forgive us our
sins) does plainly show, that in our greatest peace and safety, there is
greatest danger: and therefore when our sins are remitted us, we must then
most of all take heed that we fall not into other sins. But for the affinity
that these two humilities have with the two fears, though much more might have
been said, yet this may suffice.

Of the contraries to Humility.
NOw we come to that which is forbidden. 1. As humility is commanded: so pride
is forbidden, the excess of it.

1. Pride. Humility compared with Pride.
The comparison of it and humility may be thus: that come what sin soever will
come with humility, it weighs it down: and obtains pardon for it: but come
all the good works that a man can do, with pride, it weighs all down, and
choaketh all the good things it comes with: and this sin is the last of the
four impediments spoken of before, 1. ignorance, 2. unbelief, 3. security,
and the 4. is pride, and it has taken deeper root in all then any of the
other.
This, as it is Luke 3.8. is the high mountain, that stands in Christ's way;
and unless John Baptist take pains to remove it, he cannot come to us. I
find that this vice through the Fathers is called morbus Satanicus (and it
has a resemblance to our diseases that have their names of the persons, as
Morbus Gallicus, etc. the French disease, so this the Devils disease: it is
high-borne, and so lightly takes hold of them that are high-borne, for it was
first borne in Heaven, and so no other can be concluded by the rules of
Divinity, by Esa. 14.14. applying that to Satan, Ero similis Altissimo, I will
be like the most High: because he would have a part of Gods glory, and be above
his degree: therefore this was the cause that made him fall. The Devil has
knowledge and fear, but not humility: so the Devil took it first, and Adam
took it from him: so we come to be heirs of it: and as he said to himself,
Ero, I will be: so in Genesis 3. he said to Adam and Eve, Eritis sicut d. i, i.
similes Altissimo, ye shall be as Gods, i.e. ye shall be like the most High,
not suffering them to be content with that honorable place that God had
assigned them, but persuading them to aspire to an higher. Christ ( Luke 10.8.)
when the Apostles were come home joyful and proud that the Devils were made
subject to them in his name, says to them, that that may be profitable in
meditation to us [ Vidi Satanam cadentem sicut fulgur, behold, I beheld Satan
as lightning fall from Heaven; but rejoice not in this because they rejoiced
therein, and gave not glory to God.
but rather that your names be written in Heaven] for taking joy in that that
we should not. And that which Christ said of them, may be fitly said of any,
that this pride takes hold of.

This pride stands specially in two things, which both are in the speech of
Nebuchadnezzar, All the heads of glory may be referred to these two, 1. from
our selves 2. to our own glory.
Dan. 4.27. And the King spoke, and said, Is not this great Babel, that I have
built for the house of the Kingdom, by the might of my power; and for the
honor of my Majesty? If we ascribe to our selves either of these, that we do
any thing by the might of our own power, or for the glory of our own Majesty,
i. either that it comes from us, or that we do it for our glory, this is
pride.

More particularly, as we say, it is a desire to have that excellency
attributed to us, that is not in us: so 4. ways it falls out.

1. For he must first think that he has a greater good thing then he has,
and often times that which he has not at all: as Revel. 3.17. to the Angel of
the Laodiceans; Thou thoughtest thy self rich, and wise: and behold thou art
blind, naked, miserable, and wretched: and there was no such matter in thee:
and as 1 Timothy 3.6. none so subject to this as (...), young novices, that have
green shallow things in them: ((...)) not a novice, lest being lifted up with
pride, he fall into the condemnation of the Devil: of which Chrysostom
writing, says, if they be humble, it is no commendation to them: for if the
servant submit himself to his Master, he has no commendation for it: but
(...), if one have wherewithal to be proud, and yet is humble; he is worthy
of the commendation.

2. When we have a little good, to think that there is a greater good in us,
then we have indeed, Ezekiel. 28.12. that men are given to seal up great sums,
above that that is in them: 2 Cor. 10.14. of stretching and setting on the
Tenter-hookes; and the reason is, because that where a man has a little, there
is a stretching of that little by self-love, and the Devil he draws up a
false light, and showing our selves to our selves in a mist, or when he has
made us drunk with self-love, makes a little seem very much: and so we come
to see gemina objecta, and geminos soles, every thing will seem double.

3. It is more excellent for a man to have a thing of himself, And that is of
two sorts, 1. when he thinks he has a thing growing from his own nature: or
when he attributes it to his own desert.
then of another; if we have it of our selves, then our glory is the more: This
is a great way in pride, to imagine that we are the causes of that good we
have. But 1 Cor. 4.7. (...), etc. who made thee to differ, etc. Name one thing
that thou have not received: he abates that pride well. 2. But another is,
Though a man have it not of himself, yet if he deserve to have it, and not
upon courtesy of another, it is somewhat worth: and so comes the 4. degree of
pride, but that is laid flat to the ground, Genesis 32.10. If we will be heirs to
Israel, we will say with him, O Lord I am not worthy of the least of all the
mercies, and of all the truth that thou have showed unto thy servant: so we are
to think that God is the cause, and that without any deserving of ours, but of
his own free grace. The Church of Rome is charged with these two degrees of
pride in Nebuchadnezzar: and we are so far from thinking that any good
comes from our selves, that we know we have received all from the Father of
lights: but how true it is, that we think so, these two things will shrewdly
try us.

1. If any one of us, mispending time or money riotously, or any abuse of any
gift of God to be found fault withal, presently we forget that we have
received it: So in our practice we disallow that which we allow in our Theory.
and all into the bias of our own nature, and every one will be ready to say,
Why? what tell you me of this? Is it not mine own? In deed it should seem by
our spending, that we deal with it, as if it were our own, not as if we were
Stewards of it. 2. Another is this, that which is not our own, but borrowed:
we know we must be willing to render it at the owners call. Let God visit us
with a depriving of any of his gifts, there is such murmuring, such grudging at
it, as plainly shows that we are not willing to render freely as we have
received it freely: and it is hard for us to be persuaded that it is borrowed,
which is an argument that we account all as our own. These are trials
concerning our judgment, and we commonly err in these two.
5. The last is on this ground, though the gift in us be equal to others: yet
if we employ it better, we think it more excellency; Luke 18.11. it is the
Pharisees fault, O God I thank thee that I am not as other men are,
oppressors, unjust, or as this publican: he did so as he says, he fasted twice
in the week, he gave tithe of all that he had, he was no robber, no
extortioner, no unjust person: he said not untrue: and on the other side, he
was as far as we, he acknowledges that God did it in him: for he says, I
thank God; but then this, that he was not as other men were, His fault,
because he gave more excellency to himself, then to others.
and that he possessed the same gift as others did, but after a more excellent
manner, the giving of this to himself, and in another manner bringing in the
contempt of his brethren, this bringing in of singularity, hindered the
justifying of his prayer, and singular men will have new ways, differing from
other men's: every man will have a strange way by himself; whereof that
follows that I spoke of before. I would gladly make this sin more hateful
unto us: for it is a singular impediment to hinder any grace of God.

The Papists great praisers of humility.
The common place of humility is very strange among us now adays: and the
reason is, because it is the Papists theme. There is no good thing they use,
but I would wish we had it more common then they: and the leaving of this, has
brought our Religion to this case it is in: whether we consider those that are
without a feeling of God, or those that have eminency of parts, or if we
look to persons in high estate; the opinion of Rome, that there is a man that
cannot err; there is nothing more common in practice with us, then that to
hold, that a man cannot err: and so that which we think so absurd in the
Papists, to ascribe to man, that which is proper to God, we our selves ascribe
to man.

2. Is a degree of excellency, they will say as God says, Exodus 33.19. I will
have mercy upon whom I will: and compassion on whom I will: so they will
favor whom they will, and prefer whom they will; and whereas God has
appointed with whom he will have preferred, But they hold this, that how good
soever he is, yet it is not to be bestowed on him, but upon the courtesy.
they will prefer without gifts: and whereas there is no merit, but all is of
favor, they will have all merit, and no favor: Ezekiel. 28.2. in all things they
behave themselves not as if they were men, but God; but they are men, and not
God: so non cujus volo miserebor, it must not be, I will have mercy upon whom
I will: but merit and favor, it must be pulled down, it must not prevail,
else are we guilty of this.

Come to the common sort, take Bernards seven notes of pride, out of his Sermon
an missus est: two of them are in our soul, 1. following and pursuing after
our own counsel, As there is a pride in those those of higher estate, so in
those of lower also.
2. following our own will and pleasure.
Two in our mouth, 1. either grudging at our betters, and condemning their
speeches, and murmuring, 2. or speaking swelling words of vanity against our
inferiors, or commending our selves. Three in outward matters; Superbia
habitus, pride of raiment, tables, Those that should humble us, puff us up:
and we care not whether we use them or no. Use the means that God has set
down, and when y^^ use them, use them with credit and estimation.

and furniture.

For the means that God sends us, in them also we show special pride: Those
means that God has given us to beget in us regeneration, in many there is
with them a pride of heart, and a cloyednesse, and so they are indifferent
whether they pray, hear, or not. A degree beyond this, and that a fearful
degree of pride is, if the word be effectual, when it touches them at the
heart; yet in a pride of themselves, because they will not seem to be so moved
at a Sermon, they will suppress it, and so put it away: and if they will have
it be effectual and move them inwardly, yet they will not show themselves
outwardly to be moved one whit: and so they will resist that good motion,
thinking they can have it again at their beck: whereas they know not whether
that be the last time that it pleased God to offer it to them; and that he will
never offer it after. This is an exalting of our selves against Gods ordinance.

Now not only with the means, but with the graces of God also pride joyneth it
self: The object of pride, most excellent things.
where with further graces it has pleased God to bless, because that is the
natural seat of pride; there it will be more busy, and it is harder to
resist it. In other sins we see the objects of them are base, Cineres
reliquorum peccatorum, fomes superbiae. There is a pride in the Cross, even
when we are humbled under Gods hand. We may be proud, that we are not so
proud. Where most bestowed, there most required: where the great est gift,
there the greatest peril: and therefore ought to be the greatest watch.
vile, and most commonly brutish: only pride will deal with nothing but with
most excellent gifts, best exercises, highest offices; and when a man is
highest, then will pride be most busy with him: and even when all other sins
are burnt up clean to ashes, yet of their ashes comes pride: nay it rises
often times of the contrary to it: for humility it self begets pride, for he
that is humble waxes proud, because he is not so proud as others, or because
he is not so proud as he was before: so that the ashes of one pride will beget
another pride: therefore it is more to be feared, and so by pride they fall
into such a secure quietness, as that they have no jealousy or suspicion,
either of themselves, or of their doings: and so they are overtaken as Noah,
Lot, and David were.

For we must thus think, the greater grace God blesses us withal, God will
send the greater trial: and the richer the prey is, the more will the Devil
bend his force to rob us: therefore the more every man receives, the more he
ought to humble himself, so shall he be sure that he will keep it to the end.

We will add a few things of the punishment.

Poena superbiae, the punishment of pride. Fiscus regalis, de^ ipsius gloria,
to th^^ Exchequer is due, not only the receiving of grace, but also preserving
of it: so that man that forgers his return for preserving of his grace, is
ingratfull to God, both for the receiving, and preserving. Pride breaks the
net, wherein we should be ca^^ied to God, i. humility.
1. Gods glory (as one says well) being fiscus regalis, his chief treasure,
his Exchequer, the proud man breaking in upon it, is guilty of treason against
God, as [being not content to be the Steward of God, but] seeking to alienate
Gods glory from him, and to entitle himself to it; therefore he shall be
punished, as Prove. 15.25. the Lord will destroy the house of the proud men,
etc. even in the time wherein he magnified himself, he is taken away, as Haman
and Herod, etc. or is punished with the loss of his gift, that was the cause
of his pride* his tongue shall cleave to the roof of his mouth, his right hand
shall forget her cunning. 2. Because he will be singular, as Jerome calls it,
because he will be an Unicorn, one that will have no match: therefore as they
rumpunt rete, break the net, i. humility, wherein Gods prey is: so he
delivers them over to be people by themselves: and so they begin to be
authors, and beginners of erroneous opinions and heresies: and as the Fathers
of the Greek Church say very well, (...), shall at length come to be (...), by
abstaining from usual things, they shall come to hold absurd things, and to be
more absurd then they were, when they were young. Ratio. For when one is young,
he is mavelous fearful to stand to any thing: after when he comes to be a
man, and has found as he thinks, some experience of his strength, then he
cannot so much distrust as before; and consequently he comes to be absurder:
and there is never an Heretic, but may be an example that way. 3. Being once
brought to this, that he is able by himself to deal well enough, and to lean
on his own staff, the staff of God, i. prayer, must needs give over: so not
craving a supply of God; whereas in humility he could have withstood great
assaults, in his pride he is overcome with every little temptation. At a man's
first entry into Christianity and regeneration, God gives him great strength,
for every little want; whereby he may resist great sins and temptations;
because then he wholly relieth himself to God: afterward relying to himself,
and leaving God, he prays not, and not praying, he takes tge foil. 4. When
it pleases God to leave those three, and to suffer the gift to remain, yet it
is an example [that they are not fruitless;] we see, that where he joyneth
them with this pride, he does leave them fruitless, and no gain returns to
God by them: excellent graces of God have been employed, great eloquence has
been showed, and yet no fruit comes of them, not one soul gained to God, when
as a simple man with his simple gift, well employed in humility, shall gain
more then a glorious tongue, that is as eloquent as ever Tertullus was. 5. Last
of all, and that punishment which we ought most of all to fear [it is to be
observed toward the latter end of a man, the Fathers call it (...),] There is a
thing in the mind comparable to the Palsy, This dullness is so ordinary a
punishment of pride, that it falls on the children of God but of this
dullness do not prevail, then follows judgment.
or apoplexy in the body, and it is the state that the most part of the world
passes away in, a certain numbnesse or blockishnesse, that neither reason can
persuade them, nor all the threatenings terrify them, nor all the promises
allure them, nor any thing move them: then they pass to death without any
sense of Gods judgments: so they perish and die as beasts, nothing differing
from them, but only for the furniture of beds and pillowes. This in them is in
great measure, those that have their hearts as fat as brawn, that can feel
nothing; and in small measure it is in all: thus God makes our hearts and state
the punishment of our pride, while we not making use of pride in us, there
shall a dullness come upon us: therefore 2 Cor. 12. God lest in Paul, (...),
the best interpreters interpret it, a privy wrestling or fighting and conflict
against his own pride: keeping himself exercised, that those things might not
fall out in effect, which he felt within him: he that feels any of these, he
may ascribe it to the blessing of himself in his own heart, and security of
his conscience.
The other extreme, and that is, Coacta or Spuria Humilitas.

Alterum h^^itita^^ extremum Another extreme is constrained humility.
1. Either constrained humility, Exodus 4. in Pharaoh, the practice of it is in
the 6.7, 8 9. chap. so long as Gods hand was on him, and his people, and he
felt his plagues* so long he humbled himself to the Lord, and promised to let
the people go: Exodus 9.27. I have now sinned: the Lord is righteous; but I and
my people are wicked, v. 28. pray ye to the Lord, for it is enough that there
be no more mighty thunders and hailes, and I will let you go: and ye shall
tarry no longer, but verse. 34. when Pharaoh saw that the thunder, and rain,
and hail ceased; he sinned again, and hardened his heart, both he and his
servants; and in the next chap. he asks, Who is the Lord, that he should let
his people go? There is in every virtue beside the 2. extremes, an habit that
has the likelihood of the good habit, which they call sp^^tam ^i^^utem, a
bastard virtue. Malum c^namentum humilitatis, veritatis detrimentum. 3. Rules
how we are to stand affected in humility, and to know whether our humility be
in the truth.
Bernard expresses it in one word, videmus multos, says he, humiliatos, sed
non humiles, we see many humbled, but few humble men.

2. The other is that which they call Spuriam humilitatem, a bastard humility,
common, and especially in some natures, that by disposition are humble; Ecclus.
13.9. we must not be humiles in sapientia nostra, we must be humble in a good
cause, not in our own conceits; if we know it is Gods matter that we have in
hand, there must no humility be showed in it: detrimentum veritatis non est
ornamentum humilitatis, we must so be humble, as that we keep our humility for
cases unlike.

In every man there is of God somewhat, somewhat of nature, and somewhat of the
evil spirit: Ephesians. 3.5. the Apostle warrants me to know the gift that God
has bestowed on me, and that it is not to give place to the gift of nature
Nature must give place to grace. In the gifts of nature he prefers himself.
. Gal. 2.15 of the gifts of nature, (...), We who are Jews by nature, and not
sinners of the Gentiles: by nature he prefers the Jews before the Gentiles:
the good gifts of nature, before the corruption of nature: only this, 1 Timothy
1.15. (...), etc. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance,
that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief.
Every one may thus think, that in my nature there is so monstrous a mass of
corruption, as is in no man else: and in another there is that good, and such a
gift as is not in me: and so I to honor it, So is the place to the Philip.
understood.
or in regard of the great mass of corruption in me, may say with the Apostle,
Quorum ego maximus, of whom I am chief. But to submit the better to the worse,
as the gift of grace in me to the gift of nature in another; or the good gift
of nature in me, to the evil gift of nature in another, that is not Gods mind.

Means to Humility. There is no grace in us, that God might not have put in
any other creature.
The means are manifold, but they may be reduced to these.

1. From the state of our bodies, grounded upon good reason; Basil in his
Hexemeron says, that man's life is nothing but (...), a Schoolehouse of
humility: his ground is out of Psalm. 8.4. where the Prophet comparing his body
with the body of the heavens, and the spheres, falls into an admiration, why
God chose his body rather to put a reasonable soul into it, then any of the
celestial bodies; and out of Genesis 18.27. I have begun to speak to my Lord,
and am but dust and ashes Our nature is but an heap of dust and ashes,
: and therefore Augustine cries out, Good Lord what should move thee to give
such an excellent soul to my body, which is but a piece of clay, passing over
the glorious body of the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, and all the
celestial spheres, and to bestow it upon a pottle of choler and fleame! and
the Philosopher says, O homo si considerares quid per os, quid per nares, per
reliquas corporis parts exiret, nunquam tam turpe sterquilinium reperires. O
man consider but what filthiness comes forth from thy mouth, what from thy
nostrils, and what from the other parts of thy body, and thou will easily see
that there is no such dunghill as thy self.

2. From the state of our souls, Luke 18.13. Lord have mercy on me a sinner:
and as a Father well mendeth it, mihi peccato, that am nothing else but sin:
for so it is with many of us, and such sinners as that, Romans 7.14. we are sold
for slaves to sin: and that as it is in the 18. verse. in us, i. in our flesh,
as of nature, dwells no good thing: in so much as we cannot once think a
good thought of our selves. 2 Cor. 3.5. And not only this, but if we consider
that we have so multiplied our transgressions, as that they be more in number
then the hairs of our head: and as it is Psalm. 38.4. beside the number, Psalm.
40.15. David the flower of our nature, had both infinite sins for the number
and intolerable for the weight.
that they are such a weighty burden to us, as is intolerable.

The consideration of these will humble us; if the Devil carry us up into our
own mountain, and show us any good thing in us, we must resist him with
these, and that we have no one good thing, but we have received; and that not
of merit in us; but to confess with Jacob, Genesis 32.10. that we are not worthy
the least of his mercies, nor of all the truth that he has showed us: and if
we use the gifts that we have received never so well; yet to say, as it is Luke
17.10. we are unprofitable servants, that no gain can come to him from us:
then shall we come to pray with Daniel, chap. 9. v. 7. O Lord, righteousness
belongs unto thee, and to us open shame and confusion: and say with the
Prophet, Psalm. 115.1. Not unto us Lord, not unto us, but unto thine own name
give the praise, for thy loving mercy and truths sake.

Even in the wicked a kind^ of humility. A blessing to a blaze of humility in
Ahab. Adversity no great enemy to humility.
3. Beside these, when we consider the crosses of God which he has or may bring
upon us, 1 King. 21.29. the cross falling on the wicked, (...) Ahab: it
brought a blaze of humility into him; and that was not unrewarded of God: Our
conceit concerning adversity must be, not that it is an enemy to us, not to be
humble: for the Prophet, Psalm. 119.71. confesses that it was good for him that
he was in trouble; because he thereby learned the Statutes of the Lord, when it
pleases God to send his grace with it, it drives us to seek comfort by the
word, and by prayer; and to be willing to go to the houses of mourning, and to
them that have had a perplexity, and to be a discipline to our selves, in this
want of it, and to speak to others to tell them of their sins.

But the chief and best example, is the example of Christ: when he had many
good things (no doubt) to be learned; yet this especially, and above all, he
would have us to learn of him: humility, Discite a me, quia ego mitis sum and
humilis cord. For his order and manner of preaching, John 8.50. (...), I seek
not mine own glory, there is one that seeks and judges: for his miracles,
Matthew. 8.4. (...), he charge the Keeper to tell it no man: he would all the
glory should redound to his Fathers praise and glory: humble in his practice,
(but especially that action was to commend humility to them) John 13.15. after
he had washed his Disciples feet, he said, Exemplum vobis dedi, ut sicut ego
vobis feci, and vos invicem faciatis, I have given you an example, that ye
should do as I have done to you. His birth was humble, [his life Luke 2.51. be
obeyed his Patents in all things. His first beatitude, beati sunt pau^^^es
spiritu.
, humble] but his death more humble, as humble as could be, even at hell gates:
inso much that he was feign to cry a little before his death, Quare
dereliquisti me? Why have thou sorsaken me? so Matthew. 5.3. his first Theme in
his first Sermon is, Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the
Kingdom of Heaven: the mark of his Church, Zeph. 3.12. Then will I leave in
the midst of thee an humble and poor people: and they shall trust in the
name of the Lord: and it is the mark of his Apostles, 1 Cor. 4.

An ancient Father says, Ne contemnerent homines humilitatem, placuit Deo
plura largiri in humilitate sua, For in his Majesty he made the world, and in
his humility he remade it, and redeemed it.
quam in Majestate: and qui veretur humiliare se, veretur ea facere quae Deus
fecit. Let no man lightly esteem of Humility, seeing it pleased God to effect
more in Humility then in Majesty: and he that fears to humble himself, fears
to do that which God has done.

The signs. I dare not put Absaloms signs, 2 Samuel 15.5. which our humble men
like very well of, wherein he went very far beyond them: he a Kings son,
every one that came near him, and did him obeisance, he put forth his hand,
took him and kissed him: there was no outward sign of true humility but he
had it, low countenance, courtesy, etc. yet we see, he took a dangerous way:
for as it is in the next verse. he stale the hearis of the Israclues to him from
his father. So, many are humble in show to those that they will seem to bear
a good will, or friendship to: whereas in their hearts they have war, and
privily shoot it out, and God will severely punish it. But the true signs are
these:

1 In speech (Basils eschelica) not delighting to talk of high matters, of
matters of State, as Bernard notes very well upon Genesis the reason of the
writing of the Scriptures of base matters, as of shepherds, and falling ou^
about wells, is to delude the vanity of men [to show us an example, not to
attempt high matters] but that every man might have a mind affected according
to his estate, without thinking of a higher condition, and yet of a lower:
this, Phil. 4.12. (...): Ie^ 45.5. (...) seek thou things for thy self,
seek them not* etc.
I both know how to be abased, and I know how to abound, every where, and in
all things I am instructed, both to be full, and to be hungry, both to abound
and to suffer need. Ie. 45.5. this quaerere grandia, seeking of great things,
as God misliketh it in Baruch, Our sins must ^ver be before us, con^ea^y with
the proud If any evil come to any, we are ready to draw a cause from their
evil lite, but we never think of out own estate and we have no leisure. They
were David's Juniper coals, tacul D^mire, quia tu fe^^si^. And it is of two
sorts, I when he has of^entded God, to pray that though it please him privily
to lay never so great a plague on him, yet that it may not publicly redound to
the dishonor of the Church. 2 As if a man should stand thus resolute, that
though he cared not what became of him, yet that his Church might speed well,
and no evil, and hurt come unto it The seeking of glory at men's hands.
so it is a certain argument of no true humility.

2 From the commonest of man's thoughts: a man's commonest mediation is either to
consider of that evil that is in others, or that good that he may do ^o
others: [the pr^uds man's meditation] a wise man's object, is, ^omal ena, mala
sua: illa, ut aemuletur; haec ut emendet atque corrigat, The good that is in
others, and the evil that is in himself, that he may emulate them, and amend
himself: Psalm. 51.3. For I knowledge my fault, and my sin is ever before
me: but it is a common fault among us (...): giving reasons of our brethren.

3 An insallible sign, posse tractare contumeliosum; to be able to suffer
obirectations and detrectations of sundry. Psalm. 38.13. It is David's argument:
As for me I was like a deaf man, and heard not, and as one that is dumb,
which does not open his mouth: 14. I became even as a man that hears not, and
in whose mouth there are no reproves: 2 Samuel 16.11, 12. his humility at the
malicious upbraiding of Shimei. Suffer him to curse, for the Lord has biddem
him: It may be the Lord will look upon mine affliction, and do me^ good, for
his cursing this day. 1 Pet. 2.23. Christ, when he was reviled, held his peace.

4. The fourth is the surest, when a man is thus affected; if he being a
sinner, desires God that his glory by him be not impeached, and prays that
that reproach that comes by him, may not redound to his Church, nor to the
opening of the mouth of the wicked. Psalm. 69 6. Let not them that trust in
thee, O Lord God of Hosts, be ashamed for my cause: Let not those that seek
thee be confounded through me, O Lord God of Israel. 2 But especially this,
that though a man were never so certain of his own damnation, yet to wish
well to the Church of God, and that God may be glorified, though we be
firebrands of hell.

5 Rule, Ioh. 5.44. How can ye believe, when ye seek glory each of other,
etc. Not to consent to any that seeks to give glory one to another, and to
have it, and to deprive God of his Glory. And Psalm. 15.4. to be most abject and
vile in his own eyes, and that the proud man be most contemptible in his eyes.
Therefore we are not to seek it of men, but to look for it from God alone: and
to return it to God alone: and if not that, yet that the man that is proud may
be most contemptible in our eyes.
Where this is, it is a necessary sign of grace approaching: evidentissimum
signum appropinquantis gratiae, humilitas, as it is Prove. 15.33. (and beofre
honor goes humility:) and on the contrary side, where there is pride, there
is a fall also presently at hand.

Hope.
NOw as out of knowledge apprehending Gods justice came fear and humility, so
out of it apprehending mercy, comes Hope; for if we confer that strength
that is in us, with the straight rule of Gods justice, it will seem impossible
to us, to attain salvation by any performance of our own. Now after Humility,
it follows, as it is Hosea 2.15. That the valley of Achor shall be to us the
gate of hope. i. When we are first brought into the valley of mourning, fear
comes and despair, then he will open the gate of hope, and so instead of the
first, i. the spirit of bondage to fear, we shall receive in measures and
degrees the spirit of adoption to hope; and that after this manner. 1 By
conference of our own strength with the straight rule of Gods righteousness,
we find our duties impossible to us to be performed in that measure that is
required. But our Faith knows that a thing may be possible to us two ways.
1. If we may attain to it our selver. 2 If we may have it by another:
And the former effect of faith, i. ^eare, (having his object Gods justice)
serves for nothing, but to show that it is impossible to us, as of our selves:
that so, as it is Romans 3.19. every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may
be found culpable before the Lord. Yet we are not left clean in despair: for
though it be impossible to us of our selves, if yet it be possible by another,
if he may be found, there is hope. For Faith thus reasons, as the Psalmist
does, Psalm. 89.47. Has God made all men for naught? If then, why then falls
not his wrath all at once? and why are we not in his wrath all at once swept
away? and searching further for the cause of this, why we are not consumed, and
in a moment swept away with the besome of destruction; we find Lament. 3.22.
that it is the mercy of God that we are non consumed; And that the work of the
creation is not in vain: and then consequently, as it is Esa 6.13. that a
remnant there shall be, and God will have a tenth part always reserved to
himself: yet playner, Luke 12.32. That there shall be a little flock,
pusillus grex, but yet that our hope is, that of those few we are. If the Lord
were sparing and pinching of his mercy, there were a great impediment to our
hope: but when we read Esa. 30.18. Expectat Dominus ut misereatur vestri, the
Lord waits that he may have mercy upon you; this sets our hope in better
forwardness: and so because that out of the gate of mercy all our hope
comes; Faith is set on work to consider the persons upon whom God will
vouchsafe to bestow this hope: Lament. 3.29. he says, He will even thrust his
face into the dust: i. humble his soul, If peradventure he may have hope. Esaias
66.2. Hope is given to them that 1. hear, and rest not in ignorance and
unbelief: and 2 tremble at his words (wherein fear is included) and that are
3 poor in spirit, (wherein humility is forced) of such God has a care; and so
consequently the faith of the Law, and the spirit of humility and fear, having
wrought this (in the special promise) in us, we then come to be of the number
of the hopers.

But much more, when our faith finds, Psalm. 17.7. the promise of God: (Show
thy mavelous loving kindness, thou that art the savior of them which put
their trust in thee, from such as resist thy right hand). And Psalm. 34.21. Not
one of them that trust in him shall perish, or be destitute. And Psalm. 91.14.
when we hear him speak in his own person: Liberaho cum, quia speravit in me:
I will deliver him, because he has hoped in me. When as the very act of hope
shall have such a reward, there is good encouragement to it: and there may be
great expectation if it.

Now what it is to hope in God, the Prophet shows it, Psalm. 13.5. to hope in
God, it is to hope in his mercy, for that is porta spoi, Sperare in Deo quid?
the gate of hope. There is no entrance to God, but by it: there is no issue of
any good from him to us, but by it: so faith apprehending mercy, hops: and
the rather, because there is such plenty of mercy promised, Psalm. 32.11. he
that hops in the Lord shall have such plenty of mercy, is that he shall be
compassed about with it. Object. Quomodo fides precreate in nobis possit
timorem, and spem, own adversentur sibi.


Now if one demand, how Faith begets in us both fear and hope, two
Contraries, and doubt that it cannot belong to one man, both to fear, and hope
in God. But seeing the Holy Ghost has so nearly k^^t them together in diverse
places, we are not to doubt of it, as Psalm. 147.11. and 31.19. and 33.17.
Behold the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, and upon them that put
their trust in his mercy. Sol. Ps. 147.11. But the Lords delight is in them
that fear him, and put their trust in his mercy.


So neither is the reason far to seek, because faith breeds fear in us in
regard of our own weakness: Hope in regard of the mercy of God. So they being
non secundum idem, are not contraries, and may be both together in one subject,
in one soul of a just man. For distinguishing between faith and hope, because
there may seem to be no difference between them; though much might be said,
Reason.
yet this is sufficient, that it is faith that believes the promises: The
difference betwixt faith and hope.
and hope that expectat credita, looks for that that is believed: the meaning
is this: A thing may be believed, and not hoped for; as hell, its a thing that
every man believes, but none will hope for it: and a thing may be hoped for,
and not believed.

So the gener all truth of God, being the object of our Faith, and that
containing terrors, brings forth fear: and the matter of love and mercy in
his promises, brings forth hope: so we see they are dislinguished ab objecto:
for one has Gods truth for his object, and the other his goodness.

The three virtues, Faith, Hope, and Charity, Bernard very well divides them
by attributing to each her speech, faith says, reposita su^t bona: good things
there are that pass the conceit of man's heart: Hope says, mihi illa
servantur: those good things are reserved for me: and Charity says, curro ad
illa, and I do so run to them, that I may attain them.

Thus out of the faith of the Gospel hope arises, as fear out of the faith
of the law: and therefore hope is called of the Fathers, the Izhaak of faith.
Thus we see the nature of hope.

Uses it has two. V^us.


1. Is in Heb. 6.19. when a man with fear of the wrath of God, and the
conscience bewraying his own unworthiness, and in soul his crosses and
terrors feeling them in some part to light on him in this life, being tossed up
and down, Hop^ our Anchor.
hope comes to be his anchor: that when the ship of faith being tossed to and
fro, as Acts 27.29. the Apostles ship, when it was bereft of her loading,
tacklings and all, the ship being yet tossed of the waves, when all else was
gone, they cast out the anchor. Hope our interim.
It is also called by some of the Fathers our Interim, i. that which stays us
in the mean time, till the performance come: when we are tossed in humility and
fear, that that we first draw breath by, is hope: and gives a certain
binding, i. religion. This anchor must be fastened in the inside of the veil,
which is Christ: and we tied to it by religion, and thither we shall come,
being fastened there.

The 2. Use is, not so much to stay us, as toretaine Christ: so they call it in
their common precept, Hope cust^^ Christ's, that which retains Christ.
Custodi spem, custodem Christi, custodem dei: that Heb. 10.23. (...), let us
hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering: we have a charge given
us, to take fast hold of it: and as, when we are in danger, (as when we are
under the hands and wrath of God, we are in the case of them that are ready to
be drowned) or to fall into a pit) we cast away gold, and whatsoever we have
in our hands, and that that comes first to hand, yea if it be a bramble bush,
we take fast hold of it; which otherwise we could never touch: such an use
has hope to us. Let us therefore keep fast, as the Apostle says, (...), that
it be not gotten from us: for there is one that goes about, so much as in him
lies, by flattering, bribing, or pricking and wounding us, to extort it from
us.

3. And under this Use, that other may be, that thus keeping Christ, we have a
possession of heaven in this life: and therefore as Basil says, that it is
(...), one heaven for another; and as one may be praesens absens: so a thing
absent, is present only by hope.

Thus as of the affection of fear it has been said, that it has such an use
for our humbling, that by it all impediments are removed, that grace might
fully possess us: so likewise of this affection of hope, we see how great and
excellent an use God has made of it; and here, (that which the Philosophers
never knew) these affections, fear, hope, and love, they are become Virtutes
theologicae to his children: and those that they made but affections, are the
perfectest, and excellen^^^^ veriues that we have in Divinity: and the reason
is, because they make good those that have them; and the reason of that is,
because our nature, being not its own rule, but having it from a better, and
higher nature: Whatsoever good thing was with man, it forsook him.
whatsoever it is that applies it to us, it must needs bring some part of
goodness to us: but that hope does in some part, in respect of the promises:
therefore it is a virtue to us, and as the Heathen man expresses it in the box
of Pandora, that at the opening of the box, all good forsook it, and only hope
remained under the lid: and therefore Philo Iudaeus calls it (...), an
inborne comforter, that forsakes us not, when all the rest have left us: so
that in the regenerate the very same use has hope, as Psalm. 27.13. that he
should utterly have fainted, but that he hoped to see the Lord in the land of
the living: and so consequently in the next verse, he professes that this is
the hope that must make all strong: and so this spes vitae immortalis est vita
vitae mortalis, the hope of life immortal, is the life of that life which is
mortal: and if we were without it, we should lose breath, according to the
rule of the Schoolmen: and it is true in the spiritual life, Qui desperavit,
expiravit. For conclusion of this first rule, to this, i. hope is given ( Psalm.
84.13.) that which is to faith and fear, (O Lord God of hosts, blessed is the
man that puts his trust in thee) the blessing in this life being indeed
nothing else but the certainty that when the Bridegroom comes we shall enter
in with him, into the fruition that is reserved to the world to come. Thus of
the nature, necessity, and end of hope.

Now for the 2. rule, i. the thing, 1. commanded, and 2. forbidden: 2. Rule
our rule for faith and hope is contrary to that we said in humility,
as Dan. 4.27. Is not this great Babel that I have built, for the house of the
Kingdom, by the might of my power, and for the honor of my Majesty? i. that
hope thus accounts of God, as of the principal and sole efficient; and as of
the last and principal end, which it looks for, and whereunto it refers
the glory of the redemption.

For the 1. that our hope is to go out of our selves, 2 Cor. 3.5. that there
is not sufficiency in us, as of our selves, to think a good thought: and
thinking being the first, if that fall, the rest must fall: for, not thinking,
we cannot will: Phil. 2.13. it is God that works velle in us, and so
consequently perficere: and yet lest we should imagine some help might come of
us between, John 15.5. Christ adds, sine me nihil potestis agere, without me
ye can do nothing: and as Austin has well noted upon the place, it is not
nihil magni, but nihil, no great thing, but nothing at all: and it is not
perficere, but nihil facere, not bring to perfection, but not so much as to do
any thing: so our hope must wholly rely it self upon him, as sole efficient of
all good to us.

2. And for the other, the last end, for the referring of whatsoever glory
shall proceed from us for any grace of God bestowed on us; it is plain, 1 Cor.
1.29. he has done it in this respect, that no flesh should rejoice before him:
but ( verse. 31.) that all should rejoice in him.

In the nature of hope, there are two things necessarily to be considered, 1. a
grief, 2. a joy, or rather e converso. These two, if the hope be true, it
never suffers us to be secure: but we shall be in a continual warfare, as 1
These. 5.8. where hope is, there is a fight: because it is compared to an
helmet. And in Psalm. 27. the Prophet is beaten down first on the one side, then
lifi up, then down again: and so in sundry of the Psalms, he is three or
four times beaten down and raised up again in one Psalm; sometime hope
should get the upper hand, and joy, and anon fear: for in as much as dilatio
boni, the deferring of good, must needs have rationem mali, some appearance of
evil: and as in Prove. 13.12. hope deferred affligit animam, [it is a mighty
affliction to the soule] it must needs be, that when a Christian man shall see
no accomplishment of Gods promises; and not only that, but he shall see the
clean contrary to that which is promised, fall to him: (as when peace is
promised, there shall happen tumult, terror, anguish) and he shall be driven,
not only by the wicked men exprobating to us, as they did to David, Where is
now your hope? but by the enemy also, or our own reason, which shall make a
problem with our spirit, of the applying of it; V^^^ spe^^estra?
surely this must needs work: for ( Romans 8.23.) it works even in the dumb
creatures, though they shall not be partakers with us of the Resurrection: yet
because they see the deliverance of man is not yet performed, they groan and
desire to be delivered.

The only remedy for this, is the consideration expressed by Auslin in his
Sermon upon Ps. 36. Sustine illum, sustinuit te, dum mutares vitam malam:
sustine tu illum, dum coronat vitam bonam, Wait upon God, he waited long upon
thee to amend thee, wait thou patiently upon him till he crown thee: this has
great reasons of it, which after shall be showed in patience.

Spes quibus ^^^us comparatur.
Now on the other side comes in that which it is compared to. It is compared by
the Fathers, to a cork in Fishermens nets: if that were not, down would the
net go: but that suffers it not to sink: the certainty of both, Romans 12.12.
spe gaudenies, rejoicing in hope: there is the joy, Heb. 10.23. Let us hold
fast the (...): there is hope holding fast the profession of our hope without
wavering: for he is faithful that has promised: and all these are necessarily
in the hope of God commanded.

Another thing commanded, is in the Isaac hope, as it was in Abraham as God,
Luke 16.10. exercises our faith (...), in heavenly things, by a faith (...),
in earthly things: so does he in the exercise of our hope: And as it is said,
he that will not understand earthly things, how much less heavenly? so that
man that will not hope for earthly things, will not hope for heavenly: he that
will not hope for that which is less, will not hope for that which is more:
Matthew. 6.25. Christ argues, 1. from the greater to the less, 2. then from the
less to the greater.
God having given as a soul, and providing us food to maintain our life, how
much more will he provide us raiment for our bodies? If we are bound to put him
in trust with our souls, how much more for our bodies? how much more for
apparel? If the Sun shine on the wicked, and the rain fall on the ungodly,
shall it not much more on the godly? Qui pascit contemnentes, non pascet
colentes?

Then he comes to the beasts and birds, and shows (for food) that the Lord
provideth for them; (for raiment) even the Lilies of the field, that have no
other end, but to be seen, yet that they pass Solomon, for all his royalty:
Shall not man trust in him for earthly things? will he neglect him for whom all
things were made? therefore we must first cast our selves, and our hope upon
him, and not as Psalm. 40.4, 5. to turn our selves to the proud, and to such as
go about with les: or as Esa. 28.25. casting our selves upon his policy, that
what religion soever come, we will be at a league with it: we will meddle with
no true religion, we will fall at an agreement with Hell, Devil, etc. (but as
a Father says, as Terrena been curantur, nil male agendo contra illa: so, been
contemnuntur, nil male agendo propter illa; as we are sufficiently careful for
the things of this life, if we do not waste them, so they are sufficiently
contemned by us, if we use no ill means to get them) out common disease in
these days.

Objectum spei, Bonum futurum possibile.
We come to that which is forbidden. The object of hope is bonum, good, and not
every bonum, but futurum, the future good, Romans 8.24. Spes, quae videtur, non
est spes, hope which is seen is not hope: but yet that is the hope of the
wiseman of this world; yet they may see that, that they hope for: whereas our
promises are not in present things, but in things to come. 2. Beside that of
futurum, (because all that we have in the Creed is remission of sins) it must
be also bonum possibile, the good, it must be possible to attain it: and yet
that possibility must not be got with ease, but with some difficulty, else we
shall contemn it: and indeed if we could get it at the first, we needed not
hope for it.

Extrema spei, extremes of hope. Presumption.
Out of these two, there arise the two extremes of hope: for whereas a man
thinks thus, that this good, i. eternal life, is possible, arduum tamen, and
yet difficult to get; there is in our mind an affection called presumption,
and it apprehends it as possible and easy, and so labors and runs after it
accordingly. But as it is Psalm. 147.11. there must be a fear in regard of the
hardness, ne forte reprobi fiamus, lest we become reprobate, as Paul, after
that he had been taken up into the third heaven, yet he feared, lest he should
afterward have become a reprobate, etc.

As there must be a hope and comfort in regard of the possibility; so
presumption is forbidden, whether it be of our selves, (for in us there is no
good thing) or of others: there is a preventing grace; (to begin) and a
following grace (to continue) the preventing grace, i. divinum auxilium, divine
aid. The Papists they say of the preventing, or first grace, that there is no
preparation to it, but that it is freely given: but deny that the following
grace is given freely: [but that we have it of our selves.] Seeing we must not
only be prevented, Psalm. 59.10. but also followed Psalm. 23.6. it is a sign,
that we are not then to presume of our selves. And as not of our selves, so not
of others, Esa. 63.16. not of Abraham, nor of Israel, Job 15.15. the Saints are
not clean in his sight; and there is none that can resist his strength but
God: and therefore says Austin, solus fiduciam homini praestat apud Deum Deus
h^mo, It is he alone that makes man confident of the mercies of God, that is
both God and man, Christ Jesus. Psalm. 18.30. he is clypeus sperantibus in eum,
our Buckler. God has his Axe in his hand to strike us, no creature is able to
bear off his blow; but God if he put his Shield over us, and set himself
between us and the Axe, he may bear off the blow.

As a man may presume 1. of himself, or 2. of others: so there is also a
presumption of God: for as hope is the Isaac of faith, which is the Abraham; so
hope is the Isaac of hope And: Hope is the Isaac of faith, faith of the
promise, this of the word.
so does necessarily point us to the promises, and these are not to be found
but in the word, so that nothing is hoped for, but that which is believed: and
nothing believed, but that which is promised: and that which is promised, is
only in his word, so that there must be no hope conceived of God, but that
which is in his word: so Psalm. 119.49. secundum verbum tuum, in quo spem
dedisti mihi, remember the word unto thy servant, unto which thou have caused
me to hope: therefore that man that has no warrant to continue in his sin,
without repentance, and hope for mercy, and that is, where there is no
promise: his hope in God is presumption, which arises of a false knowledge, or
ignorance, and of a great and intolerable pride, thinking that we are such trim
things, that God will spare us, though we continue never so much in sin.

The other extreme comes by another way, Desperation.
contrary to that that hope conceives: for whereas it conceives that it is
hard, yet possible; there is desperation that thinks it to be so hard, that
it is not possible.

Despair is made of two sorts.

1. The first is, Psalm. 78.21. (he smote the stony rock indeed, that the
waters gushed out, and the streams flowed withal: but can be give bread also,
or provide flesh for his people?) Greg. in the 31. of his Morals, gives us a
note of observation, because he did see it proved always ex luxuria, because
of their lust: as the Israelites, because they were not fed with Quails, as
their lust was, presently desperaverunt, they fell into despair: and it is,
when a man conceives either that it will always be bonum futurum, a good ever
in expectation: or that it has no taste in the world with him, or that it is a
thing not greatly to be esteemed, and so gives himself to carnal living: as
Austin faith, Quia non possum habere quae spero, Habeo quae possum, and quae
sunt contra spem.
because I cannot (at my own will) have those things I hope for, therefore I
will have those things quae sunt contra spem, which contradict all hope: those
things that I can in this life: this is a desperate despair, as the Epicure,
Ede, bibe, lude, post mortem nulla voluptas, eat, drink, and be merry, for
there is no good to be hoped for after death. 2. The other is, 2 Cor. 2.7. the
Apostle he was afraid lest the incestuous person, by too great sorrow, should
have been swallowed up with despair: it is more to be pitied, and yet no
less erroneous then the other: because it imagines that there can proceed
such an evil from a creature, as that God should not be able to master it, but
it should master him: whereas it is certain, that Gods mercy exceeds all
sin, and is stronger then all. This was Cains er^or, Genesis 4.13. and Ambrose
writing on that place, says plainly, Mentiris Cain, thou lie Cain: for if
it be possible that there should be larger dimensions of any one attribute of
God, then of another, it must needs be of mercy: because that only is proper
to God; the rest are communicable to other creatures with him; Psalm. 36.6. his
justice and righteousness stands as the strong mountains, and his
judgments are like the great deep: but his mercy, it reaches up unto the
heavens, and his faithfulness unto the clouds ( i. heavens.) The Fathers they
have ruled a case in the Schools; for, disputing of the two faults of Judas,
his betraying of Christ, and his despair in the mercy of God, and examining
whether was the greater, they have certainly determined, that his despair was
the greater sin, because it was utterly uncurable, and took his breath from
him: Therefore we must be sure that we hope: and that our hope be in verbo Dei,
in quo spem nobis dedit, in the word of God, in which he has caused us to
trust: so of this we must take heed that we do not as the Devil, that will
make God so poor in mercy, as if it served for small fins only.
Media spei* Means unto hope.
1. The means: a special means to move us to look to our hope in due time, is
that Prove. 11.7. a consideration of his end: when the wicked man perishes, his
hope perishes, i. we must be sure to extend our hope further then this life:
Prove. 23.18. his advise is, that there shall an end come, and then thy hope
shall not be cut off: but as it is Psalm. 16.10. and Acts 2.26. thy heart shall
be glad, and thy flesh shall rest in hope: and that at the hour of death no
man knows, but only they that are in like case, how much a poor soul will
then set by this feeling of the judgments of God.

2. Another is Psalm. 22.4. our Fathers, they hoped in God, and were not
ashamed, they trusted in God and he delivered them: the example of others,
when it pleased God, that others that have hoped in him, should not want the
fruit of their hope; that we might comfort our selves with the same hope: there
was never greater engine laid of the enemy, then against this: for that is the
Devils policy, to persuade us, that there are none so great sinners as we be:
and that there were never men in that case that we are in, but they have been
in the like case, and have felt comfort.

3. In the 1 Samuel 17.37. the remembrances of the graces of God bestowed on us,
when we had power by his help, to resist the like sins, as David reasons
there; the Lord that delivered me out of the paw of the Lion, and of the Bear,
he will also deliver this uncircumcised Philistim into my hands: Argum. ab
experientia nostra, an argument drawn from our own experience.

4. But the chief is, that we alleged before, out of Heb. 10.23. For he is
faithful that has promised: [the strength of this depends of that in faith]
Gods great faithfulness is never wanting: and Romans 15.4. there is an addition
to it; There is nothing written, but it is written for our instruction, that by
patience and comfort in it, we keep our hope: [and therefore considering that]
the holy Ghost has especial aim at our hope, in writing of it so often in the
Scriptures, and that it is he only, whose dixit, factum est follows
continually, his word and work go always together; and example of the 30.
great promises, there remains but one unaccomplished: and Ephesians. 2.6. his
manner in penning it (...) [Nathan] i. dedit, transtulit, non transferet, not
he will, but he has already raised us, he has set us in heavenly places in
Christ Jesus; whereas it is not yet come, but yet is as certain, as if it were
now; de futuris in praeterito, if God be God. Indeed, as Prove. 25.19.
confidence in an unfaithful man, is like a broken tooth, and a sliding foot:
and therefore the Heathen, that are such scorners of hope, call it (...), a
waking dream: 2 King. 18.21. there is one good thing in the speech of
Rabshaleh; He that trusts to [the King] of Egypt, trusts to a broken reed,
that will run into his hand: and it is to be said of every one. Relation to
this, is in 1 Pet. 1.3. our hope must be spes viva, a lively hope: the other,
the worldlings hope is spes mortua, a dead hope; or at least, spes mortalis, it
is a mortal hope, and if we trust to it, it will wound us, if not with harm,
yet with shame. Erubescere, signum spei moriuae, to be ashamed, is a sign
that our hope was dead: as Job. 6.20. when they came, they found nothing, and
were ashamed: but our hope must be planted on the mercies of God, and Christ's
merits: and then shall we never be ashamed: so (God having wrought this hope in
us) we may be bold with the Apostle to say, (2 Cor. 5.5.) that we have the
earnest of the spirit: so we may be bold to say, as the Prophet says, Psalm.
43.5. Why art thou so cast down O my soul, and why art thou so disquieted
within me? O put thy trust in God, who is the health of my countenance and my
God.

Signa, sign, of true hope.
For the signs, to discern our hope; As a man thinks he believes, when he
does not believe: and as he thinks he has a thing, when the species of it
swimmeth in his head: so there is a fleeting hope, when a man thinks he
hops, and does not: it may be tried thus.

1. The first is Hezekiah his sign, 2 King. 20.3. when he was in the time of
his sickness, he prayed, Remember Lord I pray thee, how in my prosperity, I
have walked with an upright heart, etc. this is a sign that our hope is good,
this makes us cheerful, that in the time of affliction and danger, we may
say that we have been mindful of him in (our) prosperity.

2. The second is Saint John's sign, 1 John 3.3. it is a purger: not like the
presumers hope, which is a very sink to receive and maintain whatsoever
corruption our hands, our eyes, our hearts, or any other member has: But it
must be resident in the conscience. So the Fathers say, that conscientia est
custos spei, conscience is the preserver of hope: and if that be clean [kept]
then our hope is true; if not, then there is no true hope.

3. The third is of David, Psalm. 37.3. hope thou in the Lord, and be doing
good. The Heathen call (...), labor, the husband of hope: there is hope the
harlot, and hope the married woman; we shall know hope the wife, from hope the
harlot, by her husband: for she is always with her husband: Psalm. 4.5.
sacrificate sacrificium justitiae, and sperate in Domino, offer the Sacrifice
of righteousness, and put your trust in the Lord: there must be a traveling
and striving to do good.

4. The fourth is, Romans 5.3. And not so only; but we rejoice in our
afflictions, knowing that affliction works patience, and Esa. 33.15. there
must be tribulation, to bring a proof of our hope: in sile^tio and spe erit
fortitudo vestra, in quietness and in confidence shall be your strength: Such
as we are in adversity, such we are in deed
such as our hope was in adversity, such it is, if you faint in adversity, thy
hope is fainting: and thererefore the heathen call (...), tribulation, the bud
or blossom of hope: which you must pass through: if that be not nipt, there
will be fruit of it: otherwise, if it bring forth no fruit, it is spurium
vitulamen, a bastard joy.

The 6. rule, for the provoking of it in others: Rule ^.
not only to have it in our selves, but as Psalm. 40.3. that many may see it,
and fear, and trust in the Lord: and as it is Psalm. 62.8. that all the nations
may put their trust in him: so far as it is possible: and Psalm. 115.9. that
the house of Israel, 10. the house of Aaron, 11. and all that fear the Lord
may trust in him. An encouragement and endeavor thereto, Ps. 51.13. David's
promise, [to the wicked, and to sinners] that he would teach them to hope and
Ps. 75.5. to the presumers, that he would plainly tell them, that they should
not be so foolish, and so mad, and set up their horn.

Invocation.
The necessity and use of prayer.
Unto every affection there is an action: as the action of faith is hope; so the
action of hope is prayer: spei operatio, oration: so to come back again, as
the fruit of faith is hope, and of hope prayer; and as the property of hope is
prayer, Interpres spei orati^.
so the property of prayer is to be interpres spei: to make plain the desire
of the hope conceived. In which respect, as the Articles of our faith are summa
credendorum, the sum of our belief; and the Law summa agendorum, the sum
of our actions: so the Lords prayer is summa sperandorum, the sum of our
hope: for the soul of man, by considering and believing the judgments of God,
being humble and brought down to the dust, [and as it were dead and buried] by
it has some life again put into it, by conceiving an hope in his mercy: for
which mercy we must go to God: and Prayer becomes suitor for it. Aug.
Precibus, non passibus itur ad Deum: therefore, that hope may be made pertaker
of her object, ^. mercy; we must know that ( Psalm. 13.5.) mercy is of God. [And
not only prayer of words with the lips, but it must be from the heart, that it
may ascend.] Austin writes on the 66. Psalm. ut descendat miseratio, ascendat
oration; that mercy may descend, prayer must ascend: and so there shall be a
blessed exchange between our prayer, and his mercy. When we speak of prayer,
lest there should be an error, it is not to be conceived that the entreaty is
made concerning that prayer in the Congregation, which with lips and outward
gesture we deliver: such prayer, Hosea 14.3. calls vitulum labiorum, the
sacrifice of our lips, that comes not into the compass of the first
Commandment, which is only inward: but in the 1 Cor. 14.15. Orabo spiritu,
orabo and mente; I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the
understanding also; The growing of the inward (man.)
when the spirit comes to God: which howsoever it be not heard of men, [by
the outward eare] how vehement it is: yet we know it has its effect with God,
for so Exodus 14.15. we read that Moses made so fervent intercession to God,
though there be no mention, nor sign of any word he spoke: yet the Lord says,
Why cryest thou thus unto me? So that this being the especial part, and the
soul of every prayer to God, without this inward prayer, the lips prevail
not, as Matthew. 15.8. there is a drawing near with the lips: Matthew. 7.21. a
doubling of Lord, Lord, it prevails nothing, neither will it gain him the
Kingdom of Heaven. And therefore Aug. Hoc negotium plus gemitibus constat,
quam sermonibus: the work of prayer consists more in grievance than words. And
Romans 8.26. The spirit groaneth for us, with sighs inenarrable, as Esaias 38.3.
And so conceiving of it, as of an inward oblation, or speech of soul to God:
then whether it be of persons without the Church, as Act. 10.2. of Cornelius:
or of those that are within the Church, and have cast themselves out of Gods
favor by their sins, and so, as Psalm. 130.1. be in the depth: whether it be
of an Heathen, or of a sinner, it is no less acceptable to God in substance,
[though not in degree] then the prayer of a just and righteous man. Now the
applying of this to Hope, to the maine scope and end of it, i. Gods glory, as
Psalm. 123.2. it pleases God by the Prophet to account it a special honor
done to him, that even as the servants eyes are always on the hands of his
Master, and the eyes of the handmaiden are on the hands of her Mistress: so
that our eyes should wait upon the Lord till he have mercy on us. Or as Austin
in his fifth Sermon de verbis Domini, Magna est gloria Dei, ut nos simus
mendici. God accounts it great glory done unto him, when we become beggars, and
suitors unto him. And not only this glory, but also a double glory returns to
God by it: and so the action is so much the more to be commended to us, and so
much the more to be esteemed of us: for both this, when we acknowledge that we
have it not from our selves, but from him, this is great magnifying of Gods
bounty: as also when we have received, thanksgiving, i. that homage that we do
to him, that is a thing that he makes most account of. Psalm. 50.15. when he
has given commandment to call upon him in the time of trouble: and has made
promise that he will hear: [So I will hear thee, and thou shall praise me.]
But more excellently in Psalm. 107. it is five times repeated, and it is the
keep of the song: he entreating of five sorts of men, that are especially bound
to God, 1. those that go astray in the wilderness, out of the way, and find
no City to dwell in. 2. Those that are at the point of death and escape. 3.
Those that are delivered from prison, and from the sentence of death. 4. Those
that be saved from the raging of the tempest. 5. Those that are delivered from
the enemy; he says, v. 6.
So they cried unto the Lord in their trouble; then comes performance of
promise: and he delivered them from their distress: and then last, O that men
would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare the wonders that
he does for the children of men. For when as the prayer of the poor afflicted
is heard, then seeing both the humble mind by the having of his request
granted, is raised up, and begins to be glad, Psalm. 34.3. and secondly,
forasmuch as sinners, when they see the fulfilling of their prayers, and
forgiveness of sins granted them, Ps. 51.13. are converted: and thirdly, Psalm.
107.42. that the mouth of sin may be stopped all these three ways, there does
still glory return to God. Then if it be so necessary, and God without it, is
defrauded of much honor, it imposes on us a necessity, diligently to consider
of it; and to practice it in regard of Gods glory: so, in regard of our selves:
thus Luke 18.1. Christ being in exhortation, shows his Apostles by a parable,
that they ought to pray always: (...), and not to faint: for the which end, he
that never did any superfluous thing, being as the Apostles call him, our
Advocate; (1 John 2.2.) it is said Luke 11.2. he has indicted us a form of
prayer. In the use whereof that comes first to mind, that Chrysostom has in
his 1. book de orando Deum, out of Dan. 6.10. that death of hody being set
before his eyes, on this only condition, to abstain from prayer 30. days,
tanquam si, as if the forbearing from it for that time, could be the death of
the soul: so he was content rather to hazard his life, then not to perform
his daily custom. As in that respect in Numb. 28.3, 8. there is set down by
way of figure, that God requires of the Israelites, as a necessary thing,
beside the hallowing of the Sabbath, a morning and evening Sacrifice. What this
in truth is, it is expounded Ps. 141.2. the lifting up of his hands he
compares to the morning, and evening sacrifice: as the first is, burning of
incense: so the morning prayer is nothing else, but as an incense, that goes
up into the nostrils of God, and the lifting up of his hands in the evening is
the true evening sacrifice of the Christians. If a man should read what the
fathers have written in this point; as Cyprian on the Lords prayer, Gregory in
his book of Prayer, Austin ad Probam, etc. he shall rather see them spent in
persuading the necessity, then in teaching the manner to perform it; that
being an especial means to perform it, to think it so necessary. They call
it Clavim diei, et seram noctis, the key that opens the day, and the bar
that shuts in the night: Chysostome calls it signaculum diei, the seal of
the day: Out of 1 Timothy 4.5. where the use of the creatures be noisome, without
blessing by prayer and thanksgiving: and out of Mat. 14.19. and out of Mat.
26.26. Christ's prayer before supper: and Mat. 26.30. his last seal, and the
end of his supper was hymno dicto, after an hymn: it having been no new
thing, but the outward practice having continued so from the days of Abraham,
as the Jews record, their manner remaining, that the chief of the family
takes first the bread* and with that delivers prayer, and then breaks it;
as the last thing he takes is the cup, and then he delivers the second
blessing: this being so holy an use, as that it was used generally in the whole
Church; from this general custom of the Church, Christ translated it to his
own supper. In Ephesians. 6.18. for the necessity of it: as head, foot, breast, were
armed before by the Apostle, there being no place to put it in: yet in all
cases and times, he recommendeth it unto us. Prayer goes through (out) all
things, which the Fathers call armaturam armaturae, the very armor of armor:
without which, all the armor we put on beside, is of no greater strength, then
if we were naked: as in regard of the necessity of the spiritual enemies, they
call it flag ellum Daemonum, a scourge for the Devils. Athanasius stands
very stiff on this assertion, that at the bare, Psalm. 68.1. Let God arise, and
let his enemies be scattered, etc.
but hearty recital of the 68. Psalm. v. 1. it is a verse that makes all the
devils of hell to quake: and as Maximus, another of the Fathers, commends the
1. v. of the 70. Psalm. to be that, which as an instrument or means he found
always effectual to deliver him from any temptation: Jam. 5.13. when he will
commend it, he takes no other course to show the great strength that it has:
for as in hope it saw nothing of it self to be performed: but that which was
impossible to us, was possible per alium, by another: so there being the same
in Prayer, It has its force in miracles.
it is the more to be esteemed. That in Jam. 5.17. is nothing but a certain
miracle wrought in the air by prayer, that the Prophet Elias shut up the
middle region, that no rain could come down for three years and an half. If
we desire to see it in other elements, we may see it in fire, by the same
Elias, 2 King. 1.10. at his call, fire descended from heaven, and devoured the
Captain with his 50. men: and in the earth, Psalm. 106.17. at the prayer of
Moses, the earth opened, and swallowed up Corah, Dathan, and Abiram with their
Companies. In Water, Exodus 14.16. the division of the red sea. And we see the
performance of it from Gods behalf, not in elements only, but also, as Josh.
10.12. it has an efficacle on the heaven it self: at the prayer of Joshuah,
both the Sun, and Moon stood still. For putting to flight of earthly powers,
Exodus 17.11. When Moses held up his hands Israel prevailed, but when he let his
hand down Amaleck prevailed. The examples be infinite: but these seem less:
because it has power on spiritual powers, on death, and hell; on death, Esaias
38.5. in Hezekiah. [ I have heard thy prayer, and seen thy tears, behold I
will add to thy days 15. years.] on hell, Mat. 17.21. the Apostles being to
deal with strong devils, and being not able through their unbelief to cast
them out, Christ says to them, This kind goes not out, but by prayer and
fasting. But that that drowneth all, is that in Exodus 32.10. where there was no
violence done of Moses, but he only gave himself to prayer, and yet we see a
strange speech of God, Dimitte me, let me alone; as that violence had been
done him, and he had been mastered by Moses his prayer: and if it be able so
to work on God, much more will it prevail in every thing else. And this is
for the necessity and use of Prayer.

The promises made unto prayer.
Now for the Commandment, but first we will consider as it stands on Gods
behalf, both how willing he is, and what promises he has made to it. True it
is, as it is in Genesis 18.27. as Abraham [ spoke of himselfe] so we being
nothing but a handful of dust and ashes, it were infinite presumption, once to
presume to speak to him, being so excellent a God, without his warrant, and
promise: therefore Genesis 32. Jacobs prayer to God. 1 King. 8. Solomon's prayer,
for a piece of earth to speak, they fence themselves, with a promise,
whereupon one says, non mea praesumptione, sed tua promissione. For the
promise, and for the Commandment, we spoke before, Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me
in the time of trouble, so will I hear thee, and thou shall praise me. He
commands it with abjecting external sacrifices: so Joel 2.32. But whosoever
shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved. For in mount Sion, and in
Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as the Lord has said: and in the remnant whom
the Lord shall call: alleged also Act. 2.21. (...). etc. And it shall come to
pass, that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved. As on
the other side, Jer. 10.25. the curse of God is on all those that call not on
him. There is nothing can be more required then that Ps. 91.15. God says, He
shall call upon me, and I will hear him, deliver him, and save him But the
joining together of those two places, Mat. 7.7. Petite, and dabitur vobis:
Ask, and it shall be given unto you; and Joh. 16.23. wherein the one place, i.
Mat. 7.8. is, Omnis qui petit accipit: Every one that asks receives: and in
the other, Quaecunque petieritis a patre (meo) in nomine meo, dabuntur vobis:
Whatsoever you shall ask the Father in my name, he shall give it you. This is
very much, there can no more be required then these, that omnis qui petit
accipit: and, quaecunque petitis, accipietis. [But we will expound it after.]
And as he is ready to promise, so he is ready to perform. But that is the
strangest, Esaias 65.24. Etiam antequam invocaveritis; before ye pray I will
hear you: so ready is he on his part. And to testify this indeed, Exodus
30.6. in the Law he erecteth a Mercy seat: or if first ( Esaias 56.7.) he
causes a Temple, and that he gives this name, as of the special exercise,
The house of Prayer; and 1 King. 8.41. it is for the stranger also: Esdr. 7.3.
so defined by the King, (the house of the God of heaven) and in this he sets a
Mercy seat: before which (in the 7. v.) are Priests, and Levites, and Singers,
and Nethimins; and the 1. part of the service, Incense: often as Psalm. 141.2.
interpreted Prayer; and that in the time of the Law. And so is it meant Luke
1.10. that the people without were at their prayers, while the Priest within
was at the Altar, at the typical worship: i. burning of incense. And
proportionable to this is that, Heb. 4.16. that God, as here he has set a seat
of mercy, so in heaven he has set up a Throne of grace: from whence, si
ascendat oration, descendet gratia: if prayer ascend, gtace shall descend. Now
because we our selves have no access unto it, therefore Romans 5.2. order is
taken that we should have access per alium, by another: he, Heb. 7.26. that
was Heb. 5.7. in his flesh, and offered up prayers, and supplications, with
strong crying and tears, not only for his Apostles, but also for all that
believe in him, Joh. 17.20. and not only then, but now also, Romans 8.34. He
makes still intercession for us: and his intercession is from himself, not
from another: but Revel. 8.3. he is figured by an Angel: where the prayers of
the godly are received by the Angel, and there is incense put into them, to
season them withal, that the smell of them may be acceptable to the Lord: and
then offers them up to his Father: so he not only prays himself, but
makes our prayers accepted of God: and therefore, Revel. 1.6. every one shall
be a Priest to God: and every priest must offer sacrifice: and there is no
other sacrifice in the new Testament, but praise and thansgiving so he has
promised Zach. 12.10. spiritum gratiae, the spirit of grace: and that is
accomplished, Gal. 4.6. because ye are sons, God has sent forth the spirit
of his Son into your hearts, which cries, Abba, Father. And Romans 8.26. We
have not any power to call upon God, neither do we know what to pray for, or
how to pray, but the Spirit asks for us with sighs and groans, that cannot
be expressed: therefore there can be nothing required, but we shall have it.
Thus we see that all is performed on Gods behalf. Now to the duty.

The duty of P^a^er commanded.
The duty commanded, it is of two sorts; but first in gererall Invocation
contains them both: so Hilary, and Austin, 59. Ep^st. takes Invocation. We
understand it by these two things: the first is, Psalm. 25.1. a lifting up of
our soul, i. a sixing of our mind on God, who is the author and giver of all
good: secondly, as Psalm. 6^.8. a pouring out of our hearts, i. a full
declaration of our desire, and that we require, Psalm. 142.2. expounded to be
our thoughts and meditation. These two in general concur to the making of
Invocation.

This Invocation, as it is, 1 Timothy 2.1. does receive a fourfold division: for
it is divided into (...), Deprecation (...), P^e^a^ion. (...), Interaction.
(...), Thanksgiving.


The first we may divide into Prayer, and Thanksgiving.


The other three are thus divided: prayer is made either for Our selves.
Others, (...)


For our selves, either a Petition of some good to be givenus, (...)
Deprecation, (...), that evil things may be taken away from us.


Thus it is interpreted by the Fathers.

(...), deprecation of evil.
For deprecatio, that evil may be turned away, it is certaineely, as James
5.17. the most essential kind of prayer. (Is any of you afflicted? let him
pray) And the reason is, for that the removing of evil, being sub ratione
boni, though hope apprehend nothing but good, yet this comes under the show
of good; and so comes under hope.

Vt avertatur, Auferatur, Minuatur, malum.
It is in these three things. 1. As it is Dan. 9.16. that the wrath of God may
be turned away before it come upon us. 2. Or as Psalm. 25.22. Deliver Israel O
God, out of all his troubles, i. being now in it; that we may be delivered: it
is called liberatio, deliverance. 3. Or as Psalm. 85.4. Mitiga iram tuam Domino:
when we pray for a diminution, that we may be able to sustain it.


1. The first part stands always in a confession of our sins, and defects in
doing of that which we should do, and that we might be justly punished for not
doing of it. So the Prophet in sundry Psalms runs through all his sins,
original and actual; those which he committed before his conversion and
after, those that he had done by omission or commission, those that he had
committed in thought, word, or deed, against God, or against his brethren;
either by instigation of himself, or enforced by others, Prove. 28.13. H^e that
covers his sin shall not prosper; there is a dangerous saying; and Psalm.
32.3, 4, 5. there is a dangerous example; till he had opened his sins, and
made them known, his bones wore away, and his moisture became as the drought
in Summer.

2. That being done, then we come to the essential deprecation, to desire of
God that he would divert his just deserved judgments from us: and 1. against
that malum that is maxim deprecandum, that evil that is most to be prayed
against. Luke. 22.31. the Sieve of Satan, cribrum satanae, that our sins in
affliction winnow us not; as Satan desired that he might winnow Peter. Not
wishing as they commonly wish, I would I were out of the world: but as John
17.15. Christ, non ut tollas eos e mundo, sed ut liberes a malo, I pray not
that thou would take them from the world, but that thou should keep them
from the evil: And desiring this, certain it is, that that promise, 1 Cor.
10.13. cannot be void, He will not suffer us to be tempted above our strength:
and that either our strength shall increase, as the cross increases: or as
our strength diminishes, our cross shall so diminish also. Then 1 King. 8.38.
What plague soever any shall seele in his heart, and shall make prayer and
supplication for it, it shall be removed. In temporal danger, (2 Chronicles. 10.12.
Iehosophat) Cum ignoramus quid agendum sit, hoc solum restat, ut ad te oculos
dirigamus Domine, Neither know we what to do, but our eyes are upon thee: for
as Prove. 18.10. that same nomen Domini, the name of the Lord, it shall be
turris fortissima, the strongest Tower to us; as to the Saints it has been.
But yet for this temporal evil, we must submit to Gods will in that, we must
stand as the three children, Dan. 3.17. they answered to the King: We are sure
that the Lord whom we serve, is able to deliver us out of this fiery furnace;
but though he will not (because the covenant is in the remission of sins) yet
will we not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou have set
up: and as Christ, Luke. 22.42. If it be possible, let this cup pass from
me: and yet fiat voluntas non mea, sed tua, thy will, not my will be done; for
those reasons alleged.

(...) precation of good. Give to them that have not; Stablish them which have
it weak in them; Increase it in them that have it but little.
2. The second is (...), a desiring of something that is good: there is nothing
more common in the Psalms then this: 1. Give me a true understanding: 2. so
Psalm. 68.28. Stablish the thing that thou have wrought in us; 3. so in Luke,
Domine adaugenobis fidem, Lord increase our faith: so that in these three, 1.
that it be given, 2. that it be established, 3. that it be increased in us, is
this kind of prayer contained.



Concerning this petition of good, because we have it so seldom granted,
Christ's saying is verified, Mat. 20.22. his answer to the sons of Zebede is, Ye
ask ye know not what: so it may be said of all such that desire that good
which is more agreeable to their own humors then to the will of God.

Chrysostom reports of a thief, qui orabat Deum, (being not minded
notwithstanding to become true) ut non capere^ur: and eo citius capiebatur,
that desired of God that he might not be taken, and his prayer was an occasion
that he was the sooner taken: therefore our rule must be that, 1 John 5.14.
Quicquid secundum voluntatem ejus petimus, whatsoever we ask according to his
will, he will hear us: i. whereof we have promise in his word: and those in
degrees too: as Psalm. 27.4. unum petii a Iehova, one thing have I desired of
the Lord: i. one thing above the rest, (...), that I might dwell in the house
of the Lord, all the days of my life; Luke 11.13. interpreted to be that that
shall not be denied, the holy Ghost. Now with these, or after these, we may
pray for temporal good things. Genesis 28.20. Jacobs prayer is, that he may have
soode and raymeni: and Prove. 30.8. Give me not poverty, nor riches, but
sufficientiam victus, a sufficiency only: and Austin says, non indecenter
petit, quia eam petit, and non amplius, it is no misbeseeming prayer, because
he asks but for so much and no more. Else we must desire this with a
condition, as, if it be possible, let it be; yet thy will be done: so 2 Samuel
15.25. King David to Zadok, the petition of a Kingdom. If I have found favor
in the eyes of the Lord, (he will bring me again, etc.) if not, (and if it be
best for me to resign) here I am, let him do what he will. There is no way
more compendious, nor sooner to obtain, then to resign over into his hands.
For divising means, and struggling he suffers not to obtain, resignation is
the best part.

Now that we said before, (to fall into this omnis and omnia, what we are to
think of it) because it may be best expounded here: It seems a strange thing,
that every one that asks, should receive; and whatsoever we desire, we should
have: for it is certain, many ask and have not: therefore we are thus to
stand affected here, as Augustine says, Iubet ut petas, and si non petas,
displ^cer? and non negabit quod petis, and tu non petes? Does God command thee
to pray, and is he displeased if thou prayest not? and will he not deny thee
that thou prayest for, and yet will thou not pray? No, but it is to be feared,
that the cause why we receive not, is not in his promise, but in our asking:
therefore thus we are to think, 1. that it is not a mavelous demonstrative
argument of favor, to have all things granted: for Psalm. 78.29. the
Israelites, they prayed to God for flesh, and flesh he sent: yet with
displeasure. While the meat was yet in their mouths, the heavy wrath of God
came upon them and slew them, etc. 1 Samuel 8.22. The people, they would needs
have a King, and they have one: but the Lord granted it in his wrath, whereas
not only wicked men, but ( Mark 5.12.) the Devil has his prayer granted
him. As on the other side, the denying of somethings to us, is not a sure sign
of Gods displeasure: 2 Cor. 12.8. Paul, he prayed thrice, that the prick in
his flesh might be taken away, and was not heard. This being so, then we come
to the second.

1. That our prayer is either made aright, or not aright: then 1. either it is
not denied, (though we presently have it not) but defered, that we might ask
it more instantly: and obtaining it, esteem it the more: Desideria dilatione
crescunt, and ci^o data vilescunt, delay increases desire, and easy things
are slighted: So in our prayers in desiring a good after an indirect manner,
we are denied; or else if we pray for good things in a right manner, yet God
often slays his hand, because he loves our importunity: this our Savior has
laid down in two Parables, the one Luke 18.5. the Parable of the wicked Judge
and the poor Widow, the other Luke 11.8. of the friend that was importunate for
three loaves.

2. Or secondly, aut dabit quod petimus, aut dabit quod movit esse utilius,
either God will give us that we pray for, or that which he knows is better for
us: as to Paul, though he would not take away the prick in his flesh, lest he
should be puffed up; yet he gave him a better thing, i. his grace, and the
perfecting of his strength in Paul's weakness.

Where our prayer is not made aright, there is a new consideration, because as
Chrysostom says, there be (...), there be certain childish and aguish
prayers; childrens: as if you be a child, and ask bread, you shall have it:
if a knife, you shall not have it: so of sundry men, that will ask those
things that will hurt: so they should be frustrate of their desire [though they
be in an erroneous opinion:] to these Chrysostom says, in these cases thus
persuade your selves, (...), ye receive it, in not receiving it, for to miss a
man's benefit, is to have it. This is in the matter of our asking; the other, in
the manner, shall be delivered after.

But to come to the (...), interpellation for others, intercession: (...),
Intercession.
the Fathers very seldom cite Fathers; but here Aug. cites out of Ambrose his
Exemption, i. fra^er mi, si pro te tantum rogas, solus pro te rogabis; si pro
omnibus rogas, omnes pro ^e rogabunt, if thou prayest only for thy self, then
thy prayers shall go up alone; but if thou prayest for all, thou shall have
the prayers of all: so though you be not heard in your own petition, you shall
be heard in your petition for all in general, [that these things may be.]
After our selves, we must remember our brethren: Paul says, we must pray for
all men, but specially, Psalm. 122.6. for those things that make to the peace of
Jerusalem: and the Prophet wishes his tongue to cleave to the roof of his
mouth, that forgets it: and in Jerusalem, [all in the Church have need of
this: but especially the chief Rulers and Governors:] Romans 15.30. the
Apostles needed the prayers of the brethren: and Ephesians. 6.19. he commends
himself to their prayers. And not only to those that are in the Church, but
to those also that concern us in nature, and those that are afar off,
without the Church: the ground of it is, 1 John 5.16. Pray for sinners, that
have not sinned unto death: and the promise, Iam. 5.15. he shall be heard.

In which respect, in the ancient Liturgy of the Church, there is first a
prayer for them that are without the Church; for Infidels, Idolaters, Jews,
Turks, Heretics, Schismatics; then for those that be in the Church, that are
not of us: those that are in ignorance, or those that know, and practice not:
for those that are in temptation, those that are oppressed with the burden of
their sins, and persecuted, and for the perseverance of the faithful, and
those that stand: there is a worse thing behind, Matthew. 5.44. Orate pro iis,
qui vos persequuntur, Pray for them that persecute you, they must come in too.
Gregory in his 27. Homily on the Evangelists, falling on that place Ier. 15.1.
where it is said, Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet mine affection
could not be toward this people, etc. he asks why it pleased God to make
choice of them, and gives a reason of it: and the reason is very good: for
that his prayer is most effectual, that can heartily pray to God after he has
received an injury of any wretch, and desire of God to bestow his grace upon
him immediately upon the injury received, his prayer is most accepted. So
Moses, Exodus 17.4. the people were ready to stone him, and presently after he
prays for them to the Lord: and 1 Samuel 12.23. they deposed him from bearing
rule over them; and yet he says, God forbid but that I should pray for you:
therefore such prayers are most effectual.

Certain it is, that whereas our enemies, or sinners do not pertain to Gods
election: therefore some may say, that we shall in vain pray for them. It is
not so, for our encouragement we have example, Psalm. 35.15. of the Prophet
David, for his enemies, they continued, but my prayer returned to mine own
bosom; it purchased me a commodity.

Qui pro aliis oral, pro se laborat, He that prays for others, takes pains
for himself.

The 4. part is thanks, Invocation being a desiring of that we have not,
(...), Thanksgiving.
and thanks for receiving of that we desire: so that whether we ask not and
receive, as Esa. 65.24. when we have it granted before, or whether we ask and
have, Matthew. 7.7. both ways it is reason that we enter into this consultation,
Psalm. 116.12. Quid retribuam Domino? What shall I render unto the Lord for all
the benefits that he has bestowed on me? the beginning, middle, end, and
chief end (of it) is the glory of God. For this glory, all that is made, is
made: therefore after the accomplishment of the days of his work, presently
he instituted the seventh day, for his praise and glory, Genesis 2.3. this was
man's state in Paradise: after man fell, all had perished, Esa. 24.13. but that
God might have a company to glorify him: and of those that perish, Prove. 16.4.
they are kept for the day of evil, that his glory might beshewed. How God may
be exactly glorified, it is showed in the Psalms; and Psalm. 50.23. he says
plainly, he that ossereth me thanks, gives me glory: and yet more plainly
and fully, 2 Cor. 4.15. all things are to this end, that most plenteous grace
through the thanksgiving of many, might return to his glory. For as the
Heathen said, it is certain, that graius animus est meta benignitatis,
gratitude is the end of bounty: and it is the Lords aim in penning: and
therefore we see in the Obligation, wherein he binds himself and us, Psalm.
50.15. Call upon me, and I will hear you: and if I do hear you, you shall
praise me, he that receives ought, receives it with this condition, (else he
is but an usurper) and is to make account for it. This thanksgiving by the
learned of the Hebrews, is made to consist of four parts, according to the
four words that they find usually set down by them that give thanks.

1. The first is (...) a confession: and for that 1 Cor. 4.7. we have nothing
but we have received it, Psalm. 121.1. and that from above the hills, i. no
inferior creature has given it us, and from above these hills, not to imagine
as the Priests of Israel, 1 Samuel 6.9. that if the Kine went not with the Arc
that way that it was wont, it was by chance: 1 Iam. 17. (...), from above: and
how? from the Father of lights; this is our confession: so neither are we to
dissemble that which we have received; August. Qui habere se affirmat, quod non
habet, is temerarius est: so qui non confi^etur se habere, quod habet, ingratus
est, He that says he has that which he has not, is rash; and he which
confesses not that he has that, which he has, is unthankful: and so
consequently, we are to use them as dans, and not as innatis, as free, not
natural gifts. 2. The second part (...) Psalm. 16.6. it is, I like well, I am
content he says, his lot is well fallen unto him, it likes him: and so
consequently, whatsoever we have, that we find a rich portion in it, and are
content: this is the worthy valuing of Gods gifts, which excludes the disease
of the Israelites that could never be content, and were never well, though they
received very much; but murmured 40. years for all his promises. 3. (...)
annunciabo, I will declare it, that we tell it to others: so Psalm. 66.16. he
calls them that fear the Lord, I will tell you (says he) what he has done for
my soul: and Psalm. 111.1. he professes that he will tell it in the
congregation, in a public assembly: and Psalm. 40.9. in magna congregatione, in
the great congregation; and because that was not enough: therefore Psalm. 56.5.
omnibus gentibus, to all the Nations, as indeed he has: and that being not
great enough, Psalm. 22.31. to his seed: Psalm. 71.18. to all posterity: and
Psalm. 40.9.10. that which is contrary to this, I will not refrain my lips, I
will not keep back, I will not hide thy righteousness, etc. 4. The fourth
is, (...) Venue, (Come ye) but that pertains to the sixth Precept or Rule.
This thanksgiving, is prayer made; as (...), for that good that we did want;
so thanks for receiving that good: the first example is out of Abraham's
household, Genesis 24.27. his servant gave thanks presently, after he had found a
wife for his Masters son. Dan. 2.20. for a secret revealed to him. So for the
deliverance of the Israelites from the Egyptians, Exodus 15.1.20. the song of
Moses: Judge. 5. the song of Deborah and Bara^, after the victory over Sisera.

As there is a deprecation for others, D^p^^^^^, (...).
so an interpellation for others, Act. 11.18. for the benefit of the Gentiles;
It is called complementum ora^ionis, the perfection and end of prayer: because
it is the especiallest thing in prayer which tends at Gods glory; it is
especially to be commended: therefore we will speak a little more of the
excellency of it, and how it pleases God. David has this testimony, that he
was a man after Gods heart: Chrysostom examining why he was a man after Gods
heart, more then Abraham, or Moses, etc. he says he can find no other reason,
then that he did perceive Gods desire to have his name praised, more then the
rest of the Saints: and so labored more plenteously then any other, and so
deserved that title above any other: for Psalm. 55.17. he protests for prayer,
that he will keep his hours: morning, noone, and evening: (every day thrice
he will pray) but Psalm. 119.164. it is not thrice that will serve him, but
that must be done seven times a day: but verse. 62. Psalm. 119. he would give
thanks to God at midnight: according to that wisdom God revealed unto him,
that he knew Gods mind: (did he pray, Psalm. 6.5. that he might yet live to
give him thanks, for in death no man remembers thee, and who will give thee
thanks in the pit?) Ps. 118.17. I will not die, but live, and declare the
works of the Lord: this is his desire, that he may not yet die, and he gives
no other reason but this, if his body come once into the grave, he cannot
glorify God. Thus ought every man desire to live: and therefore our life to be
dear unto us for this end; Psalm. 39.15. O spare me a little, that I may
recover my strength, before I go hence, and be no more seen: therefore this
is the end of man's life, and consequently it must not be slacked, while we live
here; and it is not the end of man's creation alone, but it is also the end of
the creation of the Angles: to put us in mind of an excellency, that then we
do that the Angels do: as Luke 2.14. their song is Gloria in excelsis Deo,
Glory to God in the highest: Revel. 7.12. they cry and say, Let all praise,
glory, honor, thanks, power be given to God, etc. In which consideration
David, Psalm. 108.1. when his tongue was to be occupied in praise and
thanksgiving, then he calls it (...) his glory, his glorious member, his best
member: and in deed this is the way to make all our members glorious, to
bestow them on Gods praise, in glorifying him: so if any man be desirous to be
occupied, as the Angels are occupied, this is the means.

Now as this is a way to lift us up: so it is a way, if we walk not in it, to
cast us down: Psalm. 19.1, 2, 3, 4. Psalm. 148. shows that the creation of the
world (the duty of the creatures) is nothing else, but to declare the glory of
God, in so much as we see Psalm. 148.10. he called the very worms, and basest
creatures to their function and duty: and Chrysostomes note upon it is, that
that man that is ungrateful, and a sinner, his state is worse, and more vile
then the worm, the basest, vilest creature, in so much as he will not
vouchsafe himself to come into their number, to sing praise to God. This for
the creatures.

But for the Church, Psalm. 29.9. there, in the Temple every man speaks of his
praise: the natural duty of it. What is preaching, praedicare, but a declaring
of his creation, and his benefits of his own free mercy, then in electing us,
of our Savior and his redemption, and the shutting up of these per (...), To
whom with the Son and the holy Ghost be honor, etc. as the Fathers use is. And
for the Sacraments, the Sacrament of perfection, it sets down to us so much,
that it is called Eucharistia, a thanksgiving: and it ends with Gloria, Glory
be to God on high, etc. And for prayer, this is the complement of prayer; So
all the exercises of the Church did tend to this. Psalm. 133.1. Where the unity
is not only called a good, but also a pleasant thing, the Fathers say, that
many things are good, but not pleasant: and many things pleasant, and not good:
but this has an excellent commendation, that it has both: and Psalm. 147.1.
there is a third thing: a thing may be pleasant and good, but not comely: but
there it is said, that it is a good, pleasant, and comely thing to praise the
Lord, and be thankful. Profit we see, is a great mover: if profit be not, all
excellency else is contemned: and Act. 20.35. Beatius est dare, quam accipere,
It is more blessed to give then to receive: this is the only thing, and there
is nothing else that a man can give to God. And August. says here: If we will,
we may be beatiores: but the Lord, he has called it, magnification,
glorification, sanctification, etc. as if we made him greater, or more
glorious, or holier then he is, by it: and there is never this given, but
something is received. Luke 17.15. Ten Leapers were cleansed, nine came not
back to give God thanks: he which comes back, and gives God thanks,
receives again the second time, that is, forgiveness of his sins: so that it
is never given gratis, but as there is first ascension of prayer, then decursus
gratiae, a descending of grace: so as Bernard says, after there is recursus
gratiarum actionis, a sending back of thanks; and then a new decursus
gratiae, a coming down of benefits: so there is decursus gratiae, and
recursus: cesset recursus gratiarum actionis, cessabit decursus gratiae: a
coming down of grace, and a return of thanks, if thy thanks be not
returned, grace will no more come down; and if that come not, then as it is
compared to water, so it receives the quality of water: which if it have not
perperuall succession, it stands still, and stinketh: so this standing still,
it rotteth the gifts of God bestowed on us, and those graces that we have
received before. Bernard on the seventh of the Acts, in his book of minores
sermones, has this question, Wherefore the excellent gifts, and rare examples
of all virtues and good things in the Primitive Church, and in the times before
are not now seen. We have the same beginnings that they had, but we, if a man
continue as he has begun, wonder at it; but they did not only continue as
they begun, but went forward: and therefore they had the greater gifts, and
he says, It is not, because Gods hand is shortened, or his will altered; but
because skant and thin is our thanksgiving sown: [and therefore our harvest
and our reaping must needs be skant and thin:] and therefore Vae aetati
nostrae propier ingratitudinem, Woe to this age of ours, even for its
unthankfulness: and there is no other reason else, why there is not the same
progressus of graces with us, that was before with them. Prosper in his second
book de vocatione gentium; Gratiae nullum cer^ius est signum, quam gratiae:
there is no surer sign of Grace then thanksgiving.

There is one reason more. That work must needs be excellent, that must not be
left, though God wills it: this though God should forbid it should be done,
yet it must be done: Luke 5.14. Mark 5.20. there was a plain Inhibition to
him, that he should tell it no body: but he went and proclaimed it: and it is
there set down for his great commendation, though Christ was no way proud; yet
this disobedience was a godly disobedience; and it was but a commandment to
try him, but nothing must hinder us. So for agenda, the parts of prayer to be
performed by us; the next is modus, the manner how we must perform them.

2. For the manner of praying right, and giving thanks, (1) it is required
that our thanksgiving be animata, alive: (a common fault amongst us, that our
thanks and prayers be exanimes, without life) David, he charge his soul; My
soul praise thou the Lord, and all that is within me praise his holy name:
that it may have, not a tongue, but soul: and we have a pouring out of our
lungs, not of our hearts. In 1 Samuel 7.3. there is a direct commandment, that
in their prayer they should direct their hearts unto the Lord. In the 1 Cor.
14.15. I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the understanding
also: I will sing with the spirit, I will sing with the understanding also:
else it is dead, and returns empty; that Bernard says of himself, nihil in
mundo est fugacius cord meo, they allege Psalm. 40.1^. cor meum dereliquit
me, not so properly said, as our common translation has it, (but yet it is
Ieromes) the ascending thoughts come up so thick, that they will not suffer
our prayers to come to God: the plain duty to civil men, and to our
superiors, not to turn away our mind till our tale be done, may teach us how
God in justice may judge of our dealings and esteem of them. This is much
augmented by an humor of men in our age, that are delighted with long prayer,
and so fall into a great offense, praying above the measure of their faith: and
of praying sundry times, and to sundry purposes. Aug. in the 10. chap. of his
epistles, speaking of the gods of Egypt, and their worships says, dicuntur in
Aegypto crebras habere orationes, sed brevissimas habere quidem orationes, sed
raptim ejaculatas, the Egyp^ians are said to make many, but very short prayers,
and they shot forth, as it were on the sudden: and therefore such were called
ejaculationes; his reason is, ne intentio quae oranti plurimum confert, per
productiores moras hebeteiur and evanescat, lest the intention which avails
much in prayer, should by overlong continuance lose its edge and grow dull:
therefore his note is, that as intentio is not obtundenda; si perdurare non
potest: so, si perduraverit, non cito rumpenda, as the intention is not to be
dulled if it cannot hold out; so, if it can, we are not abruptly to break off:
and diverse are troubled in conscience for this. For the breaking off this
intention, sundry times it is broken for a better thing; if it be so, it is
not a thing to be repented of: if otherwise, as we are to withstand it, and if
not that, grow into an indignation with it, as Vincentius writes of Anthony,
Cupio salvus fieri, sed non permi^tunt me cogitationes meae, Lord I desire to
work out my salvation, but my thoughts will not permit me: and therefore he
cries, Domine vim patior a cogitationibus meis, in Domine responde pro me,
Lord my thoughts do continually trouble and torment me, Lord do thou answer
for me: then the Lord will not observe our ascending thoughts, but our prayers,
if it please us not, but that in our drawing near to him, if we cannot drive
these foul from our Sacrifice; but yet if we have but a care to prepare our
hearts, a short ejaculation will not be uneffectuall. See how it wrought for a
whole assembly, 12 Chron. 30.18, 19. Where Hezekiah prays for him that
prepares his heart to seek the Lord, though he be not cleansed according to
the purification of the Sanctuary: this also pertains to us, though not to
the exact rules of invocation: Psalm. 119. is full of these ejaculations, and in
every one of them is a prayer.

2. The prayers that in I am. 1.6. that are called (...), that ebb and flow;
whereas prayer, it is nothing else but interpres spei, the interpreter of Hope;
and Hope being the anchor, it must be stayed fast, and stir no more then Hope:
Psalm. 145.18. he distinguishes them that call upon the Lord (The Lord is nigh
unto all them that call on him, yea all such as call upon him faithfully:) that
are not moved with the waves, Romans 10.14. it is an especial effect of prayer;
belief, the root of this: and I eriullian, Breviarium fidei, a breviary of
faith: Mar. 11.24. Therefore I say unto you, whatsoever ye desire, when ye
pray, believe that ye shall have it, and it shall be done unto you: I am. 1.7.
he that asks not so, he shall be sure that he shall receive nothing. So there
must be (1.) attention, (2.) it must be of faith: and Prove. 18.9. the trial of
that is, that man shuts his ears at the preaching of the Law: so he that has
light thoughts, at the preaching of the word, he has no faith: ratio, because
the word of God, being the seed of faith, he that will not receive the seed
in, cannot bring forth the fruit.


3. The Hebrews call (...) a prayer, no prayer, a proud prayer; where the
spirit of prayer is, there is the spirit of humility: Luke 18.8.9. Psalm. 63.1.
and 42.1. it must be anima siticulosa, a thirsty soul: Psalm. 102. the form of
prayer, verse. 17. he will give ear unto the prayer of the humble: Luke 7.38.
Mary (And she stood at his feet behind him, weeping, and began to wash his
feet with tears, and did wipe them with the hairs of her head, and kissed
his feet, and anointed them with the ointment:) and Luke 18.13. the Publican:
they had their suite. Dan. 9.18. We do not present our suppl^cations before
thee, for our own righteousnesses, but for thy great tender mercies. True
prayer, it has no confidence in it self.

4. The fourth is that the Fathers call absurda oration: oration sine ratione, an
absurd prayer. Ter^ullian, Quid est hoc? accedere ad Deum pro pace, sine pace;
pro remissione peccatorum, cum re^entione? What Is this? a man come unto God for
peace, that is an enemy unto peace; for pardon of sin, with a purpose to
continue in sin? Matthew. 18. what coherence is there between Forgive me, and
Pay me? so this of being not consonant in our prayers; Prove. 21.13. He that
casts away the cry of the poor, his prayer shall be cast away: If there be a
giving, there must be a forgiving, Mar. 11.25. Forgive others, and your
heavenly shall forgive you. They call it Cains prayer, that did offer a
Sacrifice to God, and murder his brother.

5. The last, 7. of Judith 20. has his name from the men of Bethulia, and is
called the Bethulian prayer: help must come within five days, else farewell
prayer: contrary to those Euchites, Luke 18.1. to pray (...), always, 1 These.
5.17. (...), without ceasing, Col. 4.2. (...), all this for continuance: not
continually, but interpolatim, and that in Luke 11.8. in his parable (of him
that went to his friends house, to borrow three loaves) he means not that
he continually knocked at his friends door, but successively, interpolatim.

That then that is here forbidden, are the two extremes; The extreme^.
1. of the Euchites; August. 57. heresy ad quod vult Deum, of them speaks,
that they never left; which was a brutish heresy.

The other extreme, 1. Book 22. chap. (...), sleepie heretics, that held,
that a man was not made to pray, but in the night: to see in the day, and to
the use of the creatures: our practice is the like, that use not to pray but
when we are upon our beds, if then; This for the defect in the manner, 1. that
we ask not unprofitably or greedily, 2. neither carelessely, 3. or proudly, 4.
or grudgingly, 5. or not continually.
So for thanksgiving that is commanded, as ingratitude condemned: the Heathen
counted it all the evil that could be said against a man, to be called an
ungrateful person: Cuncta maledicta dixeris, cum ingratum dixeris, call him an
ungrateful man, and thou can not call him worse: Genesis 14.21. the King of
Sodom, though he were a wretch, yet the law of nature taught him thus much,
that he should be thankful to Abraham; 2 Samuel 16.17. an unkind son
condemned an unkind friend: here unkindnesse condemns unkindnesse. So the
degrees of it also;

1. When a man has the benefits, and contemns them, Numb. 11.6. But now our
soul is dried away, we can see nothing but this Manna. 2. So the cold and
careless thanksgiving, which comes usu magis quam sensu, by a customary use
of them, rather then of any true sense of the value of them. God be thanked, is
of course, and with all. 2 King. 5.18. Naaman the Syrian had received a benefit
by the Prophet: he would be thankful: but you must pardon him in this, when
the King his Master should come into the house of Rymmon, etc. he will not
hazard his place in Court, nor the Kings disfavour; a cold thanksgiving that a
man should sacrifice to his net for God. 1 Chronicles. 21.4. and that of Ioah in a
case of numbering the people, yet must be thankful, and falls to it. 1 Chronicles.
10.5.6. When his Armor-bearer saw that Saul was dead, he fell likewise upon
the swordand died.
The means. Prayer it self is a means, and the means of all means:
therefore it has means, The Means.
i. helps; none to begin it, but to help it: and they are these.

1. Psalm. 42.14. A consideration of the state of our soul, as of our body, and
so he has a table before him, wherein he sees what those evil things be,
that he is most inclinable to, and what those good things are, that he wants:
his soul brought a thirst upon him, it grew into heaviness. Nothing more fit,
then to have a perfect and true sense of our wants.

2. And on the other side, to have a Register of the benefits of God; David
received great benefits, and there is not one of them but we have a Psalm for
it. This is his course, Psalm. 40.3. Now when he had a new benefit, he would
have a new song: many times he wanted some singular benefit, and then he comes
to reck on up mean benefits: for his new house, he wrote the 30. Psalm. for his
deliverance from the hands of Achish, the 34. Psalm. Augustine calls it
colligere fragmenta, the collecting of fragments; When he came colligere
fragmenta, and make great account of them: [and] as Matthew. 15.27. the woman of
Canaan counts of the crummes, so to be thankful for a small benefit is
means; sometimes when he had no new benefits, then 38. and 70. Psalm. he takes
an old benefit, and makes of it a new song, for the remembrance of it: and
rather then he would be idle, he makes Psalms, and especially the 139.
Psalm. to give God thanks, that he had framed him in his mothers womb: and when
he wants all these occasions then he has meditations of the whole world:
Psalm. 8. and 19. and 104. he is thankful for all the earth, and for the wild
Asses, that they have water in the wilderness to quench their thirst.

2. The second means is that which the Fathers call alae orationis, the wings
of prayer; that is, 1. fasting, as 1 Cor. 7.5. Defraud not each other, unless
it be for a time, with mutual consent, that you may give your selves to
fasting and prayer: and August. upon that place, Iejunium orationis robur, and
oration jejunium sanctificat, fasting strengthens prayer, and prayer
sanctifies fasting.

2. The second is alms, whereof Daniel was a Preacher, cap. 4. v. 24. to
Nabuchadonoser.

3. The third is out of Matthew. 18.20. and Lames 5.15. Si oration tua fulminet,
that it may come up into Heaven, then ora solus, pray apart by thy self:
otherwise, esto gutia in imbre grandinis, thy prayer is but as a single drop in
a shower: when our own prayer is weak, then we are to desire the prayer of
more, and the prayer of the Church.

4. Last, if none of all these help, yet there is oration fidei, as oration
sensus, though I cannot have the prayer of feeling, yet I may have the prayer
of faith: for these spiritual duties are likened to the seed: there comes
not harvest at the first, but they being laid up in the bosom of the Lord,
will in time fructify.

Now for the signs of Prayer.

1. The earnestness of the soul, The signs of Prayer.
Romans 8.26. when it sends forth groans and sighs, that cannot be expressed
by the tongue: plus gemitibus plerunque constat hoc negotium, quam sermonibus,
prayer is often better expressed by groans then words. 2. The second is that in
Psalm. 6.9. where David being before cast down, presently after says, that God
heard his prayer, and he answers, habuit aliquem gustum divinorum, that he
had some taste that God l^vd forgiven him his sins: so if we feel a
detestation of our sins, it is a good sign. 3. The third sign is for the
fourth means: it is a patient waiting upon God, as the Psalmist says, Psalm.
101.2. (...) till thou come, yet will I walk in no evil thing.
The signs of thanksgiving.

1. Psalm. 63.5. he says, he feels his soul filled with marrow and satnesse;
the children of God have been rapt, when they have fallen into the
consideration of Gods benefits. 2. The second sign, Psalm. 66.18. when it
breeds in us a jealeusie, that if I walk in sin hereafter, God will hear
me no more. 3. The third sign, Psalm. 58.5. beneficia, be, veneficia,
enchanters: when his benefits charm us, like a strong charmer: as in Genesis
39.9. Iosesh answers his Masters wife; My Master has bestowed these, and
these things upon me, and how then can I do him this dishonesty? so it is a
sign that we are rightly thankful to God, if we can say, God has bestowed
these, and thus great benefits upon us, how then can we break his Law? 4. The
fourth ( Levit. 7.15.) is, not to defer thanksgiving; which is gathered out
of the type of thanksgiving, where the people were commanded, that the flesh of
the peace offerings for thanksgiving should be eaten the same day, and nothing
left till the morning. Nihil citius senescit gratia: we must not defer
thanksgiving.
Rule 6.
Now for the sixth Rule, the procuring of it in others, 1 Samuel 14.19. Saul, when
he should fall to prayer, thought the enemies came too fast, and laid away the
Eph^d, and wilied the Priest to withdraw his hand: and we see what a censure
the holy Ghost gives of him for it: therefore we are to see, that as we are
not impediments to our selves, so not to other: Job 21.15. not of those that
discourage others, and say, Who is the Almighty, that we should serve him? and
what profit should we have, if we had prayed to him? One of the Fathers makes
this answer, that whereas a benefit projicitur ingrato, collecatur grato: is
cast away upon the unthankful and evil, as well as conferd upon the thankful
and good, God does hereby provoke us to the like to be beneficial unto all by
his example, and so to be made sons of the Highest. Luke 6.35.

And for the affirmative part, (...) the invitation of others to the same,
Psalm. 95.1. the beginning of our Liturgy, O come let us sing unto the Lord, let
us, etc. and Psalm. 34.3. Come let us pray, let us magnify his name together:
but especially, Psalm. 148. he is not content to have men only for company, but
Dragons, Snow, and all creatures: not that they could praise the Lord; but
this, that there is not the basest creature of them all, but if it breath, it
has cause enough to praise him.

Amor Dei, the love of God.
OF the love of God, Amor Dei.
that that is said Gal. 3.17. we see it verisied: as the Law is said to have
been added for a time, till the Seed came: so here may likewise be affirmed,
that the other affections and actions were only till our nature received
trial, till the love of God come. Of which love the Fathers say, that the
having of that occupare amorem, (the being possessed of love) drowneth all
other affections. For therefore we fear for a time, that being delivered, we
may love: and being humbled, we may hope and pray: that we may say, Psalm
116.1. Dilexi, quia audivit Dominus vocem orationis meae: the coherence of
prayer and love: I have loved, because the Lord has heard the voice of my
prayer. From the beginning it was said, 1. that having of God, is in knowing
him: albeit we have him naturally, yet if we know him not, we have him not: 2.
in esteeming of him; this estimation is properly in this affection of love:
and those that went before, fear and hope, are for no other end, but for
this, that when God has bestowed it on us, it may the better be esteemed of
us, when we have been in fear: and for this end it comes, that as cito data
vilesount, we commonly slight that which we can but ask and have: so these
things that we have felt the want of so long, having been humbled, when they
come, we may have more regard of them.

(...)
Concerning the object thereof, it is bonum, good; wherein the very natural
reason of man has found two properties, 1. (...) 2. (...), a communicative and
an atractive property, whatsoever is good, it is such a thing as is desire us
to communicate it selse to as many as will ta^e it, and are meet to take it:
as we see in the Sun, and other celestial creatures, and in the natural
elements: and consequently there being a quality of desiring to communicate
good, in God, which is his goodness, no doubt it is in greater and excellenter
manner; and that was the cause in deed, of the creation of all things, that he
might have a Church, and show his glory and mercy on it.
So the mind of man seeing this nature in good consequently desires it: and
that desire goes thus far, till it come to a conjunction, and that
conjunction to an union: ita conjuagi ut uniamur: Ratio, because by the union
of two good things, there shall come good to the desirer, that he had not
before; and so he is made better.

It has bin said that the inferior things, if they be coupled and united with
things of more excellent nature, they are made more noble: as for a potsherd to
be covered with gold: as on the other side, things excellent being joined with
viler things, are made more abject: as the mind of man with inferior
creatures; and there can be no greater excellency of it, then by the
conjunction of it with that, that is all good, and contains in it all good
things, and so as it contains them for evermore.

And so of this, comes the 2. (...), (...)
the attractive force. In every good there is a force, and that allureth: and
therefore it is, that faith and knowledge must necessarily go before: so when
a good thing, because we cannot take from it his good, if that the force be
not, then as the Schoolmen say, Bonum quod non amatur, the good we love not,
it is a sign quod non cognoscitur, that we know not: for if it were the
natural desire of all, being that it is to better us, (...)
we should love it, to be bettered by it: therefore it is well said, that to
good things there is no greater enemy then ignorance: therefore it is the part
of knowledge and faith, to show us this good, and that will stir up love in
us: and so having stirred up that in us, there will follow here unio affectus,
unio a^us; and for sides, visio.

This love is of two sorts, 1. mercenarius, 2. gratuitus: that love that
begins, and that that is free not respecting reward,
they are distinguished. When a man says he loves his meat, and drink; and
his friend, and brother; it is certain that these are not all one: the one is
a desire to have it, to turn it to his own benefit for the present time, not
caring what become of it after: but he loves his friend to do him good, and to
wish him well: so in the one he secketh his own good; in the other, to do good
to other, and to him cui been volumus, whom we wish well unto. The Philosopher
distinguishes them by unde, and quo, whence and whither. In the first love,
the question is made by quo, in the other unde: what good it has in it, though
it be no benefit to us. So the one has the eye inward in it self, the other
outward to other: for as we see sundry times, the one is the beginning of the
other: and after, those that have been beneficial to us, we fall to love
them for themselves, and not for their benefits.

The first love arises out of hope, because the soul of man by fear being
brought low, to the ground, then conceiving hope, and consequently sending
forth prayer, and then receiving the fruit of it, says, as it is Psalm. 116.1.
I am well pleased, (or I have loved) that the Lord has heard the voice of my
prayer, so Psalm. 20.7. Now I know that God has heard his anoynied, when he had
received the fruit of it; and so was stirred up to this first love: so the
first love of God is, because he receives from him: that which the Apostle
applies to that which he had in hand: That which is spiritual is not first,
but that which is natural, or carnal; August. Basil, Ambrose, Bernard,
refe^re to says and love, showing plainly that Caesar's virtues were in
greater account then and Catoes; Caesar's being courtesy, affability, clemency,
liberality, etc. Catoes, conscience, and faithfulness, and justice, etc. which
were not to others commodity: yet because in the other there was sui and suum,
they were of better account: for that which is natural will be first, ( i. to
love that, by which we receive commodity:) concupiscentia before cupiditas:
this love is the inchoation of the other: for nemo repent fit summus, no man
comes to the height at first: God has taken order for it. Chrysostom, he
marvelleth, how men can slip themselves out of this love of God: for if they
will have amorem mercenarium, that love which is mercenary, he offers more
for it then any man: for he bids the Kingdom of heaven: but this is the
state of this love, as before in fear; So the Fathers, they have compared this
love and the other, to the land of promise: this to that part of the land, that
is beyond Jorden: and the other, to that on this side, where Jerusalem and Sion
stood. And for amor gratuitus, the love that aims not at reward, as Bernard
says, though it be gratuitus, yet Deus nunquam sine praemio diligitur, tametsi
sit sine intuitu praemii diligendus, Our love to God shall not be unrewarded,
though we should love without^ respect to the reward: and so they begin, I
love, because I have received. But Romans 9.3. there is a strange end of it,
where the Apostle respected his own commodity so little, that he wished
himself accursed, that the glory of God might shine to the salvation of
Israel. This distinction is profitable, that we may know we are not in the
state of reprobates, though we love not God propter se, merely for himself.

Vsius ameris, the use of this love.
Now we come to the use of this love: there is a chap. 1 Cor. 13. to end, where
he plainly shows the necessity of it: he sets it down thus, If a man for
his knowledge were an Angel; and for his Faith, were able to remove mountains;
and for his liberality, had given away all that he had, and had left himself
nothing; and for his constancy, had endured Martyrdom; yet they should not
prevail, they should be nothing, except he had the love of God with him: and
in the end of the same chap. there is a singular commendation of it: though not
to show the necessity of it, yet it may be a great motive to love. Faith, hope,
and love; it is the greatest of the three: if we take it in quantity, it is the
greatest, both for the breadth and for the length: for whereas faith and hope
consist in the bounds of man's person, and in singular men; this spreads
abroad, and reaches to God and man: and in man, to our selves and to others:
and in others, to our friends, and even to our enemies. Austin, Bea^us qui te
amat, and amicum in te, and inimicum properte, Blessed is he that loves thee O
Lord, and his friend in thee, and his enemy for thee: And this for the breadth.
Now for the length, whereas the other are in us but in the form of a lease,
and but for the term of our life: the gift of charity shall be even as a
freehold, and continue for ever in Heaven. In these respects, and of that
honorable place that Christ and God vouchsafe it, is that of our Savior,
Matthew. 22.40. saying, all the Law and the Prophets make two heads, and both
these are love: and Saint Paul, Romans 13.9. and 11. makes but one head of all,
and calls it (...), the fulfilling and abtidgment of all: and that in this
(...), thou shall love thy neighbor, etc. John 13.34. it is called mandatum
novum, a new Commandment: admitting, that though all the old Commandments
were cancelled, yet we have it in the new Commandment: and 1 John 2.7. it is
but the old Commandment: for both the old and the new are all one: there is in
the old and the new Diliges, thou shall love. But that which goes beyond
these, and which imposes a necessity in this, that whereas all other before
spoken, as faith, hope, etc. or that shall be spoken, as patience, etc. none of
them are mutual, nay they are not in God at all: and when as he deals in
them, we are not to answer him, as he deals with us: if he promise or
threaten, we must not likewise promise or threaten: but here in this, there is
mu^ua vicissitudo, a mutual vicissitude: (if God love us, we must love him
again) and therefore most necessary. Gregory says, Magnum est vinculum
charitatis, que and ipse Deus ligari se voluit, strong is the bond of love,
seeing God himself will be bound with it: this affection says Bernard, Solus
triumphat de Deo, does only get the victory over God: and as he also says,
Nescio quid magis dici debeat in laud tua O charitas, I know not what can be
spoken more in thy praise (divine love) then that thou have brought God out of
heaven into earth, and have lift up man from earth into heaven: hominem Deo
reconciliasti, and Deum homini pacasti: Therefore as on this side we are to
consider, how willing God is, that this should grow in us; so now we must
consider what is on Gods behalf performed to stir us up unto it. The Heathen
say, magnes amorisamor, nothing is more effectual to move love, then to love:
and therefore that is it, that continually is first set down on Gods part, i.
where the love of God is beaten on, that on Gods part is set first: which how
great it is, it appears by nothing more, then that of Bernard: he in his
book de diligendo Deo, sets it down in these six, quod nos (1.) prius dilexit,
(2.) tantus, (3.) tantillos, (4.) tales, (5.) tantum, (6.) gratis.


For the first, the Priority, 1 John 4.10. herein is that love, Prior. Prius.
not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be a
reconciliation for our sins: and verse. 19. We love him, because he lved us
first: for our prior, [it was] his love, because he loved us first. Aug. Nulla
est major ad amorem invitati^, quam praevenire amando: nimis enim est darus
animus, qui etsi noluit impendere, noluit rependere, no more kindly atractive
in love, then in loving to prevent; for exceeding stony is that heart, which
though it like not to love first, will not love again neither; neither first,
nor second.

For the second, ^ Tantus.
tantus, the greatness of his love, and the consideration thereof: Aug. says
in the same place, tantus, ut non liceat conaridicere quantus, it is so great,
that it is not possible to say how great.

For the third, 3. Tantillos,
, tantillos, for our estate, he loved us, when we were worms; our smalnesse
is set down, Romans 9.11. applied to Jacob and Esan: and to all that are elect,
Cum nondum essemus, when as yet we were not: we cannot be smaller then so, not
to be at all: and yet he loved us, even before we were.

For the fourth, 4. Tales.
Tales, what we were, Romans 5.10. he loved us, when we were his enemies: we
estranged our selves so far from him, that we served his very enemy.

For the fifth, 5. Tantum,
Tantum, i. for the exceedingnesse of it, we may say, as we said before; but
yet we have great light in the Scriptures, God being not willing that it should
be buried. The Fathers upon John. 3.13. Sic Deus dilexit mundum, etc. So God
loved the world; to that same (...), So, says Chrysostom, a man may put all
the adverbs, that will set up a comparison in the highest degree: Patru, Fil^^,
Sp. Sancti, Tantum.
How great? Romans 8.32. it was so great, that he spared not his own Son; and
that for God the Fathers tantum: and on Christ's behalf, his tantum was, that
for our sakes, being such wretches, he was content to leave the society of the
Angels, and Saints, and to come down here to endure such things: he suffered
all Aristotle's (...), five fearful things: 1. ignominy, 2. need, 3.
sickness, 4. enmity, 5. death. 1. for the first, i. ignominy and reproach, he
had it while he lived, and as it is Matthew. 27.63. he was not free from it after
he was dead: for they call him caus^ner and deceiver; We remember that this
cousener and deceiver said while, etc. 2. And for his need, his own mouth may
witness, Luke 9.58. that he was in poorer case then the fowls and beasts. 3.
For his infirmities, Esa. 53.4.5. he suffered wounds, and blew wounds, li^ores,
for our sakes. 4. For his enmity, John 15.18. he says that the world hated him
while he was in it. 5. But that which is the infallible sign of his love, and
the greatness thereof toward us, John 15.13. (...) there can be no greater
love, then to die for a man's friend: but Christ suffered a most shameful death
for us, that hated him, and were his enemies: and as Cantic. 8.6. the love that
is as strong as death, is perfect love, that he took upon him too.

For the holy Ghosts tantum is this, that in stead of Christ, he descended: and
Romans 5 5. shed this gift of the grace of God, and all other good gifts among
us: and is content to make his residence with us, to the worlds end. And now we
may judge between God and our selves, as Esa. 5.4. Whether a man may not
justly demand, whether there be any thing that he has not done and suffered
for us?

Now for the last, 6. Gratis.
i. gratis, the freeness of it: as Psalm. 16.2. he is like to have no reward of
us, for we cannot help him, nor reward him: nothing but only this, amorem pro
amore, Our love for His; and nihil est decen^^^, nothing is more feemely, their
that all these which God has bestowed upon us per amorem, by his love, should
be requited amore, with love again: 11. Wiseman 27. the Wiseman calls to
God, and that most justly and truly, all these ways having testified this his
affection to us: and he enjoining us nothing but this, to love him again. Aug.
Quid est homo, quod a^ar^ vis ab eo: and si non anat ^e, minaris ingeniem
poenam? annon poena satis mag na: est, non amare^e? What is man that thou
command him to love thee (O God) and if he love thee nor, thou threatnest to
punish him? can there be a greater punishment, then not to love thee? For our
natural love of meat and drink, there need no threatening, nor reward: but
this love that is supernatural, and should make us supernatural, must have
threatenings and rewards; so untoward we are. This for that that God performs
on his behalf.

Love commanded.
Now we come to that which is commanded, and that is love, whether it be
natural, and consequently by nature due to God: that we should amare cum a quo
habemus potentiam anandi, bestow that affection of love upon him that gave it
us, equity it is: or whether it be amor delectus, a love of choice, For when we
have made a sum of all our thoughts, we cannot find that is more to be loved
then God: or whether it be amore infuso; Romans 5.5. he has shed this love into
our hearts; and it is reason, that he that has scattered, should gather that
which he has scattered: for so the wicked and unjust servant can tell us.

This love, and the measure thereof is considered in it self, first either as
it is hindered, or not hindered: As it proceeds freely, Denre.
it has two parts, 1. desiderium, 2. gaud um,
Desire and Joy. Desire, so long as we seele not the certifying of Gods spirit
in our hearts: as the Prophet David, he had Psalm. 42.1. and joy when God gives
it: cum sustulit gaudium, posuit gaudium: the Devils have a desire unto that
good which they know they want, and shall never enjoy, which makes them break
out into malice and blasphemy; but the desire which is wrought in our hearts by
the work of the holy Ghost produces the effects which the Apostle speaks of
Gal. 5.22. But the fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith. When it is hindered, and resisted, that it
cannot get a desire, Zelus ex ira and delore.
then comes zelus, zeal; ira est vindex laesi desiderii; it is called sacra
ebullitio, a boiling of grief and anger incensed against all impediments: and
it is one of the signs of love: for qui non zelas, non amat, there is no love
when there is no zeal: he that can see impediments to the glory of God, if he
have not an earnest desire for the removing of them, he has no love.

Modus amoris, the measure of love.
For the measure, it must proceed thus high, as that we be ready to hate Father
and Mother, Wife, Children, Brother, and our own soul for it, i. as it is
somewhat more gently set down, Matthew. 10.37. that they must not be loved more
then God, nor come in comparision with him: but when their Commandment comes
against Gods Commandment, that must yield to this: and God alone must come to
have our love. The royal law says, that we must love him with all our soul,
withal the mind, with all the heart, and with all the strength: As the heart
is said improperly to believe, so the mind is said no less improperly to
love: but it must be so forced in us, as that all [the powers of the body and
minde] must yield to it, and show forth their actions: else we come short.

Quia fecisti me, because thou have created me: therefore I owe my self to
thee: si tantum; pro facto, quantum pro refecto? if so much for making thee,
then how much more for making thee a new? says Bernard: For it is harder to
make again, then for to make. All things at the first were made with a word,
but when it came to the remaking, there was not dixis and facta sunt, He spoke
and they were made: but there were many things spoken: Christ was feign mulia
dicere, mulia facere, gravia perpeti, etiam indigne perpeti, to speak much,
and to do much; yea, and to suffer much, even cruel and unworthy things,
before we could be restored: and with the second making, there came the gift of
God himself: nisi dedisset se, non reddidisset te, He had not restored thee,
unless he had given himself for thee. Benard upon Datus est nobis filius, Nam
etsi millies p^ssem rependere me: tamen quid sum ego ad illum
If he had but given me unto my self, I could have given my self to him
again: but when it comes to this, that I must recompense him for giving
himself; though I could give my self a thousand times, yet what am I to make
amends for that gift? yet this is to our comfort, that follows there, quod
etiamsi non possum, quantum debeo, tamen non possum ulira quam possum; sed si
possem ulierius, vellem: and if I were able to render more, I would be willing
to do it: etsi minus reddo, quia minor sum, tamen quia tota anima ex se
dilegit, nihil deest, ubi totum est, although he can give but little that has
but little, yet seeing it is the utmost power of the whole soul that is
employed in this love, where the whole is, there is nothing wanting: and that
is all that God desires, and we must labor to come unto it.

Now we come to that that is forbidden.

The Negative part.
1. For the first, Basil calls it (...), a disordered loveri. whereas God
should stand highest, and nothing should be loved extra Deum, beyond God; when
it is not so, but we love other things more then God, then our love is out of
order, and puts all out of order: It was said before, that not only the
doing of evil, but deserti^ mediorum, est peccatum, the passing by of better
duties is a sin: so here especially in the love of God, it must be dilectio,
and that with a choice: and to make choice of the abased creatures, whether we
[doe] as they that make their belly their God, Phil. 3.19. or money, Ephesians.
5.5. or 3. Epist. John. 9. primatum gerere, i. to bestow the first honor due
to God upon himself: here our love is out of order. Pro Deo colitur, quicquid
prae caeteri^ diligitur: quia amo^ meus, Deus meus. We make that our God on
which we in a special manner place our affections. Every man has somewhat,
that he esteems above all, and that is his Idol, rather then his God: and
they are all of two sorts, amor mundi, or sui, the love of the world, or the
love of himself. August. says, O si possemus excitare homines, and cum illis
ipsi pariter excitari, ut possemus esse amatores vitae permanentis, quales
quotidie videmus vitae fugientis! O that we could stir up the hearts of men,
and with theirs, our own, to be as deeply in love with the things that
concern eternal life, as we are with those which concern that which is but
transient and momentany! There are Philosophers which say, that the soul of
man est in medio loco inter Deum and creaturas, has a middle place between
God and the creatures: and a thing that stands in the midst between two
things, cannot move to both, but motibus contrariis, by contrary motions:
certainly the soul stands so, in regard of the world and God, and it cannot
move to both, but by contrary motions: and because it is through the baseness
of original sin abased; it likes well of bodily things: and because worldly
things are near at hand, therefore we take them, and illis nos ingurgitamus,
and fill cur selves with them, (and so have no taste of heavenly things:) and
as it is Prove. 27.7. Anima saturata calcabit favum, the soul filled despises
an hony-combe: so when we crambe our soul with worldly pleasures, we come to
have no taste of God, and consequently despise him: therefore we must first
jejunare, and weane our selves from these. And beside this amor mundi, there is
amor sui, the love of ones self: it is harder represt then the other: and it
is it that men are wilfully given to: and till a great measure of the Spirit
come into their hearts, they will not rid themselves; and therefore as
Prosper says, se amanies donantur sibi, because they love themselves, and lose
Gods love, and reward too. Yet not so, but that in this disobedience of our
affection, there be degrees: the degrees, they be two. 1. When a thing is
loved more, and above that it should. 2. When it is preferred above God.
The first is a degree to the second: for when men have tasted worldly things,
and are acquainted with baser things; then nothing will have any taste with
them but only those: and so many come to say with him in Plauius, Malo me
mulier ista plus amet, quam dri; so brutish are many in their heart, and their
doings proclaim it, that they had rather have the favor of this man, or this
woman, then of God.

2. The second thing here forbidden, is opposed to zeal, commonly called
stupor, i. when we account of all alike, as if there were no difference
between good dealing and evil dealing, God and Baal; and we can bear both:
Aug. says that this stupor, To bear with sinners.
to bear with evil things, is pejor omnibus vitiis, of all vices the worst:
this God punishes with other grievous sins: for it is a special prejudice
against the love of God.

3. The third is more rare, but yet in some, which the Fathers call nauseam
spiritus: we may call it the hatred of God, when thinking of God is a burden to
them, and dealers in good causes are odious to them, and they are glad when
they have not success. The case of these men is very perilous, and it is the
extremity of mischief, that a man can come to in his life. All these (both of
sirmative and negative) are to be examined per contemptum, non apsius, by the
contempt not of God himself, (for every man will say be is content to love God
for his part) but per contemptum legis ipsius, by the contempt of the Law of
God. The state of God, is as of an e^rthly Prince: as in earthly Kingdoms, qui
diligit regem, diligit l^gem: so qui dil^git Deum, diligit ^e^bum: he that
loves the King, loves his laws, so ^e that loves God, loves the word of God:
this was David^ touchstone, Psalm. 119.97. O how love I thy Law? and ideo
mandata tua dilex^, qua ^xultatio cordis mei sunt, therefore have I loved thy
Commandments, because they a^e the delight of my heart.

M^ (...) M^^^ (...) love.
Now we will add something of the Means. What means soever there are that
move men to love, they are all reduced to these three, 1. p^lchrum, beauty, 2.
conjunct^m, neerenesse, 3. utile, benefits. 1. Beauty is of it self a means,
prom^seuum argumentum, it moves love, till we find a deformed guest in a same
house. 2. Vbi ego, and meum, illa trutina necesse est praeponde^et, that must
needs be the better end of the balances that holds both me and mine. 3. He is
good, because he does us good: and so consequently ipso facto, he is good,
because we think that what good soever we have, it comes from him.



Visible beauty (...).
1. Beauty: there is a visible, and invisible beauty. The visible is such as our
eyes are drawn to: one of the Heathen calls it radium divinae essentiae,, a
beam of the divine essence: another, florem divini seminis, a flower sprung up
of a divine seed. This visible beauty is not such as should move us much. One
of the Heathen says Damihi solemn aest^vum, bring it but into the summers sun
it is done: da mihi ventum vernum, or to the March wind, it will mar it: duc
unguem transversum, scratch it but with thy nail, it is clean spoiled: or let
all alone, yet it is soloccidens, a declining sun, it will set of it self;
years and sickness will abridge it. The beauty of God, if a man had a
glorified eye, far passes all these streams: Psalm. 16. last v. the Prophet
says that he saw the likeness of God but in a vision, and it filled him
continually. For the invisible beauty, Augustine shows a good way to find it.
It may happily be that thou love a man because he is thy friend: may it not
also be that he is an old man? and what love thou then in him? his head is
white, his body is crooked, his face wrinkled. O thou will say, fidelis homo
est, he is a faithful honest man: Well says he, quibus oculis videtur fides,
iisdem videtur and Deus, God is seen by those eyes by which thou discernest
thy friends fidelity. This motive is no where greater: in God we shall have
most perfect rest: otherwise set thine eye or heart on any countenance or
pleasure in the earth, thou shall find no rest: But, quicquid est per quod
satigationi occurritur, whatsoever we take pains about, that same thing in
fatigationem vertitur; it wearieth us, if it be but awhile.

2. For the other, i. for neerenesse, propinquitas: name any name of
neerenesse, not the mention of Dominus and servus, of Lord and servant: but
there it is, and that is a great privilege that we have, that the Angels are
not our Lords, but our fellow servants: but the name of a friend is greater
nearenesse. John. 15.15. I will call you my friends: and that such a friend, as
we see that his glorious estate made him not think scorn of us, and in the
pitch of our adversity he did most love us. Brother, John 20.17. Go tell my
brethren, etc. and whereas in a natural thing it is, that if there be many, it
diminishes: as the affection of Parents, when they have many children: Genesis
37.3. this, otherwise. Luke 12.13. Brethren according to the flesh, they are a
means that the inheritance comes not whole; but this brother is so far
from keeping any portion of the inheritance from us, as that having two rights,
he was content to part with one right, and to entitle us wholly with it.
Father, Deuteronomy. 32.6. Dealest thou so with the Lord? is not he thy Father that
bought thee? etc. not as thy father after the flesh, that has begot thee,
happily to a benefit, peradventure to a curse: if thy other Father take no
better order for thee, then thy father after the flesh, especially the (Spouse)
through the whole book of the Cantic. Deus zelotypus, he is jealous over us.

And that that goes beyond all these: because he was not near enough, Heb.
2.17. that in all things he might be like unto us, he took upon him our
nature, and made himself like unto us in all things, (only sin excepted, which
made us unlike him) that there might be perfectus amor, ubi perfecta
similitudo, perfect love, where there was perfect likeness.

3. Benefits: that motive is used Esa. 1.3. hang up a crib, and see thou put
provender into it, and the Ox and the Ass will know you for it. So is the
state of benefits among men, Luke 7.47. he to whom is more forgiven, or given
to, loves more: and his love, it waxes and waneth according to the benefit.
For benefits, that we are facti and refecti, our own particular Table will
instruct us how bountiful he is in serving up all the creatures to our use, so
promotion, riches, and honor, they come not from men, but God: ipse est, qui
inclinavit corda little: what benefit soever we receive of men, we are
accountable to him for all: and then considering that dedit filium, he has
given us his son, Deus, Filius pretium. Spiritus, pignus Pater, praemium.
for a price: and Spiritum Sanctum, the holy Ghost, for a pledge and earnest;
and servat se tantum in praemium, and has reserved himself for a crown and
reward of that love, that we shall afford him: therefore if we know not his
crib, then let the Ox teach us to know our Masters crib: and he is nothing
comparable to God.

The signs of love. The proper signs are obedience and patience: which are
the proper effects of love: but others are to be recounted; Signa amoris, the
signs of love.
and they are particularly to be handled.

1. The first is, in Matthew. 6.21. Christ says, we shall know where our
treasure is, i. our love, by the heart: i. by the thoughts of our heart: The
bending of a man's thoughts upon any thing.
so that a man may know that which he loves most if he can know the thing,
that he does oftenest think of; we have example of it Mar. 8.14. if there be
any thing that a man sets his mind upon, he thinks it is mentioned, when
ought is spoken that may be taken that way: as it is said, that when our
Savior Christ began to teach them, to beware of the leaven of the Pharisces,
and of Herod, their mind was on bread, and they thought Christ spoke to them
to warn them of bread, when he spoke the Parable of Leaven: so then, that is a
sign of the love of God, if our thoughts be upon him.

Thoughts are of three sorts: either a thought Deep, Long, Often repeated.
Cogitatio Profunda, Prolixa, Crebra.


The deep thought is that which in the Saints of God is especially to show
forth it self: Cogitatio profunda.
so that sundry seemed to be in an exiasie in recounting the mercy of God, the
matter of their love: and it is a sign of great love in them.

The other a long continued thought: continuae cogitationes, though not
profundae When the mind runs upon a thing continually, though it cannot
think of it seriously.
: Prolixa.
Ezekiel. 33.31. their mind ran so much upon worldly affairs (as it is the
manner of age to think of wealth, and covetousness, so of youth, to think of
pastime) that in the mean while they thought not of the word of God. So these
continued thoughts showed what they loved: so then, if our thoughts upon God
may be continued, though they be not very deep, yet they are a good sign of
love.

Now for the third, when a man has neither deep nor long thoughts, yet if
those that he has may be crebrae, often repeated; if any man is thus affected
to God, Crebra.
it is a good sign that the love of God has taken deep root in him: though
they are not extaticall, nor continual, yet at times with some intermission.

2. The second sign of love, is this: if we esteem the pledges of that party
to whom we bear love: 2 Look what estimation we give to them, we give to God.
if we account of those earnests which he has left us: as David, Psalm. 119
97. says, he loves the Law of the Lord. Look what estimation a man bears
to his word and Sacraments, and outward means of prayer, the same he bears
to God if he love him: as on the contrary, Genesis 25.30. and it is afterward
urged, Heb. 12.16. that whereas the primogenitura, the birthright was a pledge
of Gods favor, Esau is called a profane man, and one that loved not God, (and
his reason is, because he did forgo that pledge.

3 If we forgo that that is most dear unto us, it is a sign of love. We
have the picture of God in his creatures, Vbi amor, ibi oculus.
3. So out of Genesis 25.30. that forasmuch as we cannot see him, and as the
Heathen says, ubi amor, ibi oculus; we love the party, that if we have his
picture, our eye will not be off it: yet so if we have an eye to his creatures.
So this third also was in that profane Esau, we see his love to his brothers
pottage was so great, as that he cared not what he did forgo, for that which
he liked; the best thing that he had, scil. the title of the eldership among
his brethren, the pledge of God, it was not dear unto him: so great a care had
he of his belly. This may be for an instruction to us, when we can accept of
any condition, though it be never so hard, that may set us into Gods favor,
that may be to us a good and perfect sign.

4 Desiderium, an earnest desire that thinks the time thing, till it come to
the fruition of that it loves.
4. Psalm. 12.5. all these fall indesiderium, if as we have a desire, so if we
can have a grief, for the absence of God, as for the deferring of that we
love, and for not being able to enjoy it; such is the saying of David, Psalm.
42.2. When shall I come to appear before the presence of the Lord? Gregory
says, inauditu^ est hic amor, an unheard of love, that a man should love one,
and not desire his presence: so he that desires to live here, and never to be
dissolved, has no love. These are signs of that part of love that is called
desiderium, or desire. Now follow the signs of the second part.

Joy. A general rule for those things that we love, if we be greatly joyful
when we have obtained, when we feese in our selves, that which the Prophet,
Psalm. 4.7. protests. 1 When a man's affection is occupied in that thing that
he loves, he thinks the time short, so long as he is occupied about it.
The second part is joy: an especial effect and part of love, and a sign of
it, as Gal. 5.22. But the fruit of the Spirit, is love, joy, peace-etc. as
Psalm. 4.8. when a man has no less joy for the increase of spiritual things,
then the worldly man has, that he has a good seed time, or a good harvest.
Of this love there are sundry signs.

1. Genesis 29.20. To think the time that we spend in his affairs that we love,
a short time, though it be many years: as Jacob served Laban seven years for
Rachel; yet because he loved her, they seemed to him but a few days: this if
we can do in Gods affairs, it is a sign we love him; as on the contrary, if
a man think one hour three in doing good, surely he has no joy, no delight:
and so his love is not stable. 2. Again, in the the true affection of love,
when there is joy, it is showed thus: the Philosopher says, Quicquid cupis
habere, times perdere: cuicunnque cupis conjungi, ab eo times separari, 2 In
regard of fear; whatsoever a man loves, he is afraid to lose.
Whatsoever a man desires to keep, he fears to lose, and to whomsoever we
desire to be united, from them we fear to be separated. Now if any man's heart
can bear him witness, that he can tremble at sin, and those operations are
mavelous fearful to him, that he should be separated by from God, it is a
good sign. All affections discover love, as on the other side fear, umor*
occupat omnes affectiones. Iobn 19.3. Pilat had a good mind to Christ: but his
love came to be touched when (notwithstanding all the innocence he found in
him) he would deliver him up to the people to be crucified, and all was by
reason of the fear he had of forgoing that that he best esteemed, namely
Caesar's favor, and so that fear was a sign that he loved that best. So Acts
19.25. the Silver. Smith being afraid that his Craft (whereunto his love was)
should down, he stirs up sedition, preferring his own gain before the
disquietnesse of all the people. 3 That that we love most, we will forgo any
thing for it: so if we be overtaken, that we have lost it, to be in continual
grief, til we recover it.
3. And as for fear, so grief, when we have lost it: for if we be grieved,
when we feel not the ancient comfort and vigor of the spirit, that we were
wont to have, it is a sign that we loved it: as Luke 18.23. there was a good
mind in that young man, that came to Christ, and our Savior Christ was well
affected toward him, but when he came to be touched in his love, he was
grieved more to part from his possessions, then from Christ: so grief will be
a way to love. 4 If we take great care for the recovery of what we lost, it is
a sign, that we took joy in it.
4. Again, the care that we take for the recovery, to be mavelous careful to
recover it. Psalm. 132.4. When a man will not suffer his eyes to sleep, nor his
eyelids to slumber, nor the temples of his head to take any rest, until he
had recovered it; and in the songs of Solomon. This care is in worldly men,
Numb. 23. the care of Balaam, loving the wages of unrighteousness, though God
said he should not go, and albeit he himself had said, verse. 19. God would
not lie as a man, nor change as the son of man, yet he would try again,
whether God would change his mind: so careful was he to obtain it. 5 If we
sti^k last to God when all ^lse forsake him, (...) a sign of love.
5. Again, in Psalm. 119. verse. 127. a certain sign, it is a conclusion, to
set down, that when all the world have forsaken God, therefore to love God the
more: this is the nature of the worldly man, while there is a liking, his
liking goes with other men's liking: but when a man can continue his affection,
so that his love is, when others mislike, and the more a thing is hated, the
more he will love it, this is a good sign. 6 If we can say as the Church
sa^^h, C^nt. 8 7. Much water cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown
it, if a man should give all the substance of his h^use for love, they would
greatly contemn it: that it is str^nger then death, i. when any affliction
comes, it is stronger then it He that loves for his own commodity, fears
^est the quantity of that he loves, be dimin^shed. In concu^iscence, quo quis
vult l^men suu^n, there, the fewer, the better, but in b^no ^^^^^l^niiae, in
quo vult v^lle att^^tus, there we wish that all had him. Deus omnibus eo
inunis, cuique t^tus.
6. The last sign is out of Cant. 8.7.8. that the true love can abide trial,
and false love cannot abide it: the Heathen man says, falsus amor inde fugit,
unde probatur, false love will not stand the trial: but when water cannot
quench it, nor fire consume it, and we can be contented to foregoe all, and
our jealousy can wrestle with death and the grave, and overcommeth them, then
we may say as Christ says, John 15.13. greater love then this cannot be.
The sixth precept, As we must our selves love God, so likewise we must be
desirous to bring others to his love: and here appears the difference
between amor mercenarius and gratuitus, that love which is mercenary, and that
which is free: for in the former, because a man seeks his own profit, he is
loath that another should love that that he loves, and have any part with him,
lest by the communicating of that thing to other, it should be restrained to
himself; thereof comes jealousy: but in the other, where our own commodity
is not sought, where we wish not our own good, but good to him, whom we love
for himself, there is a desire to communicate all the good things we have, so
as* that all men may have them in commune: so they that love God, would bring
all men to love that they love, for it self, and yet all in whole; Ps. 31.24.
the Prophet showing his good mind in this point, i. he desired to draw all to
the love of God. Ps. 31.26. O love the Lord, all ye his Saints, etc. As on the
contrary, Psalm. 139.21. that is also a sign of love: Lord do not I have them
that hate thee? Yea, I hate them with a perfect haired, as though they were
mine enemies, and had done me injury; Psalm. 94.16. he to draw all men into the
hatred of the Lords enemies, there his challenge is, Who will rise up with me
against the wicked, or who will take my part against the evil doers? and as he
would take part himself against them, so he labored that others would join
with him.

The second principal signs, as proper effects of love, are obedien^^* and
patience: Obedientia, Obedience.
there is no saying of all the Fathers, of greater use, then that of Gregory,
Probatio d^lectionis, exhibitio est operis: and that indeed is a true sign of
love, when it works: for the Will being inflamed with this affection, and
having the government of all the parts and powers of the body and mind,
necessary it is, that wheresoever desire in the Will takes hold, it must
elicere motum, cause motion: as if a man be given to the love of wine, that
love kindles in him a desire to have it, and that desire does elicere motum,
that he may work and earne so much money: and after still he works to get a
vessel or bottle till he may have that too. This active part does depend thus
of love, John 14.15. If you love me (as Christ said to Peter, Love thou me?
Feed my sheep:) show it by your obedience, keep my Commandments: 1 John
2.3. if a man obey not, he is so far from love, that he does not know God.

Obedience, the proper effect of love, among them that are unequal, but not
equal.
We must understand, that where the parties are equal, between whom love is,
that mutual affection is called amicitia, friendship: but where one party is
superior, there they are not called friends, though the Prince on her part and
good will, call other so, but they properly call it observantiam, observance:
the very natural actus whereof is obedience. John 15.15. Christ calls us his
friends, and by the nearest names of consanguinity: Matthew. 12.49. yet Paul and
the rest of the Apostles presumed not upon those titles, but acknowledged this
observantia, and in the beginning of their Epistles, and writings, entitled
themselves the servants of God and of Jesus Christ. Romans 6.16. Paul says,
Look whom ye obey, his servants ye are: so of this duty, this is the perfect
sign (of obedience.)

The order of the petitions shows the end of the Commandments: and so
consequently, in regard of this glory, that God has by our obedience
Now the applying of obedience to the end of the Commandment: in our petitions
that is first, that Gods name may be hallowed and glorified: How? if he be a
King: and if he bear rule over us: how shall this Kingdom and rule be
established? if we fulfill his will here in Earth, as his Angels do in Heaven:
and so is his name glorified. And it is so necessary, as that Genesis 2.17. God
for his glory appointed in Paradise, the obedience of Adam; when he was in that
state: and therefore ordained a Commandment, that he should not eat of the
tree of knowledge, [that in the obedience of that prescript, his glory might be
showed.]

The manners of the g^ory of God, two.
The glory of God comes either directly from us to him, or by others: from us,
Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the time of trouble, and I will hear thee, and
thou shall glorify me: this is for every one: that is for the first
glorifying. But being not content with this, Matthew. 5.16. God will have glory
of us both mediately and immediately Jam. 2.
So let your light shine, that other men seeing your good works may glorify
your Father for your sakes: there is that by other he may be glorified for us,
which is the second justification: the first is to him by faith alone: but the
other before men, by such works as God may be glorified by them; and so other
by them, reconciled to God: this glory comes to God.

[Now for manners,] Augustine, Si mores Christianorum sint amabiles, neque
quicquam facit bonos vel malos mores, nisi boni vel mali amores, for amor male
inflammans, and timor male humilians, If the manners of Christians be any way
amiable, we must know that our manners are said to be good or bad, according as
our love is either good or bad; for that love which inflames, but not aright,
and that fear which humbles, but not aright, are the causes of all evil in
the world.

Our love is never true, but inter similes, where there is a likeness:
therefore there must follow in God and us, idem velle, and idem nolle: this is
obedience: our Will being moved by his Will: and suffering him to be the
principal mover: for where two must Will, either the one must be proportioned
to the other, The Will of God, righteousness it self.
or they both to a third: and there is no reason that Gods Will should be
proportioned to our; no more reason then a straight rule to a crooked piece of
timber or stone, M^^^^^i, alie^^ ^^lun^^^^, est (...)
(...) not his straight Will must be made proportionable to our crooked; but
our crooked to his straight: so the special end and scope that God has
enjoined us obedience, is, that he may have glory, and our love be truly
expressed.

The necessity of Obedience, Necessitas obedi^ntiae.
Now for the necessity of obedience, the necessity or excellency of it we may
consider thus: by the good weighing of that v. 1 Samuel 15.22. where God having
ordained sacrifice an especial thing in Religion; yet before this special
part, he prefers obedience: and it must needs be so.

1. For if a man will offer to any, that which shall be accepted, it is better
if he offer somewhat of his own, then of others: for that which we offer of
our own, is dearer unto us: and therefore he to whom it is offered, takes it
better. In obedience, offertur propria voluntas, I offer up mine own Will: and
as it is, Heb. 4.12. the two edged sword divides my Will, and pierces it: and
consquently I offer it up to God. In a sacrifice offertur aliena caro, I offer
up other, not mine own flesh.

2. Again, the better that a thing is, that is offered, the better it will be
accepted; but what is offered in obedience, is better then that offered in
sacrifice; because in obedience there is a live thing offered: a beast I cannot
offer, but when it is killed. Again, in a sacrifice, there is but a brute
beast, and unreasonable: in obedience, there is a reasonable soul, which is
more acceptable to God.

3. The third is this, the more ye give, the better it is accepted: in
obedience there cannot be more given, then is given: In sacrifice I give of the
fruit of my cattle, a part of my fruit: but in obedience I give the fruit,
tree and all. I offer my self and all that I have; as one says very well,
Obedientia non potest plus dare, quam dedit, dedit en^m^se.

4. Last, that that is offered, the longer continuance it is of, the better it
is. In a sacrifice, it is but two hours work, while the fire is kindled, and
the beast burned to ashes: but in obedience, when I offer up my self to God,
it is a continual sacrifice: it is a perpetual mortifying of my Will, my
Reason, and all my members. Obedientia est juge sacrificium: therefore it is
plain that obedience is better then sacrifice: not that sacrifice should be
neglected or condemned; it is not condemned, when a better thing is preferred.
Ier. 7.22.23. When the people was mavelous careful that the Lord should not
be defrauded of his offerings and sacrifices, God says: I spoke not to your
Fathers, when I brought them out of the land of Egypt, that they should
sacrifice: but this was the thing, that I spoke to them for, that they should
obey my voice: that is, in respect of obedience: That thing is not denied
simply, which in comparison to another is set far behind it.

Again, the excellency and necessity of obedience appears in this, that
though it be a good thing, or though neither good nor bad; yet for obedience,
it must be restrained: obedience has power to make of evil, good: and of
good, evil; in observation or contempt: for had not God forbidden to ca^e of
the fruit, the eating had been neither a good nor an evil thing: but we see
the disobedience, and the breach thereof, made it evil: A more plain example
we have, 1 King. 20.36. A Prophet comes to one of his neighbors, in the host,
and wills him to smite and wound him: the man knew it was unlawful, and
refused to do it: but he delivered a message from God: (Because thou have not
obeyed the voice of the Lord, behold as soon as ever thou art departed from
me, a Lion shall find thee, and slay thee:) and for this his disobedience a
Lion slew him. Thus appears the excellency of obedience, that it is able to
change the nature of a good thing, and to make it evil: and evil, good. The
last example is of Christ: who shows the great necessity of this virtue, in
his Dilemma. Father, if it be possible, let me not obey: but let this Cup pass
from me; if it be not possible, thy Will be done: and when one of these must
needs have been chosen; either mori, or non obedire, to die, or to disobey:
elegit potius mori, quam non obedire, he chose rather to die then to disobey:
and so consequently showed, that obedience is more necessary then life it
self, and the breath we draw: and this his obedience recovered the world: 2
Cor. 10.6. as the obedience of the Saints, for it is the small number of the
obedient persons, that are the pillars of the world: otherwise without them, it
could not stand but fall.

The second rule is the precept of Obedience.
Now to the second rule, to that that is commanded: here is commanded obedience:
not as it is the general, as it is in the execution of every particular
Commandment, but as it has a respect to the intent of him that commands: an
earnest endeavor that a man has toward God to do good, and has a Will to
answer whatsoever is prescribed.

It is as the other are, of two sorts: either Unperfect or inchoate. Or Perfect.


1. For the first is an obedience of fear: as 1 Samuel 15.24. but that is
unperfect obedience: and every effect is there to be discerned, where it is
perfectly wrought. The perfect. Genesis 22.12. God himself by the obedience of
Abraham concludes his fear, not such as falls: [for the thing, it is nothing
else, but the laboring of a man's soul.]

Then that is here commanded, is obedire; it is a compound: and our rule is,
that in compositis and copulativis oportet utrumque quaerere, non suffic^t
alterum, in compounds and copulatives we must not take up with a part, but both
must be performed.

1. Then we will take the simple first, audire, hearing; audire and sequ^, to
hear and follow, are Gods words for obedience.

The Fathers in the Greek Church call it (...), and in the Latin Church
oba^dire, both which imply hearing and obeying.

For audire, hearing, it is good reason that we perform it to God: if it be
but for (...), quia audivit nos, because he has heard us: when we were
indeprofundis, in the deep: therefore we should hear him: and not that alone,
but we know not where to have a better guide to follow, and a better Counselor
to hear. If a man follow Lot out of Sodom, and Noah into the Arc, he shall
do well: when a good guide, and Counselor is set before our eyes, and we
neither follow nor hear, we shall have that punishment to follow naughty
guides, and to hear evil counsel.

And that is very hard dealing with God, not to perform that to him, which we
will perform to the absurdest here^^ke.
The not hearing of God, makes that there can come no man that shall hold never
so absurd a thing, but he shall have some hearers: the absurdest Heretic
shall have some followers, and the reason is, because they will not follow the
Shepherd: and one wishes that all the sheep, ut incidant in lupos oves, quae
nolunt sequi pastorem, they that will not follow the Shepherd to the pastures,
shall follow the Butcher to the Shambles. What is there in this our hearing,
that makes the most part of the world so loath to it? even this, audire and
sequi, this hearing and following discourage many: for they will not be
hearers of others, but devisers and inventors themselves, and leaders, and will
be heard and followed: it is that that the great wise men of the world seek
after. Malus assecla ratio, pejor voluntas, our own reason is an ill guide,
and our will a worse; for reason, he must be waited on, if there be a good
wit: and Will is a tyrant, before grace cast him down. In this respect,
because auduus, it is sensus d^sciplinae, hearing the sense of discipline: and
men will not learn; therefore it comes that this special and first part is
neglected and denied: therefore this is first commanded, that we be con^^^t to
be led, and to receive rules of God.

2. Another thing in audire, in hearing, is this; that whereas we said before,
Quod cor non facit, non fit, that which the ^^art does not, is as if it were
not done at all: this aud^tu^ must not be* as Augustine says, only canorum per
cartilag n^um, a bare sound in the ear: but unless the heart hear also, the
ea^es are b^t au^es aequivocae, (...) Idols ears, that have ears and hear
not: such are the ears of him that when his heart is about strange objects,
can be content to lend God an ear, and that is all, such are men of
u^circumcised ears. Ier. 6.10. We see, that as there is a circumcision of the
foreskin of the flesh, Circumcisio auriwn.
so it is not there only, but in every part: and there is a praeputium auris,
a foreskin of the ear, which the Devil uses: for he is Master of all that is
superfluous: and so consequent^y opens it to those speeches, as make best for
his purposes: and shuts it to the contrary, unless men do strive against
it; and until men may take away this praeputium, this foreskin, they are of
uncircumcised ^a^es.

As we use commonly to say, he will not hear good counse^, i. he will not
follow, albeit it be sure he is one that will nor stop his ear at the advice
of his friend, yet if his heart be not bent to follow it, his hearing profits
him not. And the Heathen man says, men's videt, non oculus; and men's audit, non
auris, it is not the e^es, but them ^^de that sees, nor the ear, but the
mind that hears: as this is true to lest men should think that obedience
consisted only in hearing* God does use to put an and a copulative after it:
as and custodiant, and a^^^lent, and faciant, etc. they shall hear, and keep,
and walk, and do, etc.

The best sign is the similitude of the fish-hooke, cum capit, capitur: and
tum cap^tur, cum artrahitur, when it takes, it is taken: and that is a sign
that hearing sticks in us.

We come to the other part, to the preposition (ob.) as there is loqui, a
saying, and obloqui, a gainsaying: so there is an hearing, and an hearing
against: or again-hearing: audire and obedire, i. that you shall never hear
the word of God, but ever when he speaks, there will be an oblocutor; neither
shall you heat the world confirmed of all; but when he speaks, there will be
an oblocutor also: As you must have a hearing, so you must have a contrary
hearing; We shall always heat two speakers. Amor Dei, and sui, or mundi.
there are two speakers: 1. amor Dei, the love of God, 2. sui and mundi, of our
selves and the world: then you must not only hear him what he says, but also
the other, what he says: as in amor mundi and sui,
in the love of our selves and the world, that make disordered love, there are
two speakers; we must hear the contrary of that, that the world says unto us:
and of that we our selves say to our selves: For the world, John 15.18. (...),
etc. If the world hate you, etc. Christ says, that the world could not abide
him: so it is like to speak of him; but not to his good. Now as it is Genesis
5.22. Enoch, he is said to have walked with God; so must we do: God and the
world will not walk together, Amos 3.3. it is impossible that two should walk
together, except they be agreed: the world cannot walk with Christ, because
it hates him: Enoch gave over the worlds company, and chose to walk with God
alone, and so was translated: the world, i. whatsoever evil counsel (we may
receive) not only of profane men, but of gainesayers, we receive it of the
world: 1 King. 22.12. the King, as he shall have a Micaiah to tell him true; so
it is certain, there will be a Zidkiah to speak against it: There shall be a
number of Divines, and Preachers that will say to men, id quod volunt, sanctum
est, that is the best way which they like best: that will loose, let other bind
as fast as they can: therefore they are to be taken heed of: Then this is
required, that we frame not our selves to the world, whether to the old world,
as Ier. 44.17. (their reason, why they would burn Incense to the Queen of
Heaven, was, because they and their fathers never did otherwise, etc. or the
present world, as 1 Samuel 8.20. the people, they would needs have a King, and
their reason was; We will be like other Nations, and other men.

The other speaker, are we our selves, and we before God, put new notions in
us: we are at as great odds with God, as the world: Romans 8.7. the wisdom of
the natural and carnal man is plain enmity with God: and as he is a carnal
man, Ezekiel. 13.3. there is a desire in him to follow his own spirit: and Prove.
21.2. omnis via viri recta sibi, every way of man is right in his own eyes: if
he follow that, then he thinks he has followed a right way: And as we have
this liking in us, so there is another liking in God; there is no such way in
God; Ier. 18.11. revertatur quisque a via sua, return every man from his own
way, they must come back: therefore they were in a wrong way. Genesis 6.5. Gods
own testimony that man's thoughts are (...) rak rang col hajom, naught and
exceeding naught, etc. therefore there is like to come but little fruit of this
oblocutor, 1 Pet. 2.11. his fruit that does follow them, that they do militare
(...), war against the soul: above all, this is that that shows us, that
it is the punishment of God, Psalm. 78.29. they had their desire, (he let fall
Quails round about their Tents) but lost his favor: i. with their desire they
had the wrath of God: Psalm. 81.12. he would have had no strange God to be
amongst them, nor any other God worshipped; but they refused to hear his
voice, and to obey him: therefore he gave them over, and let them fall away.
What is the reward? Such as Romans 1.24. it is the punishment of the greatest
offenses of Idolatry: and yet 1 Cor. 5.5. there is a delivering of one to the
Devil, and a good effect comes of it: 2 Cor. 2.8. there is a delivering to a
man's self: and it is better to be delivered to Satan, then to our own
desires. And it is the course of Moses, Exodus 4.14. whereas God required him a
very plausible thing to man, to be a Magistrate, he being suspicious lest his
will should beguile him, because he felt no oblocutions, so he made four
denials, before he would take it, till God was very wrath with him: The
judgments of the Fath^^ ^^^vellous.
for true obedience, it has nothing de suo, of its own, but totum de alieno,
all from another: it is a continual gainesayer of it self.

3. A third thing: and that is a joining of these two together: for there are
some that will hear God; and because they will have no gainesaying, they will
hear the gainesayer too. This we are commanded from: for when they have heard
what God can say, then Gal. 1.16. they call a conference, and hear what flesh
and blood can say, and they themselves will sit Judges. Paul says, when I was
to preach Christ to the Gentiles, I never consulted with flesh and blood: As
one says very well of our affections, that they are like Lime, which where it
should be coldest, as in water, it is there hottest: and there coldest, where
it should be hottest: so a man's reason is never so suspicious and wary, as when
it comes to deal with God: and never so careless, as when we are farthest
from him: as if he were persona malae fidei, They do transig^e tanq^^m ^u^
homine pessimae fidei.
one not to be trusted: where they need least to fear. If they heard the
Minister of the word, there they are most afraid, and are mavelous careful
for examining all circumstances, lest happily they should be seduced: whereas
in worldly matters, where most peril is, there they are most secure. Of this
proceeds a partial obedience, the Fathers call it delicatam obedientiam: for
certain things, to sit and hear an hour, and receive the Cup, the Sacrament;
the flesh sees no harm in it: but as 2 Samuel 16.18. Chusai then ready for
another: this is specially to be taken heed of: we must be content to hear God,
and so, that we be willing to gainesay his gainesayers, and never make a
mixture of them.

The last thing commanded, for the measure or qualtity of it: that it be ready
and willing, as Bernard says, though contra voluntatem, yet ex voluntate,
cheerfully: Romans 6.17. he commends them, that from the heart they obeyed; for
there is an obedience that is coacta, constrained: Ier. 23.33. there the
people, they were content to hear, but their account was, What is the burden
of the Lord? and God says, I will even forsake them for this saying, I will
visit every such one, etc. the burden of the Lord shall ye mention no more:
thus shall ye say, etc. Amor erubescit nomen difficultatis, Love scorns the
name of difficulty: it counts it a light yoke and very easy: against them
that do unwillingly: John 6.60. their opinion of the Sacrament, durus e^ hic
sermo, this is a hard saying: Matthew. 8.29. there is obedience in the Devil, he
came out, but with great grudging, and renting, (and casting him down) and he
made much ado before he came out: those that cannot do cheerfully, show
their measure to be with the Devil: Psalm. 19.10. this durus sermo, to him was
as sweet as an honyco^be, whereas the Jews counted it a burden.

The last part that we have relation to that [in obedience] that God especially
aims at; and will have done. The intent of the precept, is the object (of
this precept) of obedience: yea, though they be harder then Saul; for of Saul,
1 Samuel 15.20. the leanest he could have offered, and in killing of the poor
multitude, he could have obeyed God: but Agag, and certain of the Nobility,
and the fattest of the sheep and cattle he spared: whereas Gods intent was
rather to have had his obedience in them: but because there was a greater
difficulty, and a better estimation, he heard the oblocution.

The end is to be delivered at the third rule: of things forbidden: N^g
what is forbidden? it is called disobedience: the state whereof may be
conjectured, if we compare it with that that it is resembled to, of the
Teraphim; and see the effects of it in our nature, 1 Samuel 15.23. it is said
that rebellion or disobedience is as the sin of witchcraft: and the
abomination of the Teraphim: The reason of the resemblance: as in witchcraft,
we will yield obedience [so long] as God will answer us in any evil thing, we
will obey him: and again, because it was noted in the law, that the Witches and
Sorcerers, they should give false answers, so we see here in this place, his
disobedience answered him like a Witch: for he disobeyed for fear of the
people, lest he should be put out of the Kingdom: he did disobey, and yet the
Kingdom was translated. 2. To the abomination of the Teraphim: Genesis 31.30.
they had their d^i penates, their household Gods, about the corners of their
houses, and in their high ways; and such is the sin of disobedience; for in
the Temple all held obedience outward to the means; but abroad our Teraphim
and our Gods.

We see by punishing for it, what account he makes of^^
2. In the effect, Deuteronomy. 27.26. we see that the curse of God, whose maledicere
est malefacere, is due to this sin of disobedience: for it is a very
reproachful thing to God, to account his Commandments, as the servant Matthew.
25.24. I knew that thou wast an hard man, reaping where thou sowedst not. A
sign of this, the Rainebow, which does not only mind us of the covenant, but
of the general deluge whereby God punished the disobedience of the old world,
the performance shows what effect it wrought in God, but especially Romans
5.19. the cause of death is properly ascribed to this sin of disobedience.
Bernard: and that disobedience is the cause of our death, our daily experience
tells us. Quotidie experimur, quotidie enim morimur: and God says, by that a
man sins, he shall be pun^shed: so that, as we withdraw our obed^ence from
God; so ( Rom 8.20.) the creatures, they shall withdraw their obedience from
us: and that is attributed to this cause. And not that only [during this life
we have not only without us] but we find a disobedience in our selves, Romans
7.23. the 2. laws in us: in which the affections will not be subject to
reason, and reason cannot have any government over them, because we disobey our
Creator. More particularly, by Psalm. 119.32. the way of obedience is the path
of his Commandments: Deuteronomy. 5.32. from which way, we have a division of ways;
a way to the right hand, and a way to the left hand. Preach. 10.2. the heart of
a wise man is on his right hand, but the heart of a fool, on his lest: from
that place the Fathers fetch this interpretation, It is said that the heart of
the wiseman is on his right hand: there is probabilis inobedientia, a
disobedience that is not void of some probable pretense: and such was Saul's
here in Gilgal, his answer might seem reasonable, but that it is not it that
God commanded, which we should ever make our rule, and not the guidance of our
own reason; and into this fall the opposites of those before, not subjecting
our selves to hear and follow, the giving ear to the voice of our own
reason, and of the world, and of mingling them: all these ways lead ad
dexiram, to the right hand.

The way whereby we are led into the left hand way, we may count their folly,
that have no probability, that 2 These. 3.2. are called (...), wicked and
absurdly wicked: insomuch as the course of life they take, bears no color:
but whosoever shall look upon it, shall presently see it debauched, with out
all color or excuse.

The manner is opposed to Readily, Phil. 2.14. that their obedience must be
(...) without murmurings and disputings. As in obedience, so in disobedience,
the two exorbitations, and the manner disordered.
Murmuring was always almost the fault of the Israelites; for making of
dialogues, and asking of causes, Why for this cause rather then for that, and
why now rather then at another time, as Luther says well of the sect of the
Quaeristae: they will go with Why, in infinitum. Both these are to be removed:
and under these you may include the fault of them in Matthew. 22.5. or more
plain, Luke 14.18. they fell all at once to make excuses. The Angels yield no
reasons why they should not obey, nor excuse, nor murmr.

The last thing is in the degree: the degrees be two, 1. neglect. 2. contempt:
Neglect, Matthew. 22.12.
he that came in negligently without his wedding garment: 2. in the same place,
verse. 5. of those that set themselves to excuses, and refused to come,
contempt. This rule Austin gives of them both, Neglectus ubique culpabilis,
contempius ubique damnabilis, Neglect is always blameable, but contempt is always
damnable.

The means.

Heb. 11. that being in a good way, they gave over all possibility, and yielded
themselves wholly to God.
1. The special to this is the consideration of the good service that God has
had of his Saints before-time, and how they had great offers in the world, as
Moses, Joseph, Esaias, etc. if they had listed to have followed and heard the
oblocutor: but they were resolute that nothing should draw them from God: this
is the first.

2. Our Savior Christ his example may be as a second, as he was man, Et
subjectus est ^llis quibus^llis? pauperi fabro and foeminae.
Luke 2.51. he went to Nazareth, and was subject to them. Bernards question
upon these words, Who are they that the Son of God should be subject unto
them? faber and foemina, a Carpenter and a Woman: as he was God, or rather as
he was Christ, God and man, Heb. 5.8. where it is said, that though he were the
Son of God, yet learned he obedience: and indeed by his obedience to the
Cross, he recovered the world. And if any will make exception and say, that we
are not able to match with him, or with the Saints of God;

3. Then we may take for the third example, the state and course of all
creatures: Matthew. 8.27. the 2. unruliest creatures, the Wind and Sea obey the
word of Christ; What fellow is this, cui venti and mare obediunt? that even the
winds and the seas obey him? Take all the creatures, the heavens, the elements,
etc. there should be no manner of (...), disorder in them, were it not that
only man has broken it, and so has put himself and all other creatures out
of order: and this their obedience they have been ready to give over, i. they
have obeyed against their own course at Gods will, as the Sun standing still
at Ioshuahs commandment, whereas it is his nature to move continually: and the
fire not burning the three children, and Dan. 6. the Lions refraining from
devouring of Daniel: the earth moving, being of her own nature immovable: so
that they are not only audientes verbo divino, but also obedientes, hearers of
the word, but obeyers: which is the very true and perfect obedience, to obey in
giving over our own nature.

That if any man be disobedient, he is therefore disobedient, because it cannot
be conveniently performed.
4. Another may be taken from the nature of our obedience, for natural reason
says, where there is one duty, there are at the least two extremes, and of the
obedience of sin is multiplicior, then the obedience of God. It is truly said
of the Heathen man, negligentia plus laborat quam diligentia, idleness is more
toil then employment: and so we may say of every virtue, the adulterous man
labors more then the chaste: and the covetous man more then the well
contented man.

5. Now as this is true, that there is such equity in the Commandment, as if
there were no reward, yet without reward we should obey it; (yet which may be
the 5.) there is so great reward annexed unto it, that though there were more
difficulty, and less equity, yet it were justly to be performed in regard of
the greatness of the reward: concerning which reward, Genesis 15.1. it is an
exceeding great reward, or as the Fathers say upon that place, merces magna
nimis, too great for all the obedience we can perform; and such, as that one
of them says, that the Saints of God, they repent themselves that their
obedience was so strait, and no more upon earth, and wish that they might come
hither again to do more good works, and perform more exact obedience.

The signs. Signa.


1. For the first part, 1. for audire, Hearing, the signs before would be
sufficient, if we could once be persuaded that we do it not ex opere operato:
but our practice does so commend it, and confirm it, as that we think our
bare hearing pleases God; for after we have heard, what care we have to gather
and sum up our estates? how is our thoughts wholly taken up with the world?
what grief we have if we do thereby by neglect our profit? again, how easily
we frame our selves reasons to absent us from thence? it is a sign that we are
not aright, whereas that business we would leave at the call of man: but if we
hear with fruit and profit, and do it carefully, if in particular application
we apply it, and study to profit, it is a true sign of right Hearing.

For the other, i. obedire, obedience: as it falls out, we have a very good
trial of it: for in the dissoluteness of this time, the only benefit in our
want of discipline is this, that as there be diverse punished, that would annoy
the civil body, so those that they think the civil state will bear, are
left, which should not be, as the Primitive Church; but then sundry would obey,
as to the precepts having correctivam vim, rather then directivam, a correcting
rather then a directing power: whereas now it is seen who does it for
conscience sake; when God gives us a rule of obedience, and the laws inflict
not any penalty for the breach of it, there our obedience is free and
voluntary; when Gods forbidding and man's concur^e not, if we be obedient in as
great measure, as if they do concur, then it is a good sign of the truth
and soundness of our obedience.

2. The other and the best, when there falls out a question, wherein our nature
takes one part, and the Commandment another: [as Genesis 22. in Abraham, Nature
bade him net sacrifice his son: God commanded him to sacrifice his son:] then
we may know to whom we are obedient, if God have the victory and comman^^ (...)
^^^come, and the flesh go down, then we know that ou^ obedience is right: on
the other side, if God give place, the oblocuto^ gets the victory then we know
what becomes of our obedience: so or the world, when that and the fashion take
one part, and God and the Commandment the other; look what we follow, there
is our obedience. Aug. Si Dominus sit, si Domini amicus, while they two walk
together we cannot know the Dogs Master: but he that it follows when they
are parted, is his Master.

6. For the sixth rule, for procuring of obedience in other; the two words
aedificatio and scandalum, edification and scandal must be it. For
Edification, Romans 14.19. for Scandal, Romans ^4.13. that which is lawful, is
not lawful, as it is both in the first and second Epistle to Timothy, except
it edify, or if it be scandalous.

Patience.
But we make ^t an especial effect of love, as when love is active, obedience,
passive, patience. Qui amat t^lerat: si desistis ^^lerare, desistis amare.
NOw we come to Patience; it may be comprehended under obedience: they use to
call it obedientiam crucis, the obedience of the Cross: it is a fruit of love,
and the first of all very necessary. 1. Cor. 13.4. Charitas patiens est,
Charity suffere^h ^ong: the Heathen man has a strange saying, Non amo quenquam
nisi offendero, I love no man but whom I offend: the reason is, because ^ea^ing
and forbearing is a great sign of love: he that loves, will bear much; but
if not, he loves not: so that we see, patience comes with obed^ence: for
thus it is: This Telerare must necessarily have relation to evil, i. malum
poenae.
Of our nature, as we are natural, it cannot be said ^ruer, than that it is
durum pati, loath to suffer: especially evil, the object of it. Amos 3.6. non
est malum in civitate, there is no evil in a City but it comes of God: Romans
5.3. if we suffer sickness, poverty, etc. in the being rid of it, we put our
felicity: then this may be truly said, that that which is evil, is never
patiently borne propter se, for it self; but thus, if the good we shall get by
suffering be greater then the evil: learning is a good thing, so is ease: now
without labor, learning cannot be attained to: if any think that forbearing
of ease is better then the want of learning, and he know that the privation of
ease will so affect him, that he shall come to be learned, he takes pains,
and consequently proves learned: and so on the other side, that is the
judgment of the reason, that says thus: I will do this, because it is good:
but I will do that rather, because though I be deprived of a good, yet by the
privation of that good, I shall get a greater good: so is the judgment of
patience. The wants and troubles in this life, are less then the pleasing of
God: Gregory says well, Ardor desideriorum facit tolerantiam laborum, the
ardencie of desire provokes unto labor.

The end of Patience.
For the end, or applying of it to the scope; it falls into the same that
obedience, not glorifying God from our selves, but from others. Another, He
will have glory over the Devils by us: and it is a means whereby God uses to
quell their malice by us, therefore is patience commanded, Job 2.3. See the
triumph of God above the Devil, in Jobs patience: though Satan afflicted him
with sundry plagues, yet he continued, and so God was glorified in his servant,
above the malice of the wicked adversary.

The necessity of it, Heb. 10.36. is too plain, [you must labor after
patience,] for ye had need of patience: a reason Christ brings, Luke 21.19.
for there he says, we cannot possess our souls without it. How? thus: if
any cross come upon us, either it is too great for us to bear, and we fall
into exceeding great worldly sorrow: 2 Cor. 7. 10. (...), and the sorrow of the
world works death: and consequently, that sorrow will deprive us of our
souls, as Ahitophell, a wise man as any worldly man: or else, if we have not
patience, we shall fall to set our selves against that party, that we think
offered us injury; in anger, 1 Cor 15.26.
and so we come to hatred, and then to injurious dealing, and so we lose our
soul.

Then in this respect that we see, when we have gone through the fair promises
of the gaine-sayer; we are to deal with other enemies, as anguishes of this
life, etc. then with the last enemies: and then we are to make account, that
when we deal with the last enemy, i. death, if we escape him, we shall be
sure to keep our souls.

Patience the roof of god^^nesse: tectum*
In consideration whereof, as we said in faith, that it is fundamentum virtutum,
the foundation of other virtues: so patience is tectum virtutum omnium, the
roof to keep them from the storms of afflictions: without which, showers
would fall into the building, and rot it. And this may well be warranted, Luke
8.15. our Savior describing the spiritual harvest, says that they brought
fruit in patience: the fruit is the last thing: in the other the bud and the
blossom; the fruit that must come through the blade: more plain, I am. 1.4.
that therefore patience must be, that we may be perfect and want nothing: i.
that perfection may be added: Phil. 1.29. he joins them both together, to
believe and to suffer: Unto you it is given, not only to believe in him, but
also to suffer for him. Heb. 6.12. (...), that ye be not slothful, but
followers of them, who through faith and patience inherit the promises: faith
and patience, the first and the last, the beginning and the ending. Sure it is,
that when this virtue is come, and covered the roof, we have good cause to
rejoice, in so much as the Apostle, 2 Cor. 12, 10. he will rejoice in his
patience, that he had suffered reproaches, infirmities, persecutions and
anguishes for Christ's sake. Which patience [ Romans 5.4.] working experience,
then he has spem solidiorem, more sure and solid hope: then he comes to that
Romans 8.35. that he throws down his Gauntlet to any thing that can separate
him from the love of God: and he begins with the stoutest enemies, speaking
by experience, as the work being perfect in him.

If ^n punishment, it brings forth (...), if in (...).
To the precept, what is commanded; that is patience: but we will distinguish it
according to this object, to affliction, that is of two sorts: (...), precept
for direction, punishment for correction: and accordingly [on both sides] there
is a diverse patience. It is said, that in every law there is a directive and
corrective force: if the first escape, the second will take hold: aut faciendum
quod oporter, aut patiendum quod oporiet: either we must do what is due, or
suffer what is due; we must be either Active or Passive.

1. The first, patience, this whereby when we see that we are under the rod, we
submit our selves to the corrective law, knowing it to be just for our deserts.
The reasons be two, but one for suffering, 1 Pet. 4.19. [the maine reason of
both these] because it is the will of God. Of his Will we enquire not the
cause, but the reason it is revealed: therefore we are bold for the
confirmation of our faith: one this, he will have the whole world know, The
manifestation of his own justice.
that sin shall not be unpunished: partly plain, Numb. 20.12. the waters of
Meribah cost Moses his life: his wavering, that waters came not at the first,
was the forfeiture of entrance into the land of promise: and many more may be
brought, but they are all darkened by Christ, his punishment for sin may show
how well God likes it. Now albeit the maine punishment fell on Christ the Son
of God, and this passio Christi, his Passion was the greatest sign of the love
that he bare to us: so must it be reciproce, though that fell on him, yet so it
fell, that there should still be a visitation of his Church: though it was
promised in the beginning, God makes a covenant with us, and to this end, that
his mercy may not be withdrawn from us; yet Psalm. 89.31.32. (But if his
children forsake my law, then I will visit their transgression with the rod,
etc.) So it is a part of the league between him and us, that we shall endure
the fatherly correction. 1 Pet. 4.17. (...), the time is that justice shall
begin at the house of God: an argument; if justice begin at the house of
God: if God show his justice in punishing those which he has a special favor
and love unto: therefore it does argue, that he will punish the unbeleevers
more grievously: Luke 23.31. It in me, that am a green tree, what shall become
of a dry tree? therefore the green shall down too: Ier. 25.29. If mine own
house, where my name is called upon, offend, I will begin to plague it, and
shall you go scotfree? therefore there is a not sparing of the house of God.
This would be very unpleasant unto us, but that, if we suffer not this, a worse
thing [to be left] would follow, Heb. 12.6. Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth:
Revel. 3.19. God does castigare omnem silium, quem recipit, he scourges every
son whom he receives: so herein is our choice, whether we will be
disinherited or chastened: Aug. Si hoc tibi magis malum videtur, exhaeredari,
quam non casligari, is it hoc elige: So that if a man will be of the company of
the wicked, then Psalm. 73. he may share prosperity with them, if not, then Ier.
12. he shall be of the afflicted heritage, and if our inheritance be magis
bonum, a good rather then the other, we must pass under this.

2. The procuring of out own benefit either by calling us back when we are
gone, or retaining us in the state we (...) in.
2. Another reason of (...), correction; as the first was the declaration of
Gods judgments, so this for our own benefit: 1. Esa. 28.19. vexatio dat
intellectum, vexation gives understanding: Psalm. 119.14. it was good for David
that he was in trouble: i. many men cannot be without it, Aug. says of
himself, that when he did follow with a full stream worddly pleasures;
pectoris dol^r, a grief in his chest, was the first visitation that recalled
him: by Paul's unhorsing and smiting blind, was his entrance: and so many have
been recovered to God: and unless we be thus smitten and awaked, the natural
folly, and the world ringing in our ears, will make us that we shall not
hear. So in our continuance, of sundry, Hase. 2.6. Sepiam viam tuam spinis, I
will hedge up thy way with thorns: if thou will out of the way, a thorn shall
prick thee, and bring thee in again. Basil is said, that being a man much
subject to infirmity and sickness, once in his sickness was very earnest with
God for the recovery of his health: and when he had obtained it, he remembered
that he had left out a condition, that when he requested of the Lord, that he
might recover his health, he should have put this condition in, if that the
restoring of his health would not make him proud: otherwise, that his sickness
might come again, and he put it in: and as Nazianzen reports of him, it did
so. So in regard of our own benefit, this correction, or (...), we see is
needful.

Father in detaining some good thing from us, longer then we would, o^ if malum
p^^n^ he continued upon us.
2. (...), trial, that is two sorts: 1. for there is either dilatio ^ou, a
deferring of good, touched before in hope, which always has rationem mali, a
show of evil: Prove. 13.12. spes quae differtur affligit animam, hope deferred
makes the heart sick: the bearing of that often, is called (...), longanimity:
[for the Commandement] Habak. 2.3. he will stay: yet wait, and he will surely
come: Psalm. 37.7. wait patiently for the Lord, and God will at the last come.
This virtue in all the points of patience it said to be in God.


This ought to be dear unto us, because this is the only patience that is in
God: whereby he does expect, ut misereatur nostri, that he may have mercy on
us: Aug. de patientia: Dominus patitur neglectus, patitur contemptus, patitur
negatus: the Lord, though we neglect, despise, deny him, he still bears with
us: ought not we therefore with the like patience wait for his approach? That
man falls into infidelity, that thinks him long a coming: for he seems
to make this conclusion; it is long a coming, therefore it will never come. 2
Pet. 3.3.4.

In passione mali it has his ground, Luke 12.48. To whom most is given, he
must suffer most
2. The second indeed is the bearing of some real affliction [not for sins,
as in (...), but for righteousness sake:] To whom more is given, of him more
is required: the Devil shall have a larger license to tempt him: And the
Philosopher said very well, Deus non habet amorem maternum erga bonos viros,
sed paternum, God loves not as a mother, but as a father: i. he will not keep
them in his lap, and cocker them as a mother; but put them to trial as a
father: (the trial is between facere malum, and pati malum: do ill and suffer
ill:) and this is it that Austin says, utrum velint malum non patiendo facere;
or non faciendo pati. And this real affliction, 1 Pet. 1.7. (...), the trial
of faith is a thing which, as he expresses it, is better then the finest gold
of Arabia, i. in the eyes of God far more precious then any thing. Now this
is separate from the former, i. suffering for our sins: but this is a suffering
for righteousness, because we will not be constant, unless we be kept under
the yoke.

The reasons be four, why God set down this:

1. That commonly we see, that res prosperae, are mare mortuum; that lacus
asphaltues, that dead and noisome lake (where once Sodom and Gomorra stood)
that stands and corrupts, as armor contracts rustinesse; a body, evil
humors; fallow ground, weeds, etc. So we quickly settle upon our lees, if not
emptied from vessel to vessel: graces grow bright by exercise, and for want
of use die within us; there must be a stirring up of them, else there will be a
fogginesse of the soul by want of trial: [therefore necessary it is, that
there should be a trial.]

The right of desert was given to us, and consequently we are to hold it by his
right, of his desert.
2. He sets down, Romans 8.29. that between Christ and us there might be a
conformity: Christ has two rights in Heaven; first, by inheritance, as he is
the first begotten Son of his Father; and secondly, in his desert by
obedience. We see the clause that be holds it by, he sets down, Luke
24.26. Know ye not quod oporiuit haec pati Christum? that Christ ought to have
suffered these things? so, he holding of the inheritance by Christ, includes
this condition, that we be conformable to him in his sufferings.

In man's law it is a principle, that the inheritance goes to no other, but by
him which held it: and has no other right, then he had which had it before: It
is that that the Apostles plead, Acts 14.22. quod oportet per multas
tribulationes pervenire ad regnum Dei, that we must through much tribulation
enter into the Kingdom of God: and lest any should think himself excepted, 2 Timothy 3.12. Omnes qui volunt pie vivere in Christo Jesus, persecutionem
patientur, All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution.
And for this cause, whereas it has six resemblances, 1. to a Camp, 2. to a
Ship, 3. a Building. 4. Corn, 5. a Vine, 6. a Flock: the nature of all these
import a patience.
2 Timothy 2.4. To a Camp, the Soldiers life is nothing else but agere sub die,
to lie abroad: to a Ship, Matthew. 8.24. tossed with winds and waves: Matthew.
9.37. to Corn, which comes not to the table, but under the sickle, flaile,
millstone, oven: unto a Vine, Esa. 5.1. and in the Vineyard there is a
Wine Press, where the Grapes must suffer the press: John 10.1. to a Flock,
they are to be shorn, and carried to the shambles: and in a Building there are
Axes and Hammers daily heard, nails and such other things are required.

3. The third is that which we said before: when God gives great gifts, as the
gifts are, so is the Devils sieve, Satanae ventilabrum: Luke 22.31. and the
larger gifts one has, the larger patience [and the larger trial for Satan] he
has: and where there are most gifts, there the Devil sueth most for his
indulgences and licenses: therefore every man must prepare himself, for Satan
will have his Sieve: a Sieve is to make a separation of that which is good of
the corn and the refuse: therefore it is that God does permit evil, and evil
men in the world, because God should not use good men as scourges for good men;
therefore this benefit we have, [that there shall be a separation] and how? A
note of separation, Matt. 3.12. the separation is this, that as we see that
vituli triturantes quotidie ligantur, etc.
even by the Cross. August. says, vituli iriturantes quotidie ligantur (ad
stabulum,) vituli mactandi quotidie in pascuis libere relinquuntur, the Oxen
that are for use, are kept tied up, when those that are fatted for the
shambles, are let loose into the pastures to feed at their pleasure. Generally
most of the Fathers use the similitude of the Reds Sea, through which the
Israelites were to pass to the land of promise, not without mire and dirt, and
intangling their feet in the weeds (as Saint Gregory speaks:) so in our
journey from earth to heaven, to the new Jerusalem, to the land of Canaan,
there is something to pass through; to which affliction is resembled: The
reason of the resemblance: If you be a true Israelue, you shall go through the
Red Sea: if an Egyptian, you pass not.

The last is, the confusion of the Devil himself: to confound him, that he
may not say, Do they serve thee for naught? as in Job 2. This is an especial
end of patience, to stop his mouth; God often rewards not at all, nay he often
sends malam mercedem, an ill reward, to show that we serve grataito, freely.

The manner: there were in the Primitive Church a sort called C^rcumcelliones
(a sect of the Donatists, When it is not a senseless thing but mixed of sensus
doloris in the soul, and oppressio doloris in the body and it has voluntatem
liberandi sui, and voluntatem patiendi^tui.
) that hearing patience to be so much commended for such an excellent thing,
they presently conceived of it, as of the Stoics doctrine, to be an (...)
therefore they whipped themselves, and acquainted themselves so much with it,
that they could bear any thing. We see Paul's disputation with Epicures and
Stoics: therefore we must understand, that Christian Religion, as it is not
Epicurisme, so it is not any doctrine of the Stoics. Christian patience is not
a Stoicall (...). For we see in Job, David, Christ, though they were patient,
yet they gave notable signs, that they felt that which they suffered. But this
is patience, when a man feels it, and would be rid of it, and yet does
abide it to the pleasure of God. It is not to have a will only to be punished;
patience is not a monothelite, as Christ says, Luke 22.42. his will was to be
rid of the Cup: but yet he prayed, that not his will, but that Gods will
might be done: and 1 Pet. 4.19. because it was the will of God, he should drink
the Cup: therefore he conformed himself to it. August. in his book de
patientia, chap. 7. shows the distinction between the Heathens patience, and
the true: the Heathens patience, and the Heretics, etc. was not for a good
cause, nor for a right end: but possible it was, that they used themselves to
it, and felt it not: this is, as he says, stupor morbi potius, quam rebur
sanitatis: so miranda est: duritia, quae magna est: sed neganda patientia, quae
nulla est: an unsensiblenesse of disease rather then soundness of health;
admire their hardiness you may, which is great, but deny their patience you
must, for it is none at all.

The Negative part. Want of due regard of the Cross, and the fainting under
it. The first concemeth all, the regard is after the Cross: this they call
patientia panica. The second degree, for awhile we regard it; the Prophets
compare it to the morning dew, or the clouds.
That which is forbidden, is in Heb. 12.5. comprised under (...) and (...), the
small regard, and despising of the chastisement of the Lord: and a fainting
under his correction: for the one is the one extreme, and the other is the
other.

1. For the first it is sure, that as we see Exodus 9.28. and as Chrysostom. upon
that place notes: there is not in the wicked no regard, but a small and short
regard: we see a momentany regard of the plagues of Egypt in Pharao a
reprobate, he regarded it no longer then he was under it: and it is no other in
Jeroboam, 1 King. 13.6. there was in Jeroboam, a present humiliation, till his
hand was restored. But the common resemblance to that effect, which the
chastisement of the Lord brings upon the wicked, is of the horror that is in
Bears and Wolves, at the sound of a Drum or Trumpet, they are as it were
clean beside themselves; and are in a horror, which for a time continues, so
long as they hear the sound: or as they that are tossed on the Sea, and being
not used to it, fall sick; but when they come to shore, they have no sooner
footing on the land, but they are well again, and return to their former
health: and that present forgetfulness is the first step; Ier. 12.13. he
shows a kind of them, they were sick, and profited not by it: making it as
a mark of wickedness in them. Now by this and other degrees, we come to that
which in the ancient Fathers is called stupor morbi, and duritia, non robur
sanitatis: a numbnesse of soul, and hardness, not coming from the strength
of health: in one word they call it animi paralysin, the Palsy of the soul:
it is one thing to thrust in him that is in health, and another in dead flesh:
this is of two sorts; the one ye shall find, Prove. 23.35. he speaks there of
a person given to excess of eating and drinking: Stupor contractus, is of
drunkenness, that are drunken ebrietate.
They have smitten me, but I was not sick: they have beaten me, but I know not
when I awoke. Their life is like to theirs, that sleep in the top of a
maste; their ship is broken, but yet they continue: and so they come to a kind
of drunkenness. Now this drunkenness which is spoken of in Esa. 51.21. Ebrii
sunt, Contractus is that that troubles the world
sed non vino, they are drunk, but not with wine: it falls out also even in
other vices; as when a man is bewitched with any finne; he is smitten, but
feels not.

2. The other is such, as we read 1 King. 18.28. for it is said there of the
Prophets of Baal, when their god would not hear them, that they cut themselves
with knives and lances; Immissus stupor, whether the Devil possess us in
soul, of actually in body.
and so they might seem patient: this is not stupor contractus, but stupor
immissus, not an acquired, but an insensiblenes infused by the Devil: as we
see in Mar. 5.5. in the man that could break chains, and cut his own flesh
with sharp stones very pitifully: For in the Circumcellions, the Manichees and
Donatists, and whosoever they were, that did, as Aug. says, pati malum, ut
facerent malum, sufferevill, the better to do evil; we may see that this
manliness, or rather hardness was in the soul of them all: it is a thing to
be regarded.

The reason of both these, either because they consider not the true efficient,
or the true end of afflictions.
We return to the former, first, stupor contractus; we come to that by two
means.

1. Is a not considering of the cause from whence. 2. A not considering of the
end whereunto.
1. When the afflicted does not consider the cause from whence their affliction
comes, as Ier. 5.3. and 2.30. and Esa. 1.5. you shall see what he says, Esa.
1.5. God says, Why should you be smitten any more? etc. from the soale of the
foot to the head, there is nothing whole, but wounds, etc. Where is there any
place, where I should smite thee? and in Ier. 5.3. Thou have stricken them, but
they have not sorrowed, thou have consumed them, etc. and chap. 2.30. he had
corrected their children, but they sorrowed not. There is no doubt but the same
examples are among us, and no doubt but God calls before him, and arresteth
them, with these his Sergeants, but they are no whit called nearer to the Lord,
nor amended. These men are usually compared to Simon of Cyren, Luke 23. which
was violently caught, and was forced but to bear the Cross, whereupon, not
he, but Christ should be crucified. Now these men that carry a Cross, but are
not crucified on it themselves, they are in the same case that he was: a Cross
they bear, but profit not: and the reason, because they ascribe it to a cause
beside God: and that is it that the Divines call caecum tormentum, or caecus
dolor, a blind torment or grief: a grief they have on the sudden, and they
are not able to say, for this and this cause, this heaviness is come upon
them: Purblinde Christians, that cannot look up to the hand that strikes, nor
discern the intended end of their chastisement (...) if any alteration befall
them, they ascribe it not rori gratiae, but humori naturae, not to grace, but
nature: and so consequently they get them terrenas consolatiunculas, some poor
earthly delight, as Bernard says, pleasures and friends, and so drive it away.
If the effect be not within them, but come from without them; then nothing is
more common then this, insurgere in instrumenium, (August) to hack the staff,
and omittere percussorem, to let God go: which is a great oversight, by reason
of two concurrences: for we must note, that affliction is just on Gods behalf;
on the behalf of the instrument, injust: as the calamities of Job, they were
therefore just, because they were of God, cui nil nisi justum placet, that
delights in nothing but what is just: More plain, Matthew. 5.11. it is said,
that men shall be blessed, when they shall be injuried of men, persecuted and
accused falsely: so they shall receive injury from men, but recompense from
God: The not distinguishing of these two, breeds a desire of revenge, Psalm.
7.3. when David says, O Lord my God (speaking in regard of the instrument of
Saul and Doeg) if I have done any such thing, if there be any wickedness in
mine hands, etc. yet he ascribed this to God; and though he ascribed it to God,
yet that thing argues not, but that he was injuriously dealt withal: even as
he does ascribe that of Shimei to the same cause; peradventure the Lord has
stricken with his instrument.

As these two; when we look not high enough to the efficient cause: so on the
other side, when we conceive not aright of the end; that tribulation being of
tribulus, August. Ideo mittitur, aut ut detineat, aut ut revocet, which is sent
to keep us in, or to call us. When they consider not this, through these two,
they begin not to regard it; and so get a numnesse of soul, and consequently
they gather a thick skin.

2. We come to (...), the cause of it is most commonly from thence, (...).
Fainting under the cross either for want of due consideration of Gods justice,
or of his mercy.
that men cannot distinguish (as 2 Cor. 4.8.) between (...), and (...):
between being shaken, and cast down: the Apostle he could say, they were
often in trouble, but never in perplexity, and cast down. When a man
imagines that God afflicts him in his wrath, and that he aims at nothing
but his destruction, whereas the chastisement of God is not to drive us to
despair, [but only to bring us to a godly perplexity.]

When a man cannot distinguish these, then he falls to have an heaviness,
and that breeds death: Psalm. 42.6.9.11. he is cast down: and there is a
question between him and his soul, Why art thou so heavy O my soul? etc. but
then we see he comes to the other part: Put thy trust in God, for he is thy
refuge: he is the light of thy countenance: and so stands as Paul does here:
which thing, when it is not considered, men first feel their courage die: and
as Prove. 18.14. fall into a wounded spirit, which cannot be borne: howsoever
the spirit of an heathen man can sustain his infirmity [and though the
patience that appeared in the Heathen were great:] yet [as the Prophet saith] A
wounded spirit who can bear? Genesis 4.13. My punishment is greater than I can
bear.
or if not into that, then they fall to murmuring against Gods justice; Genesis
4.13. Cains murmuring, that they bear a greater punishment than they deserve;
as on the other side in regard of the mistaking of his justice, they fall away,
so for want of a due consideration of his mercy they are of Saul's mind, 1 Samuel
28.9. if God will not answer him, neither by Dreams, nor by Urim, nor by
Prophets, then he will come to the witch: if this fall not out, then he will
try by another way, he falls into another extreme, he lies flat on the
ground, with a brutish kind of patience, and is not moved. These two they come
either by a misconstruing of Gods justice, or by a miscontruing of his mercy:
that because he corrects like a Father, he will condemn like a Judge.

The means, in that it is truly said of Jerome, that quot sunt causae, for
God, Means common to us with the Heathen, 3 the other proper to Christians.
ad puniendum, look how many causes he has to punish us: so many means are
there to move us ad patiendum, to suffer; of the trial of patience, we have
handled before. It is sure that the examples of Scevola, Rutilius, Regulus,
etc. among the Heathen, they carried a show of patience: and we have their
reasons: if the heathen could say, Sis asinus, quemcunque asinum sors prospera
fecit; 1 The indignity to call down^ a (...) ^all man, under any cross
whatsoever.
there ought to be in Christians a more heroical courage, seeing we know the
causes from whom, and the end why: and therefore this is one special reason,
that as in unreasonable creatures, so much more in reasonable, it is an
ignominious thing, and great shame to prostrate so excellent a virtue to these.

2. That the (...) of ^^e mining of (...) in^o a good ^^^^ing, if they could
not amend it. Seeing therefore we must needs do it, let us do it with
commendation.
2. Again, this they saw, that quicquid corrigere est nefas, what cannot be
amended, it were best to make of the necessity of it some commendable action,
and turn it into a virtue; as Act. 9.5. it was hard to kick against the
prick: that yielding being necessarily laid, even that that is laid upon us,
we may do it with commendation, not like to those that have no hope.

The 3. is this, that which the heathen says, Quantum mercator pro lucro,
quantum venator pro ludo, tantum ego nondum passus sum pro virtute: which was
indeed nothing else but his ambition; 3 The compatison of that we suffer, with
the suffering of that that is much less weighty.
so much as the Merchant for his gain, and the hunter for his gain, so much
had not he suffered for his honor, or rather ambition.

To this we may add, Quantum Mercator prolucro, quantum venator pro ludo,
quantum Ethnicus pro vano honor, or, pro ambitione, tantum ego nondum passus
sum pro Christo meo: So much as the merchant for his gain, and the hunter for
his game, and the Heathen for vain honor, and ambition: so much have not I
suffered for my Christ. But on the other side, if we consider our selves, Those
that are more proper to us.
as we are Christians, and are afficted with them, tanquam (...), or proved
(with these) tanquam per (...), we have these means to be patient.

For the first, Luke 23.41. for punishment, 1. (...).
we see what the less unhonest thief of the two said, before he was converted
to Christ, It is no reason that we that are in the same condemnation with this
man, should condemn him, seeing we suffer justly, and according to our
deserts; he wrongfully: i. Whatsoever it is that we suffer, it is deserved; it
is just punishment, it is not so much as we deserve; but this man hoth done
nothing amiss: this course will take from us impatience.

A second is Ps. 119, 75. he says, that God of faithfulness has thus
afflicted him, that as the punishment is just; so if he afflict us, to ascribe
it to God of very faithsulnesse: Psalm. 89.32. if he visit our offenses with the
rod, and our sins with the scourges, yet that his mercy may not utterly be
taken from us, nor his truth fail, this is sent that we may be retained or
recalled, and so because fearing God, and making use of his punishment, we are
sure of his promise, Romans 8.28. we are sure that within the compass of that
promise, all shall at length work with them for their good: and hereof it is,
that the Heathen man says, patior ne patiar, I suffer here, We have strength
here to endure it, we have hope to be delivered, or the end will wear it.
that I may not suffer hereafter: that Abraham ( Luke 16.25.) make not that
argument of me, that he made of the rich man, Now therefore he enjoys
pleasure, and thou suffer pains. Now therefore, that this conclusion may not
be, and that here we may suffer those pains that may be bidden, mitigated,
ended, and have patience and hope for the end; that we may not suffer those
pains that have no patience to abide them, no hope to be delivered from them,
no mitigation of them, the end without end. And indeed one of them calls it a
sea: continuus cursus temporalium, as of those, Psalm. 73. that are said not to
come into misfortune with other men. There is none more dangerous sign of the
purpose of God, and there is none more certain then the contrary.

Now for (...), (...).
for trial: a means for that: Christ commends unto us Luke 14.28. that
before we build, or go forth to war, we sit down and cast our accounts
before, what it will cost us, and with what loss we shall bring our matters to
pass: for want of this fore-casting, because they do not sit down before they
enter into a godly life, what troubles and temptations they may fall into,
promising to themselves rest, therefore they are unprepared when the cross
comes, and give over. Therefore, beforehand we must set down what it will
come to.

2. Another [that we shall know] we have set down, Romans 15. 4. and no doubt it
is equally to be understood of other virtues: but there it is only to be
attributed to patience; that whatsoever is written, is written, that through
patience and comfort we may have hopo: i. that we may see, what it has cost
the Saints of God, and what they have endured; and so by considering their
cost, and their suffering, we may see what it will cost us, and what we shall
endure; in which we may include the sufferings of Christ: [but the especiall]
Heb. 12.3. 1 Pet. 4.1. recogitate illum, consider him, that for your sakes has
endured such gainsaying of wicked sinners, that you be not wearied and faint in
your hearts. Gregory, St passio Christi in memoriam revocetur, nihil tam arduum
est, quod non aequo animo toleretur: do but seriously contemplate the passion
of Christ, what he suffered for thee, and there will no sufferings seem
grievous to thee. For his heart, hands, seete, body, soul, etc. suffered so
much for us, as it is impossible for us to equal him in his sufferings.

3. The third, 1 Cor. 10.13, that being in the fire burning, Martyrs sine
flamma esse possumus, In regard of the infinite reward, the greater the reward,
the greater the means: he calls it not (...), but (...), and (...). this is the
consideration of the infinite reward that cannot be expressed. The reward the
greatest means that no figure in the world is able to express
si in anima patientiam retineamus: there it is promised that God will give us
an issue: our trial shall not be above our patience: either he will give us
more patience, to suffer greater afflictions, or as our patience decreaseth, so
shall our trial be less.

4. Lastly, 2 Cor. 4.17. (...) [for our light affliction, which is but for a
moment, causes unto us a far more excellent, and eternal weight of glory:]
(...), this is that that will by and by be calm, this is that that lays up
(...): it rewards us with an everlasting huge mass of glory, (...), from
hyperbole to hyperbole, that no hyperbole in the world can suffer* it cannot be
expressed by all hyperboles, Romans 8.18. he says there, that he counted all
that man could suffer, and he knew that it was not worthy to be mentioned in
regard of the glory that shall be revealed to the Saints of God.

The Signs: thus he shall be able to examine, by having an eye to the Greek
word (...), to abide under: (...) That so the sin that it is sent for, may be
taken away, he can be con^^nt to bear the punishment.
a very effectual and a good sign this is, when a man is thus affected to the
Cross, so that it please God to take away his sin, the cause of punishment,
that he is willing to bear the punishment still: so only let me be assured
that I shall have forgiveness of my sins, the guilt taken away, and I am
content to let the Cross lie upon me still: He that is contented, he has
laid up a good sign.

2. Tolerane and amare: i. When our bearing and enduring of pains, it works
not in us a murmuring, or a discontented mind: but so affects us as we can
notwithstanding love God with his chastisement, and for his chastisement: Job
in the end of his 2. Chap. says, Blessed be the name of the Lord, even for his
afflictions. When it is, Benedictus Dominus in donis suis, Blessed be the Lord
for his gifts; then Jobs wife will say that Grace as well as he: but when it
comes to ablationibus suis; The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away: that
is it that makes the true note of difference between the true patience and
the counterfeit: and as it has been said of the affections, that that turns
it to the contrary, is a most sure and true note. So from mercy, fear, Psalm.
130.4. Mercy, that thou may be feared: Mercy properly stirs up love; and
justice, fear. When an affection is stirred up, that properly stirs up the
contrary, that is a most true note, the love that is in us, provoked by the
justice of God, and the fear by his mercy, these are true and uncounterfeit:
otherwise, they are in the wicked sometimes: That when (...) affection (...)
wrought p^^^r^n ^l^^c^um s^^^n, that is, a ^^^ere affection
but if it come from a contrary object, that is it, as the heathen man says,
cum amare possis post injuriam, a man loves him well, that can love him that
has injured him. So when that, that the world counts injury, is past, when
a man can amare Deum, not post injuriam, though we count it so; he that can
love after that, his love is true.

3. and 4. We have a special use of them, because the fathers in the Primitive
Church had much ado to make the people understand how the patience of a true
Christian, and a Donatist should be distinguished; and therefore they used
these two notes: 1. that in the Donatists suffering (and you shall find it in
them that suffer in our days) you shall find in them a spirit of vanity, and
pride: The spirit of patience is the spirit of humility.
whereas true patience is humble; as the Prophet says, Tacui Domine, quia tu
fecisli, I kept silence O Lord, because thou have done it. That humbleness and
silence that appears in the martyrs sufferings, is a true mark: When a man
falls not into disputation concerning the causes, for which it is laid upon
him, nor bursteth into speeches, how great torments he has suffered, etc. but
either tolerat and gemit, or else respondet pro Deo: he either bears it, and
mourns in silence, or, if he reply, it is on Gods behalf: as Job 1.22. and
20.10. In all this did not Job sin with his lips: he did not give out that,
that might bewray his impatience.

The other is called alacrity: for this they commonly note, that in their
Circumcellions sufferings, that they had not an alacrity, but (...), that they
were not moved, but that not being not moved, was not with alacrity: they
grounded themselves upon Romans 8.37. in all these, In some diseases a man's flesh
shall be able to suffer any thing (...), to overcome, is to match them, but
(...), to rejoice for the suffering of them. 6. Reg.
(...), we do more then overcome, he that not only suffers, but rejoices;
that which is noted in the Apostles, Act. 5.41. that they departed from the
council after they had been whipped, not grieved, but rejoicing that they
were accounted worthy to suffer shame for the name of Christ: the other
suffering imports no fear, or grief, but it has no alacrity.

Last, is the precept for procuring it in others: for it is not enough for
every man to say in his own soul, Why art thou so impatient O my soul; etc.
but also Psalm. 27.16. that we may be able to say to others, Sustine Dominum,
wait on the Lord: that we do what we can by our comfort and gifts, to make them
patient: as on the other side, Not to give any words or occasion to move
impatience in others.
if there be any provocation in others to impatiencie, as his wife, Job 2.10.
as if affliction be come upon him, and they counsel him to give over, if we
should continue in uprightness, till we suffered for it, we must answer them,
as his answer was to his wife: that we set our selves against them, that hold
that we are to bear good things, but not afflictions. And this is the
knowledge, that every one is to have; so especially it concerns them, Prove.
19.11. Doctrina viri per patientiam noscitur: Patience espeally required in the
learned.
and as Gregory says, Tanto minus quisque [cognoscitur esse] doctior, quanto
minus [convincitur esse] patiens. The lesser our patience, the lesser our
knowledge ever.

Thus much for the first proposition: 1. Thou shall have a God.

The 2. Proposition, Thou shall have me for thy God; and that contains but
one virtue, Habebis me Dewn.
called True religion, or religion; the other are the extremes.

The 3. Proposition, Thou shall have none other Gods but me: 1. Thou shall have
one alone, 1 True Religion.
and thou shall have me alone: and that also contains one virtue, i.
sincerity, not mingling true religion with any other: 2 Sincerity.
Besides these out of the word gnal panai, there is grounded integrity, 3
Integrity.
that we be not hypocrites: and lastly, in regard of the verb, erunt, which
runs through our whole life, Perseverance.

The 2. Proposition, 4 Perseverance.
that it is not enough to have a God, unless he be the true God, 1 That there
is no man, but that he does bestow all his affections, actions, and actions
upon some one thing. Aug. unusquisque comeditur ab ali quo zelo.
which is Religion: for sure it is, that the affections of the mind, and
actions of the body, in every one are all bent to some one thing, and that to
him that is our God: for either they are bestowed upon an idol, a falfe God, 1
Cor. 8. which is nothing: or else upon the God of this world, 2 Cor. 4.4. that
is the Devil: or else as it is Phil. 3.19. (...), etc. (whose end is
destruction, whose God is their belly,) upon the belly, the flesh: or else
Ephesians. 5.5. on the idol of the covetous man: i. upon money, and wealth, the
service whereof is, as he says there, idolatry: therefore touching all these,
Mention of 4. false gods. 1 Idols. 2 God of this world. 3 Their pleasure, and
lust. 4 Their own goods

it is that the Prophet, Psalm. 4.2. makes his complaint, that there is a
generation of men, that turn the glory of the true God into dishonor, i. are
not careful to deliver unto him his true honor. And therefore, 1 Timothy 6.20.
to have scientiam falsi nominis, i. to follow vanity and lies: [and come to
have the fruit,] as Hosea: they shall eat the fruit of lies. i. Grief of mind,
smart of body, confusion of soul, therefore to have, it is not sufficient, but
we must also have the truth. And indeed, that which the heathen man Plato says
of this, is true: (...) every man, if he will have a thing, he will have it
according to the truth. Every soul, if it have not the truth, it is not
because it is not desirous of the truth; but if it find not out the truth, it
is against the will of it: unless it go against nature. Genesis 20.9. When as
Abraham had made answer to Abimelech, not in truth, as he thought; Every m^n
for knowledge, is desirous to have the truth.
Abimelech, being an heathen, could tell him that he had done those things that
he should not; so these men can say, that see merely by the eye of reason, that
truth is it which we all seek after. But that which is yet more strange, Genesis
3.1. the Devil begins there, Yea is it true indeed, has God said indeed, Ye
shall not eat of every tree of the garden? so that he himself being the
author of lies, Now when ^t comes to practice, Aug. distinction, bonum dulce,
and bonum amabile, we will first seek after.
yet this is his desire, that the woman should make him a true answer: So we
see the mighty force of truth, that howsoever it is not sought in practice, yet
in judgment, not only good men, but also the wicked, the Heathen, yea and the
devils themselves would not willingly be beguiled, but witness to it.

This Commandment is because of our trial, and our trial is, because it ^s
precious in Gods eyes: and that is, because it is the course of nature.
The end and scope of the Law, and the Lord the Lawgiver, it is in respect of
trial, which before was named, 1 Pet. 1.7. this (...), the trial of our faith
is more precious to the Lord, than all the riches and goods in the world. This
trial of us has bin the cause why God has permitted and does permit so many
errors, heresies, and false worships. Deu. 15.11. We may say in a fit
comparison, that albeit God has plenty, and abundance of all things, that he
could have made all rich: yet for the trial of a liberal, and a
compassionable mind in the rich, he would suffer the poor always to be. So it
may be said of truth: it had been an easy matter for him to have taken order
for every one to have had the true profession: but only for (...), our trial.
1 Cor. 11.19. Ideo oportet esse haereses inter vos: therefore there must be
heresies among you, that there may be a trial, and that they may be known
that are sound and true. He said, fiat lux, and facta est: let there be light,
and there was light: As easy had it been for him to have said, fiat veritas,
let there be truth, let there be great plenty of truth, and there should have
bin nothing else but truth only. He has given a cause, and a reason why he
suffers error, that they may be tried, that seek after the truth. The
meaning is this, Psalm. 138.^.
that forasmuch as it being set down that God has magnified his word and
truth above all, i. that it is the highest thing that he makes account of, and
most highly esteems it: therefore he would have it diligently to be sought of
us, that we should show our estimation conformable to his, and that we likewise
should esteem it, and magnify it above all things: and this is Paul's
counsel, and this is the end, and he would thus have his glory sought.

For the necessity of it: we need not speak much of it: for it has partly
been handled heretofore. And for as much as truth, and true religion is a way,
and is called so, 2 Pet. 2.2. and that way must bring us unto the right end,
then necessary it is we find it: if we find it not; aliquis erit terminus eunti
in via, but error immensus est: if a man keep the right way he shall at length
come to the end of his journey, Jam. 1.8.
but error has no end. Therefore it is requisite.

By the spirit of truth, and the way of truth, we shall come into the truth.
The thing commanded is Religion, or true religion, very nominis religio: which
Christ, Mat. 13.35. under the name of the Kingdom of heaven likeneth to a
pearl, and him that sought after it to a Merchant, that sought many pearls,
and at the last found one of inestimable value, and when he had found it, he
sold all that ever he had and bought it. Herein are three things, 1. that we
seek the truth: 2. that when we have found it, we rest in it: 3. that it be to
us a girdle.
Then this desire is first: an earnest study, and applying of the mind to find
out the truth among errors, and falsehood in the world, ought to be in us.
Whereas the common manner is this, every man in that religion he is borne in,
he will grow up in it: and die in it: and we presuppose our selves to have
found the pearl, before we seek it: and so when our studies begin to ripen,
we only stick to some learned man's institutions. Deuteronomy. 4.32. Moses seems to
be of another mind, it is not only an exhortation, but comes in the way of a
commandment, that the Israelites, they should enquire into all antiquities,
and in all parts, and ends of the world, whether there were any such religion
as theirs: and that they had nothing but truth it self, and wisdom it self.
So that this is the first thing, As there is inquisitio dubii, so there is
examinatio very. Esa. 65.1. Romans 10.20.
that no man do suppose that he has found the truth, before he has sought it:
and Mat. 7.7. he that seeks for it, he has a promise that he shall find it.
The promise of the calling of the Gentiles, that God would be found of them
that sought him not, is not a pattern for us in this case; but as we are to
enquire into all doubts, so are we to examine all truths: among the pearls
that sundry show us, and promise us that they have worthy stuff for us, we
must take that course, that we can distinguish, that all those are not such
pearls, as that a man should sell all that he has for them: but that we indeed
have the inestimable pearl that the Merchant found, and bought with all that
he had. Hereditary religion, religion upon offense, or religion upon a sudden,
these three at this day occupy the greatest persons of mankind, and most of
mankind: either because they are of Auxentius his mind, In hac fide natus sum,
in hac item moriar. This faith was I borne in, and in this will I die. So we
see sundry either to this, or to the other part inclined, because it was the
religion of their Ancestors, and of their country, this they were taught, and
this they will keep. This religion finds us, and we find not it. Or on the
other side: when it is not sought, but because we find some grief and crosses
in some religion: and because we have sustained loss by it, we will be
revenged of it, in leaving it. And the third [ that which we find so Soon, as
if we should stumble on it:] they go over seas, and in one or two years they
come and have sought and found the pearl, and are able to defend it, this is
religio repentina, this is a stumbling upon religion. Now adays Revelations
are but few or none: we must have an ordinary time and study, and ordinary
means, and according to them we must address our selves to find it, otherwise
he has no promise. Now if any man will say, we have found it before we have
sought: because we are borne in the true religion, I answer that there must
nevertheless be a trial of it, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. which answers to seeking.
They that have it must either seek it, or examine it: not as the Turks, which
make it a matter of Death to examine it.

This order of seeking must be kept with the two precepts concerning the manner
of seeking. The Fathers make many points: but we may bring them to two.

The first is Mat. 6.36* Quaerite primum, that it must be first sought: because
the seeking of it will sanctify to us all our [other] exercises, that come
after: and if that be not sought first, neither that shall be sanctified: and
it is very likely, that the other shall not. God is ^necreil at the first.
Esa. 55.6. he says, that God must be sought, while he is nigh: and at the
first he is nigh. Phil. 2.21. When the question is made, An quaeremus quae
nostra sunt, an quae Christi Jesu? whether, quae sursum, or, quae deorsum?
whether we will seek our own things, or the things which are Jesus Christ's:
whether the things which are above, or the things which are below? Now when it
is come to this point when we give primum to things beneath, while they may be
found, God may be near; but when they have primum, God may go away.

The other, Deuteronomy. 4.29. a serious seeking with the whole heart, with an earnest
desire to find: Jer. 29.13. They sought me and found me, because they sought me
seriously, with all their heart: Now the contrary to this is, Esa. 21.12. If
you do seek him, seek him indeed: for me thinks you seek him as if you
cared not whether you ever found him or no: you do but trifle in your seeking.

And though our state be miserable, because it must come to such a comparison
as that in Prove. 2.4. Solomon notes a seeker of wisdom, when a man seeks
for wisdom, as a worldly man seeks for silver, and for hidden treasures: if
we can come so far, let that Comparison stand.

Jer. 45.5. And seek thou great things for thy self? Opposite to this in
the matter it self, is the affection of those that thu^k religion is
hereditary, as the opposite to seeking, so to diligent seeking, that of Esaias, a
seeking not worthy its name.
2. Another, Joh. 20.15. When we stand weeping, and desiring him with tears to
grant us his truth, though he grant us nothing else: as Mary did, when she
could not see Christ's body in the Sepulcher. So on the other side, as Jer.
45.5. when we do primum quaerere grandia, seek first great things for our
selves, and after Religion: or as Esaias calls it, a seeking, and no seeking,
when as our seeking cannot properly be called a seeking: Saul's seeking his
Fathers asses, and the woman in the Gospel, her groat, shall be with more
care, than ours for religion.

2. The second point, 1 Timothy 6.3. as we must seek, for the truth, when we have
it not: or if we have it, examine it: so when we know that we have it, we must
acquiescere religioni, rest in it.

Thirdly, the use of religion, Ephesians. 6.14. that it may serve us instead of a
girdle, to gird our loins: i. the truth must be hard applied to our reins, as
the girdle.

Regula distinguendi inter excessum and def^ctum.
On the other side, that which is forbidden: the two extremes, nimium, and
parum; the excess and the defect: the rule distinguishing these in all: that
the excess is, where the negative must be set behind, as if we yield honor
cui non oportet, A rule of the Schoolmen* set your particula neg. after it,
you have the excess, contra the defect.
and quantum non oportet, that argues an excess: and the defect, where the
negative is set before, as if we honor, non quem oportet, non quantum oportet:
they are both in Religion. Cui non oportet, where we honor whom we ought not:
and there comes in Idolatry: whether it be by honor, or by office and use,
as August. de doctr. Christiana speaks: and so it is, that we come in aliquod
pactum, into covenant with the Devils, Sorcerers, Charmers, Stars, Dreams,
and other inchantings: all come into this: if a man yield any of the former
affections and virtues, as love, fear, etc. to the Devil: or if he fear the
Stars, as the Genethliaci: and those that, quia usum non habent, etc. Or
attribute to dreams, enchantments, to ligatures, lots, characters, etc. it is
comprehended in this. 1 Timothy 1.19. They shall make shipwreck etc.
Esa. 41.23. God says, that none can foreshew things to come, but himself:
not meaning those things that are known by natural causes; but where the
cause is libera causa, free; therefore if that honor be attributed to any of
these, they take a peculiar office from him. Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11, 12. there are
almost all these forbidden, that were reckoned up before; Jer. 10.2. there is a
plain commandment, that we should not ascribe to the Stars the event; Esa.
8.19. Ezekiel. 21.21. there is the same thing. Examples of these condemned, 1 Samuel
28.8. Saul consulteth with the witch of Endor. 2 King. 1.3. Eliah to Ahaziah,
because he sent mesengers, being sick, to enquire of Baal Zebub the god of
Ekron, if he should recover his disease: Is it not because there is no God in
Israel, that ye go to enquire of Baal Zebub the god of Ekron? And albeit, true
it is, that in regard of the formers wisdom, the truth was told: As the death
of Saul was showed by the witch of Endor, and Act, 16.17. the Pythonisse said
true, that they were the servants of the living God; yet God condemns Saul's
act, 1 Chronicles, 10.13. and the cause of his death is attributed to the seeking
and asking counsel of a familiar spirit: and Act. 16. Paul rebukes the spirit
that spoke in her, and made him to come forth: And Deuteronomy. 13.2. there is a
commandment, though a Prophet foretell a truth, and say, Let us have another
God, he must not be followed, but he shall be stoned.

The other, i. Quantum non oportet, when we give more honor then is required,
is commonly referred to superstition; but rather it is in idolatry: as the
other (in profaneness) it lightly does end in Atheism. Superstiti^.
Quantum non: as it appears by the second Council of Nice, they that brought
up Images, their principal reason among all, is this, because God cannot be
too much remembered: and therefore that it were good to have images, that we may
have God always in our mind: which is no argument; for then there should be no
superstition: Tully showing the first beginning of superstition, he says that
certain of the old Romans did nothing but pray day and night, that their
children might be superstites, and survive them, and upon that occasion these
men were called superstitiosi: and after it went to other things. In this
respect also we condemn the Euchites.

It is true, as the Fathers say, that for quantitas absoluta, R^^^ (...)
quan^^^^ (...) ^^dum ara^^ (...). We must (...) so, that we (...) continue N^n
cut, n^^ quantum.
if we were as the Angels, there were no nimium, no excess: but for as much as
in an earthly man there is but quantitas ad proportionem: that he may still go
forward in the worshipping of God: and so how an absoluteness, exconduione; he
is but weak, and therefore not to consume himself in one day, but so that he
may continue; this makes that there is a nimium in religion, and so
consequently a superstition.

For the other extreme, parum, the defect: they call it commonly profaneness:
and it was a punishment in the beginning; that a man should be such a one, that
he should not be suffered to come within the Church intra fanum: [but to stand
extra fanum,] without the Church: but now in these days there are many, that
account it no punishment, nay it is to be feared, that it has a reward, and
they are better thought of, which be such.

We come to the second point, to non acquiescere, that proceeds from a
corrupt vein in us, a desire of new and strange things: (...), and therefore
that God might make them more odious unto us, he has made it a name for those
things, that he hates most of all: Number. 18.7. he calls him externum
ministrum, the stranger that offers: Levit. 10.1. Nadab and Abihu are said to
have offered strange fire to the Lord, ignis alienus: Prove. 2.16. an Harlot is
called aliena mulier, the strange woman: Genesis 35.5. alieni or peregrini dii,
and to follow strange Gods, Deuteronomy. 31.16. is called fornicari post deos alienos.
And thus we come to that, That Witch being our (...) wi^^.
Gal. 3.1. to be bewitched by this Witch, and desire of novelty, being the
Witch. This putting to new devises is that, that has changed the pure doctrine
in the Primitive Church, and it has made our religion so as it is: Acts 17.21.
these Attica ingenia, Academick wits, are lightly given to it.

In both these, there be three degrees, according to our exceedings and defects.

1. Schism in superstition, and in the way to superstition, and so in the way
to profaneness: and to have such a conceit, that he should not, or not that,
that he should. 2. Haeresis. 3. Apostasia.
1. A Schism is, when a man upon indifferent things, and for trifles, will
make a rent in the whole body, 1 Cor. 1.10. Heb. 10.25.

2. But, when it comes to a point of doctrine, then it is an Heresy, as 1
Cor. 11.19. Acts 5.17. haeresis Sadducaeorum.

3. (But if all be given over,) Apostasy, a denying of all the points of
religion. Heb. 6.14.

The means for finding out the truth and true religion, They be four^. * The
Fathers derive religion a religande, but Cicero and Varro a relegende, of often
reading: and the Prophet Daniel seems to be of the same mind chap. 12. v. 12.
we see what they be in the state of them that are Heathens: 1. in the Eunuch,
Acts 8.28. his means was, that he read the Prophet Esaias. 2. Acts 10.2. in an
Heathen, Cornelius, a Centurion:
his means were prayers, and alms, and fasting: and that which is somewhat
strange, before he was called, he was said to be a man that feared God: but
that the Fathers have well resolved it, that say, he was called so, quia non
detinuit veritatem naturae suae in injustitia: by holding, (as contra, Romans
1.18.) that truth of nature, which God has given him, and not abusing it to
licentiousness, but exercising it with good and godly exercises: therefore God
bestowed a further light upon him: i. his fear, and such is the fear of God,
that is in men before they are called: so then, if we use Cornelrus his means,
and if we shall fear God thus much, that that light [and truth] we have, we
do not press it nor detain it in unrighteousness.

3. The third is in Acts. 18.24. [the meanes] of Apollos, that in that he knew
he was ready to speak fervently, and teach diligently the things of the Lord,
i. in the Baptism of John: [that we be ready and willing to speak for the
confirmation of that we know, till more come. These are the principal means:
the rest may be taken from the ways of increasing knowledge.

Signa. 1. Antiquitas. 2 Pu^gati ^^^nae. 3. P^^g^e^ius. 4. Exemplum morum.

The signs of true religion, twenty and more, we spoke before of them, and
therefore we need not to repeat them here: but only this we say, that of
them, 1. the antiquity, 2. the purgation of the soul, 3. the beginning and
growing up of religion, and 4. the examples of excellent virtues in the
professors: these four Aug. de civit. dei, accounts to be the especial.


For longer life he moves his p^tition for this end.
The sixth rule for the promoting of it in other. Psalm. 30.10. David's desire
there is, that he may not yet die, because the dust shall not declare his
truth: and John 18.37. Christ says, that he was borne, and came into the world
to this end, to bear witness of the truth: On the other side, as it is Romans
16.17. whosoever cause strife and offenses, we are bidden (...), to avoid them.

The third part, if we have him, it is not enough; but we must have him alone:
the Chaldee, he adds Barmin, [so have the 70. Interpreters (...), but me:]
Matthew. 4.10. (...), Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall
thou serve: [this maketh] the full affirmative of this, and is all one with
that Deuteronomy. 6.4. or Deuteronomy. 10.20. only there is not there (...), him only: but
by him is supplied, and all by the same spirit.

The reasons were before touched: the reasons why, and the scope, that we may
say Soli Deo, God only can deliver us from evil, only give us good: therefore
his alone is the glory.
honor et gloria, glory be unto God alone: as the Apostles and other holy men
did, in the end of their Epistles and Writings, as in the end of the Epistle to
the Romans, of the second of Peter, and the last of Jude: and the reason, Esa.
42.8. because he will give his glory to none other: his glory is indivisible.
If any will add another, he shall see the conditions, 1 Samuel 7.3. If you seek
me only, then will I help you, then you shall have help both of body and
soul by me: if others, then as it is, Judge. 10.14. let them whom ye serve,
help you.

2. Another is this, that the name wherewith God is entitled of a Father, and
of a Master, Mal. 1.6. of a King, Psalm. 5.2. (Hearken thou unto the voice of my
calling, my King and my God) of an Husband, Hoseah 2.20. all these can be but
one: there is one Master, one King, one Father, one Husband: unless it be an
adulterous wife: Luke 16.13. you cannot serve God and Mammon: to this Et, you
(as one notes very well) may join any thing: Matthew. 6.24. it is impossible
for any to serve two Masters: so the same estate being of God, were see the
precept stands on good ground, that there must be no other God.

In a conjunction of two things.
3. The third was touched before, Esa. 1.22. if you join any with him, that is
worse then he, (as he must needs be worse, whosoever he be) then you abase
him: if there were any matchable with him, then it were no abasing: and
therefore you shall see a continual course in Scriptures.

Genesis 35.2. [by the light of nature) if you go to Bethel, and make an Altar to
Jehovah, you must put away other, and strange Gods. In the Law, by the way of a
Commandment, Deuteronomy. 4.10. and by way of figure, Deuteronomy. 22.9. there are all
mixtures forbidden: 1 King. 18.21. there is a reconciling humor in us: the
Israelites they would halt between two opinions, and please both God and Baal:
2 King. 17.41. against the Samaritans, So these Nations served the Lord, and
served their Images also: So did their children, and their childrens
childrenias did their fathers, so do they, to this day: and Zeph. 1.5. against
them that would swear by Jehovah and by Malchom with one breath: Luke 16.13.
No servant can serve two Masters, for either he shall hate the one, Sincere
religion, sincere affection.
and love the other: or else he shall lean to the one, and despise the other:
ye cannot serve God and Mammon: 2 Cor. 6.14. there is a perpetual enmity of
this mixture of religion.

That thing that is commanded, Mandatum. 2 Cor. 1.12.
1 Cor. 5.8. and 2 Cor. 1.12. (...), etc. that in simplicity and godly
sincerity, and not with fleshly wisdom, etc. he alludeth to a figure, that we
must keep our Passover in azymis, with unleavened bread: that figure of bread
he applies to immixtion of religion: there must be no mixture: and there must
be (...), (...).
and that is here commanded, (...), properly signifies a judging of such wares
as have counterfeit with them: (...) synceritas favi, mel syncerum.
and carrying of them into the Sun, and the Sunne-light must judge whether
they be counterfeit or no. God says, he will seek us with Lanternes.

This is synceritas mellis: when there is nothing but pure honey, and no wax
mingled with it: such an affection in religion is called synceritas religionis.
This is in two respects: 1. for the matter, Luke 5.36. a joining of old patches
with new garments, or putting new wine into old bottles, making a corrupt
religion to be an incorrupt and true religion: Revel. 18.6. the Whore of
Babylon is said to have a mixed cup, of a perfect mixture: and in the Turks
religion, there is a mixture of all paganism: for they worship Jupiter,
Minerva, etc. and they have a Temple dedicated to Minerva; and of the
Nestorians, and of the Jews, and beside he has added devises of his own:
this for the matter.

We must be careful to preserve our affection sincere.
2. Now for the mixture of our affections; that as our religion ought to be
sincere, so that we come sincerely to it: that in regard of the quality that
comes of the mixture of hot and cold water, which is luke warm, Esa. 28.20
reason of it, the heart to a strait bed.
as Revel. 3.16. they that are affected with this quality, the Lord will cast
them out, i. such men as come unto him with a narrow heart, that will not serve
him in the full Latitude of religion, but will be sharers for themselves apart,
though they be not wholly like them in John 6.26. yet as he says Esa. 36.16.
[and] Esa. 28.15. Because ye have said, we have made a covenant with death, and
with hell we are at agreement: they are at league with death and hell, if
persecution come; they will not shrink: if Iosiahs Statutes go down, and if
Omries come, they are ready to receive them also: Iam. 4.8. he calls them
homines duplici cord, men of a double heart: and Iam. 1.8. he gives a reason,
because their affection is not sincere: because of their inconstancy.

The other extreme is the defect: you shall find it, Prove. 30.39. we must not
be so affected, as he that will blow, till there come blood: Qui mungit nimium,
sanguinem elicit, he that will have his nose too clean makes it bleed: that
we must not desire purity in the Church so, and in so much measure, that while
we seek to make it too clean, we make it bleed, at the nose.

The means.

1. There is no better thing then that Revel. 3.15. of lukewarm: Gods wish
there is, that we would resolve with our selves, to be either hot or cold.

So we shall come to the cera syncera, or mel syncerum; that resolution must
be: for men stand wavering.

How much he esteems it and how long he will esteem it.
2. When we are resolved, and we say, we will be hot, then that we come to our
price: Job 28.13. if it be the truth, it is said, there is no price of it: nor
that it is to be found in the land of the living, i. though we give our selves,
and all that we have, yet we must set no price: The Simile is taken from
Merchants, that at the end of their clothes and wares, will set a mark of the
lowest price, that they will sell them at. Otherwise, as it is in Zach. 11.12.
the Prophet in Christ's person says; Let Us see what you will value me at: and
they weighed for my wages 30. pieces of silver: and what he esteems of the
price, we see: he turns it over to the Potter: a goodly price for me to be
valued at of them: a price more fit to buy potsherds: there is not such a price
set on us, God has not valued us at so small a rate, whatsoever we esteem of
the truth or Christ. To know how God is to be esteemed, is how he and Christ
esteemed us, 1 Pet. 1.18 as no corruptible thing, neither silver, nor gold
could buy us.
1 Cor. 6.20. Empti estis precio magno, ye are bought with a great price, more
then 30. pieces of silver: for it is certain, that all should have gone,
rather then he; if it would have served: therefore we must so price him, for he
is the truth, that no corruptible thing buy us from Christ.

The signs of [true religion] likewise were handled before: these four, 1. If
it ascribe to God alone all things; and give no part to any other: 2. If it
favor not man in any of his corrupted desires, but urge the contempt of
father, mother, friends, and himself, and all: 3. If it be merely spiritual,
and have no mixtures; that were the decay of religion: Mixtio theolog. ^um
Philosoph. Judaismo,

the 1. in Col. 2.8. the mingling of Religion with the errors of Philosophy:
Aug. calls them very well, orationes Philosophorum acute abtusae: and thus,
(as Clemens Alexandrinus, and Origin witness,) Platoes (...), and Aristotle's
(...), By diverse Platonists conversed to religion, so diverse Aristoteleans
and other errors of the Philosophers crept into the Church, and at length
prevailed.

2. The other is in Tit. 1.14. of Jewish fables: i. that part of Judaisme, that
is abrogated: more plainly, Gal. 4.9. egena and infirma elementa, weak and
beggarly elements: i. Jewish ceremonies, and Philosophers principles: for these
did the Whore mingle in her Cup.

Among the 20. ^easons. The signs of the sincerity of affection, if we have no
end, or reward, but our eye only upon him.
4. Last is, penetratio cordis, circumcisio cordis: that that takes away the
circumcised skin of the heart; this in its full extent gives a mavelous
scope to Non concupisces. For sincerity of affection: 1. Psalm. 73.24. John
21.15. In the Psalm he says: Whom do I respect in heaven or in earth, but
thee: i. that he had no other end but God: but the other place, Diligis me plus
his? love thou me more then these? then these things here on earth, or else
our heart is not aright: for if we come not to that, certainly look how far
short we come of it, so far are we short of true sincerity.

Of an example of a mixture that Peter would have brought in.
The 6. rule, for the procuring of it in others: 1 Timothy 6.14. there is enjoined
by the Apostle, that Timothy, and especially all those that are in the room of
Timothy, keep the commandment (...), without spot, without wrinkle: Gal.
2.11. though Peter bring in Judaisme, withstand him to his face: to hinder
whatsoever corruption is brought, or ready to be brought into our religion.

[Lest any man should think that this coram me, were of no importance:] Aug.
says, that this [Coram me] magnam habet emphasim: Coram me.
this addition coram me, has a great emphasie, and force: and indeed so great
force, as it makes a distinction between this commandment, and the other
three in this table.

The first rule here is that, Romans 7.14. the law is spiritual: 1. For there is
a great rule of it in Romans 7.14. 2. It makes two distinctions
this rule is grounded on these words, gnalpanai, before me: coram facie
humana, and coram luce, etc. in the sight of man, they fall into the exterior
act: but coram tenebris, and coram facie Dei, in the sight of God, they come
only to the thought, to the inward part of the soul: and therefore properly
pertain to this Commandment, and come only to the sight of God. Esa. 45.7.
He has framed the light and created the darkness: therefore it is all one to
him, to see in darkness and in light: Psalm. 94.9. he made the eye, and by
virtue thereof he sees whatsoever the eye can see: and by a further virtue [by
creating and forming the spirit of man] Zach. 21.1. he sees that the eye sees
not; It is against the nature of a Maker to make any thing prejudicial to
himself
but only the spirit of man: so that (as Aug. says) whether the candle
burns, or be put out, he sees: and that which is above all these, 1 John
3.20. he sees more then our spirit can see, in us: though the heart cannot
condemn us, yet he can condemn us: for he is greater then our heart.

The other distinction.
Another thing touching this point, in the moral Philosophy of Christians, the
distinction of bonum apparens and verum, good in appearance, and true good:
this coram me, before me, i. God, makes it: coram homine, before man, makes it
not; for coram homine, or any other coram, it argues nothing else, but every
thing as it appears; but it cannot truly be so, except it be so to God: that
that appears so coram facie Dei, that is so: and for the better and plainer
undestanding of this, we must know how Ephesians. 3.16. he divides man: every one
is divided into two men: and the same words are used by Plato before him:
whereby some gather that he had read him: there is (...), and (...), the
outward man, and the inward man. Now whether of these two pleases God, he
himself shows, speaking of himself: 1 Samuel 16.7. Samuel had a liking to
Saul's countenance, and high and comely stature: man looks into the eyes, or
face, or comeliness of body: but God looks not as man looks, he looks
into the heart, and consequently, because he looks into the heart, Psalm.
51.6. for this cause it is, that he requires truth in the inward parts: and
for the same cause is it, that Luke 17.21. the Kingdom of God begins within
us: and not as certain ( Pharisee like) who look only to the outside of the
dish, and rest in some external pieces of Gods worship. It is the integrity of
the heart which God especially looks at: for,

First, there is the principal rule of the Scepter of Christ set, subduing our
will unto Gods will: there is in us a corrupt affection of man (...), that our
desire is contrary to the desire of God. We desire only to seem: as 1 Samuel
15.30. Yet honor me I pray thee, before the elders of my people, and before
Israel: that he might seem before them to be in good state still. Such is our
nature: and in Saul our nature bewraieth it self: so then we see the coherence.

To apply it to the glory of God: the common saying is, Every man is delighted
with that especially, in the which he exceeds other: and because we know that
gnalpanai, is a thing that God excels all other in, (for he only is a
searcher of the heart) therefore it is that God delights so much in this.

Another, and two more, they are both, Prove. 4.23. the wise man's counsel is to
look to our heart especially: there is his reason; because from thence comes
life, and all the faculties of soul and body: that is a cause containing a
double reason; 1. because it is the principal member: therefore it must
principally give glory to God. 2. If it be corrupt, there will be no glory by
the fountains.


The necessity appears in this, that al those glorious duties before handled,
take them and remove them from this, they are not only not accepted before
God, but an abomination before his eyes: therefore if our belief must be
acceptable to him, Romans 10.10. it must come from the heart; if our prayer, 2 Timothy 2.22. it must come from the heart; if our love, 1 John 3.18. it must be in
word and in truth, which is from the heart: so likewise our obedience must be
from the heart, Romans 6.17. and to conclude, whatsoever we do, we must do it
(...), from the heart. Col. 3.23.

Mandatum. Inward soundness, against inward hallownesse, sincerity against
mingling.
That which is commanded: it is called by the Fathers virius integritatis, the
virtue of integrity: they ground it on Genesis 17.1. [when he begins the
covenant of circumcision] Ambula coram me, walk before me: what is that? that
is, esto integer: (...) be thou perfect: you shall find it commonly used with
another word: as in Job 1.1. that Job was (...) they properly sound thus,
[streight and sound:] the nature of the words is taken from timber, in which
there must be straightness, that it be not crooked; that is coram facie
humana: and soundness, that it be not hollow; that is coram facie divina: this
is for God, the other man may see: Luke 8.15. Christ expresses them under
these words, (...), an honest and good heart. Nazianzen speaking of that place,
in the person of God, says, (...), give me the pith^ and not that only; but
straightness is required without too: so that without and within, we must be
such as is required in good timber.

In Exodus 25.11. and 37.2. all his embroydering and works, they were both
foris and intus, without and within: but for the distinguishing other Kings
daughters, from the Kings daughter, i. the Church, Psalm. 45.14. it is said
there, that her beauty is specially within: for the outward beauty may be
counterfeit; and represented by them that are not of the Church: but the inward
beauty is required: and that is it, that admits no hypocrisy.

The defect, hypocrisy.
That which is forbidden; there is forbidden here the fault of the Pharisees,
Matthew. 23.26. whose fashion was, to make clean the outside of the cup: quod
intus autem est, non curare, and never regard the inside: and we see
hypocrisy, is the sin of seven woes: more then ever any sin had.

Excessus, when a man is simple without wisdom.
The other extreme is, as in Hoseah 7.11. i. soundness and plainness: [the
Prophet calls it] columba sine cord, a Dove without a heart. Matthew. 10.16.
Christ calls it columba sine serpenie, the Dove without the Serpent. It is of
one that is, as we read, Prove. 29.11. pouring out his spirit without any
manner of wisdom and discretion before every man: our integrity, it must be
preserved with wisdom.

The Means.

Media. Where we are commanded a good thing, there is also the means of it
commanded.
1. Senecaes counsel to Lucillius (for he desired integrity) was, that
whatsoever hetooke in hand, he should imagine Cato, or Scipio, or some other of
the ancient Romans, renowned for this virtue, to stand before him; and it is a
good means, we have in Psalm. 16.8. of the same kind, but it far better
exceeds that: Let a man (as the Prophet there says) say, I have set the Lord
always before mine eyes; i. imagining that whatsoever he does, he is in the
presence of God. And if that will not move him, then that in Romans 2.16.
possibly will, if he set not God only absolutely, but as he sits, when all
hearts and the secrets of man shall be opened: i. the adding to God the day of
judgment: Preac. 12. the last verse. Every thing, though it be never so secret,
shall come into judgment.

2. Another is, Ephesians. 6.6. and it may be a forcible reason, if this (...),
eye-service satisfy not God, no not to our earthly masters: if God will not
allow that for current to men; but will have it done even to them in
singleness of heart: surely this may be a sufficient argument to persuade us,
that he will much more exact it of us for himself.

3. The last is the dealing of Christ with us for the integrity of our heart:
for he yielded the integrity of his heart to us: he suffered it to be ripped
and pierced: therefore it is reason that we should yield up the integrity of
ours to him. Bernard: Just cor nostrum vendicat, qui suum pro nostro dedit, he
justly challenges our hearts, that has given his own for ours: he thought
not his hands and feet, etc. enough, i. when he had given all his members
beside, he thought not himself, that he had given enough to us, except he had
given his heart too: therefore it is not our hands, and our feet that can
requite it; for they cannot make recompense for his hands and his feet: but
the integrity of the heart also is to be yielded.

The Signs.

Nilcons^ire sili, nulla pallescere culpa: hic murus aheneus esto.
1. You shall know it by that of the Heathen man: you shall know a sound heart
by a wall of brass about it: it is so full of courage, as we see what Paul
says, 1 Cor. 4.3. Mihi pro minimo est, at a vobis judicer, with me it is a
small thing that I should be judged of you: i. that the soundness of the
heart, it is it that will put courage to the heart: (if he be not conscius
mali, conscious of evil) as that all the strength in the world cannot appall
it: Contra, if we want a sound heart, our courage will fall. We have examples
of both, Mar. 6.18. John's courage in a good cause, and in an heart accordingly
affected, was exalted even above the Majesty of a Prince: contra, where the
heart was false, in Peter, [ Mar. 14.66, 69.] we see two silly maids
outcountenanced him, and he is feign to cast himself down under them both: he
becomes a peasant.

2. Another sign like to this; but it is under the Cross: Look how we are
there, When a man receives comfort under the Cross, by that that he has done
out of the Cross, a good sign.
so we are in deed: that will bewray what our heart is. 2 King. 20.3. there is
a Cross, that dismaieth not Hezekiah: Why? because he knows that in his
health he walked aright before God: but contra, Psalm. 22.14. it is in the
midst of a man's body, like melting wax.

1. A detestation of sin in our selves, and in others.
3. Genesis 38.14. by the example of Judah: that if the like hatred of any sin be
in himself, or rather greater, when he does no less punish it in himself,
then in other: if it be the case of Thamar, then to cry, Away with her, to the
fire, let her be burned: but we see a strange and sudden alteration in verse.
26. if it be his own case, then he says, Sure I am not so righteous, as she
is: this falls much into the account as the Heathen man says of Anthony and
his fellow, Brutus and Cassius The true hatred of sin must begin at our
selves.
that they did odisse tyrannum, but not tyrannidem, hate the traitor, but not
the treason, etc. But the true hatred of sin must begin of our selves: yea,
and that for the least, as Romans 7.24. the Apostle for concupiscence in himself,
we see what a great hatred and grief he falls into, that he cries out, O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver, etc.

4. The last may be this: [it is somewhat an hard signe] if there be any man
that can say the two last verses of Psalm. 139. an excellent Psalm in this
behalf, if he can say it without panting of his heart, and fear, or changing
of the affections: Prove me, and try me, O Lord, etc. If any dare take this
upon him, if he deceive not his own heart, it is upright.

But a gentler then this, Psalm. 7.3. where he says, If my heart be not true
and sound in this respect, then let me feel the hand of God, then let the
enemy persecute me, etc. or when Psalm. 4.4. when a man entering into his
chamber, can say, As mine heart has been upright before thee, so I desire to
be helped in my greatest need, and to be comforted in the last gasp: so to
offer up obedience within us must needs be a true sign.

6. Rule, for the procuring of it in others: Reg. 6.
we have the Apostles desire and commandment, Phil. 1.10. and the example we
have in the friends of Job, though after a corrupt manner. for though they
took a wrong course, yet the desire was good, to see that his heart was
upright: haec de integraute.

Perseverance.
THe knitting up of all is to persevere. Perseverance, it stands first,
Perseverantia.
Non habebis, or non erunt, thou shall not have, or there shall not be, but in
the order of handling has the last place, because it has the shutting up of
all: It is in the words non erunt, which will not be answered with non sunt, or
non habui, or non habeo: but this must answer it, non habebo, I will never have
any other God. And this is a greater matter then many do imagine: fui, sum,
and ero, are the notes of the three times: surely every man examining these
three times, shall find that fui, the time past, to remember is a sorrowful
thing; and as Bernard says, Recordare praeteriti, and erubesce: it is a great
shame for us to remember what we have been: In sum, the present time,
peradventure there may be comfort, because we strive to attain: but howsoever
it is, ero, the future time, must needs be a fearful thing, for a man to
consider in what case he shall be hereafter, and what his latter end shall be,
whether God will forsake him, as he has done many that have been in as good,
and peradventure in better case then he is: and therefore non erunt is a sharp
commandment.

We place it last; and this is the natural order, for it to come in here: both
because the Heathen have seen it, that say, that (...). and the end or last
part of fortitude is perseverance: and because that all virtues are preserved
by this, (or to allude to the phrase of the holy Ghost) poudred with it; as 2
Cor. 13.5. Abijam King of Judah to Jeroboam of Israel, Ought you not to know
that the God of Israel has given the Kingdom over Israel, to David forever;
that is, to him, and to his sons, by a covenant of salt, by serving him in a
covenant of salt: and the truth of that is, [that every virtue should not be as
summer fruit, but as a virtue conserved and poudred.]

There was no Sacrifice without Salt in the Type of the Law.

Now the reason is in regard of the end that God looks at in all our actions,
by our persevrance is made known the truth of our performances, otherwise the
Hypocrite might go for a true Professor. 2. It pleases God to make a
propotrion in every virtue, to some quality in God.


But another and peculiar to this; For there is in every virtue a conforming of
our selves to some attribute in God; as in our knowledge, to his wisdom: in
our belief, to his truth: in our sear, to his justice: in love, to his mercy:
in integrity, to his ubiquity: and in our perseverance, to his eternity:
because he ( Revel. 1.8.) is a and o the beginning and ending; which is the
book of perseverance: so we according to our Quamdiu, begnadi, till I die,
usque ad mortem, and as he says to the Angel of Smyrna, Revel. 2.10. not only
to natural death, but also to violent death: Heb. 12.4. there is another
usque: and that usque includes blood: usque ad sanguinem. So does the Apostle
resolve it, Acts 21.13. I am ready not only to be bound, but also to die at
Jerusalem: this is our o, and howsoever, or wheresoever our a is placed, this
must be our o: this must be our eternity, even till I die. Otherwise, as
Bernard says, Quid levitati, and aeternitati? there is no fellowship of God
and man, without perseverance. So on the other side against our nature; as we
had in regard of the last affection, a desire to seem, rather then to be:
because it is easier: and we love ease: so here we have an affection, that is,
of a back-starting Bow, Psalm. 78.5.8. as he describes the nature of the
Israelites, We have often a desire to start back, so that it comes to be a
pain to go forward.
and of all, to be like a Bow: that is bent almost: and let it go never so
little, and it starts back again: or as Gal. 6.9. no less excellent, by
(...), i. to feel a grudging in our bones all the while we are a doing good.
Now the subduing of this natural desire, and the conforming of it to Gods
eternity, that is a thing that specially pertains to his glory.

But this bountifulness is but on this condition, si permanseris.
The necessity of perseverance is plain: Esa. 7.9. the like, Romans 11.22. this
is our first covenant, Nisi credideritis, non stabiliemini: here is the last,
T^bi bonitatem Dei, si in ea permanseris, alioquin excideris and iu: it
stands on the forfeiture of all. In the reason and laws of man, it is set
down (for all bargains) that nihil praesupponitur esse actum, donec aliquid
manet esse agendum: as in a building, it is not said to be done, till the last
stone be laid: so we shall be condemned even according to our own reason; for
even by our own reason perseverance is very necessary.

Mandat. The heaviness of the eye, and the heaviness of the soul, is that
that hinders us in our duties.
That which is commanded here is perseverance, set down Matthew. 24.13. and in
many other places; but metaphorically it is called watching, Matthew. 24.42. and
so the contrary is called in the Parable of the Virgins, Matthew. 25.5. sleeping:
(...), they all slumbered and slept: Matthew. 26.43. it is not in Parable, but
the very action of the Apostles, and the saying of Christ to Peter, Could ye
not watch with me one hour? etc.

It is is distinguished from patience: the object of patience is tristitia
crucis, the heaviness of the Cross: the object of this is taedium
diuturnitatis. Perseverance is in regard of a longtime: and a certain
tediousness withal; which, he that overcommeth, has it: it is to do well of
great continuance: i. as the Apostle says, Heb. 3.13. While it is called to
day: this hodie, to day, says Jerome, it is quotidie, every day; when we have
done with, to day, it is not blotted out, but when to morrow comes, it is
there still: and that is so long as we live: usque ad mortem.

That which is forbidden. The first fault is of them that are called (...),
wilful continuers: as they that have taken an evil course, as Esa. 5.11.
there be some, that can rise early to the wine, and continue at it till night;
even till the wine inflame them: and Prove. 23.29. there is a greater
continuance set down: till they get them red faces, and red eyes: It is the
use of all evil persons, [to labor then most, when other labor least.] Mat.
26. When the rest of the Apostles fell asleep, it is said of Judas, Judas autem
festinavit, Judas was busy how to betray him: and Aug. upon that place says,
Petre dormis tu, and non dormit Judas, sed festina^? the night brake not his
naughty continuance. We see it also in the drunkard, and in the glutton; that
will not give out while their skins will hold: the avaritious, till he burst,
he will suck with the horse-leach: and the adulterer, while his loins last:
and the contentious man, so long as his purse will last. In so much that Jerome
says, Infel^x populus Dei, qui tantam perseverantiam non habet in bono,
quantam improbi in malo! O unhappy people of God, which do not so persevere in
goodness, as the wicked do in evil!

The other extreme is more riese, and more usual now adays, i. to be like to
the Romines, Romans 1.8. What a glorious sort of professors speaks he of there?
I thank my God, through Jesus Christ for you all, that your faith is spread
abroad over the whole world: yet 2 Timothy 4.16. there, when he was at Rome, at
his first appearing before Nero, he complains, that all forsook him: This is
the manner of those that want perseverance: for a while they are hot, and
zealous, afterward they leave Paul quite: The state of sundry Christians is
like this Image.
i. they have the just resemblance of the image that Nebuchadnezzar saw, Dan.
2.32. his head was of Gold, his feet of Clay: they begin in gold, but end in
dirt. Sure it is, there is none so evil in the whole world, but a beginning he
has in good: John. 1.9. the light must lighten every one that comes into the
world: so that there is not the worst man, but sometimes he seems good: and
then he falls into his former excess of riot again.

These revolters are of two sorts: 1. either they will be as Demas, They
begin well, but give over.
( Phil. v. 24.) of whom there was great account made in the Church, and was
always joined with Luke: but 2 Timothy 4.10. Demas has forsaken me, and has
embraced this present world: and either they do fall together away at once,
and without any sign of return: or else in the 2. place, they are such as may
well be compared to Pharaoh, from Exodus 6. to the 11. we read of many
beginnings and interruptions that he had; come a shower of rain or hail, etc.
come a new plague; then he cries, The Lord is righteous, and I and my people
are sinners: then, pray for me, that this plague may be taken from the land,
and I will let you go: so there are some that have a great many beginnings,
that have every day a beginning and never go forward: it is very fitly called a
religion of brunts, or that comes by fits; but has no continuance: It may be
thought not so fitly likened to the Beast, Revel. 12.3. that had seven heads,
seven beginnings, first, many beginnings. The second sort are they that out of
malice set themselves to oppose the truth which they formerly professed, with a
resolution never to return again; which is high Apostasy.

The means in regard of the near conjunction of patience with perseverance.

1. The first in patience [for every man] to regard, and to cast, how long his
time would be: so here in perseverance, knowing that he shall have many rubbes
in his way, and the time will be happily long, so that the Lord will not in the
first watch, nor in the second: yet that he prepare himself, not to be found
asleep, whenever the Lord shall come: but consider what God says to
Joshuah, cap. 1. v. 6, 7, and 9. he was to undertake the possessing of the
land: and such a thing do we undertake, Ephesians. 6. and in sundry other places, an
encamping against Captains, the flesh, the world, and the Devil: and rather
then we should want, God himself would wrestle with us: Be strong and of a
good courage, etc. only be thoustrong, etc. Have not I commanded thee? etc.
This purpose, and acquainting of our selves with the difficulty of the matter,
and so arming our selves against our stout enemies, is a special means to
hold out in times, and things either difficult or dangerous: for this here
thrice repeated, shows, that there is great need of this affection in us.

2. Another means, if we consider our own judgment in the case that is not
our own: touching those things which continue not: if we compare Christianity
to a tree, what account is made of that fruit, that is bitten in the blossom,
or that is wind-shaken? that is rotten, or worme-eaten, or that cannot come to
the gathering? If we consider the hatred of the husbandman, Hosea 6.4. against
the morning cloud, he knows it is a deceitful cloud, and that it is not like
to rain all that morning, Amos 8. of the summer fruit; that even it rotteth in
the hand of him that bears it: or as Luke 8.13. of the seed that falls on
a stone wall, that grows, but yet there returns no profit of it: neither
the mower, neither the reaper fills his hand, or bosom of it: or thus; In
our possessions, in our vessels we occupy: how glorious a show soever there be
in glass, yet we better esteem of peuter, and wood, then of it: or in our
possessions, more of a poor croft, or a seely close, than of a fair house;
rents: and all in regard of continuance. Seeing then it is our practice, we
must needs by that condemn our selves.

It is the desire of all, not to beat the wind, not to run in vain: this
vanity may be in two respects.

1. In the behalf of the party of Christ: untolerable to make him, so royal a
person, Pretium non vile laberis.
to come down from heaven, to be borne, to live amongst us, and to dye in so
unworthy an order, being of great excellency, Laber irrius supra emmen
laborem. The want of perseverance makes a man's action ipso facto vain.
and that in vain; and all because we continue not: whereas he went through
all, and would not suffer the cup to pass away, but drank it up clean; this
is the price of all his labors, man's continuance: otherwise it is more grief
to him, then it was for him to suffer; and that vain suffering is more to him,
then all the torments he suffered, that wrought so upon him, that he cried,
Eli, Eli, etc. That is a thing may happily move us to perseverance. 2. And for
our selves, our case stands thus, as 2 Pet. 2.22. our washing is but a vain
washing: for there is after a casting up, and we return to our wallow and
vomit: and what are we better for our washing? Number. 6.12. of the ceremony, the
Nazarite that vowed more particularly to Gods service, and lived a strater
life, than all other, if he had at the last day of accomplishing his rite, but
touched a dead body, he must have begun all those days anew: for all that
was done before, was counted as nothing. The same in figure, that Ezekiel in
truth sets down, Ezekiel. 18.24. Look in what hour he gives over, his
righteousness, it shall be as if he had not done a righteous deed. Therefore
if we will not lose the fruit of our former labors, we must look to our
perseverance: He shall not only not b^ better for it, but be worse,
otherwise a worse thing shall follow: not only Christ and we shall lose our
pains, but that man that has swept his house, and garnished it, keeping it
empty, there shall come the same spirit, and not that alone, but seven more;
and how? the end of that man shall be worse then the beginning. i. we shall
make our state much worse, without hope of recovery.
Intuitu prae^^i.
4. Last, to prevale with them that are the children of grace; that the reward
which he purposes to bestow on us, shall not be a reward of days and years,
but it shall be an endless reward for ever, Seeing it has pleased God, not to
reward us as hirelings, but have the inheritance of sons, it is no reason
that we should labor as hirelings. It is somewhat hard to find the signs of
it, because it is a sign it self.
and ever; and sure it is, (as the Philosopher says) that our labor should be
proportionable to the price of our labor; we should not serve as hirelings,
for a year or term, but quamdiu, that our obedience endure quamdiu nos, as
the reward quamdiu ille: we are to serve him in our eternity, seeing he
rewards us with his.

The signs; the principal sign is perseverance: the Gentiles could see this,
that this is a sign it self a posteriori, that deceives not: so could the
heathen say, Ante obitum nemo, supremaque sunera foelix Esse potest: but after
that was past, they could pronounce what was in him.

It is an especial sign, for as much as in Joh. 10. it is Christ's note: and
indeed it is the note that does infallibly separate the true professor, and
the hypocrite. If you take this gratiam gratis datam, Praecipuum perseverantiae
signum perse^^rantia.
grace as a free gift; as sharpness of wit, etc. you shall have it in as great
measure in the hypocrite, as in the true professor: if a glorious profession,
they commonly go beyond in that: if diligence, it falls out alike, sometimes
more. But when the wolf comes, Joh. 10.12. there is a distinction; for then
continues the true shepherd, and will lay down his life for their safety:
and the hireling betaketh him to his flight. In hearing we may make the like
difference of seed: so whether a man be begotten with mortal seed, that is,
whether in hearing of a Sermon, (which because it is made of good words,
peradventure he shall be moved for a while:) or of the immortal seed, when as
not any thing in man moves him, but the power of the word, the pure and
immortal seed, that will continue: notwithstanding a man may have use of these
two notes, to be able to judge of the like. So whether we be humbled before God,
or before his judgments; if that, it will continue: if this, it will continue
but for a while. But we may have two notes to judge of this: 1. If we have
that, Phil. 3.12. which the Apostle so earnestly urges; (...). 13. (...) 14.
(...). As if that he should say, I do not look back, but I still look
forward, and consider not how long I have continued, i. I flatter not my self
in respect of my life past: non dicere, sufficit: si dixisli sufficit,
defecisti: not to say, I have done enough, if we say, we have done enough, it
is a sign we are yet far short. So, whenever we are moved to look back,
we must not hearken to them that would tell us, how far we have gone, but
follow on still toward the hope of the reward, and press to the mark.

Whereunto Gregory on Genesis 28.12. his allusion of the life of a Christian man
to Jacobs ladder: For there Jacob saw the Angels ascending and descending, but
none standing still. Quando desinis esse melior, incipis esse deterior. When we
cease to be better, we begin to be worse: for there is in us a nature like to
the bow; as in the bow, if you bend it not forward, it will back of it own
accord: and therefore it must be still thrust forward, until the string be in
the very nocke.

2. A 2. and a better is a mark, Revel. 2.19. of the Church of Thyatira, there
the Angel witnesses that her last fruits were more then her first; Psalm.
84.7. We must grow from strength to strength.
Ps. 84.7. they shall bring forth more fruit in their age. i. the true
worshippers. Blessed are they that dwell in thine house, they will be always
prasing thee: Phil. 1.9. (...), that your love may abound yet more and more:
Psalm. 92.14. they shall also bring forth more fruit in their age, they shall be
fat, and well liking.

3. For a 3. that may serve of the woulfe: if we persevere then, when the
woulfe comes. 2 King. 2.11. Elias was not afraid of the fiery charet. If we
fear not the fiery charet, or the fiery horses, it is the last, if this make
us not afraid, then shall we have that spoken by God, of us ( Job 2.) which God
says to the Devil of Job; What say thou now Satan? for yet he continues
in his uprightness, though thou movedst me against him to destroy him without
cause.

6. Rule. For procuring it in other: We see, Heb. 12.12. how it stands us
upon to strengthen our ^^ke brethren, that we be as to our selves, so to
others: Act. 11.23* ^^^nabas, and Silas, exhorted all, that with purpose of
heart, they would continue in the Lord. Act. 13.43. Paul and Barnabas spoke to
them, and exhorted them to continue in the grace of God; Act. 14.22. confirming
the Disciples hearts, and exhorting them to continue in the faith, etc.

As contra, Ezekiel. 34.4. not to provoke our brethren, to leave to strengthen the
weak, not to bind up the broken, nor to reduce the strayers, is set down
there as the mark of evil shepherds, and evil sheep.

Joh. 19.30. as the receiving of the vinegar was Christ's Consummatum est: so
perseverance is the consummatum est of the Christians. Ezekiel. 9.4. so shall we
have the sure mark (...), the last letter: the letter of perfection, the
letter of endurance, and continuance: which whosoever have, they shall not be
slain, and they shall enter into the holy City: And they that have it not,
shall be slain without pity.

So much for the first Commandment.

The II. Commandment.
Thou shall not make, etc.
(...) Praecepti.
THE Commandments of the first Table are divided into such as concern the
worship of God; either inward, as the first Commandment; or outward, as the
second, third, and fourth. The outward, is either continual, or for a time, on
a set day: or, either private and public, or public only. That for one day,
and public only, as the fourth Commandment: The other continual and
private, teaches either the outward gesture, In honor, reverentia, in
gestibus, as the second Commandment: Or in praise, which is exhibited in
speech, as the third Commandment: Or else, concerning the manner of worship,
in the second, or the end, as the third Commandment.

That part of outward worship which concerns the manner of it, and behavior,
to behave our, selves in all parts of the body, and in external signs, is
distributed into the Precept it self; and the Sanction, which is brought in by
way of a reason. v. 5. For I the Lord thy God, etc. And ye know in Princes
Laws and Statures, after they have set down those things that they command,
and that we should do; then they set this down, Qui secus faxit, punietur: He
that does not thus, shall be punished: And that is called Sanctio praecepti. i.
the part of the precept that touches the corrective part, and shows how we
shall be corrected, that will not be directed by the precept.

The Precept is of two sorts; for first, either it prescribes what manner of
worship he requires, in respect of himself: Thou shall not make, etc. Or
secondly, how we are to be affected to him in that manner so prescribed: Thou
shall not how down, etc.

That is as much to say, as God will have his honor in outward worship: but he
will prescribe it himself: And secondly, he will require at our hands, that
unto that manner of him prescribed, we should every way behave our selves
reverently. So first, he will have modum a se praescriptum: And secondly, he
will have reverentiam exhibitam to that modus.

If we mark, as the other precepts stand, the other eight are very short: This
and the fourth may for their length be called Statutes, containing a long sum
of words; and you shall see it was not without cause. For an inward honor to
be given to God, all Laws took some order for it; as Solons, Deos cast
adeunto: and then again for the keeping of their oaths, they were exact,
severe, and strict. So the Heathen, they knew these two parts, but they knew
not the other two.

And for the second Table, they are altogether exact in it, the last excepted.
But the outward manner of Gods worship, and the day of worship, were things
blotted out in the time of Gentility; and were most grossly of all the rest,
transgressed. Then it is, because these were in especial fear to be violated;
and ergo it is not for nothing, that he uses such order in them. For inward
honor and keeping of the vow, we agree with Turks and Pagans: But this is it
wherein we disagree, the outward manner of worship; and this makes the
distinction between Christ's Church, and Satan's Synagogue.

Let us come to the opening of the meaning of this Commandment: Thou shall not
make, etc. And as all the rest, so this stands upon a Synecdoche, under one
general, comprehending all the rest.

The general thing forbidden here, is not the making of a similitude or graven
Image; but a farther thing, set down, Col. 2.23. (...) Invented worship,
Will Worship, devised by man. Will Worship.
For the energie or force of the Commandment, is in these words, non facies
tibi; that is, we must not invent any thing whatsoever: Non simulachrum, non
imago damnatur, sed, non facies tibi.

The invented, or will worship has two things in it to allure us unto it: they
are both seen in the worshipping of Images. First, because it has a show of
wisdom; that a man should invent such an excellent thing. When any man is
thought to be wise, that he may be taken to devise a worship for God.
Secondly, it has a show of humility; that a man should not cast down himself
before God, but before his Image, and Angels, etc. as Paul sets down, Col.
2.23. But if we so run, it will make us lose our reward.

The affirmative part, or general thing commanded, is set down, Heb. 8.5.
cited out of Exodus 25.40. That seeing God has prescribed an order, we should
do after it. It is said, as Moses was warned, as Moses received an Oracle: See
thou make all these things like the pattern of them that were showed thee in
the Mount, precisely in every thing; in the length, breadth and fashion; swerve
not one whit, but do all things according to the pattern received. i. Because
God, after the delivery of the moral Law, showed him every thing precisely of
the outward worship in every particular point; he gives him a charge at his
departure, ver. last, that he square it according to the order that he had
prescribed. So the affirmative is, that our outward worship be as he has
prescribed it. We must make his word our pattern.

The negative, that we mingle none of our will worship with his precept or
worship; as it is These words may be taken of the inward worship also, but
especially it concerns the outward worship of God.
Deuteronomy. 12.32. God speaks very generally; that he will have a man Hoc tantum
facere, quod tibi praecepero; hoc autem faciemus, si nihil addamus aut
detrahamus. If we do either, or both of them, it will follow, which is Mat.
15.19. Frustra colet is me; Worship him we may, but we shall lose our labor:
Quis ista requisivit a manibus vestris?

The reasons whereupon any thing is here denied or commanded: 1. Seeing there
is an honor to be given to God, and he will be worshipped; the question is,
Whether it should be given as we, or as he thinks good? And for this,
Socrates in Plat. 7. Lib. de legibus, can tell us, that every god will be
worshipped, (...), in that manner that best likes him. Chrysostom also Homil.
51. on Matthew. Qui honoratur, eo maxim honor delectatur, quem ipse vult, non
quem nos volumus; else, non est honor, sed dedecus, si vel contra, velpraeter
mandatum aliquid fiat. When it comes to man's worship, we make no question of
it, whether he be to be worshipped and honored in that manner that best
pleases him: but in honoring Great men, we endeavor to fit their humors: So
then much more is it hard, not to allow God so much wisdom, as to appoint
himself his own honor, seeing we perform it to man.

This then may be the conclusion, that Jerome sets down, that honos praeter
mandatum est dedecus; that honor that we give contrary to the commandment of
the honored, or that he does not care for, it is a dishonor to the party, and
no honor. This for the general; now for the particulars.

This being set down, our first question concerning that that God has made
choice of; is, Whether God will have us worship him with Images or not. In
which there is a very mere translatio scopi, as the Logicians term it,
between us and the Papists, or Church of Rome. For whereas God has delivered
his will in these two terms, (...) and (...) We see all the great stir they
make, is about (...) and (...), words that are not in the Commandment. And
ergo whosoever falls into any stir with them about these words, must needs
fall into a (...), a shadow-fight.

This is then that I require, Whether when God names (...) sculptile, and
after (...) a word very general and large, and so general, as neither in the
Latin, nor Greek, there can any word be found, that can answer to it, and
contain it; it containing both exemplum and exemplar; and not that only, but
extracta notio, and inducta in materiam, whether it be in our brain, or
brought into matter: and so many kinds of it, as it is very universal, whether
he do not rise from the Species to the Genus; It is true that Gregory Martin
says, that there be thirteen Hebrew words here forbidden; and there may be
added to them three more: and for avoiding of tediousness are cast under one
of them. For there is Sculptile, any carved, or graven Image; and fusile, any
thing that may be molten; and conflatile, a thing of the mingling of both
these; and there is a picture, etc. In that Martin says true and well, that
Sculptile was more common in those days, then the rest; and it was taken of
Moses as most usual, to comprehend all the rest. But when it pleased God to
ascend to (...). i. as the Seventy interpret it, (...); a likeness or semblance:
albeit (...) does not fully express it, and wholly: Let any man judge, whether
in forbidding all kind of Images, there be not a flat precept containing both
Idola and Icones: These two have a plain distinction; but so cannot (...) and
(...) in regard of the use and abuse: so that we see what the ascension of the
holy Ghost is here; that no kind of graven Images might be used. And to the
other there is a special word joined, all kind of Images; whether they be
resemblances of true things, or false. So most impudently is that set down in
the censure of Collen, that God has forbidden in no place of the Scriptures
generally the use of Images. Now then after he had so ascended, to the
general, we see how to make all sure, what he does. So because we should have
no pattern to frame our selves to, he makes an enumeration of heavenly and
earthly things. The reason, first, to take from them the gods that then were
worshipped. Secondly, that forbidding all manner Images, he might comprehend
them under one general word; so that it might not be lawful to have any
Images, which the Nations about them had; neither any other at all. For he
makes sure work, after this ascending; in taking away al kinds of things,
whose likeness or Images they should have; as first, all that is in Heaven.

Things in Heaven.
First, for the deity; the Papists, as Hosius, and others of their late writers,
begin utterly to disclaim us, and are weary to defend that an Image should be
made to represent the Deity. Esa. 40. is wonderful vehement that way.

Secondly, Angels; a special cause why he should forbid them, because these
(...), these petty gods, and these intelligences, there was none of the
Philosophers, but he knew them, and worshipped them.

Thirdly, for our selves, and for the soul of man, no less necessary; because
we know they were received up into Heaven, and an usual thing it has been, to
deifie them.

Fourthly, so for the Sun and the Moon: Jer. 44.17. a worship given to the
Queen of Heaven: The Sun was so called, because in the Hebrew it is of the
Feminine gender, and it was the god of the Persians. For the Stars, Acts
7.43. The Stars were their gods: And wheresoever there is mention of Moloch,
there is nothing else meant by it, but the Star of Saturn; and there is also
mention made of the Star of the god Rempham.

Fifthly, after those things that are in Heaven, then he comes down to the
earth: and there is forbidden the serving of any in earth, to men, as the
Images of Baal P^rizzim, Baal Peor, Baal Zebus, Hercules, Antidotus Muscarum.
Secondly, Women, as was that of Astarothe. Thirdly, of fowls, as Ibis in
Egypt; the Owl amongst the wise Graecians. Fourthly, Serpents; as the Otter
and Crocodiles, and Belus was one while worshipped in the shape of a Dragon.
Fifthly, Worms, as the Snailes among the Troglodytae. Sixthly, Plants, as Isis
in Egypt; and all other things whatsoever, even things made by art, as pieces
of red cloth, as Strabo testifies of them that were toward the East and West.
Ezekiel. 8.14. 2 Kings 23.11. Jer. 44.17. Exodus 6.32. 1 Kings 12. Golden Calfe.
Sixthly, All that is in the water, as Sirens, water-snakes, fishes, Neptune god
of Philistims. Dagon his similitude was like a male watersnake. Aesculapius was
worshipped under a watersnakes shape. There was occasion given him by the
Gentiles of all those that are here forbidden; so that we are not only
forbidden our Simile, but also our Pattern. Now Deuteronomy. 4.12, 13, 14. Moses
making as it were a Comment on this Commandment, says; Remember this, that
when God came into the Mount, ye saw no likeness or similitude, but only
heard a voice: and ergo a voice, say the Rabbines, because a voice not being
able to be painted, nor drawn into any shape, it was never like to deprive God
any way of his honor. But the reasons they weigh thus much in the Chap: as if
he should say, If it had been the will of God that there should have been any
Image, he would have showed you somewhat when he came into the Mount: but you
saw nothing, but heard only a voice; take heed ergo that you correct not God,
and make to your selves any Image. And as it is, Heb. 11.1. it is the nature of
faith to be rerum invisibilium, not to see: Now to bring visible things into
Religion and Faith, it is the next way to dishonor God, and the overthrow of
Faith and Religion, Joh. 4.23. Christ himself tells the Woman, that the time
was come, when all Ceremonies and invented places for worship should go for
nothing; and even the very Temple at Jerusalem God would not accept it: But
this was it that should be accepted, that they should worship him in spirit and
truth; whereunto nothing is more opposite than Images, no truth being in them,
but only the show of a truth and visible. Then they will ask, if all
likenesses be condemned, why was then that of the Cherubims permitted? yea
prescribed by God to be made; for that was a resemblance, Heb. 9.5. But yet it
was no such Number. 21.8. 2 King. 10.
resemblance, as they define an Image to be, quod habet exemplar in rerum
natura. For the Cherubims were made round like two young men or boys, without
arms, and in stead thereof with two wings. But for that matter it is plain,
that he made them, not to be worshipped; but if he would have had them
worshipped, he would not have put them into the darkest place; but they were
put into the Sanctum Sanctorum, where none ever came, but the high Priest, and
he but once in the year. And they were made, as appears, Exodus 25.22. to
this end, that the high Priest might know from whence God would give answer.
But Tertullian in his Book De Idololatria, Tom. 2. page 447. answers this
fully. God says not, that an Image may not be made: But, non facies tibi, that
we make not any to our selves. But they say then; Why did Moses make an Image?
and he has that objection in the same place: Ait quidam, Cur ergo Moses ex
aere fecit serpentem? His answer is there, Quod idem Deus and lege vetuit
similitudinem fieri, and extraordinario praescripto aeneum serpentem fieri
fecit. Tibi eundem deum observa: Legem habes, eam observa; quod si post
praeceptum factum, sine libidine feceris, and tu imitare Mosem. i. ne facias
nisi and deus te jusserit: licuit deo legem ponere, licet ei quod vult; si idem
deus diceret tibi, Facies, qui dixerat, Non facies, jure faceres. God by his
general law forbade that any Image should be made; then by an extraordinary
cause, by an extraordinary privilege of an extraordinary matter, caused an
Image to be made: except you have particular commandment from God, as Moses
had, do not you make any Image. Concerning this point we have showed on Gods
behalf, what did move him to make this restraint: now it follows that we
show that in regard of our selves, and our own corruptions, it is necessary
this restraint should be made. Tertullian in the same Book, De Idololatria,
sets it down, that before the Flood, even during the days of Seth, the
worship of God was corrupted with Images: and that Enoch's restoring, was
nothing else, but the restoring of the true Religion unto her pureness again;
and that he is ergo said in his days to have walked with God. This is it that
Tertullian says: For the likelihood of it, since Adam, we have example of it
that it was true; for Jacob by being in the house of Laban, had learned to take
Teraphim, gods of Images, to mingle them with God. The reason of this is in
Genesis 6.3. God will trouble himself no more, nor set himself against man; and
his reason is, because man is wholly evil, fleshly: i. though he consist of
two natures; one of flesh and bones, the other of the spirit; yet he suffers
the grossness of the flesh to overgrow the pureness of the spirit, and to
corrupt it, turning the spiritual nature into flesh: so that we wholly become
flesh; and ergo love that with which the flesh is delighted, i. sense. Insomuch
as the Apostles many times in their writings, and Paul gives us warning to
take heed of the flesh of the soul; (...). The meaning of this is, that we
have an affection in us; and that affection is called (...), a desire to feel
or see him. This was Saint Thomas his disease, that would not believe, except
he did feel his wounds, and see him himself, etc. And it was the disease of
Mary Magdalen, about the death of her brother: Master, if thou had been here,
he had not dyed. And we see it was not hers alone, but of all the Apostles;
they desired that Christ might stay to erect an earthly kingdom, and that they
might be with him always; insomuch that he was feign to tell them, that except
he were taken from them, the Comforter could not come to them. Such a thing
there is in Religion. In Exodus, Moses had been in the Mount but a few days,
but there is a general cry of the Israelites, a little after they came out of
Egypt: Fac nobis Deos visibiles; make us gods that we may see, to go before
us. And this affection of man's nature to See, was the beginning of all
Paganism and Idolatry. So says Lactant. Lib. 2. de Orig. Erroris. Verentur,
they fear lest if they should not see what they worship, they should be
thought to worship nothing at all. For Esa. 36.7. such was the conceit of
Rabshakeh, touching Hezekiah and the people of Judah, that they had no god at
all; because Hezekiah had taken away the Idols, etc. and there was no god to be
seen. The very same thing in Serapion. They had a desire of visible gods; Where
are your gods? You have no visible gods, but only bare Altars, as you had in
the beginning. This desire of sense, was the cause of all evil in the
primitive Church. Now then this was a special cause.

(viz.) First, verbum Scriptum, the Scriptures: Secondly, Praedicatum, the
Preaching of the Word: Thirdly, the visible Word, i. the Sacraments: Fourthly,
the great Book of the creatures; of whom David says, Psalm. 19.1. Their sound
is gone out into all Lands, and their words unto the ends of the World. These
four be Canori monitores: Yet they would not content themselves with them,
thinking that there could be no Nimium in Religione and cultu divino: and
consequently, no superstition. Thus they gave the honor due to God unto
creatures, which were not Divinae, but Humanae, Romans 1.23. This is certain,
that seeing God had such care of his people, he would never have forbidden
Images, if they had been good for them to move them to the duties of worship;
it had been injury to them if they had been so good teachers: no grosser people
then they.

Let us ergo weigh this superstition, against the Euchites, and against the
private Mass, which came in by too much communicating, and then they were
weary of that, and came to have it privately in their houses. The writer of the
Book of Wisdom (which has as great authority as any of the Heathen) Cap.
14. sets down the reasons how Idolatry grew before the coming of Christ;
one of them was (...), a desire and love of sense; insomuch as there was
nothing excellent in sight, but it was corrupted. Rabbi Solomon of Labans
Teraphim says, that they signify nothing else but an Astrolobe, or
Mathematical instruments of the Astronomers, having the proportion of men, as
Dials, etc. And a Teraphim in the beginning signified nothing but an instrument
used in Astronomy. And the Syriake translation of it, is a Mathematical
instrument. Thus they were brought to turn them to Images. So the Symbola
amongst the Egyptians are arms and Emblemes, to distinguish countries; as
Isis, a clod with grass: showing that part of the country to be fertile, and
Ibis a dog, showing the woody country, and Images upon the tombs of the
dead, as the Statuae dedicated to Belus, and Minos. And the cause of it was,
because they too much addicted themselves to the senses, as it is said in
Wisdom. Though there came an occasion that did help them forward, in this
(viz.) to please their Princes, Belus for his virtues, and Minos then living:
and then they came to be tyrannical; worshipping them at first of favor, as
Belus and Minos; they were afterward by edicts of Princes constrained to
worship them for necessity. And this was before Christ; about which we agree
with them.

Now since the time of Christ, they begin to strain, a special thing in the
controversy wherewith they think to dash us, which is this, Show us (say
they) when Images came up first: And there is nothing more easy then to show
the beginning of Images. For Ireneus who lived not long after the Apostles
times, the first two hundred years after Christ, Lib. 1. Cap. 24.27. and
Epiphanius, 3.24. De haeresibus. Haeresi 27. rehearsed a kind of Heretics
called Gnostics, one of whose errors is, that they had Images of Christ, Paul
and Peter, etc. Which they said they received of Pilate; and Ireneus says that
they had the Cross, which they feigned to have power against Devils, and many
operations; and that the first founder of these, was Carpocras commonly called
Carpocrates, and Ireneus Lib. 1. Cap. 1. against Valentine: That the
Valentinians were the first men that found out any divine virtues in the
Cross; they attributed two virtues to it: 1. (...). 2. (...).

Thirdly, Epiphanius, lib. 3. Haeres. 79. shows that the Collyridians,
Valentinians and others, had Images of the Virgin Mary; and he there speaks
against them that used to offer to her such outward gestures as were due to
God; and there he speaks against it very vehemently, even as a man may do:
And if they are able to show more ancient Heretics than these, their Religion
shall be true, and ours false. Thus were they at first.

There were four occasions of the invention of them; two came up in
persecution, the other two, when the Church was in peace. Aug. Lib. contra
Adimantum. Cap. 3. shows that both the forenamed Heretics, and also the
Manichees, had Images for a policy; Aequi^res sunt simulachris ut misereantur;
They show, says he, themselves better friends to Images, then we; that they
might make the Heathen idolaters, in their persecutions, more friends to them,
then they are to us: So that it is a policy of them, to gain the more
friendship of the persecutors, and not be so cruelly handled, as were the true
Christians.

2. After this, that which is forbidden, Levit. 19.28. (that which is an
especial thing for the bringing in of Images.) It is forbidden also in the new
Testament; many men for the great love they bare to their dead friends, to
express their love and grief, and for remembrance, would with hot Irons set
marks in their face and other parts, that it might continue as long as they
lived; which is forbidden by the Apostle, 1 These. 4.13. Yea, some of them would
set up Images to remember them. Chrysostom says, that Milesius a Bishop of
Constantinople, very learned and godly, dying, was so beloved of the Citizens
and Clergy, as that when he was dead, every man would get his picture in
remembrance of him, into their Parlors and Rings. And so he first came into
their Rings, after into their Parlors; but afterward, as appears by the
Epistle of Epiphanius ad Proepiscopos suos, his Image was removed at last ad
praetoria, to the common places of judgment, and the Images of such men; and
from thence, as appears by the fifth Canon of Carthage, into the high ways,
as Crosses in memory of such a one that dyed; and from thence to the
Churchyards, then to the Chuch-walls, then to the Church Porch, and door, and
so at last into the Church, and to the Altar. Here was magnum ex parvis, sed ex
pravis principiis. And the like is to be feared of us; for we have them in our
Parlors already. So we see the beginning and causes of Images in persecution;
first, a desire to please: secondly, an inordinate mourning.

Now in the peace of the Church, there fell out two other causes: First,
because they would have their Church as rich as themselves. For in the 2.
Nicene Council, Sect. 4. is an Epistle of a Noble man of Syria, that had built
a Church for the Christians, to one Nilus; he had made the Walls white, but not
contented therewith, thought thereupon to have all the creatures of God
painted; wh^rein he desired his advice. Who answered, that his advice was,
there should be no such thing; but that he would be contented with the
simpleness of the Christian Churches; but if he would needs paint, he should
write nothing but the story of the Bible, and sentences of the Scripture; For
it is seemlyer then beasts, etc. So that one cause was, by reason of their
wealth, they desired things pleasant to the eye.

Secondly, another cause, in the same place, was that of Paulinus, a Bishop of
Nola in Campania: that having occasion of a Journey into Syria, and so into
Egypt, and having none to preach to his people in his absence; because he
would his people to have some teacher in his absence, thought good to paint on
the walls the whole story of the Bible; (and did so) that they might preach to
them; and so their Preachers and Schoolmasters, were nothing else but painted
walls. But this is not any way to be commended in him, and the effect was
accordingly: For it so came to pass, that they grew to be ignorant, and had no
other teacher but the very walls? And as Syrenus says, because their Pastors
began to wax dumb Images, therefore their Images were their Pastors. But it is
certain by the writings, that to the days of Hierome there was none such. So
is the reason of the second Commandment.

A brief recapitulation of what was said before.
The second Commandment was divided into, first the charge, secondly the
penalty; the charge of two sorts, concerning the manner of Gods external
worship. First, Non facies, etc. Thou shall not make. Second, Non adorabis,
etc. Thou shall not worship. In the first is restrained, 1. Exemplum, in these
words, Sculptile and Imago; 2. Exemplar, or the pattern, In things above, or
in earth, or in the water, etc. The Exemplum, of two sorts; either particular,
and then most usual, Sculptile: Yet so, that whatsoever else there is of the
same kind, whether fusile, or ductile, or conflatile, there are words in the
Law for every one of them, and therefore God was so manifold in setting down
all the words. Or for taking away all quarrelling, he has set down the common
name, (...)
Temunah, and Col temunah, all likeness; which condemns the metaphysicall
notions abstracted from all matter: and in the matter, all kind of likeness,
whether Idols or Images, true or fantastical; and all are comprehended in
Temunah; let Arias and Pagnine be their Judges. For further exposition of this,
there was added out of Deuteronomy. 4.2. and John 4.23. the gloss of Moses, and
Christ; concerning the general restraint of this, there were seven reasons
remembered.

Now for the Exemplar; we showed it was necessary, because there was nothing
almost, but the brain of Man had abused it; which was declared by five things
in Heaven, six in the Earth, and three in the waters. Then we came to the
particular question of Images; handling these three points: First, what might
be alleged out of the Scriptures for them. Secondly, what reason there was
for them. Thirdly, how, at what time, by whom, and by what means they came
into the Church.

For the first, in their Rhemish Testament, but one place found in all the New
Testament, Heb. 9.5. Vetus arca habebat Cherubim: and that is taken out of the
Old, Exodus 25.18. and so confess none to be in the New. And in the Old, that
of the Cherubims, and of the Serpent, is all they can show for them; Unto which
both, our answer is, ut ante, chiefly that of Tertullian. There were
privileges for them; if they can show the like privilege, for the Crucifixe,
or any other Image in the New Testament, it is somewhat for them; Generi per
specie^ non derogatur: they have no express commandment for any Image.

Again, the ends of both are otherwise; the Cherubim was not to represent God,
but to be a place out of the Church, from whence God would give his answers,
Exodus 25.22. And the Brazen serpent being a point in Physic, not in Divinity;
the end of it was health to the sting with serpents: therefore they make
nothing for the worshipping of Images. But 2 Kings 18.4. when the Brazen
serpent began pati abusum, to be abused, we see how he used it; Which shows
plainly how little affinity it had with this Commandment. So the Cherubs
should have been served, if they had been abused by the people. But God had
taken order for them; for none could come to them, but the high Priests, and
that but once in the year.

Secondly, for the reasons: 1. (...), not only in the Israelites, but also in
the Apostles; and in Moses, Exodus 33.18. he desired to see God, and he had
nothing showed, but his back-parts. This being condemned, 1 Cor. 3.3. and being
not only in regard of the people of God, that this made them draw every thing
to Idolatry, but even in the heathen: Aug. lib. 4. de Civit. Dei. cap. 21.
says that Varro spyed it, that it brought great inconveniences to Religion:
his reason, quia facile contemaere divos in stoliditate simulachrorum. It was
also showed 2. nimium, is a broad way to superstition; and it is a vain
assertion of theirs, that there can be no nimium in Religion. And Aug. in Psalm.
101. scorneth it, and says, that if we do so, we may soon bring a rock into
the Church, because it did represent Christ too. So for the time when, and the
Authors by whom Images began: we have showed out of Ireneus. 1. that the Cross
came first from the Valentinians, the Images of Christ and his Saints from the
Gnostics, 1. Iren. 24. in Epiphan. 27. here is. and Lib. 3. the Image of the
Virgin Mary from the Collyridians. August. in his 13. Book contr. Adimant.
gives four reasons. First, the policy of Heretics, to claw the Heathen
persecutors, being themselves inclined to them. Secondly, too much mourning for
the dead, noted, 1 These. 4.14. Thirdly, the wealth of the Church. Fourthly,
idleness of the Ministers; these were the causes of Images.

Now for the full handling of this question of Images, we will see what can be
further showed for them out of the Fathers and Counsels. Their Fathers are
either true, or counterfeit. Truly alleged for them, they have none, but
only Basil and Eusebius. And Basils sentence deceives Aquinas, and the
Schoolmen. For where he says, that the honor due to the abstract,
redoundeth and is due to the pattern; he goes about to prove, that Christ is
equal with God, as he is the Image of God; and he speaks there of this
conclusion: that Christ is to be worshipped with the same worship, that is due
to God the Father; out of Heb. 1.3. where Christ is called Character
substantiae patris. If the Papists can show us any such Image of Christ, as
Christ was of the Father; we will accept of it, and worship it.

2. Eusebius. Lib. 10. Cap. 4. in his Panegyr. to Paulinus; that he is with us:
and in his Epistle to Constantia the Empress; set down in the second Council
of Ephesians. the report he makes there, is only of an Image of Christ that was
set up by some of the Gentiles, for the miracle he wrought on the Woman of
Syrophenissa. Which makes nothing for the Papists. For it is absurd to say,
The Heathen did it, therefore the Christians should do so.

Their counterfeit Fathers, are Athanasius, Damasus, Chrysostom. Athanas. in a
certain absurd Book, not his, but going under his name, concerning a
Crucifixe, that wrought miracles. It is easy to be seen, whether it is his, or
no. If there be any man that shall read it, he will say at the reading of one
of the first periods, that it is far from Athanasius; nay, that it is far
from a man of common sense. Such another is of Damasus, in his Pontifical, in
the life of Sylvester. There is no more to be done in this case, but that which
is said, Noveris, oderis. To know them is sufficient to make us hate them, and
never like them again. Read the Treatises themselves. So may we say of
Chrysostomes Liturgy, as Juell notes in it, that there an Emperor is prayed
for by name, that lived six hundred years after Chrysostom was dead; for
they prayed for Alexis, whereas Chrysostom lived in Arcadius his time.

Counsels there are none for them, but Council. Nicen. 2. in which were more
unlearned and evil disposed men, then in any that ever was. For the gatherer
of this Council together, was Jrene the Empress; she an Heathen borne,
daughter of an Emperor of Tartaria, nuzzeled up in Paganism from her birth,
till after matching with the Emperor Constantinus his Father, was converted
from her Paganism to the Christian Religion; and so consequently after his
death, because her son was too young to take upon him the Empire, she took
it, in his name, soon after her conversion. Constantine at the first, seemed
not to stand against her; but after when he came to any small judgment, rather
then he would admit Images, lost both his eyes; for he was after put into
prison, and had his eyes pulled out: Whereby we may see that she was a woman
without natural affection; subject to that, Romans 1.31. and 1 Timothy 3.3.

The chief speakers in this Council, were Tharrasius a Layman, Bishop but of
one year, and Patriarch of Constantinople; all his life before, a Courtier:
and John, Legate of the East Church; of whom we need no other witness, then
him for whom he was Legate, who testifies, he was a good devout man, but of no
great learning. The like may be said of Theodosius and Constantinus: These
ruled the whole Council; and it may be truly said, that in any one Council,
there were never such a sort of simple men, in respect of their gifts; and more
evil disposed, in respect of their boldness and attempts, presuming above
their gifts. There is not in all Durandus Scripture worse alleged; there are
not in the Legenda more fabulous Narrations, then in the second Nicene Council.

There are in it such errors, as they cannot defend. Action 2. there is a
plain conclusion, that the Angels are bodily substances. Action 6. that Christ
was borne the five thousand and first year of the World; and in the third,
fourth, sixth, and seventh, there is Anathema against Honorius the Pope, for
the Heresy of the Monothelites: insomuch that they cry out, the Council is
corrupted in all those places. Lastly, the council is ranker on their side,
and says more then they would. Action 1. and 4. Non sunt duae adorationes, sed
una and eadem adoratur, prototypus and idolum. And Action 2. there is a worse
then this; Idem imaginibus honor debetur, qui and beatae Trinitati: That is,
that the adorations of the Idol and the prototype are not two, but one
adoration; that the same honor belongs to an Image, and the Trinity.

Now what they say on our side against Images.

First, an heathen, Elius Lampridius, in vita Adriani, says that he in a good
affection was content to build the Christians according to the manner of their
Temples, bare Temples without any Ornaments: Which were after denied by the
Senate of Rome; but it grew after into such contempt among the Heathen, that
thereof came a proverb of them: If any of the Gentiles had built them a bare
Temple, it was called Adriani templum.

And for Fathers.
First, Ireneus 1.24. cha. abhors them in the Gnostics and Euchits; they
said they had the Images of Christ, and Paul, and Peter, and of Pilate; and
that as he left them, of the drawing of the skilfullest men in Jury. This he
disalloweth in them.

Secondly, Clemens Alexandrinus, in his Paraenesis, goes too far, Nobis
vetitum est omnino fallacem hanc pingendi artem exercere; he is so far from
favoring Images, that he will have all painting and painters taken away;
calling it the cheating art of painting: and he alleges this Commandment.

Thirdly, Tertullian, in Apologetico; Nos adoramus oculis in coelum sublatis,
non ad imagines and picturas intentis. We adore with our eyes fixed on heaven,
not bent upon Images and Pictures.

Fourthly, Origin. Lib 4. contr. Celsum. Celsus nobis objicit, quod non habemus
altaria and imagines; prositemur, inquit. Celsus upbraids us, That we want
Altars, and Images; We profess, we do so, quoth he.

Fifthly, Arnobius, Lib. 2. contr. Gentes. Objicis nohis imagines; quid hae,
nisi vilissima fabrorum opera? Thou objectest Images unto us; what are those,
but the most base works of Mechanics?

Sixthly, Lactantius, Lib. 2. de origin erroris, wholly: there is nothing
alleged, but you may find it there.

Seventhly, Eusebius, Lib. 10. c. 4. Epist. ad Constantiam Augustam; set down
in the second Ephesine council. That she must now require no Image of Christ,
not as he is man, because now his glory is much more, then when he was in the
Mount; and yet then the Apostles were not able to behold him; much less can
then his glory, as he is now, be expressed. And in the first Ephesians. council,
Anathema sit, qui Christum ullo modo dividit. Let him be anathematized, who
divide Christ, one nature from the other; which an Image of him does. And as
Augustine says, 34. de moribus Ecclesiae, Omnino errare meruerunt, qui
Christum non in divinis codicibus, sed in pictis parietibus quaeri voluerunt.
They deserve to err, who will seek Christ not in inspired books, but on
painted walls. And again, In stoliditate crucifixi, they easily bring Christ
into contempt: In the Crucifixe they show that Christ suffered no more then the
Crucifixe shows; but he suffered in soul the pains of Hell, which no
painter in the World is able to paint; neither do they show: and therefore
they derogate from his passion, and the loss of that.

Eighthly, Ambrose in his Book de fuga seculi, chap. 5. Nostra, inquit,
Ecclesia, non novit has, etc. Our Church knows no such thing.

Ninthly, Hierome, in Ezekiel. 4. and 16. Nos vero unam tantum veneramur imaginem,
Jesum nempe Christum, qui est imago Dei patris. We worship only one Image,
Christ, who is the express Image and character of his Father. Erasmus, in his
preface to Hierome, says, That till Hierome was dead, there was no Image
received.

Epiphanius is one that they cannot abide, Haeres. 79. and in Epist. to John
Bishop of Jerusalem; that coming into a Temple that had an Image of Christ, he
rent down the veil, wherein the Picture was, and pulled it down; and told
them, it was against all Scripture and reason. Aug. 34. de moribus Ecclesiae
catholicae; in that chap. he seems to say, that some among the Christians
began then in corners to worship Images. Novi (says he to the Manichees) esse
in Ecclesia nostra adoratores imaginum sepulchrorum: sed isti viri prosessionis
haec nec sciunt, etc. So branding Image-worshippers with ignorance, etc.

So Lib. 1. cap. 10. De consensu Evang. against some that held Christ writ
certain Books of Magic, and that he wrote them in Egypt; I think because
Torrensis brings this to prove that Augustine allowed Images. But for
Augustines mind, it is straightway added, Sic omnino errare meruerunt, qui
Christum non in divinis codicibus, sed in picturis and parietibus quaeri
voluerunt, as was now alleged out of him. After when the five hundred years
were expired, there was better hold for them, yet they had gaine-sayers;
Cyrenus the Bishop upheld the matter, that he would not have them; so also in
the year six hundred, and seven hundred, there were (...) Idol Champions,
and combatants both for, and against them; and about Ann. eight hundred, they
were much used. But Claudius Bishop of Tarentum stood against them: saying,
Amplexi sunt idololatriam permutatam, that the Christians embraced the same
Idolatry, which the Gentiles did, but only that it was changed somewhat (in
name.) At the same time Constantius 4. Leo 3. Philippicus 2. set themselves
against them; It had entrance then, but it never got sound sooting till the
second Nicene Council.

We have four Councels for us.

First, The second Ephesine Council, wholly.

Secondly, The second Council of Constantinople, wholly.

Thirdly, Eleboris, where was Honorius the Bishop. Canon 36. Placuit, ut ne
pingant in parietibus. It pleases us that there be no painting on walls, etc.

Fourthly, for the taking of them down out of the way, 5. Council. Carthage:
Can. 14. Whereat Aurelius and Augustine were present. And so much for the
controversy of Images. Now for our Rules.

The third Rule, That not only that that is set down here, is forbidden, but
all (...), whatsoever is like, to make to a man's self, is here forbidden, as
our own inventions. Hierom on Amos 5. God said well, quae fecerunt sibi; deus
enim non fecit; They received them not of God, but themselves were forgers of
them. So this is the rule of the Fathers, Idola ethnicorum exceperunt haereses
Christianorum: meaning of the external worship of the Heretics.

2. That it be not against the spiritual worship; so that here is forbidden
petitio cordis; a restraint of the first fancy, that rises in the brain of
man, concerning the substance of God, unreverently imagining a bodily shape of
it, as Serapion a Monk; Reliq uorum Praeceptorum concupiscentiae sistendae in
cord, hujus vero secundi Precepti in cerebro. The breaches of the other
Precepts have their first risings in the heart, but of this, in the brain.

The fourth rule; Here is forbidden the means that bring in will worship; and
they are four, handled in the former exercise.

The fifth rule; the signs. For if it be true that is Jude 23. that we must
hate even the very garment that the flesh has defiled, surely because the
Idol is an unclean and abominable thing; no less abominable must the garment
be unto us, that it has spotted, and the pillars whereon they stand. Deuteronomy.
16.22. God commands that there be not so much as Macsevah, the pillar, or
basis, or statue, (...)
to be raised for them. Thou shall set up no pillar, nothing that the Lord thy
God hates. And Deuteronomy. 7.25. he does there protest that the very gold and
silver, the matter whereof they are made, are abomination unto him: and
therefore he commands them to burn it, lest they be ensnared therewith.
Deuteronomy. 16.21. they must plant no groves, the place of their worship. He will
have no such place near his A^tar, to have Temples among the heathen; and not
that only, but 1 King 15.14. even the very high places on which the groves
were planted, in which the Temples were built. And he runs along through the
books of the Kings, with this, as a notable blemish against the Kings that
would not dig down the high places, though they took away the Idols, etc. These
things show how God abhorred Idols.

In the other part it is not expressed, if it come contrary to the act, if a
conceit come to help the act, 2 Samuel 6.6.

If there be a good meaning to save the best and fattest of the sheep, 1 Samuel
15.21. But the people took of the spoil, sheep, etc. Because it is facis tibi,
and because we are (...), selfe-taught to Idolatry, therefore the Lord
abhors it.

The sixth rule, we are commanded, as Genesis 31.19. not only not to deal, nor
to have them our selves, but even seek to deprive, not steal them, (for the
means is not so convenient and commendable) but by all lawful means to
deprive Laban our Father of his Idols: Joshua 22.27. we see if it had been an
Altar of sacrifice, as it proved to be an Altar of remembrance, there had been
store of blood shed for it. Thus much for the negative, now of the affirmative
part of this Commandment.

Affirm pa^^
The affirmative is set down, Heb. 8.5. All things must be done according to
the pattern showed in the Mount. Numbers 12.7. the commendation of Moses, that
he was faithful in every point, that is, he varyed not one whit from his
pattern. And Heb. 3.2. Christ is said to be as faithful as he: He might have
been an act above him, because he was the Son, and the other but the
servant; that is, he was likewise faithful in Gods house: his pattern must
be precisely kept. It is commonly expressed by the phrase of the holy Ghost:
Acts 3.22. by hearing of one Prophet, not adding nor detracting. A Prophet
shall the Lord your God raise up to you, like to me, etc. The acknowledging of
Christ to be our only Prophet; and that he has set down whatsoever is
necessary, and to which, as Deuteronomy. 12.32. we are neither to add, nor detract
therefrom; nor to alter any thing. Deuteronomy. 2.11. nor of that that is commanded,
to leave any thing undone, Deuteronomy. 5.32.

Cultus Dei ext^rnus part^s ejus. 4.
Of this affirmative part, the external worship of God, we are to consider, 1.
the substance of it, 2. the ceremony.


The substance consists of four parts, 1. Preaching. 2. Prayer. 3.
Sacraments. 4. Discipline.


First, Preaching the word. We see this has been used always; as 1 Pet. 3.19.
he preached to the spirits that are in Prison: Preaching, a part of Gods
outward worship; ever used in the Church
Noah a Preacher before the Flood. Acts 15.21. in Moses time: Moses has them
that Preach him every Sabbath day. Deuteronomy. 33.10. the Priests office was to
Teach, to burn incense, to offer Sacrifice. In the time of the Prophets, Esa.
61.1, 2. And the same continued in the time of the second Temple: Nehem. 8.4.
there was a Pulpit of wood set up, and in it, Ezra preached. In Christ's time,
Luke 4.16. Christ himself, anointed to preach the acceptable year of the
Lord: and as he himself preached; so Mark. 16.15. a commission is there given
forth to his Disciples, Go, preach the Gospel to every creature; and 1 Cor.
1.21. it is the foolish kind of preaching that God has made to overthrow the
wisdom of the wise.

Secondly, Invocation; as it is called vitulus labiorum, the calves of the
lips, in Amos; is of two sorts: 1. Petition. Genesis 4. ver. last, in the time of
Enoch, then began men to invocate the name of the Lord, Genesis 20.7. and Exodus
8.8. Abimelech and Pharaoh knew this; so Genesis 24.11. and 28.20. Abraham's
servants, and Jacobs prayed. But when the Church began to be gathered, Numb.
10.35. the Army of Israel never moved nor stood still without Prayer; it never
pitched, but it continued in Prayer. Rise up O Lord, etc. Return O Lord, etc.
1 Kings 8.22. At the building of the Temple, Salomons Prayer to bless his
Temple, that it would please God to grant a blessing. Psalm. 102. there is a
general Prayer. And Luke 11.12. an express form of Prayer, taught by Christ
to his Disciples.

2. Thanksgiving is the other part, commanded Deutero. 31.19. Practiced
privately, Genesis 24.27. after he had obtained his request: Publicly, of Moses,
Exodus 15.1. a manifest form of it. The general form of it, Psalm. 95. And
that Psalm, and many other, the holy Ghost bears witness. 2 Chronicles. 7.6. the
Kings used to sing them. After, Ezra. 3.10. in the time of the second Temple.
Psa. 92. a Psalm of thanksgiving. In Christ's time, Mat. 26.30. and when they
had sung a song, etc. Ephesians. 5.19. speaking to your selves in Psalms and
Hymns, etc. Col. 3.16.

Thirdly, Sacraments. The Word is the speech that God has to us; Prayer is the
speech that we have to God. This is the covenant betwixt God and us, Ge. 17.2.
Circumcision, Exo. 12. the Passover, the Sacraments of the law, seals of things
to come, Mat. 28.19. Baptism Mat. 26.26. the Supper of the Lord, the
Sacraments of the Gospel, seals of benefits past.

Fourthly, Discipline. Commanded Matthew. 18.18. John 20.22. Executed
extraordinarily, Acts 5.4. by Peter: Ordinarily, 1 Corinthians 5.3. by Paul.
Rules for the full ordering of it, 1. Tim. 5.

Secondly, the Ceremony. Of this we have four Rules. First, that they be not
many, and those necessary. Acts 15.28. there are only four set down.
Secondly, 1 Cor. 14.26. that they be to edification, Gal. 2.18. that the
outward ceremony pull not down that which the inward substance has set up.
And it is the reason, why Paul, 1 Cor. 14.14, etc. refuses that prayer that is
made in an unknown tongue.

Thirdly, that it be for order, 1 Cor. 14.32. 1 Cor. 11.33. without confusion
in the Church, 1 Cor. 14.4. (...), according to order, verse. 33. they broke
order.

Fourthly, (...), that it be for decency: in which respect he commands them
that they come into the Church with their heads uncovered, 1 Cor. 11.4.

The fourth rule, The means: the rule for it; to keep the depositum, that
which is committed to us, as Paul wills, 1 Timothy 6.20. without adding or
detracting. It is strange that they of Rome allege it, that Religion is
depositu, that is, a thing committed of trust: that we neither add thereto, nor
detract from it; but we allege it, that we impair it. And the means for
that is, Josu. 1.8. that God was shouldred up, by not letting the Law be lost:
Let not this book of the Law depart out of thy mouth, but meditate therein day
and night, that thou may observe to do all therein. The volume was either
gone, or else corrupt, as if it had never come forth; therefore that the Legend
thrust it not out of the Church. They were wont to have the Legend read in the
Church, and books of sentences, and other scholasticall sums of the Schoolmen
read among them that gave themselves to Divinity, and none of the Scriptures.
There was ambo in medio posita, and nothing else but volumen utriusque foederis
laid upon it. 2 Cor. 2.17. As we must take heed that it go not away; so that
none come to it, that do (...) of our cultus arbitrarius and praescriptus. 1 Timothy 6.13. the Apostle interprets himself; he charge him under a severe
charge, that he keep it (...); that there be not a spot in it, like the Lepers
skin. 1 Cor. 5.6. a little leaven will sour a whole lump; or as Nazianzen,
a little Wormwood will mar a whole Barrel of Honey. For the proceeding of
this, the best way is, arcere coenaculis. 2 Kings 16.14. Uriah the Priest
devised an Altar in all points like to that that King Ahab sent from Damascus;
and being made, brought and set it hard by Gods own, the brazen Altar; and
after that, brought it in further, betwixt the Altar, and the house; and at
length it got the North-side of the Altar, that is, the upper hand: and so it
will be; therefore we must take heed of this.

The fifth Rule, Signs. There is no better sign, then if we say, or prove
nothing, but either as the Prophets did, Dictum Jehovae, or else as Christ
proved the Resurrection, by a Syllogism, Mat. 22.32. or as the Apostle, Quod
accepistis; haud alterum quam accepistis: Quod accepi a Domino, etc. 1 Cor. 11.
These three are good signs.

The sixth rule, Be accessory to procure this, that others do it, Exodus 34.12.
Deuteronomy. 12.2, 3. We must stand so affected to it, as that we be ready to break
down whatsoever is contrary to it. But this must be understood of those that
be in authority; as Moses, Exodus 32.20. He took the Calfe and burned it in the
fire, and grownd it, etc. It was Hezekiabs office to break the Brazen serpent.
Secondly, the private man's office is, as Exodus 23.24. not to bow down to them,
and to do as the three Children, Dan. 3.19. that is, Though they may not run
and pull them down, yet they must not worship them. And so much for the first
part, that is, the manner of Gods external worship.

The second part of the precept, is how we must be affected in this worship: 2
Part.
Thou shall not bow down to them, etc. For whereas it may be said to the first
part, thus; Where he says, Non facies, I may answer, Non facio: alius fecit,
ego factum reperio; as we see, the Danites, Judge. 18. found in Michahs house an
Idol framed: and not that alone, but 1 King. 12. not a private man, but
Jeroboam makes a Calfe of gold. And Dan. 3. Nebuchadnezzar does not only
erect an Idol, but also commands it, on pain of death, to be worshipped.
Enough for the answer of this objection, is that that follows, Non adorabis
ea, neque coals. Howsoever they were made as thou have no part in making; so
also in worshipping thou must not have any part. The first word is (...)
Teshtacaveh: and before used; and the second, (...)
Tagnabhodh: as * Pesel and Temunah. 1. To bow down: 2. To serve:
that word signifies that, that was then the usual manner of adoring. That it
was the usual manner, it may appear Genesis 18.21. as in Pesel and Temunah. Now
from this, unto a general word, to Tagnabod, non servies, or non coals. For we
know a man may Colere and Gnabod, unto that thing, unto which he may not bow
down himself. It is a diffused word; and therefore as you find, Psalm. 97.7.
Gnobed Pesel; so Genesis 14.4. you shall find Gnobed, of men, Genes. 3.23. Genesis
2.15. Gnobed adamah, Esaias 19.9. Gnobed pishtim, a trimmer of Lyme. As in
Latin, Colo, is not only given to God, and man; but color jus, vitam,
glebam, hortum: And thereupon is Agricola called. So that the Papists are in an
erronous opinion, that think the holy Ghost ascends from a word of less
importance, to a word of greater importance: from the Species to the Genus. The
like may be said of (...), and (...); But if these two, non incurvabis te, non
coals, will not serve; then we must take a third thing, which is, Exodus 23.24.
do nothing that any idolater does to his gods; do nothing that pertains to
the worship of them.

For the making plain of truth against error, and first against the error of
the Romans.

We see the Commandment double, First, of making; Secondly, of serving and
bowing down to Images. The Romans therefore, which do maintain them, should
not only bring a general commandment for making them; but also for the
worshipping which they cannot do, nor do they go about to do: For though
they bring for the making, that of the Cherubims; yet not for the worshipping:
We must have a warrant for both.

Now, for bowing down, ye shall understand, that in their defense, they are
constrained to give us over. And as in the former* they went from Pesel and
Temunah, and leaned to Idolum and Icon^ so here they leave the Hebrew
Tishtacaveh and Tagnabod, and take them to the Greek, (...) or (...), and
(...) They profess (...), but not (...), yet they break the Commandment. Now
for some shift, they say in the Rhemish Testament, on Mat. 4.10. because that
(...) is not joined with (...), but with (...), therefore say they, we may
(...) to Saints, etc. But by looking to the verse precedent, we rejoice that
the Devil required no more of Christ but (...); and therefore unless we make
(...) proper to God, Christ's answer will not serve, nor be sufficient; and the
Devil might have replied, that he required not (...), but only (...); to
which (...) was not joined.

Secondly, we come to (...). The distinction of (...) and (...), although it
have been long in the Schools; yet in the Fathers it is not found: except in
August. Lib. 10. de Civit. Dei. cap. 1. and 1. de Trinit. cap. 6. he sets it
down and holds it. But they do falsely allege Eusebius. Lib. 14. cap. 4.
and Hierome Epist. 52.53. cont. Vigilant. no such thing being to be found in
them. For Augustine, we acknowledge him to have been a great and reverend man
in the Church, and such a one as took pains. Yet this we may say of him
without any irreverence, Augustine said of himself, he had no great knowledge
in greek and Hebrew.
that the best part of his learning lay not in the Tongues: And indeed he was
very unskilful both in the Hebrew and Greek, which himself acknowledges in
diverse places; and therefore not a meet man to pronounce that by (...) is meant
the service of men: and by (...) the service of God. But if we will distinguish
these words we may do it truly thus: (...) is properly the service of our
own servant, and (...), the service of him that is hired; so (...) is our own
servant, and (...), an hireling: and so come in Latro, which, as Varro says,
at first signified nothing else, but an hired or stipendiary soldier, of
(...), Merces: and after by the abuse of their calling, and by their evil
behavior, came into this odious name as it is now used.

It is not the service of God, Heb. 8.5. but (...). The reason why for Lagnabod
the Septuagints use (...) may be taken out of Tertullian in Lib. de Idolat.
Because they would not have Gods people to be hired for money to dress, and
adorn the Images of the Heathen. It was the use of some Christians in the
primitive Church so to do, against whom Tertullian inveyeth. And though the
Papists think (...) to be for creatures; and (...) only for God; yet it is
certain that they had (...) to the creatures; as you may see in Aquinas his
sums, part. 3. q. 25. determined there, that the picture of Christ, and that
every part of the Cross is to be worshipped adoratione latriae. It is too
manifest; but the Hebrew takes away all these questions and controversies. Now
the learneder sort among them, by a greater knowledge and use of the tongue,
seeing that their distinction falls to naught, have found out another shift;
that they are no breakers of this Commandment, because non colunt imagines
ipsas, sed Christum and Sanctos per eas; they worship not Images themselves,
but Christ and the Saints by and through them. But how evil this succeeds
with them, it may appear by the records of antiquity; for this indeed was (but
'its varnished over a little) the answer of the old Idolaters in the primitive
Church. For the Heathen, Lactantius Lib. 2. de orig. erroris. cap. 2. says,
that when it was objected to the Heathen, Quid timetis, aut quid fugitis? What
fear ye? What fly ye? they would answer, Non Idolum, sed Deum, sed numen
aliquod, cui Idolum aedisicatur: Not the Idol, but God, etc. and in that
Chapter there follows how Lactantius thinks of it.

2. Chrysostom Hom. 18. in Epist. ad Ephesians. says to the Heathen, Adoratis
simulachra; Non simulachra, inquiunt, sed Venerem and Martemper simulachra
Martis, etc. Still they same answer; not the Images, but the Deities
represented thereby.

3. Augustine, on Psalm. 79. verse. 7. Confounded be they that worship carved
Images, etc. says of an Heathen Philosopher, Sed extitit nescio quis
disputator novus, qui sibi doctus videbatur, qui se non lapidem adorare dicit,
novit enim tanquam Propheta, lapidem non sentire, nec loqui; sed illi numini se
servire, quod non videt: Quis est iste? numen quoddam invisibile. To which
Augustine answering says; Hoc modo reddendo rationem de idolis, optime factum
putant, ubi comprobarunt se non adorare. Idola. And this error is as ancient,
as the Calse in the Wilderness, Exodus 22.32. and if we examine the case, it is
all one with them. For the Israelites would not worship it, but God by and in
it: For they did not think the Calfe to be God, or that God could be made, but
they desired only a visible representation of God; which may appear by these
reasons: First, because they would have it to go before them as Moses did; and
that was to represent God unto them: For Moses was a visible representation of
God to them, and now they could not tell what was become of him. q.d. He whom
we had as an assurance of Gods presence with us, is not to be found; therefore
let us have in his stead gods to go before us; Now either this reason must
hold, or else Moses was their god before. And they made a Calfe rather then any
other thing, because they knew no other shape of God, then they had of the Ox,
called Apis, in Egypt.

Secondly, The assent of Aaron; if he had not had somewhat in his mind beside
Idolatry, he had not received that favor, but had been destroyed with the
rest: For verse. 4. the cry of the people, This is that that brought thee out of
the Land of Egypt, cannot be understood but that they took it only as a
representation: and Aaron took great hold of these words of the people, and
built an Altar, and consequently made a feast to be held to Jehovah. And there
Jehovah receiving a feast of them, shows plainly that it was but a
representation of Jehovah; so that this was the Elench, that deceived Aaron,
that they might worship God in it; but it could not so deceive Moses, for he
breaks it in pieces, and burns it to ashes and gives it to, etc. Here the
Romans fly to a third shift; they will not adore them, nor worship God by them;
but they will be put in mind of God by them: the ignorant people must have
somewhat to help them to remember God. This also is no new objection; but used
of the old Idolaters; as we may see by Symmachus his words, Epist. 44.10. there
must be something to put the ignoraut in mind of God. It is answered by Ambrose
and Prudentius, Omnia deo plena. The like we have in Arnobius, Lib. 6. contra
Gentes, simulachrorum ado^atores and assertores dicere solent; they knew there
was no life nor sense in the Image, nor made any account of it; but for the
ignorant people, that are put in mind of God by it. And Athanasius in an
Oration contra Idola, Istiusmodi simulachra esse pro libris, quae dum legunt,
cognitionem dei discunt: this he says is (...), not (...).

So we see there is nothing said in this cause, but has been said before. Now
if we ask them, that if the people must be put in mind, Of what it shall be?
Not of the Deity, for they themselves began to be weary of that defense: Yet it
was a very usual thing among them, in shapes of men to resemble God. And
Hosius cap. 66. in decalogum, says and confesses, that such Images crept in,
dormientibus Ecclesiarum praepositis and pastoribus: while the Watchmen slept.

Then we must come to Christ; First, if they say, this is the picture of
Christ, they must picture God; for he is God and man. They cannot as he is God,
because his attributes are infinite, therefore as he is man only; Therefore
they do as Nestorius, divide the natures of Christ; and so consequently run
into the Anathema of the first Council of Ephesus.

Secondly, if they speak of his manhood, as now it is; then Eusebius his
answer to Constantia, his glory is now far greater, then in the Mount where
the Diseiples could not look on him; therefore neither of them can be
exhibited by any Pensill.

Thirdly, But they say, they will show his shape as he was in the days of his
flesh. We answer, that their remembrance is evil; and as it is Habak. 2.18.
they be teachers of lies: so this Image teaches us to forget by it; for the
whole Church has taught us, that Christ suffered more then we can see painted;
that is, piercing of naylos in his hands and feet; a blow in his side, and
thorns on his head; the especial pains and torments he suffered for our
sins, are forgotten: the heavy wrath of his Father, powered out in in most
full manner upon him; and so consequently the Image has taught us to forget
the greatest part of his passion.

Then if they will come to a third point, that they will have a remembrance of
the Sacraments; this is a new question: that is, for the Sacraments themselves,
we must come to this; they are no better then the Angels; therefore, since the
Angels have refused, as the Angel, Revel. 22.9. (...); therefore it must be
restrained from men: And Augustine, on Psalm. 96. says of this very well; Si
audirent angelos, discerent ab illis non adorare angelos. And we must remember
the second signs of feigned worship, Col. 2.18. they have Speciem (...), a
show of lowliness, but will at length beguile us of our reward. Thus much of
the continuance of it with the other, and for the delivery of it from error.

The affirmative part. The latter part of Exodus, after that Moses went up into
the Mount, contains the first part of this Commandment; that is, the manner
of Gods outward worship. And Leviticus contains the second part, that is, how
we ought to behave our selves in this worship. And as the first Commandment
must have Internum honorem and internam laudem; so this second Commandment
must have Externum honorem; and the third Externam laudem, in word. So that
Honor, whether it be signo or facto, is the thing commanded. The honor of the
sign, in Tishtacaveh, in bowing down; of the deed, in the word Servies, Mat.
5.15.

A candle is not lighted, to be put under a bushel: the maxim the Fathers
have gathered thence, is this; Bono debetur manifestatio; for candles, that
have bonum lucis, are not to be thrust sub malo tenebrarum; so that our candle
must be put on a candlestick, to be made known: This is Gods will, that if we
have the candle light in our soul and heart; that is, the internal worship;
we must set it on a candlestick; that is, we must bring it forth, and show it
by outward worship: it must not be a chamber godliness. 2. We know that in
copulativis, utrumque faciendum est; therefore we must next join that, 1 Cor.
6.20. (...), we must glorify him also with our bodies: glory being nothing
else, but a conspicuousnesse and enlarging of honor and praise; as to
glorify, is to honor and praise externally; therefore it contains honor in
it. Then this is requred, that God be honored both outwardly and inwardly;
therefore he must be honored as well with our bodies, as with our souls. and
the Devil knowing that God requires both, does therefore require the one, but
the bowing of the body of Christ, Matthew. 4. because he knew, that if God
have not the Copulative, body and spirit; he will have neither of both.

The third is, Levit. 26.28. and Eccles. 4.17. or as it is in some Books, 5.1.
in his Sanctuary, in times and places of religious exercises, we must observe
Utrumque pedem: if we must have a care of our lowest parts, much more of our
ears and hearts.

This externus honor, is, either signi, or sacti.

For Tishtakebeh, the signs be two, as the Apostle proves Christ's humility,
by these two signs, Phil. 2.7, 8. the first is to empty our selves, and
deponere magnificientam nostram; as it is called in the wisdom of men; so he
being equal to God, made himself empty of that magnificence, and gave the
whole honor to God. For the magnificence of our selves is in reason and will:
now if we can be content, though our reason show us good reason, yet to submit
it to the reason of God, and our will to his will, so outward worship and
magnificence. Job 19.9. he has spoiled me of mine honor, and taken the crown
away from my head: then to take our crowns, the best things that we have, and
our glory, and to cast it at his feet with the Elders, Reve. 4.10. is this
signum. So did David put off his Robes, 2 Samuel 6.22. and took the Ephod, and
was contemptible in the sight of Michall; but he said it was his duty to be
vile in the service of God: So nudatio capitis, 1 Cor. 11.14. For pileo donari,
was a sign of honor, and peculiar to Freemen: It was the magnificence of the
head; for ever after, si cepisset pileum, he became free. Which sign, if he
laid aside, he was said deponere magnificentiam; and it is the sign of a
servant, when he honors his Master; and it is that, the Apostle urges men
should use at Prayers and Prophesying.

Secondly, the other is (...), Humiliare, to make us near to the ground. First
into this falls Tishtacaveh: when we make that that is highest in us, nearer
to the ground; this humiliation did the Devil require of Christ; God makes it
a sign of his true worship, 1 Kings 19.18. in the seven thousand that had not
bowed the knee to Baal outwardly. And Esaias 2.9. this is his quarrel against
them, because there was a carved Image, and a man bowed himself to it; so the
contrary is condemned and plagued.

2. For honor facti, that is, service: we have two parts set down, Mat. 8.9.
in the Centurions servant, and commended of Christ. First, I say to one, Go,
and he goes; Come, and he comes; that is, to be at commandment. The second
is, Do this, and he does it; that is, to do his work. In these two respects
Christ will say to some in the day of judgment, Nescio vos; But how can, or
shall he say so, but as a Master to his servants, or a King to his Subjects?
but only as they come into his jurisdiction? and then this Nescio vos shall be
pronounced either to those, which never came to his house of Prayer; or come of
evil will, not to do his work: and so either they have nothing enjoined
them; or hearing of him, he is not made known to them, nor have any part with
him. The one is, of not being present; the other, not doing the Masters
business. Genesis 22.1. God calling Abraham, he presently answers, Ecce ego.
This is that that God requires; we must be present at his assemblies. David,
Psalm. 84.4. sets down his affection in himself; that before he was called,
he had a great longing to go into the Lords house: When he is called, then you
know what Christ says of himself, Psalm. 40.7. Then said I, Lo I come: the
same readiness ought to be in us; Wisdom, Prove. 1.24. Because I have called,
and ye refused; therefore I will take pleasure in your destruction. So they
that refuse to come, being invited, Mat. 22.8. are pronounced unworthy. The
manner of coming Pro. 8.17. it must be mature, and verse. 34. quotidie, early
and daily to wait at his door, and so show our selves desirous to be called.

For service, Luke 17.8. the property of a servant is to do his Masters work;
and so as he prefers his Masters work before his own: that is, his Masters
work shall be done first, and then his own. And Genesis 24. we see the practice
of it in Abraham's servant: He would not eat, till his Masters work was done:
and under this falls the commandment of the service of the great work,
Deuteronomy. 18.5. God says he has chosen the Tribe of Levi, to serve him at the
Altar; so that service, is the service of choice; howsoever some account of it.
That desire ought to be in every one.

The outward behavior in the outward worship was in bowing down, and in
service; that is, for gesture, honor signi, which we call a reverent behavior,
it had two parts: First, the laying down of whatsoever sign of excellency is
in us: secondly, a drawing near to the earth. The other, honor facti, which is
in service, which is properly called devotion or devoutnesse; that is, the
promptness and readiness of our will and of our selves to serve God. By the
service of God, we showed what was meant, by a division not given, but yet
approved of Christ: first in going and coming when we are bidden: Secondly, in
doing his business, preferring it before our own.

For the making of this more manifest and plain, and applying it to the former
parts; you shall understand, that the Prophet, in Psalm. 95.6. (which our
Church has used as an antepsalm, or introduction to the service of God) that
there is placed, first, a coming; secondly, a worshipping; thirdly, a falling
down; fourthly, a kneeling: whereby we may see, that in the substantial parts
of the service of God, first, in Prayer; secondly, hearing the Word; thirdly,
administration of the Sacraments; fourthly, in the execution of discipline; but
in the two former especially, there is required a due gesture and manner of
behavior. And first this, as we have our direction according to the council
of James, Cap. 5. verse. 10. to take the Prophets for examples: And 1 Pet. 3.6.
that Women are to attire themselves, as holy Women in old time: Then laying
down this, and it being the approved practice of the Church; we shall find
that they never came without exhibiting some reverent external behavior both
in accessu and recessu, both in coming, and going; For their coming together,
2 Chronicles. 6.12, and 13. Solomon coming into the Temple of God, and standing
upon the Altar, they all worshipped toward the Prince, and he himself before
all the Congregation kneeled on his knees, and stretched out his hands toward
heaven and prayed. For their departure, 2 Chronicles. 29.29. Hezekiah a devoute
King, and the people departing; they all bowed to the earth and worshipped: And
so they went to the Lords Temple, and returned: Then this is the first; there
must be a reverent behavior in access and recesse.

Now in particular, for our presence. 1. in prayer, seeing it comes, as was
said, partly from humility, partly from hope; the outward behavior is to be
conformed to the inward affection; therefore in prayer, there is an outward
sign and behavior.

Behaviout in Prayer.
First, for humility; there must be depositio magnificientiae, which is, 1 Cor.
11.4. With uncovered heads; in prayer and prophesying; and that (...), it came
in this respect.

The other part in humiliation, making our selves near to the ground, in
kneeling at prayer, Genesis 18.2. Abraham first did it to the three men, and his
servant, Genesis 24.26. taught by him, performed the like duty. In the Law, Exodus
12.27. the people bowed themselves and worshipped. In the Prophets time,
Solomon and the people, 1 Kings 8.58. the Prophets, Dan. 6.10. Daniel kneeled
three times a day and prayed. After the second Temple, Ezra, 9.6. Ezra fell on
his knees, and spread out his hands to the Lord. Christ, Luke 22.41. The
Apostles, Acts 9.40. Peter kneeling down, prayed. Paul, Ephesians. 3.14. For this
cause I bow my knees, Acts 20.36. When he had thus spoken, he kneeled down,
and prayed; there, the whole Church of Ephesus, Acts 21.5. We kneeled down on
the shore, and prayed. So we see our pattern; if we take the Patriarchs, or
Prophets, or Christ, or the Apostles, or the whole Church; and if we do thus,
we see what our duty is.

The word in Hebrew signifies service, which is also in standing.
True it is, that because not only in kneeling, but also in standing before
another, there is a phrase of servitude; because they are both signs of
service; therefore in many places we read, that the gesture in prayer was
standing; and that some prayed standing; we speak now of it, as it is a part
of service; as Gehezi stood before Elisha, and Samuel before the Lord; and in
no other respect. Abraham, Genesis 19.27. And Abraham's servant, Genesis 24.13. Lo, I
stand by the Well of water. Exodus 33.10. All the people rise up, and worship
every man in his Tent door, Numb. 23.10. Balaam to Balak, Stand by the burnt
offerings and I will go, etc. Psalm. 135.2. Ye that stand in the house of the
Lord, and in the courts of the house of our God. 2 Chronicles. 23.13. And when she
looked behold the King stood by his pillar, at his entering, etc. These are
commonly read for public prayer. In private prayer, if he be so affected, a
man may prostrate himself before the Lord; as did Moses and Aaron, Number. 20.6.
Deuteronomy. 9.18. and Christ, Mat. 26.39. fell on his face and prayed; but this to
every man, as he is affected inwardly. Sitting at prayer time, is not warranted
by the word. Balaam willed Balak to stand by his burnt offering, Numb. 23.15.
and being set, he willed him to rise up. verse. 18.

Secondly, for the sign that hope brings; Oculus elevatus expectat; manus
elevata petit, and postulat, a lift-up eye hops and expects, and a lift-up
hand beggeth and asks; therefore we lift up our eyes and hands.

The first is the effect of hope, the second, the effect of prayer; therefore
these two gestures are used in prayer; and it is used in that part of prayer
which is called Petition: otherwise in deprecation; for herein our eyes may be
cast down, with the Publican, Luke 18.13. Else when we are to ask or to give
thanks, Psalm. 123.1. Unto the Hills lift up mine eyes; and of Christ, John
11.41. and John 17.1. He lift up his eyes to heaven; which show that it was the
usual behavior so to do. So for the hand, Exodus 17.11. When Moses held up
his hands, Israel prevailed: Psalm. 141.2. Let the lifting up of my hands be an
evening sacrifice: and 88.9. I call daily upon thee, I stretch out mine hands
unto thee. 1 Timothy 2.8. lifting up pure hands. These examples are set down for
our instruction. In this part there is an evil and corrupt custom come up in
our Church: Baalam would not suffer Balak to sit, but to stand by his burnt
offering. To pray sitting and covered, not warranted by any place or example in
the Scriptures; In regard of the Angels, we should be reverent.

For outward behavior at the ministry of the Word, it is plain, that in the
Old Testament, Ezekiel. 33.31. my people sit before thee; so in the New, Mar.
3.32. the people sat about him. Luke 5.17. and 10.39. Mary sat at Jesus feet,
hearing his preaching: and Acts 20.9. there sat in a Window a certain young
man, etc. that it was lawful for them to sit; as also, standing, Nehem. 8.5.
When he opened it, all the people stood, etc. But this has been a thing
always indifferently used; and permitted to all estates at the preaching of
the Word, to stand or sit.

Thirdly, for the administration of the Sacraments; the very action shows
plainly it self, what behavior ought to be used.

Fourthly, for Discipline, and the executing of it, it is plain; the judge is
to sit, the other to stand; and so it is manifest by the course of the
judgments of the Law.

It pleases God to set down these things for us; one end may be taken out of
1 Cor. 6.20. that we might glorify God with our bodies: And a second end,
Psalm. 16.7. that our outward gesture might stir up our soul; and that our
hearts might learn the duty of our outward parts: And a third, out of 1 Cor.
14.25. and Tit. 2.10. not only to stir up our selves; but also for the
moving of others; that they seeing our reverent behavior, may fall down with
us, and be moved to do that, which at any time they shall see in us. So we
have gone through two parts of the Commandment.

Now the negative is nothing else but the opposite of this that has been
taught and delivered. As if a man come with a proud eye, and behave himself
proudly in his service: as it is, Pro. 6.^^. a proud eye is the first and
chiefest of the seven things that God hates. And if he hate it at all times,
much more at that time.

To the second is stiffenesse, When we are not willing to fall down and
worship, and to give him the honor and reverence of our eye, head and knee. In
the other part of service, for not coming. Chrysostom says, Ludus jubet, and
facis; vocat, and venis; cultus dei jubet, and non facis? vocat, and non venis?
and whose servant art thou now? The Centurion will teach thee, whose servant
thou art: even his that says to thee, (...), Go and come, and thou go and
come.

For the doing of the work, and in the first place, (for the chief part of
his ministry is of purpose declined, because it has been long time in
controversy, and is as yet:) to the service of our work, and behavior in the
same work, five points are considerable.

First, the service of God in the Liturgy: i. whether it be not the will of
God, as his rule is, 1 Cor. 11.33. to stay one for another; that inward
unanimity, and outward uniformity, be not a delight to God: Matthew. 22.12. he
without the wedding garment, when he was found unlike his fellows, and not
uniforme in his apparel; therefore he was separated from them, and condemned
to be cast into utter darkness.

So at that time that the Church does pray or sing; when any one does not pray
or sing with the rest; it is a separation and breach. Psalm. 122.2, 3. Jerusalem
is a City compact in it self; and the spiritual compacting no doubt is an
especial commendation of the Church: and it is that, that is so often set
down in the Acts. Together with one accord, Acts 2.1. They were all with one
accord in one place: When they heard, they did it together; when they sung,
they sung altogether, Psalm. 34.3 and let us magnify his name together in
idem. As if the whole Church were one person; and had but one lip: The
separation of tongues and lips, a curse of God; and the earth was blessed in
this respect, when it was said to be Unius labii, that it had but one lip; as
this was a curse. So that in Revel. 14.2. And it shall be an especial blessing
of the heavenly Jerusalem; that the Elders and all that stand before the
throne, shall lift up their voice together, and with one consent, sing. This is
a thing that the Fathers in their ages have much beat upon. We see how highly
it is extolled, by Chrysostom: That it smites upon Heaven and the Lord, as a
shower of Hailestones; and Augustine concerning the singing of praise, says,
that it sounds in the Lord ears, tanquam resonantia Maris, even as the Sea:
And he seems to take it out of Revelations 14.2. and I heard a voice from
Heaven, as the sound of many waters, etc. Then this is the first thing.

The second, that whereas the service of men: therefore much more, the service
of God, ought to be, as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 6.5. in singleness of heart, 1
Peter 2.18. (...), in all fear, and Paul, (...) with fear and trembling: even
to men. But in our exterior service of God there is so little fear, or rather
such want of fear, that commonly we see that thing, which is contrary to
fear; namely, sleep: which cannot concur with fear; and our service cannot
keep us from it: like the Apostles, which could not hold up their eyes, being
with their Master in Horto. But Jacob, which feared his brother Esau, slept not
all the night. The example of the Apostle was remembered as a special thing in
the primitive Church, Acts 20. that the Christians watched and heard Paul's
Sermon media nocte. Of which Chrysostom says, Ad hoc commemoravit eos, qui
vigilabant media nocte, ut condemnet eos, qui dormiunt medio die; and that we
may know how far we are from them, whose seed we follow. Now the actions of a
natural man, being first, cibus; secondly, potus; thirdly, somnus; meat,
drink, and sleep; sleep condemned by the same reason of the Apostle, by
which he condemns the other two, 1 Cor. 11.22. because we have houses and
chambers to sleep in. His reason there is, The Church is not appointed to that
use, that is in private houses; therefore ye ought not to eat and drink in
the Church: Have ye not houses to eat and drink in? What, contemn ye the
Congregation? Apply it to sleep; we have our chambers and our houses, to that
end, to sleep in: Despise ye the Church of God? And as from the place; so we
may reason also against it from the time; 1 These. 5.7. he exhorts to wake;
Nam qui dormiunt, noctu dormiunt: but we say and see, Qui dormiunt, die
dormiunt: Natural reason tells us, that Actio vestita indebitis
circumstantiis, mis-circumstanced actions are unlawful. Esaias 5.27. there the
Prophet, as his manner is, after the denouncing of a curse on a careless
people, falls into a blessing of the new Church: Non dormiet quisquam nec
dormitabit. Mark 13.36. Take heed, that the Lord, when he comes, take you
not sleeping. As also we may see what loss the Church has by sleep: Cantic.
3.1. she slept and awoke, and found not her Beloved; and we know not whether
God will forsake us utterly in it, or not. As after this, of the Apostles,
Matthew. 26.40. some departed; nay, all left him, some forswore him; this measure
of apostasy is to be feared. But howsoever it stands in respect of Gods
punishments and mercies; yet the former reasons do condemn it; but
especially, Luke 24.32. The heart rightly affected, is, ARDENS COR, and a
Father says, It is not possible that Sub gravi Oculo should be a burning heart.

Again, seeing every sin is to be weighed and esteemed, In primo partu, and
prima poena; as of disobedience in Adam; Murder in Cain; unlawful marriage in
the old World; Pride in Sodom: so in the New Testament, unreverent hearing,
punished in Eutiches, Acts 20. verse. 9. and in the Apostles, that after it
forsook their Master. And this is the second sign.

The third is, that our hearts be present; Many there be, that outwardly watch,
yet their gesture testifies to all that look on them, that they are
praesentes absentes. Where the heart is absent, it is impossible but that the
outward members should give a sign of his absence. If we have Cor fatui,
Eccles. 7.6. it will be in the house of mirth; the mind runs on the place
where his sport lies: and so as Prove. 15.7, and 14. Non dilatabit scientiam,
non quaerit scientiam, as the wise heart does, which does not let knowledge
pass: but Eccles. 21.14. the inner parts of a fool are like a broken vessel,
they can keep no knowledge; it runs out as fast as it is powered in: the
wise, not so; Eccles. 21.17. They inquire at the mouth of the wise man in the
Congregation, and ponder his words in their heart. That the fools heart is
such, as ante, will be testified by some sign, Proverbs 17.24. by having his
eye in all quarters and corners; not as they, Luke 4.20. that fastened their
eyes: nor an eye searching out the places of Scripture, Acts 17.11. and his
hands and feet will tell you that he is not present, Proverbs 6.13. And when he
hears his fault reproved, it is but a laughing matter, Proverbs 14.9. to
behave himself in this sort, Patrare scelus hoc. And it is nothing to hear,
except we look how we hear, and be attentive, Luke 8.18. or be affected, as
Lydia was, Acts 16.14. To give an ear, is nothing; but to give a wise ear,
Proverb. 18.15. and 3.13. and happy is he that speaks to a wise and
understanding ear, Proverbs 25.12. it is compared to a golden earing. The
foolishness of the ears of this Generation is such, that you shall see the
same attention given to him that gives out a sort of words, as to him that
tells us the message of God.

It is a sore plague and often repeated in the Scriptures, Esaias 6.10. a
fearful place, repeated by Christ, Matthew 13.15. Mark 13.12. Luke 8.10.
John. 12.40. Acts 28.26. Romans 11.8. beside three times in the Prophets: Give
this people an heavy ear that they may hear, and not hear; give them a fat
heart. This is the extremity of his wrath, and a heavy curse: and so to be
accounted. If it be true, and the heathen could say, Pietas non est vultu
laedenda, sive serio sive simulate; then our own reason will lay on us an hard
rule of framing our gesture, when haec pietas is in place.

The fourth, That we talk not in the time; for that is clean opposite unto
it, not to allow unto it so much as silence. Preacher 4.17. When ye come into
the house, be ready to hear, and not to offer the sacrifice of fools; to
prate and talk, Joh 29.21. If I spoke, every man gave ear, and there was not
a word: a note of reverence in them; for if any man should turn from us, to
talk with another, whilst we tell him a tale, we will think he makes
little regard of us: and that is to offer the Sacrifice of fools. Zephe. 1.7.
When the Lord speaks, let all the earth give ear and keep silence: and he
speaks, when his messenger speaks; for that, Qui vos audit, me audit:
therefore Deus loquitur. And the Fathers say, that that place is taken out of
Esaias 32.17. Cultus justitiae silentium. So in the primitive Church, the first
word was (...); and that is out of Paul, Act. 13.16. he made silence with his
hand.

The fifth, not to depart from it, till it be done and ended; set down Exodus
33.11. and may be gathered out of Tit. 2.10. (...); said there of Joshuah, that
he dealt faithfully in the Lords service: because he departed not. Used in
Psalm. 119.118. they had a relation to the departing out of the Congregation,
when the Law was a reading. As preaching is the speaking of God to us: so
prayer is a speaking of us to God. We pray that he would hear us: Psalm. 30.
and 38. Go not far from us, O Lord: Why then should we go far from him?
The Law is equal: as we deal with God, Psalm. 130. so will he deal with us;
and if we be attentive to him, he will be attentive to our complaint; and so
there shall be talio, Psalm. 38.21. we shall have occasion to say, Go not from
me, O Lord: Why then, go not from him; forsake him not: Else, when we say,
Quare dereliquisti me Domine? he will say again, Serve mi, quare dereliquisti
me? that sentence, Discedite a me, Mat 25.41. shall be a punishment for them
that go far from him here, in this kingdom of grace, where he is willing to
keep them. In the primitive Church, from the first word, (...), unto the last
words, (...), none might depart; for the punishment of it was no less then
Excomunication, Council. 4. Carthag. 24. so that none might go out till the end.

The fourth Rule, the means. The first, in Eccles. 4. ver. last; well
considered, and with it, Heb. 12.22, 25, and 28. These by meditation well
digested before the service of God. Take heed to thy feet, when thou entrest
into the house of God; Give not the sacrifice of fools; Be not hasty. In the
other place; Ye are not come to the Mount that might not be touched, but to
Mount Sion, etc. Despise not him that speaks. He makes it more to come to
the Church, then to the Mount.

Secondly, to consider that the Angels are present among us, 1 Cor. 11.10. and
1 Pet. 1.12. the Doctrine of the Gospel is such, as the Angels of Heaven
desire to behold: Therefore if they see any not to esteem it, which they so
much esteem; shall they not be ministers of Gods wrath, etc? therefore the
Angels presence, another means.

Thirdly, we live to glorify God by our work; and how shall we do that, if
we hear not? Ut audies, ita facies; for glorification comes from
instruction, and instruction from hearing.

Fourthly, but if you put too, Ut audies, ita audieris; of God and men; it may
be a fourth means: therefore this is the punishment of God upon Ministers,
that they shall fall into such a company, that will not hear; because they had
dull ears themselves in hearing before; and not only that, Pro. 28.9. but
also to speak to a dull people.

The fifth Rule, of signs. The Commandem^nt it self is signum, i. Mal. 1.14.
a way to examine us. God makes there a very abject, and as Augustine says, an
unlawful comparison; to compare himself to a great King on earth: and verse.
8. he reasons, If you should offer such a gift to your Prince, would he
accept thy person? If we would hear him, as we would hear a great Prince* 1 Samuel 19.8. Jonathan to David. To morrow is the day of the month, you will be
looked for; for my Father will see your place empty.

And our place may be empty, that is, we may be absent, for diverse causes:
First, 1 Samuel 19.14. sickness, Lawful causes of absence: from Church.
for so Micholl answered to Saul, for David: Secondly, 2 Samuel 20.28. the answer
of Jonathan for David; He went to Bethel; for my family, said he, offers a
sacrifice to day; so if a man be to offer a sacrifice himself, he may be
absent from Saul's sacrifice; for it is best to be the principal agent in Gods
service: Thirdly, Mat. 9.13. Misericordiam volo, potius quam sacrisicium: the
works of mercy, to visit the sick, is lawful, etc. because they be means
ordained for the duty of charity: therefore for such a duty we may depart and
leave the other duty.

The second sign, Judge. 9.7. the meditation of this talio; Look as you hear,
so you shall be heard: Hear what I say, and I will hear what you say. It is a
good sign if we can say, Even as I hear, even so hear me, O Lord.

The third sign, Psalm. 119.63, and 79. If we be companions of those that
worship God, and if those persons be more dear to us, because they are
reverent and zealous in Gods service; and the other more odious, because they
be cold; it is a good sign.

The sixth Rule, Accessory, to procure it in others. Hierome on Numb. 36.13. no
man may be a curtain in the Lords house, unless he has a hook and a tache:
Quilibet verus Christianus est cortina patris, to draw on another brother.
Psalm. 42.4. David's affection. I remember it with joy. John 1.41, and 45. of
Andrew to his brother; We have found that Messiah: and of Philip to Nathaniel,
We have found him of whom Moses in the Law did speak, etc. 1 Cor. 11.33. the
Rule spoken of before, one to stay for another, and one to bring another, that
they may by (...), of the same mind, and one accord.

The contrary condemned and punished, Acts 13.8. in Elymas, for seeking to
hinder the Deputy from receiving the Gospel; he was stricken with bodily
blindness, etc.

Order is taken Com. 1. for the inward worship; and Com. 2. for the outward:
now he proceeds to the Commination or Sanction, which contains a penalty on
the breakers, and a reward for the keepers of the Commandment. Every
Commandment, sancitur praemo and poena.

If it be asked, why this Commandment is the first that has this punishment
set down, as the fifth Commandment is said to be the first with promise,
Ephesians. 6.2. We have three reasons for the justifying of Gods work in it.

First, because that as Deuteronomy. 25.2. the punishment must be proportionable to
the fault; and the sin against the first Commandment is hidden, and in the
womb, in our hearts and bosoms, that God only can see it, and view it:
therefore the punishment of it also is left to God; and Acts 17.30. he is
content to oversee it. But this, because it comes into the light of the Sun,
and is to be seen of every body; in this respect God has more particularly
pronounced a punishment against it, 1 Timothy 5.20. that others may fear.
According to the rule of justice: Malum ubi contingit ibi moriatur: if the
fault be open, so shall the punishment also be: if private, so also. And seeing
this is committed in the sight of all, therefore to be punished in the sight of
all.

The second is, that whereas every punishment is brought in, Ut prohibeat
impetum ad turpia: and our impetus or inclination being marvellously whetted to
the breach of this, by profit and safety, the best Orators, annexed to it; I
speak of that corruption, wherein every head is full of new platformes, that
it will devise to it self; and that we cannot be vile in our own eyes, as
David was, 2 Samuel 6.22. but of this, that sometimes it falls out as God
foretold, Revel. 14.9. that the Beast gets place, and then he that will not
receive the mark of the Beast in his forehead, he shall neither buy nor sell;
and not that only, but he shall be rent in pieces: Here then is the motive,
that man can be content to leave God, and bow down to the Beast, if they can
be persuaded, they may thereby enjoy temporal commodities, and security of
this life; for come what Religion will, they are ready for all. And in regard
of the coming with these reasons, not only of that the Devil counted a great
thing, Job. 2. the saving of men's Skins, but the Fleeces also, peace and
tranquillity; so because this profit was annexed, it was necessary there should
be a punishment, cohibere impetum hunc, to stop our inclination.

Thirdly, because we see, Dan. 3.6. and 6.8. and Acts 4.18. Edicts and
Commandments contrary given out: i. for receiving of a false invented worship;
that men should at the sound of the Trumpet fall down and worship the golden
Image; else to be cast into the midst of a hot fiery Furnace: And that who so
should pray to God within thirty days, should be cast into the Lions den;
And an edict that the Apostles should speak no more in Christ's name. Therefore
it was necessary that God should give a countermaund, and a contrary edict: And
that as Princes say, Qui secus faxit, he that transgresses, shall forfeit this
and this: So God should say, If you will not bow down and give me this
worship, you shall forfeit you and your children after you, and your childrens
children shall be subject to mine indignation. This for the reason, why God
has made it a penal Statute.

The Sanction or establishment is divided into Commination, visiting the
iniquity, etc. Promise, and show mercy, etc.


The preface was touched before, in the beginning of the Law, Of Jehovah thy
God. Now of fortis and zelotes, strong, and zealous, the two words that
remain; they contain the certainty of bringing to pass that which he
threatens or promises here in this Commandment: For mighty signifies that
there is no hinderance in performance of it: He is able to do it. It falls
out that where men, whose arms and hands are shortened, conceive mighty wrath
and indignation, but there wants strength; and therefore are not feared; as 2 Samuel 16.13. great malice and hatred in Shimei, yet it was nothing but an
handful of dust; and because he wanted might, it was feign to end in words
only; Whereas if he had been mighty, his anger would more have prevayled: So
the want of might is many times the hinderance.

(...): Mighty; so in Esaias 31.3. and in other places of the Scriptures, it
pleases God, when he opposes himself to men; Egypt is not (...) but (...):
there is such strength in God, that man's weakness is not able to match it. In
Hebrew there be two words given to God, that comprehend the whole nature of
strength; first, (...)
Gnoz; the second, (...)
Cayl. The first is that we call Robur, internal strength; the other,
external strength, either of Weapons, or Arms, etc.

1. For the first, as when it pleases the H. G. to debase the strength of man,
1 Cor. 1.25. that the weakness of God is stronger then the strength of men; so
Exodus 8.19. when he speaks of Gods strength, and the mighty wonders which he
wrought in Egypt, he compares it to the finger of God: Which finger, Psalm.
144.5. if it do but touch the Mountains, it will make them smoke; and not
only his finger, but more; the puff, the wind of a man's mouth, is the least
thing and weakest; and yet he says, At the proceeding of it out of his
nostrills, the foundations of the Hills were discovered, and the ground
removed, Psalm. 18.15. This is positive; and not only this, but also
privative: Psalm. 104.29. If he do but hold in his breath, all things perish;
or he cast his eye aside, the World comes to an end in a moment.

Secondly, for fortitudo, strength or munitions without him; albeit this is
sufficient to move us, yet that, Jer. 23.29. Is not my Word even like a fire,
says the Lord? and like an Hammer, that breaks the stone? And Psalm. 7.13.
Except a man return, he will whet his sword, he has bent his bow and made it
ready. For the other, his powers and Legions of Angels, Psalm. 68.17. twenty
thousand: but in Dan. 7.10. they are said to be more; Thousand thousands, and
ten thousand thousands of heavenly soldiers; Luke 2.13. Legions of heavenly
soldiers. Besides in the 8, 9, 10. of Exodus, Armies of the basest creatures,
Lice, Frogs, Caterpillars, Grasshoppers, etc. By which he brought mighty things
to pass, against the great princes, as Psalm. 105.

2. Zelotes, Jealousy; that seems to import thus much: It might be thought
all one for God, whether we did afford him this outward worship or not; and
that he cares not, nor regards this outward manner; and therefore conceives
no anger against the breach of it: therefore he, to take away all such doubt,
sets this down, that he is a regarder, and a jealous regarder of this.
Psalm. 10.13. he ascribes to the wicked, this speech: Tush, God, he regards
it not: The other possibly will make us regard, yet there are but few that make
regard, whether he can; therefore he has taken upon him that, that implies
the speciallest regard, that can be; and betokens such an affection as is in
them, that have a regard. Jealousy is the excess of love, whereby every man
regards a thing so, as Numbers 5. that he cannot abide it to be common to any
with him; as he that is Impatiens consortis, and cannot abide to have any one
part common, but he must have it whole himself.

1. For the first, Impatiens consortis; when he will have no fellow: 2 Cor.
11.2. the Apostle says, he was jealous over them, with the zeal of the Lord,
that he might present them a pure Virgin to Christ only.

2. For the second, that he must have the whole: Psalm. 69.9. The zeal of
thine house has even devoured me; and Christ has applied it to himself. It
is an affection, that it must devour the whole man, and eat him up clean,
and separate him so, that he have no fellowship with any other; such regard
then has God to his outward worship.

This affection in it self is good, else God, Numb. 5.14. would not have given
that Commandment, allowing the spirit of jealousy: Yet by reason of hitting
or missing, in us it is joined and mingled sometimes with other affections; and
when we miss of our purpose, wholly, then it is Zelus amarus, ex laesa
concupiscentia, as James calls it, Quia extra non sentit; quod jutus
concupiscit: and this grief stirs up another, Vindicem laesae
concupiscentiae, Nahum 1.23. such anger as will have revenge; and further then
that, Prove. 6.34, 35. a raging and universal revenge. Now then if this fall
into (...), it proves not to be like a spark in a stack of Straw, or falling
into an heap of Chafe; which makes a flame, and vanishes away; but like a
spark of fire falling into a barrel of Gunne-powder, bearing up all before
it. According to man's strength is his anger: The Kings anger is death, and the
eternal Kings, eternal death, of body and soul, Luke 12.5.

For avoiding error, touching this that (...) is affirmed of God: what is to be
thought of it; and what profit we may have of this affirmation. Whether there
fall any affection of man into God? It is certain it does not: if a man speak
properly, if he speak not by a metaphor. And to them which say, Indignum est
haec de Deo dici; we must answer with Augustine; Indignum certe est, si quid
quod de eo diceretur, inveniretur dignum; but we cannot: for our great and
glorious titles; of Majesty, magnificence, glory, are nothing to his glory:
Magis congrua and accommoda sunt humanae imbecillitati, quam divinae majestati:
so this is spoken for man's infirmity. The applying of it to the Scriptures. 1.
Whereas it is said in many places, God is not as man, that he should repent
him; and in other places, that it repented him that he made man, etc. For
reconciling of such places, his rule is: Cum negantur istae affectiones de Deo,
significari immutabilitatem; cum dicuntur de Deo, efficaciam; that he will
work effectually. So that these affections here, show that God will do, as
men do, which have the like affections; not that he has these affections; but
that he produces these actions that they do, which have those affections.

Secondly, also, as Augustine says, that those things are affirmed of God and
man, eodem verbo, sed non eodem modo. For jealousy in man may be light and for
no cause; but in God with knowledge and wisdom: man's jealousy knows no
order, it is disordered and raging; in God it is tranquilla justitia.

Thirdly, to these two, we may add the end; that it is convenient to the same
nature, these two being observed; that he will work the like effect, as men
do for the breach of Wedlock.

Out of these we have three commodities.

First, we learn, that we are of dull spirits, not feared with Gods proper
names, of justice, etc. but he must take other, of raging men; so jealousy we
fear: but when we hear that God is just, we hear it without any great motion.

Secondly, that of Tertullian, Lib. 2. contra Marcion: Utitur Spiritus hoc
vocabulo, ad exaggeranda ejus scelera: that sin is so odious a thing, and so
vile; that if it were possible, would make God angry, and to be, that he cannot
be.

Thirdly, it is the Apostles use, that he makes of the justice of God, as we
see in 1 Cor. 11.29. he protests himself to be jealous, that we our selves
might be jealous: that is, that every man enter into his own heart, and
consider what God is; and say thus: What says God, that he is jealous? let us
consider what God is; and again, what we are; how excellent he is, and how
vile and wretched creatures we are. Why then, it should appear, that this
should pertain to us, and not to him; and rather of our selves and our own
salvation; there is nothing worthy in us, that he should be jealous of. And
this for the entry to the thing.

Now to the thing it self: Visiting the finnes, etc. This commination has two
things: 1. The censure of the sin: 2. The punishment.


The censure is by two names: First, by hatred; for if it be love that makes
us to keep the Commandments; then it must be hatred that makes us to break
them. But can any thing hate God?

The nature of God is essentially good, Solut.
nay goodness it self, which can no way come to be the object of hatred.
Again, sundry of his effects come from his love; and they are such, as the
very wicked love them; and him for them, because he bestows on them their
being, life, sense, moving. But there is another kind of effects that proceed
indeed from his love; by which he would have us preserved; and so consequently
he gives us Commandments, Cohibentia voluntatem inordinatam: that bridle our
licentious will, and these are they that make him to be hated of us. For when a
man is given to his own will, and is drowned with the zeal of himself, then
he must needs hate those Commandments, because they are adversaries, and
contrary to his will and affection: and indeed, God comes to be hated, by too
much love of our selves. For it would have all our desires to be free to our
selves; and any that does oppose it self, it hates it. So then, as God says,
Mal. 1.5. Your eyes shall see it, and you shall say, The Lord will be magnified
upon the borders of Israel.

Secondly, I have loved you, says the Lord: And ye say, Wherein have thou
loved us? Was not Esau Jacobs brother? yet I loved Jacob and hated Esau; and
made his Mountains wast, etc. Expounded Romans 9.13. to be nothing else, but
that he did not choose Esau. Then are we said to hate God, when there stands
a case between his will, and an inordinate affection of ours; when his will is
not chosen, but our inordinate affection is preferred, and our mind: Hoc est
odisse deum, deum non eligere. For God loving us, it is the will of God, that
when the question comes, his loving being so exceeding good to us, as that it
challenges us wholly; and that love is Vinculum conjugale, and therefore the
love of the Lord should be Amor conjugalis; which has no third thing: but aut
amat, aut odit; non est medium, Mat. 6.24. either he must love, or hate: Deuteronomy.
22.16. the Maids father shall say to the Elders; I gave my Daughter to this man
to Wife: and he hates her, etc. and chap. 24.3. And if the latter husband hate
her, and write her a bill of divorcement, etc. treating there of love between
married persons: he says, If a man marry a wife, and hate her: that is, cease
to love her, and begin to be weary of her. If she be not only and wholly
loved, she is hated; because these duties are joined to one alone: there can be
no third thing.

2. The other name, which God calls (...) iniquity, perverseness; peevish and
perverse: the having of it, is to meet with the opinion and censures of men:
as Dan. 3.14. Nebuchadnezzar, to the three Children: What disorder is this in
you, that you will not serve my god, nor worship the golden Image that I have
set up? For the observing, and not transgressing of this Second Commandment,
they were called perverse fellows, and disordered Subjects: because they
obeyed not the Kings decree. Therefore God shows the truth, who are
disordered; even those that are breakers of this Commandment; and so it shall
be found at the judgment of judgments at the last day of judgment.

God says, Exodus 23.2. A man must not follow a multitude to do evil: his
reason is, because in doing so, he shall become perverse. But the voice and
judgment of the world is clean contrary. But the resemblance of it, that is
commonly made of the Fathers, is of a pond full of Crabs, a perverse swimming
fish: for she swimming backwards, and a fish that were cast into the pond,
should swim right: they would charge her of not swimming right; because she
swimmeth not backward, as the rest. But God, Christ, the Prophets and
Evangelists, the Apostles tell us it is not so: but that they are disordered
that break this Commandment. And this for the censure.

2. Now for the punishment. It were enough to be found among the hated of God:
but God moreover adds here a visitation: the meaning of it we have, 1. Sam.
7.16. the word betokens the Circuit of a Judge: as Samuel went his Circuit
year by year: to Bethel, Gilgal, and Mispeh: and judged Israel. And out of our
own practice, or as we our selves term it, the Visitation of a Bishop. And
because visitare, is to go to see, it presupposes absence, and so an
intermission: and it does very fitly resemble the judgments of God. For the
forbearing of them, as it is Luke 19.44. Dominus requiret de manibus vestris,
he will require it at our hands, to know the time of our visitation. As there
be some that say, the Lord is long a coming: so there be some that say, he
will not come at all. That say, Non requiret Dominus, as Ps. 10.12. therefore,
for the patient waiting of the just, for the judgment and glory of God, that
they may know that it is a sure thing that he will come as a Judge: and though
he be long a coming, yet at the last he comes, and then he takes order: so
certain we should be of the requiring of our sins, at our hands, though he
seem as though he would not come at all.

The visitation of God we find to be fitly resembled to this his judgment: as
Ps. 69.25. a visitation in outward goods: Let his habitation be void, etc.
Again for transgression, a visitation upon the body. 2 Samuel 11.14. upon the
child. In the taking away of Gods benefits, Matthew. 21.42.43. And yet a more
grievous punishment, quando paena odii est odium. And as God says thus, qui
sordescit, sordescat adhuc; so he may say, qui odio me prosequitur, odio me
prosequatur adhuc. For it is the moth and consumption. He visits the sins
of the fathers on the children, etc. that is, whereas the Devil plays the
Sooth-sayer in Peter, Matthew. 16.22. parce tibi Domine, let none of these things
come to thee: whereas they thought to have saved themselves by this means: God
says, As neither they, so neither their sons after them, nor their sons
sons, their sons nephews shall escape.

For the first, for himself; They thought the Devil had given them good
counsel: but Deuter. 7.10. God protests there, that he will pay it to his
own face that hates him. 2. And on his children, when he thinks he has
best provided for them, then he pulls down evil upon them. The which craft
of sin, to make us believe we avoyde such an evil, by that, by which we
bring it upon us. The Devils prophecy, good counsel: so that when the wrath
of God has consumed him, it takes hold on his posterity: Ps. 79.5. he will be
angry still, like fire: and shall go along to the third and fourth generation.

Now to consider the grievousnesse of the punishment, we measure it by three
things: 1. a Gravitate. 2. a Multiplicitate. 3. a Prolixitate.

For the greatness and grievousnesse of it, it is said, that it shall be upon
the children: which are in account with the fathers, as themselves: Luke
8.41.42. he fell down at JESUS feet, desiring help; because his only daughter
lay a dying; and Luke 9.38. miserere mei; for my son is sick: and 2. Sam.
18.33. they were so dear, that the father would redeem their life, with the
loss of his own: as there David could for his rebellious son Absalom:
vtinam pro te mortuus essem. This shows that the thing is very dear to them.
They are our work, and not as Abraham's well, Genesis 21.25. (werein, when it was
taken from him, he thought he had wrong:) but a part of our substance, as Genesis
2.23. bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh. Genesis 3. and not that alone, but a
principal part of the substance: Zerang, the seed and the beginning: as though
it were but the chafe, after the children were borne. Again, Prove. 17.6.
Childrens children are the crown of their Elders, our crown while we live:
and as the heathen man says, our image and remembrance, when we are dead.

For multiplicity; that, that is, Luke 12.47. the distinction there by many and
few stripes: is here for the multiplicitie, and manifoldnesse, three or four
generations.

For the continuance and length. Mar. 12.40. They devour widows houses, under
pretense prolixae orationis: ideo erit eis prolixum judicium. Long judgment
shall wait on them. So it is here: the whole memory of man: a generation. So
long as a man can remember: so long as the mind of man can endure, he shall be
punished: and as he can have any abiding in this life, or as he can have any to
behold it after him. Hereby we see it verified, Hebr. 13.20. that it is a
fearful thing to fall into GODS hands. And Ps. 44.20. we see how the godly
account of it. It is so fearful, that the godly had rather abide death, then
break this Commandment. That is, that martyrdom is rather to be chosen,
then to transgress that, which he has prescribed in his Commandment.

Here may be a question concerning the justice of this visitation? Whether one
may justly be punished for another offense? Where we note, that the very word,
which proceeds out of the mouth of GOD, is not free from mistaking minds: and
therefore let not this discourage any. And those words, Ezekiel. 18.2. Jer. 3.29.
They shall say no more, Our fathers have eaten sour grapes, etc. Rise they not
as a scoff of these words?

That which seems to stand against this, is Deuteronomy. 24.16. every one must
suffer for his own offense: and he says not here, he will punish the child
for the fathers offense: but that he will visit the fathers offense on the
child: so neither the contrary, he will not punish the father for the child:
set down, Ezekiel. 18.20. anima quae peccaverit, morietur. Gal. 6.5. Every one
shall bear his own burden: and 2. Cor. 5.10. Every man, at the judgment seat
of CHRIST, must receave the things done in his body, etc.

For the making of this plain. Understand, that this is the course of many
learned men, especially of the Schoolmen; They say, as to the place of Esa.
38.1. to Hezekiah; Put thy house in order: that as there is meant, non quid
suturum esset, sed quid ex despositione naturae futurum esset: by nature, thou
art to die: so here GOD speaks, non quid saceret, sed quid ex dispositione
meriti nestri saceret. But this would make neglectummandati: and the
commination would be vain. On the other side we will proceed on this order.

Whether it be a thing unjust, that one man offending, another should be
punished? I say not for his offense: for so it is not.

There be three respects in punishing: 1. Satisfactio. 2. Medicina. 3.
Correctio.


By these three a man may justly be punished; and yet no offense committed by
him.

First, for satisfaction: as in suretiship: when the debt pertains to one
man, and his friend takes it upon him, and bears the punishment: is this
injustice? Absit. For then that which CHRIST has done for us; to wit, our
Redemption, should be of none effect. But voluntarily one may satisfy for
another, yet no wrong done to justice, nor yet punishment taken for the offense
of the other.

Secondly, for medicina; may it not be as in the body? For the eye and the head
is sick, and the arm is let blood for it: for otherwise the whole body might
be brought into danger. So then it is not only a just thing, but also a
necessary. Therefore, If punishment be sent propter medicinam, as a medicine,
another may bear it, without breach of justice, as it is in Physic; that
that is deprived must be less then the thing for which it is deprived: as a
Finger to be given for an Eye: this is a good medicine. So temporal things are
to be given for the recovery of spiritual: temporal punishment may be taken
on the son, for the recovery of the father spiritually.

3ly. For correction. In that (as before) there is a respect to this: the
amendment of the equality broken. A man should desire no more than GODS will
is: but we see daily he does: Therefore, he breaks equality, and is to make
amends for it. Therefore, he must break something less, that he desires; and
so there is equality, when nimis is punished with minus. For this equality of
it, it must be in the father, and in the child: if equality be not broken in
them, here is no injustice. For the Fathers say, frustra requirit debitum, qui
non impendit indebitum: to require a debt, and not to pay that that is due is
no justice: as GOD says, Deuteronomy. 32.6. Do ye so reward the Lord, O foolish
people, and unwise! Is not he thy father that has bought thee! He has made
thee, and proportioned thee: and qui contristat patrem suum, merito
contristatur a silio suo: that is, If we being GODS children grieve him, it is
a good right we should be grieved of ours. Another is that Genesis 17.7. in regard
of the visible Covenant in the Sacrament: he is the GOD of us and our seed: so
when the father breaks the Covenant, he says out of Matthew. 27.25. Let this
man's blood be super nos, and filios nostros, upon us, and on our children.

2. To the son: first sure it is, and all agree in it, that in a temporal
punishment, because filius is res patris, a possession of the fathers:
therefore, he may temporally be punished, the body may be punished. Deuteronomy. 1.1.
in regard of the Covenant made with us and our seed; it must suffer as we do.
But for warrant of the equality; his nature is it that GOD finds, as Cantic.
2.15. the Church finds a nest of young foxes, they have yet destroyed no
vineyards, nor worried any lambs: but if they grow up, sure it is, they will
do both. Now the question is, Whether the Church may say, capite nobis
vulpeculas, etc. take us these young foxes. Because there is a poisonous nature
in the scorpions eggs, therefore, we may tread them under-foot. And it stands
with justice. For Ps. 51.5. As soon as ever the seed is warmed, it conceaveth
sin, as soon as sin comes, there is no way to recover it: DEUS tui, and
seminis tui, he is not only our quod, but the quod of our seed. Therefore,
justly may it be destroyed. Then there is no way to recover it; but by contract
of marriage; for that, as Hose. 2.2. GOD has sent them a bill of divorcement:
Plead with your mother; for she is not my wife, nor I her husband: but let her
put away her fornications out of her sight, and adulterers from betwixt her
breasts: And so consequently they have no interest in the Covenant: because, as
its Deuteronomy. 31.6. They have gone a whooring after them that are no gods: after
gods of strange lands: and Job. 31.12. it is said, It should be a fire, that
should devour to destruction, and root out all his increase.

Then there is a third thing to be put to both these: namely, a propagation of
this sin: by an education, whereby every one is delighted to bring up his
own children, as he himself was, as 1. Pet. 1.18. (...). we do like our
fathers. Our fathers have worshipped Baal, and we do so also. Symmachus says:
That Religion that comes to us, having continued thus many years, let us
keep it still. And the propagatian of this sin proceeds as it were a
leprosy. If it once take hold in the father; it continues in all the
posterity: yet GOD, when he executes this judgment, exequitur chirographo
suo, non paterno; it is for his own debt, not for his fathers. But in this
case, jus meriti is left, and we fly to jus beneficii; we plead not merit, but
mercy. And it is the obligation betwixt the child and GOD, and not the father
and GOD: it must be gratuitum, his free Covenant that we must hold by.
Therefore, we must remove from the the Court of Justice, to the Court of Mercy:
where we have, not jus meriti, but jus beneficii: By the which as Augustine
says well, good fathers have wicked children, ne virtus videretur esse
haereditaria, least virtue should seem hereditary. And again, wicked fathers
have good children, ne malitia serperet in infinitum, least naughtiness should
grow on to be infinite.

To resolve these; First it is certain, here is no punishment for the grapes
that are in the fathers mouths, but in their own.

2. This punishment is only in respect of Justice: but miseretur cujus vult, he
will have mercy on whom he pleases. And he have mercy once; then this which
Gregory says, only he; qui imitatur gravatur, he that imitateth sin, it is he
that feels the smart of it. The bond of this Commandment is agravated, as
Ezekiel. 18.28. it is said, If he turn from all his sins that he has done, he
shall surely live, and not die. But now the matter is removed from the former
question. GOD says, Jer. 8.7. I will speak suddenly against a nation to
destroy it. But of this nation, against whom I have pronounced, Turn: I will
repent, and it shall stand, (i. e.) I will speak suddenly, I will build a
nation: but if they keep not my precepts, I will not: as we see, 1. Sam. 2.32.
There is a good purpose to have established Levi his house in Eli: but now
there shall not be an old man in thine house for ever; but Jonah 3.10. God
said, Nineveh shall be destroyed: but by a new decree, reversed. These come
from other Courts. And this serves for all Gods commandments.

Sam. 11.15. the punishment is upon the Fathers.

Deuteronomy. 26.5.) to acknowledge our selves to be sons of Idolatry, and every one
said, before the Lord his God, My Father was a Syrian, who being ready to
perish, etc. and all to say with David, Psalm. 106.6. We have sinned with our
Fathers, we have committed iniquity and dealt foolishly; and as Dan. 9.8. to
pray that we may not bear our Fathers sins. And as backward, so forward,
Genesis 18.19. It is said of Abraham, that he would take order that his Family
should serve God after him; a mutual care, for the building up one of another.

The promise is mercy: it proceeds from zeal. There is a zeal for a thing,
and against it; a zeal to do good, Esa. 9.7. the increase of his government
and peace shall have no end, etc. Zelus Domini exercituum perficiet hoc, the
zeal of the Lord of hosts will perform this; and as it is said of that
zeal, Cantic. 8.6. it wrestled with the grave and death: so that the taking
away of that part of zeal, is a great pain; and Ezekiel. 16.42. the promising of
that jealousy is threatened by this, he promises mercy: A great promise,
because it contains all promises and benefits of God; and therefore, if we
be purged from sin, or what good soever we do, it comes from his mercy.

Again, for Mercy; as visitation is for justice: so here should have been
merces, and not misericordia, not Mercy but wages; but our reward does argue,
non mercedem, but gratuitum amorem, not wages, but mercy. Now that it is called
a work, and operans misericordiam: and the other, (i.e.) his justice: but a
visitation, (i. e.) a thing intermitted: that is also a special thing to be
observed; the nature of his justice is restrained to the fourth generation: and
his mercy is extended to thousands; so here is a proportion, the one containing
the other, two hundred and fifty times; not that the mercy of God is greater
then his justice, but because he is more delighted in the action of the one,
then of the other.

The reward is promised to them that love him: the manner of love, is according
to the love of God, because he is jealous for us, that we might be jealous
for him; that we may say, as 1 King. 19.20. Elias, zelo zelatus sum, I have
been very jealous for the Lord God of hosts sake: zelantes potius quam
amantes: The trial of this love consists in keeping the commandments, (i.
e.) that if it be not a commandment, it is not from him; and therefore
whatsoever was without them, was not from love. Another, it is very certain,
that the righteousness of speech, and the true sign of loving him, had been
the keeping of him: but he says not so, but the keeping of my commandments;
the reason is, because he is able to keep himself, and needs not our
keeping; therefore he has set our love to be tried by two things; First, by
mandata or praecepta mea, his commandments; Secondly, and minimos istos, his
little ones; for the commandments it is said, We keep him in his par^^^^^
and his love, in mandata.
Hosea 4.10. that they kept them not. 2. for the other, Mat. 25.45. quandiu uni
ex istis minimis non fecistis, neque mihi, etc. in as much as ye did it not to
one of the least of these, ye did it not to me.

Psalm. 19.10. David accounts of them as dearly as of much fine Gold of Ophir,
and Psalm. 119.72. Thy law is dearer to me then thousands of gold and silver.

For keeping, by this word Keeper, we must understand that God has made us
keepers of his commandment. Now the property and charge of a Keeper is to
preserve that thing that he keeps, as from himself, so from others; and to
see and have regard that it be neither lost by negligence, nor cast away, nor
broken, nor hurt, but kept sound, till his coming, that gave them to him in
charge.

For the loss of Gods commandments, 1. King. 20.40.

For the breaking of them, Mat. 5.19. Whosoever shall break the least of these
commandments, etc. shall be called the least in the kingdom of God: but a
contemptuous threatening is, Psalm. 50.17. Now that they may be safely kept, and
as it is, Prove. 4.21. it is best to lay them up in that place that is surest,
even in the midst of our heart.

For the keeping in regard of others, we must not say as Cain of Abel, sumne
ego custos? etc. am I my brothers keeper: for as Caine should have been keeper
of his Brother, that others kill him not; so we should be keepers of Gods
commandments, that others break them not. We must have the commandments of
God, not only observanda, but also consenvanda, not only observe, but conserve
them. And if we perform this duty, we shall do as they do, Prove. 16.17. he
that keeps them, keeps his own soul by them.

So much of the 2d Commandment.

The III. Commandment.
Thou shall not take the etc.
THe object of this commandment is the Name of god, or his glory. The thing
commanded, is a reverent taking of his Name, comprehended in this word praise.
And the proper place of Gods glory is in this commandment, by reason of the
object, which is his name, by the which he is glorified. And this his glory is
such, as for it, Esa. 43.7. he created all things: For mine own glory I
created them; and for this, that which was before his Creation, his
predestination, Ephesians. 1.6. unto which we must join our praise. Now if they
must be made like to their creator; if the work must be according to the mind
of the maker, it is well; therefore, that end which moved him to make us, must
be our end; and therefore all our actions and thoughts must come to this, to be
as it is, 2. These. 1.12. That the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be
glorified in you.

In the second Commandment be these two respects, First, that the honor
exhibited in outward behavior, is exhibited to one that is present; Secondly,
that the honor exhibited is given to the party himself, for to him alone it
must be done. Now the worship of the Tongue, which we call Praise, goes
beyond these, and is most excellent; for it is of him that is absent, and to
others; and not to himself. Though God be present every where, yet when we in
our actions and speeches speak of him to others, there is praise; and so it
goes to him. And yet there comes a further portion of glory. So that it is
not only true, Luke 14.8. that honor is given to the person, but also to his
Name, Psalm. 29.2. Give to God the glory due unto his name, which giving of
glory is properly called praise: for the worship of God is made an especial
glorification of God, Psalm. 50. verse. last, he that offers me praise,
glorifieth me; which shows that it is allone, to give glory to God, and to
give him praise.

Now this praise has his proper place in our mouth, Psalm. 34.1. With my mouth
will I praise thee, the instrument chief in this office, is the Tongue, and by
performance of this, our tongues are made glorious: Psalm. 37.30. The mouth of
the righteous will be talking of wisdom, and his tongue will speak of
judgment.

The manner how this praising is to be performed is set down in Moses, Deuteronomy.
32.3. I will publish with my mouth, give ye glory to God, (i. e.) one must
report, and they that hear, must give glory to God. Now, as was said before,
in the word Glory, accordingly as it is taken both in divinity, and out of
divinity; there is more, then either in honor, praise, or worship, because all
these are directed, that the party on whom they are bestowed, might be
glorified. And the matter of glory has proportion to Claritas, the brightness
in glass, and in other such visible things; that as they are seen a far
off, so that party to whom such honor is given, it is in such sort, that he
might have a name a far off, and known. Therefore for this cause in Psalm.
66.2. the Prophet having exhorted men to praise, he goes further, and
exhorts them to make his praise glorious, that is, doing as he shows us in
the book of Praises, that is, the Psalms, as Psalm. 71.8. First by filling our
own mouths with it, and then with filling other men's ears; as Psalm. 66.8. O
praise our God ye people, and make the voice of his praise to be heard. And
this is to be done, Psalm. 34.1. continually: and so continually, as that there
be no staying, but ever more and more: as Psalm. 71.14.15. But I will wait
continually and will praise thee more and more. My soul shall daily rehearse
thy righteousness and thy salvation: for I know no end thereof. In the duty of
praise, touching this point of it, that when we have resolved our selves thus
to fill our mouths with it, it must be as it is, Psalm. 66.16. before them that
fear him: and not before them alone, birds of our own feather, but also
before the Congregation, as Psalm. 149.1. Let his praise be heard in the
congregation of the Saints: and not only before every assembly, but before the
great assembly, as Psalm. 40. I have declared thy righteousness in the great
Congregation. Gather all into one place, and one assembly: yet this is his
wish, Psalm. 71.18. that he might fill all the World with his praise: and that
he might speak to a company of all Nations: Forsake me not until I have
declared thine arm to this generation, and thy power to all them that shall
come. And that that goes beyond all this, that he is not content with this,
but is desirous to deliver over this affection so, as Psalm. 22.31. and 72.17.
it should continue so long as the world endures. So much of the end of this
Commandment.

The necessity of this Precept.
The necessity of this, was handled before, and stands upon 12. Reasons, and
as we have heard before, that therefore man was made, and therefore
consequently, we must exercise it. Then he is in vain, if he have not his end.

1 The Hebrew shows it, (...) and (...) creare and benedicere, to create and
bless: because the element added, is nothing else, by reason of the affixe, but
an effect of the Creation.

2. They gather the necessity of the end out of the word Creation, by Genesis 2.2.
It may be better gathered out of the words following. The first thing that he
did after his Creation, was the sanctifying of a day to that end, to be wholly
spent in his praise. In which respect of favor Christ delivering to us a form
of Prayer; though God in the first place (commanded,) that the internal
worship should be first, yet having regard to the end, and knowing that the end
in our intention is the first, he gives it for the first petition, and
teaches that we might first desire Gods name to be hallowed.

3. That was said before, it was the work of the Sabbath, and that is a figure
and resemblance of all the actions we shall be occupied about in patria, ( i.
e.) in Heaven. This is a third thing that commends it unto us, that it shall
be our continual, opus, in our Country, and therefore if any be desirous to
participate the Celestial exercises here, let him spend his time in glorifying
God while he is here.

4. The setting of us while we are here in earth, being somewhat lower then
the Angels in their estate. Their delight is, as Luke 1. to sing Hallelujah,
praise to the Lord. It is the exaltation of the nature of man, while he is yet
in the way of corruption, and while he is on earth, to be made equal to the
Angels in this work of praise.

5. The casting down of a man, when he is not fit to do it, as Chrysostom on
Psalm. 148. says, that seeing the basest of them are called to do it; then he
is baser then the vilest creatures, that will not do it.

6. From the exercise of the Church militant, it is best acceptable to him, as
Psalm. 29. verse. ult. it is the work of the Temple, and so consequently, to be
preferred before the work of the Market place: The reason of the place, as that
place is the place of all places.

7. This is alone the thing that distinguishes a man from all other creatures;
all other creatures have but one sound, they have no voice. And as he is a
Reasonable soul, he is distinguished in regard of the first commandment, so
his voice, in regard of this commandment, man alone has a distinct voice, and
therefore can praise God with the tongue, and therefore ought to be delighted
in that, wherein he excels all other Creatures, ( i. e.) with the glorifying
of the name of God.

8. Not only because it is a proper work of Man, but that which is next, that
by this means, whatsoever is occupied about it, whether it be tongue, lip,
or pen, etc. it gets a dignity by it. And as James 5.8. casts down the
tongue when it is lewdly occupied; so David extolleth it when it is thus
occupied. It is in the highest degree of dignity.

9. For the reverence of the great commendations and motives that this yielding
of praises has, Psalm. 147.1. It is not only good and honest, but also
pleasant. David's soul, at the praise of God, was as delightful, as his mouth
filled with marrow, and that it is seemly and profitable, honorisicantes me
honorificabo, they that honor me I will honor; God will bestow what he can
upon him; and for the reward, it is to be chosen.

10. Whereas the excellency of man stands rather in dare then accipere, in
giving rather then in receiving; and rather in facere quam in fieri, in doing
rather then suffering; here is only our facere and dare. In all other things
we are made, and we receive: but this we give: glorify to God, magnify him,
sanctify him. There is as it were magnifying, and as it were an holiness
wrought in him by our praise.

11. This duty lies so strait on us, as that though Christ commands the
contrary, (as in the man delivered from the Devil,) yet he must not be obeyed:
whereas all other precepts are such, as the contrary of that commandment, is
not to be done; there is no such thing here: there can be no precept against
this precept.

12. That which is Prove. 12.14. A man shall be satiate with good things by the
fruit of his mouth, and Christ, Mat. 12.36.37. not only men's works, but even
their words shall justify or condemn them. The employing of our tongue, will
either receive fruit to life, or gall and wormwood to confusion; and so
consequently there lies a necessity of this duty on us to hallow his name.

We see by the petition what is here commanded, (i. e.) that Gods name may be
hallowed inwardly by our intent, making it the end and scope of all our doings;
outwardly by making it the matter of our speech and writing, and that our
tongue be an instrument of speaking his praise, and that our lips be, as Psalm.
45.2. the pen of a ready writer; and our tongue a Trumpet to sound his praise.

And not only these, but also in outward action. It is that (...), that light,
Mat. 5.16. that our works may be as the works of him, that our tongues may be
declares of Gods glory, as ( Psalm. 19.1.) the Heavens and firmament are.

Now we come to the commandment, which has two parts, 1. a Precept, 2. a
Penalty.


To declare the precept, we must learn what these three words mean, 1. Name
of God, 2. Take, 3. In Vain.


For the Name (of God) which being a word, as properly belonging to the Tongue,
so the duty of the tongue is commanded in it.) it is a word as the Heathen
says, per quod cognoscimus alios, and ab illis cognoscimur, by which we both
know, and are known of others: and consequently it is a word of distinction,
whereby we distinguish a thing from all other things. And that is the proper
use of it, and the first: according to which use, the Name of God is set down
diversely in the Scriptures. (2 uses in the Bible,) It is best set down in
Exodus 34.6.7. he protests to proclaim his name when he cries Jehova,
Jehova, etc. his name there is of three sorts, 1. in respect of his Essence,
Jehova; 2. in respect of his Attributes or Adjuncts, which be of two sorts,
affirmative, as misericors, omnipotens, aeternus; merciful, omnipotent,
eternal; 2. ^egalize, as infinite, invisible, incomprehensible, etc. and all
those names that made Dionysius to write de Theologia negativa, of negative
Divinity; and those that belong to his qualities, as they do denominate, 3. in
respect of his works, Creator, Redeemer, Sanctifier, etc. and they are verse. 7.
And to these three may be referred whatsoever may be read of his name.

Now this very Name is reverently to be used; Of every of these names may it be
said, as the Angel said to Manoah, Jud. 13.18. that it is most fearful; And
if the Angel, Jud. 13.18. appearing to Manoah, said to him inquiring after his
Name, Search not after my name for it is fearful: much more is the name of
the Lord fearful, and cannot be known. It is no question, as it is Deuteronomy.
28.58. so it is. If thou will not do all these words that are written in this
book, if thou will not bear reverence to this name, The Lord thy God, then
there follows a Catalogue of Plagues in that place.

Now if that be reverenced, then the second use of his name is much more to be
reverenced, because men are only known or distinguished by it, that some duty
might some way be done to them, that is not done to any other. We must take
heed of the Pharisees distinction, Matthew. 5.33. concerning this name; that
except he did swear by the Lord Jehova, and take the very Name of God in his
mouth, he was safe from this commandment, but there a man might swear by the
Heavens, or Earth, or Jerusalem, because they were not the Name of God,
therefore that that makes this Name, is that we call a Good name in English,
or Credit in private men: but those that are in higher places, as the dialect
of Princes is, their glory, magnificence, majesty, etc. as in Jer. 13.11. that
they might have a name, and praise, and glory. For the name (...), of praise
and glory, and the common phrase of that tongue is this, that if a man be in
credit, he is called, (...) a man of Name, a man of credit, a famous person.
This good name has a more extra ordinary commendation annexed to it; according
to the glory of the person, so rises this name: as the Apostle reasons, Heb.
1.4. that Christ was so much above the Angels in glory, as he had received a
more excellent Name then they, and Genesis 17.5. it is the practice of God; when
he would exalt Abraham from an Harlot to his Church, and establish the church
in his house, and make him Father of the faithful; then because he was more
glorious, he gives him a more glorious name: Thou shall no more be called
Abram, but Abraham, etc. And we see the like, Genesis 35.10. Jacobs name is
changed to Israel, a name of more dignity.

Then the second use is of good report, if it be of private men: For a private
man, it is a pleasure to have a good name, Eccles. 7.1. A good name is better
then a good ointment. The especial thing to keep a man's name; because it was
it, that was most usual and most esteemed in those days; and for treasure and
profit; Pro. 22.1. A man's name is better then either silver or gold: The other
name may be changed, as Abraham's and Jacobs: but this is such as may not be
forgon for neither pleasure nor profit. And it is not only of Gods Law, but
also of man's: the Heathen could see the excellency of this; for they say,
Interesse famae est majus omni alio interesse, the weight of a man's good report
goes beyond and above all weight: And further as a Father says, Fama pari
passu cum vita ambulat, goes cheek by joll with his life: Man sees this, that
it is greatly to be magnified; so Psalm. 138.2. Thou have magnified thy name
above all things by thy word. So that indeed it is the glory of God that is
chiefly here intended, and secondly his very name.

2. Non assumis, etc. thou shall not take. To understand it fully; it is the
scarcity of our tongue, Take.
that the word is no better expressed: For the word (...) from whence it
comes, has a double use; and to these two, may be referred whatsoever is
borrowed. It signifies properly to take up, to lift up; and that two sorts of
things; First, it is applied to a standard or banner; and secondly, to an heavy
thing, as a burden: And indeed, these two kinds of things are they, that we
take away or remove. If any thing be glorious, we are content commonly to take
and lift it up: And on the other side, if there be any thing that is necessary,
and that we have use of, though it be heavy and weighty, yet we will lift it;
so that the one is in rebus gloriosis, the other, in rebus necessariis. On the
contrary, if they be neither glorious nor necessary we let them lie; the first
use, the glory of it is set down, Exodus 28.37. God says there must be a
Plate, and in it must be written, SANCTITAS JEHOVAE, Holiness to the LORD: and
it must be removed to Aarons forehead, as it must stand in the Myter of Aaron.
And Moses, in Exo. 17.15. called the Altar, Jehovah nissi! from a word of great
affinity, The Lord isour standard; that is lifted up as glorious things: as the
badge of any Nobleman, it is lifted up on the shoulders of their servants to be
seen.

For the other use, for lifting up of a weighty thing, for the necessity and
use; Genesis 29.7, 8. of the great stone before the Well, Jacob did not lift it
up, till all the sheep came together, till there was great need. The first of
these pertains properly to all the rest of the duties of praising, to all
that take Gods name: The second only to the duty of Swearing; for that is an
heavy thing. Under these two, are comprehended all other takings of his name
whatsoever. But to take them as they are under the first; namely, in lifting it
up as a thing glorious; as the Standard of Moses, and the Plate of Aaron: the
first thing enjoined is this, The being called by his name, Genesis 48.16. as a
great dignity and privilege, Jacob granted to Ephraim and Manasses, but denied
it to the rest; and it is part of the glory that children take of their
Parents, their name: So we are called Gods children, by his name; and not that
alone, but Esaias 4.1. Seven women come to one man, and say, We will eat of our
own bread, and wear our own garments, only let us be called by thy Name, to
put our shame from us. And in marriage the woman honors the Husband by
leaving her own name, and taking his; and it is a glory to her, that she may
so do. In the truth of this it is said, Esaias 43.7. They shall be called by my
name, for I have created and formed them, etc. How is that? That is no
otherwise, then as it is, Acts 11.26. the Disciples at Antioch were first
called Christians; for that is the most excellent name that is. That glory that
becomes Christ is given to Christ.

The second is, that the servant by lifting up on his shoulder his Masters
Badge or arms, lifts up his countenance, but with service; that is, to his
Masters glory there is joined a service of his: and therefore to his glory, all
his doings from that time forth, must be referred: and so we must be at Gods
commandment, to do his business, having his Badge; which is plain, by 1
Cor. 10.31. God can receive no profit, but glory; therefore, to his glory we
must refer all that we do. For if you once come to that, Genesis 11.4. Paremus
nobis nomen, I will get my self a name. Then we see it is accounted Bellare
cum Deo, to wage war with God; and he will visit them with the confusion of
tongues and minds: not only that, but if a man do not refer, but take
glory to himself; as 2 Samuel 15.8. of Absalom. Thy servant vowed, etc. If the
Lord shall bring me indeed to Jerusalem, I will serve the Lord, and 1 Kings
21.9. of Iezabels fast; the one setting the name of God on a bloody murder;
the other, the vow upon a wicked and lewd conspiracy. To abuse the name of God
to our own wicked inventions, is a monstrous thing.

These are within us, now without us.

1. In our tongue. The 1. thing is, as Genesis 29. verse. last: of Judah, of whom
were the Jews, he was called (...) because his mother said, she would confess
Gods name. To God we are not Iehudim if we take to our selves a name: but we
must wear our name to Gods glory, and not be ashamed: but when we are ashamed
of it, we care not for it, we confess it not, Mat. 10.32. the duty is plain,
Will ye confess me before men? I will confess you before my Father: Are ye
ashamed of me before men? I will be ashamed of you before my Father. Revel.
3.8. When there come many evil works, yet this weighs them all, that they
had not denied his name: as on the contrary, Revel. 14.9. When a man comes to
receive and wear the mark of the Beast, and his name; then a portion is given
him in the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone.

The second, of the outward, may be comprehended under Confessing, and it is
called defending, when we hear it blasphemed: God says, Esaias 59.16. his truth
went down into the judgment seat, and through the streets, in every place,
and none would open his mouth to defend and speak well of it: and therefore,
when he saw none would do it, he will make his own arms to serve; and
therefore we see how terrible and fearful a judgment he threatens them in
the end of the chapter.

3. That that is contrary in his part, is the doing as the Scribes and Sadduces
do; they come to Christ and say, Thou art a good man, how say thou, is it
reason to pay tribute to Caesar or no? Some say, for disputations sake it is
lawful for them to defend wicked opinions and assertions in Religion. This may
be done in necessity. Now out of the case of necessity, a man is bound, as
David says, to make mention of his name; that is, to use it, in his speech, to
show himself mindful of him, Genesis 50.3. because of the great mourning the
Egyptians made for Jacobs death; therefore in recompense, the Inhabitants
called the name of the place of his burial, a place of mourning. Though it be
said, Deuteronomy. 4.9. Take heed ye forget not. Forget, says Jerome, it is
impossible they should; but he tells how; If you forget me, and behave your
selves so in your speeehes, as that there is no man but would think you have
forgotten him. When a man shall live so, that nothing concerning the praise of
God comes into his mouth in seven years. It is the fault of many: And though
they say they have not forgotten, yet there can be nothing gathered, but that
they have: and so, rarum erat nomen Jehovae, a reverend mentioning of the name
of God was rare in some men's mouths: Prove. 10.31. it is said, that the just
man's mouth, does meditari sapientiam, meditate wisdom; that is, speak of
something that may redound to Gods glory; and Prove. 10.11. and 12.18. he
calls the tongue of a wise man, venam vitae and ipsam salutem, a vein of
life, and health it self; out of which there may return glory to God, and
health to himself. But of a fools mouth, he says, Pro. 15.2. it does
ebullire, it bableth and foameth out vanity and foolishness: The word he uses
is vanity, that is, there is no good nor profitable use of it. So that mentio,
and not only that, but honorifica mentio, an honorable mention; out of the
case of necessity, must serve the turn: for a man to speak of the name of
God, as God, Exodus 9.16. he will therefore show his judgments upon Pharaoh;
because he will have men speak of him through the World. That is the first, it
shall be sylva orationis.

In this mentioning we must have three things.

1. It must be often and greatly spoken off, (...), for this is the end of the
great wonders, Exodus 9.16. narrare nomen ejus, to declare his name; of this
has been spoken before.

2. That it must be well spoken off, (...), 3. Reverently, (...). For the
second, (...). for blessing Gods name, Psalm. 72. ver. ult. Blessed be his
glorious name for ever: for the revenge of the wicked; as the Fathers, when
they talk of this, they say it is the Epiphonema: David expresses it, Psalm.
70.4. they shall say always this Epiphonema, The Lord be praised, and Psalm.
58.11. there is an Epiphonema after a judgment: Surely there is a God that
judges the earth; and Psalm. 124.5. when they are delivered, they shall say,
Praised be God, etc. but, praised be God that has not given us over for a pray
to their teeth: and Psalm. 35.27. when he sends a blessing, and prosperity;
then Praised be God, which shows himself to have pleasure in the prosperity
of his servant. This speaking well of God, and converting the judgment or
blessing into an honorable mention of his name is commanded.

Contrary to this, when a man receives mercy, and it is not great enough, he
grudgeth, and is not thankful for it; and a judgment, and it is too great;
and then commonly he murmureth; and every thing he converteth to the dispraise
of God: he learneth not to bless God, whether he give or take away; as Job did.

3. (...); A reverent speaking of a thing; whose contrary (as the Hom. makes
opposition betwixt sanctifying and profaneness) is, making common. Whereas,
Levit. 22.32. a man counts of it, as a common thing, and gives it no more
reverence. When a man makes account and uses the name of God, as a stone
lying in the street, that is to be looked at: when a man talks of serious
matters, as of Gods Predestination, etc. without any sense of it; there is no
(...), reverence in their talk; much less in those, 1 Samuel 28. that use his
name to Sorcery and Witchery, etc. but least of all, Levit. 24.15, 16. in
Blasphemy. This for the respects out of the case of necessity.

There comes a third thing, in regard of applying Gods name, to the Actions;
which be, first, either our own; secondly, or other men's.

1. To our own, there is a commandment, Col. 3.17. omnia quaecunque facitis,
etc. and whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do them in the name of the Lord,
that is, every action you take in hand, sanctitfie it; how is that? as David,
Psalm. 124.8. our help is in the name of the Lord that made heaven and earth.

2. To others, Deuteronomy. 10.8. applied to the Levites; Imponetis nomen meum illis,
and benedicetis illis, ye shall put my Name upon them and shall bless them:
how that is, David shows, Psalm. 129.8. We wish you good luck in the name of
the Lord: Contrary to this, is to curse, Iam. 3.9. Therewith bless we God the
Father, and therewith curse we men. Ephesians. 4.3. When we curse God with his
name: that is, as Augustine says, Quando faciunt Deum carnificem suum, when
they make God their Executioner, and say, Now God confound them; he must be
their Executioner. For God has given his name for a strong tower of defense.
And thus much for our Speech; now for our Actions.

There follow two for our outward actions, making them glorious: that is, Mat.
5.16. that we deal so in our actions, that they may see our good works and
glorify our heavenly Father; that is, 2 Timothy 2.19. Every man that takes the
name of Jesus in his mouth, let him depart from iniquity: for the wickedness
of the Child polluteth the Father; Levit. 21.9. If the daughter of a Priest
commit fornication, she polluteth her Father: So do the wicked the name of God,
Psalm. 50. he is our Father, when we take his name upon us, and do not glorify
him as we should, nor depart from iniquity; we do what we can to make him
polluted. There are many careless and notorious men; and yet Psalm. 50. they
will take the covenant of God in their mouths, and talk of points of
Religion. This must not be done, Romans 2.24. to wound Gods name by our evil
conversation, and cause others to sin.

The second in this point, is the commandment of a Free Vow, Psalm. 119.108.
Lord I beseech thee accept the free offerings of my mouth, and teach me thy
judgments; and Psalm. 76.11. that a man should make a freewill offering to God;
insomuch as God has done so many things for us, we should not only do the
things commanded of God, but vow our selves.

Now as touching the use or necessity of Gods name in an Oath, the commandment
is, Deuteronomy. 6.13. Thou shall fear the Lord, and swear by his name; and Deuteronomy.
10.20. Thou shall fear, serve, and cleave to God, and swear by his name.

In Vaine] To understand this, we must note in every action, Three things; the
1. End. 2. Agent. 3. Work.


These three being marked, we shall soon know what it is to take Gods name in
vain.

First, we know, in the chief signification, that which wants an end, and is
done to no end, is said to be in vain: as Levit. 26.16. You shall sow your
seed in Vain: you sow your seed to get a harvest; and you hope for it: You
shall have no harvest, your enemies shall eat it up. So it is of Gods name; he
that for no end lifts up Gods name, does it in Vain: Therefore we must
look cui bono? what fruit have ye of it? the fruit and profit, is our end: So
if we do no good, it is done in vain, Prove. 26.7. All other fair shows, are
like straight and well fashioned legs, which yet cannot go. Frustra pulchras
habet tibias claudus; if it be not the due end. Now the great and chief end is
the glory of God; it is that that he requires; he would impart all the
blessedness he has upon us; and requires nothing again of us, but glory. To
which if we bring no profit, we must be accounted of him, as Nabal was to
David, 1 Samuel 25.21. David had done magood turns for Nabals shepherds, he
desired nothing but a little meat, and could not have it: Therefore he said,
All that I have done for him is in vain. So it is in the case of Gods glory;
God does all for his own glory: so if that come not by us, then all that he
has done is in vain.

Secondly, under this great end, is next, the health of our selves, and our
brethren, Phil. 2.16. he says, he has labored in vain; so if there be not
sought things tending to Gods glory, to our neighbors edifying, and our own
souls health, it is in vain, and to no end. The first, Vain is ex privatione
finis, when it wants an End.

2. Yet if there be an end, we must look to the Agent, that is, the swearer,
the person; consequently upon that part in him, that is the principal agent;
that is, his soul and heart: For if his soul be (...) Rhachah, that is, a
vain soul, it comes not with due advisement and reverence: as Prove. 21.6.
if it be Actio erroris, an action of error; that is set against constancy,
though he have a good end, yet if he do not so stably as is said, it is in
vain; that is, lightness: if any come to take the name of God, and if he be
not res stabilis, and he come not with due reverence; there is another taking
in vain: When it is (...) Hebhel; a light thing, as smoke, or chafe; and so
fit to be carried away with every blast.

3. In respect of the Work; 3. Work.
in that there is a third vanity, when a thing bears a show of that it is not
this, vanitas opponitur veritati, this vanity is opposed to vertiy; want of
stability, want of truth. So Jer. 10.15. It is a vain thing, a thing of
error, (i. e.) when the thing is taken from a Lie, for look what truth is in
natural things, the same is truth in moral things. If it want his justice in
action, it is vain; if it want his truth in affection, it is vain.

Of the two manners, whereby the name of God is lifted up by us, the one was as
a burden, which is applied to the necessary use of it; and being necessary, it
comes first to be entreated off and handled, I mean that taking of Gods name
up by swearing by it; wherein albeit God be not more, nor so much glorified, as
in the other kind, yet in regard of our necessary use of it, the precept has
almost taken up the whole commandment, as little mention of it.

For the duty. As first for the necessity of it, upon what occasion, after this
manner it is expedient that all controversies, ( Heb. 6.16.) and strifes should
not be continued, but have an end; and this cannot be, except one part have a
confirmation above the other. And for confirmation of these, we see God, Gen
18.21. when he in his judgment will go down, ut certo cognoscat, to know it
surely; that he may proceed on a sure ground. Now this proceeding where it may
be had by argument or proof, it is best: So, if it can be, as we see the
practice of Joseph to his brethren, Genesis 42.20. this was his trial of their
truth, if they brought Benjamin. Where Argument and reason wants, there we
must come to witnesses, which is the second course, Deuteronomy. 19.15. where argument
or proof wants, that the matter should be established in the mouth of two or
three witnesses. And because many times it falls out, that not only proof,
but also witnesses want; then, as Numb. 5.13. the man being in jealousy upon a
suspicion of his wifes adultery, the woman not being taken in the very deed,
then as it is verse. 19. she shall swear that she has not defiled her self.
This necessity, as many times in regard of the action, it is hidden: so always
in these two respects it falls out that when there is an assurance to be had,
de occultis cordium, of the hidden secrets of the heart, which cannot be known
by any external proof, Jer. 17.9. who knows the heart? there is no
knowledge of it. And secondly, when it is concerning things to come, Eccl. 8.7.
who knows that which is to come? then comes an Oath to men: they cannot be
wise, because they cannot know what will come hereafter; so for promises: of
these three cannot be by witness and argument any (...), or confirmation had.
Now in regard of the secrets of a man's heart, and of uncertaintyes in things to
come, here comes in the division of Oaths. Of secret things, some are de
facto, past, here is jus jurandum assertorium, an oath of assertion; some are
to come, and there jus jurandum promissorium, an oath of promise. Then when as
the argument of a man's will, and testimony of his mouth falls out, in these
cases there is no way but to fly to God, (i.e.) to make him a witness; and not
only a witness, but a Judge and a revenger, if he be called to an untruth, for
it is nothing else, but calling him to witness.

In this place falls the two parts of an oath according to these two, First,
where God is called as a witness, whether it be true;

Secondly, the other where it is called forth as a Revenger, if it be false.

The first is called sub Deo test: Contestatio; a taking to witness; so did
God himself, Numb. 14.21. vivo ego, as truly as I live; so the Fathers in the
old Testament began to use it, Judge. 8.10. vivit Jehovah, as the Lord lives;
and so I shall see the effect of that I promise.

The second part, Sub deo vindice, this is called Execratio, that is, the curse
of themselves, if it be not true, as he may well witness to it. And again,
Levit. 26. and Deuteronomy. 28. he takes this order; but this also in relation to
that place: where are all the threatenings of his revenge, Sic faciat mihi
Dominus, and addat, the Lord do so to me and more also, if that they have not
spoken the truth. The first plague and the second, it comes in those terms,
God do this to me, and add this also. So it is used by Ely, 1 Samuel 3.17. God
do so to thee, and more: And when he is brought to this, that he has affirmed
it, and God is his witness, and if God be called to an untruth, that he has
desired against his soul: then (as in Greek) it is called (...), an hedge or
enclosure, he has hedged and enclosed himself with the truth of God, and his
judgment to perform it; so in the part of the swearer: he that has sworn,
is holden as it were persistere in dicto, and praestare pollicita, to persist
in his saying, and to perform his promise.

Now contra, in regard of the party to whom it is sworn; it is called in
Hebrew (...) or (...) that is, a safety, or satisfying; which shows that he
must be contented and satisfied, and that he must be filled, that is,
satisfied: And therefore it signifies to Swear, and to fill to Satiety, and
the Latin translation of Jerome, pro jure habere, that is, now that I have
promised, I have bound my self to it, even es it were done by a Law; here is
(...), an end of contention. And so of the necessity of an oath, and upon what
causes oaths were first: But our necessity is small, except God have glory by
it. Then to apply this to the scope of Gods glory; there comes a great
portion of glory to God in an Oath: For first our rules of reason tell us, that
Nihil confirmatur nisi per certius, there is no confirmation but by a thing
more steadfast. Then there is a great honor to God, when Demonstration and all
fail, that his name should be Turris fortissima, the most strong tower; more
certain then all reasons and witnesses, etc. so that we count it as Prove.
18.10. The name of the Lord is a strong tower, the righteous runs to it, and
is exalted. (And the Heathen man says, (...), of all things men set most by
their faith) When all fail, we may take Sanctuary here: This is the first part
of the honor of God.

2. In regard of the cause, as before, his greatest honor, the ground of all
honors, Faith; that this proceeds from a great Faith. In regard of the
former part of an oath, that is, Contestation; that we bear witness with
tongue that are present: that we believe as 1 Cor. 4.5. that God will lighten
all things that are in darkness, that God will make all manifest: He sees all
things, even the very secrets of the heart. And secondly in regard of the
execution: as Romans 12.19. that he will punish: mihi ultio and ego retribuam,
Vengeance is mine and I will repay it: Herein we believe that God has power to
bring his judgments upon us. This belief, that he has vengeance to execute,
turns greatly to Gods glory; and therefore was it, that God was contented as
it were to lend his name to swear by it, to make an end of their questions.
Thus we see how God has his glory hence.

The next thing is to see what we are commanded and forbidden.

1. The affirmative part, that we shall take his Name to end our quarrels, his
name shall come as a sanctuary to quit or condemn, in which we shall enclose
our selves, and satisfy our Law.

The first is jurare to swear; that is commanded flatly, Deuteronomy. 6.13. set close
to that which was the affirmative part of the last Commandment, but more
effectually and vehemently, Esaias 45.23. I live, and have sworn by my self,
that every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue swear by me. For this cause
there comes another division of Oaths: he has not only taken order that we
should be willing that the oath should pass, Exodus 22.11. which they call
(...), a voluntary Oath; but also, 2 Chronicles. 6.22. that if they still not be
willing, there shall be (...) an oath of imposition: conrsticte jurare, to make
him swear precisely and punctually: And Levit. 5.1. if any man hear an Oath,
that should return to Gods glory, and do not utter it but hold his peace, it
shall be accounted to him as sin. So we see what Gods will is herein, what he
commands; and then the great end of Gods glory, and necessity of men.

Now for examples of these; David, Psalm. 63.12. Laudabuntur omnes and
laetabuntur: qui jurabunt per eum, every one that swears by him, shall glory
and rejoice: Therefore we see this commendation. All the Saints have passed
under it. 1. God himself Genesis 22.16. I have sworn by my self says the Lord;
because thou have done this thing, etc. verse. 17. therefore I will surely
bless thee. 2. After God, the caelestiall spirits, Revel. 10.6.
The Angel lifted up his hand to Heaven and swore by him that lives for ever
more.

So the division concerning the case first, of Gods glory, to be confirmed; and
secondly, the benefit of our brethren. For the glory of God, a famous Oath, 2 Chronicles. 15.14. of Asa and the people.

They swear to the Lord with a loud voice, for the observation of David's
Religion. 4. Likewise, Nehem. 10.29. The chief of them received it for their
brethren, and they came to the curse and to the oath, to walk in Gods Law, etc.

For the other part, in regard of man's benefit; the wealth of mankind. First we
see it in mutual leagues and confae deracies; the example of Abraham, Genesis
21.24. betwixt Abimelech and him. Secondly, likewise for a conspiracy public,
Judge. 21.1. Moreover the men of Israel swore, saying, None of us shall give his
daughter to the Benjamites to wise. Thirdly, for the receiving or uniting of
Nation to Nation, Joshua 9.19. To the Gibeonites Ioshuah made peace, and league
with them; that he would suffer them to live, and they swear: and the breach of
it was punished, 2 Samuel 21.2.

2. For obedience and reciprocal duties between the Prince and Subjects; we
have examples and commandments.

First, of the Prince, 2 Kings 11.12. of Ioash. Secondly of the Subjects, 1
Kings 1.29.
For the succession of Solomon, David's oath: And the King swore, as the Lord
lives, etc. For Subjects to him, 1 Samuel 24.23. David swore to Saul: And all
the Subjects took an oath for the preserving of David's life, 2 Samuel 21.17. And
the men of David swore to him, etc.

Thirdly, in a case of safeguard of a man's life: Ioshuah 2.12. And in regard of
Marriage, Abraham's example, Genesis 24.2. therefore Abraham said to the eldest
servant, etc. Put thy hand under my thigh, and swear by the Lord, etc.

Fourthly, in Litigious Suits and Causes, Exodus 22.8. and 11.

And as these come under the form of a Public oath; so for Private oaths in
the New Testament, in remembrance, in prayers, and in love. Paul seareth not in
Romans 1.9. and Phil. 1.8. to call God to witness for a matter of suspicion, 2
Cor. 1.23. Now I call God to record unto my soul, etc. all this tends to
this end, that we seeing the two maine reasons; the exact Commandment of God:
his own example, and the Fathers in the Old Testament, and the Apostles in the
New: We might be far from the vain opinion of the Anabaptists, that are gain
sayers of this first part, and hold that we may not swear at all; grounding on
Christ's words, Swear not at all. For Mat. 5.17. we know that Christ came not
to break the Law, nor to undo the least jot of the Law; and if it had been
his meaning to have had us not to swear at all, he would have said, Non
assumes nomen Dei omnino, thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God at
all: For Christ's words, (...), they should not swear at all: Sure it is, that
you must mark the scope; for it must be referred to the scope of the place:
which is to reconcile the Law from the Pharisees corrupt interpretation; for
they thought if any man swore by any other name, so that he swear not by the
name of Jehovah, sumere nomen Iehovae, and only frustra, in vain; that he
might swear by any other name. Some take also jurare to be put for pejurare.
Augustine in his 27. Homily, and 30. de verbis Apostoli, handles it
sufficiently and largely.

To swear is commanded, and to consent to Anabaptisme is forbidden.

The second point Affirmative, the word added here, Thou shall take the name of
God: that is, our swearing must be by the name of God, and by no other, Esaias
48.1. There are they that will swear by the name of the Lord, but not in truth
and righteousness. They that swear not by his name, take away his
praerogative; I have sworn that every tongue should swear by me. This is his
Prerogative royal; this it one of his privileges: therefore it is often
called, the Oath of the Lord, Iusjurandum Iehovae; So dignari alios honor hoc,
or to translate the praerogative of God from him, that is the thing that is
forbidden: and that is two ways.

First, if we leave out the name of God, and in stead of it take another, as
Amos 8.14. they had forgotten God, and swore by the Sin of Samaria, and said,
Thy God O Dan lives, etc.

Secondly, when we can be content to name him, but so, as to add another name
to it, Zeph. 1.5. Vivit Jehovah, and vivit Malcham, that swear by Jehovah, and
that swear by Malcham; this joining, whether it be false god, or any creature:
they are both unlawful and forbidden. The first, Exodus 23.13. You shall not
make mention of the name of other gods; and Joshua 23.7. the very same is,
Psalm. 16.4. But they that run after another god, shall have great trouble;
their drink and blood offerings will I not offer, neither make mention of
their names within my lips. Hosea 2.17. I will take away the name of Baalim
out of their mouth, they shall forget him. Zach. 13.2. and Ier. 5.7. If any
swear by that that is no god, it is an abomination. For in this there is a
three fold injury: First, to God, that requires his glory to be done to
himself.

Secondly, to our selves, Hebr. 6.16. he that swears, must swear by a
greater: And therefore he sets it above himself; and if he swear by a
creature, he makes it greater then himself.

Thirdly, and to the Creature it self, which is contented with his own place:
So by the Law, which God has set in it, and would be avenged of us.

This is the second, when any Idol or creature has been abused, as by this
Bread, we confirm our controversies.

The third is in vanum, in vain: And that that is opposite to it, is commonly
in swearing, taken out of Jerome, Hom. in Jer. 4.2. for he speaking there of a
people that should swear aright, he says, they should swear, in veritate,
judicio, and in justicia, in truth, in judgment, and in righteousness. These
are says Jerome 3. comites juramenti, the three comitants of an oath: If we
have not these, the other may be refused.

First, for truth: We have a commandment, Levit. 19.12. that is opposed
against perjury. To call God to witness to confirm falsehood. Augustine, Vt
hic est detestanda bellua! Whosoever does this, seems to be a man, and
becomes a beast that thinks so. The Heathen and the Jews, as says
Diodorus Siculus, Perjurii paena, capite plectatur, Does he call God to
witness to an untruth? Let him lose his head.

This is done; First if a man do testify falsehood: Secondly, or if it be of
that he doubts of.

Secondly, False, either when we know it to be false. 2. Or perhaps it is true:
but falsum; commentitium, putative, when a man will affirm it will fall out
otherwise; he is guilty. And this in Assertorio Iuramento, in an oath of
assertion: When any of these is done, there is Perjury.

In Promissorio, in an oath of promise; when there is not certum propositum, we
do not purpose, si non statuat, aut si non perstet, either not to purpose
then, or not to purpose when it should be performed.

Examples of it, Mar. 14.71. for affirming of falsehood, Iuramentum Petri,
Peter's oath; a fearful thing, it cost many tears. For the other, not
performing, in Promissorio, under an oath of promise; 2 Samuel 21.2. There was an
oath made, and by covenant, Josh. 9.15. So Joshva made peace and league with
them, that he would suffer them to live; also the Princes of the congregation
swore unto them.

Secondly, for justice; that holds either altogether, or for the most part in
Iuramento promissorio only, in an oath of promise; truth holds in both, Esaias
8.2. that is, when a man swears to that which is possible and honest; it is a
just oath, else it is unjust. If it be inhonestum, dishonest; then it is not
Ius, in justice; if impossible, then it is not Iurandum, an oath to be sworn:
Examples, 1 Samuel 28.10. Saul took counsel at the Witch, lent her an oath,
which was inhonest and unlawful. Impossible was the oath of them, Acts 23.4.
that swore they would neither eat nor drink, till they had killed Paul. After
a man has taken such an oath, there does, emergere aliquid impossible, some
impossibility arise. This impossible it may be, e principio, a thing that
always was impossible; or secondly, emergens post Iuramentum, or an
impossibility emergent after the oath. Augustine on the oath that Herod took,
Mark 6.23. says, That of it self it was not unlawful nor evil, and might
have been performed if a thing possible and lawful had been required:
therefore when she asked his head, it was emergens illicitum. For there is no
oath of promise, but it does elicere, it is a drawing out; or understand these
two: as Joseph to his Mistress, How can I do it? that is, How can I honestly
do it. In malis promissis nescire fidem, unlawful oaths are better broke
then kept. The reason is, there is exitus sine tertio, when the oath is past;
he must choose whether to keep in that sin, or fall into two other; First,
into unlawful murder; Secondly, superstition in the foolish keeping of the
oath; into superstition, if he think it not to be broken, or murder if he
do it.

3. In judicio, in Judgment, that is, as Hierome says, In discretione, in
discretion; it stands upon this point, to know the nature of an oath to be,
not bonum per se, a thing good of it self; but bonum necessarium, a good in
necessity: and necessarium extra terminos necessitatis, non est necessarium
neque bonum, a necessary good, but in case of necessity, is neither necessary
nor good; as a Potion is necessary, but when a man needs it. So consequently,
in judgment, a man must so stand in it, that he come to an oath necessarily:
And that is naught, extra terminos necessitatis, when there is no necessity; as
not because the oftener he does it, the better it is; but propter defectum: The
case is made plain by David's doing, Mar. 2.25. when he had need, he fed
himself with the Shewbread; which, if he had had other bread, he would not
have done; necessity makes things good, which otherwise were not good to do.

So in case of necessity a man may come to swear, else not: In a case of
necessity we may come to the Sanctuary, not to fire a Beacon; To take in this
necessity, there are two things: First to take it reverently, not rashly,
Preac. 4.5. and Eccl. 8. Secondly, to take it as an holy thing, and therefore
Levit. 22.23. (...), etc.

this is a judgment then to be heard of: and consequently because this
includes both vanitatem finis, the vanity of an end; opposed to profit, and
opposed to soundness and steadfastness; withal, as he must know the time, so
a man must know what it is, Psalm. 111.9. The Prophet sets down (holy and
reverent is his name) to holy, is opposed pollute, Levit. 22.32. Neither shall
ye pollute my holy name. And to make common, Acts 10.15. Reverence, that is,
Fear; against that commonly is opposed Rashness, whether it be of anger, or
grief, or an headdy affection, outgoeth an oath, Eccles. 5.1. Be not rash with
thy mouth, look well to thy feet; and they need less looking too: these two
offend, in judicio, in judgment. If a man use it commonly, if rashly in the
case of necessity: So Preach. 8.2. I advertise you, that ye have a due regard
to the word of a King; but much more to the Oath of God: Out of the case of
necessity, we must not swear a truth; but we must have it in price and
reverence. Preach. 5.2. A reason why rashness in swearing is condemned; God is
in Heaven, and thou in the Earth: and in the sixth of the same, he shows
commonnesse in swearing should be condemned; and the times of necessity, are
not commonly sine judicio, without judgment.

In publico juramento, in the oath of imposition, there is good order taken: by
taking order in regard of breaking judgment, that nulli impuberes, none under
fourteen years of age, should be admitted to swear; that were not, nor that
had been proved to forswear himself before. That men should not swear, for
fear of the inconvenience crept into the Sacrament, as 1. Cor. 11.21. men
should not swear after any meat taking, lest that might have overthrown their
discretion.

4. Lastly, that they should swear uncovered, and with an admonition before;
and the Book of GOD laid before them; only to incite the inward deliberation,
or judgment concerning this fearful action we have in hand.

In the voluntary oath, there has been no order taken, but rashly upon every
vain perturbation stirred up in us, there comes an oath, and herein we are
so rash, that we make Gods Name our parenthesis. 1. Sam. 25.33. David moved
with the affection and grief of unkindnesse, swears upon the sudden: but
after being let to see what an oath it was, he blesses God for sending Abigail
to him on the other side, 1. Sam. 14.28. Saul touched with a greater desire of
the victory, then to the request of God, swears, that if any touched bread
or drink till sun down, he should die. And we see the great evil success
that followed on it. Every fool uses this in every foolish speech: we may
speak of it with grief.

For the commonnes of it, and the doing of that to him, that we would be loath
to do to any other, i: e: every half hour, and for every trifle calling him
out of Heaven, to confirm our quarrels: and so one says, We turn Gods
Sanctuary into a brothell house: making the Name of God like an harlots house.
Aug. lib. 1. confessionum, Cap. 16. touched with an holy grief, breaks out
into these words; Vae tibi flumen moris humani, cursed be the streams of the
customs of men; quis resistet tibi? quando non siccaberis? quousque evolues
Ecclesiae silios in mare magnum and formidolosum? quod vix transcendunt? when
will this dry up? it carries them even as a strong stream, into that fearful
lake, that they which are in the Ship, can scarsly escape it. Per te aguntur
flagitia, and non putantur flagitia: by this customary swearing detestable
sins are committed, which are not thought to be sins. And as he says,
Sermon. 30. verbis Apostoli: it is as the slipperinesse of the member: quia
lingua in udo posita est, the tongue is seated in a moist place. And therefore,
James. Cap. 3. gives great charge of it especially. For the hand and foot not
so much. And saint Aug. counsel upon that place is, Quanto illa citius
movetur, and facilius, tanto tu adversus illam fixius ito. domabis, si
vigilabis: vigilabis autem, si timebis: timebis si te Christianum esse,
recorderis, etc. The more quick and nimble the tongue is be thou the more
steddie, and resolved against it, thou shall tame it, if thou watch over it,
thou shall watch over it, if thou fear it, thou shall fear it, if thou
remembrest that thou art, a Christian. Si cras factum non fuerit, non fiat
juramentum hodie, pignus fiet cras, cras non omnino, and triduo moritur pestis
illa a die qua laboramus. Sicut vigilabis, sic vinces. And of himself he
adds: Juravimus, and nos passim incidimus in istam teterrimam consuetudinem:
sed ex quo die DEO servire incepimus, and quantum malum sit vidimu^, timuimus
vehementer, and veternosam consuetudinem timore excussimus. I have been a
swearer my self, I have had this custom very riefe, and it would have brought
me to death, but since I fixed my heart to serve GOD and considered what great
evil is in it, I was set in a trembling.

Then for these voluntary oaths privately taken upon us, it may be inquired,
whether they are not in cases lawful: we doubt they are. Then as Augustine
says, for private oaths: quantum ad me attinet, non juro: sed quantum mihi
videtur, magna necessitate compulsus, cum videam nisi sic faciam mihi non
credi: and ei qui crederat magnum, and ei qui non crederet incommodum: then,
hac perpensa ratione, and consideratione librata; cum magno timore and
reverentia coram Deo dico, and novit Christus, quod hoc est in animo meo. For
my own part, I swear not, yet I conceave were I necessarily thereunto
compelled, as when I see if I do not swear, I shall not be believed, and
that my word would be profitable to him that would believe me, and
prejudicial to him that would not, in this case this reason truly wayed and
considered with what fear and reverence I use this form of speech, Before
God, or this, Christ knows I speak from my heart. And after he says, quod
meum est, est est: quod amplius est praeter est, non est jurantis, sed non
credentis. For mine own part, I would never wish to say, but est, est; non,
non; yea, yea; nay, nay. But it is the incredulity of the other party.

The fourth Rule, is in the Psalm. 24.4. Et non juratus est dolose proximo suo,
and has not sworn deceitfully unto his neighbor, it must be spiritual. Our
case must not be, juravi lingua, mentem injuratam gero, my tongue swore, but
my mind never meant it: it was so odious, that the whole company hissed at
it. Man must not take Gods Name in guile, but mean it from his heart. The
heathen men saw it, that lex est spiritualis, that it must be a spiritual
oath; the whole judgment and will must submit it self to it: otherwise (as
Isidore says) his rule is: look which party it is that meant the deceit, God
will understand, and take the oath, as the other party took it: if he that
swore, had a fraudulent mind, non vt ille, qui juravit, sed vt is, cui juratum
est; so it shall be.

The fifth Rule. The means we have before Aug. cave facilitatem: The Means.
he begins with it there: de facilitate nascitur consuetudo: ex
consuetudine perjurium: ex perjurio, blasphemia. By easiness we come to a
custom: by a custom, to have no Religion in swearing, for from that sometimes
to bestow it upon a lie; and by a lie to perjurie: and by perjurie you shall be
in a way to blasphemy: as Jobs wife: Bless God, and die: id est, curse God.
And if higher, to the fearful sin, the sin against the holy Ghost:
obstandum igitur initiis: we must therefore look to it betimes in the
beginning. These are the links of the chain of an oath.

2. Again, as he there says, beware of that which is not a perfect oath, but
a way to an oath, as per fidem nostram, per salutem meam: by my faith, by my
salvation: not as CHRIST said Amen, amen. But when a man says, and comes to
swear per fidem meam, (...), id est, an execration, that is, a part of an
oath: It is, as Augustine says, obligo me per fidem meam Deo: so when a man
says, per salutem meam, he does obligare salutem suam Deo. If it be not true,
the gift of belief, and the salvation of his soul, he desires to be taken
away from him. And God may take it away, if it be his will, in that hour. This
is a way, whereby Gods Name comes to be porfaned, and God first displeased.

3. The third, is the reading and the abridging of two infirmities or evils.
1. Impaciencie of spirit: 2. Vainglory.
These bring us ad facilitatem juramenti, to an easiness of swearing. Ps. 4.4.
Be angry, and sin not. The same Fathers: The first sin is Anger; if a man
be of an angry spirit, it comes not without an oath: in an angry man's
mouth, nothing is so soon as an oath. Therefore, one way to rid our selves of
it, is as GOD says, that we be slow to wrath: that our spirit be long within
us.

In glory men will seem magnificent, to swear, to make their oaths as true
as Gospel.
2. For the second; a vain credit, or glory; every man desires that every
word he speaks should be esteemed as the word of GOD, as an Oracle, or to
be as true as the Gospel: or else there comes an oath. It is well said of
one, There is nothing that they desire so much, as that they make so light
account of their faith, as do they that make shipwreck of it at every blow.
That they should not be lightly accounted of; and so they come to be lightly
accounted of: ideo leviter aestimant, ne leviter aestimentur: and leviter
aestimando, leviter aestimantur.

4. Lastly, the judgments of GOD particularly considered: there have been
Sermons of them: there has no commandment had so many visible judgments, of
GOD, as the breach of this, in no age.

5. The Signs. To stand in the due consideration of an oath, The Signs.
as it is [massah] a burden, a taking it up as an heavy thing: if an oath be
unto us as an heavy thing: as we would mark what signs there may be drawn
of it. There is the first part of a burden, we put not more upon you, than
you can bear: Act. 15.28.
the avoiding of it, every man is loath to take more upon him than needs he
must: but otherwise more burdens than he must bear, he will not take upon
him. Then the first is, when we come to it very hardly or unwillingly.

2. The second is, 2. Chron. 15.15. When a man must take up an heavy thing,
he goes to it with all his strength, vt been feratur onus, that he may the
better carry it. For they did swear to GOD with all their heart and soul,
etc. id est, their understanding was occupied in estimation of GODS Law: id
est, every part of their soul was occupied, their members trembled: to swear
with all his heart, his affections being stricken with a due fear.

3. The last, Matthew. 11.28. CHRIST says there, from the nature and property
of those that are laden, that they would be refreshed, and be desirous to be
unladen: so if our desire be to be rid of it so soon as we may be: If when
we have entered an oath, presently: I have sworn, says David, Psalm. 119.106.
and will perform it. Ps. 15.5. though it be to his own disadvantage.

Last point for the keeping of this Commandment, being keepers of it, Psalm.
74.10. he speaks there of those, that do irritare nomen Domini; when the
name of God is provoked (a thing that we are to take heed of;) if we know the
persons to be vaineglorious and heady, in their oaths; yet we seem to
consent, and as it were irritare nomen Domini. Therefore these two are to be
taked heed of. First, either to deal so, as that we wring not our an oath, nor
that may be provoked. Secondly, when it is provoked and is not kept, as Ezekiel.
17.12. malicious and fraudulent interpretations.

Next to the nature of an Oath, comes juramentum promissorium, the Vow; and
for the affinity of both, the one is to be handled after the other; A Vow.
because the same conditions are annexed to the Vow, as to a Promise. The
difference is this, that the oath is necessary, the vow is a thing of our own
accord voluntarily offered. And again, that an oath is betwixt man and man;
but a vow betwixt Us and God. This vow is, when by the particular consideration
of Gods graces in us, we bind our selves, either secretly in heart, or else
outwardly in word before others, to yield him any duty, which by necessity we
are not bound to do. It may be performed many ways; and they may all be
reduced to two.

The limitation of some general Commandment, to a particular; as this, To
give alms, it is a general commandment; but to restrain my self to this
person, or to give this quantity of my goods, yearly, and weekly; we know it
falls not under any precept; neither is commanded specially: So these
particular restraints fall under the Vow.

Again, for the second he handled before; that we call sepes mandati, the
enclosing or fence of the Commandment. When a man can be content to abridge
himself of any lawful thing, which Christian liberty makes common to all,
least he fall into unlawful things. Or thus, When a man by the use of any
lawful or indifferent thing, finds himself less able and less meet to
sanctify the name of God: and so enters into a vow with himself, to abstain
in that behalf. Such a Vow seemed that of the Rechabites. Jere. 35.6. So we
see how the matter of a Vow stands either in binding of general
commandments, to a particular person: or in using or not using those things
which Christian liberty makes lawful: according as his own experience shall
find most profitable for him, that his course in godliness may be more swift.
It is true that David, 1. Chron. 29.14. says, quae de manu tua accepimus, ea
offerimus tibi. When the people had offered willingly to the LORD, this is his
Vow and Confession: that they gave nothing, but they had received it. And a
Father says, Dedit autem sua Dominus, vt reciperet sua: and recipiendo sun
daret se: the LORD gave his own, that he might receave his own again, and
receaving his own, that he might give himself: and with himself, all that
he has: a greater gift than we can possess in this life. Thus we see the
ground of it in the Prophet, Psa. 76.11. vovete Domino and reddite: Vow unto
the LORD, and pay. To him that promises, and to him that performs, in both
respects there is a thanks due: even for a bare promise some thanks is due;
though the bare promise be but as a blast of wind out of a golden pair of
bellows: but the great thanks is to the performance. So is it in these two
words, vovete and reddite, Vow and pay. The great and general thanks pertain
to reddite, to our paying: because we bind him to our selves: that is, for it
he accompteth himself debtor to us, only for the Vows sake.

Now to come to the necessity of a Vow for our parts, where our hearts are to
do good, lutum DEI, as GODS clay: The Necessity of Vow*
yet they are caera diaboli, the devils wax, easier turned to evil then to
good: and for perseverance in evil, mala voluntas est plus quam voluntas, a
will unto evil, is more then a will: but in doing and continuing in good, it
is minus quam voluntas, it deserves not to be called a will: it is a volo,
nolo; I will, and I will not: Therefore, it is expedient, yea, necessary to
make Vows, to set our mind and will in a stay, that we cannot go back: to
stay our minds in good, and keep them from evil. Augustine confuteth those,
that think a man should never do any thing by Vow: because Vows being of
necessity, the Vowers being bound, deserve less thanks. In deed, says he,
if it were an outward necessity, and not assumed, it were somewhat they said:
but concerning necessity he says, foelix necessitas, quae compellit ad
meliora: that necessity is true happiness, that makes a man do that that is
best for him. This is best done, when it is done, either voto simplici, by a
bare and simple Vow; or in a solemn Vow before others. Now then besides this,
that it strengthens man's will in goodness, and so makes our deeds the more
acceptable to GOD, as the stiff and settled purpose of the sinner makes his
sin worse; so this resolution, that he will not go back, it works yet
further, and makes his good thing the better: For there is nothing that we
do under a Vow, but in this respect it becomes a Sacrifice. That we do it
vowing, because we have pledged it to GOD: And not only that, but also beside
the Vow, which is acceptable to GOD; there is a Sacrifice made to him of our
own freedom and liberty: yea, of our power. So then a man rests not on his
own person, to do these actions which he will: but he has made over his
power to GOD, and binds himself to it: so that now he rests not of
himself.

So then certain it is that men have freedom, and liberty: as it is plain
by* Deuteronomy. 23.22. If a man do not vow, he shall not sin: neither shall he
loose his freedom: but that to good natures, the rule lies more straightly upon
them: Pauciora licent illis quam vllis, quibus licent omnia. Their liberty is
less then any other liberty, that have it to do as they list. So is the
nature of the children of GOD: where they are let loose, there they strain
themselves. And so consequently in the nature it self, it must not be imposed
upon us by others; but we must be content to take it, and leave it our
selves. So we must know, that if there be any that think, We see that those
vows should flourish in the time of the Gospel: Esa. 19.^2. (...). ^.24. Rom
10.1^. dedicated their goods, etc.
because it is a matter of freedom, that Christians are to be exempted from
it; he is confuted by Esa. 19.21. he shows plainly that GOD will look for
the service of Vows: and Nahum. 1.15. more plain, applied Romans 10.15. to the
Preachers of the Gospel. We see in Act. 4. and 5. in the Apostles time, that
the consecrating of their possessions to common uses, and the laying of their
money in common, it was nothing else but the performing of a common vow. Such is
the necessity.

The next thing is this, to enquire what things GOD accepts best in this
service; and how the children of GOD have behaved themselves in this point? and
how we must.

1. We see, that they have begun with themselves, and that in two respects.
A man imposes a vow on himself, either as it is Numb. 30.14. for the humbling
of his soul, for some sin past; id est, The suffering of some temporal
affliction; as fasting, or otherwise. 2. or the vow of the Nazarite. Numb. 6.
which was nothing else, but a straight and perfect kind of living, straiter than
any other. When they were to enter upon their calling, or any such weighty
thing: and it is concluded of the Fathers that it grew especially afterward to
be an holy and solemn thing. For every one, before he gave himself to
study, and entered into the Schools of the Prophets, he was wont to separate
himself by the Vow of a Nazarite.

So secondly we find, that a man may vow suos, not only himself, but his: as
his children as Anna, 1. Sam. 1.11.28. vowed Samuel. Psalm. 119.108. Levit.
27.2. Revel. 2.1. And these are personal vows.

The other, 1. Votum reale, a vow of some thing: is either fructus labiorum, as
Psalm. 61.8. I will always sing praises to thy Name, that I may daily perform my
vows. He says, that the vows of GOD, were daily upon him. id est, he had
enjoined himself to a task concerning prayer and thanksgiving, which daily he
was to perform to him, even by virtue of a Vow.

2. So when we depart from that, and come to substantial things, as David's
vow, Psalm. 132.2. for the building of the Temple, Levit. 27. A man may vow to
GOD, an house, as Colleges. So likewise erection of Lands to the maintenance
either of Religion, or of the seeds of Religion; in the same Chapter in the
end. In Exodus 36.3. Offerings and Free-gifts: and Genesis 28.12. a certain
portion of his goods. And further, Levit. 23.38. a certain number of days,
and of times. For besides their Sabboths, they had their dies votivos, days
vowed to the Service of GOD. These are the chief heads, and all Vows are
comprehended under some one of these.

The easiness of a promise (as the Proverb goes) when a man is not master of
his own tongue, but of his purse: has made that now the former part of a Vow,
if it were nothing but vovere, merely to vow. It were easy to do, and nothing
easier than vovere, to make a vow. But as Augustine says upon Psalm. ^6. Quia
audivisti Reddite, non vis vovere; modo voluisti vovere: all the while we
talked of promising, you would vow: now ye will not: why! because ye hear of
Reddite, that you must pay your vow. For as it is no sin not to vow: and yet
it is a diminishing of perfection: because, if any vow, and performs it not,
he sins, and that grievously: insomuch as Preach. 5.4. he says, A man had
better never to have vowed, then not to think seriously, and perform
speedily, that which he has vowed. For it is nothing else but a gross
dilusion, and scoffing at his Majesty, when his promise is not kept. Prove.
20.25. it is said, that for a man to devour a thing that is sanctified, it is a
destruction: as Solomon, he had those about him, his courtiers, that would do
so to those Treasures that he had laid up, for the building of the Temple.
And when a man has made a Vow, and does not seek to pay his faith, it is a
thing that will choke his soul, and shall ever cleave to him as a snare.
Therefore, the performance must needs be thought on. And because it is but
one of the conditions, we will join the rest with it. With the purpose of
performing we must have these conditions.

1. In regard of him that voweth: Numb. 30. that he be sui juris; a free
person: and one that may promise without the consent of another: as there, the
child without the consent of the father, cannot vow: nor the wife without the
husband, nor the servant without the master.

2. And the second is, of the affinity of the nature of a promise, it must be
licitum and possibile, lawful and possible. Now what is possible, and what
impossible? There are diverse that make an hard matter to define: and therefore
have abstained from vowing. And of that comes a disallowing of vows made in
former ages: as that it were not possible for a man to vow singleness of life.
As to say that all men may do it, is dangerous: so to say that none at all may
do it, is no less dangerous. We must take heed least the heathen man rise
up against us in judgment, that says, Nolle in causa est, non posse
praetenditur, the true cause is we will not, when we pretend we cannot. So
we say, we have not the gift: in deed we want another gift, that should go
before it; the gift of great abstinence in meat and drink, which they had in
the ages before: and then came a general possibility, to vow, and to
perform. But now in our days Tertullians saying may be verefied, that
multivorantia and multinubentia must needs go together; because there are many
feasts and drinkings; therefore, there must be many marriages. And the heathen
man said, that libido is spuma ingluvici, lust is the froth of gluttony.
Therefore, men must strain, and not say they are not able.

3. The third. Vt sit licitum: that it be lawful and honest: not a frivolous
matter: such as was the shaving of the head: but such a thing as it shall be
verified of it, non debet voveri DEO, quod displicet DEO. That it may be
worthy of the LORD; to whom it is vowed. As their oath to kill Paul, it was
unlawful: if GOD would not have it paid, he would not have it vowed. This
for the matter.

4. For the time, it is set down, in Psalm. 66.13. When I was in trouble: and a
practice of it, in Numb. 26.2. For the time of affliction, binding our selves
to some general action. There the Israelites in time of danger vowed a vow:
and it was allowed. But that Jonah 1.16. a vow, not before, for deliverance,
but after deliverance; those vows that are vowed in tranquillo, in a Calm,
are most accepted of GOD.

5. The last; That before, id est, The rendering or performing of it: and that
presently, without delay. Levit. 7.15. If the Sacrifice be a Vow, it shall be
eaten the same day. And fully without commutation, or detracting from it.
Levit. 22.28. and carefully in every respect in performing it; to go rather
further then we have promised, then to come shorter. Numb. 6.11.

The rest of the duties for the Glory of GOD, are before handled.

4. The fourth Precept and Rule, is; That this Law is Spiritual: That is as
much to say, as, Because in the beginning, the Name was but an object of
speech: Esa. 29.13.

That this swearing, vowing, speaking of the Name of GOD, it returns to that
place, that all those things, if they be done with the lips only, and our
hearts be far from them: we are in the number of those, that with lips
come near; but are far off with their hearts.

A sort of people, that pervert the true worship of GOD: That the heart should
first come, and the lips attend upon it. Augustine in his tenth Book of
Confess. Cap. 33. says flete mecum fratres, and flete pro me; and in that
place he confesses those infirmities that were in him, and what is the thing
that he desired to be moved from: It is, That in finging Psalms in the
Church, he did more set his mind upon the Tune, than to please GOD in the
matter. Animus enim meus magis erat ad cantum, quam ad id quod cantabatur.
Which he confesses to be a great fault. The sum or effect is this: That the
exercises performed to GOD with the mouth, when as there is nothing else but a
noise, as the cracking of Thorns burning under a pott, there is a loud voice,
but a dumb affection, it is a thing lamentable; and therefore, to be left of
us.

Yet it is not to be doubted, but the man had many good motions: as he says,
Ita saepe facio non sentiens: but postquam feci, sentio, I do so often, and I
perceive it not; but after I have done it, I perceive it, that I have done it.
And this might be wished that we might feel it, when we have done it, we be
far from these sayings.

The Means, the inducing means: The Means.
For a man to esteem Gods name Holy, may be the consideration of Phil. 4.3.
that he has likewise magnified our names greatly, insomuch as he has
registered them in the Book of life. And not only that, but as it is, Heb.
11.16. even as we were his own in the World, so he is ours: and he is not
ashamed to be called Deus noster, our God; that we should not be ashamed of his
name; and that he has exalted our names to so honorable a Book; these be
ways and means to induce us unto it.

2. A second way or means how to perform it; that before we can come to
glorify him, we must be persuaded that the actions which we do, are for his
glory; and we must learn what actions please him: and before we have
assurance of them, we must have them before us; but we have none, but in
examples of those in former ages, before our time: And they little affect us,
because either we think that they pertain not to us; or if they pertain to
us, we are in doubt whether they be so or no: or else if we think they are
true, we think that God had glory and praise enough in those days; and we
have but little present use of it. And therefore counsel has been given,
that as it is written of every man of God, of Nathan, Gad, and the rest of the
Children of the Prophets: that every man had annals, from the beginning of his
time, that he might see the visible judgments of God that he had showed upon
his enemies; and a Catalogue of his mercies on his Children, to be reverenced
among men: and joining the present examples with those that are past, one shall
not be an impediment to another; neither those that were before shall seem
incredible, because we see them, or the like done in our days: and on the
contrary, ours shall not seem strange, because we see the like done before.

3. Another is, a Dexterity which we see in Christ, and in the servants of
Christ; wherein they had so inured themselves, from every action and creature
to the glory of God; so that there was nothing could be spoken, nothing done,
nothing heard, but they would make use of it to return to Gods glory: as Luke
8.12. Christ, by occasion of being early in the Temple, and the Sun shining
bright, took occasion to fall into large discourse of the Sun of the World,
and Heavenly light; and concerning the Natural darkness of man, and made a
fruitful speech of it. And John 6.26. upon the inquiry of them how he came
thither; and his answer, that that question was moved rather because they would
have their dinner again then for the Miracle they saw, and upon some small
speech of Manna, there was an occasion of his great Sermon of the Sacrament,
and the Bread of life. Most notable Luke 14. in one dinner three occasions: 1.
of the strivings of guests for the highest places. 2. for the substantial and
chief persons invited: 3. of the speech of one at the table uttered, Blessed
is he that eats bread in the Kingdom of GOD:
CHRIST there enters into three very fruitful Exhortations or admonitions,
directly tending to the Glory of GOD. Esa. 5. by going down to the Vineyard,
Jer. 18.1. by going down to the potters shop. Act. 17. by a blind altar, by
Esaie, Jeremie and Paul, occasions were taken to confound the Jews, and to
convert the Gentiles. When every man studieth to attain to this aptness, no
thing can be offered, but some seasoned talk would be raised from it, and
GOD daily glorified.

The last is, by a reverent behavior in our speech, not only of GODS Name, and
credit: but also of that which he has given us, as a means to it. Whatsoever
the Name of GOD is printed on, id est, whatsoever is called by the Name of GOD.
For there is no name that CHRIST had, as JESUS, and SAVIOR, etc. there is none
of them, but Men had and were called by them. Only this Name Verbum, the Word,
none ever had it: that men might know, that that Name was most est emeed of
GOD; and in the highest degree. Act. 9.15. by the judgment of late and best
Writers, where Paul is said, he should carry GODS Name before the Gentiles;
that is nothing else but his Word. Because it is an especial means for the
magnifying of His Name. And Zach. 10.12. the abominable and cursed practice of
sundry ungracious persons, condemned by all the sacred Counsels, that ever
have been, and anathematized, and accounted so gross a fault in Popery, as
that the Counsel of Trent, 4. sect. last, punished it: that is, for applying
sacred sentences of this Word to profane libells and jeasts. What shall we
say, says Augustine: but only that these men set themselves in a way, by
neglecting GODS Gift; id est, His Word, after to neglect His Name: so by
neglecting GODS Word, not to stick to swear by great and blasphemous oaths.

The Signs. The Signs.
As in the first signification of a Burden, and applying it to a Christian
Oath; so here, when our Necessity is not sought, but the Glory of GOD, when a
Burden.

As it is compared to a Banner or Standard, the example of the Name, and the
behavior of a man to that, may show us, whether we be aright. For in the
Host, they stood still when their Standard stood still, and they moved, when
their Standard moved. So if there be any man that for his actions, meditations
and enterprises, that stands so affected, that he can go, and will go so
far as the Banner goes: so far as GODS Glory leads him, and that
standing, he will go no further. Howsoever flesh and worldly powers and
reasons would allure him to go further. If we be at the Commandment of the
Glory of GOD, then we have the first Sign. There are many, that when that
stands still, go; and when that calls back, go further; and yet neither
come to leave off nor to do: When Gods glory is to be sought, they sit still;
and when it calls them back, they go on. These men are far from the first
sign.

2. A second sign, and that was a part in the Graecians and Romans oaths, at
the entering of them, first, into the Camp, when they were sworn Soldiers:
Pugnabo pro sacris, and solus, and cum aliis; he would fight for it alone, and
with company also: This is a plain sign, whereby the World is condemned of
not seeking his glory: if all turn, he will turn; he shall have no glory, a
solis: for it is, cum aliis that gets God the glory: but if they shrink
away, there are but few that will keep the second part of their oath, that will
stand soli, themselves alone by the standard, when the whole Realm runs to
Apostacy.

3. The third is this, That whosoever belonged to one standard, or had once
professed that he was of that band, it was present death, if either in mouth
he had hostile symbolum, or about him, hostilem tesseram. If he had the
enemies Watchword, or their Badge, it was death. Now I would know (but every
one may know by seeing and hearing) there are some that profess Christ in
outward behavior and show, that in their gates and apparel are opposite to
this; there are plain Tessarae, Badges of the enemy; and if you hear them
speak, they have the right Watchword of the Devil: Worldly speeches and
worldly signs; and that we do militari carni and sanguini, we wear them
daily; and so by this we may examine our selves.

4. The fourth, The perishing of a righteous man in his righteousness. It was
the manner of the delivering of the standard among the Lacedaemonians, (...);
My name I deliver unto you, either bring it home, or be brought home upon it.
This is confession of the name of Christ; that we bring our Shield sound to
God, or else dye for it, rather then lose it; that is, he must not only be
bound at Jerusalem, but dye for Christ Jesus.

5. Last, How to others, we may be persuaded for the procuring of it in them
also. The Apostles precept, Col. 4.6. our speech must be such, as the hearers
may receive grace, and have profit by it. It has a place in the second
Commandment; and not only in speech, but also (as Christ says) in Works,
etc. And as Romans 2. Esaias 52.2. that men blaspheme not the Word of God by your
unreformed lives; that men say not, this word is a word, not of power, but may
say it is a Religion of strength; that they say not, that our Religion is
Unweaponed, or a Favourer of Vice.

The Penalty of the Commandment, Penalty.
God will not hold him guiltless: that is, as before in the second
Commandment; he says, he will fall down to an Image, because he will spare
himself; he shall not need to beg: therefore he will fall down: but God
upon that says, they shall all fare the worse for it; he will visit him and
his children to the third and fourth generation: So here is a Frustra, quod non
erit frustra, here is a taking of Gods name in vain, which will not prove in
vain; for he will come in judgment: they to save themselves from some present
danger, will take his name in vain; but here comes not an holding Guiltless,
but a Condemning for it. It shall turn to his destruction, where he thought to
be saved. The reason why God annexed here a penalty, as before, the great gain
a man might reap by changing his Religion. So here, when there is a great
profit, then there is a great penalty set upon them, that break it. So here,
Ubi lapsus est, in procliui, as a man's tongue (as Augustine says) Posita est
in udo, is set in a glio and slippery place: Therefore as it is, Psalm. 141.3.
God must set a door and a lock upon our lips. And that door is, Thou shall
not be held guiltless: that is, if ye be called Christians, and take upon you
a vain profession, and make frustrate Gods name. For a Christian must depart
from wickedness, 1 Samuel 2.3. Psalm. 75.5. I said to the fools, deal not so
madly, and to the ungodly, set not up your horn. If you take upon you any
other name, if you defend not this, or defend things opposed to this, in
Disputations maintain false Doctrine; if in your speech you bury the name of
God; or if you bury it not, but talk of it foolishly and vainly, and without
fear and reverence; if in talk you forget it, if you speak evil of Gods
name, by disliking of his mercies bestowed upon any, or his judgments; if you,
when you should bless his name, you take it and apply it to Witchcraft and
Sorceries, and evil things: If when you should bless others, ye make it a
Byword to curse them by it. If in swearing you take it in vain; if you vow
and do not perform; if any of these ways you blaspheme God; How then? Then
it is said, The Lord will not hold him guiltless. And it is well said: for it
is he indeed that must do it; for the World will hold him guiltless; as
swearers now a days are not punished. For a man that should empaire a man's
name, I have better remedy for it, then for the blasphemy of the name of God:
He shall not go scot-free, for slandering my name; but Gods name finds not
so much favor of our Law. Therefore because the World regards it so little,
it is necessary that the Lord should take it into his hands: the Lord will
look to it.

Not to be held Guiltless, is the whole matter: for who is there that shall
not fall into intolerable and endless trouble, if the Lord hold him not
Guiltless: For every man is guilty before God; and if he found him guilty,
yet he will not be accounted guilty; but this name shall not be holden
guiltless, Hic est totus fructus, ut auferatur peccatum, this is the whole
fruit, that our sin may be taken away; else we are the most miserable
creatures, if we lived always in Vain.

Because Gods threatenings in the Law pertain as well to this life, as to the
life to come; and we said before, that there is no Commandment that ever God
has set down, that there is so fearful judgments in this age, and in the
age before, and in every age, as this has had. Zach. 5.4. The Prophet sets
there a flying Book, and that was to take hold of the house of the Swearer,
and to consume the Posts, Timber, Stones, and all. For stoning, Levit. 24.11.
to stone the Perjured person to death, Number. 5.21. Then the Priest shall charge
the Woman with an oath of cursing, and he shall say to the woman, The Lord make
thee be accursed and detestable for the oath among the people, and the Lord
cause thy thigh to to rott, and thy belly to swell, verse. 22. And that this
musty water may go into thy bowels, to cause thy belly to swell and thy
thighs to rot. And not only in these private persons; but Jer. 21.7. the
plagues of God against whole Nations, 1 Samuel 21. the plague of a Famine. Shall
he prosper, shall he escape that does these things? or shall he break the
Covenant, and be delivered? Ezekiel. 17.16. Destruction and Captivity on a whole
Land. And there are books of this thing alone: and of particular persons and
whole Nations God has showed manifest judgments: And this cannot otherwise
be, because we are so zealous and careful of our name, how much more is God of
his? For his name passes ours. We say, and it is a common Byword among us,
What is a man, but his good name? 2. They say, Crudelis est sibi homo, qui
famam suam negligit, aut inultam sinit, He is a cruel man that neglects his
name: that God should be negligent, if he should not punish it. Et solius
laesae famae causa duellum est permittendum, quia fama ambulat pari passu cum
vita, the taking away of a man's life, that takes away his good name. Then if
we for our own names sake be thus zealous: and so, if it be for the name of
our Father, or any of those that we receive benefit by, we will think ill of
our selves, if we take not the quarrel upon us: God is not to be accused, to
punish those that take his name in vain.

To conclude, as it is most certain that Gods name is glorious in it self,
Psalm. 8.1. How glorious is thy name in all the World? So it must be in every
one of us. If thou will, it shall be glorified by thee willingly; if thou will
not, in spite of thy teeth, whether thou will or no, he will be glorified,
Exodus 14.4. And I will harden Pharaohs heart, so I will get me honor upon
Pharaoh and upon all his Host. Deuteronomy. 14.2. Thou art an holy people unto the
Lord. We must be as the Israelites, or we shall be as Pharaoh. He that will
not glorify Gods name with the Israelites, shall glorify it with Pharaoh;
that is, by suffering Gods punishing hand. For the Lord will not hold him
guiltless.

The end of the third Commandment.
The IV. Commandment.
Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day, etc.
THE outward worship was divided, into the general, or state and temporal
worship. The reason is this; because, whereas God commands the inward worship
of the Soul, in the first Commandment, both of knowledge and will; and in the
second, he would have manifest and known outwardly, the submitting of our
knowledge, wisdom and reason, by reverence, a worship; the submitting of our
affections or will, by yielding reverence of gesture; and for this outward
gestnre, because it could be performed only to him, he would not have it done
then only: but when we were dealing with others, and to others, that the
glory of his name might be magnified in speech; and therefore the duties of the
third Commandment are enjoined; and these three, perpetual and general:
besides these three; in the fourth Commandment he takes order, that there be
not only a general profession, but also, a set day, a solemn profession;
wherein there should be a public profession of these duties and those: and
wherein they should all be brought to ^ight, Levit. 23.2, 3. The feasts of the
Lord which ye shall call the holy assemblies, even those are my feasts: Six
days shall work be done, but the seventh shall be the Sabbath of rest, an
holy convocation, ye shall do no work therein: It is the Sabbath of the Lord
in all your dwellings.

The end of the Sabbath. A great and holy assembly, for this end; either that
they might be sanctified and all taught; or that they might practice them to
his glory in the great congregation. It is true, and that the Heathen man saw
well, Publicorum cura minor, the common care is not the best care: But that
that is looked to of all, is cared for of none; and comes to be regarded of
none: and so no doubt would men have dealt with God, had not he provided a
particular day for himself, and settled it by a Commandment; and that in very
particular manner. By that continual and general Sabbath, they have no day of
rest. The drift of God in adding this Commandment, shall be seen.

For the Commandment it self; generally it is full out as long and longer
then the second Commandment: of many words, and therefore moves us to a due,
and no less consideration of it. We see for the duties of the second Table;
four of them are ended in a word: because common honesty, and writers; as
Philosophers, politic and civil Laws, have taken order for them: as in
manslaughter, whoredom, and theft, etc: but the fifth, because God sees there
is an humor in us, that will not willingly yield to subjection; therefore it
was necessary that God should fence it with a reason: So likewise in the tenth,
there is a great particularity used in it; because men think that their
thoughts are free, and not to come into judgment; and therefore they may have
their Concupiscence and Will free. But now in the first Table, every
Commandment has his reason: but above them all in particular, this
Commandment, it includes six respects, that are not found in any of the rest.

1. That where the rest run either barely affirmative, as the fifth, or
barely negative, as the rest: in this both parts are expressed: Affirmative, in
these words, Remember thou keep holy, etc. Negative, In it thou shall do no
manner of work, etc. So that our desire and inclination to the breach of this
Commandment, is both ways met withal. 2. That not only to our selves, but
to all others that pertain to us, which in a full ennumeration, and a
wonderful kind of particularity God proceeds here to reckon them up, that
with us, or by us may be violators of this Commandment. 3. In the other, we
see how the case stands; they all are imperative, and they run
peremptorily: the word here used, though it be of the Imperative Mood; yet it
is rather a word of entreaty, Remember; and may be a note of separation from
the rest: this Commandment therefore, imperat and persuadet, does both command
and persuade, in the word Remember. 4. Again, beside the Commandment, it
yields a reason, and persuades; but not with one reason, as the other: but
with one maine reason indeed, and three others; so that this exceeds all, by
the multitude of persuasions. 5. Another is this; that we see in the former
Commandment, the reason is fearful, so it is in the second Commandment. In
this it is a far more easy and reasonable; for the great and maine reason is
this, that we should do no more then God has done. 6. That as we see by the
preface annexed, Recordare, Remember; when we know it is that word, that we
express an especial charge by; because we think that it makes no matter,
that it is but a trifle, whether a duty be broken or kept: and therefore he
wileth and charge us to have an especial regard of it, and not forget him.
The Commandment, as it stands, is divided into the 1. Precept; and 2.
Aetiologie: that is, the reason or persuasion.


First, the Precept; Remember that thou sandine a day unto me: a day of rest to
the Lord. For the understanding of it, we must know what is meant, first, by
day of rest, or Sabbath; secondly, what by sanctifying.

A day of rest or Sabbath, properly in the Original tongue betokens such a
rest, as there has a work gone before it: Cessa^i^, such a rest is plainly
set down, Levit. 25. When the Land has been labored and tilled six years;
he charge it to be suffered to rest the seventh year, and lie fallow: a
politic Law. So that after a labor of six days, this is it that God
requires, that there should be a day of ceasing. Sanctifying is here
attributed to two in this Commandment; in the end, that the Lord sanctified
the Sabbath; here in the beginning, that we must remember to sanctify it.

The rule in Divinity is, that where any word is given to God and to Man, that
to God is applied, Sub modo destinandi: to Man, Sub modo applicandi. When God
does appoint a thing to an holy use, he is said to sanctify it: when a man
applies it to that end, whereunto God has appointed it, he is said to
sanctify it.

It is sure that by nature all are alike before God; and men differ not by
nature: and so may it be said of Water, Bread, Wine, and Days, etc. by nature
all are alike, and of it self, one is not more holy then another; but Levit.
20.26. the first action, God says, I have put you apart from all people, that
you should be mine. When God puts a man apart, that he should be his,
whether his in the common wealth, or in the Church to do it there; either
Magistrate or Minister, then this separation is the beginning of a sanctifying.
So of that Water, that is separated to Baptism; and in the creatures of Bread
and Wine, there is no more in them naturally then in others; till they be put
apart, from the rest of the Water and Bread and Wine, and made Gods, that is,
appointed to an use in his Church. And so likewise of days naturally, there is
not more holiness in one of them then in another; only it is the Ordinance of
God that makes the separation of it, from the other to become his. The common
use, that a man does separate to the Lord of all that he has, whether it be
man or beast, may neither be sold, nor redeemed; for every thing separate from
the common use, is most holy to the Lord.

Now the nature of such things is, as Levit. 27.28. Every thing that is
separate from common use, is most holy to the Lord; and it must neither be sold
nor redeemed: therefore we see that Exodus 28, 29, 30. Chap. For his Tabernacle,
the fireforks, pothooks, fleshooks, made for the Sacrifice, and the basest
instruments made for the fire to stir it up, and the meat in the Caldrons,
whereof a libamen, (or offering) should not be put in any other fire; and the
Snuffers to no other Lamps, but those of the Tabernacle: all only to this. So
this is the nature of a thing sanctified, and how it differs from other
things. Other things may serve, if they be done in part; this it must not be
done in part, but only and wholly, Psalm. 1.2. Meditation every day and every
night does well; Psalm. 145.2. Every day he will praise God: and Psalm. 55.17. he
will do it thrice a day, in the Evening, Morning, and Noone: and Psalm. 119.164.
he will do it seven times a day, because of his righteous judgments: Yet all
these are but in part; for in these days other things may be done jointly with
it, and they may take also a part of the day lawfully; but here is the
difference: This day the most holy day and separated to Gods use, this it must
be done only and wholly, not in part, nor jointly with any other exercise.

Now the question is, wherefore it pleased God to deal thus with that day to
sanctify it, (as we see it was) before any sin came into the World? as Genesis
2.3. whether it be for himself, Tit. 1.25. To the clean, all things are
clean; to the holy all things are holy. God is most holy and needs nothing
to be sanctified to him: if not for him, therefore for us. 1 These. 4.3. Our
sanctification is the will and pleasure of God: And consequently to the end we
might be made holy, he has hallowed the day, his Word, etc. So by the second
way or part of sanctification, by annexing a blessing to them, he blessed it;
and in the Bread of the Sacrament; as Mat. 26.26. he blessed the bread; and his
dicere is facere; that is, he gave it a power of doing good. As to his bread,
so to his day; and has it in two sorts of holiness: First, for whereas the
place is said to be holy, as the place whereon Moses stood, and all that
belonged to the Tabernacle, because they were means unto holiness.

Secondly, so the fruit is another use; when as holiness is wrought and
brought forth in practice (Sanctificamini, and sancti estote) then it comes
to thus much, God has put apart this day, to the end that it might be applied
wholly either to the means of sanctification, or to the practice of his
sanctification begotten in us. Christ, Mark 2. did a good Sabbath days work,
and he has given it a blessing; that is, that what means of sanctification we
use in it, the meditation that we have in it, it shall be of more effect and
force to us, then it should be on any other day not sanctified.

Then if we see how God has sanctified it, we must see how we must do: (i.
e.) As he by his blessing sanctifies it, so we must sanctify it by our
obedience.

In two parts; first, in estimation or account, that is for our judgment:
secondly, in our use, that is for our practice.

First, we must account of it as a day holy to God; Acts 10.15. we must not
count it common. What God has cleansed, that must not be counted common; our
judgment must be of it, that it be not common; but as a Magistrate is among
men, so that must be a day of days.

Secondly, our use that we so use it: The use is excellently set down, Esaias
58.13. that we do not our own business, that thinking of common thoughts,
take not up our brains, nor common communication; and that our behavior be
sanctified, tending to the practice of holiness. Hag. 2.14. It is plain, that
if that that is sanctified, touch that, that is common, it imputes not
holiness to that that is common, but it receives unholinesse from it: So that
the touching of an unholy action in our life that day, is a polluting of the
day of the Lord. This we must take heed to, as much as in us lies: else, Mat.
5.25. as our Savior there shows, a woman may be chaste, and yet adultery may
be committed, if a wicked eye look on her, to lust after her; there is
adultery, though the party remain chaste: so in respect of holy things, they
remain holy, yet we do pollute them, when as by touching profane things, we
labor as much as in us lies to make them unholy.

Here are two things, and both commanded; but not equally, but the one for the
other: for sanctification is the last end and drift of God, and the means and
practice of it only and wholly is his chief end, and is the end of the other.
Now the other, the rest, is a subordinate end, because without it, this matter
will not be brought to pass in that order that God requires.

To the making it plain, thus much; that the Heathen men by the light of
nature have seen, that every thing is then best ordered, when it has but one
office, and is ordained to do but one thing; that is, whatsoever is done, it
must thoroughly be done; it must be alonely done, the reason is, because we are
res integra finita, finite creatures: and if two things be done at once, one
part of our thoughts will be taken from the other, we cannot wholly intend two
things at once; this is our case. But it was the case of our Father Adam in
innocence; because he had a natural soul, and finite, therefore he was not
able wholly to intend the dressing of the Garden in six days, and to intend
the whole sanctification of the day of rest, commanded Genesis 2.3. now because of
this, God would have a solemn profession of body and soul; and therefore this
was the end, why God instituted, blessed and sanctified the seventh day; so
that it comes for a remedy against distraction to be intended to any other
use, especially in the solemn worship of the Lord; that takes up the whole
man, and necessarily suffers no distraction; therefore it does not suffer him
to be intended to any other use. Now, if being then in that case, he could not:
we that have more impediments to withdraw us, we had need of a remedy against
our distraction. And thus comes the rest in, because that this total solemn
sanctification cannot be performed without ceasing from the rest of our works,
and labor; because unless we do rest, we cannot sanctify. Therefore is it,
that this is commanded, with our sanctification, a day of rest; otherwise,
whereas our resting hinders our sanctification, it must be taken away. And
indeed Christ does acknowledge, Mark 2.27. that man was not made for the rest,
but for sanctification. Sanctification was his end, and man was made for it:
rest is a subordinate end, and man was not made for it, but rather that for
man; and as it is, 1. Tim. 4.8. a man's bodily labor, so his bodily rest
profits nothing, but to this end applied, God likes it not.

There is beside in the commandment another word Remember, and because that is
properly of a thing past, therefore it refers to some place or time before;
and there is mention of the Sabbath but in two places before, one is Exodus
16.23.24.25. but that is not it; for God in the end, adding (God blessed it)
refers us to that place, where the same words are: Genesis 2.3. and so we know
that we are referred thither: And by this occasion falls in that first
question, that many think it is a Ceremony, and sundry are so persuaded, and
hold that men are not bound to sanctify it since Christ. Our Savior in the
case of difference, and resolution of Polygamie; has taken a good course and
order, he goes to the beginning; how it was ab initio, non sic ab initio,
from the beginning it was not so: to call it to the first institution; for that
is it, that gives the best judgment, and the last: first end is the true end.
A thing is not said to be ceremonial, if a ceremonial use or end be annexed
to it; for then not one of the ten moral Commandments, but it should be
ceremonial: for they have some ceremony annexed to them: but that is a
ceremony, whose first and principal end is a ceremony; which this day of rest
cannot be. The reason, because Paradise and man's perfection, and a ceremony
cannot agree, in the state of a man's innocence. The reason is, because that
before there was a Savior, there could not be a type of a Savior: and before
there was sin, there needed no Savior: So consequently, needing no Savior,
needed no ceremony; and needing no Savior, nor ceremony, it could not be
ceremonial. But that was it, that Adam having in the six days a natural use
in his body of the creatures, should for the glory of God on the seventh day,
have a spiritual use and consideration. So that this remedy against
Distraction is the first and principal, and general end; though other ends
were after added: as Deuteronomy. 5.15. it pleased God to add this reason, that they
might remember the benefit of the deliverance out of Egypt; but this was but
finis posterior, a particular and after end, and necessary. So it were well if
we might add to our days of rest the memory of our benefits. And Exodus 23.12.
God yields a politic end; the ceasing of beasts and men that they may
return more fresh to their labor: there is moreover no better nor certainer
way to keep off our enemies: those (...), Ephesians. 6.12. those spiritual
wickednesses, the preaching of the Law then is a mean to enable us to
withstand the crafty and subtle suggestions of sin and Satan. And if any will
say, that beside these ends, there was figured by this rest, that rest we shall
have from sin by Christ's death: True, but yet it is an accessorie end; in the
Sacrament of Circumcision, Circumcision is ceased, and the Passover, so is the
Sabbath: but the Sacrament of initiation is not ceased, there were two ends of
it.

1. The first, was to seal us, to his preventing or following Grace. 2. The
other to be a figure of the circumcision of the Heart: of the Sacrifice of the
world, this is ceased. So the seventh day is ceased; but there is another day:
there is a day remaining; because the end of it was immutable from the
beginning. The reason of it self is so forceable and plain, that without
bringing in a manifest absurdity, it cannot be avoided, when they see these
ends to carry us to the Institution, and that in Paradise. But you will say,
Adam never kept it, neither was it kept till Exodus 16. Which should in the very
misliking, seem an absurd thing, that GOD two thousand years, before a thing
should be put in use, should consecrate that thing to Sanctification: and all
that while it should be to no End: And indeed the sort of the Heretics that
held, that materia prima, was so made of GOD a great many years before the
world, and it abode by him till the world was made. They are confounded by the
Fathers, by this, that no man of wisdom does make any thing to stand by him,
many years before it can be put to any use: Therefore, GOD uses not so to
do: but when he shall have use of any thing, then to bless it. This
prooveth, that this day rests on the consciences of men, and that the
institution rises from GOD immediately, even in Adams innocence.
We must understand, that Deuteronomy. 4.13. GOD makes there a plain distinction
between Ceremonies and the moral law, by this manner. That the one proceeds
from him immediately: the other by the ministry of Moses, and that very same
is Deuterenom. 5.31.

Again, beside the Confusion and breach of Order, a thing which GOD misliketh;
one of the Fathers, on these words says, Nunquid and Saul est inter Prophetas?
What is Saul amongst the Prophets? Not a Prophet by profession: they wondered at
it, that he should be amongst the Prophets: one says, that Saul is
heterogeneum amongst the Prophets: it will fall against order for a Ceremonial
precept to stand in the midst amongst moral commandments. For every
Ceremony or Type, because it was a foretelling of the Gospel: therefore, must
be referred to the Gospel, as the shadow to the body: for indeed Ceremonies
are Evangelicall. So there is not only this, but also a Confession of the Law
and the Gospel in the Decalogue.

Again, this being held as a principle, that the Law of Moses is nothing
else, but the Law of Nature revived, and that a resemblance of GODs Image; if
that we say that this Precept is Ceremonial, then must we say, that in the
Image of GOD some thing is Ceremonial. (...), not to abide, but for a time.
But all things in him, and in his image, are eternal according to his nature.
And so consequently in the Law of Grace.

Again; when CHRIST delivers to the Scribes the sum of the ten
Commandments, Thou shall love the LORD, etc. It is no question, but it is a
sum of the Commandments. Then in that part of the sum, Thou shall love the
LORD, etc. We must find the religious observation of the Sabbath, and so
Moral the love of GOD in which it is contained: else our Savior had delivered
an imperfect sum.

Lastly; a dangerous way is taken for bringing in one Ceremony: and the
Papists, as Parosius and Politian^, they will bring in another; for they will
have the second Commandment also to be ceremonial: and there is no reason
why there may not be as well three, as two, and so four and five, and so all.
Therefore, the best institution, the best way for upholding the duties Eternal
and to keep them without blemish, is to hold that part of the ten
Commandments, to deny all Ceremonies in the law, as coming of the nature of
the Commandment: but they are plainly Moral.

6. To come to the time of the Gospel, Ephesians. 2.15. we hold that all ceremonies
are ended, and abrogated by CHRIST'S death: but the Sabbath is not, which is
plain, by Matthew. 24.20. for there CHRIST denouncing, the overthrow of
Jerusalem, bids them pray, that their calamity befall not in the winter, or on
the Sabbath day. We know this destruction fell out long and many years after
CHRIST'S death, when all ceremonies were ended, the Veil rent, etc. Now then if
he should have prayed that their flight might not be on the Sabbath; and that
were abrogated as a Ceremony, he should have prayed that it might not have
been on that day, which indeed should have been no day. Therefore, it is
necessary that it be counted no Ceremony.

7. Another is, that to chop and change one day for another, is not abrogatio,
but commutatio Judaismi. 2. So the Seals of the Covenant of their own nature
are things moral, though in regard of some other respect they be
ceremonial. Yet in the other that are mere typical; there is no manner of
commutation, but they are clean taken away: for if we grant that the wax
candles, the copes, etc. are not the Jews, but changed, where as Judaisme is
not to be: but as it is Ephesians. 2.15. He has broken down the wall, he has
taken away, etc. It is manifest that in stead of the Jews seventh day, in the
Apostles days another seventh day was ordained. Therefore, it was not as the
Ceremonies, but as the Ministry of the Covenant, and Seals of the Covenant,
and the Day of the Covenant. For we see Act. 20.7. where as the Apostles
called together the Disciples in the first day of the week, (which is our
Sabbath now) to hear the Word, and break bread. And 1. Cor. 16.2. he wills
them in their meetinges they should every one in the first day of the week,
put aside by him, and lay up as GOD had prospered him, that there might not be
gatheringes when he came. And Revel. 1.10. it is plainly called (...), The
LORDS Day.

So then we see plainly, in the whole time the Apostles lived, it being changed
by them, and not taken away. Therefore, not of the nature of the Types of the
Law. But when the old Covenant ceased; then ceased the Ministry of the old
Covenant. The Priesthood of Levi was changed, and given to all Tribes: and in
stead of it is our Ministry. And as the Seals of the Covenant ceased, the
Ceremonies of the Covenant, as Circumcision and the Paschall Lamb, and in
their place, our Sacraments Baptism and the LORDS Supper: so the Day of the
Covenant is taken away, and in place of it, is put the LORDS Day. None of them
being in his first end ceremonial, but as having a continual use, the Sabbath
lasts as long as the Church militant.

The reason which might seem to have moved the Apostles to change this day, De
ratioue mutationis Sabbath.
may be fitly taken from the institution of the Sabbath in the time of the
Law. For as then nothing was more memorable then the day of his Creation: so
when it pleased GOD that old things should cease, there was a benefit that did
overshadow the former. Therefore, from that day, we now celebrate the
memorial of CHRIST'S Resurrection, and became of the other work also
concurring fifty days after, the great and inestimable benefit of
Sanctification, and the people by speaking with strange tongues, and the
memory of the benefit of creation being as well showed in the first day of the
week, as in the last: and so have we it by great reason established of the
Creation, Redemption, Sanctification, of the three special benefits wrought
by the three Persons. And so much for the clearing of that place.

The three Verses that follow, 9.10.11. they are thus divided: First, they give
light to the Commandment, thus; the 9. and 10. is nothing else but an
expounding what the LORD means. And secondly, at the eleventh Verse. There is
a reason yielded, why they should yield obedience to this? And in the first
there is an order taken as well concerning Works, as concerning Persons. For
works, six days shall thou labor, and do all thou have to do. For persons,
thou, thy son, etc. Again, in the first part, there is an affirmative, six
days shall thou labor, etc. and a negative, In it thou shall do no manner of
work, etc. 2. There is a permission; six days thou shall work, and do all,
etc. Six days has GOD bestowed on thee; but the seventh day he has kept to
himself; he has bestowed six days on thee, the seventh is GODS.

Now in these two oppositions, there are two by-reasons included: for the maine
reason is in the 11. Verse.

1. By right of Creation we are GODS, and all ours; for he made us of nothing;
and so might challenge us, and our days: so that standing in this case, we
could not challenge one day to our selves: insomuch as if it had pleased GOD
but to give us but one day, and had reserved the other six to himself, we
had no just cause of complaining. But if he had dealt thus liberally with us,
to grant us day for day, we should not have murmured, but have opened our
mouths to praise Him: then the order he has taken now, if we be not clean
void of good nature, must needs content us: in granting to us six, and
reserving to himself but one. We see likewise GODS bountifulness with Adam,
Genesis 2. When he granted him all the Trees in the Garden except one: then
presently the Devil was at him, and upbraided him with GODS niggardnesse; that
he had not granted him all the Trees of the Garden: may ye not eat of all the
trees? etc. And so no doubt the Devil uses this policy now a days in this;
May ye not do what ye will all the days of the week? The consideration of
this, the great bounty of GOD. That we cannot say, but that we are well
dealt withal, having granted to us two times and a time, six days, to his one
time: and consequently that we be careful to give him his. And that by this
great liberality we may learn to make him a better answer then Adam did: and
say as Joseph to his Mistress, Genesis 39.9. All that is in the house, my Master
has granted me; only thee has he reserved for himself; how then can I do
this thing? So that our answer be: all the days of the week he has granted
us, only one day he has reserved to himself: how then can I be so unkind,
as not to let him have that? He having granted so richly and largely: And if
not that; then to pattern our selves by David, 2. Sam. 12.5. he being so
richly provided, for of GOD, if that one sheep the poor man has, he will not
suffer, but pull it out of his bosom: so we if we cannot suffer that one
sheep, but pluck it out of GODS bosom, and make it common to our selves,
having many of our own, making it onus servile, that because we deal so, we
are worthy a thousand times to be the children of death. And this is one
first reason that might move us. 2. The second is the greatness of the
permission of GOD: of these days, one is permitted to thee, to do as that in
Genesis 2. of all shall thou eat: there is not a necessity. Though one thing be
handled in diverse Commandments, as prayer was handled in the first
Commandment, as a part of inward worship in the second, as a part of outward
worship in the third, as a sacrifice of the lips: and here as it is an
exercise of the Sabbath. Where in there is an uneven proportion: He has but
one to our six. And therefore, the seventh day to that one. So that the vice of
idleness of forbearing of work is forbidden in the eight Commandment: and so
does Paul put it Ephesians. 4.28. to stealing is opposed painful working. So then
this liberal permission of GOD, wherein there is such an unequal and uneven
proportion; if it be broken, we are to be charged of great wickedness.
That that follows, (And do all thy work,) The meaning of it is this, that
indeed GOD might have dealt with us, as before, he might have made all our
life, to be bestowed on musing of his will: but he is content to forbear us,
and to spare us the rest of the week: that in those days all our business
might be dispatched, and none to be done on His day. As Nathan said to David,
So much have I given thee, and more would I have done, if this had not been
sufficient: so certain it is, he saw in his wisdom that this was sufficient;
Therefore, he wills us to remember: when it is a coming, that we may end
all, according as the thing sanctified requires.

Then, in the tenth Verse, there follows another opposition, which
comprehends a second reason; But the seventh day is the Sabbath of the LORD,
etc.] idest, If as GOD has permitted you six days, so likewise He had made
the seventh day yours to; then in it ye might have done, as in the other: but
now has he reserved this seventh day from you, and has kept it to himself:
and therefore, you cannot without open stealth break upon this day to do your
work, wherein you have no manner of right: as much as if a man should say, You
may wear that which you have bought; but this that I have bought with mine
own money, you cannot without violent injury pluck it from me. So because
his dealing is liberal, you cannot without manifest injury to GOD, take it
away from him. And because this is his, he will keep it, and wholly to
himself. Therefore, is it that follows; In it thou shall do no manner of
work. This for the first part of the tenth Verse.

Now to the other, to the Persons; They stand in five ranks: 1. Thou; 2. thy
children; 3. thy servants; 4. thy cattle; 5. strangers within thy gates.


1. Thou.] Matthew. 24.45. it is said, that it is a preferment to one, to be set
over the family of the LORD: and therefore, Cui plus datur, plus ab eo
petetur: Luke 12.48. unto whom much is given, of him shall much be required.
Therefore, the first charge is in this; Even upon him that is Chief. As there
is in this, upon Jos. 24.15. so long as a man is alone, in the state of a
son, or servant, he may answer, Ego serviam; I will serve: but if he come
once to have a charge, a family, then he must say, Ego and domus mea; I and
my house will serve the LORD. Because CHRIST, as Luke 19.9. When he had once
converted Zacheus, said, This day is salvation come to this whole house: Why?
Because this man that is chief, is become the child of Abraham. Eexmplum dedi
vobis. So Gal. 2.13. Whereas the principal fall away, there all the other,
even Barnabas himself will be drawn away: so though he discharge the duty
himself, yet if he see not that other discharge it, he is a debtor: id est,
he ought to be so far from giving occasion to others; and not only that,
but from sitting them on his business, that he ought to see, that both he
and they discharge it.

2. Concerning Children: The argument of Augustine is good, on Deuteronomy. 20.15.
After a man had builded a new house, the manner was to consecrate: If a care
lie upon him to consecrate the works of his hands; much more to consecrate
those which are the fruit of his loins; as his Wife, Sons, Daughters: and
the affection of Abraham. Genesis 18.19. Where the greatest love is, there is the
greatest desire, as well of conjunction in Spirit, as in Body. It is true
natural love, Curare liberos, to have a care of our children as of our selves.

3. Concerning Servants; because Col. 3.11. God knows no servants, that is,
he has no respect of persons in this regard: all bound to worship him;
therefore it is that he brings in, that thy man servant and thy maid, may
rest as well as thou.

Another is added, Deuteronomy. 5.15. the estate of servants; Gods care of the
Commonwealth: and we know that in the Spartane, and other Commonwealths,
there has been Insurrection, by reason of overburthening of servants:
therefore is this put in, a preservation of the Commonwealth. Gods providence
is great in providing of this.

4. So likewise of the next member, of Beasts, Psalm. 36.6. his mercy and
providence is extended to the beasts; so Prove. 12.10. to the soul of the
beast, that is, he will take order that the beasts be not tired; because the
earth shall have her Sabbath. One end of Gods providence for them, is the
restrayning of our covetous humor, who rather then we will omit any little
gain, we will put our land and cattle to the uttermost; and we care not to
what pains. Again, another, that by beholding the beasts doing their duties,
we might be the more moved to the doing of ours. We must therefore note, that
God commands not their rest, as delighted therewith; even as Jonah 3.5. the
beasts commanded to fast, not that God was delighted with their abstinence, or
was acceptable to him: but only this, that as the Ninivites seeing their
beasts pyned before them, they might consider of it, and be moved the more: so
here, seeing the beasts to keep Sabbath, they might remember to keep it.

5. The last is the stranger within thy gates. The Gates of an House or a City
in Scripture, signifies Jurisdiction, or Defenced protection: That as then he
is in his Gates, so he is in his Jurisdiction; so whosoever comes under
another Gates, as he comes for protection if he be be injured; so he must
confess that he must be under his Jurisdiction, that for any godly duty he
may command him: and Genesis 19. Lots intercession for the Angels; Therefore came
they under my roof, that they might receive no harm: and as he had a care
that they might receive no injury; so ought we have a care of their souls. As
Nehem. 13.19. the men of Tyrus and Ashdod, so long as he had any hope to
reclaim them, he suffered them to bring in their Wares: but after he saw they
would bring in their Wares for all his warnings and threatenings, he took order
that the Gates of Jerusalem should be shut against them in the end of the
(...), or preparation of the Sabbath. And so we see both for Works and for
Persons, in several and particular.

The maine reason is, verse. 11. For in six days the Lord made Heaven, etc. As
we said before, that a rule for discerning precepts is, Ratio immutabilis
praecepti, facit praeceptum immutabile, if the reason of a Commandment be
immutable, it makes the commandment to be immutable: and so consequently,
because the reason is to sanctify Gods name: when we shall be glorified in
Heaven, we shall there do it, we shall there only intend it: until we come
thither, we have but finite souls, and cannot intend it wholly; this reason
being immutable, that it shall there be done of us in the state of glory, when
we shall be (...), One to One: So may we likewise say of this, it being a
reason abexemplo, from Gods own example: For concerning that, this axiom. The
Creator is to be followed of the Creature, in that he commands: it is an
immutable reason; for as much as it is the example of God, nor can receive any
time of exception; because I have rested, I propound the same to thee:
Therefore it pleased God to use this reason, as most forcible. He makes use of
others besides this, Exodus 23. and Deuteronomy. 5.15. those he uses as proper to the
Jews: this reason of the benefit of the Creation is here forced being
greatest, as well for the use, as the duties which God that day calls for to be
performed by us in an especial manner; (the consideration of his goodness,
wisdom, power, and eternity.) So also for the meditation of it in that day:
as the 92. Psalm was made for that day: As for the continuance of the memory
of the Creation, and keeping men from Paganism; for if it had been duly kept,
then that great doubt that troubled all the Philosophers so much, Whether the
World had a beginning, had been taken away. And therefore this day being one
especial means, that men might not fall into Atheism, is therefore
sanctified of God to be a day of Rest.

Augustine on Genesis, entreating of the Creation, says, That it is true, that
it might have pleased God to have said, Fiat totus Mundus, let all the World
be made in one moment; as Fiat lux, let there be light: in the first it had
been all one to his Omnipotency, to have made it as well in a moment, as in
six days: his inquisition is, What then should move God? and he finds no
reason but this, that men might proceed in the musing of, and meditation of the
Creation in the same order that God has taken in the Creation; else they
should have been in a maze. Therefore, Psalm. 104. David when he enters a
discourse of the Works of God, he uses an order: and Basil and Ambrose have
written books of it; that men might begin to think, and give themselves to
necessary thoughts, and wholesome cogitations. And this is thought to be the
course that was in the Primitive Church.

For the substance of the reason it self, generally to move all, to do as God
has done; nothing moves a man so, as a notable example: as Christ, John
13.16. Exemplum dedi vobis, I have given you an example. When he saw his
Disciples given to pride, and would have them brought to Humility; What way
takes he? He takes up a basin of water, and a towell, and putting off his
upper garment, washes their feet: and when he had done, verse. 15. he says,
Wott ye what I have done? Exemplum dedi vobis, Ye call me Lord, and ye do
well, for I am so. If I that am your Lord wash your feet how much more ought
you to wash one another feet. And in the 1 Cor. 11. Paul propounds a
marveilous example: Be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ. And therefore he
himself may do that I have done my self; and because I that needed not, have
rested: therefore must thou rest, that need it.

The last reason of the three; Therefore the Lord blessed the seventh day: he
did not only rest himself, but he has consecrated it also; and besides his
example, he has annexed a solemn Institution: So that it shall be to us a
Mercatura animae, the market day of our soul; both for amendment of the week
that went before, and for a better life in the week to come. But this is not
the reason: the force of the reason is in this, because God has blessed and
hallowed it: therefore this is a marveilous strange kind of opposition. Seeing
I have done it, see you do not resist me; but see ye submit you selves to my
ordinance; that is, God is resisted, if his Ordinance be resisted; and Romans
13.2. he that despises his ordinance, despises him: therefore that God has
hallowed, we must not pollute. We see then how far this rest is to be kept,
and what is required to the sanctification.

The substance of the fourth Commandment, consists especially in these two
things, 1. in the outward rest of the body; 2. the other, the End, to Sanctify
it.


As before, we must Remember it both in the week before the day come; partly,
because then we are to yield account of the former days works to God, In
singultu and scrupulo cordis, with sorrow and trouble of heart: partly also, as
Augustine says, Ne quid operis rejiciatur in diem festum, that we put not off
any business until the Sabbath: and when it is come, as Gregory 11. Mor. 3d.
Epist. because there are two things; the one, Aliorum exempla, the example of
others will make us forget duly to sanctify it: The other, Ludorum and
spectaculorum studia, the desire we have after sports and pastimes; we are
therefore then the rather to sanctify it, for Esaias 58.13. Delicatum Domini
Sabbatum, the Sabbath of the Lord, is a delicate thing. Because these two
therefore engender a forgetfulness, we must both remember it aforehand, add
then also when it comes.

The thing that we are to remember, is a day of rest; to sanctify it.
Augustine in two words comprehends it well, Otium sanctum, a Holy Rest, or
returning from labor. And if we ask, A returning from what labor? the words
following show from what works. A Canon of the Church shows it. Quod ante
fieri poterat, and quod post fieri poterit, What might have been done before,
and what may be done afterward, must be rested from: And whatsoever is meant by
the labors and works of the week days, that must be ceased from of us: on
the contrary Ab eo quod nec ante fieri poterat, nec postea poterit, non est ita
avertendum, that which could not be done before and that which cannot be done
afterward may on that day be done by us. The reason why it must be thus; Aug.
Epist. 157. ad Optatum: and Jerome upon Ezekiel. 20. concerning that the
distinction of the bodily rest is for sanctification: For out of Eccl. 3. they
take this for a ground; that there is nothing but must have his time: and
consequently, that we appoint certain times for our bodies, for repast, as of
sleep, etc. in which time we take such order, as that we be not let by any
thing; and as he says there, the more serious a thing we are to deal with;
the more we seek that nothing be done with it, but that only and wholly; The
chiefest care to be had of the soul, that nothing trouble it from his whole
meditation: but to this end it is meet we be even solitary as Augustine says.
and we think we take a good order in it so. So in the Law of Nature, there is
a time for the soul, and the building of the same, for procuring holiness to
it, for declaring holiness in it; and so consequently, that we are (because
it is a serious matter) to use no less diligence in the cases thereof, then
that there may be no other thing to hinder us.

And it is a matter so plain, that we see even the council of Trent (taking
order for keeping of holy days) has set down, Quae abhis qui humanarum
occupationum negotio detinentur, omnino praestare non possent, that this body
entermeddle not it self with worldly affairs. So many of the Fathers as write
upon that, Psalm. 46.10. Vacate and videte quod ego sum Dominus, be still and
know that I am God: show by the course of wisdom, the same that the
Philosophers require; that Postulandum secessum, ut melius intendamus, a full
Vacation from cares, that a man's head be not occupied with thoughts in worldly
matters, but that his soul might wholly intend this day; and the body might be
at command with the soul: therefore the forbidding of works in this
Commandment, is not therefore, because the works of themselves are evil, but
only because they would distract the mind; and would not suffer the whole
man, wholly to intend the works of the Sabbath. The substance of this
Commandment, I said, consists of these two parts, Rest, and Sanctification.

The Rest, is the first part, otium. It is a very strange thing, that the
nature of man is so altogether given to be contrary to Gods will and wisdom;
so that it falls out on both sides contrary. Where the precepts are
laborious, Nota.
and of travel and pain, there they will be idle: and where the precepts are
not laborious, and of no pain, there, rather then they will not break the
Commandment, they will take pains, and we will even against our natures,
make our selves business: and we will pick out that day of all days of the
week, that he has chosen: so that we make it a kind of policy, to make
advantage of that day, and to find labor in that day, which he has denied us
to labor in. This for the easiness of the Commandment, and perverseness of
man.

Concerning this rest there are six Countermands.

The first thing that we find Countermanded here, is Exodus 16.26. there God
takes order in Elim, before the Law was given, that from their very necessary
labor, from gathering Manna they should cease; the reason is, because it is
mercatura animae, the souls Market; there is a better thing then Manna, John
6.58. and 1 Pet. 2.3. speaking there of the heavenly food, of that day, does
prefer it before Manna.

2. A second forbidding in Nehem. 13.15. not only the gathering of Manna, or
the going out to gather; but though it be brought us, yet a plain countermand
and execution upon it, shows that it is unlawful. So we are forbidden, as
from gathering of Manna, so from buying of Manna. To this belongs Buying and
Selling; all Markets and Faires on that day forbidden.

3. From carrying burdens, Jer. 17.21, 22. there is a great commination
against those that carried burdens on that day, that made it their carriage
day, that he would bring a plague upon them; and that such as is there
mentioned, that is, Captivity: So we must not carry on that day, except we will
that God give us a burden, that is, Captivity.

4. A fourth thing forbidden, Exodus 34.21. because this carriage and inninge of
harvest and grapes might seem to be a matter of great necessity; therefore he
says, that both in Seed-time, and Harvest, and Vintage, his Sabbaths should be
kept; that is, so as that the provision of the whole Commonwealth, must give
place to the Rest of the Lord. And that is for carriage.

5. For journeying and traveling on the Sabbath day, Exodus 16.29. Cras erit
Sabbathum Jehovae: maneat unusquisque in loco suo, neque egrediatur quispiam,
to morrow is the rest of the holy Sabbath unto the Lord, abide ye every man in
his place, and let no man go out on the seventh day. Which is a great abuse
with us.

6. In Exodus 31.13. there is a matter that goes beyond all these; neither may
the contrary course be taken: for there in the Chapters precedent, in the 28,
29, 30. God having set down this platform for the building up of his
Tabernacle, and willed Moses presently to go in hand with it, yet he says in
that thirteenth verse, Notwithstanding I will have my Sabbath kept: which is as
much to say, that in that work that might have best show, and might seem the
best and lawfullest, and make most to his glory, yet he would have his Sabbath
kept, and not broken for it; because in other matters ye may refrain, in this
ye may not: And so verse. 15. he takes order for the universal day. Whosoever
he be that does any manner of work, on the Sabbath day, is judged worthy of
death: Nomanner of work, the universal term. And Numb. 15.35. it is executed
upon one that brake the Sabbath. Jer. 17.27. he there protests for polluting
the places of his rest, that he will visit them with a plague of fire, and such
a one, as should burn up the Palaces of Jerusalem, and should not be
quenched. The Prophets are great urgers of this Commandment above all other
Commandments: and where this plague of fire is threatened, there goes before,
a profaning of the Sabbath: and we may observe that there has not been any
strange visitation by fire, but some notable profanation of this day has gone
before; and it is usual among us also. So when it shall please God to visit us
with the like judgment, we know where to have the cause of it: Therefore to
conclude this place; those that go out to gather Manna, that carry burdens,
that buy or sell, that gather in harvest or vintage, that journey and travel
up and down, and to speak as it is Exodus 31. generally; let not them think,
it is otium, or Sabbatum Jebovae: that it is the keeping of the Sabbath.
Augusline 3. Sermon. de quadrages. non sabbathum Domini est, sed sabbatum Tyri:
The 37. Canon of the council of Ments, tempore Caroli: The 35. Canon of the
first council of Triburia. The 1. Canon of the second council of Mascon;
injoyne a holy observation of this day: In the 37. Canon of Ments, there is a
deprivation of the Communion for three years, against that party that goes to
plead causes, or keep Markets (belike it was their custom in those days to
plead causes on the Sabbath) So in the council of Triburia, the like order
was taken; and likewise Council: matisconense; it was larger for the fault,
milder for the punishment; for it was but for half a year. And (as one says)
God commanded the rest, not for the rest it self, but only Quia toto die hoc
Deo tantummodo vacandum: and to give over himself body and soul to God.

Here then falls in the question concerning the strict observation of the
Sabbath, Quest. 1.
which was enjoined the Jews, and whether the same also does lie upon the
Christians.

Unto this Commandment, Res^l.
as to every Commandment, there were ceremonies: Two, the one for not dressing
their meat; the other, for not building their fire on the Sabbath day, Exodus
35.3. which are both ceremonial. The reason, for there is no external duty of
the Law, but it may be performed of any man, of any Nation throughout the
World. But it is well known, that those that are under the Poles, they cannot
live one day without fire; and to let their fire go out, it were the utter
destruction of them all: and therefore because it is such an external action,
it is certain it is not moral. The like may be said concerning the provision
of meat; for they that are under the hot Zone, under the Equinoctial, their
provision will not last them but one day; therefore these Acts cannot be kept
in the whole World; therefore ceremonial. So the Christian is released, not
but that they could be performed of the Jews; and therefore a peculiar precept
to the Jews, because they had no hindrances.

To make yet a further question. Quest. 2.
Whether all those six rests are absolutely to be holden or not; and whether on
the Sabbath, all of those before mentioned, as to gather Manna, to travel,
etc. be simply unlawful* We answer to this, No: no further then the precept
Eth hasshabbath, etc. for that our rest must be a sanctification: the outward
rest is Destinatum sanctificationi: ideo quiescimus, ut sanctificemus. So
whereas our quies is not destinata sanctificationi, where the sanctification
can be cum quiet, with Rest; there it is lawful; where it cannot be, there
it is unlawful. Certain it is, that a man may rest, and not sanctify; and so
he may sanctify, and not rest: and therefore it is said, there are many
resters, and few sanctifiers. In these cases the sanctification stands thus,
either upon the means of our sanctification; or else in the declaring of our
sanctification; that is, in the practice of it. Whereas a man's rest cannot
agree with both these; the rest, because it is not destinated to them, may be
left; the rest being a subordinate end. And the rule is, in Logic: Tantum
destinati sumendum est, quantum ad finem prodest, so much of any thing
appointed is to be taken, as conduces to the end wherefore it is taken; as if
you will take a purge, you must take so much as will serve to purge; and where
his end rises, there must also the destinate arise, Mat. 12. for the means of
sanctification, Christ defending his Disciples against the Jews, which indeed
were altogether urgers of the bodily rest, he shows that the rest in regard
of the sanctification, may be broken; as of the Priests in sacrificing; and
indeed it is the most laborious time for the Minister; but hereby they are
blameless, because they are in opere cultus Domini, exercised about divine
worship. And so shall you read, Acts 1.12. mention made of a Sabbath days
journey; out of 2 Kings 4.23. for there the Shunamite coming to het husband
for her Ass, he says to her, Why should you go to him to day? it is neither
the Sabbath day, nor the new Moon. The meaning is this, that the Shunamite was
wont to go out to hear the Prophet; and because she had not means, she
would ride forth: Therefore where the means of sanctification are wanting, a
man may take a sabbath days journey; he may go where they are used to be
gotten: Thus for the first part of sanctification. Now of this first part of
sanctification, the means is less acceptable to God; then the second part
thereof, which is the practice of the work of sanctification: For Christ, Mat.
12.9. out of Hosea 6.6. when as he was there reproved for a work of healing,
he defends himself, and bids them go and learn, what that saying meant, I
will have mercy and not sacrifice. Mercy being here indeed a work of
sanctification, is preferred before the means. So in regard of the practice of
sanctification to show a work of mercy, a man may leave the very means of
sanctification; for if in Sermon time, there should happen a fire, or man or
woman sounding or traveling; the means may be left, because by this means
they show a work of mercy, saving those which should have perished: therefore
this is the thing that makes that for the second part, the bodily rest may be
omitted.

It shall be convenient to consider this point, that as God is glorified in his
Creation, and the memory of this from the beginning was the cause of this
Institution; so has he glory in the preservation of his creatures: and so
consequently by the preserving of them. As John 6.12. Christ bids the fragments
to be taken up; his reason, that nothing be lost: and if the least things may
not be lost, much less the life of any thing; much less mau or the life of
man. And we see for man's life, Matthew. 12.13. and for beasts that serve man,
Luke 13.15. that he will have works of Mercy practiced on the Sabbath day,
as contra, for other peril, Matthew. 12.11. and 13. But we must with all
understand this, that those cases of showing mercy, must be only praesente
necessitate, and not impellente, or imminente necessitate. When any present
danger is offered to my life, I am to defend my self, and save my self,
without the help of the Magistrate; yea, even with the the taking away of the
life of the other: in casu praesentis necessitatis, quisque magistratus est,
and personam DEI gerit, vt occidat potius quam occidatur. But if the peril be
not present, but imminent, as if it be told me I am way laid, etc. I may not
take the matter into my hands; but look to the Magistrate; so for the present
peril, or necessity, there is exemption, and the LORD has given his right
into our hands: but not for imminent peril. And on the other side, we must
mark another thing: that because we have to deal with GOD, who searches the
heart, though happily men be borne in hand, that it was a present necessity,
and could not be prevented, nor differred, whereas before hand, we might have
either prevented or differred it, it must be so, that we be able to justify
our hearts in GODS eyes: but that we have been careful and labored by all
means possible to prevent that business: and could not have prevented nor
deferred it, but that we were overtaken with present necessity. Else it is no
necessity; but we draw it unto us with coards.

For this end, tell them abroad, touching their working in harvest, on the
Sabbath, by what authority they do these things? presently they will have
their answer, that it is not GODS will, that any of his creatures should
perish. And it is true. And therefore, that which they do, is only for the
preserving of the creatures, and not for their gain. Therefore, for this case
a proviso must be had; and there was a good proviso in the Canonical Church
made for it: that because they should make a distinction betwixt the works of
that day and other, as 1. Cor. 16.2. Every first day of the week, let every
one as GOD has prospered him lay up by him, etc. That whatsoever was then
gathered, it should be given to the poor; to the Glory of GOD. And by this
means the Church shall come to take good order. And this shall try with what
heart they do it. We see then what is commanded, and in what cases, and how
far in these two points.

The other, Sanctification
by what mark it may be known? When we have our rest, have we all we
should have? It is sure we have not. Leo hom. 3. de quadrages. Our people,
says he, will hene vestiri and nihil agere. They think they have got enough,
if they have on their best apparel, and do nothing. Whereas 1. ^^m. 4.8. GOD
knows, that as it is not the labor of the body; so not the rest of the
body that pleases him. He that can give account that he has done nothing,
this the Fathers call Sabbathum boum and asinorum etc. The ox and the ass
keep as good a Sabbath as he. Besides, there be yet two sorts they be
neither idle, nor well occupied. That neither buy nor sell, nor yet are idle.
Augustine in his Book de december chordis. Cap. 3. and sermon. 1. on Psalm. 32.
Shows who they are. 1. Such as did vacare nugis, theatris, speclaculis, and
choreis; such as did spend the day in toys, in running to plays and sights,
and dancing: and 25. hom. he puts another kind in Carthage; that spent the
Sabbath in venatione, in hunting. Leo. sermon. 3. de quadrag. (in this behalf,
worth the reading) he puts more to it: for he says, they did vacare
chartis and aleis, rationibus and commessationibus; they spent it in playing at
dyce and cards, in discourse and feasting. But yet so, as the LORD knows
they were not occupied in any work of sanctification. These men's Sabbaths, as
Augustine alluding to the people Exodus 32. that said cras observabimus
sabbathum JEHOVAE, they would keep a sabbath to the LORD, it was to eat and
drink and play: Sabbathum aurei vituli: this is the Sabbath of the golden
calfe. Against this carnal Sabbath severe order was taken. Council. Gangrense,
in Paphlagonia: 5. Can: 18. and last: and the Council of Agatho: in France,
38. Can: 1. For the other, it was for the worldly sabbath: but this for the
carnal sabbath: Council: Grangren: 1. Can. 18. That the people, the true
Christians, they gave themselves so wholly at that time, to celebrate the
Sabbath, and to the sanctifying of it, that they would sit all day in the
Temple, praying and doing other exercises without eating or drinking any thing,
so as that there grew diseases amongst the people, insomuch as the Council was
feign to give such an Edict, that he should be anathema, quicunque remaneret
in templo in die dominico, that no man should fast so, and sit in the Temple
till night, if he did, he was given over to the Devil.

These as they fall not into our time: so certainly they show unto us, the
excellent examples of Abstinence.

2. The other sort, for if the affairs of our calling be not lawful, and the
recreations, at other times, and at other days being lawful, may not be
used; then the works of our own nature, such as Esaias speaks against, Cap.
58. much less; as Gluttony, Lust, Grunkennsse, and such like. Where such are,
no doubt there is a double Iniquity: 1. Because he breaks this Commandment
of the Sabbath: and 2. the other of the Commander.
And that people that has picked out this day, of all the days in the week,
to deal exceeding despitefully with GOD, as the other did celebrare Sabbatum
Tyri, etc. did keep the sabbath like the man of Tire. So these do celebrare
sabbathum satanae. Do serve the devil in their sabbath. But Esaias 58.3. the
right Sabbath is called Deliciae JEHOVAE, that wherein the LORD takes great
Delight and pleasure: and that is kept, by ceasing from our own works.
Whether it be from our own nature, and will, or calling, on the six days, or
ceasing from that that is Pleasant in our eyes: from our own pastime; then we
shall keep Sabbathum JEHOVAE delicatum; and GOD will make it a day, to learn
his will in; and learning it, to practice it, and practicing it, shall bless
us: and so we shall come to the inheritance of our crown. And on the
contrary side, if, Lament. 1.4. and 7. he complains, that the high ways of
Sion shall complain, That none came to and fro to GODS Sanctuary: or if it
fall out, as it is Verse 7. that the enemy mock at her sabbaths; if order be
not taken; GOD himself, Mal. 2.3. will take orde: projiciet stercus
solemnitatum vestrarum: he will make them as odious to us, as dung: and we
shall loath it, or as Jer. 17. the last Verse; he shall punish it by fire: But
if ye will not hear me to sanctify the sabbath, etc.

To sanctify it: It is well, says an heathen man, if one alone do it, but
better, if many together, or an whole city, Psalm. 40.10. The special reason
of the instituting this day, was that his truth and glory might have the
praise thereof, and that in the great Congregation he might have the Glory.
In this sense, Joel. 1.13. Gird your selves, and lament you Priests: howl ye
Ministers of the Altar: for meat-offrings and drink-offrings are taken from the
house of your GOD. And Joel. 2.15. Sanctifying is taken from assembling
together. The reason, in regard of the Church was; 1, uniformity: That they
might be known all to keep one profession of faith, and to be in one bond
of obedience, that did meet in one place, at one time, in one day, to glorify
GOD. And 2. The Means, Prayer. And 3. for the Common wealth. Psalm. 68.6. He
is the GOD that makes men to be of one mind in an house: and as the heathen
men saw, that this (...), meeting together in one place, was because of (...),
it was a way to maintain amity. Therefore, those that set up tyranny,
separate men.

4. For each private man, that (as was said before) from these nundinae animae
from this spiritual fair, they might carry commeatum animae, provision for
the soul, for the lightening of their understanding: For the restrayning of
their will; even as in the market day before men gather for their use to serve
them the whole week after: And so consequently being thus stored, and
provided for, the great end may be gained, in Ezekiel. 38.23. That GOD might be
sanctified: id est, That he might be magnified. Exodus 31.13. The Sabbath was
a Sign betwixt GOD and us; whereby we may know that it is he that
sanctifies us. So when this is wrought, we might bring forth fruit of this
sanctification. Whereas GOD, Genesis 2.3. did first make holy this Day, out of the
proportion of it, John. 17.19. he sanctified it for our sakes, and not for his
own: and his sanctification was, as it is, Jer. 1.5. The ordaining of it to an
holy use, and that as Zach. 7.3. appointed by a separation to that exercise,
from other days; and then as 1. Cor. 10.16. by giving a blessing to the
exercise, that is upon that day: And that that was his, to make holy; is our
duty to keep holy: For if a thing be destinated to an use, and be not
applied to it, it is perverted. See Ezechias his course, 2. Chron. 29.5.
whatsoever God has sanctified or made holy, that the fruit thereof may
redound to us; it needs not that we should sanctify the thing, but we must
first sanctify our selves. We cannot make it holy, but keep it holy; as the
destination is of God, so the application is of our selves; but Exodus 30.29.
what thing soever is holy, he must see he be holy that touches it: So he that
lives in that day, that he do not touch it, nor look upon the Sun that
shines in it, but that he be able to make it, and himself holy: all that
look on the sun that day must be holy.

For the use of the means. For this cause, Romans 15.16. it is plain, that we
are sanctified by the Holy Ghost: And there is therein a resemblance to (
Levit. 8.10.) the Leviticall sanctifying: There was nothing could be
sanctified, but it must first be anointed, 1 John 2.27. it is said, to be as
the figure of the spiritual Unction; which is nothing else but the spiritual
working of the Holy Ghost in our hearts. So then first we must see that the
Unction be in us, then (as before) Luke 11.13. because the Holy Ghost which
only can sanctify us, is the gift of God, and is not denied to any, to whom
he has given grace to receive it; the spirit expresses it in this manner,
and compares himself to fire, the spark is given by God; so that the matter
must be gathered and prepared by us, that we (1 These. 5.19.) do not quench
the spirit, that is, Prophesies, or the ordinary means which God has
ordained. Deuteronomy. 12.8. That sanctification shall not come to any man by his own
brain, by doing that which is good in his own eyes; but only the prescript
method that God has set down for the gathering of Matter for this Spark;
which the Holy Ghost must set on fire; that so it might not go out. The
Fathers in the Council of Gangara, last Canon, have set it down thus; That if
any man keeping his house that day, be never so fruitfully occupied, and think
he pleases God, they give him Anathema for it, especially at those times.

The means of sanctification. In which nothing else can be said, but that was
said before in knowledge; how the true knowledge might be come by. Only that
that Augustine says, of the often iteration: that this is the fruit of
iteration, that he that speaks may say, Domine scis, quia dixi, Domine scis,
quia iteravi, Domine scis, quia contestatus sum, Lord thou know I have
sanctified thy Name because I have preached thy Name, I have talked of it again
and again, I have been witness unto thy truth. In 1 Timothy 4.4. the Apostle
attributes the sanctification of every thing to Prayer that is used before:
and therefore they have termed it, the Preparative to all the duties of a
Christian: More plainly, Mar. 1.35. Christ in the morning before day, arose
and prayed so long, and came into the Synagogue; which may necessarily be
gathered to be the Sabbath day. Then we see here Christ, for the means of
sanctification took order, first beginning with Prayer: For the exercise
thereof, that is, Prayer; it has two parts, either it is before, or after.
Before, either private, as of the faithful, Psalm. 111.1. and Mark 6.46. of
Christ: Or public, Acts 16.13. that even the Heathen themselves went out to
pray at the rivers side: But especially by 1 Cor. 14.16. that to the prayers of
the Congregation every one should join his own Amen. And secondly, After,
Numb. 6.24. because, as before we be not fit to receive, so after we have
received unless God cover his spirit which he has given unto us, the enemy
will seek power against us to take it away (as Luke 8.12.) except we desire
the Lord, that his word may remain with us still, and bring forth his work.

2. After that succeeds the use of the word: that is sanctified for
sanctification. Esaias 42.21. more plainly, Deuteronomy. 4.10. Gather me the people
together, (for this end) and I will cause them to hear my words: Therefore the
end is, to hear the word. The word in that day, has a double use: First, as
it is read or heard, read only: Secondly, as it is Preached, or heard preached.

1. The first; the Church in great wisdom always thought best and most
necessary, that it should go before, that men might not be estranged, when the
word was read; that the other should not be strange to them. But it is a
strange thing, that we at the hearing think we have done enough, if we can
apprehend it; whereas if before we would meditate well of it, when it is read,
we might make better use of it: and at the hearing afterward, might be
confirmed in the same.

The ordinary course and time of reading the Scriptures, among the Jews was
their (...), the preparation to the Sabbath; at the ninth hour, at rhree of
the clock: and was told them before, that they might be acquainted with it the
better.

2. To come to the public reading in the congregation; it is warranted by Acts
13.17. and 15.21. by the Gospel, 1 These. 5.27. I charge you that this Epistle
be read to all the Brethren the Saints.

Then for private reading, after the congregation is broken up, because Christ
shows plainly that his witnesses be the Scriptures, and therefore will have
the Scriptures to be searched, because they were Prophecies of him: and Esaias
8.20. for threatening; and Esaias 34.16. Seek in the book of the Lord, and
read, none of all these things shall fail, none shall want her mate; for his
mouth has commanded, and his very spirit has gathered them. And for the
examination of that that is taught, Revel. 3. a practice, Acts 17.11. for the
acquainting of the Berreans to examine the Apostles doctrine.

There are two more uses in reading, Revel. 1.3. There is a blessing pronounced
to them that read, or hear the words of the Prophecy, because it exciteth
men to praise God: Men seeing the Prophecies fulfilled and executed, they may
not doubt, but consent to God: For which cause these were monuments of the
Church, of the fulfilling of any promise or threatening; yea they suffered in
the old Church, the Monuments of the Wars of God, for the Israelites, Number.
21.14. their liber bellorum Dei, and their verba dierum, of Nathan, Gad,
Shemajah, etc. they suffered them privately in an holy use to be read, that
seeing his promises with the denouncing of his threatenings, they might be
excited to the greater praise and fear of God.

Another use is, as they gather by the Analogy of Daniel 2.2. and Acts 8.28.
Daniel was occupied in the exposition of the Prophet Jeremie; so the Eunuch
reading Esaias, asked the exposition of it of Philip: and no doubt, if Philip had
written on that day, he might have had use of his writing, as of Preaching.
Therefore God has ordained Expositors, such as the book of Iasher, Ios.
10.13. a commentor of the Law: his works being for this end, to make known
the hard texts of Scripture, and expound them unto us.

The second part in the means of sanctification, is the Word preached; that is
it that Romans 10.15. the Apostle speaks of, For Sanctification.
which is the ordinary means of Faith; and Christ in his Prayer, John 17.17.
Sanctify them in thy truth: and thy word is truth. Christ himself, Luke 4.16.
by his Preaching has sanctified it: and the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.21. has
pronounced, not to receive any other alteration to the Worlds end.

3. The third follows, the pondering of that that we have heard read or
preached; as Luke 2.19. according to the example of David, Psalm. 119.97. O how
love I thy Law; it is my meditation continually; the occupying of our minds
and meditations to apply it hereafter, and make fruit of it. Beside the
meditation of the word, that we shall hear read, or preached; the 92. Psalm
(which was a Psalm made for the Sabbath, and is sung as on that day; and if
credit may be given to the Jews traditions, they tell us, that the two first
verses came from Adam, and he used to sing them in Paradise:) gives three
further points to consider. First, verse. 4. which is indeed that which God here
urges, the consideration of the works of his hands, the making to our selves
a contemplative use, as we have made all the week long an active of them; so
we should have a spiritual. And the second is, verse. 7. a meditation of the
judgments of God: The third is, verse. 10. and 12. a meditation of the mercies
of God; of the mercies and visitations; taking judgments, for the genus to
both. These, whether they extend to our own persons, or come on our Fathers
house, or the place wherein we live, or the Church round about us, there is
none of these, but they afford us an object of meditation; and as we see the
meditation of the creatures of God, of the wild Asses, Sparrow, Crane, Lillies,
etc. they yield still meditation from tha less to the greater; if they be thus
thankful, how much more are we bound to him? So Romans 2. he sets down his
judgments to move us to repentance, and his mercy to move us to thankfulness;
and thus, when we are wearied with prayer, and reading, and preaching is
ceased, our meditation remains to continue the whole day and still finds
matter to work upon.

4. The fourth; Which is not a beating within our selves in our counting house,
of any great calamity; but the examining of it betwixt us and others; and that
is done three manner of ways.

1. With them that have taught us; as Luke 2.42. it appears plainly, that
after the solemnity in the eight day, the last of the feast, it was the
manner, the teachers sat them down at the Table, and the Auditors propounded
Doubts and Questions, to be resolved of them. And so was CHRIST no doubt, not
an apposer, but as in the the state of a Learner: and yet showed a great gift
that way above his years. And if points of doctrine fail, Luke 3.10. and Act.
2.37. what other points were to be resolved of: as there were diverse questions
moved by some, how they might live accordingly: id est, by the Soldiers and
by the Publicanes. Now, because there are no doubts, it is a sign that fear
is clean extinguished out of men's hearts: and if there be any, it is not of
doing, or leaving undone, but of detracting.

2. Between equals, Gal. 2.2. 2. Kings 2.11. Luke 24.17. Mal. 3.16. When as
hearers, or two of like calling, whether they be Teachers, as in the two first
places, as Elias and Eliseus went talking: The word in the original, bears a
further signification; and as Paul with Peter, and the disciples in Luke, with
CHRIST'S approbation: and in Malachie, it is accompanied with a blessing: id
est, because that thing in the preaching of the Word does good to one, which
does not to the other; by the laying together as it were a symbolum in a common
shot they receive a more general benefit. As on the other side, those
imperfections, and infirmities, that hinder me, happly the same may fall into
the mind of my brother, and I may show him how his case, and how I was
delivered out of it.

The third, is Deuter. 11.19. Where it is said; Of the exercise of the Law,
there shall be an examination in families, and the father or chief thereof,
he shall question with the younger; and that shall enter, and whet them more,
and make it stick faster. So these three make a full member.

4. Concerning the fourth, and last; It is not to be passed over, Aug. lib.
10. de Civit. DEI, accompteth it totum opus Sabbathi; as if the Sabbath was
made for nothing else. But only for thanksgiving and praise. For this end was
(as is aforesaid,) penned Psalm. 92. for that end appointed. Howbeit, they have
drawn Psalms generally to these three points; That the Church of GOD
publicly, that every man particularly may make use. Either of those that
contain general matter, or of some particular custom. For general
instruction, Psalm. 91. the general ( Psalm. 103.) of some particular benefit,
as Psalm. 68. When as we have had too much rain, and pray for fair weather;
or when there is too much drought, the latter part of Psalm. 65. Then for these
particular benefits, particular Thanksgiving: or as Psalm. 35.18. (the neglect
of which is a blemish in our Church.) He desires deliverance, and promises
that being heard, he will sing His Praise in the Congregation. So Psalm. 65.1.
the very word there, is due: There is due to thee an Hymn: The reason is
because thou have heard our prayers. Tibi debetur Hymnus a SION. These actions
are so general, as that they may serve, for every action of the Sabbath. In
wicked exercises we can never be frequent enough; God requires, that we
should be as faithful in his work. The celebration of the Sacraments, Exodus
12.16. and performing of the discipline of the Church. It is the Sabbath days
work: The order does pertain to all; and it so pertains to all, that least
any man should think it is enough to do it once, Revel. 22.11. Qui
sanctisicatus est, sanctisicetur adhuc: He that is holy, let him be holy
still. There is still a necessity, every Sabbath day we must continue, 1.
Cor. 13.9. Our knowledge is but in part, and our prophesying but in part. There
shall still remain scrutamini scripturas; search the Scripture; Revel. 7.14.
That we should still wash our Robes in the blood of the Lamb: id est, Come
still nearer, and nearer to cleanness: so far forth, as 1. Tim. 4. If we
continue there in, we shall save our selves. This for the Means.

The Means are for the Fruit: and therefore, he that planteth a Vineyard, hoc
est vltimum fructus ejus. Though he hope when it is yet aframing; yet last is
the Fruit. This is the fruit that GOD looks for; the great end of the
Commandment, that His Name may be sanctified in us, We must not use the Means
only: For the Means the phrase is set down, Numb. 20.12. Because ye believed
me not to sanctify me in the presence of the children, etc. Levit. 20.7.
Sanctificate and sancti estote: Sanctify your selves, and be ye holy. Such
words, because of the two fold glory that redoundeth to GOD, have a double
use; GOD is glorified. 1. either by us directly, or 2. from us by others
indirectly, Matthew. 5.16. That they seeing our good works, might glorify Him.
Therefore, comes it to pass, that these words, as sanctification and
justification, etc. have a double sense: First, it signifies a making holy.
When we are indeed made holy, and that is by Means: for this cause
sanctification is a making holy. Second, in regard of the other, a declaring of
this made sanctification: And of our selves, The first being 2. Pet. 1.10. And
second, showing it to all other men to be so and so; we may glorify GOD our
selves, and GOD may be glorified in others. Whereby it falls out, that
because good works make this. Therefore, CHRIST, Matthew. 12.12, says, That a
good work is lawful on the Sabbath day: What work soever shows
Regeneration is lawful, 2. Tim. 2.21. for there the Apostle says thus; (...):
id est, Prepared or made fit to every good work. But because that the day is
specially instituted for the remembrance of his great Mercies, as 1. Making us,
when we were nothing: 2. Redeeming us, when we were in a worse case: and 3.
The beginning of Sanctification, for these three great Mercies.
Therefore it is, that no work does so well agree, as Thanksgiving for these
Mercies. He is so delighted in no work, as in the work of Mercy. And
therefore, comes it that there is an especial affinity, betwixt
sanctification and works of mercy. Ose. 6.6. When he had sacrifice without
this, he abjecteth all. Therefore, to compare this with the rituall
sanctification of the law. As you had anointing: so you had the second part;
every thing was sanctified by two means. First, If he were a person: his hand
was filled by Aaron; implevit manum ejus Aaron. And if it were an Altar; then
there was somewhat offered on it. So oblation or filling the hand, is the
second: Deuteronomy. 16.16. There is a charge to Aaron; that whenever they came to
appear before the LORD, none of them should appear empty. Therefore, Levit.
8.31. There is mention made of a Basket of sanctification; in which were
reserved those things, that afterward they would consecrate to the LORD. The
very same order was taken, 1. Cor. 16.1.2. On the LORDS Day there should be
collection for the poor. There is nothing that so sets out the matter, as
Deuteronomy. 26. wholly.

The works are either outward, and performed to the body; or inward, and
performed to the spirit of man. For the first Matthew. 25. our Savior certainly
as he is CHRIST, when he shall come to judge, it shall be happy for six
works that he there reckons; and the seventh may be added: three in Verse 35.
first, the feeding the hungry: second, giving drink to the thirsty: third,
the merciful dealing with, or good entertayning of the stranger. And three in
Verse 36. first, clothing the naked: second, visiting the sick: third,
succouring them that be in prison. Seventh, is the care of the dead. 2. Sam.
2.5. We see that the Prophet David desires a blessing of GOD for the men of
Jabesh Gilead; because they had buried the body of Saul. Ioh. 12.7. CHRIST
commended Mary's work: Joh. 19.38. Nicodemus and Joseph are commended; the one
for begging CHRIST'S body of Pilate, to bury it; the other for enterring it
with linen clothes, and with spices.

Augustine, lib. de cura pro mortuis, gives this reason, that this care of the
dead, is a work of mercy. It is done, ne pateat miseria sua, to make that
this misery of rotting, may not be seen of every man. It would grow both
loathsome to the eye and nose. As also because every man loves his own flesh
so well, that he would have it well, and honestly dealt withal. And
therefore, this is a benefit done to him.

Now, for flesh and blood, it is easy to reason against this: They say, we
know not whether a man be hungry or no: and we see none go naked, etc.
Therefore, the Fathers in a General Counsel have set down this; Idem, est
occurrere necessitati, quod succurere: to keep from misery, and to help out
of misery is all one. For this case of necessity, the monuments that they have
left behind them: show, that they were more given to this, than we. Their
rule is this, In di^ Domini extend ad DEVM, ne extend ad pauperem: stretch
out the hand to GOD, on the LORDS Day; and stretch it not out to the poor: and
ye shall stretch it out in vain. Augustine. For he asks nothing, but his
own, that which he gave you: and that which ye cannot keep long: does he
ask of thee, but pauxillum, a morsel, to reward thee centuplum, an hundredth
fold? and but caducum, that which fades, to reward thee eternally?

And then, because there were then, as there are now, that would talk of their
unablenesse: and therefore, their answer was, Si tibi non susficiunt res tuae
ad Christianos vsus, parandum est, vt tu sufficias illis: If thou have not an
estate to bestow upon thy poor Christian Brother, bestow thy self upon him.
And further, because they alleged, that they had but little; they would
answer, that GOD does not regard quantum, but ex quanto: what I give, but what
I have to gives: as the Widows mite, multum obtulit, qui parum sibi reliquit:
he parts with much, that leaves himself but little. Last, there were some,
that were able to give, and when they had given on the Sunday, they would
recover it on the other days, either by dealing hardly, and oppressing them;
if they were under them. Therefore, The last caution was that Esa. 15.16. as
that his mercies must not make him unrighteous. Esa. 58. So the conclusion is
this, If a man do, dare rem suam DEO: and se peccato, or Daemoni: Give his
substance to GOD, and himself over unto sin and the Devil: and so give quod
est minus DEO creatori, and quod majus est, inimico: The less to GOD, and ^he
more to the Devil. Howsoever, he does look for the mercy of the LORD, he
shall not keep his Sabbath.

Augustine: Est quaedam charitas, quae de sacculo non erogatur. All charity
comes not out of the purse. There are spirituales eleemosynae, or
misericordiae: Spiritual Alms. And they are so much better than the other, as
they do mederi partis principalioris miseriae: They take order for a more
principal part: id est, the Soul.

1. They be seven: 1. Amongst which if a man shall Psalm. 51.13. Dan. 12.3.
teach the ignorant: 2. Prove. 27.9.
Give good and christian advise to one that is in doubt: 3. or 2 Cor. 13.11
exhort him, that is slack in soome good duty.


2. The second: The comforting of those that are in perplexity, and in
distress of mind, 1. These. 5.14. Flere cum slentibus: to weep with them that
weep. Romans 12.15. Rejoice with them that rejoice. Such was made, Job. 29.13.
The blessing of him that was ready to perish.

3. The third, is the duty, which CHRIST, ( Matthew. 18.15.) made as a part of
Discipline, the reproving of our brethren betwixt us and them. 1. These. 5.14.

4. The fourth is Matthew. 6.14. The forgiving^: The persuading with our selves
to forgive, whatsoever is committed against us of others. Greg: qui dat and non
dimittit; he that gives and does not forgive, (upon Matthew. 5.23.) does a
work unacceptable, that GOD likes not of: sed si dimittat, etiamsi non dat,
yet he shall be forgiven of GOD; so often as he forgiveth others. Si tu
ponas limitem, DEUS tibi ponet limitem: but if you forgive, sine limite, nor
put limits to the offense of thy brother, GOD will not limit thy sin.

5. The fifth, is Romans 15.1. We that are strong, ought to bear the infirmities
of the weak brethren, Gal. 6.2. Alter alterius omnia portate: bear ye one
another burden. 1. These. 5.14. Bear with those that are weak.

6. The sixth, Jam: 5.16. praying one for another. Here was a work: but the
especial thing is Matthew. 5.44. to pray for our enemies: as ( Luke 23.34.)
CHRIST did: and his example must be every man's imitation in this kind.
Augustine; Fortasse causaberis te non posse docere: It may so happen, that thou
can do^ no good by thy advice.. Some are as forward to advise you as you
them: Perhaps you have not the gift of comforting; and if you tell them of
their fault, they will contemn you: nunquid dices, non possum dimittere
offendenti: But to forgive one that has offended thee: to bear with, or to
pray for him, this may always be done: vt malitia ignoscatur, nulla
excellentia, nulla sapientia, nullis divitiis opus est: To pardon a wrong done
unto us, there is neither excellency, nor wisdom, nor riches required of us.
Therefore these take hold of all.

7. Last, Matthew. 5.9. Reconciling those that are at variance, making peace.
That so we may show our selves to be Children of GOD. Now, because here
falls an objection likewise; What if they will not? Aug: lib. 2. contra
Parmenian: If thou have done thy good will, thou art a peacemaker: Tum si
aequitate improbas, pacificus es. These are the seven fruits of spiritual
mercy. Further then these, whatsoever is a work of the law of GOD, is also
acceptable: but especially these.

The third Precept, is the Rule of HOMOGENEA. Where any thing is commanded,
there all things are commanded that are of the same kind. And we find Levit.
16.31. and 25.32. That the day of Humiliation, or a Fast, is called there a
Sabbath, an ordinance: or as Augustine says well; If the estate of Innocence
had continued, then there had been but one only day to have been observed of
Christians; and that had been wholly spent in the giving of Thanks, etc. But
since the Fall, there comes by the wants we feel in our souls, that GOD is
not only Glorified: Sacrificio Eucharistiae; with the Sacrifice of Praise, and
Thanksgiving: but also, Sacrificio spiritus tribulati and humiliati; with the
Sacrifice of an humble and contrite heart: Quia bonum perfect vt volumus, non
possumus. And so alleges that place of Paul, the bond that lies upon us,
cannot be so accomplished of us, as it ought to be: and so consequently, we
have ofter occasions to glorify GOD, in this form, or way of Humiliation for
At tonement, then we have of the other, and the portion of this Sacrifice,
Romans 12.2. is greater then the portion of the other, so that as the other
tends to the initiation of the joys to come; so this tends to the
mortification, in this present life. It is the Ordinance of God, that there
should be a day of both. It is strange thing, that whereas some do agree that
the exercise of fasting is moral and not a ceremony, yet they will not grant
the same performance to the Sabbath it self. And the reason that it is moral,
is, because whatsoever was a ceremony, it might not at any other time be used,
in any other place or order, then was prescribed of God in the book of
Ceremonies: but this of fasting has been otherwise; in Joel 2.15. and Zac.
7.5. in the fifth and seventh month they had both upon an extraordinary cause:
And Zachary, not that only, but also in the tenth month: which, had it been a
ceremony, had been unlawful to do. But a ceremony in the time of the Law
was tied to certain places and times. Again, that our Savior, Luke 5.35. as
he does there give a reason, why his Disciples should not fast; so he shows
plainly, that after the Bridgroome was taken away from them, after his taking
up into glory, they should fast; and so consequently when he should be taken up
into glory it should continue.

Lastly, the practice of the Church, Acts 13.3. at the sending forth of
Barnabas and Paul; of private fasting, as of Paul, 2 Cor. 11.27. In muli is
jejuniis, in fasting often; and his precept, 1. Cor. 7.5. even of those that
are Married, that they might sever themselves for a time, to give themselves to
Fasting and Prayer; show plainly that it was accounted lawful then, and
therefore practiced. And for the later part of the Primitive Church, the Books
of the Fathers, are exceeding full of the praise of this exercise, herewith
they did so consume themselves, that they might say with David, Psalm. 109.24.
Their knees were made weak with fasting, and their flesh had lost all
fatness. This Sabbath of humiliation or day of fast, receives the division of
a public exercise, or private. Public, as to which the silver Trumpets must
be blown, Joel 2.15. Private, which none might know off, Matthew. 6.16. it must
be done as privately as may be: so that this is only the difference; for the
ends and parts, they concur, and are the same, no difference. The ends and
reasons of a public fast are these: 1. Either for the turning away of some
evil, or for the procuring of some good; and because malum is paenae or
culpae, evil is either of sin or of punishment, for both these, and specially
the punishment, either our own, or upon some other: Our own, either present,
mali grassantis, or impendentis, hanging over our heads: For present evil.
When the Church or Common wealth has any of the shafts of the Lord sticking in
their ^^^es, (as Chrysostom says very well, on Joshua 7.6.) a public f^^^,
and upon the overthrow in Judges 20.26. and consequently (...) ^he time of
Captivity, under the Philistims, 1 Samuel 7.6. and in (...) time of dearth, Joel
2.13. When as the judgment of God (...) as not yet come, but only imminent, 2 Chronicles. 20.3. and Jehoso^hat feared, and set himself to seek the Lord, and
proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah: a public fast, Hester 4.16. Go and
assemble all the Jews that are in Susan and fast ye for me, and neither eat
nor drink in three days, neither day nor night: and I and my Maids will fast
liken ise, etc. Jonah 3.5. When Ninive was threatened with destruction within
forty days. When this punishment lies not upon us: but upon the Churches
about us, Zach. 7.3. Solemn Fasts for the Churches dispearsed in Babylon and
Chaldea.

To come to Malum culpae, to the Fault: because there is a great affinity;
therefore we see, though there was no visitation to the Jews, they matching
themselves with strange wives; yet therefore, Esra 9.12. they are forbidden to
match their sons with the daughters of the Gentiles: And though it be an
evil example, 1 Kings 21.12. At the command of Jezabell a Fast is proclaimed.

Last, for procuring of some good, Acts 13.3. and 14.23. The one at the
ordayning of the Apostles; the other at the ordayning of the Ministers; that it
would please God to make them sit for the work unto which they were called.

In this duty of fasting, if we respect the punishment only, or the visitation
of God, no doubt it is hard to make it Statarie; at a set time, a prefixed day;
neither has the Lord appointed so for that Jom appormi, a day of expiation,
Expiare peccata sua jejunio, and so consequently it hinders not, but that
there may be set days, and a set fast: and it is more expedient it should.

And as these are the causes, which when they befall, the whole people ought to
make a solemn Sabbath, to move all: so the same causes, when they concur but
to a private man, then comes out the second, the private exercise of it.

2. The causes are the same; either when we are under the hand of God, 2 Samuel
12.16. there David himself alone fasteth: when it is not upon us, but
threatens us, and hangs over us; 1 Kings 21.27. Ahabs Fast, though not
inward, yet not unrewarded of God, when as the Prophet Elias threatened, for the
unrighteous putting of Naboth to death. When it is not our own case, but
pertains to others, it may be lawfully used: as Psalm. 35.13. David says,
That when they were sick, he fasted: When it is no punishment, but a fault
only; so that it be Propter languorem boni, 1 Cor. 7.5. When the prayer loses
some part of his fervencie, when it is not so fervent; or when there is any
tentation. Christ says, there was such a kind of spirits, as that without
prayer and fasting they could not be cast out, Matthew 17.2. without prayer and
fasting, some kind of tentation not to be avoided.

Last, for the procurement of some good; and that either in general, Acts
10.13. Cornelius himself when he was to enter into the general vocation of a
Christian. Or particular, CHRIST'S own example, in the entering of his
Mediatorship, Matthew 4.1. It is the opinion of the Fathers. 13. and 14. of the
Acts; before the Inauguration and calling of the Ministry: This, whatsoever
the Magistrate does, ought to be done of our selves.

The Parts are of no other nature then the parts of the Sabbath: and they are
two. First, the external, as the rest; outward sorrow: Secondly, internal
abstinence, as Sanctification.


The outward, they call abstinence, or fasting: the inward, sorrow, or
mourning, or humiliation.

First, in the outward, it is required of us, that from Even to Even, we do
wholly celebrate the Sabbath, Levit. 23.32. wholly abstain from meat and
drink; Ezra 10.6. (...), Whatsoever is to be eaten, and (...) whatsoever is
liquid, a general restraint of both.

Secondly, in Joel 1.13. Gird your selves and lament you Priests, howl ye
Ministers of the Altar, come and lie all night in sackcloth, ye Ministers of
my God, etc. An abridgement or breaking off the ordinary course of our sleep.

Thirdly, in Exodus 33.4. of laying aside of the best apparel; which in Nehem.
9.1. and in sundry other places, is expressed by wearing of sackcloth. And that
we should be without that too; but only for the commandment of God, for
nakedness. And generally, Zac. 7.3. separating our selves from all that is
commodious or pleasant to the senses: from all commodities and delights of this
life. Et quia non peccavit sola gula, ne jejunet sola; Bernard. Because the
taste has not sinned alone, therefore it must not keep a fast alone; but the
rest of the senses must have their separation also. And as we are forbidden and
restrained all these; so Levit. 23.28. are we forbidden any labor, or work of
the six days: and so falls in, that the same rest is required then, as on
the Sabbath.

Last of all, as we find, Esaias 58.10. the precept, an example, Acts 10.3. the
Centurions fasting, that it was joined with alms: Canon. Quod ventri
subtrahitar, illud pauperi addatur, that which we spare out of our own
bellies, must be given to the poor.

But now, because as we said before, it is not bodily labor, or bodily rest,
(so Romans 14.17. the Kingdom of God is not in meat and drink:) If there we
stay and go no further, it will not serve: Therefore the Prophet tells such
fasters, Esaias 58.3. though they lay in sackcloth a whole day, yet it was not
that God required; because the outward action is but ordained for the inward,
the account that God makes is of that; it is instituted for humbling; Matthew.
9.13. what is there said of Sacrifice, may be said as well of outward mourning:
And as it is, Joel 2.12. not the rending of apparel, but the heart: and the
fast that he allows off, must be accordingly. And 2 Cor. 7.11. where the
Apostle describes the full course of whatsoever is required of us inwardly in
this fast. And Romans 8. it must come from the spirit, with such sighings, as
cannot be expressed.

Of the sorrow, there cannot be an exquisite method; but as he sets them
down there, they are in two companies: either a working of sear, and
consequently a sorrow: and after that, a sorrow, that we have been so unkind
to offend so merciful a Father; and then after that we have a while remained,
that we proceed to a desire of amends, and that we be careful: and that care
shows it self zealous; and if we chance not to proceed a right, then that we
be ready to punish our selves. In a word, the fruit of those actions, they tend
to this end, 1 Cor. 11.31. that we may judge our selves, that so we may escape:
As his policy was, 1 Kings 20.31. and as we see the common practice of the
rebellious subject, if by any means he may make the bowels of his Prince to
yearne within him: But always except the seal of humiliation and fasting be
added, all is naught. Nehem. 9.1. and last. Where after a great vow before the
Congregation, protested that after an exhortation four times; and after a
solemn reading of the Law at that time: When as ordinary readings was but
twice. This was the order for the furtherance of this: and when he had drawn
a Covenant, they set their hands and seals to it, and so bound themselves by
an everlasting Covenant. Which vow if we can keep, if we can bring our selves
to the vow of obedience; if we can do this unfainedly, and do it so
effectually, as we promise readily, ever afterward; it is very certain that
this has taken a good root in us.

The fourth rule. The spiritual part of the Law. Which, because Esaias knew the
value of it in the Fast; as Cha. 58.3. and in his Sabbath, at the 13. verse of
the same, nothing did so belong to them, as if they would give over their own
corrupt Will: if man's corrupt will could be brought under: This is that he
shows, 1 Pet. 3.15. Sanctify the Lord your God in your hearts; It is a thing
that may be performed of man; and such as the Lord delights greatly in.

The means in which the lord throughout the Scriptures comprehends these:
that whereas there must be a solemn prosession of thankfulness, and our
sorrow for our unthankefulnesse there must be a place also, and persons chief
in these actions of Sanctification: And these persons, not Ex tumultuario
grege, they must not be men of the common rout; but such as must be trained up
for it. And because the trayning up will require cost; therefore the order for
the maintenance of the Ministers, and the Universities, which are the places to
prepare them for Ministers, and Schools, they are commanded alike of God.

For the place, Leviticus 19.30. and 26.2. in both places, is this sentence:
Ye shall keep my Sabbaths, and reverence my Sanctuary: making the
observation of his day, and reverence of the place to run in one verse; and
making them of one nature.

The Sabbath is the day of rest, and when we hallow it, we call it the Lords
rest; so Psalm. 132.14. we see the Lord will give the same name to the place.
This is my rest: Concerning which, as the Apostles took order, as that the
exterior part of GODS worship might be performed decently and in order. So on
the other side, that the place of GODS worship should be so homely, and so
ordered, that the Table of the Lords Supper, where (one says well) Tremenda
Dei mysteria, the dreadful mysteries of GOD are celebrated, that it were
fitter to eat Oysters at, to be an Oyster table, then to stand in the
Sanctuary of the LORD, this is so far from Pompa, that it is far from
(...), Decency: that every thing should be (...). And it is a thing that would
be thought off: it is not Gravior pars Legis, the weightier part of the Law,
yet not to be neglected. As our working, traveling, etc. show that we esteem
not that day; so the Walls and Windows show, that we are not esteemers of his
Sanctuary.

From the place, to the Person (the Minister.) Concerning which person likewise
we know, that GOD has appointed him to be the chief dealer to stand betwixt
Him and Man, Tanquam pater patratus, and so far forth excellent in their own
natures are the Ministers of GOD, that are his Ambassadors not to the people,
(...), but to the highest Princes upon earth; yet it falls out with them, as
with the Day and Place: they are disesteemed and neglected. In the old time,
wicked Princes thought meanly of the Ministers, as they to whom it pertained,
as they thought then but to burn a little Incense; and the Priests office to
be nothing else, but to offer Sacrifice. So now most think that it is nothing
else, but the reading of certain prayers, and going up into the Pulpit of
Wood, and speaking there an hour, without sense and reason; yea, many times,
without any reverence: In this respect GOD has taken order, that whereas,
Levit. 10.11. and Deuteronomy. 32. there he shows, that it is not that alone; that
he shall set Jacob to school, and learn Israel his lesson: but he shall teach
the King also, even Joshuah the Prince, and at his bidding he shall go out and
come in.

It is not a thing that pertains so much to the outward celebration; but the
works of sanctification: and so consequently, that is not wrought by statutes
of Princes, but by the Lords Law. But the Counselor at the Lords Law must be
esteemed. If a Prince be but only (as the Heathen man says) Tanquam subulcus,
or like an Heardman that keeps herds, and looks that one beguile not
another, and have no charge of the soul: there were somewhat that might be
said. But it is otherwise; and so consequently as he must look over the soul;
and the soul is a chief part, and requires a chief care: and the chief
care requires such, as be fit to be Doctores gentium; that is, to teach whole
Countries. And again, if it were our outward and bodily enemies, that fought
against us, as Spaniards, and Frenchmen: somewhat it were, that the cases might
be so. But seeing, Ephesians. 6.12. it is a spiritual combat with spiritual
enemies, with (...), which will break out to the overthrow of the Prince, and
the wresting of the Law; therefore such must be chosen, that may set
themselves against those, that are Currus and auriga Israelis, the Chariots and
Horsemen of Israel, to keep and beat back this spiritual Host. Therefore
it should be better maintained, 2 Chronicles. 24.17. the Holy Ghost shows there
plainly, that the life of Jehoiadah the Priest, and his wisdom, was the
means that kept the King from Idolatry, and consequently from destruction. In
Psalm. 82.5. there is a political use, he shows that the want of knowledge
is it, that brings the foundations of the earth, all the Laws, out of
course. In a defect of all statutes, the maintenance of knowledge, is that,
that would, Servare Legem a fraud, keep the Laws; as Prove. 29.18. the wise
man and the wise King says, that that did Servare gregem ab interitu. That
which did keep the people from perishing, is Prophetia, the careful looking
to Prophecy. For if a man do but look into the estates of mighty
Commonwealths, whose wisdom and policy has been great, yet we see that
Riot and the sin of Gluttony, and diseased bodies, and weakness; and on the
other side, Adultery, bastard-slips, and last Translation of Inheritances;
these were the decay of the Assyrian Monarchy.

Again, look into the Persian Empire, Idleness, neglect of Tillage, and of
Mechanical Arts, and Merchandise, and thereby every man growing to be
Patricius, a Gentleman; they were the ruin of that Empire. And the Greeks had
never the overthrow, till then that Covetousness got footing among them, and
so needless dearth; and that the greater men begun to vex the inferior,
and the Prince to burden his Subjects. So the Romans, by their own Pride,
Envy, Emulations, Heartburnings, Seditions, were brought down. And thus was it
with all those Monarchies, for those vices, which GODS Law would not have
suffered; and it is not possible by other Laws to amend them.

To come to our own; in the time of Britains often injuries, and a bringing
in of delays of Suites, and making of Laws only for the Fine; the Lawyers
they were desirous to maintain Causes and Suites, only for the Fee. So that
the Land was overrunne with oppression, and GODS Law not heard amongst them,
they were brought to destruction. And we see by experience, that our enemies
would invade us at such places, where the people are least taught the fear of
God.

Now how is it possible by any Statute, or Act of Parliament, to provide and
take order, that a man should not be Covetous, that there should be no
Idleness, no Riot, Pride, etc. the causes of the decays of those Countries?

Sobriety must first be begotten in the mind: else politic justice will not
be. Judge. 17.7. In those days the state of the people was such, that they
could keep nothing. Chap. 18.600. men of Dan came into Michaes house, and
took away his graven Image, and his Ephod, and Teraphim, and a molten Image,
and his Priests: and Chapter 19. What a monstrous example of lust is that? and it
is attributed to this, because says he, In those days prophesying was rare.
So 1 Samuel 4. after it was once settled, and they had a Judge, yet the corruption
of that calling was the overthrow there, for suffering Hophni and Phinehas to
be such, as brought them under the Philistines: but yet more, 2 Chronicles. 15.3.
where is it possible in any Commonwealth to find 7. such notable changes in so
few years, of the state of Kingdom, as in the 16. and 17. Chap. of 2 of Kings?
and whether all that time it is not ascribed to that, because Israel had been
without a Priest, and a Law. It is Moses his wish, Number. 11.29. that if it were
possible, all the people were Prophets; and the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.5. wishes
that all might speak with tongues, but rather that all might Prophecy:
knowing this, that it were the perfect estate of knowledge so to be: Malice,
and all manner of sin is soon brought in there, where there is no
prophesying. It is our shame that we make not provision for the increase, and
propagation of Prophecy to posterity, but leave our children in danger to be
nuzled up in ignorance: We are right of Hezekiahs mind, Esa. 39. v. last: and 2
King. 20.19. Then Hezekiah said to Esaiah, The word of the Lord which thou have
spoken, is good; for said he, Shall it not be good, if peace and truth be in my
days? Tantum sit pax in diebus meis: it makes no matter, so long as there is
peace in my days: If that were taken away, and a care were had of posterity,
so well as is in other things, and order taken for the government, there is no
doubt, but this must needs be seen, that the observation of the Civil Law
would be the better maintained, by the observation of the Spiritual Law of God.

3. The next is, that for the maintenance of this, there must be such places,
as where these kind of persons must be maintained, Maintenanc^.
that are for to spend their days in the ministry: and for giving of oracles,
it is necessary, that there should be order taken for education: and so
consequently for the education of such, there ought to be institution of
Schools, and Colleges. As soon as the worship of God ceased in one family:
in Egypt, 1 King. 4.31. that in Egypt these, Ethan the Ezrahite, and Heman, and
Chalcol, and Darda the sons of Maholl, four men famous for learning and
knowledge above all the rest: they were raised by God: Ethan, as we read, 2 Chronicles. was Judahs son by Thamar: and the other three being his brothers
children, Mahols sons. And as those were during the time of the captivity; so
Moses is said, Act. 7.22. to have been brought up (...), in all arts and
sciences; as in the Mathematickes. Josh. 15.15. before the Israelites coming
into Canaan, they came to a City called Debiroth: afterward, v. 49. made a City
of learning, it was called Debir, their Oracle: their places then were infinite
greater then ours. 1 Samuel 3.9. There were studies round about the Church, to
occupy themselves: and 1 Samuel 10.5. there was familia Prophetarum, a whole
company of Prophets. The first College we read of there, where the garrisons
of the Philistines lay: which the Philistines so reverently used, that they
passed to and fro by them, and never endangered them: 1 Samuel 19.18. that he
himself built Naioth in Ramah: i. the Beauty of Ramah: and so consequently to
the times of the latter Prophets, 2 King. 4.38. that Elisha had a great number
of the children of the Prophets, daily sitting before him: and the very
ceremony of pouring water on Elias his hands, is not pretermitted. In 2 King.
3.11. in the time of captivity, there was Daniel and the rest: afterward there
was the magna synagoga; called Sanedrim, of the Greek word corrupted (...).
After that, as Philo Judeus reports De vita contemplativa, concerning
students in Alexandria in Egypt, Act. 13.3. and 2.3. and 6.6. that there were
Colleges in Jerusalem; And lastly, we may see Paul's good affection, Act. 19.9.
that disputed daily in the School of one Tiranus; and that which is above all,
1 Timothy 4.15. that he should be altogether conversant in the study of those
things: which cannot be, except there should be a place. And this does show
plainly, that there should be such a calling. And as this is, so is the next
part of it, that concerns maintenance of these both. Neh. 10.33. The covenant
taken, that they would take order for the Tenths: which stands always as of
a stipend, so of free oblation. For a set stipend, 1 Cor. 9.7. the Apostle
proves it sufficiently: and the Law of the Lord, for the tenth part to the
Levite, to be of the same part of the commandment. But the Apostle reasons
thus: that every man that labors for another, must eat of the fruit of his
labors. He begins with the oxen first; then he rises to the soldier; from
thence to the spiritual Sower: that it is nothing to bestow of the bodily
harvest upon him, that works in the spiritual harvest.

And for Tenths, 1 Corin. 31. less then a tenth part cannot be by these
reasons.

1. By the annexing of it to the Priesthood of Melchisedek: to whom Abraham
gave Tithe of all that he had. Genesis 14.20. Hebr. 7.2. 2. Genesis 28.21. The
promise of Jacob 1 Timothy 5.3. is made moral. 3. Because the reason of it was
not particular to the Jews, and therefore that to pay the tenth, was not
particular to them, but lasted to us, Number. 18.3.
Lastly, by Christ's denial, Matthew. 23.23. to the Scribes and Pharisees: And
the Apostles bidding to communicate all things with order. Non est respicienda
analogia, ubi non habenda.

Come to oblations, Oblation:
Deuteronomy. 26.19. God has taken order, has made it free. So the practice of the
godly: Samuel, Abner, Joab, 1 Chronicles. 26.28. And after, Salomons answer to the
Rabbis. In the opinion of the Rabbis, that whosoever did so, he did
certainly: and the answer made by Christ, Joh. 12.8. He accounted it no
defrauding the poor of that that was bestowed on him. So likewise Paul's
testimony, Romans 15.16. That I should be the minister of Jesus Christ toward the
Gentiles, ministering the Gospel of God, that the offering up of the Gentiles
might be acceptable, being sanctified by the Holy Ghost. They are commanded,
Ezekiel. 48.14. not to sell, nor change, nor alienate their first fruits; Levit.
5.25. Zach. 5.4. I will bring it forth, says the Lord of Hosts, and it shall
enter into the house of the thief, and into the house of him that falsely
swears by my Name: and it shall remain in the midst of his house, and
shall consume it with the timber thereof, and stones thereof. Because it is a
book against theft, therefore it shall be in their families, but it shall eat
and consume that family.

The signs are two. first, Esaias 66. verse. last save one, S^^^^
where he says, 1. The people shall be so careful, that they shall take
order, that from Sabbath to Sabbath, from month to month, they shall give of
their own: From Sabbath to Sabbath all flesh shall come to worship before me.
2. Ex superabundanti. If that day, every nation be like mount Sion, and every
man's house be instar templi, as a Church: and the whole people, every man be
instar Sacerdotis, as a Priest.

The last rule for procuring it in others; 6 Rule.
plain in the Commandment, Thou and thy son, etc. example for families,
Job. 1.5. and for the Commonwealth, Nehem. 10.31. he would suffer no wares to
be brought in Sabbato, upon the Sabbath. Contrary to all these is he, whosoever
he be, that makes many Sabbaths or holy days to his pleasure, or that makes
no Sabbath, as they of the Family: but every day a Sabbath, and so none. If
either we so account of it, as the Pharisee, Matthew. 12. not to think it
lawful to do a good work on the Sabbath: or contra, of we indeed do abrogate,
i. if either we be given to the means alone, Ezekiel. 33.3. but never the better:
or contra, if we think the means not to be esteemed, Hos. 6.6. or if we
think mercy to be such, that the knowledge of God is to be neglected: and
last, for doing wholly and only, according to Ezekiel. 28. Hag. 2.

So for fasting, 1. the negative, Matthew. 24.38. if we eat or drink^, etc. or
Amos, 6.6. they never fasted, but drink wine in boules, and anoint themselves
with chief ointment. Contrary to those Ezekiel. 9.4. The Papists fast faulty: N^^^
to show therefore in how many points the glorious fasters err: in six points.

1. Levit. 23.31. The right fast is from even to even: theirs is but till
noone. 2. Ezra. 10.6. In a true fast, an abstinence from all that is to be
eaten and drunken: they abstain only from flesh, and that that comes of
flesh. 3. Levit. 23.27. That it should be an holy Convocation, if the fast be
public; they make none. 4. We should do no weeks work on that day: they do.
5. It is without any prayer or humiliation, contrary to Levit. 23.27. 6. It
must be secret, if it be private, Luke 18.12. They tell it to God, and think
they merit by it: and they tell it to men: and are like the Pharisees: i.
contemn others that are not so exercised as they, Luke 5.33.
For maintenance of Schools, etc. 2. transgressors: 1. One which by corrupt
manners, and lewd behavior, turn them to Schools, and Colleges of
Libertines, Act. 6.9. 2. The other of Ahabs crew, that drive the Prophets to
bread and water, 1 King. 18.13. They are in fault that spoil the decimae of
the Lord, Mal. 3.8. or that convert them to Civil uses, as 1 Samuel 8.15. And he
will take the tenth of your seed, and of your vineyards, and give it to his
Eunuchs and to his servants.

For plain oblations, Psalm. 83.12. those that said, Let us take the houses of
God for our own possessions.

Last, against procuring, Jer. 17. from 20. to the end, against the Princes and
chief of the families.

So much of the first Table.

THE SVMME OF THE SECOND TABLE.
THe Sum of the second Table is Matthew. 22.39. out of Levit. 19.18. Love thy
neighbor as thy self. It is like the former, for in this we depart not from
the love of God, but rather love him more.

The similitude is in three respects. 1. As first he commanded his own love:
so here, the love of man: that he thereby might be the more loved. August. De
doctrina Christiana, says: It is as if we should love the child of our friend,
though wicked; even for our friends sake. So we may love the children of God,
though we see little in them to be loved. This respect is 1 John 4.21. This
commandment we have of the Father, that he which loves God should love his
brother also.

Brotherly love necessarily implies the love of God.
2. As Gal. 5.14. 1 John 4.20. this is a sign of him that loves God, Romans
13.9. Jam. 2.8.10. All the law therefore is contained in this, as by reason of
effect, or sign. For if we love not him whom we see, how shall we love him
that is invisible? And if we love man, that gives often occasion of hate, how
should we not love God, which is always doing good?

3. Quia similis est necessitas in praemiis and poenis earum: so that he that
breaks the second Table, does also break the first.

The scope of this Table is, 1. that God may be loved more by our love to
other. And the second scope is, that man's society may be kept according to
policy: the ground whereof depends on Genesis 2. Man cannot be without an helper:
so that one must love another, and so love invicem.

Three things are here to be observed, 1. The Commandment, Love. 2. The
Object, thy neighbor. (...)
3. The Manner, as thy self.
For these in this sum there be three words, Thou shall love, etc. There be
three words in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, that signify love.

1. The general Latin word, Amor, which is in all, 1. Amor.
extending it self to all Gods creatures; with a desire that they may remain
in the course that God has set them: yea and justum Dei judicium: by the just
judgment of God, in the devils themselves.

2. Benevolentia, 2 Benevolentia.
in reasonable things only: it is rash, and may be with error.

3. Dilectio with consideration, 3 Dilectio.
and without all error, August. De doctrina Christiana, verus amator debet
esse verus aestimator: he that loves aright, must estimate aright. Ambr. Ne
erret judicium, ne pereat beneficium. Though we do good, and be hated for it:
yet we must remember we are in no other case, then Christ in the deceit of
Judas. And that our love might be strong, it was best to begin, so that our
love might reach to them that are furthest from us: as our enemies, Luke 6.5.
Matthew. 5.

And here, as Aug. says, then we might say, Non possum vigilare, I cannot
watch: we cannot say, Non possu^ amare, I cannot love. And this makes
difference between all the duties of the Heathen and Christians, for take
away, amare alios, and propter Deum, to love others, and to love them for Gods
sake: and then the Heathen be as good as we. Gregory therefore does well set
down the (first duty of the second Table) first thing in our love: ut rivus
justitiae ducatur a font pietatis, That every duty of the second Table come
from the first. And consequently, as we must look to the soundness of our
understanding, that we err not in that: so that our affections be right. And
though Romans 9.3. be an high measure, as August. says; yet we may come so
far, as to wish that others may be saved with us: and to desire that to every
man, which is to his salvation, and wish away the hindering evil. In Gal.
5.22. be three works of that love.

1. To rejoice when good comes to our brother, Romans 12.15. not to be envious;
to hinder others from the partaking of our good: the fault of the servant, that
hid his masters talent, Matthew. 25.26. And if we have not the talent, we must
not envy that others have it: for this is the devils fault, and the cause of
the first temptation; that would not have any better then himself.

2. To procure peace, Romans 12.18. Agreement with all: yet seeing the Angel
says, Luke 2.14. that peace was come: and Christ, Mat. 10.34. says the
contrary. This must be distinguished thus. In bonis nil optabilius pace, nil
odiosius discordia: in malis, nil optabilius discordia, nil odiosius pace: with
good men nothing is more desirable then peace, nothing more odious then
discord: with ill men, nothing more desirable then discord, nothing more odious
then peace. And peacemakers according to this order, are blessed, Matthew. 5.9.
And as August. contra Donatist. Aliter sapere, quam res habent, non est contra
pacem hanc: but rather like to that, Prove. 27.27. for the searching out of the
truth.

3. To have a care one of another: Levit. 19.16. Matthew. 18.17. and therefore we
must not give any scandala: but if any be given, bring help, Levit. 19.17, 18,
etc.

In this dilection we must mark two things, First, to hurt no man, Levit.
19.13. Secondly, Romans 12.14. Matthew. 5.44. not to recompense evil.

Three particular actions of this Love.

1. To succor the needy and hungry, Prove. 22.12. Matthew. 25.44. 1 John 3.17. If
any man have this worlds goods, and sees his brother have need, and shuts
up his compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? Which are
defined to be those, which we give out of the abundance of sufficiency. 2. To
pray, Romans 12.14. Matthew. 7.14. to pray for all. This is radius charitatis, the
beams of Charity. 3. To perform our vocation: as the Lawyer, to give good
counsel, Luke 6.27, 28, 29. To part with our clothes, etc. is a thing to Gods
glory, and the health of our neighbor.
2. Objectum, Thy neighbor.
2. Proximum.] They take this word strictly, for their friends only, Matthew.
5.43. but Luke 10.37. Christ makes the Scribe confess, that it reaches to
the Samaritanes, their greatest enemies; which would not entertain Christ,
because his face was toward Jerusalem.

Seeing that he is Proximus, a Neighbor, that has mercy, and proximus is
proximi proximus, therefore he is a neighbor, that can receive mercy. So that
misericordia, non loci differentia facit proximum: a work of mercy, not
difference of place makes a neighbor. And the Law confirms it, Deuteronomy. 22.5.
If thy brothers ox, etc. which brother, Exodus 23.4, 5. is said to be our
enemy.

This has for it three words, 1. That which is here, fellow, or friend,
Amicus. 2. That which Christ calls it, and that is plainly a neighbor,
Proximus. 3. John's word in his Epistle, brother, frater.


Reasons why we should love all these, are strong, and of like force, so that
the words are all one.

1. Frater: naturae identitas: as beasts of the same kind do love: and children
their faces in a glass: originis identitas, all of one blood. 2. Proximus. 1.
Usus, one has need of another. 2. Unitas propositi:
all tend to one end, to be partakers of the reward. 3. Amicus, or Socius: 1.
by precept of love: Amor, amoris magnes, love is the loadstone of love. 2.
Societas ejusdem periculi, per eundem liberati.
And we had all one peril, hell: delivered by one Christ, 2 Timothy 1.6. So we
may use any of these words.
In this proximo, neighbor, be two things to be had. 1. We must beware, that
we take not the sin of our neighbor for our neighbor: for, Omnis peccator,
quatenus peccator, odio habendus: omnis homo, quatenus homo, diligendus: sic
homines, ut non errorcs; quia facti sunt, non quia fecerunt. Every sinner, as a
sinner, is to be hated; every man, as a man, is to be loved; we must so love
the men, that we love not their sins; love them we must, because they are
made men, not because they have done this or that. The reason is, for that I
shall therefore love him, because he shall be partaker with me of the good;
but how then should I love that that hinders him from this? that is, his
sin: Proverb. 29.24. He that loves evil company, hates his own soul, for
he loves those things that are against his soul.

2. For degrees, whether alius be alio propinquior: Whether one be nearer to
me then an other. That there be degrees, it is plain: because omission of
duties to parents is worse then to strangers: so that there must needs be a
greater duty to one of these, then to the other. As in natural things, where
the greatest action is, there is the greatest inclination: so here must be with
the greater duty, the greater affection: and so a greater love. Where all be
not alike, there is some primum; and that which is nearest, is prius: so there
is ordo: which ordo is such,

1. God, for he is that bonum, that good, by participation of which, all other
are bona, said to be good; and the universal nature, to which all the other
give place: as in policy, bonum publicum. 2. Our selves: for we are unitas
with our selves, which can be but united with our brethren. 3. The souls of
our brethren, before our own bodies. For any soul can directly participate
the universal good: but no body, except by the soul: therefore every soul to
be preferred before the body. 4. Our own bodies. 5. Then the bodies of our
neighbors. And of our neighbors, first we must look whether they have need:
if not, we are detained from doing this good for them. If they have need,
before others, we must do it familiae fidei, to the household of faith, Galat
6.10. And of those, to our Countrymen, Psalm. 122.8. of these to those which
are nostri, 1 Timothy 4.8. of these, our household, and kindred: and first the
wife, Genesis 2.24. 1 Samuel 1.8. Am not I worth ten sons? And of strangers, to
the poor before the rich. And if there be two equal every way, and the thing
cannot be divided: cast lots, quem sort Deus elegerit. August. whom God shall
choose, take him.
For the manner. There be three respects in this love.

1. Dilecti: of the thing beloved. Excellentia bona, those things that are
excellent, and good, must be most near unto us in a case of justice, done by
law or precept. 2. Diligentis, of the party loving: propinquitas in gratuitis,
quae sunt judicio nostro: he may have respect to propinquity of kindred, etc.
3. As thy self: non quantum, sed sicut: not as extensively, but as sincerely.
And that in four things. 1. The end: sicut te: i. propter quod amas teipsum:
as thy self: i. e. for that that thou love thy self: that must be, quia
Deum amas: ideoque omnia quae sunt Dei: ob hanc causam dilige fratrem: because
thou love God, therefore thou must love all that are of God, and for this
cause thy brother. 2. Means: application to this end; ad quod teipsum, chiefly
to his soul: so we must tollere impedimenta, remove those impediments which do
hinder our souls from this goodness: and so, non consentire ejus voluntati in
malo, not to consent to him in evil. So that as August. says, aut ama me quia
sum Dei, aut ut sim Dei: either love me because I do pertain to God, or that
I may pertain to him: and so we must love our brother. 3. Manner: not for the
use of him, or because we hope to have a good turn of him: but gratuito,
freely. 4. Order: first God: for the second Table must help the first, and not
cancel it.

And thus must our love be ex font pietatis, justus, verus, and ordinatus: it
must flow from piety, in justice, truth, and order.

This is the sum of the second Table.

The V. Commandment.
Honor thy Father and Mother, etc.
THe last Commandment is the fountain, whence all of the second Table do
come: as a stream beginning at the Conduit-head.

This fifth Commandment has all those properties, which are due to any man
with respect. And in those two things which must be seen in love. 1. In
respect of God, the excellency. 2. In respect of us, conjunction or nearenesse.
Whereas in conjunction we must rather love the faithful, our countrymen and
kinsfolk; here, in the case of excellency it is not so. For sometimes we
must give more honor to an infidel: as Acts 25. Paul to Nero, and Dan. 6.3.
to a stranger, as they did to Daniel: and Genesis 41.40. as Pharaoh did to Joseph.
And to give this to men endued with gifts, is in regard of their nearenesse to
God: for by his benefits they are nearer his end: so, as for this cause they
are to be preferred, and made nearer to us also. And they are also nearer to
us, in respect of the greater profit we shall receive of them: according to
that of the Heathen, (...), (He as God;) for God sets as much by that which
is his his own, as by himself: so that being nearer our profit, we may love
them: and being nearer to God, we must perform all other duties unto them.

Why are not all men excellent alike? Quest. Sol.


Gods wisdom wonderfully appears in this; For seeing Genesis 2.18. the occasion
of the Woman was, that she should help: because that though it were good, yet
not the best, that Man should be alone: for he being finite, and therefore of a
finite power, might with help perform better services unto God. Now, seeing
they were plures, more then one: the question is, whether they must be one body
or not? And if there be one body, then must there be diversity of members, 1
Cor. 12.21. But if it be said, there should not be one; that is confuted here.
Also, God being most excellent, and having all other things under him, would in
his creatures have a pattern of that excellency and subjection: so that for
that cause, 1 Cor. 15.41. he made every star differ from other inglory. So
also, that they might be those diverse vessels, 2 Timothy 2.20. And by this
Commandment does all power stand: And hence it is, that he has called them
Gods, Psalm. 82.6. And therefore this Commandment possesses this place, as in
medio, in the midst, as Philo Iudaeus says, because God would have him first
to look to his worship, and then to his own honor in the second Table. Genesis
17.9.

This Commandment has two parts. 1. precept, Honor, etc. 2. Reason: that thy
days, etc.


This division proved, Ephesians. 6.2.3. The precept contains the duty of
Inferiors, Honor. Superiors; to be Fathers and Mothers.


For God includes in one word, the most especial things.

And because, as Chrysostom says, first they must be, before they can be
honored: therefore first, What is meant by Father.

What is here meant by Father
1. That is true, Matthew. 23.9. We have but one Father: for all others, as the
Heathen said, be but instruments. Whenever therefore any thing is attributed
to God and man; God is the first, Ephesians. 3.17. so he is the first Father: Psalm.
27. which took us out of the womb: and the last Father, Psalm. 82. which
takes us up, when all other have forsaken us. So that, seeing to be a Father,
comes from God, and our superiors are made partakers with God, as his
instruments, they must also have their duties from him.

The word Father signifies him, that has a care or desire to do good: for
which Job, cap. 25. was called a Father: so that he is a Father, by whom others
are in better case and estate.

2. Mother. This has the name of a faithful keeper: as we may see by the end
of her making; which was, to help. And the same word was so used, Job 12.20.
Ruth. 4.4. And the Heathen themselves know this, that a good governor
differs nothing from a good Father.

3. Honora, honor. The word (...) signifies aggravare: so where excellency
is added to the thing, it is of weight: and in precious things, the heaviest is
the best. So that addere pretium, is addere pondus; and so by translation,
honorem, (honor:) for when a man has received the person of God, it is more
to be esteemed.

It was a miracle among the Heathen, that so many Kings should give their heads
to one, sometimes to a Woman: sometimes to a child: which argues plainly,
that they knew a divine power therein, that might not be resisted, i. Gods
ordinance: and so works a reverence in our hearts. And as in the former word;
so for (...), honor: Solon in his Laws, and Plato, and the Romans, do make
choice of this word; and other that write of Laws, and that matter.

1. Now what the estate of them is, this is to be set down: as 2 Cor. 4.13.
All things are for your sakes: i. for the Churches sake. Politia est propter
Ecclesiam: set down, 1 Timothy 2.2. For there the Apostle goes thus to work.
God would have all men saved: that they might be saved, he would have them live
in all godliness and honesty: that they may do thus, he would have them
taught the knowledge of God; this necessarily requires a rest; (for in the
wars there is nothing rightly ministered:) That men might intend thus to live,
it is said, verse. 2. it is expedient they should (...), lead a peaceable life,
in regard of outward invasions: and (...), quiet, in regard of mind, and
inward tumult and troubles.

Now if the natural Father and Mother could have performed this, (as a while
they did, to Genesis 9.) there had needed no other. But Genesis 10.8, 9. there comes
one Nimrod with a company of hounds at his tail, (the same metaphor it
pleases the holy Ghost to use) i. sons of Belial; and he takes upon him to be
an hunter: i. a chaser of men, to disturb. So because the natural Father
cannot perform it; and because we cannot in deed do fully the duty of our
souls: therefore there is a Priesthood in the Tribe of Levi: a spiritual
Father in the Apostles, and their successors: For this cause, Heb. 13.17. to
souls, and bodies, 1 Timothy 2.2. was it, that God first allowed; and after
instituted, that men should have government: both for resisting of outward
foes, and quieting of inward strises. Romans 13.1. (...). Let every soul be
subject, etc. There it is said, that this binding of men into one society, this
power is of God; and so to be accounted of us: for verse. 4. he says, God has
delivered him a sword, to the end, that he should be vindex malorum, against
the evil, and disturber of this quietness; by which men might intend the
former rest: and consequently, that he should be a comforter and cherisher of
good men, and those that love to live quietly, to learn to know. Dan. 4.9. the
civil estate and government thereof is compared to a huge tree, under the
shadow whereof, etc. and Esa. 32.1. to a great Rock in the Wilderness, giving
shadow and water. And consequently, Ier. 29.7. quoniam in pace ejus est pax
nostra: In the general peace is every man's particular peace included:
therefore every man is bound to hang his weight upon it, to establish this
authority.

H^n u^ noted in three words.
Now this same is noted to us by three words in the Greek: for it is called,

1. (...), 1 Timothy 2.2. an excellency of a gift: when a man has somewhat above
others. 2. (...), Romans 13.1. a power. 3. (...), Tit. 3.1. principality.
There is an affinity between these three. For first, God gives a man a gift
and excellency in the gift, then a power, a sword, and then a place of
government, to exercise his gift in.

In this order we must mark, sometime there is (...), without the other two:
because there might be a choice of them that have maximam (...), the greatest
excellency of gifts; that they should be called up as Assistents; and to do
good in private, when it pleases God to cease a government.

1. In this order, the government is either of pater naturalis, of the natural
father within a family: And there be three governments; Of the Wife, Son,
Servant. Of the Son, it is plain: so of the Wife; for he is pater familiae,
the father of his family, whereof she is a part: and of the Servant; by that
reason: and 2 King. 5.13. an example, Naamans Servants call him Father.

2. Father. We come out of the family, and then in patriam, abroad into the
country: which is the people, among which we are borne. And that is entitled
with one of these names, 2 Samuel 20.19. The woman of Abel says, that that City
wherein they dwelled then, had been a mother in Israel, because God committed
the government first to the people themselves: so Genesis 23. Abraham's courtesy
and honor to all the people: and Psalm. 58. to the whole people. This company,
as it is to be honored, so it compromitteth and sets over his honor to
some party: and thereby comes it, 1 Pet. 2.13. that he calls the
Magistrate, humanam creaturam, the ordinance of man: and he did give them light
to do it. But indeed, magistracy is called man's creature, to distinguish it
from Gods creature, against the Atheistical contempt of the Ministry, (...),
he that will disanull or abrogate that which my self have enacted, he does
make a Law against me, and does abrogate and disanull me.

First, to consider, that Divina creatura, Gods Ordinance in the minister, as
it is solemn: as he is to receive the Fatherhood. 1 Cor. 4.15. Though ye had a
thousand Schoolemasters, yet ye had but one Father, etc. More, the very
Heathen, Judge. 17.10. Come and be my Priest, and my Father. And because under
this Ordinance of God, is another, the erecting of Schools, 1 Samuel 10.12. 1
King. 2.12. Elisha calls Elias his Father, when he was taken up into Heaven:
Phil. 2.12. Paul commends there their obedience unto him in this kind. And
when the sons of the Prophets came from the hill, one asked, Who is your
Father? meaning Elisha. And Acts 5.34. honor is attributed to Gamaliel, he is
counted honorable. In regard of this, Paul calls his Scholar Timothy, his
son.

Come to the Magistrate: which was first by man: Exodus 18.21. Deuteronomy. 17.15, 16,
17. etc. There are rules for making them: Genesis 45.8. the man Joseph, was a
Father unto Pharaoh in Egypt: Judge. 5.7. the woman Deborah, a Mother in Israel:
and this honor was not to be given to the Supreme power only, but to every
subordinate governor: 1 Pet. 2.13. the division there is into the King and
Governors sent by him: so he that is Dux militiae, a Captain, may be called
Father of the Camp: and whosoever has authority in any other sort, may be so
styled, that is set over others for the good of the public: so that rule in
the Canons, Quaeque res in conjunctione, in every society that thing is to be
taken, and esteemed, and preferred, pro bono conjunctionis, that makes for the
public good of that society: as among scholars, for learning, he that has
that bonum most, he that is most able to teach, is fittest to rule: for the
honor of excellency was not (...), neither principlity nor power.

Come to the other part, when it is alone, honor is to them due also: and this
(...), is of four sorts, 1. ratione annorum, in regard of their age: 1 Timothy
5.1. old men and old women, as our Father and Mother: 2. Inregard of some gift
of wisdom and counsel: so that he be able to direct others, and to invent
more then they that are above them: so attributed to Iubal, and to the
inventors of instruments, Genesis 4.20. 3. In regard of a degree either in Church
or Commonwealth. Because that money is nervou politiae, the nerves of policy:
therefore rich and wealthy men the land do most esteem. And so to men of
wealth she gives a degree, if they be called to Assemblies, more then to
others: because in her need, she shall be more helped by them. So Nabal for
his wealth, 1 Samuel 25.8. is called by David, implicit, Father: (and to thy
son David, etc.) And it must be done no otherwise then in respect: else if
one should do it, Iam. 2.9. it were (...), to have respect to persons. 4. In
regard of a benefit: when he is able to do another a pleasure: as Job. 20.16.
he had the honor, that he did pleasure the poor.


[Honour thy.] The duties first in general, after in particular.

The duty stands in the 1. Action. 2. Manner of the action.
So both to be handled.

And because certain duties are reciprocal, mutual between supreiour, and
inferior; to avoyde needless repetition, it shall be good to have spoken thus
generally of them.

1. The first then is love: but in a higher degree, then that that is due to
every man: therefore the name of it is (...), a natural affection, either
ascending from the Son to the Father, or descending from the Father to the
Son: either naturally proper, or by analogy. The Apostle showing what
degrees this love stands in, expresses it by this term, (...). There is a
common love, and a peculiar love, which we have with our friends: and it is but
(...) but this is (...), because it is in a more special degree: and the want
thereof, Romans 1.30. 2 Timothy 3.3. is imputed as a great crime: and it is a
prophecy for the end of the world: that then men shall be (...), without
natural affection.

2. The second is the property of love: to wish well to him whom we love: and
because Christianum vorum est oration, a Christians man's wish is his prayer:
therefore in this respect we bring it to prayer: which is a mutual unity or
affection of love, between the Father and Son: 1 Timothy 2.2. a Commandment
that prayer be made for Superiors. The like, Ier. 29.7. for Babylon, the
Country: and backward and downward. 1 Cor. 29.18, 19. David prayed for the
people, and for his son Solomon: and Job. cap. 1.5. was wont to pray daily
for his Sons. So for the duty reciprocal.

[Come to Honour] (which is the duty due from Inferiors to Superiors:) what
it is in particular. As there is a Father, Matthew. 23.9. So we have exactly but
one Father; viz. God: so, as truly is it said of honor, 1 Timothy 1.17. honor
exactly belongs only to God; But that he himself has vouchsafed to resign
part of it to some men: 2 Timothy 2.20. he created some vessels to honor, etc.
and consequently, Heb. 5.4. out of the generation of mankind, he calls some
to be honorable: and as Matthew. 25.24. his calling is known by his gifts: for
he gives them parcels and portions of his goods, whereby they excel their
fellows.

It was said that the Scripture uses three words, (...), Excellency; (...),
Power; (...), Principality: unto this Excellency, honor properly belongs:
and it is twofold, 1. outward, 2. inward.


1. Inward honor, as Prove. 5.9. Meddle not with a strange woman, etc. so Prove.
20.3. for he shall lose his honor, Inward honor
that good opinion that men have of him: And opinio honesla, and honest and
good opinion is defined to be, testimonium excellentiae; whereby we witness
that there is in this man a certain excellency above us: or somewhat above us
by nature. Paul, Col. 3.18. 1 Pet. 2.13. expressed this by (...), subjection:
to be subject: as Luke 2.51. Christ went, etc. and was subject to them: i. in
respect of his manhood he acknowledged himself a child: and so consequently,
somewhat more to be in them, then in him.

The contrary will make it more plain. Numb. 16.3. Corah, and his company: his
thesis was, The Lord was among them, all holy to the Lord, and equal:
therefore Moses should not be so excellent.

The contrary of this is, when men do not only confess, that there is not
any equality, but that some excel: and that not by chance, (nor as the Poet
says, (...)) but by Gods appointment: and this is the first and inward part of
honor.

But 1 Samuel 16.7. God and man look not one way: God looks on the heart;
which man cannot: therefore he cannot see this inward excellency. And this
makes the exterior honor, as it is taken, Honor external.
1 Samuel 15.30. where Saul says, Yet honor me before the elders, etc. Matthew.
23.67. the desire of the chiefest place, chief rooms, greetings, etc. the
honor that the Pharisees longed for.

What the exterior honor is, what kind is to be exhibited, and due, it is
better determined and known by the manner of the Country; because all are not
alike in fashion. For our selves, they may be reduced to these seven heads.
Every one has a warrant from the practice of the godly.

1. To rise up: when the person of excellency, (which either by nature,
analogy, or property is our Father) is in presence: done to Job cap. 29.8. and
a greater, by Solomon to Bathsheba his mother, 1 King. 2. he rose up and met
her. 2. Nudare caput, to uncover the head; which was ad honorem, in token of
honor: in use with the Saints; as 1 Cor. 14. 3. Genuflexio, the bowing of the
knee: practiced Genesis 41.43. the cry of Pharaoh made to be proclaimed before
Joseph, Abrech. i. bow the knee: And thus far proceed the first salutations.
4. Afterward, it pertains to exterior honor, to Stand: Exodus 18.13. Moses,
quia Iudex, because Judge, sat: the people stood: 2 King. 5.21. Gehezi stood
before Elisha; and indeed it is the common expressing of service. 5. Silence:
to give ear when he speaks: Job. 29.9, 10.11. so they did to Job, when he
was in presence. 6. When we are by necessary occasion to speak, to use words
of Submission: as 1 Pet. 3.6. Sarah called Abraham, my Lord, or Sir. Genesis
31.35. and 43.28. See it in Joseph's brethren, Thy servant our Father, etc. And
they bowed down and made obeisance, Genesis 31.25. So Rachel to Laban, Let not my
Lord be angry, that I cannot rise up: and give testimony of honor: because it
is with me after the manner of women. 7. The last, is dispersed throughout the
Scriptures, and is comprehended under the word ministrare: Luke 17.8. when we
wait upon, and when we perform any duty, which men's servants use, by that
action, whatsoever it be, we testify a sup^r^ority and excellency in that
party. It comprehends many duties. And thus far goes honor. For when
(...), (...), Power To Power belongs fear.
power, is added; then another thing (viz. fear) does belong to it: as Ioh.
19.11. power, it is not but from above, from God: and so consequently comes
there unto them that have power, part of that fear that we owe to God. To this
belongs an awe, a standing in awe, a reverent fear, Levit. 19.3. Every one
shall fear his Father and Mother. Ephesians. 6.5. With fear and trembling to our
Masters, secundum carnem, after the flesh. Prove. 16.14. A great fear belongs
to the King: because his anger is the messenger of death: and Job. 29.8. that
the people stood in such awe of him, that they, when he came forth, conveyed
them out of the way, as if they had done some unseemely thing, etc. And this
properly belongs to the Superior in regard of his power.
(...), Prin^ipality. To (...), is due obedience.
3. In respect of his government: unto (...) is due, 1 Timothy 6.1. obedience:
expressed by (...), to go under a yoke; that is, when they bid us do this or
that, we be contented to put our necks under their commandment: Prove. 23.22.
and Ephesians. 6.10. plainly, Obey thy Father and Mother, etc. (...), and (...),
both set forth this obedience: examples of which we have, Genesis 22.9. of a Son
to his Father: Isaak even to the death obeyed, etc. of a Servant to his Master,
Genesis 31.6. Jacob served Laban with all his might; and Josh. 1.6. Joshua by Gods
commandment, is made servant to a Kingdom.

Now for the protestation of this obedience, and for the expressing of it,
order was taken for a second government: as Prove. 3.9. he wills men to honor
God with their substance and goods. It is the wanting of (...), the laws of
grarefull retaliation; that Mar. 7.11.12. a man says to Father and Mother,
Corban, i. by the gift that is offered, thou may have profit: he shall be
free: and so suffer him no more to do any thing for his Father, and Mother.
Wherefore, Romans 13.7. we are commanded to give tribute and custom: that is to
show, that we are not only ready our selves, but also our goods are at
command: partly with protestation, that we do give it as stipend; and partly,
that we are ready at the commandment of the Commonwealth, by that commandment
of imparting.

The last is, to the other part of the Law: of that which is ours. Now because
the Law has two parts, 1. directive, 2. corrective: if we break our
obedience; then Heb. 5.8. and 12.8, 9. to submit to correction: and so far
stretches obedience.

Now touching the second, the manner: it is, that it be done in simplicity, in
conscience, The manner.
from the heart: Col. 3.11.2. that we do it alacriter, with cheerfulness.
And lastly, 1 Pet. 2.29. that we do endure, and continue therein; we are not
given by nature to this: therefore they yield six reasons, to induce and exhort
men; and they place them upon the duty.

1. That the place of the Commandment moves: that it has pleased God to give
it room before our goods, yea before our life showing that the maintenance of
this superiority ought to be dearer unto us then those.

2. The Name it self, Father, and Mother, which is by nature a name full of
love, and very amiable: insomuch as unreasonable beasts, they owe this duty and
perform it more exactly, then reasonable men.

3. The third is no less amiable, the promise of long life; and death is a
thing to man's nature most repugnant, and consequently, God makes choice of
this Commandment, Ephesians. 6.2. and does annexe the promise to this rather then to
any other.

4. 1 Timothy 3.4. it is (...), a good thing to see to: it is (...): acceptable:
and Coll. 3.20. (...), a thing that God is specially delighted with, and
pleased withal; because they are to have a special regard, that they be
(...), and (...), excellent, acceptable and wel-pleasing men.

5. Ephesians. 6.1. it is also (...), a right thing, we cannot forbear it without
injury: and therefore Christ, Matthew. 22.21. says, (...), Reddite quae sunt
Caesaris, etc. render unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's: it is our Duty
to do it.

6. Heb. 13.7. Expedit enim vobis, it stands you in hand so to do: the reason,
because where honor is detracted, there care of preservation is diminished:
and by reason thereof, the power, wickedness and impudency of wicked men is
increased upon us, and the more it is increased, the more is our estate
troubled: and so is our unquietness the more: therefore better it is that
honor be given them, that they may be encouraged in their places. So he that
breaks this, goes about to bring in an Anarchy. And besides, Genesis 11.4, 6.
they set themselves against God. It does argue a great rebellious pride, even
against God himself. As Romans 13.2. If you set your selves against power, you
resist God. By weighing these reasons we may rapply be induced to give unto
them that are set over us, that honor and obedience that is due unto them.

Now to superiors duties in general because in Gods law these are always
conjoined, (...), and (...), to have worth, and to be reverenced for that
worth: as before, 1 Timothy 6.5. Saint Chrysostom upon that place makes it an
Axiom. And because this honor is due unto them for their worth; therefore
before they have this honor, they must mereri, be worthy and deserving men.
And worthy they shall be, if they be fathers and mothers. The neernesse of the
two significations of (...) which signifies heaviness and honor; and in
greek (...) honor, and a loss; and in latin onero, and honoro, to honor and
to burden; show that God would not have this neernesse to go without a
meritum, some desert: nor meritum, this desert, without a charge: therefore
they must have meritum, and by consequence honor is by them justly required at
our hands.

1. First then their duty is, 1 Pet. 2.13. Romans 13.4. to know, that the office
is propter Dominum, that they be Gods ministers, (...), and therefore must
their song be of mercy and judgment, Psalm. 101. as they are his ministers, and
have received power from him, and honor due to him, so this must be their
special care, that they that are under them, may come to be Gods vicegerents:
as they are said to be by Jehosophat, 2 Chronicles. 19.6. The judgment is not
yours, but the Lords. They must serve, and you must command. Therefore for the
Lord it is to be used. So 1 King. 21.7. when that Jezebell thinks he is not a
King, except he can command, and have a thing wrongfully, it is a naughty
opinion: and omnium seminator malorum: it is that which sows all mischief in
the world, not to acknowledge (...), that they are for the Lord, but to blot it
out, and set in place thereof their own will: whence breaks out all
injustice. God gives no authority prejudicial to himself: but because some
have set down this for a maxim, that he is no master nor superior except he
may do what he will; therefore, 1 King. 22.8. if Micaiah the son of Imlah, or
any man say, that he must look to (...), that he is for the Lord, he cannot
abide him: and so falls it out, (as it is in Proverb.) He becomes an enemy
to them that speaks just things.

Superiors were ordained for inferiors.
2. Then there is a second, making more weight, Psalm. 78.71. and 2 Cor. 12.14.
The children are not for the fathers, but contra. David, taken from the
sheepfold to be a King: why? to feed Israel. The heathen also say it, that
superiority is ordained for inferiority: and the Prince for the benefit of the
subject. For God in the beginning considering the want that was in children,
ordained a duty to be first showed to them, before they were able to give
honor: and after they are to return and exhibit honor as a reward.

2. Under this is that Ephesians. 5.29. They must nourish, and cherish and count
those that are under them, their own flesh: as Moses, Number. 11.12. he carried
the people in his bosom, and made their welfare his scope: and as Christ, Mat.
23.37. example of the hen, which to defend her chicken, fights against the
foul, that is mightier than her self. This loving, cherishing, and defending
is the end and whole scope, why governors were ordained.

Again, it is added in Exodus, That it may be well with thee, and that thy
days may be long: If thou do thy duty, well; otherwise, it is a shortning of
thine own time and prosperity. For Deuteronomy. 17.17. Governors are not potare in
rosa, nor colligere auream messem, to gather for his own profit: though they
make it their end, to gather and scrape gold together, and to seek their own
ease, as they in Ezekiel, 11.3. who account the City as the caldron, and us the
flesh: to be in it till we be sodden. The security and ease that evil rulers
take, the profit of the inferiors being not a whit regarded, this makes them
evil. But the wealth of the inferior is their duty and care.

3. Because God has made them Fathers, and Mothers, and the rest children: and
consequently has brought into nature a different degree of high and low; that
they should not pervert this difference, and make them equal. As Nathan to
David, 1 King. 1.26. Nathan the Prophet, and Zadok the Priest, and Benaiah the
son of Jehoiadah, and Solomon thy servant. He knew well enough where to give
him place: and not as men do now: for now is Solomon first, etc. Mal. 2.9. God
has made the Prophet vile in the peoples eyes: the reason goes before, 1 Samuel
2.29. Inhonorasti filios tuos, thou have honored thy sons: whereas Eli
should be honored by his sons, he honors them, and entreats them, as an
inferior his superior: as it is plain there.

It is said there, that God would make their seed abjects, because they gave
away their honor from themselves. Esaias 34. He will set children to be their
Princes, etc. the meaning is in the next verse: The children shall take upon
them against the ancient, and the vile person a against the honorable. This
presumption comes at first by perverse inverting of the difference.

4. As this order is thus established, and we must retain it: so it must not
be a resemblance, or dead Idol, but put to use, 1 Thessalonians. 4.11. he must see
that such as be under him, be put to their work and business: and if any
break order, then Romans 13.4. he has not authority in vain, but propter
vindictam malorum: he is a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil.
If they do well, Mat. 25.23. he must encourage them with Euge serve bone, Well
done good and faithful servant, etc. Gods ordinance must not be an Idol, but
for the countenance of the good, and discountenance of the evil. It is a shame
for Governors, when men that work iniquity, and for the same are condemned,
Prove. 10.29. The way of the Lord is strength to the upright man: but fear
shall be for the workers of iniquity. Prove. 10.29. they that should fear,
fear being for them: yet are they not in fear, because an Idol is in place.
But contrary, Romans 13.4. that is a worse shame, if he be terror been agenti, a
terror to them that do well: and if they of all other be most persecuted.
Potest as non mandatur, nisi adversus vitia, contra quae homines nolunt esse
potentes: God gives not power against mankind: he will have that preserved:
but it is set up for the punishment of vice, against which men will not show
their power. So then these are four general uses that concern the superiors.

1. The manner is set down, Psalm. 101.2. showing there how he will govern his
inferiors: he says, he will walk himself perfectly, and be an example
before them. Gregory makes the right use of power; ut sit potens in seipso, vel
potius miro modo contra seipsum pro seipso: that a man be powerful over
himself, or which is more, for himself against himself: that is, against the
rebellious affections of his own nature. And so he shall bring himself to
goodness.

2. This being done, Lev. 25.43. then he will have moderation, as well knowing,
(as the heathen man says) this (...), this power, is not (...), to carry
themselves loftily above others, nor (...), to have others in a base esteem:
much less for (...), to constrain men thus in proud manner, with contumelious
words, and tyrannous deeds, as Ephesians. 4.31. in every Christian, all (...),
excess of anger, and (...), bitterness, and (...), crying out, and (...),
railing, ought to be far from the meanest: therefore consequently from him
that is in higher place. Solomon, Prove. 28.15. counsels the governor ut non
sit tanquam Leo in vi sua, that he be not like a lion in the way, and Zeph.
3.3. describing a naughty government, says, her Princes are like roaring
Lions. But God says there, If thou sit over thy brother, do it with
moderation.

3. The third is, that he be not as Saul, to begin well, and end ill, 1 Samuel
13.1. Saul was King over Israel above 20. years; yet there it is said, he
reigned but two years. As now many are mavelous careful at the first: but
post quinquennium Neronis, after four or five years good government, like
Nero afterward they come to be like flesh in the midst of a caldron.

There are six reasons more concerning superiors in their duties, whom as in
Dan. 4.4. God exalts, that men may have rule for themselves: they are in
Psalm. 82.

1. His charge, v. 3. do well, How long will you give falfe judgment, and
accept the persons of the wicked, seeing God is among you? v. 2. nay, more he is
a Judge among you, v. 1. and will have a reckoning, and will that men should
have a Father. 2. In the the 3. and 4. v. the end of the power committed to
them, to defend the weak, not to oppress them: contra vitia, non contra
homines, they are not to oppress men, but vice. 3. Verse. 5. Choose you: if you
will be ignorant, and that wilfully ignorant: and continenter ambulare, walk
on, and continue so: it is the overthrow of all the foundations of the earth:
All will go to wrack: concutientur omnia fundamenta: you will bring all
things out of order: there will be no good thing. 4. Verse. 6. I have said, ye
are gods: indeed ye are none, the meaning of this place is expounded, Joh.
10.35. The word of God came to them. There came not only a Commission from
God, but a delegate power: therefore ye are not to rule absolutely, but by
Commission: you have therefore a superior to whom you must give account. 5.
Verse 7. For abusing your commission, ye shall die like men; no difference in
your death from others. And straight he corrects himself; ye shall die like
Princes; not like mean men, but like Kings, as it is said, potentes potenter
tormenta patientur, the greater men shall endure the greater torments. 6. Verse
the last. For all the heathen pertain to thine inheritance: that is, all the
earth is thine: and thou have made them thy children, and have given them the
earth to order it, and they to come in part of thine inheritance; and they have
abused thine inheritance, and made it full of brambles and thistles; and so
seized: and therefore have made themselves incapable of honor. It is better
set down, Ezekiel. 34.5. ye have not performed the service and duty, therefore
he says, Arise O Lord, and take the inheritance into thy hands; thou will
perform the charge.
Before we come to particular duties, here be two questions to be handled, for
the understanding of the duty of obedience, hereafter to be handled.

Quest. 1. Answer.
First, whether we owe honor to one that is evil?

I answer, yea, Romans 9. where the Apostle reasons in a like case; that the
unfaithfulness of a man cannot frustrate Gods promise: so the wickedness of
the person cannot take away the commandment: nor make Gods ordinance void:
Romans 13.1. All power and ordinance is from God, so no evil can make it void.

Evil is twofold, either which runs to the punishment, or to the fault.

1. For roughness, or oppression, 1 Pet. 2.18. Obedience must be given to the
crooked and froward, i. to such as Holofernes, Judith 3.8. such as nothing will
please; example, Genesis 16.6. of Sarah, and Agar. Although Sarah dealt roughly
with Agar, yet the Angel wills her to return to her mistress, and submit
her self to her.

And as in the family, so in the Commonwealth. It is known how Saul dealt
with David: yet Psalm. 120. v. last, he says, He sought peace with those that
loved not peace: i. acknowledged submission, offering no violence neither in
the cave, nor in the bed.

2. For the other wicked governors, be they never so hard, it is plain
likewise, that to them obedience, and honor is due. For as it is true, Hos.
10.3. that God in ira, in his anger, denies us a Prince: so also, Hos. 13.11.
he gives a King in his wrath: expounded, Job. 34.30. that it is the peoples
fault, for their sins, Hos. 8.4. It is his doing, because the people would
have it so: For when as they in election proceed not in timore Dei, in the
fear of God: and things are not respected in themselves, Hos. 8.11. Because
Ephraim will have altars to sin, they shall, etc. and because they will have
a wicked man, I will plague them, etc. so it comes often by the peoples fault,
though the Prince be evil: seeing Prove. 21.1. his heart is in the hands of
God, and he can rule it as a vessel in the waters, he may, as he has moved
diverse evil Kings, and them that have no fear of God, to good decrees, and
purposes: as Belshasser, and Darius: so though the Prince remain good, yet, 2 Samuel 24.1. he suffers Satan to prevail over him, as over David here: and as
it is temporal; so 1 Samuel 16.14. he takes away his good spirit continually,
and an evil spirit is sent of him on Saul. So this is all one, to make of a
good Prince an evil: and to set up an evil Prince at the first. Which though
it be thus, yet Jer. 27.7. the Monarchy which the King of Babylon had, was his
own Kingdom: and all other countries willed to serve him: as likewise Esaias
10.5. The rod of his wrath, the King of Assure, was by him purposely sent. This
being Gods doing, Jer. 29.7. they must pray for Nebuchadnezzar: and cap. 27.7.
they must submit themselves to him, and obey him. So in the New Testament, 1 Timothy 2.1. prayers for governors, though no Christians, and 1 Pet. 2.18. Obey
the King, Nero: and Act. 25.11. Appello Caesarem, I appeal unto Caesar: Paul
uses the benefit of his government, refuses his Deputy, and appealeth to Nero
himself. Only this add out Chrysostom, (...).

The honor we give, is done, not to man, but to God himself. We reverence the
ordinance of God in men, not man, so that honor is due not (...), to the
person, but (...), to the vizard that God has put upon the man's person: more
plain, Ester 6.8. Haman counsels the King, Thus shall it be done to the man
whom the King would have honored: he shall put on a robe of estate, etc. And
Mordecai, a base man, was so honored, and yet returned to his private estate.
The honor there, was done to the Kings robes, and Crown, not to the private
man. Thus we must conceive of evil men: that they are invested in the Lords
robes and Crown; to which we give honor, not to the man.

The Heathen Emblem is, (...). There is an Ass laden with the Image of Isis,
a goddess: and the people fall down and worship: But the inscription is, Non
tibi, sed religioni, we worship not thee, but the goddess. This is one thing:
Every one may bring down himselse: yet he is clothed with robes of estate.

Another is this, and that is plain by Hose. 13. Because, be a government
never so bad, yet it is better then none at all. Oligarchia, better then
anarchia. If in his wrath he gave them a King: yet in the fury of his wrath he
took him away; and made their plague greater, to leave them without a Prince.

So much of this question.

Quest. ^.
The second question goes a degree further. Vtrum malo in malo, or ad malum
sit obediendum? Whether a man does owe absolute obedience to the wicked
commandments of a wicked Prince? S^l.
The resolution is negative. Absolute obedience is due only to God. For the
making plain of this place, we must understand, that now it comes to the
point. For here he comes to be nobis Rex, he now shows himself a King;
while he was in his robes, though he had the honor, yet he was not nobis Rex,
a King in deed: for he is no further a King, then quatenus imperat nobis, then
so farre-forth as he commands and rules over us: therefore great heed is
here to be had, lest we be entangled in the action.

For the first entrance into this question, the saying of the Fathers is to be
embraced; for they say, that Lex charitatis Deo, the Law of God which
commands us to obey him, did not take away the Law of nature: therefore it is
very good reason, that this Law of nature, (by which is Father and Mother)
should not weaken, but strengthen the Law of God. We cannot say, when we do
evil, that the Law of nature is cause of it.

The second thing is this; that because, as we said before, the word of God
came to them, and therefore their power is not absolute, but delegate from God:
So we may say out of Prove. 8.15. there Wisdom speaks it, (which is the Word
of God: the second Person in Trinity:) that it is the word, per quod reges
regnant, by Which Kings reign. Now, per quod est, by which any thing is, that
is the essence. Every Superior, he has something that gives the essential
part: and that is the word. Now, 1 Samuel 15.26. when he casts away the word,
he cease to be our Superior. Because thou have cast away my word, etc. And
if altogether he disclaim the word, every man is bound to disclaim him, as
they did Julian the Apostata.

For the plain seeing of this, it were good to consider that word in Hebrew
(...) which signifies gradus, a degree: and in Greek (...), which signifies
an Order. In order there be two things: for there is summum principium, the
top, in respect of whom all the rest are stairs, so the step is better,
which is next the top; and then there is series, a row or order, in a line
coming down from the top between them: which series has in every calling
a latitude; and is not infinite, but in God only: as superiors for soul
matters, for the soul: for bodily matters, for the body: for instruction, such
matters as are for instruction. The series has bounds: and they may be
referred to two, to which every transgression may be referred: for when a man
goes aside from that summum principium, that is, Ne superior excedat aut
recedat, lest the Superior shoud exceed, or swarve aside: when any one does
recedere, as he does, when he goes from the order, if he go out further, then
he breaks. We are to remain in the ascending line, to the top; for that we
shall be (...) keep order still: So we are not to go out, we must keep our
sitting still. Again, because the series has a certain breadth, having his
bounds about on both sides; he that passes the bounds, and prescribes any
thing without the bounds, he goes from the nature of a Superior. It is as if
the Prince of this land should command things to be done, in other lands where
she has nothing to do. First then, he must not forsake his seriem: secondly,
he must not recedere a principio suo: If the King or Ruler observe these two
orders, we are absolutely to obey him. Ob. Matthew. 6.24. No man can serve two
Masters: God and manare two. Sol. It is resolved thus, Dominus and servus,
Master and servant, make but unum agens, one agent; where there is a
subordination, there they are all but unum agens, one agent: so there be not
two Masters, till he break order himself, and be a Master himself against
order. Erigere altar contra altar, and erect an Altar against an Altar. For
it is in order, as in nature. The Prince he moves heavy things, and it is
inclinatio gravitatis, the natural propensity of heavy things to descend: yet
as their nature is ad conservationem universi, to the conservation of the
universe, to break their natural course, according to the will superioris
magistri, of a higher Master, and ascend: Such a thing it is in matters of the
Commonwealth: if any inferior Master command somewhat, I must not obey him:
the higher place, has the more honor; and the greater is to it. Acts 25.11.
Festus was an honorable man; but Nero more honorable: and Paul, when he
fears that Festus would break order, does refuse him: and so consequently
uses the benefit of appeal. By which place we may see, that when one deals
with an inferior officer, it is easy to procure a Supersedeas: the superior
taking the matter into his hands. Then when the highest mover of all, and
Prince moves, there is no more Fathers: that is, when his word comes, it
gives a Supersedeas to all comers, underneath: and Appeal is to be made unto
him. These two dissent often: as Matthew. 6. For our Savior speaks there of
obedience to be given to them that have power of the body: so he says, Fear
not them that kill the body: It were a caveas needless, if Princes had not
broken order, and if they had commanded nothing contrary: but he then tells
them, whom they should fear most. The conclusion is Acts 4.19. Deo potius quam
hominibus, to obey God rather then man.

The reason of this stands thus. God has taken order for the inaugurating
into his politia and government every son: as Phil. 3.20. our (...), our
(...), and conversation is in Heaven: Ephesians. 2.29. we are Citizens with the
Saints.

A child is no sooner borne, but fertur ad baptismum, he is brought to be
baptized. So he is no sooner in the world, but presently he is sent out
again: for there he renounceth the world; and there is his first oath,
Sacramenium militare: therefore men cannot go from their first oath: nor must
he swarve from that, whatsoever inferior Prince bids: therefore Iam. 2.4.
in heavenly matters, if one man be regarded more then another, (because there,
they are all paris juris, of the same authority) it is respect of persons:
therefore the Prince is not superior, but equal, in Gods matters: he must not
command contra seriem suam, against his own order.

And in natural things, as eating, drinking, marriage, he cannot command, as
Ambrose proves, Epi. 43. and consequently in natural things, there is par
jus, the same right: therefore when the case does come to this, we must disobey
him. So then in regard of this first, whereby we have thus set our selves apart
unto God by a solemn oath, we owe him chief and special honor.

1. It is Christ's own saying, Luke 14.26. He that commes to me, and hates not
his father and mother, etc. He expounds it himself, Matthew. 10.37. by plus
quam me, if he love them more then me: or if they love them not less then
Christ. As minus malum, a lesser evil is called good, in respect of the
greater: so minor dilectio, a lesser love, is less, in respect of major
dilectio, a greater; and his less love is this: because bonum quod impedit
majus bonum, in eo minus diligendum, that good that hinders a greater good,
is for that cause less worthy of our love.

2. Example of this in the second Commandment. To this Nebuchadnezzar a
Prince, is contrary: he will out of order: there disobedience is in him: he is
disobeyed; and disobedience is there to him, and no disobedience: disobedience
is not but in (...), in order: he went out first, Dan. 3.18. Another example,
for prayer, between Darius commandment, and Daniels order in the same, Dan. 6.

3. For the third Commandment, Josh. 9.15. an oath taken between Joshua and
the men of Gibeon. They preferred the religion of their oath, before their
oversight, till Saul's time, 2 Samuel 21.2. he, to remove them, would have the
Israelites break their oath: which they did, unlawfully obeying: thererefore
punished fame iriennii, by a trienniall famine.

4. Example, for the fourth commandment. Against which Antiochus commanded, 1
Macc. 1.28. and he died miserably: but Maitathias, that disobeyed him,
prospered.

5. In the fifth Commandment. A Commandment of God for the preservation of
the Ministry and Prophets. Abab, 1 King. 18.13. commands contrary, all Gods
Prophets to be slain. Obadiah saves one hundred, and thinks not himself
disobedient. So he commanded, Honor Father and Mother: yet 2 Chronicles. 15.16. Asa
deposed his Mother, etc. and justly. And Mat. 15.5. the Pharisees Corban
against this Commandment, was not to be obeyed.

6. In the sixth Commandment, Pharaohs commandment was, Kill all the Males;
the Mid-wives disobeyed it, and were rewarded. And Heb. 11.23. Moses Parents
kept and hid him three months by faith, and disobeyed; and if they had kept him
three months longer, it had been a stronger faith. God commands, kill not an
innocent, 1. Sam. 22.17. Saul commanded to slay the Priests of Nob, his
servants would not do it: and they are justified in it. For it is no
disobedience, if the Superior going out of the line, the Inferior keeps it:
Nay, the Inferior is partaker with his Superior in the offense, if in such
cases he obey him, as 2 Samuel 11.16. Joab obeying David's letter, and putting
Uriah only to chancemedley, is condemned, and Mat. 2.16. the soldiers for
executing Herod's command, in killing the Infants: and Acts 23.20. the Ministers
of Ananias for smiting Paul contra justiciam, jussu Ananiae, against all right
and Law, by the command of Ananias.

7. In the 7. Commandment, 2 Samuel 11.11. David's command to Uriah to ly with
Bethsabee, disobeyed and praised: and contra, Absalom obeyed to go lie with
his Fathers concubines, 2 Samuel 16.22.

8. In the eight Commandment, Mich. 3.3. oppression of Princes, and taking
away of every man's goods: Elias was not disobedient to Ahab, when he reproved
him for the Vineyard, for the holy Ghost also threatens him, 1 Kings 21.19.
And Naboth refusing, disobeyed not, 1 Kings 21.3.

9. And for the ninth Commandment: Jezebels device for the witnesses, 1 Ki.
21.10. and Mar. 14.55. the high Priest setting up false witness, etc. both
condemned, Pro. 17.7. Lying, least becomes men in authority: and Pro. 12.14.
it is interpreted, using deceit, that is, bearing false witness: and Pro.
29.12. the Prince that is a liar, shall have servants enough to sooth him in
it; and consequently, ca. 19.28. he that makes a lie, and scoffeth at
judgment: his servants also will come to make a mock and scoff of judgment.

One example more. Christ, who most perfectly fulfilled the law, yet disobeyed
his Superiors, in both respects.

Christ disobeying.
First, Luke 2.49. Christ's defense of not going down at first, cum patre and
matre, with his father and mother: Aug. Ubi nihil impedit ibi conveniens est;
sed quando impediunt, cave ne feceris: haec enim non est obedientia; when the
Superiors hinder not, it is good to obey; but if they command contrary, take
heed you be not deceived, in this case obedience is disobedience: To such it
may be said, Wist ye not that I must go about my Fathers business?

Secondly, at the Marriage, John 2.4. Augustine there makes this objection;
Venerat ne ad nuptias ut doceret matres contemnere, what came Christ to the
Marriage for, to teach us to contemn our Mothers? And he resolves it thus,
What Christ took of his Mother, wherein he was subject unto her, it was his
Flesh. Now she would have him show a Miracle: could he do that by his Humane
nature? No, but as he says, Miraculum facturus, non potuit facere secundum
humanam naturam, sed secundum majestatem divinam, being to work a miracle, he
could not do it by his humane nature but by his divine Majesty: and that was
out of her latitude: therefore he goes on in the person of Christ. Quod in me
tu ge^uisti, non potest facere miraculii, that which I have from thee as my
Mother, cannot work a miracle: and it is that only you may command: in rebus
divinis, mulier quid mihi tecii, in divine matters, woman what have I to do
with thee? Therefore you are not now intra seriem, within your order. But when
he suffered on the Cross, he acknowledged her to be his Mother, being as a
man; and so to provide for her. Augustine, I will say to my Superior, Ne
praetereat jussio tua terminos professionis meae, let not not your command
extend further then the warrant of my profession: that is, the promise I made
in the state I am in. So this it it in effect, In nullo mihi parcat superior,
eorum quae promisi neque plus exigat quam promisi: Wherein I have sworn
obedience, let him not spare me: In other things he has no right to command
me, we must beware also that we be not enticed by them unto evil by the
allurements of preferment. Solomon, Pro. 25.16. says well; Mel invenisti, have
thou found honey, eat not too much. Indeed this is the Commandment where honey
falls. And this is it, 1 Samuel 22.7. that Saul braggeth off; Can David give
you Vineyards, can he promote you? I can. The hope of preferment is often the
cause that we sooth up our superiors in evil, and teach them that because they
are Princes, therefore, quod libet licet, their will may be a Law, as 1 Kings
21.7. Ahab accounts not himself a King, except he may have what he would: and
1 Kin. 22.13. they must come and speak that the King likes off, and will
accept for good. This sets the first Commandment out of doors; As we must
make heavy our Superiors, so we must take heed we make them not nimis graves,
heavier then God. Christ says, that this (...) and (...), this defying of
Superiors, is abominable; and it shall consume the government: And so
detestable it is, as Hos. 5.11, 12. it shall be a Moth, God says there, Israel
is oppressed, and broken in judgment, conteritur ibi judicium, the reasons;
quia placent, quae sequuntur mandata, because they willingly walk after the
commandment. Now there are but two commanders; God and Superiors. God would
not have punished, if he had commanded: But because they follow their
superiors, and not God, and cry placet to him; therefore says he, I will be a
Moth in Judah, and I will consume them.

To conclude, 1 Pe. 2.23. this honor must be propter Deum, for God, that is,
Ephesians. 1.6. in Deo, in God; that is, Tit. 3.1. In every good work: so that in a
case of justice, we must not respect any superior, nor decline one whit, Levit.
9.13. Jerome. honorandus generator; sed praeponendus creator honor thy Father,
yet thy Creator more. Notwithstanding all this, it shall be expedient, non
(...), not to carpe at every little thing, but to obey rather, if it be in our
powers, as when the thing is doubtful. So 2 Samuel 24.4. Joab though he could
see no reason, yet obeyed; and would not therefore discommend it: So likewise
in an unjust Commandment, the (...) be just obedience, Mat. 17.27. Christ for
quietness, paid tribute, more then he needed. So for quietness must we part
with our goods. Augustine, Ut illum reum facit iniquitas imperandi, ita me
innocentem facit ordo parendi, as the injustice of his command makes him
guilty, so throughthy obedience art thou made innocent. Particular duties are
between 1. Husband and Wife. 2. Father and Child. Particular duties.
3. Master and Servant.


First, Husband and Wife, because first ordained, and a nearer bond between
them. Of this duty, there be two ends. 2. Ends of marriage.
First, in respect of God, Genesis 1.28. that all be blessed in his seed.
Secondly, in regard of the Church, 1 Timothy 2.4. to show a care to bring one
another to godliness. First then of the mutual duties of these; to be seen in
three words, used herein. 1. Conjugium. 2. Matrimonium. 3. Nuptiae.


1. Conjugium, is the fellowship of a Yoke: that they might be better, then if
they were alone. But we may, 1 Cor. 7.1. by diverse circumstances in these
days of corruption, be alone better, Genesis 2.24. is the greatness of this
conjunction; in our departure from our dearest things, to be united in this
conjugio: which conjunction, is a covenant, Mal. 2.14. not to be broken of man,
Mat. 10.16. And in this respect is made an help, therefore are all such
conjugia condemned, as be a hindrance to Gods Religion, or contrary thereto;
and those that be unequal, not bearing the same yoke, and are not in Domino,
they marry not in the Lord, 1 Cor. 7.39.

2. Matrimonium: ut fiat matter. This was before sin; the first end whereof,
Genesis 1.18. is propagation, not as of other things; but Mal. 2.15. of the holy
seed of Gods Church: for though Woman was the instrument of sin; yet as 1 Timothy 2.15. if the children be faithful, there shall be a mean to save her. So
these children must be proles sancta, a holy offpring to build his Church.

3. Nuptiae, after sin. So as Ambrose says, Nubo signifies first to cover;
as we may see by the compound of it, obnubo. Therefore as Augustine says,
aliquid sit celandum, by this some thing is done which ought to be concealed:
For so it is said they were naked, which was because of their sin: which
sin made their appetite irregular, and by that the Devil takes occasion of
temptation, 1 Cor. 7.3. for by it we are made opposite to that, Heb. 13.4.
Lectum immaculatum, undefiled bed; and to that, 1 Cor. 7.7. avoiding of
fornication: and to that, Prove. 20. avoiding of strange Women; and to that, 1
Cor. 7.14. that they should be as though they had none.

In particular, 1 Pet. 3.7. the husbands duty is set down, 1. Ossic. viri.
to dwell with them as men of knowledge, seeing that Genesis 3.6. she was deceived
by the serpent, as she confessed, Genesis 3.12. he beguiled me, etc. and therefore
Genesis 3.16. she must never follow her own will hereafter, but be Subject. So
that his duty is to govern her, but so, as to bear with her, Col. 3.19. for
she is coheire with him, and also for his own quietness; for who troubles his
own flesh? So that he, 1 Cor. 14.35. because she must ask him, must be able
to answer her, her inquisition enquiry of instruction; and must not

be carried away with her affection, but exhort her wisely, as Elie his sons, 1 Samuel 2.23. and Ioh his Wife, Cap. 2.10. not to be over credulous as Potiphar,
Genesis 39.9. Moses his Wife also stomached against the Sacrament, Exodus 4.15. So
Iezebell, 1 Kings 23. 2 Samuel 6.2. David's Wife also found fault with him: So
that the Husband must be able to rule his affections, and not yield to them.

And here the duty of the Woman is, 1. Offic. uxoris.
submission. She must not stand to her own will: therefore subject, which
subjection must be, Ephesians. 5.25. as to the Lord; and that with fear, showing
that they have authority, 2 Pet. 2.10. 1 Cor. 11.4. Man is the Woman's head: And
because the sense of seeing is there, she must see by him. So also as Augustine,
Non e pedibus, neque e capite facta, est sed e latere, ut fere sit aequalis,
the Woman was not made out of the head, nor feet, but the side of Adam, to show
that she is almost equal with him. The Heathen could see this to be absurd,
that Women should not be subject. Hest. 1.

The second duty of the Husband agrees with the general duty, (...).
Love, yet in a particular and special respect, as it appears by Genesis 2. we
are to forsake that that is dearest to us for this; And as this love takes
hold in outward things, Prove. 5.18. so specially in inward things, Ephesians. 5.29.
to be such as Christ to his Church, to forsake all and unite himself to it,
and spiritually to make it without spot; so that our love being such, must not
be fleshly, but in the spirit, to care that they be fellow heirs with us in
Christ. And for the Woman, Prove. 31.29, 30. she is above all, that is timens
Iehovae, if she be one that fears the Lord: therefore is Lidia set for a
pattern of this, Acts 16.14. So in outward things, that she have an amability,
to be modest with humility, Prove. 11.16. 1 Timothy 2.9. 1. Pet. 3.3. And all these
to that end, 1 Timothy 5.4. to give no offense; but to convert the very enemy, 1
Pet. 3.1. 1 Timothy 3.8. To provide for his family, an honest care for him and
his: that is, meat and cloths, such was Jacobs care, Genesis 30.30. When shall I
provide for mine own house? This is that desire, Ephesians. 4.28. to be chargeable
to none, but rather to help other: Set down metaphorically, Prove. 5.15. To
drink water of his own Cisterne; so he sends the sluggard to learn of the
Ant, Pro. 6.8. and calls him a son of blessing that gathers in Summer,
Pro. 10.10. Thus did Joseph lay up, Genesis 41.40. And this blessing must be only
to them, which provide thus without any grudging of conscience, Pro. 10.2.

And the Woman, 2. Offi^. uxoris.
1 Timothy 5.4. must look to this and preserve it, John 6.12. Gather up, that
nothing be lost: This is commendable; for though Christ rebuked Martha, Lu.
10.40. yet John 11.5. he loved her: and those houses are happy, where Martha
complains of Mary. This duty of the wife is set down particularly, Pro.
31.27. She overseeth the ways of her household, and eats not the bread of
idleness. That they must keep at home, and carry their houses on their backs,
Tit. 2.5. A pattern of this we have in Sarah, Genesis 18.6.

4. There must be officia resultantia; in regard of this marriage knot, there
must certain duties result from both parties to each the others friends and
parentage: an honor and love of their friends mutually: Of the Man, we have
example of Moses toward his Father-in-law, Exodus 18.7. etc. Numb. 10.29. And
for the Woman, very excellently, Ruth 1.16.

Mutua parentum and liberorum officia.
2. The second between Father and Son. And this is from the second mutual
duties, of this duty there is also two ends; First to the end that there may be
proles sancta, that they may teach their children; and again, they, theirs,
etc. Psalm. 78.6. And secondly, Pro. 17.6. Ut sint corona patrum, their Fathers
crown: a comfort in age, Psalm. 127. that through them they may not be ashamed.

1. The first duty of Parents to Children, is in begetting them; mark here the
manner of the generation of the most excellent servants of God, Isaac and Jacob
were of the Promise: Joseph in the affliction of his Father, Gen: 30. Samuel in
the lamentation of his Mother; Solomon, when David was cast down with the
death of the other child, Psalm. 31.18. The Fathers say, Non tam generatio
spectanda est, quam regeneratio, in this act we are not so much to look after
the generation as the regeneration of our children. Neither is this duty to be
performed with a brutish appetite, but by sanctifying themselves to the
propagation of Gods Church: Because that there are whole Generations of evil,
Proverbs 30.11, 12, 13, 14.

And for this duty, the duty of a child cannot answer, Ephesians. 6.4. he has
begotten me, Offic. liberorum.
but it is impossible I should do so much for him: therefore as wisdom
speaks, Eccles. 3.18. They must be honored, be they never so base: as Mat.
12.30. (...). Luke 15.29. the Prodigals elder brother styles himself his
Fathers servant. Yea, 2 Samuel 14.33. wicked Absalom could do this, bowing down
to the ground; so Solomon in his royal estate, to his Mother: If then any
refuse them, or be ashamed of them, Prove. 10.6. and 30.10. look on them with a
scornful look, as Cham, Genesis 9.22. this is to be accursed. But if any come so
far, as Pro. 20.20. to curse them, he is filius mortis, he must die for it.
Levit. 20.9. Exodus 21.15. It is as much as murder, to hold up the hand against
them.

The second duty of Parents to their children, is Ephesians. 6.4. (...), to nourish
them, being begotten: And herein, if Exodus 21.22, 23. the child be hurt to
death; or Genesis 21.11. forsaken of his Parents, or neglected, 1 Kings 3.19. or
hurt, as Mephibosheth, 2 Samuel 4.4. all these are great offenders. For 1 Timothy
5.9. we must nourish them as our selves, and not against nature, give them a
stone, Mat. 7.9.

The third duty of Parents is, 1 Timothy 3.18. (...), to bring them up, that is,
continually to nourish them, 2 Timothy 1.4. Deuteronomy. 21.15. laying up for them, and
dividing the Inheritance. And if there be no inheritance then that (which
Augustine says) differs nothing therefrom; they are to provide them such
Trades as every one is fit for; as Jacob espied in his sons, Genesis 49.
particular inclinations: and the choicest of them they are to dedicate to Gods
service, 1 Samuel 1.11. And to answer this, The sons duty is, Offic. fil^.
Pro. 17.13. Remuneratio, requital, Pro. 18.14. not to detract falsely from
them as wicked children do. but 1 Timothy 4.16. to maintain them: and Mark 7.12.
let Corban alone, rather then they should want. Such was Christ's care of his
Mother, being on the Cross, John 19.26, 27. (...). and as the Storkes carry
the old ones (that are worn with age) upon their wings. The neglectors of this
duty are not only to be (...), without honor in the Commonwealth: but
sometime manifestly punished, as Homer the Heathen could say. But the duty of
the godly is such, as Joseph performed, Genesis 50. to bury them after death.
Genesis 25.9. as did Jacob and Esau, Genesis 35.29.

4. Duty of the Parents.
4. (...), that they bring them up in Religion, as Mark 2.6. If it were for
goods, wealth, or honor, we could be careful, and sorry of the contrary: but
in the LORDS cause we are less careful: and for the offending of him, less
sorrowful. But this is required of Parents as an especial duty that we be
made Christians by them in (...). Was Abraham's care, Genesis 17.14. 1 Cor. 7.14
Sanctifycation of children. So Esaias was so careful of this, that he took
witness at the receiving them into the Church. And when they are made members
of the Church, they must be instructed, Prove. 22.12. Deuteronomy. 4.9. and 11.19. to
make GODS Word known to them, that when they come to hear it, it may not be
strange. So did Abraham, Genesis 18.19. and David, 1 Chro. 28. and so did Paul's
instructor, 1 Timothy 3.15.

5. Duty of Parents.
5. Fifthly, they must add to these, Exemplum, their example, with due and fit
correction, for it is with a Child as with the ground, if untilled, it is
soon overrunne with thorns and nettles, Prove. 24.32. and because didicit
obedientiam ex eo quod passus est, Prove. 29.15. The rod and reproof, give
wisdom; the Rod is (...), to put a soul into them; and to lose the bundle of
folly: Pro. 21.15. for so, Prove. 3.12. Qui non corrigit odit, He that does not
correct his child, hates him: and Prove. 22.13. Non morietur, si corrigas, If
thou correctest him, he shall not dye. This makes against them which love over
foolishly. Yea, there is a blessing for this correction, Prove. 13.14. for it
delivers the soul, and brings rest if it be with this condition, Dum spes
est, Prove. 19.18. while there is hope; while the bundle is not too fast bound.
This is Abraham's work that every man must sacrifice the (...), the young and
budding lusts of their children.

6. Duty of Parents.
6. Lastly, a particular kind of prayer and blessing, which sanctifies all the
rest: else all other means be cursed, Genesis 17.10. and 49.48. 1 Chronicles. 2.19.

Child's duty.
The child's duty to answer all this, is his obedience; if he will not bring
shame and discomfort; he must be wise, Prove. 27.11. Viz. such as mocketh not at
good counsel, Prove. 10.1. as also Prove. 6.20. Imitatio exempli, We must
imitate them in their good example, as did Jacob. Again, subjection to
discipline is also required, which distinguishes a natural son from a
b^stard, Heb. 12.9. (See the obedience and practice of this in indifferent
things in the Rechabites, Jer. 35.6.) For it is an honor to them, to refer
our selves to their counsels. So here is condemned such marriages and
contra^is, as the Parents consent not too, Numb. 30. No vow can stand without
their consent, much less this: and 1 Cor. 7.13. the father is said to give his
daughter: so the Son must be given also: And the contrary to this was always
a note of the wicked. Genesis 28.9. Secondly, they do not perform this
obedience, that are such as one described, Deuteronomy. 21.18, 19, 20, 21. which is
truly thus translated, Commessator, or cauponarum frequentator, A riotous
eater and an hunter of Tavernes; if any have such a son, and he will not
hear his Fathers counsel, let him be stoned. So the Heathen would have the
Father, Dicere sententiam, to give sentence against his own son. Solon
thinks, and says, he has proved by experience, them to be Bastards, that
will not obey. And so every of them had their Eridnis, as the Heathen said. So
not much unlike is that, 1 Samuel 2.25. Elies sons could not obey; for God was
purposed to slay them, wherefore he hated their disobedience. He that will not
obey his Father and Mother, shall once obey the Hangman, or worse as the Poet
says.

The duty of children toward their Fath^^ ^kindred, etc.
This duty must yet reach further on both sides, Levit. 25.29. to his Brother,
his Fathers brother, and his Fathers brothers Son, ( Numb. 35.51. he that is
next of the kin, is always called, vindex sauguinis, the revenger of blood.)
This of Father or Superior to his Inferior, we fee in Abraham to Lot, Genesis
13.11. in Mordecai to Hester: Cap. 2.15. so that in this respect is the precept
of the Widow, Deuteronomy. 26. and the fatherless, 1 Timothy 5.4. that first they look
to their own house, to help such. And for children; though Caine be wicked,
yet as the Elder, he is to be honored of his brother, Genesis 4.7. Acts 10.
Cornelius sent for all his friends, to be partakers with him of Gods word. So
we have, Judge. 4.11. a deed of love in Israel: Of Kinsefolke, Luke 1.^9. Mary
to Elizabeth. So 1 Timothy 5. the Inferiors must look to their Superiors, as
Prove. 27.10. Thine own friends, and thy Fathers friends, forsake not: but as 1 Samuel 15. Be friendly, even to the friend of thy friend.

Dominii origo The Masters power over the Servant.
3. The third duty is of Master and Servant. This is (...), a humane ordinance;
but the approbation of it was from God; and it depends on 2 Kings 5.13. where
Naamans servants call him Father.

Dominii finis, The end of that power and government.
The end of this is, first, Luke 19.9. that the regeneration of Zacheus should
be the regeneration of the whole house. And secondly, Eccles. 8.9. Dominari in
bono, The mutual good one of another.

Se^itutis or^gonalis, The institution of the Servants duty.
For the institution of this: As, if man had continued in innocence, we should
have had no servants; so we read of none, till Genesis 9.25. and afterward of
Esau. Now after this curse, came that which the Fathers call Depressio
intellectus, Darkness of the understanding: Whereby men became more fit to be
ruled, then to rule: And Prove. 11.29. Solomon there shows, that by nature,
insipiens, the fool, shall be Servus sapientis, Servant to the wise. So did
Jacob prophecy of Issacar, Genesis 49.14. that he should have this Depressionem
imellectus, this darkness of understanding; as also God has showed, in making
the body sit to bear, rather then to govern. So we see how natural servitude
and service came in.

Then, Genesis 13.38. and 10.18. after, this plague of God (though it were under
all) began first to bring men under subjection: so that Nimrod and his crew,
oppresses the Kings of Sodom, and the Pentapolis about them. Genesis 14.4. And
thus came Servitus ex necessitate. servitude forced through necessity:
Necessitas enim dat legem legi. From this necessity came servus pacti, a
servant by Covenant; for men would willingly make a covenant, and bind
themselves, that they might be free from those their oppressors. And hence it
was that Abraham had so many servants, as the Jews note, 318. Because they
seeing his equity, were glad to be with him. And Genesis 17.29. it turned to their
great good, receiving thereby Circumcision, the freedom of their souls; and
for this cause, none of Israel might be servant, for God by their service,
might gain the more of the Heathen. Yet after, other respects drew even the
Saints of God to be servants. Genesis 27.29. Jacob served Laban twenty years; so
that in this respect, where poverty is, that a man may be made rich; Where
ignorance is, that a man may learn knowledge; he may be servant, Deuteronomy. 13.12.
(And thus came this service, by Gods goodness; turning the punishment into a
blessing to his. So that when we can have no freedom, it is generally for all,
1 Cor. 7.17. and particularly for every one, verse 20. and 21. to abide
service. And 1 Timothy 6.2. though they were Heathen, yet obey them.) So Paul
sends the servant again to Philemon, to teach him with his knowledge, and to
be willing to impart to him of his riches: so then is service, eopacto,
permitted by the Gospel.

So must servants respect two ends. 1. Gods glory, 1 Timothy 6.1. 2. The Masters
profit, Phil. 11. So did all things prosper under Joseph's hands.


Particular duties.

1. Duty of the Master.
1. For the Master, ars imperandi, knowledge to enjoyne them their work: and
herein there must be four things. 1. That it be lawful, else it will
displease (...), thy Master according to the spirit; and though we have (...),
A Master after the flesh: Yet Praeponendus est Dominus secundum spiritum, the
Master after the spirit must always be preferred before him; so did Joseph set
God before his Mistress, Genesis 39.9. Therefore we must walk integre,
uprightly; Psalm. 101. and therefore command them nothing but what is lawful.
2. It must be Possible, For a thing may be lawful and not possible. And
therefore Abraham's servant puts the doubt, Genesis 24.5. What if she will not
come? and is in that case set free. 3. It must be profitable: David shows, 2 Samuel 13.17. by not drinking the water, that it was an unprofitable
commandment; and might as well have been left undone. 4. It must be
proportionable to person, time and other circumstances: Pharaoh, Exodus 5.7.
went above all proportion, and this is the Masters duty.


2. The Servants duty answering this, is set down, 1. Duty of the Servant.
Mat. 24.45. Faithfulness and Discretion. 1. For Faithfulness, the Heathen
can say that servus is totus alterius, a servant is wholly another man's;
therefore, Mat. 6.24. he can serve but one Master; and the reason is, because
his duty is infinite: he cannot set down any time, when he shall have done;
but must work all the day, Luke 17.7. and at night too, till his Master set
him free. Yea, he must spare from his own meat, to do his Masters business;
as Abraham's servant, Genesis 24.33. Opposite to this faithfulness, Opposites of
faithfulness. 1. Wasters.
is First, when they will do some thing beside, or let some thing stick in
their fingers, Tit. 2.10. Filchers, Luke 16. Wasters; such as spend in vile
company, Mat. 24.49. Secondly, lying, 2 Samuel 16.3. such was Ziba, 2. Lying.
2 Kings 5.22. Gehezi was grievously punished for this. Thirdly, slothfulness;
3. Sloth.
when he will not give to his Master all his strength: non accurate agere, as
the Poet says; but be servus glis, not like to Jacob, Genesis 31.40. nor to them,
Prove. 31.15. rise early, and verse 18. get up in the night. Therefore, Matthew.
25.26. the slothful decrease; but Prove. 12.24. the diligent increase. 4.
Unwillingnes and murmuring.
Fourthly, Ephesians. 6.7. when they do it unwillingly; which when they must do
it, will not do it with commendation: Therefore they must do it (...), with
all thine heart; Col. 3.23. not murmuring, Tit. 2.9. but as the Poet says,
(...). do as the Centurions servant, Matthew. 8. he heard Go, and he went
presently. Fifthly, deceitful diligence, only at their pleasure, eye-service,
5. (...).
Ephesians. 6.6. Col. 3.22. but it must be done with singleness, least the chief
Master be displeased. And if they do it so, he will reward them with another
reward.


2. For Prudentia, or Discretion, 2. Prudentia.
the distinctions of servants which the Philosophers have,

First, one can do no more, then that which he is taught to do; and this is
like a bleared eye: of which a man would gladly be ridd, but that he cannot
spare his sight. Secondly, the other is such, as Luke 12.42. knows his
Masters will; and then as the Steward would do for himself, Luke 16. so must
he cast for his Master in due time and season, Genesis 31.38. as did Jacob, so
shall he prosper with Joseph, Genesis 49.2.
2. Duty of the Master.
The second duty of the Master is, not to be asper, rigorous, Levit. 25.43. but
Col. 4.1. he must govern with justice and equity; for they are conservi,
fellow servants also; and servants are humiles amici humble friends (as one
calls them:) And though it cannot be said to us, as to the Jews, Remember
that ye were servants: yet as the Poet says, in futuro, remember that you may
be servants: and therefore Quod tibi vis fieri, do as you would be done by.
But if the servant will not understand, then Pro, 19.29. he must be corrected:
Offi^^ seve:
and thereto be subject, 1 Pet. 2.8.

3. Duty of Master.
The third duty is, Pro. 31.27. to provide for them abundantly, meat and cloth,
Pro. 31.2. Mat. 25.27. When he has done well let him be preferred: and before
the going down of the Sun, be partaker of the fruit of his hands, Deuteronomy.
15.12. etc. Exodus 21.6. and Jer. 34.14. Levit. 25.39. after he is free and the
time of his service expired, his wages must not remain in thine hand: so that
on both sides, there be mutual duties to be performed on both sides. The
contrary to which is, that Pro. 29.4. Bribery and not friendship; which
prophecy of Solomon was fulfilled in his servant Jeroboam to his son
Rehoboam. And thus much of these three duties.

Now to the other division: For (...)
This (...) (or ordinance) is either (...), divine preparers, or Masters of
Schools; Pastors for the Soul. (...), Humane.


Teachers and Schools, their institution, etc.
For the Preparers and Schools. The ground of this is in the Prophets, where as
2 Kings 2.3. one tells Elisha that his Master shall be taken from him; and
verse 12. he himself calls him Father. This is to be a Father by
Regeneration. And it is that, which the Heathen make their eloquence: so says
Philosophy, (...). And as Elisha being for the Ecclesiastical use, called him
Father; so the young King being for the Politic use, 2 Kings 13.14. calls
him Father. So seeing he is the Father, both of those that are in the Church,
and in the Commonwealth; he has his maintenance from both; from the Church, 2
King 4.42. from the Civil body, 2 Kings 8.9.

P^nis scholaru^^, etc. The end of Schools.
The end of this is, Esaias 8.16. That the Law might be sealed in the Disciples, 2
Pet. 3.16. There be those that be unlearned, that corrupt these seals: and
those, which be not grounded, which counterfeit others. So, that his Seal
might remain, he will set it in the School, Hosea 6.5. that men might hereby
be made fit to build the House of God, Ut dolentur homines, be made fit matter.

For as it is, Ephesians. 4.18. there is a natural blindness of heart in every
one; so that the taking away of this, is a special part of this function. So
says Balaam, Numb. 24.14, 15. that he was borne, clausis oculis, with his eyes
shut, Jer. 10.14. Every man is a beast in his own knowledge, etc. But Audiendo
verbum, sentiebat artem: sic veniebat, vidit and locutus est. At the first they
were called Seers, 1 Samuel 9.8. yet they would not be so called, but Dophim,
that is Speculators, seeing in a glass some things that others saw not.

Institutio huj^^ ante^l^g^^.
Institution of this; before the Law, Numb. 10. toward the end, Genesis 8. and Number.
11.28.14. There must be Elders, they must have the spirit put on them; that is,
nothing else, but to take the spirit which he has, and to give it to another.

The word in Hebrew, Esaias 58.9. signifies a peaceable learning; as Romans 10.
Plentifulnesse of wisdom: and that is, 1 Cor. 14.3. to edify, exhort, and
comfort; not to foretell things only, for that was extraordinary, and is now
ceased; and so is not the prophecy there meant: for then we should perish that
have it not, as the wise man says. Then they had both Levites, and Nazarites;
that is, such, as of any other Tribe were given to the service of GOD in his
Church. And of these, their Colleges stood, Amos 2.11. and also of many other
good Students, such as was Moses his servant, Joshuab; which tarried always
about the Tabernacle; that is, plying his study, and so became so excellent,
Exodus 33.11. when they came to the Land of promise, they found a City of
Books, which after they called the City of God, least the Books should be
thought the chief cause of Prophecy. After, they had Mispat, Gilgall, and
Bethel, 1 Samuel 10.11. where Saul was wondered at, for being among the Prophets.
It is manifest that they acknowledged it to be extraordinarily: and so, that
there was an ordinary means to Prophecy. After this, when Samuel left the
Rule, he went again to his Fathers calling, and built a College at Rhamah,
and was Master of it himself. And this continued till the Captivity. When they
had places likewise to study in, and left behind them there, that learning
that was there to be had. So that it has been from the beginning, to Christ;
and Christ accepts of that name, which was for a Teacher, Rabbi, and calls
his Disciples Scholars, John 15.8. Mat. 12.4. Mark 10.42. he will reward a cup
of cold water, that is bestowed on these. And by that (...), how he came to be
so learned, that they wondered at it, John 7.15. it is sure that Christ was
learned in all, and taught so. After. Christ's instruction, it was necessary, 1 Timothy 1.13. to keep the true pattern, 1. Cor. 4.13. to teach it, and read it,
verse 14. to write it: and Mat. 23.24. to meditate it, to show our progressus;
and (...), and to make our fruit known to all men, 1 Timothy 4.5. 1 Cor. 6.5. to
be Wise and Learned: and Paul denies not of himself, 2 Cor. 11.6. and Festus
confesses of him, Acts 26.24. For though Peter and John were unlearned men;
yet Luke and Mark were learned, when Christ chose them: And the (...), or free
gifts; are five: Charismata doctoris quinque.
1. Of Nature. 2. Doctrine. 3. Education. 4. Exercise. 5. Laying on of hands.


After, in the Primitive Church, when they were all moved against it, Acts
13.1. it removed to Antioch: and there were learned men, and thence to
Alexandria, where Mark was chief; whence it were easy to bring it to us.

For the duty of the Teacher: Offic. doctoris. The Teachers duty.
Christ chose but one out of three so he must know and choose them that be fit
for this, as Lucas would discern Joseph to be fit for a Nazarite: For all be
not apart, Luke 10.13. so there must be a choice in the behalf of this Teacher.
For there must be a Cephas as Peter, Mat. 16.22. in that he gave counsel; and
in his courage and willingness to hear of his Fault, Gal. 2. And James and
John were called the sons of Thunder, Luke 9.14. And this is such a name, as
has in it some sign; and such as Job 23.33. Unus inter mill, one of a
thousand; And thus a choice must be, in the behalf of the Teacher, and the
Learner.

The Learners duty.
Of the Learner; for as Zach. 13.5. such as acknoweldge themselves neither to be
Prophets, nor sons of Prophets: For Pro. 17. what should cost be bestowed on
them, that are not apt? Pro. 26.1. And he that teaches those Dolts, is as if
he should lift up a lame man from the ground; for he will fall again.
Therefore as Plato would have those that are to be of the School or
Commonwealth, to be either Gold or Silver at the least: for Pro. 27.2. and
Jer. 6.28. they turned his bellows, and wearied his arm, because they were
but Brass, so that in vain he melted them; therefore, Esaias 28.9. Quem docebo?
Whom shall I teach knowledge? Not such as must have precept upon precept, and
be ever in the Principles: but those that can take stronger meats. And if they
cannot do thus; then must Zachary say, they are more fit to be Husbandmen.
The Popes opinion for choice.
The Popes opinion of this choice, which they have in the Canon, is thus: That
it is better (...) strict in it, then otherwise: for it is better to be a
wiseman in the Church or Commonwealth, without this dignity, then to be fool
with it The neglect of this choice, Mal. 2. to take into this place of
Prophecy all that comes; was the cause why the Sun was darkened. For thus
the Prophets became Bardi, stupid blockheads, Jer. 23.13. without common sense
o^ it. Thus Prophecy fails, and so the people perish.

Signa eligendorum. The signs of such as are to be chosen.
There be therefore three signs of them that are to be chosen, Pro. 16.7.

First, in the Ant is noted a natural quality to provid without gain; which
is called Solertia, the duty of the active part of understanding; together of
it self: As we see many of the Fathers, Ambrose, etc. were very wonderful men
this way. The second is, 2 Kings 4.29. Docilitas, To be able to conceive; which
is the duty of the passive part of the understanding; to have cor latum, a
dilated heart, to conceive so, that Solertia, the active part of the
understanding may have matter to be occupied in. Thirdly, Eccles. 11.6.
Instanter operari, to take pains; which made Paul more excellent then all. So
that we have that cor latum, and solertiam, with this diligence; to show both
at morn and at even, and never to rest: then are we fit to be chosen.
If we have not these, there will rise between the Teacher and the Scholar,
Difficultas quaedam, quae arguit errorem, some kind of difficulty, and
consequently, error. And if there be so in this first step, it is like the
error in the first concoction; which cannot be helped by those that follow. So
for all that follow, we must presuppose that the choice is made aright.

Then seeing some things have outward principles, as res artificiosae, things
artificial: and some inward, as natural things: and some both, as health: And
that these that are done extraordinarily, are done without these Principles;
sometimes, as health, procured by nature it self, without medicine; so is
Prophecy extraordinarily gotten without teaching: And as in medicine, it
adds nothing to nature, but ministers to it, and helps it; so teaching
adds nothing to the internal Principles of Prophecy, that is the light of
our hearts, but helps it.

This light is that, which John 1.9. is in every man: and this teaching helps
it by sensible things; (...), and similitudes, as by bringing conclusions into,
or by the right disposing of the medicine. So that to make known that which is
unknown; and bring to order that which is confused, is the effect of Teaching.

Generally then for mutual duties: Mutua doctores, and discipuli officia.
Mutual duties of Teacher and Scholar.
First, we must be persuaded, that this lumen, this light comes from God; and
therefore we must go to Heaven for it. Psalm. 36.9. in lumine tuo lumen
videbimus, in thy light, shall we see light, etc. 2 Cor. 4.6. his light must
shine into our hearts: And the way to this, is prayer, Psalm. 6. toto: and
Psalm. 119.66. Teach thou me, etc. Secondly, we must have regard to the
Commandment wherein it is; that is, his Law; that is fuller of all knowledge,
and in better manner, then all the works of the Heathen. Thirdly, we must,
Ephesians. 5.14. wake out of sleep; that is, sin: for wisdom will not come in
cor malevolum, into a heart malevolent: by the avoiding of which, the Fathers
were far more excellent, then we, in all their meditations, though they had
not so good means as we.


Thus, as Aug: says, there must be magister intus, a teacher within us; which
Esaias 30.27. stands behind us, and tells us, when we are right; without which,
our study and care is bootlesse.

The Teachers duty.
Particular duties. First, of the Teachers; set down wholly, Pro. 22.10, 20.
to make known to them, to write it for them; to counsel them in the practice
of it. But particularly this is done: First, by parables, as did both Balaam
and Moses; and Matthew. 13.3. by sensible things make known such things, as are
more removed from the understanding. Secondly, this must have with it an order,
and no interruption; as Luke 24.27. he began at Moses when he expounded unto
them the Scripture; and John 15.12. he had other things to teach them, which he
did not at that time, because they were not capable of them. Some must have
stronger meat then others.


Now for this, there be four ways to teach by, 1. Precept, Psalm. 119.31.
Teach me thy precepts. 2. Example, Pr. 24.32. the field of the sluggard, etc.
3. Experience, which we call our Genesis, Ge^. 30.27. 4. Ex eo quod passus est,
Heb. 7.8. (...), Correction is good instruction.


Christ, the most perfect pattern of a Teacher in all these, and of all names,
he accepted of this, to be so called.

1. Concerning precept, Mark 4.34. he expounds every parable privately. 2.
Example, John 13.15. Exemplum dedi vobis, I have given you an example. 3.
Experience has taught them practice, Mat. 16.13. John 4.2. in increasing in
knowledge, Mat. 17.14. in casting out spirits, Mat. 10.1. in preaching; of the
first order of the seventy, whereof twelve were after chosen to be Apostles.
The difference of these are, 1 Cor. 3.2. that some are chief builders; which
lay the foundation; as were the twelve, whereon the other must build, as the
seventy. And thus then remain distinctions in the Church, by Christ's first
Order. 4. Ex iis, quae passus est; for teaching by reproof, Mat. 15.16. know
ye not, etc? Mat. 16.12. in their ignorance of the leaven, and v. 23. he
reproved Peter for his counsel, Mark 10.14. for keeping children from him,
Mat. 17.7. when the spirit resisted them. Thus they learned by reprehension:
for so Pro. 17.16. as sharp words to the wise are better then whips to the
fool. Christ could teach by stripes also, when it was needful; as Joh. 2.15.
when they made the house of God, dens for thieves. And there is a theft in not
laboring, as well as in not praying: we shall find all that are held up with
sufficient allowance, and yet idle, to be such thieves.
Learners duty.
The Learners duty answering to this, is Pro. 22.17. Bow down thine ear, etc.
and Lam. 2.46. it is set down to be 1. (...), Studious in hearing. 2. (...),
to ask questions.


First, (...), opposite to this, is Heb. 5.11. dullness in hearing: accompanied
with dullness of heart, Luke 24.25. Therefore this must come, as Pro. 22.17,
18, 19. in aurem into the ear, and then, in cor into the heart, and hence
again, ad labia, unto the lips; and for weakness of memory, we must do as the
Scribes, write it in tables of paper, and by often reading, bring it into the
tables of the heart, Proverbs 7.3.

Secondly, (...), to inquire, Exodus 13.14.6.20. to show it to all: and Deuteronomy.
23.1. all commanded to ask, John 16.17. Mat. 13.10. and 15.5. Every Scribe
must have both new and old parables, to teach them that enquire: For they
bought Christ by Interrogation to express many things which could not be left
unexpressed, without great doubt to the Church: as Matthew. 23. concerning the
Kingdom of Heaven; and John 9. in rendering the cause why he was borne blind;
he showing the cause of all defects of nature. 2 Samuel 20.8. We must enquire at
Abel, the town of learning. And withal we must add to this conference, spoken
of before. Solomon likeneth it to two Irons, one whetting on the other, Pro.
27.17.

2. Duty of the Teacher.
The second duty of the Teacher, which Aug: would have in his son; is vitia
morum, magis quam verborum vitare: the Solecisme in manners chiefly to be
avoided. Quintilian says well, Quid prodest, si studiis prodesses, moribus
autem obesses? potior ast been vivendi, quam optime dicendi facultas. What
avails it, that thy instructions be profitable, if thy example and manners be
hurtful, it is far more praise worthy to live well, then to speak well.
Luke 10.20. It is our Saviors advice that we only rejoice in our salvation,
not in any other knowledge, 1 Cor. 15.2. For without charity the foundation of
all good manners, all the tongues and knowledge are but as Brass. 1
Corinthians 13.1. Therefore Christ, Si scitis haec, beati estis, si faciatis:
aliter non, if ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them, and not
else; John 13.17. This did John rejoice at, John 3.4.

The Scholars duty answering this, Lam. 3.47. Is to persuade themselves, it is
a blessed thing to bear the yoke of Christ in youth: Therefore thou must, Romans
12.11. redeem the time: If thou loose any of the Day, take up as much of the
Night, Ephesians. 5.10. And Numb. 6.13. that there is a day of Consecration, and
thou must study for it. 1 Samuel 10.11. 1 Timothy 3.6. he must be no young Scholar:
for these are they that bring all out of course, which take that upon them,
that they are not able to discharge. Of these complain the Prophets, and the
Fathers; and themselves also fall into temptation.

2. Also they must he willing to be directed, not without leave to do so much
as bury his Father. And this is it that makes a Disciple in the estate of
following; that is, to be enjoined, and not to depart without permission. And
then the Apostles counsel, 2 Timothy 2.22. He must fly the lusts of youth: one
noted, Tit. 2.6. by the opposite, (...), to be sober minded. How is that? Esaias
51.21. there is Ebrietas e vino, a drunkenness through wine; and a
drunkenness that comes not by Wine. For Wine and company, they that are
given to it, delight in it, Pro. 23.20, 21. avoid such. The avoiding of such as
are amatores pinguium, lovers of commessations, and of ease; of slothful and
drunkards. Dormitatio vestietur panais, nunquam sapit amator vini, sloth shall
be covered with rags, and the drunkard may not boast of wisdom.

The other, that is not with wine, in Esaias; to be drunken with his own conceit
and opinion; it is in them that know least. When a man has a fume in his head,
and thinks he can do as the drunken man, that thinks he can overcome all the
World, Pro. 30.12, 13. he speaks there, of a generation pure in their own
eyes, not so indeed: ye shall know them by their outward behavior, as by
haughty eyes, holding up the head, showing the breasts, etc. Pro. 11.2. With
the lowly is wisdom: It is the first discite of Christ, Matthew. 11.29. and
John 13.16. expressed in example. And it is his Maxim: No Disciple is higher,
or to check his Master. The heathen say, they are protervi and petulantes,
impudent and saucy that do so. Deuteronomy. 32.15. the Holy Ghost says, If two be
scholars, and taught together, and one of them had a conceit of himself: and
the other were a fool, there were more hope of a fool to prove a Scholar
then the other, Proverbs 26.16. It is incident to those that are nothing but
Lumpes, informed by abuse, that thinks himself wiser then seven that can give
a reason.

The conclusion of this part: seeing Eccl. 7. there is a time to be silent, and
a time to speak; the first is, when he is a learner. And Christ was conversant
in hearing and inquiring; not setting down Positions of his own: so we must
not be such as are conceited of their own wisdom; but such in whom wisdom
does dwell. We must be humble: contra, Pro. 5.13. when a man will not hear his
teachers, he shall after say, How has my own conceit rent me in pieces as a
mad Bull, how has it brought me to nothing.

3. Duty of the Teacher.
Come to the third: It is tueri, to defend, according to the name of Tutors:
practiced by Christ, Mat. 9.14. and Mat. 12.2. and 15.2. defending his
Disciples; and thereby showing, that in every matter wherein they transgressed
not, he would stand with them.

Scholars duty.
The first duty answering this, in regard of defense; God says, The Nazarites,
Numb. 6.14, 15. shall bring besides, every one what he is able, 1 Samuel 1.22.
Anna carries up her Son, and three Bullocks, etc. that she might not be
chargeable to Elie. 1 Samuel 9.7. Shall we come to the Prophet, and bring him
nothing? was Saul's care when he went up to Samuel. So Luke 2.29. we read the
entertainment of Christ by Levi. Matthew. 8.14. by Peter: and likewise of a
counsel that was held against the Heretics, fratricelli, where it was
concluded against them, that Christ lived of his Stipend, and not of begging,
as they make him; (and so of his Disciples:) and he had of his own, and Judas
had the Bag.

The second duty is to minister to them, 1 Samuel 2.11. Samuel to Elie, coram
Domino, before the Lord: 1 Kings 19.21. Elisha, though elder then Elias, yet
ministered to him; and 2 Kings 3.11. powered water on his hands: the like we have
in the Gospel of John, toward our Savior. So Mat. 11.2. he sent two of his
Disciples of his errand: Mat. 26.17. he sent two of his Disciples to prepare
him the Passover, Mar. 3.10. to provide him an Ass to ride on, etc. John 4.8.
to provide meat for his Dinner.

Thirdly, there must be that resultans officium: So John 19.27. he charge
some of his Disciples, that were best able, with the maintaining of his mother:
and more, after his death, they brought odours, etc. for his burial, Mat.
14.12. John's Disciples did the like; and more, they spoke of him with praise,
and a perpetual memory of him. Luke 24.19. He was a Prophet, mighty in deed
and word, before God, and all the people: Therefore they must not be forgotten
after death: Death must not end the duty to them.

But there is another duty: that is, though we be not in charge to them, if he
be in the room and calling of a Prophet, we are bound to owe honor unto him:
and so 1 Samuel 9.6. as Saul's servant honored Samuel, so eo nomine, as he is a
Prophet, he is to be accounted of them that be not under his charge, an
honorable man: as Gamaliel, Acts 5.34. and this being performed, 1 Timothy 2.2.
we shall have men faithful; and such as are able to teach others: that is, the
University shall bring forth such, as shall be fit for the Church, or
Commonwealth.

The end of the erection of Schools.
The end of the erection of Schools, is to bring forth men, (...), able to
teach: 2. (...), able to govern; the first in the Church, the later in the
Commonwealth; first of the former.

The Ministers of the Church.
First, they are called Fathers, both ab Ecclesia Dei, by the Church of God, 1
Cor. 4.15. and also, even among the Irreligious, Judges 27.12. and after that,
cap. 18.19. And because (as before) all paternitie that is, comes from Christ,
and there was no other Fatherhood in him, but only that he was the only Priest
and Prophet of the New Testament: (reserving that that was before in the
beginning said; that God, because he is fons omnis boni, the fountain of all
good, he must needs have this quality of goodness, to be (...), Communicative
and make others partakers of it; which was the cause of the creation of the
World: even as it is called, the Mystical incorporation; and that (...), that
celestial policy, is partaker of all that goodness and glory, that God has.

The earth made for man with his three divisions.
Now God purposing to make this created World, with the three divisions in it:
1. Heaven, as his (...), His place of reward: 2. Earth, as his (...), His
workhouse: 3. Hell, as his (...), His prison:
To the end, that men exercising here, in the place of work, as they receive
grace and increase the talent given them, so they might be rewarded, either
with bliss in Heaven, or damnation in Hell. So the earth, and all that is in
it, being a place of exercise, All things made for the Church.
was made for the Church; and Heaven for reward. For this cause has he
ordained the whole World, and consequently, these former paternities: the
natural, to beget holy seed; and all oeconomicall, for education: and this
last, the Fatherhood of the Families of the Prophets, for instructing and
making them fit for the principal paternitie, to the work of the Ministry.
So that those that follow, are nothing else but Pales and Railes for the
Church, to make that this work may the better go forward. In Ephesians. 4.12. is
this order set down: All that Christ did, his coming down, suffering, etc.
all was, first, for the gathering of the Saints; which was to be effected:
secondly, (...), by the work of the Ministry; and then the third, to build
them up in the knowledge of faith and virtues, ver. 13. they being, 1 Pet. 2.5.
living stones: and consequently partakers of the (...) the growth, ver. 13.
unto the stature of Christ, to be coupled with him, here by a spirit, and after
in Heaven by presence. This is the great work of all, because it had all other
works ordained for it, 1 Cor 3.21. And so because ye boast in men, ye labor
your selves in vain; all things are yours, Paul, Apollos, Cephas, the World,
etc. (speaking to the Church) that ye might be Christ's, and Christ Gods, and
so consequently that union performed spoken off, Ephesians. 4.1^. Then we see the
institution and ordaining of, and withal, the end of all those that take on
them to be these Fathers; and so we see, what we are to think of their work.

There is nothing more plain then this, that both Families and Schools, and
Commonwealths, and the whole World was created to the work of the Ministry,
that the knitting and building up of the faithful, might be effected.

It is the not duly considering this, that brings the perturbance and
confusion in the World, that now is: For whereas it is expressly set down, that
this ought to be a thing, for which we ought anhelare, to breath after: And
Esaias 49.24. this should be the whole drift of the King, to be nutritious pater,
a nursing Father; and of the Queen, to be nutrix, a nurse to the Church; and
their duty to be wholly, nutrire, to do the part of a nurse; that the Churches
estate might be more glorious: (And by these they may be in best estate) in
stead of this (as before) they that be in high places, Ezekiel. 11.3. such think
it to be for nothing else, but to soake in their breath, and seek their own
ease, and others think with Jezebell, 1 Kings 21.7. they may do what they
list: and because Foreign envasions, tumults and broils would hinder this
taking and using their commodity: Therefore the next thing that comes to be
provided for, 2 Kings 20.9. is only to care, ut sit pax tanti in diebus meis,
to keep peace; and so consequently, the Church of God lies trodden under foot
and neglected.

And so on the other side, where the Subjects also be such, as Psalm. 49. last,
being made to be in honor, yet come to be without understanding; that is, do
know no other, nor further bonum, but sensibile, their bellies, table, and
regard of furniture for their house: it is as Col. 3.2. (...), to mind earthly
things, to have their conceit only on them: or Mat. 16.26. so they can find a
commutation for their souls, they have no mind of this mind of Gods, or of
God; but only follow their senses, and sensible things. And so, having such a
mind, are willing to be governed accordingly; and so the purpose of the Lord
does come to be of none effect: so that he himself must lay to his hand, and
if he should not set to his hand extraordinarily, he should get none.

For when as 2 Cor. 10. Paul had given out great words there, of the Ministry,
that it was able to cast down, etc. then verse 7. he begins to say, you
look on things after the outward appearance, and pomp; and then there is no
such thing in it. For the sensible glory, and sensible signs of that glory, as
a sword, etc. they strike a terror into men's minds; but here it is not so:
Because they measure, (...), according to the outward appearance; this is the
cause that they contemn them: and so they dealt with Christ, Esaias 53.2. the
Prophet says, they looked on him, and he seemed to them to have neither form
nor beauty, that they should desire him; and so they despised him, and were
ashamed of him: And so they are ashamed of the calling wherein he lived, and
was so greatly magnified. Contempt of the Ministers most common.
So then there is nothing more familiar in the World then this, Luke 23.11.
Herod's account of Christ; he did (...), set naught by him; and (...), scoff at
him: so that it is called a Calling not to be set by, and to be scoffed at;
whereas God had advanced it. And so under the Law, 2 Kings 1.9. Ahaziahs his
men in denision called Eliah, The man of God; for why else should he call for
fire to consume them. So 2 Kings 9.11. Ahab his Courtiers, when the Prophet
came to Jehu about the Kingdom, etc. they said, What did this mad fellow with
thee, etc? So shall you see it to be, where Religion has not taken deep root;
he which has the greatest work, is paid with the greatest score. Only we are
helped in this, with the distinction of David, Psalm. 52. verse last: That there
is a bonum, a good; by the contrary member, as it should seem; that there is a
bonum coram mundo, and a bonum coram sanctis, there is a good which seems so
in the eye of the World, and a good which is accounted so only by the Saints.
I will praise thee O Lord, etc. for thy Saints like it well, says the vulgar
translation; but not so properly, as bonum coram sanctis, it is good in the
eyes of the Saints. The World would think as Pharaoh did, if a man should sing
or give thanks to God, he is idle, as humor reigns too much in him:
Therefore he says, Thy Saints like it well. To this is the the judgment of
the Apostle, 2 Cor. 10. last: It is not the well thinking of man, that makes
it to be well thought off; but Gods liking, and the bonum coram sanctis.

Duties of the Pastor.
Come to the duties of the Pastor, where we will pass over the duty before;
that is, bringing of the gift; which was handled under education.

The end and scope of the calling to the Ministry.
The Apostle, Heb. 5.1. (...), in things pertaining to God; shows the end of
the Ministry; he is for men, in stead of us, wherein we are to deal with God,
he stands for the Church. Now this being an honor, no man must take it unto
him, unless he be called, Mat. 25.14. Gods calling is known by his talents
that are given. Thus being inwardly by Gods talent called, and having (here is
bringing up, and having, 1 Timothy 4.14.) (...), the gift of Prophecy; then we
come to his duties. We shall find them in John 10. 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1. and from
thence, John 10. there be four degrees of Ministers, three bad; first, a
thief: secondly, mercenarie: thirdly, a Wolf: one good, the good Shepherd.
He distinguishes them thus, into Calling, first lawful, and secondly
unlawful: A Thief has no lawful entrance, as the second and third have; for
he says there is an usurpation: and we all hold, that usurpation and abuse is
not of God. For he says there, that if he come not in according to Christ's
Institution, by the door, by the ordinary way, and not bring his talent; he is
an usurper and thief; as Jer. 23.21. They run, and I never sent them; they
Prophecy, and I bade them not. For the Law and ordinance of God, Deuteronomy. 16.19.
being perverted and wrested (as there) two ways: first, per gratiam, by favor
of some great man, or friend: secondly, per munus, by a bribe; that is, as one
says, the Bishop for the one falls down for a reward; and he goes over his
back, and the other goes in at the lower hole, as alluding to that of Danae,
(...) the shower of Gold that fell into her lap, etc. These two ways pervert
this Ordinance. Hence, 1 Timothy 5.22. is Cita impositie, the sudden and
unadvised imposition of hands; that because he has not the gift of the heart
to commend him, he is loath to examine him: but for the gift of the hand, they
will let him go: Quaecunque malo incobantur principio, difficulter hono
persiciuntur exitu. God blesses not the ends of those, that come not in by the
doote.

The Merce^^^y ta^^or.
Now the two other marks do make a distinction again: For they that follow,
come in right, but there is an abuse of it. Therefore there is a thing called
(...) or (...), a Purpose, 2 Timothy 3.10. O Timothy, you know my purpose, you
know what you have to do. It is well expressed, Phil. 2.20. by (...) * a
natural care: as if there were some, that had spuriam curam, a bastard care:
And that germanam curam, that natural care; one of the Fathers calls zelum
animarum, a zeal of souls. They that have not this purpose of heart, John
10.13. be called mercenarii: for they have no care of feeding, Zach. 11.15.
they are not instrumenta pastoris boni, In^irum^^^^ p^^^^^is stulti.
but stulei, they are not the instruments of a good but a foolish Shepherd:
which the Fathers make forcipes and mulclram, a pair of Sheeres for the
Fleece, and a Paile for the Milk. And so after, whatsoever occasion befall,
that there come danger to the Flock, for the soul, they reward it not; but
when there is but the least danger of the wool or milk, then every one,
sumit, instrument a pastoris stulti, takes the instruments of a foolish
Shepherd, and bestirreth himself. The Jews call them such as draw near to
the Arc or Temple for the Corban, for the offering box, Mat. 15. they care not
for the Law, so the Corban speed well. Abiathur, of the offpring and posterity
of Elie, being a wicked man it is prophesied of him, 1 Samuel 2. last: that Elies
posterity should stand thus affected, they should come to some of the Priests,
and desire a place to serve for a piece of bread, and a piece of silver, this
was their end. But Abiathar was displaced by Solomon, and Zadok put in his
room. Christ, Job. 10. shows a way, how this should be discovered. For if
there come a Wolf, or fall Teacher, with authority a persecutor, they will fly
to him: And Acts 20.29, 30. they will also become as bad as Wolves, Heb. 13.17.
the Apostle would have them mark the issue of their conversation. Now this
(...), or issue marreth all here; for if the Wolf come, either he will give
over, John 10.12. or worrie the flock too: The Apostle says, that even of your
selves shall rise men, teaching perverse things. So you see, that whether he
continue the care for his belly, or degenerate into a Wolf; yet he has his
lawful institution. And this discerns them that come in right, but yet are
Mercenary. Now though this duty every minister ought to look too; yet quia
obediendum est malo, the people must obey an evil shepherd, if it be not ad
malum, unto evil. But this question is before, Page 378. etc.

Come to the second, that as care is to be had of their coming, Mat. 22.12.
in; so of their abuse. And that there is no abuse, but where there is a duty,
it is plainly set down, Ezekiel. 34.3. that (as the manner is now) they did eat
the fat, and cloth themselves with the wool, and killed them that were fed:
but the sheep they feed not: Where there is an abuse of a duty; and the duty
here is of four parts, which may be subdivided into two.

The first, they call Exemplum, example; it is here of Christ, John 10.3, 4.
expressed by going before the sheep. And their manner was in the East
countries, they drove not their sheep before them; but their sheep followed
them: More plainly, 1 Timothy 4.12. he must be Typus, that is, such a thing, as
makes a stamp upon the coin: and the Iron that gives the form and
impression to the money. So it is used again, Tit. 2.3. and 1 Pet. 5.3. And it
is Moses his order, Deuteronomy. 33.8. first Thummim, integrity of life, then Urim,
learning: and Number. 17.8. which is by way of figure, it pleased God to make it a
sign of Aarons calling, that his rod was virga fructifera, a rod bearing
fruit, by which, as by the fruits of the spirit, good works and virtues be
often meant. So of Christ, Acts 1.1. his order, quae caepit Jesus, 1. facere,
2. docere, first what he did, and then what he taught: and where it is ex
professo, handled, 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1. that he be exemplum, unblameable; that for
manners he be not rebukeable. So that is first, that he be typus, and that he
may facere, do; and then afterward that he may docere, teach: He may be
exemplum, an example, two ways: First, in himself: Secondly, in his Family, 1 Timothy 3.4.

1. (...) 1 Timothy 3.2. without spot: so there is a relation to Levit. 21.17,
18.22. none of Aarons seed, if he were misshapen, or had a blemish, shall come
near to offer the sacrifices of the Lord made by fire. That is it, that the
Apostle says here, If he have any notorious sin or crime, (for he speaks
not of inward crimes, but of outward, only of such as may be laid to a man's
charge) he may not take on him this Fatherhood, the reason is, because, 2 Cor.
6.3. there must no offense be given to the weak, (to think that they may do
so) (...), that the Ministry be not blamed; that there might be no slander, no
Momus, no slander for the adversary to laugh at.

For the taking away of these slanders (according to the Apostles
interpretation, 2 Cor. 8.20.) we must beware of all things which comprehend
occasionem scandali, occasion of scandal: This was the Apostles care
concerning the alms, that should be carried to the poor brethren in
Jerusalem, he would not meddle with it, except he had another to go with him;
because he would be without blame, least some should suspect him of defrauding:
because he did (...), provide for honest things before God and men: He would
not give the adversary occasion to speak evil of him, so John 4.27. when the
Disciples found Christ talking with a Woman, they marvelled; showing, that it
was not his custom: He eschewed as much as might be, all occasions of
slanderous suspicions.

Thus of the Genus: Now of the Species, four: and the sour opposite virtues,
which he must have in himself.

The first is, that he be, Tit. 1.8. (...), temperate; and 1 Timothy 3.2. opposite
to this, is non habere unam uxorem, not to be content with one Wife only: So
continency, or single life, is the virtue. Secondly, 1 Timothy 3.2, 3. the virtue
opposed, verse. 2. Sober, for his diet: opposed, verse. 3. (...), transiens ad
vinum, sitting by the Wine, for the lust of the body, and the pleasure of the
taste; they must be in this order qualified. Thirdly, 1 Timothy 3.2. (...), by
Chrysostom distinguished from (...), vigilant: it having not an opposition to
those we spoke of before; but to the parts called (...), and it does signify
to the part (...), but to the affection, anger. The opposite, 1 Timothy 3.3. no
striker. And Tit. 1.7. (...), soon angry: and the virtues: 2 Timothy 2.24. a
mild man, not furious, one that will bear injury, no striker, pertains to
this. Fourthly, habitus, (...), modest; and is by the counsels referred, ad
habitum, gestum and incessum, to the habit, gesture, and gate: and is not as
Ezekiel complains, A light sellow in his outward behavior. The opposite
vice, 2 Timothy 2.22. Not to eschew youthfullnesse. These four virtues he must
have in himself, (...). And more, 1 Sim. 3.7. he must have a good report of
those that are his enemies; and without the Church, he must not go to birds of
his own feather, but to his greatest enemies; they must be able to say, Surely
he is a man fit for the calling; that they, by his example, may become
Christians.
Secondly, for his Family, verse. 4. He must govern his own house well: which
duty is in three points.

First, Tit. 1.6. those that be under him, must be religious and faithful.
Secondly, 1 Timothy 3.4. (...), having his children in subjection; and the vice,
(...), unruly: if he be not able to keep in his own, it argues a
presumption of negligence, or that he is faint hearted, or careless; and so
unfit to rule the Church. Thirdly, 1 Timothy 3.4. (...), with all reverence,
gravity, modesty; because that that is opposed to it, Tit. 1.6. (...), that he
may not be accused of riot, surfeiting drunkenness, gluttony: Thus must he
be Exemplum gregis, an example to his Flock: And these be the duties of the
Pastor.
People^ duty.
The duty of the People, conformable to that of the Preacher, if he must be
typus gregis, their type, then it must be their duty to be (...) pastoris, his
antitype: as the Iron and the coin are of the same sign, as Heb. 13.8. they
must (...) he imitators: Ut domus Presbyteri sit magistratus disciplinae
publicae, the Priests house should be the rule of public dicipline.

2. Come to the next, the applying of his gifts, that he learned in the
Schools: because nemo accipit donum propter se, no man receives a gift for
himself: as it seems by the parable of the talents. So he is there called
(...), or (...), apt or fit to teach: Now it is well said, that the word
docere, to teach, governs two Accusative cases, Esaias 28.9. Quem docebo
scientiam? whom shall I teach knowledge? Whom and what they should teach. For
the first, there be many that have quem, a people to teach, but they have not
scientiam, knowledge to teach withal. So they are not teachers sent from God,
but of the Devil, whether they be in the Colleges, or in the Church.
Therefore this he must have. It is a strange thing, but yet it pleased the
Fathers, the great hatred that God bare to the Ass, Exodus 34.19, 20. Every
first begotten of all beasts, but the Ass, must be separate for God; but that
must not come into the Sanctuary, Asinus illustratus non admittendus in
Sanctuarium
but rather then so, the neck of it must be broken. Hesychius, and others
intepret it, illiteratum, the illiterate man; and sure it is (...). that is,
concinnitas, an apt exposition.

Consequently, he that has not this, is not to come into the Lords Sanctuary,
Hos. ^.6. quoniam repulisti scientiam, ego repuli te, ne scis mihi sacerdos,
because thou have rejected knowledge, I will also reject thee, that thou shall
be no Priest to me, Deuteronomy. 33.10. the teaching of Jacob his Judgments, and
Israel his Law, is his first duty; not offering and burning of incense: And
Mal. 2. he stands altogether upon it.

The later Canons, the later School men, and Aquinas questioning what the Holy
Ghost should mean by these words, ABILITY TO TEACH: they have brought a
distinction between competentem and eminentem scientiam, between competent
and eminent knowledge: therefore we must know of the Holy Ghost, what this
competens scientia, this competent knowledge is: We have a convenient place for
this, Tit. 1.9. he determines, (...), (...) esse quid sit?
he must be (...), by learning he must be able to defend that he has been
taught. Secondly, ^he must be able to exhort and comfort by wholesome Doctrine.
And thirdly, he must be able to confute and overthrow all that shall gainesay
it: And this is the comment on this, as I take it.

Pastors must profit in their ability.
Now to this, is opposite that, 1 Timothy 3.6. (...) he must not be one newly come
to the Faith; but as 1 Timothy 4.6. he must be brought up many years, and long
time in it. And after he is ordained Minister, he must, verse. 16. (...),
proficere, he must study more; and 2 Timothy 1.6. he must blow and stir up his
charismaeta yet more, Must (...).
and make them burn yet lighter: by the practice of this it is, that he
challenges, and holds his honor by ((...)) that he puts it to use: and 2 Timothy 4.2. he must Preach: Must preach.
and 1 Cor. 9.16. a necessity lies upon him; and Vae mihi si non Evangelizem,
Woe be to me if I preach not.

But now, there is another word that comes between, that is, Must instare.
(...) And so, being instant out of season, and in season; it is not as some of
our people will have it, to Preach; but the Apostles meaning is not so; but
only, he must be instant in season, etc. and this (...), being instant, a man
must not use continually; but instancie is in season, upon ordinary days; and
out of season, is upon extraordinary occasion; if a greater matter fall out in
the Church, as calamity, affliction, or any greater benefit. If any such
befalls them, if his time come, he is to do it upon ordinary days; else, if
it will not serve, to make a new day, and a new course, but not as the others
do, making the duty of the Minister infinite. And besides, it is one thing to
be instant, and another thing to Preach: for a man may be instant, and not
Preach.

Three faults Doctrine.
Now for the manner of the Doctrine, there be three faults that the Apostle
says, fell out in the Church.

First, (...), 2 Timothy 4.4. a desire of fables; it springs hence, when a man
is soon full, and cannot abide to hear of one thing often; but will have a
new. Secondly, and when that comes, 2 Cor. 11.4. it cannot be, but they must
needs have alium Jesum, another Jesus preached unto them; and then Tit. 3.9.
(...), questions of no profit, and deciding of high and nice points, of
discipline, they will have predestination preached: Therefore there is a desire
of these unprofitable questions. And the third is, pruritus aurium, itching
ears, 2 Timothy 4.3. a desire to hear a declamation out of a Pulpit; to have a
period fall roundly, pleasing the ear, and doing the soul no good: having
conceptum naturalis hominis, they have the conceit of a mere natural man.
Against these the Apostle sets down a form; that that which he preaches,
be necessary to be taught: that it be (...) and (...). Tit. 2.3. that it be
sound and healthful, not corrupted Fables or false Doctrine; he must be
perfect in this: and 2 Timothy 2.14. he bids them in the contrary, not to
strive about things of no profit; and that do no good by preaching.
2. Against the second ((...),) is Tit. 3.8. after soundness he must teach
these things, quae sunt bona and utilia, which are good and profitable.

3. Now for the delivery; because it is against the third point: as it must be
learned; in learning it is required, 2 Cor. 11.6. that he give not place in the
stuff it self: it must be of knowledge; Though in word I be rude, yet not in
knowled. Secondly, and for keepping of his Auditors, Mat. 13.52. he must have
vetera and nova, new and old things: not new Doctrine, but new ways of
expressing, new arguments; the Doctrine may be all one, yet the manner may be
diverse, he must have new parables; because they will loath them: and so there
will be a (...).

And the third is, 2 Timothy 2.15. a perspicuous order, and orderly deliverie:
(...), Heb. 4.13. his preaching must have two edges, and that is a very
especial point in preaching. For, as Augustine says, it is common that their
Sermons and preachings have but one edge, and the back commonly does as much
hurt, as the edge does good: they meet not with both extremes; as when they
speak of obedience, they speak so of it, as if they took the contrary quite
and clean away, and would have a man never to disobey. And when they speak of
peace, they speak so, as if they took away all contention.

4. And the last is, Tit. 2.7. (...), delivering of it with authority, gravity,
and modesty; as knowing it is not his own, but the everlasting truth of God:
and therefore, if he deliver it (...), with gravity, and their practice be
contrary, they shall answer for it.

2. Exhortation how to be used.
2. The second point is exhortation: There is a fault in some that exhort.
First, the Apostle, 2 Timothy 4.2. advises that it be done, (...), with Doctrine;
a man's judgment must first be convinced; and the second thing, (...), a true
exhortation must be with Doctrine and long suffering. There be some, if they
speak twice in exhorting, and they amend not, they give over, 1 Timothy 5. and
the two last verses. A man must think thus. Many men are now in sin, and may
hereafter come out of it: and many men seem glorious now, and may hereafter
miscarry: fearing them then that already stand fast, least they fall; and many
that are fallen we must wait patiently upon them, 2 Timothy 2.25. proving if at
any time God will give them repentance.

3. Reproving, how to be used.
Then for the third point, Reproving: first, argue, prove the fault: then
secondly, redargue, reprove; and not as the common manner is, first reproving,
and then proving. In regard of the persons, his way is, first, in 2 Timothy 2.25.
if they be only led by a disposition to a fault; then we must reprove in
humility, (...), 2 Tit. 2.13. If it be done in contempt, then (...), with all
authority.

Thirdly, if the parties be slow of nature, Tit. 1.13. then (...), roundly and
sharply. And fourthly, if it be a public fault, 1 Timothy 5.20. publicly, that
others may fear.

4. Refuting, how to be done.
4. Tit. 1.9. for improving or refuting the adversary, we come into four
degrees: first, verse. 11. if it may be, that we may stop his mouth: secondly,
if that cannot be, yet Tit. 2.8. (...), that he may be confounded: Thirdly, if
not that, yet Tit. 3.11. that inwardly he may be convinced, and say within
himself, that his conscience does rebuke him, and tell him the contrary:
Fourthly, if that cannot be, 2 Timothy 2.9. that the hearers may plainly see his
folly.

The application of this is out of Ezekiel. 34. ye bound not up the broken, etc.
And Zach. 11.16. For lo I will raise up a shepherd in the Land, which shall
not look for the thing that is lost, nor seek the tender Lambs, nor heal that
that is hurt, nor feed that that stands up; but he shall eat the flesh of
the fat, and tear their claws in pieces. 1 These. 5.14. there be infirmi, such
are (...), feeble minded; and they need comfort: some are broken, and they must
be bound; such as Paul calls (...), weak men, they must be upholden and born
withal: there be some depulsi, strayed away, called by the Apostle, (...);
unruly, they must hear of it and be admonished: And those that are led away
with Heresies and Schisms, must be sought out.

The fourth point, his conversation with other men; (...), or (...). for this
is the (...), the communicating of spiritual gifts; 1 Timothy 3.2. he must be
(...), hospitalis, given to hospitality: and Tit. 1.8. (...), very friendly to
those that are well given; and just to all men: Tit. 1.8. and for holding of
justice, when it is his own right. 1 Timothy 3.3. he must be (...), no brawler;
and so consequently, (...), patient, one that can remit of his right. And Tit.
1.7. opposed to this, (...): self willed; one that will not give over. Now
because the questions of right be of temporal things: therefore he must not be
(...), set upon money, 2 Timothy 2.4. neither by intangling himself with worldly
things, nor by seeking them by evil gain, (...). This ought to be the Pastors
duty.

Peoples duty.
The peoples duty answering to this. First, John 10.4. the sheep must know the
shepherd: and so that they can discern his voice. 1. To have judgment to
discern.
Here a certain judgment is required in them. The people now a days have no
judgment at all. Let a man come to them, and deliver excellent things, and let
another come, that is volubili lingua, of a ready speech, that brings
nothing, but (as the Fathers well call it) veram spumam verborum, very froth;
there shall be a like commendation of both; and commonly the later shall be
preferred.

1 These. 5.12. he wills them to know (...), them that labor among you, and
what they say; and that you can say indeed, That is well said, in this there
was some stuff, the others was but spuma verborum, the froth of words.

2. Obedience.
The second point for this, is Obedience, John. 10.4. whether it be by
following, as here it is said, They will follow him: or He. 13.17. (...), they
be persuaded, and give over themselves to be ruled by them; and not only that,
but they will, (...), give place, though they be not persuaded, till they be
better persuaded; for without this, the other is but a fained obedience. He
that said he would not go, and went afterward, did his Father more honor,
then he that bestirred him, and went not; though he had borne never so much in
outward show. This following, it is another thing; it is plainly by 1 Pet.
3.2. All interpret the principal effect of baptism, a question of the
conscience; for the conscience is to ask the question of God; and if a man's
conscience never ask of God, the baptism of that man has no effect in him;
but if he can, it is certain that it is effectual; there would be a great
inquiry of this. Numb. 27.21. peruse it: It is said there, when Joshuah was
substitute in Moses room, he should come to Eleazar; and look how Eleazar did
bid him do, so he should do. They should go in and out according to his
saying. This was the first substituting: this was not abrogated since of any
order: but not regarded, it comes now utterly to be neglec^*

3. Double honor.
3. The last point, 1 Timothy 5.17. double honor.

First, of reverence, Philip. 2.29. in judgment, (...), we are to honor such:
and in affection; 1. Reverence in judgment and in affection.
that love only to the Minister is is applied in most singular manner, 1 These.
5.13. That you have them in singular love, ^or their works sake. Secondly, the
other, the honor of maintenance, that is, a worthy maintenance, 1 Timothy 6. Gal.
6. (...), 2. Maintenance.
that they should communicate in all their goods. Zach. 11.4. God has broken
one staff; and if the Prophets wages be not mended, he will break the other
staff too: and then all will go to wrack, and then a certain Barbarism must
needs follow. It is very well set down, Hosea 7.14. when a man is sick, he
sends for the Minister; then he thinks on Heaven, when he must needs leave the
earth: and when there come great droughts, or rain, they can remember God for
a while, else never. When they got in their corn and wine, they rebelled
against him. But the Lord abhors this, and says, Eccles. 12.1. Remember me
in the days of thy youth, and in thy wealth; or thou shall have no answer of
me, when the evil days come. We will conclude with the Apostle, ^ Cor. 10.15.
the want of performing this honor proceeds of the want of faith. That is all
the hope we have, that when it shall please God, as your faith grows and
increases, that we shall be magnified, and have excellent love performed; if
that do not increase, faith shall not.
Now of those whom nature, and men lumine naturae, by the light of nature, have
called patres patriae, fathers of their country: the Magistrates: of whom it
is showed, that the men are Fathers, as Genesis 45.8. and the women Mothers; as
Deborah a Mother in Israel, Judges 5.7. Now because there is no person that
bears rule, but by virtue of the people that is under them; they have power
over themselves, and power to appoint and choose one over them: Therefore it is
that God first commends the country it self; and wills us to have regard to
it first of all, Genesis 12.1. God gives it the pre-eminence, and sets it before
the kindred, and the Fathers house. And we see, Psalm. 137.1. the tears of Gods
Saints were shed, when they were constrained to go into a strange Land: and
being desired to sing one of the Lords songs, they would not: and when they
were restored to their country, Psalm. 126.1. their joy made them so
extaticall, that they thought it was not a true thing or action; but that their
returning had been but a dream. This is not only in the people, but the same
affection is also in men of excellency for gifts, as in Nehemiah, cap. 1.
verse. 4. To this we are first led, to procure the good and health of it, and
especially of the Church; because it was for it, that we were borne and
appointed.

The reason is plain of that, which we call bonum partis and totius, the good
of a part, and the good of the whole: that bonum partis is not without bonum
totius; and is for the good of the whole. And we see the body that is in
danger, that some member is seared, some vein opened, and sacrificed only,
that the whole body may receive health: so there have been detriments of
singular men, for the benefit of their Country; some have displaced themselves
of the place, wherein they were borne; some of their own life.

Magistracy, properly and principally belongs to God.
For Magistracy, we see that plainly in three judgments: In adjudging the
Angels that kept not their estate; and for not standing, they received a
punishment: the two other in adjudging the Woman and the Serpent: and the
third, God himself punished Cain, for the murder of Abel: So it pertains to
God properly, principally and especially: After it came to man, by permission
first, and then by Gods approbation. When Caine, being cast out, and being
generative, had many children, it is said, Genesis 4.7. that he was the first that
built a City, and ver. 23. in his posterity, Lamech, by reason of his sons,
Juball and Tuball, the inventors of those crafts, that the Commonwealth shall
have need off, grew to so great insolency, that he would bear no injury at
any man's hand: so we see it is the disposition of wicked men, to be like him.

Now then it was Cain's City that made the godly first to band themselves, and
consequently to take order for their defense, as we see, cap. 4. verse. ult. in
fine. After the birth of Enos, Seths son, when Seth also began to be
generative, he made an open profession of the name of God. Why the ecclesia
sticall government not sufficient
There was city against city; and that was the occasion of the Civil
government. And indeed this Ecclesiastica potestas, the Ecclesiastical
government, would have been sufficient to have governed the whole World; but
that as David says, Psalm. 32.9. there is in some another nature. They are like
the Horse, and wild Mule, that will run upon men, and offer violence and
injury, and consequently, there must be another power to bridle those. Now then
the great reason of the Commonwealth; why they would be under one man: and of
giving potestatem vitae and necis, The great reason of the Commonwealth.
power over life and death, to one man: their maxim is, Praestat timere unum,
quam multos, better to fear one Wolf, then to have every Wolf to be his
controller, and to have his life continually in hazard. Genesis 9.6. A magistracy
and the sword was appointed by God: and so consequently, Genesis 14.18.
Melchisedech (whom the best writers agree to be Sem) took upon him a Kingdom;
and took upon him a way to defend the Church and people of God. The chief end
of a Commonwealth is to serve God, Praecipuus finis re publicae cultus De^.
1 Timothy 2.2. Which Abraham not finding in Caldea, where he was pars patriae,
one of the country, chose rather to live solitarily, by himself, Exodus 5.13.
the same end is noted, Israel being under a strange King in Egypt, that knew
not Jehovah, desired to go and serve the Lord in the Wilderness, out of the
Land of Egypt. Psalm. 122. the Church and Country are both joined together:
and 2 Chronicles. 11.13, 14. the Levites ran from Jeroboam out of all the suburbs,
and possessions and came to Juda, and Jerusalem: For Jeroboam and his sons had
cast them out from ministering in the Priests of sice before the Lord, Deu.
17.18. as soon as the King is set in his throne, he must get him a copy of the
Law. For this a man may forsake his Country, if his end be gone, that is, the
service of God.

2. End, peace.
After this end, came in the other, as the second end, quietness: That is in
three points in this order. Because Pastor is applied to the Minister, much
ado there is, Pastor in the word more often applied to the Magistrate then to
the Minister.
in urging great and extraordinary diligence in them. But it is strange, that
Pastor in the Scriptures being oftener attributed to the Magistrate, no such
diligence is required of him.

The first metaphor from that signification is given to the Magistrate, Genesis
49.24. to Joseph: and Psalm. 78.71. to David. Secondly, Number. 27.17.
metaphorically. So also: provide a man over them, that they be not as sheep
without a shepherd. Now that they might not stray as sheep; because it is good
for sheep to keep together, for fear of the Wolves, therefore it is first,
that they might be fed. And then, for that there falls dissension among
them, Ezekiel. 34.18. and 21. I will judge between sheep and shepherd. verse. 23.
And I will set up a shepherd over them, even my servant David, etc. There are
the fat and the lean sheep; and what do they? The fat sheep having fed, and
drunk, trample the grass, and trouble the water, that the lean sheep can
eat and drink nothing but such: and verse. 21. they will strike one another
with their horns, etc. Now for the keeping of the fat from the lean, in the
inside of the fold, that they may feed quietly. This is the second end.

3. Now besides, John 10.12. because there is a Wolf without the fold, an
outward enemy, that is, foreign invasion: here is the third end, to be quiet
from foreign invasion: from the great Goats and Wolf. We see how the causes
depend one of another: The first end of Princes, to be nutricii ecclesiae,
nourishers of the Church: pascere nos, non seipsos, to feed not themselves, but
us: The second is to be procurers of peace at home: The third, to keep off
foreign invasion: plain in exemplo regis non boni, by an example of none of
the best Kings, Saul. 1 Samuel 11.5. he looks there, ne quid sit populo, quod
fleat, that the people have no occasion to weep: they be not disquieted by
Nahash the Ammonite, etc. so we see the end.

Now to the duties. Usurpation.


An usurpation is here too, as well as in Ecclesiastical government, Judges
18.7. In Laish men were quiet, because there was no usurping, Prove. 8.15. Per
me reges regnant, By me Kings reign, says Solomon: As he is the door,
Practices of usurpers.
so they that enter rightly, enter by him; but he says contra, Hosea 8.4.
Regnaverunt, sed non per me, they have set up Kings, but not by me: So there
be some Usurpers of Magistracy. Videlicet, such as be not called: as Hebrews
5.4. but do, as Amos 6.13. Assumpserunt sibi cornua, (that is,) potestatem,
etc. take unto themselves horns: by horns is meant power. We have an example
in Abimelech, Judges 9. Ambition is the usurper; his means be, verse 2. his
friends. But now they are grown more impudent, they will say it themselves.
Abimelech had more blood in his face; he desired his friends to say for him,
and he does by humbling of himself, seek friendship: and verse 4. When they
had little better consideration of them, he gets him a few light brayned
fellows to aid him, verse 5. and 21. those that had right to it, he drove
away. These are the three practices of Usurpers; which Jotham, verse 15. and
16. tells them in a Tale, and so shows them what manner of fellows they
are, etc.

The Magistrate being set in his charge rightly by God, the division of 1 Pet.
2.13, 14. comes in (...), a King. (...); under Officers:
as in War the Captain, in Peace the Judge.

The cause of under officers
The reason of Under officers, is Deuteronomy. 2.9. Moses confession, Exodus 18.13.
Jethro tells him he is unable to bear the burden of the whole government,
Numb. 11.16. is Gods approbation; Deuteronomy. 17.16. they have authority to make a
King; and Deuteronomy. 16.10. to make under Officers. Here note, that these under
Officers are given to help the King: Underofficers must not be too many.
therefore that there be no more granted then will serve to help the King; that
the Realm be not clogged with too many, Nehem. 5.15. They themselves handle
them not hardly; but their servants, their under Officers oppressed the people:
Therefore that is gravamen reipublicae, a burden to the Commonwealth; which
the people cannot bear: So it is against policy, and against justice too; for
they must have their Fees to them.

General duties.
So the duties in general of both, What manner of men they should be.

What manner of men they should be.
And the first is this, Whom God calls: All elections must be according to
that rule, Deuteronomy. 17.15. Quem Deus eligerit, whom God shall choose, else naught
and injust, ipso facto, 1 Kings 1.20. Bethsabees speech to David, The eyes of
all Israel are upon thee, that thou should tell them who shall sit on the
throne of my Lord the King after him: and verse 33. he chooses Solomon. And 1 Chronicles. 28.5. he says, Among all the sons I have, God has chosen Solomon.
And indeed it is all one to choose a man for his gifts, as if God had chosen
him: Every one must be chosen for their gifts of wisdom, etc. that shall be
acceptable in the sight of the Lord.

A second form, Deuteronomy. 27.15. and 1.13. general to both; he must be some of
their own Nation: The first reason is, because of natural affection, grounded
on education. Where a man has been bred, he will be most profitable. The
second reason is, Acts 26.3. the reason of Paul's joy, in that he should answer
before Agrippa: a great matter, to be acquainted with the customs of the
Country. These in general.

Deuteronomy. 27.1. In any wise, he shall not prepare him many horses, nor bring the
people again into Egypt, 4. Particular duties of the Prince.
for to increase the men.

The particular duties of the Prince: Deuteronomy. 17.16. four duties are set down.

First, he must not be affected, to Egypt, which is Nutrix idololatriae, the
nurcery of Idolatry; he must not favor false Religion; and if he do, he ought
not to be a King: ver. 16. Secondly, ver. 17. not uxorius, it is a Synechdoche:
whereby is meant, he must not be voluptuous, given to pleasure, Pro. 3.3, 4.
they must not meddle with Wine and Women. Solomon pronounces woe against the
Land, where Princes be early at their Banquets, yea and late too. Thirdly, ver.
17. No hourder of Gold and Silver; not covetous, 1 Kings 12.4. it was Salomons
fault: for he, by his seven hundred Wives, and three hundred Concubines, made
such an imposition on the Land; that when his son came to reign, the
Subjects come and tell him plainly, he should not reign and be their King,
unless he would ease his Fathers burdens, 1 Kings 12. Thy Father made our
yoke grievous; make thou it light, and we will serve thee. And ver. 16. seeing
themselves not regarded, said, What portion have we in David? We have no
inheritance in the son of Ishai: to your Tents O Israel; now look to thine
own house David. The Prince to have a copy of the Law, and therein to learn
three things.
Fourthly, verse. 18. which is the first to be done, because it is provision for
all the rest, he must have a copy of the Law; in which he may learn three
things: first, to fear God: Secondly, to show the practice of it; 1. in
himself: 2. in the Court: 3. in the whole Country:
And the third thing, to be humble. And keeping this Law, his throne shall last
for ever; as Pro. 29.14. that will make sure succession, as Samuel told Saul, 1 Samuel 10.6. dedit Deus cor aliud, God gave him another heart: How? Because he
was there among Prophets. The means be plainer, Psalm. 2.10. Erudimini Reges,
be wise now therefore, O ye Kings, etc. Christ, Mat. 10.21. gave one that he
liked a lesson, but his possessions choked all; so they choke learning and
all other good things: Hinc illud Christi: How hard is it for rich men to enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven? He that is thus qualified, is meet for a kingdom.
Now being in his seat, he must not think he is there by himself; according
to their style, Caesar Dei gratia, etc. Caesar by the grace of God, etc. So
whereas the Law distinguishes, potestas into arbitraria and delegata, power is
either Arbitrary. The Princes duty delegate not arbitrary.
Assigned.
He must acknowledge the later to be his; and say with the Centurion, Mat. 8.9.
I am under authority of Claudus Lisias, he under Faelix, he under the Emperor,
he pro Deus, under God: and so he is under authority also. The Heathen man
said, Kings are our Countries, and over Kings is God. Being Gods Viceroyes,
they must rule as God would, if he were on earth: How is that? Even secundum
verbum ejus, according to the prescript of the Word: So must Princes rule: and
Numb. 27.21. because the Prince has no perfect skill and deep cogitation in
the Word: therefore this ruling must be at the mouth of Eleazar. And this is
the first duty.

The peoples duty answering to this: To acknowledge him Gods deputy, 1. Duty
of the people.
1 Samuel 10.26. whose heart God touched, they are obedient. Obedience, as
Principality, is of Gods spirit, Mat. 22.21. by Christ's answer there, it
appears how he stood affected in his obedience unto Caesar. Two sorts of men
were then in Juda: There was one Theudas that made an insurrection for Tribute,
that was commanded, some there were that would not pay tribute; and Theudas,
Captain of them, he took on him to defend them; and to prove that no tribute
must be paid. On the other side, there were certain spiritus aulici, court
spirits, Herodians; they would have every thing given to Caesar, even Gods part
too: And therefore they and the Scribes ask Christ tempting him, Is it lawful
to give tribute unto Caesar, or not? To whom he says not, omnia sunt Caesaris,
all things are not due to Caesar: but Caesar has his quae, and God has his
quae: So he goes from Theudas to Obedience, that is medium and mediocritas,
the true mean.

2. Duty of the Prince.
The second duty is, because God has dealt so liberally with Caesar, as to make
him his Deputy; Quod dicitur de Deo and creaturis, derivatur a Deo in
creaturas, that supremacy which God has over his creatures, he has derived
and given to the creature: So it comes from God who was able to have done all
himself alone; if he had followed that, which some worldly men say, Author
alienae potentiae aufert de sua, and perdit suam, he that sets up another, pulls
down himself; he had not bestowed his dignity upon any. But he imparted of
his honor to Caesar. Now Caesar must not requite him with breaking into that
that is Gods alone: for there is a (...), a division, quae Caesaris, quae Dei,
Caesar has his, and God has his: therefore he must let God have his own. And
so Caesar must not dominari conscientiae, bear rule over the conscience: none
but God keeps court in conscientia: Therefore he must not command a man
against his allegiance in baptism, that sealed his conscience to God. So he
must not go against the Word, from which faith proceeds. Jerome says, That
that is paid to Caesar against the Word, is not Caesaris vectigal, but
daemonis, not Caesar's but the Devils tole: So he knowing Gods glory to be his
end, he must be ( Deuteronomy. 16.17.) custos legis, that is, omnium operum legis, a
keeper of the Law, that is, of every work commanded in the Law; and all is for
the prohibition of external violence. For do the Minister what he can, some
will use violence. Judges 17.6. No King in Israel, and then every man did what
was good in his own eyes: explained in this Chapter, in Micha's attempt, cap.
18. in the dealing of the Tribe of Dan; and cap. 19. of the Tribe of Benjamin:
Therefore for the prohibition of these external injuries, he must be custos
utriusque tabulae, observe and keep both the tables: Augustine, lib. 3. contra
Crescon: Gram: In hoc sciant reges a Deopraecipi, ut Deo inserviant, in
quantum, etc. they are to govern according to the adaequate rule which God
has prescribed, and not to meddle so far as to do all for and to
themselves. 2 Chronicles. 26.6. Ozias took on him a supremacy; and 2 Chronicles. 29.8.
Hezechias takes on him a supremacy: he will order things to himself: The
former, as a King of late did, whatsoever he purposed, it should be good
Divinity: Now Hezechias he claims one, and rightly; but he looks but for
the provision of Religion; it is only to see the Altars down, The primacie
that a Christian Prince should have.
he medleth not with the action: And this is all the primacie that a Christian
Prince ought to have: This care they must have: to see Religion provided for, 1
Kings 15.14. But they put not down the high places; never the less, Asa his
heart was right, etc. 2 Kings 18.4. Hezekias took away the high places, etc.
he did prohibere, quod attinet ad divinam religionem, for providing of true
Religion.

Under this, is that Compulsion, Compulsion.
Luke 14.23. to come to the service of God: as he says to the servant, Compel
them to come in, etc. Augusline, contra petil: he was resolute at first, that
no man should die, or be troubled for Religion, but after he changed his mind.
There must be soris necessitas, a necessity from without; that there may be
intus voluntas, a willingness within: As there were diverse Donatists, that
being compelled, and turned to Christ's Religion, thanked the Emperor for
compelling them: Therefore let the Papists sit at Sermons; and so this outward
compulsion belongs to the King, and is one part of his duty. Because the
people were Gods instruments to choose him: therefore that he in love, and care
for them (1 Samuel 15.2. as he is made their head, and as the head provideth for
the body,) so he ought pascere eos, like their Pastor to provide for them, and
feed them.

One of the Fathers, on Hosea 7.5. where it is said, there was a company of
Wasters at the Table, and them he fed till they were sick; that same is pascere
histriones and canes, but not subditos, to feed a company of Players and
Hounds, and not his subjects; but his own belly is the destruction of all. In 1 Samuel 8.11. is the true description of a Tyrant: Descriptio tyranni.
he holds opinion that all were borne to be his Drudges, Pages, Horse-keepers,
etc. Pro. 28.16. A foolish King is a great oppressor; the reason is, because
he is only given to sensible things, to pleasures, etc. So they are given to
oppress, as did Solomon: Then are they, as Zeph. 3.3. Lupi vespertini, evening
Wolves; they gnaw every one so near, that he that comes in the morning, shall
get nothing.

The Heathen say, that Aristides wished, that either his household were the
Commonwealth, or contra, the Commonwealth his Household; because indeed he
regarded that only. Examples in Scripture, Jos. 19.24. (Our Rulers and
Governors will choose first, but) Joshuah made division for every Tribe; and
at last he desired but a small portion to himself, and was served last, Nehe.
5.28. a notable example; he did not as the former Rulers, nor as he might: The
rulers before took forty shekels of the people; he for his part, from the 20.
to the 32. year of Artaxerxes, for twelve years, took not that he might: And
besides, there were 150. Jews and Rulers at his table.

In this Provision, 2 Chronicles. 7.9. they must begin at the soul first,
Jehosaphat sent Preachers into all the Cities of Judah, ver. 7. and that our
souls may be provided for, The Princes chiefest care must be of Religion.
1 Samuel 19.18. there must be looking to Naioth; for from thence Preachers are
sent into Israel. Then secondly to the body: here he must have a care too, as
Pharaoh, Genesis 41.49. to lay up corn for scarcity, and see that there be
plenty, 2 Chronicles. 9.41. sending ships abroad for foreign commodities; and
for inward lacks. Provide Judges, 2. Chron. 19.5. Jehosophat set Judges, etc.
And not only that, but for outward. He must see there be soldiers, 2 Chronicles.
17.2. Garrisons put in Judah and in the Cities of Ephraim, which Asa his Father
had taken.

2. Duty of the people.
2. The peoples duty answering to these: That they be not breaking into Gods
right, Pro. 24.21. that they be not seditious or disobedient to the Prince: or
(...), quarrel about trisies. There be diverse shires and incorporations in
this Land by themselves; and there is over every one of them Magistrates and
Justices; but there is but one Politia under the Prince. So the Princes and
Kings of the earth, are but as Justices of Peace in several Shires: there is
but one chief over all, God. Now if one of these should go and rebel against
the Prince, and should say, I am set over you, you must obey me; he is a Rebel
both to Prince and God: therefore if I hearken to him, I rebel with him. In
regard of their care over us if they take that order that God has done, Romans
8.28. that bonis omnia bona, that all things may go well with them that are
good and honest, we must obey them.

And in regard of their care over us, it is not a giving, but a rendering, Mat.
22.21. he says not date, but reddite: And by the rules of justice we know,
that cuique reddendum est, quod suum est, we must restore to every man his
own. We have in our hands some thing of theirs: Augustine, Non illicita
quaedam requirit, dum requirit quae sua sunt, it is no unjust demand for a man
to demand what is his own: Christ, though he was Caesaris conditor, Caesar's
maker; yet Caesari censum retribuit, he paid tribute to Caesar; having some
thing to render, being borne under his jurisdiction, and living as a man: They
keep tillage safe, therefore they have (...), tribute for Lands: and because
they keep the Sea safe; therefore they have vectigall, custom: and censum; and
besides, Nehem. 5.15. that which he calls the Governors bread; donarium;
called canon regis or regni. And then indiction, in time of necessity, and in
Wars, his Oblation and his Subsidies. 1. Kings 11.

3. Duty of the Prince.
The next duty of a Prince is in cases of appeal, to give Justice, Pro. 16.12.
Justice must especially be commended; for by it he has his solium sirmum, his
throne established: Augustine, Sine justicia magna regna nil aliud sunt, quam
magna latrocinia, without justice great Kingdoms are but great roberies:
Therefore, Pro. 16.10. Et os ejus non declinabit in judicio, he must see that
his mouth transgresses not in judgment: In so doing he shall exalt his
kingdom, Pro. 14.34. and shall make it flourish: that is, by making all things
for the best. And that is, Pro. 11.11. When the righteous flourish, then the
Kingdom flourishes. Psalm. 97.2. In his days shall the righteous flourish.

2. As on the other side, Pro. 20.^8. his looks shall be so terrible in the
seat of Judgment, that even by them shall he drive away all evil; and Deuteronomy.
13.8. for those capital sins and crimes, he says, Non parcat illi oculas
tuus, thy eye shall not spare them: and Psalm. 101. in David's justice against
the evil we have an excellent pattern. Pro. 23.4. the wicked are like dross
in the republic. Take away the dross from the Silver, there will be an
excellent cup for the Fyner: So there will be an excellent Commonwealth, if you
take away the wicked from it.

3. Duty of the people.
The peoples duty in regard of this Justice is, to fear him, Pro. 20.2. knowing
that the fear of the King is like the roaring of a Lion; and Pro. 16.24. fair
words are a sweetness to the heart, and health to the bones: therefore we must
fear if we do evil, Romans 13.5. otherwise, though he have power over the
body, Luke 12.4. Heb. 11.23. if we do well, fear not the kings commandment
or edict: seeing he is therefore appointed, ut omnia coopperentur bonis in
bonum, that all things may work together for the good of them that are good.

4. Duty of the Prince, humbleness in government
The last duty that procures them honor, is their humble and meek ruling, the
meek usage of the poor; not having the spirit of Saul, 1 Samuel 22.7. I can give
every one of you fields and vineyards, and make every one of you Captains,
etc. nor of Pilate, John 19.10. Know thou not that I have power either to
crucify or release thee. An insolent bragging of their power; and as the
Septuagints interpret it, Heb. 5.11. they cannot (...), and digest that God
has sent them; but all the World must know it. 2 Cor. 10.8. A good lesson for
every Magistrate: no man has received power to hurt, but to do good; none to
destruction, but to edification: And he shall answer it, that uses his power
otherwise. The Heathen man makes this distinction between a Tyrant and a good
King. A good King, when he is to do any thing, will say, (...), I must do it,
I pray you pardon me; it is my duty to do it. A Tyrant will say, (...), I may
do it, and I will do it; therefore I will do it. Therefore his counsel is
there, that they be (...), though they may do it alone, yet to take some unto
them, this makes their authority less envious; and to depart sometimes from
their right: And so of Wisdom, as Eccles. 4.13. better is a young man of good
discretion, then an old King that is foolish. Why? Because he will not receive
counsel and admonition. It is a special point of Wisdom to receive
counsel, as Naaman did of his servants, a Kings 5. though not of the Prophet.

The conclusion of both is, Pauciora licent illi, quam ulli, oui licent omnia,
he that may do what he will, must do less then any man; and let him think
so: And thus to think, is a part of that humility. The Heathen man says, this
(...), this fear may bring (...), adulation, but it will never bring (...),
true good will.

4 Duty of the people, to fear for their Prince.
Now on the other side, according to that saying, Esto quasi unus ex illis, be
thou as one of them; cap. 32.6. then the peoples duty is, (...), not to fear
him, but to be afraid for him, least any hurt come to him. Example, that fear
of David's men for their Master, 2 Samuel 18.3. and again, cap. 21.17. They
called Abishai, and he succored David, and killed the Philistim. And David's
men swear to him, thou shall no more go with us, etc. least thou quench the
light of Israel. This is honor, or good will.

Another part, 1 Cor. 12.23. a bearing with their infirmities, so that he
covers them (a covering of an uncomlinesse, Exodus 22.28. 2 Pet. 2.10. (...),
etc. they that despise government, presumptuous are they and selfewilled, etc.
And Jude, verse. 8. we are not to speak evil of them; unless they be of that
Quorum, 1 Kings 18.18. I have not troubled Israel; but it is thou, and thy
Fathers house, in that ye have forsaken the commandments of the Lord, etc. or
unless it be ob unum ex enormibus peccatis, for some enormous offense.

Inferior officers what they ought to be.
The under Officers: what manner of men they ought to be, and what is their
duty, Exodus 18.21. There be two properties of theirs: first, they must be men
of courage; and they must not be tossed with affections: they must be constant
to do it, and stand to it. How is that? If they fear God: this takes away
all vain fear and affection. Secondly, true men; they must hate Bribes, and
not be perverted with consideration of them. Thirdly, besides these, there is
another, Deuteronomy. 1.13. to be wise: and not only that, but intelligens; that is,
he must know whither he must go; and when he must go from the general rule.
And not only that, but he must be a man famously known to be such a one,
throughout the Tribes. And Numb. 11.25. that comes by taking of Gods spirit,
and putting it upon him. Where this is not, but when a fool is preferred to
bear rule, it is even as if we should gild a Potsheard; which is indecorum, an
unseemely thing: and Pro. 26.8. there is no worse thing, then to give honor
and glory to a fool; and so to close up a precious stone in an heap of stones.

The second inconvenience is: Put a pellet into his Crossebow, and he will say,
Have at you, and let it fly. And then by consequent a majore, if the great
King may not be an upbraider of his power, much less does it become them, that
be but Kings of little molehills; the under Magistrates to be proud.

First, Deuteronomy. 16.18, 19. their office is set down, what they are not to do:
And if he be not a man of courage, this will move him, Si non facias non eris
amicus Caesaris, if thou do it not, thou art not Caesar's friend: So he will
accept persons. This must not move him. And then, as the Eunuch will have him
make a lie for the Prince, I pray you lie, for the King? As he must not accept
a face; so neither a gift nor bribe in the bosom. It was Acts 24.37. Faelix
his fault, he called Paul the oftener, because he hoped to receive some reward;
but when none came, verse 28. willing to pleasure the Jews, he left him bound
still. There was acceptio personarum, accepting of persons. And the man that
will take Bribes, Prove. 29.4. there is no trusting of the Commonwealth in his
hands; he will destroy it. He must judicare justiciam justiciae; id est,
justiciam justissime: that is, if there be one juster point in it, then other,
he must judge by that: And Psalm. 94.20. he must make inquiry for solum
aerumnarum, if any grievance or injustice be obtruded upon the people, it must
be withstood, and complained off; as in an house, Luke 16.1. the Steward is
complained off, for wasting his Masters goods; and put out of his
Stewardshippe. So there must be complaints carried: And this is the grief.
Let there be a complaint carried, that is never so just; and then our state
shall be as Paul's, Acts 25.19. you shall see what cold comfort he had there,
to the end of the Book; though he were an innocent, yet was he never
delivered.

Now for the obedience due this way (that rule is good, latitude jurisjurandi
sumenda est ex latitudine faederis) it must be acccording to the degrees of the
Law that we are governed by.

If the Queen command, not to eat flesh, on the Monday, there being but three
days in the week for it, Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday; She commands out
of the latitude of the Statutes.

We said in the beginning, that it was a general rule, That any duty, which
belongs to any propter rationem peculiarem, is referred hither; and plainer,
when we distinguish the (...), the excellency of the person, from (...), and
(...), power and principality: some are in office, and have them; some are
without them: yet because honor is nothing else, but testimonium excellentiae,
of that excellency they have: therefore they are to be honored, though they
want the other two.

Dignitas signifies both the Dignity it self, and the worthiness of it. If
he have the excellency of the gift, he is in the later signification; though he
be not in the present estate, and want the other. And according to these two
parts dignitas debitum. The Canons make two degrees of debitum: first, legis of
the Law, to be given to Fathers, Masters, etc. Secondly, debitum honestatis,
the other of Honesty: in which there is no compulsion: yet if we will be such
as we ought to be, we ought to do it. This being well understood, we come to
them that have excellency separated from dignity: which because of their
excellency are to be honored. In this kind there is a threefold excellency,
of the three kinds of good: viz. of the 1. Mind, which they call excellentiam
doni. 2. Body, as Age. 3. Outward estate, as Nobility, wealth, etc.


And fourthly, the applying of any of these to our selves; it is called well
doing, or to be a Benefactor: as we receive the gift of the mind from one that
has it; or a benefit from wealthy men, or Rulers of experience, from the aged:
or we bestow a benefit.

1. For the gifts of the mind: Juball, Genesis 4.20. and the rest to whom God had
given gifts of inventing crafts, were therefore called Fathers. In no other
respect, Genesis 45.8. is Joseph called Pharaohs Father, but only because there
was a greater portion of wisdom in him: otherwise he was Father to the people.

Then this, which the Schoolmen call Gratiae gratis datae, (...), free gifts
of God, (not gratia gratum faciens) these are they which wheresoever they fall
into any man, are to be honored; and he for them: because they be the effects
and gifts of Gods spirit, 1 Cor. 12. And they are given to men, verse 7. (...),
for the profit of the whole body. And though that this be not the Fear of God;
that is, (gratia gratum faciens) and so consequently, the more sufficient man,
though not so holy, nor the more religious; yet a company may use the benefit
of it.

These coming from God, must have honor; and the vessel wherein he puts
them, for the gifts sake, must have some honor.

Concerning the reverence we owe to him. The first part is, the acknowledgement
of the excellency that is in him, we freely confess it to be in him, and in
that degree and measure that it is in him. And we must commend ir, and praise
God for bestowing it on him, even as if he had bestowed it on us: and desire
and pray that he would increase it, and make it as fruitful in him, as any
gift in us, or that is be bestowed on his Church. The Prophet, Ezekiel. 28.3.
though Daniel lived at the same time with him, yet he gives him an honorable
title, ot testimony; saying, Art thou wiser then Daniel? If he had thought as
others do, that he that auget alienam famam, detrahit suae, he that adds to
another man's fame, detracts from his own: he would not so much have impaired
his own credit, by commending another, 2 Pet. 3.15. he confesses there is a
greater measure of wisdom in Paul, and in his Epistles; and yet in those
Epistles Paul tells them that he had reproved him to his face. And we see in
Paul, Gal. 2.9. For there speaking of James, John, and Peter, he calls them
Pillars of the Church, and of the Apostles. It is that that Saint John Baptist
said of Christ, Mat. 3.11. That he was not worthy, etc. And Joh. 3.31. Hunc
oportet crescere, etc. he must increase, etc. The similitude is, as the light
of the morning star, when the Sun is up. This is not only between our
selves, but even to evil men: Judges 8.2. Gedeon plainly confesses his
insufficiency to the Ephraimites: that a Gleaning of Ephraim is better then a
whole Vintage of Abiezer. And not only in outward matters, but in inward also,
2 Samuel 16.23. David's testimony of Achitophels wisdom, David's enemy; that his
counsel was as the Oracle of God. Then this is the first.

2. And the contrary to this we do commonly, being moved by Saul's evil
spirit, 1 Samuel 18.8. we cannot abide that any man's thousands should be more
then our own. And because Saul had but his thousands, and David his ten
thousands; Saul had but a squint eye at David from that day forward. So we must
not deny the gift of God that is in him, to be in him. And secondly, we must
not extenuate, that which is in him indeed; as to say, but it is not so much as
is thought, Job 1. the Devil says of Job, he is righteous indeed, but not
thoroughly, and as he ought. And when we cannot do that, that we cannot either
deny it to be in him, nor to be in that measure that it is in him; then we
wreake our selves upon the gifts; and we come to extenuate the gift it self.
Tush it is a base gift, it is not so good a thing, there does not so great good
come of it: it is better to be well read, etc. And then a fourth way; perhaps
the gift is such, as all cannot but see, it is a rare gift, then we begin to
show a defect in another gift; in that part of learning, wherein he is
defective; he is no body, he can do nothing in such a thing: And then we go
to the use and usage of it. But he abuses his gift; at the least wise we will
find some fault with some imperfection in his life; one thing or other ever
stands awry: So was Christ dealt with, Matthew 9.34. when the power of God
was seen to be great in him, in casting out Devils, etc. they said he did it
by Beelzebub, etc. And Matthew 13.35. Why was it more in him then in another
man; there can be no great matter in him; we know his bringing up, he is but
the Carpenters Son, etc. and then Matthew 9.11. they fly to sift his
conversation; he was an eater and drinker with Publicans, etc.

Now his part, that has the gift correspondent hereto, is, 1. Corinthians. 15.10.
to know who it is, that has separated him, and that there was nothing in him
naturally, but it was given, Ezekiel. 28.17. there be many that will prodere
sapientiam indecore, with too well thinking of themselves, they loose all they
have: therefore it is best to acknowledge the giver, and to be humble. And he
may humble himself thus; as the Apostle, though not with the defect of other
gifts, Romans 7.24. with the body of sin, that he carries about him: and so if
he can bring himself, 1. Coriath. 15.10. if the grace of God be in him, and
not in vain. for it may be in vain, in respect of doing good in the Church.
for it is commonly seen, that there be many great gifts without fruit in many
men. Secondly, it may be in vain, in respect of himself; that as the Preacher
says, he may be wise and never do himself good by it.

And last of all, not only for this life, but for that to come, 1. Cor. 9. he
may Preach to other, be a Minister, and at last be a castaway himself, if he
be not humble. And as Eccles. 6.2, 3. man's conceit will rend him like a Bull,
like a wild Bull; so that neither he himself, of himself, nor any other shall
receive any profit of him, or his gifts.

The duty is set down, Romans 12.10.16. that he go before other in giving
honor; that is, to make himself equal to those, that be his inferiors,
verse. 16.

The second of the Inferior, seeing God (1 Cor. 4.6.) does (...), separate men
by their gifts, not that they should live alone; but he gives them a degree of
separation from others, in bestowing on them a more excellent gift, for the
good of others; therefore comes the second: The duty is, praeferre, or
praeeligere, to give it the place of preferment before another, which is not so
great a gift as it is. For certainly where God has placed his greatest and
best gifts, there he has pointed the finger, that that man should have the
greatest pre-eminence: The Apostle wills them, 1 Corinthians. 12.31. study for
the better gifts. Why so? Because verse 7. by them they shall do the greatest
prosit. And so consequently, he is summo jure, and even by lex talionis, to
have the best place, to do the most good in: So mean gifts God gives for
means places; great gifts, for great places. This is his order, Pro. 3.15.

4. If there should be an election between gold, silver, precious stones, and
learning; learning is to be chosen before the other, Pro. 8.11. Therefore he
would have the greatest regard to be had of it. It is strange that this being
the second point in all moral Phylosophie, the first being Bonum eligendum,
malum fugiendum, that which is good is to be chosen, and that which is evil to
be avoided: this, the second, Quod melius est eligendum, of two goods the best
is to be chosen: and the third, e malis minimum, of two evils the least: that
that being a principle of moral Phylosophie; yet now we must prove it, though
it be a ground: and when we have proved it, men cannot obtain it.

But the reasons are, 2 Samuel 7.14. A fort of wicked men is met; and they cry,
the counsel of Hushai is better, etc. therefore we will follow it. Esaias 40.20.
The Idolater that is to make an image he will choose, lignum forte, and lignum
melius, the best timber he can get; It is a sensible thing by natural reason,
yet we cannot be brought to practice it.

2. Now then there comes another sin, by another reason: Those that founded
such places as these are; had this reason says the Lawyer, that they would
give their goods to a College, and not to their Kindred: because if they made
of their own kindred heirs, they should have haeredes promiscuos, they knew
not whether their posterity should be good or bad: but here they should have
haeredes ex optimis; the best should be heirs of the whole land. This was the
institution: but now it is otherwise.

Now besides this, a third: For when as they gave their statutes, many things
run bare affirmative; but the Canon of the Law says, Clarissime exponunt
legislatores, se summevelle, quod maneant sub virtute sacramenti. I charge thee
to deal faithfully with me, according to my will in the statute. This is sum
velle mandare sub virture sacramenti: yet this is disapointed. There is an
evil opinion of some, which think that we are in such cases, like Potters;
because these matters are res premii: And so whatsoever we do, we may do it
ex mera gratia, as we will. But God was not of that mind: for if he were, to
what end in making under officers, moderators, such as Masters of Colleges,
should he appoint them their qualities of knowledge, understanding, etc? If
these qualities be set down, it is very certain such elections should be,
Esaias 49.2. We are to pick them as chosen shafts, and hide them in the Lords
Quiver. It is thought to be spoken of Scholars: more plainly God himself, 1 Samuel 15.28. Samuel says, But now he has taken thy Kingdom from thee, and
given it to thy neighbor, that is thy Better. This is no injury. It is the
Devils election, to take from the better to give to the worse.

1 Kings 2.32. David moves Solomon of a escape in his time, touching Joab, that
had killed Amaza, a man better then himself: he commands he should be killed,
though he were allied to David. Yet because Amaza was his better, 2 Samuel 19.13.
he would have put out his Kinsman, and put Amaza in his room, etc.

2 Kings 10.3. Jehu his message to the Governors, etc. Among all your Masters
children, choose out optimum and aptissimum, etc. the best and meetest of your
Masters Sons and set him on his Fathers throne: there is a plain direction.
So if there were a case of peril we should do. But the case of Justice
over-ruleth; in that, we should do more then the Heathen: because Hester was
better then Vasthi, Hester 2.9. thorefore the King deposed Vasthi, and set her
up. Genesis 41.39. It is Pharoahs reason to Joseph: Because God has endued thee
with greatest wisdom, etc. Though he were a stranger borne, yet he sets him
before all other.

1 Samuel 16. The matter there passes: For Samuel being to choose a King, at
first began to be a little overseene in choosing Eliab: but after, when God
bade him not regard the stature, but the gift; that is, Gods choice: then he
comes in roundly, neque Dominus elegit hunc, neque hunc, etc. the Lord has not
chosen this nor this: All denied, till David came: and then he says, hic est
ipse, this is he, Esaias 58.6. Because ye keep my Sabbaths, and choose those
things that please me, therefore I will bring you to my holy mountain. So on
the other side, Esaias 41.24. Behold these things are of no value, and ye have
chosen them that be abomination, etc. and chap. 65. he shows what punishment
he would bring on them, verse 12. Because ye choose them, that I would not,
therefore you shall leave your names as a curse, etc. Sow see what God
decideth in this case.

Now to give the reasons set down by the Counsels, in their Canons in the
Primitive Church; this is one reason: He whom God calls not, ought not to be
chosen; and he calls not, but when he calls to a better: otherwise he will
not bless them in their calling; and therefore when he blesses them not, they
are ventres, mere Bellies; and that is their care, and they study for nothing
else, Zeph. 13.3. they are there called light persons; the blessing of God not
being with them: because they were not called of him. Note moreover that it is
worse to make an Hophni, then not to correct an Hophni. Ely was blamed for not
correcting, in that place: therefore much greivouser had his sin been, if he
had put in an Hophni, whose mind is all on the Pot.

Thirdly, this is one of their Maxims in Divinity: Indignum promovere est
decipere, to promote an unworthy man is to deceive. They deceive the party,
that gave his goods to be bestowed on them that were worthy: and they make a
lie to the World, and they bear an evident false witness: For they do as
much as say, This man is meetest. And if any should come to a temporal Lord,
and set him an unprofitable servant, promising one that should serve his turn;
this were plain deceit: and there might an Action in Law be had against him.
And so, more treacherous is their dealing, that in GODS service, place
unprofitable Servants.

Fourthly, by these means they do ponere sub periculo, they bring into danger
the souls committed to them. Set an unmeete Workman to any thing, and the work
will be in danger of marring. The danger is four fold.

First, the persons that come in thus, know they come in by favor; like clay,
because the Potters will so have it; and they are mere creatures: and
consequently they must needs be servile; and hold that rule for doctorem
ballatum; D^^unt quedam.
the Doctor made by the Popes Bull. Such men sew pillows to their Patrons
elbows, and sooth them up in their sins, as he that would hold with the Pope,
because the Pope held with him; therefore seeking to require the Pope, he kept
this rule, Quod Papa approbat nemo potest improbare, that which the Pope
approves, no man may dislike: and so by keeping this rule, ye shall be sure
to make him this recompense. The second peril is, that they have not two
Accusative cases: they have a quem, whom to teach, but not a scientiam,
knowledge whereby; and so privately, all that are committed to them, are
spoiled: and when they come to do any thing publicly, they are scoffed and
laughed at of their Auditors: and so there is great peril of loss of time and
charges. Thirdly, that there shall nothing be well done, Zeph. 3.1. For when
the City is ingluvies onocratili, compared to a maw, there is sordes and
nutrimentum, both filth and nutriment: you shall have a good and a bad joined
together, in an exercise; and so it cannot be well done, but be spoiled: For so
Philosophy teaches us, because both cannot do their part. Fourthly, a
perpetuity of a miserable estate: for they cannot but take in such, as are
like themselves; and they cannot for shame, take a better then they. They will
say, I was no better. It is an hazard of the estate for ever. Thus of the
second dishonouring, not to choose his neighbor that is better.
The duty of the Superior in this regard, 1 Samuel 9.21. to think of himself as
it becomes him. Our Tribe is the least of all the Tribes, etc. I and my
Fathers house, the least Family, etc. he thinks that all that is bestowed on
him, is more then he deserved, 1 Samuel 18.18. What am I, and what is my Fathers
house, etc. So there is in him appetitus, and contemptus also honoris, there is
a desire, and also a resusall of honor, There is laudabilis appetitus honoris,
a laudable desire of honor, in that he does nothing contra ipsum, male agendo,
he has not committed that evil that should bar him of it. And there is
laudabilis contemptus honoris, a laudable contemning of honor, because he does
no evil thing for it: nihil male agendo propter ipsum, ad assequendum ipsum,
no composition. But to prefer one because he is kin to me, or because he is
my own by education, or my friends, or spes lucri, the hope of gain; or last,
the despite of one that is good; a despair, not that he will not be good, but
that he will not be good for our turn; these shoulder out the gifts: so he
must do nothing evil, whereby he may procure it.

2. And when he has it, he must not think he is fallen into the Pot, that is,
into a place of rest; but that greater preferment may befall him: and so may
use it as a way to profit more then he could in lower place. This ought to be
his duty.

The third point of the Inferior is, to make use of the gifts of one that is
better then he: or se confer, ubi Deus est, to come unto God, Exodus 18.15.
the people come to ask of God, when they asked of Moses; and 1 Samuel 9.9. when
they came to ask of God, they came to the Prophet; because he was brought up
in rebus Jehovae, in the things concerning God: to make use of the Prophets. So
their account was, that God was in the gift; they made use therefore of the
better gifts, Deuteronomy. 1.17. hear you, you under Officers: If any thing be hard,
bring it to me, etc.

And the duty of the Superior, is utendum se praebere, to offer himself unto
the people; as the Philosopher said to Antisthenes, he made a long preface to
him, I would come and ask you, but that I should be troublesome to you; and
his answer to him is, Why man, (...), I live to this end; now I have gotten
some thing my self, to be used of others? So Christ, John. 1.39. to them that
asked him where he dwelt, he says, Come and see, etc. Pro. 9.4, 5. Wisdom
says, Come hither thou that art simple, and want understanding, I have sent
my Maids, that is, under Arts; as if they were gone abroad to call them. None
does receive a gift, propterse, for himself alone.

Senes. The duty toward old men.
The duty of the body, that is between the Old and the Young; the Apostle
wills the younger to be dutiful to the Elder, as to Fathers, 1 Timothy 5.1.

The first duty is, Job 32.6, 7. The young must have their mouths locked, and
must hold their tongue, so long as their elders were in presence. Elihu, though
he were an excellent young man, yet he held his peace, because his elders were
in place: the reason, Job 12.12. because among the ancient there is wisdom;
and in the multitude of years there is understanding: they have gone through
more. The Philosophers counsel is, that when we have gotten our own
demonstrations, we should give ear to the indemonstrable positions of old men,
that they have had by experience. And it was the confusion of Rehoboam, 1 Kings
12.6. When he should have dealt with the Ancients, he did the contrary, and
took counsel of the young men.

And the duty that they are to return back again; that they be not, as Esaias
65.20. pueri centum an norum, children an hundred years old. Jerome translates
it Elementarios senes, old men which have not as yet learned their A. B. C. but
it is required that they have canum intellectum, as they have canum caput, that
their intellect be as grave as their hair. Jerome says, there is aetas
temporis, and aetas meriti, an age of time, and an age of merit. Jude speaks of
arbores autumnales, trees that begin to blossom in the end of harvest, when
their fruit should be gathered. This is the shadow of an old man without
understanding. But though they be such, yet (ut ante) we must honor them:
though they be not worthy hoc pati, to receive this honor, yet it is meet for
us, hoc agere, we must give it.

The second duty to old men, Levit. 19.32. assurgere, to rise up in sign of
reverence: because they have (as in Dan. 7.9.) the image of God: that is called
antiquus dierum, the ancient of days: and Pro. 20.29. they have the crown,
whereby they resemble eternity: So they have a double resemblance of eternity,
senectus est vestigium aeternitatis, old age is the print of eternity, Pro.
16.31. it is a crowning of a man, if he have lived righteously, Tit. 2.2. There
are six qualities set down for them.

The third duty of the Younger: We must consurgere, that is, provide for their
ease, for they are weak: young boys are not to sit, when ancient men stand.
Numb. 8.20. When a man is past the age of fifty, he must not travel in the
Tabernacle; yet he must have his allowance, Esaias. 3.5. his prophecy, that
children should presume against the ancient; and old men to stand, and they to
sit, a thing against sense: surely, sic nobis fiet, so shall it be done to us,
when we come to years: and sic fiet nostris, so shall others of our humors
do to our Fathers, as we do to others: And we shall not make their age (which
is a burden unto them) to be light; as we should, by a reverence in young men.
And if we do procure this, they shall bless us, and pray for us, and we shall
prosper; else we may have a curse from God and our Fathers too. GOD hears the
blessings and cursings of FATHERS and MOTHERS.

Come to the three degrees in the Commonwealth, as Nobility, Gentry, etc. they
are by the Holy Ghost styled Fathers, and consequently is there a correspondent
due to them, 1 Samuel 25.8. David calls a wealthy man Father: I pray thee give
unto thy servants and to thy son David, whatsoever comes to thy hand. The
reason of the duty they have, is, because there may proceed a common benefit by
them, to the Commonwealth; as for War, the nervus reipublicae, is argentum,
round pay for Soldiers is the nerves and sinews of a Commonwealth; and it is
especially in their hands: Therefore it is, that because God has blessed them
more in their oeconomicks, the Commonwealth does account of them more; and
gives them a degree above other.

In the 1 Timothy 6.19. is their duty: To be willing to impart their goods, for a
common profit; as Nehem. 5.17. he had beside his own Family, a hundred and
fifty of the Rulers which he maintained at his own table.

It is better exemplified, 2 Samuel 19.32. Barzillai a very rich man; and David
all the time he was at Mahanami, lay at his charge: therefore he rewarded him
for it. And 2 Kings 15.20. the King of Assure would overcome Juda, if he had not
money presently: but that Menahen being then King, took of every man of
wealth, a great benevolence, etc. So for provision of Armies and things
necessary; and then their duty in the Commonwealth in regard of this, Pro.
31.23. is to prefer them, and to set them in preferments, and to place them
among the Elders in the gate, the reason is, (and it is a good reason) if they
have been careful in their own house; they will be much more in the
Commonwealth.

The second duty is; that when a man has wealth, there be some virtues that he
may exercise excellently, that others cannot, magnificence, liberality, alms,
etc. and if he be allied to a Noble man, to help forward good causes. So
because they are to be helpers in good causes, they must venire in partem
honoris, they must have their honor, verse. 18. We have an example of this
duty, 2 Chronicles. 31.6. voluntary oblations for the Temple; so as there were great
heaps left: great provision for the maintenance of the Levites. And 2 Kings
4.10. the wealthy woman says to her Husband, I pray, lets furnish a Chamber,
etc. There was a care of helping the Church, of helping Prophets, Schools and
Colleges, Mark 6.41. Some cast in a great deal into the Treasury. This is
the second duty. And then consequently, the Commonweal contra, back again,
is to deal, that these men may be especially good; and so do good, Acts 13.8.
There was a great care lest Elimas should have corrupted Sergius Paulus, the
chief man in that country: therefore Paul deals roundly with him, verse. 10.
1 Timothy 6.10. when he had made an end of all, he would have him take order, that
rich men may be good, and do good to many. The Heathen man says, If I were to
make Amphions harp, I would bestow greater pains in making that, then if I
were to make a common Harpers harp.

The third duty of Rich men downward, 1 Timothy 6.17. not to be high minded, nor
to trust in their riches, Pro. 18.11. they commonly count their riches their
strong City or Tower; that is, when they have any cause, though there be no
right in it, yet they will do it, Pro. 31. they will undertake evil matters,
trusting in their wealth: and so likewise, 1 Samuel 25.17. Naball was such a
surly fellow, that no body could speak to him, Pro. 16.2. The rich and the
poor meet, and the Lord has made them both. The rich must not despise the
poor: And then the duty, 1 Samuel 18. of them that be under, is to account
themselves their Sons, and them their Fathers.

4. Of receiving benefits and thankfulness.
Fourthly, of receiving benefits, and of thankfulness, Job 29.16. he showed
himself a Father to the poor, etc. Whatsoever is sub ratione beneficii, may
be considered as a benefit or good turn, of any thing done to any man, it
comes under here. There are three duties of the Benefactour, and three duties
of him that ought to be thankful.

First, Rich men must do it: They are not bound to any one in particular; in
officib they are, but not in beneficio: They may make their choice, but to some
they must do it; they must give wheresoever they are; they must not mark men's
ingratitude. And the Heathen man gives a reason, why they should not give
nothing: melius est ut pereat beneficium apud illum, quam apud te, it is better
that he should abuse thy benefit that receives it, then thee in not giving it:
that is, they must do it freely. And these men that say our preferments are
benefits, yet they do not give them freely: They look not, as the Philosopher
says, ubi optime, but ubi quaestuosi ssime, where they may do it for the
greater good, but where they may bestow it for the greater gain: so they
bestow upon men, as a man allows his Horse, when he is to ride forth; he
allows him so much bread, because he should ride on him, etc. So they bestow
on such a one, because they be to use him. So the Physician loses his honor,
now a days, perdit honorem gratiae propter praemium; for sure it is, he cannot
sufficiently be recompensed, that saves a man's life: but now because he
prostituteth his Art for gain; because he does now as it were buy and sell, he
loses his great honor. Dignus est decipi, qui de recipiendo cogitavit, cum
dedit. He is well worthy to be cheated that when he gives, thinks of
receiving; and fears least the party should not fulfill his expectation. I
think the World will shortly make Indentures, when they give Benefits, to bind
men to be thankful. Secondly, another property, it is the rule: it is not now
as it was. Apage homines, quorum lenta sunt beneficia, praecipites injuririae,
away with those men that are quick enough to do one an injury, but will
consider on it before they will do you any good: but now, prosande odium simul,
and infunde beneficium. They will not let him have all the benefit at once; bu
first weary out his patience, and then a little pleasure or benefit. Seneca
shows it very well: They will have longum spectaculum potentiae suae, it must
be, Your worships, your honors pleasure, and many such circumstances: and be
forsooth must be prayed; and they look for an (...), some gratuitie: So their
benefit is like lapidosus panis, as gravel in a man's mouth: and it cannot be
without grief and torment, to any ingenuous nature, while he receives it.
Thirdly, that when you have done the benefit to any, you must forget it: If a
man bestowed a benefit on me, and I know that he should bestow it ut ducat me
in triumphum, to make me the object of his Vainglory, I would never thank
him for his benefit: nay, I would thank him more, if he had never bestowed it:
so he had not done this. Therefore it must be done, and they not know of it.
Now the Receiver owes a Recognisance.

First, that such a man was Gods Instrument, or principium, by whom such a
blessing of God came to him; and so to acknowledge. There is nothing that the
Fathers have concerning this, but they take it out of Seneca. And surely but
for some points that the Stoics hold, his seven Books, De beneficiis, are very
excellent Books, and worthy the reading. Seneca would have eandem hilaritatem
accepti beneficii, quae fuit petiti, the same cheerfulness after the
receiving, as there was in asking a benefit. Because gratia does so soon
senescere, because a good turn does so soon wax old: therefore that a man's
value or estimation should be all one, that he made before that, or when he
received the benefit.

Secondly, not only this is required, but also effusio affectus, the effusion
of this affection; and this is testimonium excellentiae externae, a testimony
of his external excellency, that God has exalted such a one, to be a
Benefactor. If he remember it, I need not: as exprobatio is satisfactio pro
beneficio; so, if he forget it, I must not, but must tell it; and not extenuate
it: but be benignus interpres, interpret it well; as that it was a great
benefit; or if it were not, that it was a great one to me: if it were not
neither, yet I know he did it, with so good an affection, that I cannot but
think of it highly.

Thirdly, if happily ever he shall need (but we must not desire, or wish it)
that we be ready to do the like for him: and interim to acknowledge that we
cannot recompense it. Though now they call finem injuriae beneficium, they
think they do a benefit by making an end of their injury; and it is a policy
now a days, they will mergere eos, ut extrahentur, throw them into the water
that they may pull them out, and when they have pulled them out, they think
that they are beholden to them; such benefits must not be. I am not to wish
that he were in need; but if ever he stand in need, my assiduity, and diligence
about him, and the best counsel I can give him, he shall be sure off. I will
always wish him well, and acknowledging that I shall never be able to
recompense him. And this is recompense.

Now Unthankfulness is a great vice. Unthankfulness.
But there is one kind that is now thought unthankfulness, and yet it is not.
Every one that receives a benefit, he must not only requite it with the like,
par pari refer, but he must trudere in manus, requite that, and do annother:
or else it is not beneficium. And when he fails himself, tranfferre in Deum,
he must desire God to recompense him.

But when as a man bestows a benefit upon his Inferior, and afterward does
look, that he should like what he likes, and mislike what he misliketh, and
to be at command; and if he will not follow, then to be accounted unthankful:
this is not unthankfulness. For first, unthankfulness is res gratiae, not res
officii, is in matters of favor and not of duty: therefore it is
unthankfulness in the other.

And secondly, it is injustice: For that is a benefit, quod licet non dare, or
dare, which I may give or not give; but in a matter of Justice I cannot requite
him; because there is not non facere, or facere, l liberty of doing or not
doing: therefore I will say, That that I may do, or not do, if he require it,
I will do it. But now he comes to me in a matter of Justice: let him come to
me, in re gratiae, in a matter of courtesy or favor, and I will be thankful:
let him not come to me in re officii, in a matter of duty.

Another (and that is better then this) is this: He would havo me follow his
appetite, to do an injust thing; I will not consent to him: Is this
unthankfulness? The rule is, quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne fcceris, thou
may not do that to another, which thou would not have done to thy self;
a man is made the rule of duty to his neighbor. If my appetite would lead me
wrong, or to any injust thing, should I follow it? No, for I should wrong my
self; because thus doing, I do consentire peccato in me, consent to the
motions of sin within me. And so in like manner, if I consent to him; he
would have me to do him a displeasure, for my pleasure: he would have me do
evil for good; he would have me to do his soul hurt, to consent to sin.
The heathen man calls it, occidere amando, a killing love; and so not to do
this, is species injuriae, and species ingratitudinis, quae saepe incidit in
virum bonum, it has a show of injury and ingratitude, which is often many a
good man's case: But a good man, per mediam infamiam hujus ingratitudinis, will
tendere ad officium, this reproach of Unthankefulnesse, makes him look the
narrower to his duty.

The second Rule: of (...), let that suffice, which was spoken before.

The third Rule: concerning the working of all this in the heart; this law also
is spiritual. For the Superior, Psalm. 78. verse. last. That he must feed them,
not only intelligentia manuum, by the skilfulnesse of his hands; but also in
simplicitate cordis, in the integrity of his heart. And 1 Peter 5.2. it is in
two words expressed, (...) willingly, and (...), diligently, readily. And as
this pertains to him: so on the other side, because not only (before) the
abuse, but the usurpation was touched; and the usurpation of the place, being
either lawful or unlawful: Therefore against usurpation, David, Psalm. 131.1.
non est exultatum cor meum, mine heart is not haughty: likewise, Romans 12.5.
(...), id est, (...), there must be a sober appetite in the mind; because it
falls out, as the Heathen man says, that there is often purpureus animus sub
radi panno, a high mind under a beggars cloak: and Judges 9.15. some are of
the brambles nature; and of that thistle, 2 Kings 14.9. that he would needs
match his son, with the Cedars daughter.

In regard of the Inferior, Judges 5.9. The people must be of a ready and
willing mind, as Barach and Deborah testify in their Song; and because their
faults are comprehended, either under the spirit of Theudas, or of the
Herodians, or tumultuari^ spi^itus, or of those tumultuous spirits, Job 30.11.
he finds sault with some, that as soon as the Cord is losed; they themselves
lose the Bridle; and so, as it is showed plainly, be the sons of Belial. And
for a second for a too much servile spirit: we have our rule, Joshuah 1.17.
tantum si Jehovah fuerit te^um, only if ye depart not from Jehovah, we will
not depart from you, but hearken to you in all things: and that tantum, that
Only must be our direction, if they command further, and we disobey we are
still good subjects. This for the spirit of the Commandment.

Media bufut mandath.
The fourth Rule: The means: partly handled before: In the behalf of the
Superior, they be four, our of the hundredth and first Psalm.

First, a means, whereby a Superior shall be able to call up himself; verse.
2. quando venies ad me? O when will thou come unto me? Therefore his thought
will be of his end first; because he must give an account how he has behaved
himself, and must answer to that ( Jerem. 13.20.) God shall say, Ubi est grex
tuus? What is become of thy slock? The second means, is in the same verse: For
the well ordering of his whole Kingdom, he will begin with his House. And if
he be in a Family, with himself. John 8.3. Qui facit peccatum, servus est
peccati: and qui servus est peccati, he that commiteth sin is the servant of
sin, and he that is the servant of sin, should he be over the Creatures
of God? Who are indeed therefore committed to him, that he may deliver them
from it. Thirdly, verse. 6. another means. He professes that his eyes shall be
always on the Lord, to pick and choose out integros, wise men, that be worthy
that he might set those in the places, as perpetual looking glasses: as well
to see, as to know those that are to be called ad praemia, to places of reward.
Fourthly, and verse. last: this shall be out of the City of the Lord; the price
of those, over whom he is. The Heathen man said, Remember ye are over free men,
and over the Athenians, etc. showing that there was not so great odds between
him and them. And so beginning with himself; and so considering the
excellency, and having ever his eyes over the Realm, to pick out fit and
worthy men; and last, having always before his eyes: when he shall come
before the LORD, may breed a carfulness.
Now on the other side: For his usurpation: it shall be good if he think of
himself, as David, 1 Samuel 24.15. the account he makes of himself there: Art
thou come to pursue a dead dog, and a stie? and as 1 Samuel 26.20. a Partridge,
and a Worm and no man. The Fathers say, in that respect it may be he is
Dominus iugenii and liaguae, he may have wit and eloquence at command; but if
he be servus peccati, subject to sin, it will be sufficient matter to humble
him: And so consequently, seeing want of gifts within him, or with them, his
unthankfulness, which makes them of no fruit nor account; it cannot but quiet
such aspiring thoughts, and bring the heart into better temper that he may
follow the Apostles counsel, Phil. 4.11. This is that I have learned; in what
place soever God has set me, I am well contented with it: And 2 Samuel 15.2.
David: If God will have me come again, etc. if not, here I am, let him do as
seems good unto him: So to say, If I be for the place, the Lord will provide
it for me: if not, what dignity soever it be, I can be as well without it as
have it. And so consequently, Psalm. 131.2. there will be ablactatio a weaning;
because there is in us a spirit, and a lust longing after honor; even as the
Babe does lust for the pappe: And David, he has weaned his soul from such
thoughts. Indeed he could set such before his Fancy, and they were delightful
to him: but he weaned himself from them.

And 2 Samuel 6.22. a degree further: he was too low, as Michall thought; (indeed
for such a Kings daughter as Saul, she thought he had disgraced himself:) but
he says, he had not only prepared himself to be so low; but also to be yet
more vile and low; so far was he from thinking of an higher estate, that he
would demean himself according to those of the lower sort, and exercise as it
were how he should be able to prepare himself, if it please the LORD to set
him in a lower estate, if he become more vile: This were good to prepare our
hearts before, and to answer as Numb. 24.11. Balack did Balaam; though he were
a wicked King, I was purposed to have promoted you; but God has denied you.
Mat. 20.23. Zebedees sons would needs sit one at Christ's right hand and the
other at his left: Christ answers; It must be for whom God has prepared it.
And so confequently that greediness, Ezekiel. 13.4. the Prophets were like a
sort of young and old Foxes: hungry, in a desert: Schools, like Foxes, hungry
and ravening; every man desiring a testimony of that excellency that is not
in him: And so he will not give place, not be in lower estate. But whereas
Christ, Luke 14.8.9. counsels, not to take the highest places; and Luke
12.42. says, my Steward shall answer according to (...), a Portion: He will
have more then his (...), and so requires Injustice of the Lords Steward.

Signs of good Inferitiours.
The fifth Rule, The signs. First of Inferiors, herein we will take no other
course to measure this honor, then the Heathen men have done. One of them
says, non dicto, aut facto, aut vultu laesi pietatem, I have not; forgot my
duty to him either in word or deed; no, nor of an ill look can he accuse me.
And for Vultw, it is a common saying; that Vultu saepe laeditur pietas, a man
may by a wry countenance break this duty.

And for deeds, Heb. 13.17. Our outward deeds ought to be such, to our
Superiors, as they may take pleasure, and rejoice in them: and they that may
not govern us with sorrow. Exemplum, 1 Samuel 24.6. David did not hurt Saul in
the Cave; but only cut the lap of his coat: yet his heart touched him; it
being a disgrace to the garment of Saul. The Apostle, 2 Cor. 9.8. exhorts
Christians to abound in every good work; they must show forth a fruit of
righteousness: and he says there, it must be abundans fructus, a fruit that
abounds. We must do our duty, and more oftener then our duty; in more places,
further off then our duty enjoyneth us. The Apostle, Phil. 4.17. speaking of a
duty likewise: It is not the matter we esteem, or weigh so much; the paying
of Tax or Tithes; but this is that we speak, (...), the Fruit, that shall be
counted an overplus, at the reckoning day. This is a good sign; to do more
then duty. By this means (as we see in a contrary in Jacob, Genesis 34.30. they
had made him stink among the Inhabitants of the Land, etc.) We shall cast a
good comfortable smell to the Superior: as Esaias 9.17. so as God and the
Superiors shall take delight and pleasure in our young men; doing not only
that they should, but also those duties that are not necessary.

Secondly, for Dictum, Words: Exemplum, 2 Kings 2.23. When the Prophet came by
the children of Bethel, they had their terms for him: and were there executed:
An example, Luke 16.14. Christ's auditors knew themselves in a fault: yet it is
said, (...), they scoffed at him: it is the uttermost part of derision; a
drawing together of the Nose: they made a nose at him; this ought not to be:
But the Wise man says, Proverbs 25.12. Blessed is he that speaks to an
understanding ear: And he shows there, how an understanding ear will make
use of it, and will lay it to heart: and will not go away and scoff at it.
This is not that ear, to which he may deliver that Wisdom.

Thirdly, For Countenance, Genesis 4.5. Cain being angry, etc. his countenance
sell, etc. he hanged his countenance, Genesis 31.2. Labans countenance, not to
day, as yesterday, toward Jacob, etc. So contra, as Jerome says, on Psalm.
80.16. there is vultus increpationis, a rebuking countenance, and that by
look: and there is vultus detraclionis, a detracting countenance: how is that?
Pro. 21.29. to strengthen the face, when he is rebuked: to put on a good strong
face: or as Psalm. 131.1. an high look, an hardened countenance; which
signifies that inwardly as much as in him lies, he does laedere pietatem.
Elisha, 2 Kings 3.4. says to Jehoram, But that I reverence the face of King
Jehosophat, etc. So that their presence, who be not infected with I do latry,
is to be reverenced of us.

Signs of a good Governor and government.
For the duties of Superiors; because, as they say, their power is bottomless,
so their abuses are bottomless: There be certain signs of a good government.

First, Esaias 32.3.5. In a good government, eyes that can see, shall not need to
wink, etc. and he that is flagitiosus, a wicked lewd man, shall not be called
a good Superior, etc. So he gives to understand, that an ill government, quod
scis, nescis, you must see, and not see; you must Sir him, that is not to be
Worshipped: you must bring your terms cross. Example in Esaias and Amos: the
one living in the days of Uzziah and Manasseh; the other of Uzziah and
Jeroboam: Amos 5.13. In that day shall the wise man hold his peace, he shall
not dare to speak; his wisdom shall do him no good: if he speak, he shall
be served as Michah, Judges 18.25. was. Tace, hold thy tongue; else one of us
shall run thee through: this is no time for a Wise man to speak. But in the
days of Hezechiah, Esaias 22.16. Esaias durst say to Shebnah, Who are you? Whence
come you? God shall deal thus and thus with you. And their mouths and eyes
shall deal thus and thus with you. And their mouths and eyes shall be open.
Christ, John 18.22. standing before Annas; for saying, I am not bound to accuse
my self; presently for saying so, a Catchpoll lays him on the face. So it
was done to Paul, Acts 23.2. he begins to clear himself; and Ananias
says to one that stood by, Strike him on the face. Amos 6.10. We must not say
what is right or wrong: This is the first sign.

Secondly, another: Paul, for all his appeal, could get no Justice; because
Nero was upheld by his Governors; and he must uphold them.

The same was the case of David, why he might not go and fight, 1 Samuel 29.9.
There the King persuades David to be gone: then David says, What have I
done, that I may not go and fight against the enemies of the LORD and the
KING? And he says, Truly I find no fault in you: You have been good and
upright in my sight: but my Lords and the Governors, they like you not; my
Princes will not have it so.

The third sign: His speech. The Heathen man. A good Governor says, (...),
it is my duty and I must do it; and an evil Governor will say, (...), I have
power and I may do it. 1 Samuel 22.7. Saul, I can give you Vineyards, etc. John.
19.20. Pilate, I have power, etc.

Fourthly, another out of Menander; whose eye brows swell greater then their
estate: proud Governors. If there fall out a fault, and ye tell them not of it
before; they will say, Why told ye not us of it? Tell him of it, and he will
say, (...), or (...), We will consider of it. And it shall be as much amended,
as if you had not told them. This makes a fourth sign. 2 Samuel 18.13. one
tells Joab of Absaloms hanging; and Joab said, Did thou see him, and not
kill him? Thou should have killed him, and I would have given thee a reward:
The other said, You see what strict charge the King gave you and Abishai, and
Ittat, not to lay hands upon him: But you would have happily said to the King,
He is worthy to dye: if I should have done it, you would have been against me
your self. He counsels him to have done that, which he himself would have
reproved in him.

Fifthly, another (and it is greatly complained of by the Fathers, and was wont
to be in the Primitive Church:) It is not Christianity that abrogateth Justice.
They would have their Rulers do wrong to a Christian Bishop: then he must
have Justice: and when it comes to the Emperor, Why, says he, you shall
have Justice. A day of hearing is appointed, if it be plain, and when it
comes to the point; then the Deputy comes to him, and says, You are a
Christian, you ought to be patient; you need not follow your suit; you should
rather forgive it, etc. So they, rather then to show their folly, would give
over. So the Christians were dealt withal, and laden thus, till their backs
were broken. Such is that; Acts 16.39. They go roundly to work with Paul,
they whip him, and his fellows; and the next day would have let them go
privily. Paul among the rest, takes this courage to him and says, They would
not; because they had corrected them openly without a cause, he would have them
come themselves and fetch them out; so that they were feign to fetch them out
themselves. So when men desire not that Christianity should drown Justice, it
is a sign of a good government.

Sixthly, the thriving of the righteous: a good sign, Psalm. 72.7. In a good
man's time the righteous should flourish. Contra, as the Heathen man says,
where it is not (...), the Flatterer is best: (...), then the Sycophant: (...),
and then he that is naughty and lewd: 1 Samuel 26.16. David says, If God have
done it, let him smell the savor of a sacrifice: if men, cursed be they
before the Lord. So he knew there were Sycophant talebearers, as Doeg: that
told Saul of David's being at Nob, and in the Cave: He was the chief of all
his servants, over all his flocks: a great office in those days. My meaning
is this, Eccles. 29.9. that these putrid members be cut off, and the righteous
be releeved for the Commandment sake. Beatus qui non suit subjectus indigno,
as the Heathen man says: When Caesar first entered into his tyranny; he gave
preferments, sic ut bonestaret hornines, and tamen inquinaret ornamenta. So
places of good credit are discredited by placing such Officers as discredit the
places. There be many more signs, but these may suffice.

The sixth Rule: The procuring of it to others. A precent, Pro. 24.21. an
example, 1 Samuel 24.10. and 26.9. That for dehortation. Now for exhortation, 2
Kings 25.24. Fear not to serve the Caldeans, let us serve the King of Babel,
and we shall be well. This is to be understood out of Numb. 16.3. when the
Governor is meek, and commands that which is right in the Lords eyes: not
such as the gainsaying of Corah was. But Psalm. 44.16. if the Chair of Justice
do singere molestiam, do cause heavy commandments, praester statutum; then,
quis consurget mecum. In unjust commands, I will not do: then are we both to
harden our selves and others: and wish them not to do it.

That thou may prolong, The reason.
etc.] In general it was said, that it was to all a general promise; as in
the second Commandment, To them that love me, etc. But this is particulerly to
one, and has a particular promise, Long life. So that is true, Ephesians. 6.2. it
is the first Commandment with particular promise.

Now the reason to this Commandment. It is a common proverb: Adorant plures
solemn orientem, quam occidentem, more worship the Sun rising then setting: our
parents be compared to the Sun going down, Job 12.5. When a man is toward
his end, he is like a candle that burns within the socket. Therefore we
neglect them; but hope for somewhat to come by them to us; if they grow up with
us, and so may profit us hereafter; but when they are one foot in the grave, we
have there done with them, we esteem them no longer: therefore here is a
reason or motive from God that if we give due honor unto them, we shall be
rewarded our selves with honor and long life.

Secondly, the convenient proportion of the promises; and that it is most just;
for that it is said of the Heathen, Si reddideris benesicium gratis, tuere tu
beneficium: if he become thankful, orna quantum potes. In our birth we
received a benefit from our Parents: that is, life: being thankful to them,
this benefit shall be preserved. Therefore God will have life to be preserved
of them, of whom we had it. 1 Timothy 4.8. Piety (one of the special parts whereof
this is) has promises of this life, and of that to come. The Heathen man
says, if all the Adverbs were linked together, and been and male, well and
ill, were out, it were to no purpose. Therefore God, Deuteronomy. 5.16. adds an
explication of this: That thy days may be long: And that it may go well with
thee: Augustine, ut non solum vita longa, sed laeta, that thy life may be not
only long but cheerful. Now the means he says, shall be our Parents; that
by their blessing they may prolong our days: he has annexed his blessing to
the blessing of the Parent. For this blessing of life in the Scripture, came
from Noah; the blessing first was to Sem, of the life to come; and to Japheth,
of this life: God shall persuade Japheth, etc. showing that the Parents giving
it from the soul, and Faith ( Heb. 11.20, 21. making it a fruit of faith: By
faith Isaac blessed Jacob concerning things to come, etc.) It will work
miracles; Sem and his seed had a great privilege, for the World to come:
Japheth, for this life: and a curse to Cham, both for this life, and the life
to come: his seed has always been in subjection, and they have had small
light of Religion, and small sparks of the Gospel: Again, in the blessing
from Isaac on Jacob; legatur locus perpendantur circumstantiae, Genesis 27.7. etc.
He blessed him with etc. and he was blessed. He loved Esau more; and so no
doubt the blessing had been his; but that by Gods providence, it was carried to
Jacob: Genesis 48.20. A strange blessing (for the manner) and mighty (for effect)
was that of Jacob on Joseph's sons: and Genesis 49. He to Joseph; because he had
fed his Father, blesses him with the blessing of the Heaven, the Air, the
Deep; and that Tribe continued longest in prosperity. Psalm. 115.15. Vos estis
benedicti Domini, ye are the blessed of the Lord: and so consequently, the
blessing being of the Lord, of which Parents be instruments; it is
instrumentally to be ascribed to the blessing of the Parents; because it is
they that have made it, by their blessing. All this is to provoke the prayer of
the Superiors.

Whether is this promise fulfilled? Quest.
A busy nature may supply many objections; and our experience will show us the
contrary: obedient and dutiful Inferiors have dyed betimes: disobedient,
stubborn, and contumacious children have prospered and lived long: Therefore
it is certain that the wise man says, Eccles. 9.2, 3. that all thing in this
World be alike to all men; the reason is this, Genesis 27. God shall give thee of
the fatness of the earth: Isaac he could give it to Jacob; and after he gives
it, verse. 39. to Esau: so God shall give to thee, as to thy Brother: Pro.
13.16. they are distinguished. Immortality, length of days, are the gifts of
the right hand: Glory, riches, and preferment, are the gifts of the left hand;
and prosperity is common to both: and the reason is, Ne homines cupide
prosequantur, Sol. 1
lest men should be set too eagarly upon getting. And adversity is common to
both: Ne illa turpiter effugiatur: For, why should a man sweat, if he thought
he might not get out of adversity? More reasons. There is common adversity:
Why? God gives to some of his, adversity; and not to some of the wicked;
because, if he should give to all the wicked, 2 Pet. 1.3, 4. there would be no
judgment: contra, if he should give all adversity to his children, then Psalm
11.12. certe Deus non respicit nos, Gods providence should not be in this
World: therefore that he may show that he has a providence; he will give to
some of his, these good things: And that he may show that he has a Judgment,
he will give them to some of the wicked. He would not have these good things to
be altogether in the wicked; because then they would think, that God had not
the disposition of them. And as Habak. 1.16. they would sacrifice to their Not,
and to their Yarne: and contra, if good men should have all, and the Devil
none, then the Devil would say, as he did, Job 1.19. Nunquid servit Deo
gratis? Does Job serve God for naught? How then? First, been and male must come
in; it is not so much long life, as the comfort and delight which we enjoy in
our life, which is here promised as a blessing. Wherefore 1 Kings 19.4. Elias
he quits God with his promise, I pray thee take away my life, for I am not
better then my Fathers: and Deuteronomy. 5.16. it is expounded: They shall prolong
your days, so long as you can live prosperously and well. It must be a
benefit, if a man have a promise of a long life; if it come to be a
displeasure, it were better not to have it.

Life may be a displeasure in two respects.
Now in two respects, life may be a displeasure: First, in regard of the evil
time, 2 Kings 22.20. Huldah says, Josiah was a good King; but there were evil
times over the Land: therefore she says, That to take him away from this
evil time, God would shorten his days. Secondly, Esaias 55.1. In regard of
himself; lest he should be corrupted. The time shall not greive him, but shall
corrupt him, Raptus est e facie maliciae Enoch, Enoch was taken away from the
earth, because else he would happily have been corrupted: or contra, would have
fallen into a marveilous grief of mind. And this is one answer.

Another answer they say, Sol. 2.
is this: That although he take them away upon this condition, yet it is not a
sufficient compensation. But as out of Mark 6.23. When Herod had promised half
his Kingdom, it is certain if he had given her his whole Kingdom, it had
been no breach: And so, if God promise vitam prolongatam, a prolonged life;
and give for it, vitam perp^tuatam, eternal life; here is more then half in
all. As he that promises twelve pieces of silver, and gives twelve pieces of
gold: or he that promises to give a Vessel of Beer, and gives a Vessel of
Wine; breaks not his promise.

But the last and most sufficient answer is this. Sol. 3.
There is no temporal thing of this life, that does cadere in promissum Dei,
fall under a promise of God, but only as it shall help and further the next
life: This life is but via ad vitam, the way unto life; so that whatsoever he
promises in this way, he promises but as it shall help to the end. Infima
pars faelicitatis perfectae est terrena faelicitas, this earthly felicity is no
felicity, except it dispose us to that felicity in Heaven. Because (as we said)
it mu^^ cooperari bonis in bonum, Romans 8.28. it must work together for their
great good, else it is not Gods promise: Ut ita disponatur de minimo,
quemadmodum convenit summo: or, Ne peri culum fiat de maximo. And so it is very
certain, that as it is not prejudicial to the life to come, God keeps it:
And therefore as one says, we lose our life pro Rege, Lege, and Grege. for the
King, the Laws, and the People: David he has cases. When there comes a case
of Gods; then Psalm. 69.7. for thy cause suffer we reproach: and the zeal of
thine House has even consumed me. Or when the case of the truth comes; or of
faith: then 2 Timothy 4.3. fidem sequere; lose thy life to keep the faith. Or when
we are in a case, pro grege, for the people, we must be made an example for the
ages to come, James 5.10. as the Prophets were. In these cases falls it out,
that if a man do yield to this life, he shall live: but yet this life shall be
derogatory and prejudicial to his other life. And yet God does, when we lose
vitam nostram, this life, not only reward us with vita gloriae, a life of
glory, but also with vita memoriae, a life of memory. Psalm. 112.6. the
righteous, erit in memoria aeterna, shall be in everlasting remembrance. And
how? Pro. 10.7. memoria ejus erit in laud sancta, his memory shall be blessed:
they shall say, Praised be God that ever such a man was borne. It is noted (
Esaias 22.16.6.) by one of the Fathers, that there is an unchoosing, when a man
is chosen, as when a question is asked, Quis est ille? Who is that? or how got
he in? by that very question it shows a fault. As contra, Quomodo non venit
ille? Why comes not he? this is a plain election in foro justiciae, in a
court of justice. So they say; quomodo mortuus est iste, Oh how bravely he
dyed! this makes his praise to be glorious. And Quomodo mortuus est iste? How
chance he turned his Religion? this shows that he was unworthy to live.

The prolonging of wicked men's days, not of the promise: yet 4.^. reasons be
of it.
Now again, as before, the prolonging of evil men's days, it is (...) of the
promise: yet GOD rendereth four reasons of it.

First 2 Timothy 2.25. (...), if God peradventure may give them repentance: that
not cutting of them off betimes, is the means of returning back again. We
see it in Paul's conversion: if he had been cut off in the time of his
persecuting, what an excellent Apostle had been lost? Again, by not cutting
off of Solomon, what an excellent Saint he came back again to God? This is the
first. Secondly, 2 Kings 21.24. and 16.20. he has respect to their Progeny:
as not letting Achaz live, he had lost Hezechiah. And not letting Ammon live,
he had lost Josias: and so consequently, that these may come, he suffers them
to live Thirdly, Esaias 10.5. because God must have rods of his wrath, therefore
wicked men may be. Ashur may be the rod of his wrath, for the trial of his
Church. Fourthly, and lastly, It is an universal Document for all that will
do it, Romans 9.22. that God, to make his power and wrath known, suffers his
vessels of wrath, that we might learn to be much more patient and long
suffering in our injuries. And yet God is even with them. First, Esaias 66.24.
the godly shall come forth, and look on their condemned carcasses: They are
condemned persons, and shall condemn one another, 2 Kings 9.31. Jezebell, she
condemns Zimri and Absalom, 2 Samuel 16.17. showed himself unkind, and grieved
his Father: and yet he could condemn Hushai, for leaving his friend. Secondly,
and the second punishment, vermis eorum non morietur, their worm shall not
dye; so their life is not laeta vita, a life that has any delight in it.
Augustine, eorum consciencia paena, their conscience is a continual tormenter.
Thirdly, and ignis eorum non extinguetur, their fire shall not be put out;
their name shall be an abhorring to all flesh; it shall be put out, Psalm.
34.16. or else, Prove. 10.7. it shall be a rotten name: And so consequently we
may see how the Preacher, Cap. 8.12. says, for all their long life, it shall
come notwithstanding without the compass of the promise.

The end of the Fifth Commandment.
The VI. Commandment.
Thou shall do no murder.
ITt was said, that whatsoever duties were between man and man in particular,
pertained unto the fifth Commandment. Now these duties that are commonly
called promiscua, promiscuall duties, follow in the four next Commandments.
The sixth concerning the life of man, the preservation of it: the seventh
concerning chastity, or the preservation of wedlock: the eighth concerning his
goods: the ninth concerning his good name.

The Commandment is exceeding short, God providing for the memory of man;
therefore, he has made choice in one word, The commentary of the Commandment.
to signify a great catalogue of sins; making choice of murder, which is
almost the highest: that he might show the under affections are to him no
less odious then murder it self: which if they had not been expressed in
this word, would have seemed light.

The Commandment then is expounded in the Law it self, Lev. 19.17.18. By
murder he means tale-carrying, that may redound to man's blood: standing
against the blood of his neighbor, hating his brother, not rebuking, suffering
him to sin; revengement, or mindfulnesse of wrongs: Our Savior Christ also,
Matthew 5.22. and so from thence to verse. 27. at the 38. verse. and so by the
end, gives a large exposition or commentary on this Commandment.

The like has Saint John almost through his first Epistle, and especially,
cap. 3.14.15. where he says plainly, that whosoever hates, is a murderer:
and so consequently does show plainly, that God rather gives his Law to the
heart, the fountain of the affections, then to the actions, that man does take
order for.

Those places we must weigh and consider: when we have weighed them, we shall
find it true that the Apostle says, Ephesians. 4.27. that this affection of anger
and hatred, is the gate of the Devil, whereby, Anger, the Devils gate.
as James 3.16. there is way made for strifes and debates, and to a great many
of evil works.

1. The order of depending of it. The fifth Commandment was concerning the
beginnings and authors of our life: The order.
therefore no object comes next, better to be entreated of, then life it
self, which flows as an effect out of the other: that every man should
highly esteem it in himself, and other. And it must necessarily stand here;
the next cannot stand before: for we are made partakers of wedlock, goods and
good name, by being first: and they cannot be without life: therefore it must
necessarily stand before.

Omnis iniquitas mentitur sibi.
2. Another reason that is in the last Commandment, the ground of it was a
conceit of himself: omnis iniquitas mentitur sibi, all wickedness deceives it
self. We shall see that the very consequence of sin came from that
original; as the first murder was, Genesis 4. of innocent Abell, and verse. 5.
the beginning of it was, because Caine thought his brother had a dignity, and 1
John 3.12. he says plainly, he did therefore kill his brother, because he
was better then he; his brothers works were good, and his naught. And again
we see Genesis 27.41. Esaues anger brast out into threatenings of the death of his
brother, for his prerogative, for taking away his blessing. And Genesis 37.4.
because the rest of the children of Jacob saw that Joseph was more made of then
they, therefore they hated him exceedingly; and afteward, verse. 9. when he came
to tell them his dream, that he should be a Ruler over them, and that his
father and mother should worship him: it is said, their hatred exceeded yet
more.

And generally, the conceit of our selves, that nothing ought to thwart us, or
that we deserve to have facilitat^m actionis nostrae, our doing well
entertained; this makes us, when we are crossed (1 King. 21.4.) do as Ahab
did, because he could not have his desire of the Vineyards presently, he was
exceeding wroth, and after fell to murder.

True it is, (...) and (...).
that (as diverse well note) the power in the mind, that is called (...),
fervor of spirit, proceeds always of (...), desire, from our desire: and
these affections are called (...), vigorous faculties, for so the Divines.

Ye see in natural things, when as fire does know his place to be above, it
has a desire to be there: and it has a quality given it, that is lightness,
to go up: now if it be hindered in his course, it has a second quality, which
is heat, and that will make it way, if it be able to burn through, it will
scorch and snatch, and would remove it, if it had strength: and thereby does
make plain, that the nature of it is so to do. Fire in the soul.
Such a thing is in the soul of man: for God having given us light to know
what we are to do, he gives us also a desire to do it: so we make toward
it, we go up: then has he given us that part of the mind, which is called
(...): and that is answerable to the lightness of the fire: so in this he has
given us answerable to calor, heat, our (...), called of heat. Then in good
matters, we are by the zeal of it, to remove whatsoever will hinder us in the
course of godliness. Now because Ira, which is the first motion, is vindex
laesae concupiscentiae, an avenger of a wronged desire: (...) index laesae
concupiscentiae.
for which cause, that being the first hinderer, there is naturally ebullitio
sanguinis, a boiling of the blood, and after that (...), ire, a desire of
removing the impediment. Now this we are to understand, that as there be some
affections, as envy, that do sonare malum, sound evil: as soon as a man
hears them, he hates them: so anger is none of these: for it fails not in
the object, but it fails two ways, 1. in the cause, 2. in the quantity. Ephesians.
4.26. a distinction. Irascimini, and nolite peccare, be ye angry, and sin
not. Then belike there is an anger which is not sin, and the sin comes
not in respect of the object or effection it self, which is indeterminate: but
when we are angry, either for no cause, or for a light cause: or if we be angry
for a just cause, we keep no measure in it, but our anger grows too great.
To be moved with indignity is very good, and a virtue called (...),
indignation: Ira per z^lum (...)
when a man does see that it ought not to be done; and is angry if it be done;
if it be not for Gods glory, or the good estate of the Church: this is (...),
and ira per zelum, indignation and anger kindled by zeal: and is called ira
spiritus sancti, a holy anger. John 2.17. It was our Savior Christ's anger, and
of Elias: and the other called, ira per vitium, or ira carnis, a vicious and
carnal anger: thererefore we must look to these two conditions. 1. Matthew.
5.22. he that is angry with his brother (...), without a cause, etc, How to be
angry.
it must be for a cause: 2. That it be intra modum, within measure: as Romans
12.19. not avenging, but giving place to wrath, not resisting it,
i. suppressing it: Resist irae si potes, resist anger as much as possible.
When the affection is not thus ruled by reason, and is not affectus ancilla,
the handmaid of passion; but falls out otherwise: then is it that the
Apostle says, Heb. 12.15. radix omnis amaritudinis, or venenum Serpentis, the
root of all bitterness, or the venom of the Serpent, that is in us, and
infecteth our nature.

Gradus irae ^i. nosae, and fucius
Now of this (as was said before) there is first this sinful wrath: the spawne
of these vices that James reckons up: And this poison is either at the first
rising in us; or it is Suppuratio vitii, an impostume, or inward rankling of
it: and then, 1. Suppuratio vitii.
if it be against a Superior, it is called a grudge; if against an equal, a
rancor; if against an inferior, it is disdain. And the grudge, if it continue
a little longer, it will grow to an impostume of envy, and rancor to hatred,
and disdain to contempt: After they will break out, and they have two issues.
An impostum of envy.
1. In the tongue. 2. In the countenance.


1. That that breaks out at the tongue, they call Spuma vitii, 1. Spuma vitii.
the foame, or froath of the vice: which if it be to our Superiors, they call
susurrus, whisperings, detractings: and to our equal (...), contentious
speeches, railing, brawling, etc. and to the inferior, taunts, scoffs, and
reproaches.

2. Now, when it breaks out into the eyes, it is called Icterus vitii: 2.
Icterus vitii the jaundis.
the jaundise of sin: We shall know it, to a Superior, per obliquos oculos,
by a squint eye: to an equal, it will be over all the face: it will be pale,
sweat, he will foame at the mouth: and to an inferior, per suspensum oculum,
hanging of the eyes, and high look.

Now then, besides these two, it comes into the work, into execution, to the
hands and feet; and then it is lepra peccati, Lepra peccati.
the leprosy of sin. They called it Rixam, fighting, wars, bloodshed: and
from this lepra, there comes not only this, but an infection to others: as
Ier. 18.18. Come let us smite him with our tongues, let us not hearken to any
thing that he says. These are murders cousins. This is a brief declaration
of that, that shall hereafter be set forth at large. But because it was said in
the beginning, There are in the Commandments of God, not only negations, but
also affirmations: there is not only somewhat forbidden, as murder, and his
kindred: but there is also somewhat commanded in general; as that we should
study to preserve the life of our neighbor. We must be ^ginum citae to our
neighbors.
The Hebrews called it, esse lignum vitae proximo, to be a tree of life to our
neighbor. What it is to be lignum vitae to him, we see in Prove. 11.30. that
fructus justi, is lignum vitae: to deal justly with him, and offer him no
wrong. Prove. 13.12. There is another lignum vitae, desiderium expletum: that
is, the virtue of beneficence: A wholesome tongue is a tree of life: but the
frowardness thereof breaks the mind.
these be ligna vitae, and Prove. 15.4. lingua placabilis, that is lignum vitae
too, a gentle tongue, by giving of gentle speeches, and by fulfilling his
desire, and Prove. 14.30. We shall make him, if we do these, cor sanum, a
joyful heart: that is indeed the true lignum vitae. For this life otherwise,
is (as the Heathen says) (...), a comfortless life, without this. For a
foolish opinion is of some that think their body and their senses is the best
thing that they have: and so consequently, they imagine murder to be only of
the body: But it is of the soul also, and the murder of the soul is referred
to two lives. 1. To this life. 2. To that to come.


As indeed, the word in the Common Law counts it murder, if the body, or the
good estate of the body to endammaged.

The good estate of the body is Incolumitas, is incolumity, which is in
threethings. Incelumitas in 3. things.


1. In interigty; besides the life, if a man lose an arm, there may be an
action for it. 2. In incolumitate sensus, in the safety of the sense: when we
are at ease: as on the other side, if any man strike us, it is made a battery.
3. There must be libertas metus, a freedom from fear: as on the other side to
bind one, or to shut him up, this is prejudicial to incolumity, and comes
under murder: and there may be an action for these.
Now, as not only the body, but also the incolumity of the body is not to
receive damage; so likewise there is such a thing in the soul which may not
be hurt, and it is called (...), tranquillity.

The incolumity of the soul also stands in three things.

1. Dilectio, The incolumity of the soul.
lovingnesse: and here, against this comes in odium, hatred, with all his
crew, and retinue. 2. Gaudium, joy: against this comes that, when a man is so
dealt with, that he falls in (...), in torporem animae, into a drowsinesse of
the soul, that he takes no delight in any good thing: or if he fall into
envy. 3. Peace. Gal. 5.22. and that either 1. Within himself, his thoughts:
against that comes scandalum, scandals. 2. Outward, between him and other,
and there comes desire and contention.

So (as was said in the beginning) he is not only an offender, that comes
against the body, or the incolumity thereof: but also he that comes contra
animam, against the soul: so he that comes contra (...) animi, against the
tranquillity of the soul: Genesis 27.46. whereas Esau matcheth himself against
the consent of his Parents, Rebecca says, taedet me vitae, I am weary of my
life: because of the disquietnesse, and vexation with the Hittites. This does
Job call amaritudo animae, the bitterness of the soul. Job 10.1. But there is
no place plainer for this, then Genesis 45.27. for there Jacobs soul being dead
by Joseph's death, and Simeons keeping in prison, and Benjamins departure: it is
said, that when as news came that Joseph was alive, the spirit of Jacob
revived within him: as if before by torments it had been dead.

The Hebrews know what it is percutere animam: we know not; but do commonly
express for it, percussit animam: when any grief comes to one, we call it
the killing of the soul. And it comes somewhat near to it, Prove. 17.22. this
spiritus exiccat ossa, a broken spirit dries the bones: and indeed it is the
very diminishing of the natural heat, and shortning of this life. Then this
is it that we say, Latitudo husu, praecepti.
what soever is contrary to (...) or (...), life, or the welbeing of life, God
meant it here.

The scope of the Law; (as before) It is not one private thing, Why God would
have none killed.
but the good of all, that God in this Law commands.

1. In regard of himself, Genesis 9.6. he would have none killed: why? his
reason: he will not have his Image destroyed and defaced. It is counted treason
to earthly Princes, to deface their Image. 2. In regard of the Church. 1 Cor.
12.13, 27. he says there, that how many soever are Christ's, they are become
one body, and that in one unanimity: and so consequently that man, that shall
take any part of this, he makes a rupture into the mystical body of Christ.
3. In regard of the Commonwealth. Levit. 26.6. he says, It shall be a great
blessing he will give, that man shall do his business without fear, and
shall have peace, and sleep without terror.
Now, for every private man, Psalm. 36.9. For with thee is the Well of life:
That he has given to every man a life, and nobilem rationis usum, the noble
use of reason: whereby he may perceive himself (...), settled in mind: and by
this he has fenced him. Now to consider it particularly.

First, in the fault: A man may kill (as the Fathers and Aug. say, and it is
the highest division one can come unto) either a man or a beast: 1a. D^vis^^.
And he makes this division against the Manichees, for this is one thing that
they hold; they thought that a man might not pull up any herb of the field, nor
slip the branch of a tree: for the ttees, they lived too. A fond opinion, for
Genesis 1.29. God says there before the flood came, he gave all green things,
not only the herbs, but also the trees to man and beasts. And we see plainly,
Genesis 9.3. whatsoever lives and moves, they are given to man to be food; most
plainly, Lawful to ^il^ Beasts.
1 Cor. 10.25. Quicquid in macella, etc. Whatsoever is sold in the Shambles,
eat it. And indeed, reason it self (in Law) shows it plainly. For, where
there is no Ius societatis, a Law of society, there is not societas juris, a
society in Law. But they have no society with us, because they want reason.

And secondly, to use all things for the end they were ordained for, is no
sin: but the less perfect things are for the more perfect; therefore herbs
for beasts: and beasts, as being less perfect, for man. Only in these two
cases, 2. Caveats.
the holy Ghost forbids to kill beasts: first, when it turns to the detriment
of our neighbor; the sin is not to kill the beast, but to endammage him by
it. And secondly, that we kill them not in the impotencie of our wrath;
exacting that power or understanding of him, that is not in him. Aug. he says,
men are so foolishly bent, they must have facilitatem motus, things work to
their mind. If the poor Pen, through their negligence and perverseness, did
not write as they would have it, capit and collidit, he takes it, and dasheth
it: So in beasts, if they do not as we would have them, then we show our
impotencie. Psalm. 36.6. Gods mercy: he preserves both man and beast, and
Prove. 12.10. man must be like to him in this point: he shall be merciful to
the soul of the beast he rides upon. In this regard he shall not kill the
beast.

The second division of man: 2a. Divisi^.
We will take him first, as he is a member, then as a head of a society. There
is a slaughter, 1. Sui ipsius, of a man's self. 2. Alierius, of another man, of
his neighbor.


Because we see the Heathen, as we read of Lucretia, Seneca, and Cato; that
though they would never have been brought to kill others, A man may not kill
himself.
yet they durst lay hands on themselves; and were therefore highly thought of
amongst the Heathen: But Christian Religion teaches us, that it must not be
so: and that no man has power of his life, for these causes.

1. We must needs understand Non occides, thou shall not kill, so: because, as
was said before, the general rule of the Law is, Si^ut te ipsum, as thy self.
Then non occides alium, sicut non occides teipsum, thou shall not murder
another, even as thou should not kill thy self. So the proportion is
against the Law of charity and nature. Against the Law of nature it is, we are
so linked to our selves, that nature first makes alimentum individuum, the
nutriment to satisfy the stomach, before she gives propaginem speeiei,
supplement to the other members: showing that to every man belongs a care how
to preserve himself. 2. Because that every man that lives in a society, or
Commonwealth, is a part thereof: and so is not his own, but societatis or
reipub. the societies or Commonwealths: therefore he cannot injure or kill
himself, but he must needs bring detriment to the whole company whereof he is:
And consequently by the Law of the Heathens, they forfeit the goods to the
Exchequer, as they do by the the Law of the Christians; though it be somewhat
otherwise. So the Commonwealth will take some revenge of him, because in that
action there does concur some damage to her. 3. Because our life is the gift
of God, 1. Sam. 2.6. so consequently, it is God, that gives life, and brings
death; therefore we must not dispose of the gift of God, without the mind of
the giver, Romans 12.4. rather because the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.23. he says, we are
bought with a price; we are his servants that bought us: Then comes that in
Romans 14.4. Quis tu, qui jud cas servum alienum? Who art thou that judge
another man's servant? so Quis tu, qui intersicis servum alienum? Who art thou
that killest another man's servant? Matthew. 8.32. Its said, that the very swine
would not have run into the Sea, but that they were carried of the Devil,
else they of themselves would not: therefore as Aug. reproving the deed of
Razis, 2. Maccab. 14.37. and so consequently, the authority of the writer that
commends him for it in that place: and the Papists dis-allow the thing: So it
is a fault to think that any man may kill himself, whether he do it, that he
may fugere molestias temporales, hoc enim modo, says he, incidunt in
perpetuas, to avoid temporal evils, for by this means they fall into
eternal: neither ut evitet peccatum alienum, ne incipiat habere gravissimum
proprium, to shun the sin of another, lest he become guilty of a most
grievous one himself: nor pro suo peccato, for his own sin; for there is
time of repentance: neither ne peccer, lest he fall into sin; as the woman
did in the Primitive Church: sic enim incidit in peccatum certum, ut evitaret
incertum, for so he commits a certain sin, to avoid an uncertain one. And
indeed he proves out of Romans 3. that we must not do it for any cause.
2. Come to the next, in alium, Manslaughter, looking into man's nature; we must
not kill any other. The reasons, Manslaughter.
besides the general reason, Quod tihi fieri non vis, Matthew. 7.12.
etc. Whatsoever ye would that men should not do, etc. And besides the other
of Gods Image, no man must kill another. Esa 58.7. he says, when thou see a
naked man, cover him, and despise not thine own flesh, because we are one
flesh: This Esa 9.20. is made a strange judgment, that they should be brought
to such extremity, that every man should eat the flesh of his own arm. But
Gal. 5.15. this is done: and if they bite one another, and prey one upon
another, according to discords, contentions, and hatreds, and so consume
themselves: unnatural sin. John 8.44. By this means we come to be
primogeniti Diaboli, Murderers prim^ge^iti Diaboli.
Santans first begotten: because he was the first murderer. Genesis 3.4. By this
nequaquam moriemini, ye shall not die, he brought in a moriemini, death: and
so brought them to it. Genesis 4.10. It is said, that the blood of thy brother
cries unto me, because it is peccatum clamoris, a crying sin. Bloodshed,
that will cry, and come up to Heaven; and will not cease till God take revenge.
Other sins, they may be as if he heard them not: but his ears shall be open to
this; for this is somewhat more straight. Deuteronomy. 21.8.9. A man found lying dead
in the fields, and no man knows who killed him; God says, This order shall
they take. The Elders, and Judges of Israel shall come forth, and mete to the
Cities that are round about him; and the Elders of the next City shall take an
Heifer out of the drove, and chop off her neck at some stony valley: and all
the Elders of the City shall come to the flaine man, and wash their hands over
the Heifer, and shall testify and say: Our hands have not shed this man's
blood, neither have our eyes seen it: and shall make their protestation there.
And by this means shall they stint my wrath, and by no other means, except
protestation of their innocence be made, and confession of their negligence.
Genesis 4.11. maledictus Cain, cursed is Cain; and Cain his own confession verse.
14. Behold thou have cast me out from thy face this day, etc. that is,
excommunication, and depriving of the grace of God; excommunicating from the
Church, the first sentence executed: and verse. 15. if that the same God does
set a mark on sin; it is thought by the best writers, to be an inward
horror, and if it be that, it does of all other accompany this sin of
murder: so that a man cannot be satisfied commonly, till he have quit
himself, or made an end of himself: as Genesis 42.21. when the Patriarchs were
taken for spies, presently they say one to another (being conscii to themselves
of selling their brother,) Surely we have sinned in selling our brother, and so
this trouble is come upon us: and Genesis 50.15. presently, so soon as their
Father was dead, they said: Now he will be even with us, and they could not be
quiet till they were quit. So there is a brand-mark, a continual horror,
besides the casting out from the presence of God. Genesis 4.14. For it is said
there, Whosoever shall find Caine, shall kill him. Caines own sentence. And
the Heathen says, homicida quod fecit, expeclet: Et viri sanguinum, Psalm.
55.23. non dimidabunt dies suos, a man-slay^r expects that measure from others,
that he has meted to others; and bloody men shall not live out half their
days. This is Caines sentence. Genesis 21.14. God will set Caines sentence
forwar. Has he slain his neighbor? flies he to mine Altar? pull him away
from mine Altar, and let him die: the horns of the Altar, which are in other
cases, a Sanctuary, were no place for murder, as 1 King. 2.32. Benajah, when
he killed Ioab at the horns of the Altar, being in the fault, killed ^o
doubt, an acceptable Sacrifice to the Lord. Genesis 9.5. Wheresoever it is shed, I
will require it: yea even at the hands of a beast will I require it; how much
more, if a man kill a man? And lastly, Genesis 4.10. that is Gods saying to Caine,
The earth receives blood, how then should man spill it?
Thy brothers blood cries from the earth, which opens her mouth, that has
no reason, and will receive it. And shall man, that has sense, and power, and
reason to govern his affections, let it out and spill it? So he passes beast,
and earth, and all. This killing of another man is augmented by circumstance,
for either it is against a public person, or a private.

1. Against a public, and that is a more worse and grievous sin: because it
is peccatum in plures, a sin against many: and as 2 Samuel 21.17. that man does
what in him li^th to put out the light of Israel.

2. Among private men, they are either joined to us, as being near of blood:
or they are as extranei, as strangers. It is worse, and a more heinous thing,
to shed the blood of them that are near unto us; the reason is, quia
superadditur respectu^, because of the tie in nature: that is one way of
augmenting. There comes a double respect: he is a man, homicidium: he is a
father or brother, paricidium. Exodus 21.15. Qui percusserit patrem aut matrem
morietur, he that smites his father or his mother, shall be surely put to
death: If he should kill them, no doubt it were too little for him. Yet as the
Heathen man says, he should have lentam mortem and deformem, a lingering, and a
loathsome death: and likewise as 2 Samuel 14.7. As the woman of Thekoah said to
David, if we have but one son, or one brother; it is much worse then if we
had more: I have but one spark left, and they seek to quench it.

Of extranei, those that are removed from us; either they are of strength to
defend themselves, or weak. Exodus 22.21.22. Those that be impotent, it is
worse to kill one that is fatherless, a widow, or stranger, that is more
destitute of power: that is (...), cruelty, crudity, eating raw flesh; against
the Lions nature. Matthew. 18.6. Our Savior says, Qui offenderit unum e
minimis, whosoever shall offend one of these little ones, surely I will set my
self against him. And again, of those that are strangers, and not once
matchable to resist, it is worse to lay hands upon an innocent and good man,
then upon a wicked man; The reason? Because in so doing, we commit a
mavelous, strange, and grievous sin, doing him more hurt and injury, to
whom we ought to do more good: so that we sin against charity, and against
justice; for he is indignus, he is least worthy to die. Then besides, he is, as
the Heathen man says, (...), a common good: Vir l^rus is (...).
and so we hurt the Commonwealth, that had need of such. And last of all, the
injury redoundeth likewise to God especially. Zach. 2.8. Qui vos tangit, tangit
pupillam eculi mei, he that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye; and
that cannot be without great sorrow: and that will have revenge: and so
consequently, there be three degrees in this.

Here comes in, Whether the Magistrate may kill or no?

And we fall into the division: in Insontem. Sontem.
Guiltless, and Guilty.

Because we fall into this branch of the division, here falls in the case of
restraint of this Commandment, the rest be rules of extention.

For the nature of man is so crooked, that without occides, non cecides (thou
may kill; thou shall do no murder) would not be kept: Magistrates may put
to death
and therefore, as in Physic, a crooked and deep wound, must have a new wound
made; fit incisio, ut vitetur excisio, an incision is made, that an excision
may be prevented: and as in the cure of the eyes, the Ophthalmists will have
the sight to be taken away, and dammed up for certain days, that after the
eye may see: So in this, God gave his power, ut fundaiur sanguis, ne funderetur
sanguis, that blood might be shed, lest blood should be shed. As in the
beginning it was the establishing of government, Optabilius est timere unum,
quam mulios, it is far better to fear one then many; forasmuch as every man
in regard of the whole society stands as a part of it: the same rule is in
the civil body, that is in the natural body. For in that, if any one part be
so corrupt, that it does bring danger to the whole, it is no cruelty to cut it
off. Because, as was said in the beginning, and it is a most true rule, Melius
est us periat unus, quam unitas, it is better that one perish, then unity
should be broken. And as we see in a common fire, that a house that has taken
fire so long as there is hope that it may be saved, they deal with water: but
when there is no hope, and it brings danger to the next houses about, they
pull it down; extinguit incendium ruina, that the fall thereof may quench the
fire: thus we see it in the natural body, so likewise in the civil. Deuteronomy.
19.10. and 20. and 13.11. In the 10. he will have them tollere homicidam, ut
malum tollatur ab Israele, to cut off the manslayer, that evil may be taken
away from Israel: and that a double malum, a double evil there is, the wrath
of God upon the whole land; because, if any part shed innocent blood, and the
land, that is, the whole look not to it.

Impunity magna venefica, to make other do the like.
And a second malum, a 2. evil, verse. 10. is the multiplying of it. 1.
Impunity, because it is magna venefica, a great Witch to make other men do the
like; therefore, Deuteronomy. 19.20. and 13.11. that men may see, and hear, and
fear, and the like evil may be no more committed. They shall not only avoid
his wrath and multiplying of murder, tollere malum ex Israele, but take away
evil also from Israel. So consequently, if blood be shed in this respect, as
Moses says, Exodus 32.29. it is not a polluting, but a consecrating of the
hands: and Ps. 101. verse. ult. the Prophet David says, his common morning
exercise after prayer, should be this, that he would cut off all the wicked
from the Lords City. Prove. 20.26. There is the wise Kings study: or this shall
be his study, how to scatter the wicked, or to make the wheel go over them:
For as it was found in the establishing of the Magistrate, that it was Caines
City that made Seth to make himself a City; and not only that, but there were
also sundry of Caines spirit, that came in among the seed of Seth: therefore
heed was to be had to them, as Ezekiel. 34.18.21. to the He Goats, to the
Rams, and to the fat sheep; for they would push at the lean sheep with
their horns: and as the Heathen man says, Tam necesse est, it is as needful,
that there should be, qui arceant homines, such as may restrain men from
outward invasion, qua^ necessariae sunt palpebrae oculis, as the eyelids are
needful for the eyes: for they keep out outward injuries, and that that would
hurt the eyes, and the sight from hurting it self: for else it would disperse
it self too much: therefore, expedient it is, that prius sanguis funderetur, ne
plus sanguinis funderetur, that blood be first shed, lest more blood afterward
should be shed. How this may be done, it is manifest; that blood may be shed:
Genesis 9.6. and Matthew. 26.52. Qui gladium acceperit, gladio peribit, he that
takes the sword, shall perish with the sword: and the sword, Romans 13.4. is
given to one, who is there called Gods Minister, and to the Magistrate, to whom
he has delivered it, not to bear it in vain: and consequently, in deed and in
effect, no man sheddeth any blood, if it be lawfully shed. For (as we say) it
is not the sword that kills and sheddeth man's blood; so neither does the
Magistrate, the Minister of it, nor the Judge: but the chief cause does it:
for quod est organum utenti, id est minister jubenti, what the tool is to him
that uses it, such is the Officer to him that commands him. Now, Iubens est
Deus, the Commander is God: for we blame not the sword, neither must we the
minister, but we must have recourse to God.

The Magistrates Writ.
Now then for the Magistrates use of it; as we say, that the Sheriffs and
Underofficers rule is, they must do nothing, but ex praescripto, by a Writ:
and when it does come down for execution, then they must do it, and not else:
so certainly the Prince, he must have a Writ too from God, else he is not to
execute. Now Gods Writ or Prescript in this behalf we have, Exodus 23.7. for
there is said there is a Countermand, that no innocent man should have his
blood shed. If any do it, I will not spare the wicked man says the Lord. And
Abigail, 1 Samuel 25.29. does well set it out: The soul of my Lord shall be
bound in the bundle of life, with the Lord thy God, and the soul of thine
enemies shall the Lord cast out: Whosoever is a man of blood, and lives to the
disquieting of the society that he should maintain, his soul shall be
thrown our, as out of a sling. And 1 King. 1.52. he says there according to
his Writ, If he will be a worthy man, and a faithful subject, there shall not
a hair fall from his head: but if he will be seditious, he shall surely die.
So then we see, that a Prince may not execute the innocent: and when he does
so, 1 King. 21.8.13. Naboth, an innocent man, is put to death by the King: then
the King is a murderer, he is Rex homicida; for he is so called by the Prophet
Elisha, 2 King. 6.32. See I pray you this murderers son, and 2 Chronicles. 24.25.
when Ioas fell violently on Zachariah, an innocent Prophet, for telling him the
truth; it is said, that God revenged this murder, and stirred up his own
servants against him to kill him. And for this cause, because he had murdered
the children of Ichoidah the Priest. As on this behalf, we must not execute
the innocent; so on the other side, Deuteronomy. 19.13. non miseraberis, non parcet
oculus tuus, thou shall not have mercy upon him, neither shall thine eye pity
him: there is an irrevocable Writ, that whosoever is a murderer, must die.
Then the question, Whether any one that is a murderer, may be any way
afterward executed? And therein there are three points necessary to be
considered.

The first we call Iudicium perversum, unrighteous judgment. That those that
are innocent, are put to death, and those that are nocent are spared. But a
just man must not be killed, and an unjust man must not be spared. The second,
Iudicium usurpatum, judgment usurped: Every man must be kept in his limits.
Romans 14.4. Quis i^ es, qui judicas alienum servum? Who art thou that judge
another man's servant? Others subjects, that pertain not to our Prince. If
further then jus gentium, against the law of arms, any be executed, it is
usurped. The third we find, Deuteronomy. 19.18. Diligentissime inquisiveris, thou
shall make diligent inquisition: without trial he must be sons damna. tus,
condemned against law: Acts 23.35. Claudius Lysias would have Paul's accusers
come before him. And John 18.27. the wicked could say, What accusation bring
you against him? Acts 25.16. Festus says, It is not the law among the Romans,
to condemn any man before his accusers come. They that are able amongst you,
come down, and I will hear them in this plea. Deuteronomy. 17.6. and 19.15. God would
not have blood shed at the witness of one man, but either by his own
confession, or he must be convinced by two or three witnesses. And in regard of
this, as Chrysostom says, was Christ's Act: though he knew Judas to be a
thief; yet because his theft was not manifest, because he was sons damnatus,
condemned as guilty, he did not cast him into prison; the law would take no
hold of him, he did it so craftily and wilily. So that judgment may proceed
aright, 1. He must be a subject borne. 2. He must be lawfully convicted: and so
proceeding, the law may proceed on him. Where one side is broken, the other
will be broken too.
We see it by plain experience, that it has always happened, i. if a Prince
come once to spare a party that is guilty; surely it will come to pass, that
he will put to death an innocent: and contra. 1 Samuel 15.9. Agag and the chief
of the Amalekites, men appointed by Gods prescript to die, were spared by Saul:
and 1 Samuel 22.18. he causes an innocent company of Priests, a whole City to be
put to the sword; contrariwise, 1 King. 20.42. Ahab first began by putting to
death Naboth the innocent: and afterward ibidem, he does not kill Benhadad,
sed dimittit eum dignum morte, but let him go that was appointed to
destruction: therefore, his life shall go for his life. For whereas clemency
is commendable in a Prince, yet the rule and ground in Divinity is this: As he
must diminish that that is his own arbitriment, so the punishment set down by
the law he may not diminish: but if the punishment be left to his arbitriment,
then he may alter it.
Now, for increasings of punishments, otherwise then God has set down, Deuteronomy.
17.12. that in theft, or in any other crime that is not capital of its own
nature; but with a contempt: for theft, mentis; and an high hand, elevata manus
proterve and petulanter, lifted up both wickedly and saucily; contemptus,
contempt, which is ubique damnabilis, every where damnable; neglectus, neglect,
only is culpabilis, culpable.

To the second case, ut ante, Ezekiel. 34.18.21. he has a sword given him; As he
must have a pointlesse sword, as the Lawyers call it, whereby he sees good
rule kept amongst his subjects, and takes order that the grass be not
trampled by the fat Sheep: so he has another sword which has a point, which
they call gladium exteriorem, against the Wolf, and that is war. The
authority of bloodshed in war, it being plain, 1 Samuel 25.28. quod praelians
praelia Dei, thou fightest the battles of the Lord: therefore it should seem,
that the Lord has some battles to fight: More plain, Deuteronomy. 20. where the
whole order of war, and conditions are set down in the second verse, how
they must go to war, and how it must be enterprised. The Priest shall exhort
to fortitude, verse. 5. The Officers shall make a Proclamation of separation of
those that go out, from those that tarry at home, verse. 10. When they shall
come to any City to encounter with their enemies, they should first offer them
peace: and verse. 12. if they will not take it, they should not spare them: and
verse. 11. they have leave to take all the wood of the Country round about
them, to make them forts. As in the law, Genesis 9. for the Sword, and the Gospel,
Mat. 26.52. does not take it away: and as Aug. says very well, 4. de civit.
Dei, upon Luke 3.14. If it had been unlawful, John would have said to the
Soldiers, Abjicite arma, deserite militiam, throw away your aims, and forsake
your colors: but he says, offer injury to no man, accuse no man falsely, and
be content with your wages: and so teaches them their duty in war, and and
does not take it away; therefore war is lawful. Conditiones 3. li^iti belli.
That war may be lawful, the common distinction is three fold, to make it so.

1. As the party must be a Magistrate in the one, so in the other a Physician,
both to wound and cure: for the first, here it must be done, ex justa
authoritate, by lawful authority. Judge. 1.1. After Ioshuahs death, the people
of Israel that could not go out to war, till they had received authority
from God; they would first receive a lawful guide. And David, 1 Samuel 17.37.
until Saul was made acquainted with his enterprise, would not fight with
Goliath. 2. It must be a just cause, and it is a pattern of just war, 1. to
defend our selves, 2. to resist others.
As Abraham, Genesis 14.15. for the recovery of Lot: in which respect he had a
loss and injury, he under-tooke it. And secondly, according to jus gentium,
one Nation has power over another; for an injury, not for every light injury,
and small; but to revenge some notable course of injuries. So it must be for
weighty matters; John 22.12.13. for a matter of Religion, as they thought: and
for civil matters, Judge. 20.23. that the whole multitude of the Tribes of
Israel rose up to revenge the fact of the Tribe of Benjamin. 3. It must be done
with a right precept, set down, Deuteronomy. 23.9. When thou go out with thine
host, against thine enemies, keep thee from all wickedness: that is, the
spoil and the prey, which was the end of them. 1 Samuel 15.9. Ravening must not
be our end and purpose: but with this, to fly evil. And as Abigail said to
David, Quia praeliaris praelia Domini, idcirco ne inveniatur apud te malum,
because thou fightest the battles of the Lord, let no evil be found with thee:
see that no evil be found in thee. Otherwise, if there be not this, we know
what David said to Solomon of Ioab, 1 King. 2.5. that the blood of war stuck
to his girdle and shoes: therefore, he willed Solomon to punish him. Else, if
it be lawful, and thus qualified, it is a virtue, and it is a part of
fortitude; as in the other part of fortitude, there is (...), a reformation of
justice: so in this Christian fortitude; whereby, for our Country, for our
Church, we are willing to hazard our life, 2 Samuel 10.12. propter pop. nostrum,
and urbes Dei nostri, for our people, and the City of our God.
A third thing depending upon these, because as we said before, necessitas est
exlex, necessity has no law: nay more then that, necessitas dicit legem legi,
necessity imposes a law upon the law: therefore in the case of necessity, which
we must take, pro imprudente necessitate, for unlooked for necessity: not
imminent only, but pro termino indivisibili, but even for that instant; in
that case, every man is a Magistrate, and in that case has his authority from
God. Exodus 22.2. he says there, if a thief come by night and break up my
house, I may kill him, I shall never answer for it: therefore, if I may do
this for my house, I may kill then for my life much more. This is the reason
that gladius Petri, as August. says, is lawful for a man to carry about with
him, which the law grants to carry, to keep one from evil by the terror of
my weapon, which is not nothing; but especially, because I have the laws in
mine own hands, and if I do slay, I am quit. But when this terminus is
divisibilis, when the necessity has a latitude; Acts 23.17. they swear Paul's
death, but because it was not present, Paul might not run upon them; but
caused it to be revealed to Lysias, the chief Captain: so it is inculpata
tutela, that is without any purpose of shedding any blood: save only, when
otherwise I cannot save my self: a man must plus timere vitae suae quam
alienae; therefore I may in my defense.

And another division is; he that is slain, is slain either of purpose, or
without purpose. Now it is not lawful when it is done without purpose, and the
reason of it is this: We do not attribute to nature, but that which is done
per se: And as the distinction per se and per accidens in natural things; so
answerable to these in moral things is, ex intention and praeter intentionem,
to do a thing purposely, or besides our intention. And as we say not that it
is natural, that is per accidens in natural things: so it makes neither a
good, neither an evil action, that is done praeter intentionem, besides our
intention in moral things: so if blood be shed praeter intentionem, the
shedder thereof is no murderer. Praeter intentionem.
Not only so, but we see God, Deuteronomy. 19.1. and 4.29. Exodus 13.35. Numb. 35.24.
he builds up his Sanctuaries of refuge for them that do praeter intentionem:
Now God will build no Sanctuary for vices. Deuteronomy. 19. If one be hewing a Tree in
the Wood, and by chance his Hatchet fall, and kill his neighbor; and Numb.
35.25. when as he had no intent and purpose, the Congregation shall deliver him
from the avenger, and restore him to the City of his refuge. And indeed, as
August. proves, and goes further, if we take this praeter intentionem, for
murder; if we take away intentions, then must we cease to have any thing that
may be an occasion of evil: for I have ferramenta, instruments, as ropes,
shovels, spades; and with these may a man go and kill a man, praeter
intentionem nostram; therefore I must not have them: and for other uses, I have
Trees in mine Orchard, and oxen; and a man may hang himself upon one of my
Trees, and one of my Oxen may happily kill a man, therefore I must have no
Trees, nor Oxen: and not only that, but a man may be cast out of a window, and
therefore I must not have a window in my house: and consequently, we shall
have almost nothing: but absit (as he says) when a man does intend to keep
them from that end; yet in these matters, God has qualified them two ways: he
must dare operam rei licitae, bestow his time in things lawful: Exodus 21.22.
If there be two men striving, and one of them hurt a woman with child, and the
child pass away from her; if the child miscarry, he shall surely be punished,
though it were not his intention; yet doing a thing unlawful, as striking was.
Besides, they that are evil occupied, that are at unlawful games, if any such
thing fall out, are not to be excused.

The second thing, there must not lack debita sollicitudo: he must do his
diligence. Exodus 21.33. If a man dig a Pit or a Well, and cover it not over
night, and another cattels fall into it and die, he shall make it good,
because he might have covered the Well. And if a man should let fall a piece of
timber from the top of an house, and give no warning, and kill a man. In these
four cases, the whole restraint of the Commandment consists.

Now in the extension of these, that willingly, and of purpose commit murder,
there be two sorts, for some murder directly, and some indirectly. Directly,
Numb. 35.16, 17, 18. If any man smite another with an iron, stone, or wood, or
any instrument that will kill him, W^lfull murder
he is a murderer; and he shall die.

And besides this, there is a colorable murder, and indirect: And there are
three sorts.

First, by poison. Ier. 11.19. Mittamus lignum in panem ejus, Let us put some
of this poisoned wood in his meat: so by Witchcraft, Deuteronomy. 18.10. or by
sorcery: or if not by poison, yet by strange things, medicamen: a infanticidii,
killing of children in the womb, a grievous murder: and in the Council. of
Ancyra, Can. 21. (and according to the Greek, but 20. in the Latin) (...), and
in the 35. can. Council. Wormatiens. That they are murderers, if they take
strange purgations, and do abigere parium, cause abortion: she is homicida, a
murtheresse, that does so. And not only that, but if a man be cooperator, or
accessorie; as Matthew. 26.49. Judas was accessorie with his kiss. 2 Samuel 3.27.
and 20.9.10. Ioab said to Amaza, art thou in health my brother? And took Amaza
by the beard with his right hand to kiss him, verse. 9. but Amaza took no heed
to Ioabs sword that was in his hand, for forthwith he smote him in the fifth
rib, and shed out his bowels to the ground, and smote him not the second time,
so he died. Ioabs kiss, when he murdered Abner and Amaza: so the murder was
colored. 1 Samuel 18.17. By bringing into danger, as Saul to David, I will make
David Captain against the Philistims, my hand shall not be upon him, but the
Philistims hand shall be upon him. 2 Samuel 11.15. David does deal so with
Vriah, following Saul's example: he writes letters to Ioab, Let him stand in
such a place, etc. though his enemies flew him, yet it was David's murder. And
1 King. 21.13. to stand a false witness, and cap. 11.49. to be a counselor to
it: and John 18.28.31. the high Priests and Scribes sought not how to put
Christ to death: but yet, because they were as bellows, incouragers of the
people to ask Barrabas, they were murderers of Christ: likewise, Acts 7.52.
and Acts 8.1. if he be a private man, and consent to it: and Matthew. 27.24. if a
Magistrate that may hinder it, and does not, and in Magistrates permission.
Pilates washing his hands would not serve. 1 King. 2.5.8. the permission of the
wicked man Ioab. verse. 8. Shimei troubled David toward, his death: I suffered
them; but look thou to it: so the not putting to death of wicked men, and the
not saving of the innocent, this is one indirect means.

To the second, and that is, committing our selves (as the wise man says Prove.
3.17.) to danger: Qui amat periculum, peribit in periculo, when a man will put
himself into danger and need not; and when he uses not the means of escaping
danger, he is accessory to his own death. Matthew. 4.6. We know what Christ did,
we must walk in the way; not tumble down, when there is a pair of stairs.
Acts 27.31. Paul was very careful of the Mariners, that they should not
forsake him, though he had Gods promise: and Levit. 13.4. a Leaprous man shall
be shut up, that no man shall go to him; but if any man will go to him, and
take the Leprosy of him, that is again presumption.

And the third means, by our own negligence, 1 Timothy 5.23. the Apostle says
there, I would have you drink no more water, because your stomach is over
weak: but drink a little wine; that is, the means that God has given to
strengthen nature, I will have you to use it: else you will weaken your nature.
And no doubt, if he had not followed the Apostles counsel, he had fallen into
the breach of this Commandment. Now, as Timothy was to drink a little for the
strengthening of nature, lest neglecting the means, nature should have
perished: so Luke 21.34. when men with too much surfeiting and glutiony die,
they kill themselves: so that a man must use, or reframe, or temper himself
so, as that he use them to preserve his life, and the image of God: so 1 Timothy
6.8. meat and appatell, though not so much, Romans 13.14. as to fulfill the
lusts of the flesh; but those that are (...) and for rest, Mark 6.31. Col.
2.23. Psalm. 27.2. for due exercise, and due release, due study, and due
recreation: not too much exercise, nor too much rest: for both with too much
tristitia m^nd^, care of the world, 2 Cor. 7.10. destroys: and Prove. 17.22.
dries the bones: and too much pigritia, slothfulness, robs a man: therefore
in these things that the Philosophers call non naturalia, not natural: a man
must use them carefully, that he hasten not his end.

Now this neglect, as it must not be in our selves; so it must not be toward
our brethren. Deuteronomy. 22.8. There is the prescription of battlements, that the
workman may not fall: Exodus 21.29. If the Ox be wont to push, etc. the Ox
and he both shall die, and verse. 33. if they stop not the Well at night, and a
man fall in and die, he shall die also for his negligence. By the equity
whereof, Prev. 3.27. and 24.12. there is extension made. Contrariwise, a
Commandment as Ambrose says, Pasce ovem morientem. Non pavisti? occidisti:
feed that Sheep which is ready to perish; if thou feed^st it not, thou
killest it. Ierem. 8.22. Is there no Balm in Gilead, is there no Physician,
that the people be not healed? and Ezekiel. 47.12. that God has ordained plants
for bruises and sores, and Exodus 21.9. he says that the party that shall
afferre alii injuriam, wound his neighbor, he shall pay for his healing: this
is likewise a means to preserve our lives. And on the other side, Mark 5.25.
he says, the woman with the bloody issue, had received many medicines of
diverse Physicians, and had spent all her goods, and was never the better, but
rather the worse. The practice of Physicians, (...), to their shame be it
spoken, in all examples, it is a sin to them; and Ecclesiasticus 38.15. it is
a punishment to the party.

Now come to a disposition hereunto: For it is not only the life of the body,
but incolumitas: for we see, that if the hurt be of any one part, if you have
hurt the least part of the whole, consequently, the whole counts it self
hurt: and says Quare me? Why smitest thou me? As not the whole, so not any
part must be hurt, Levit. 24.19. there shall not be any blemish upon our
neighbor, Exodus 21.25. a wound and a stripe is forbidden: if a rupture, or
ustulation with fire, it is an injury; we shall have the like our self: Levit.
24.20. And as this vulnus is contra incolumitatem: and plaga contra sensum: so
contra motum, wound impaireth the safety of the body, and causes smart, so
hinders its motion: 2 Samuel 3.34. binding restraint, and Genesis 42.17. Deuteronomy.
32.36. imprisonment: these are accounted as impediments, and as punishments;
these things are not to be inflicted without consent of Magistrate: Not any
private man must do it, because therein there is a disposition ad totum: yet
one of the privileges, Eccles. 6.3. if a man live not to his own
contentation, he has not lived at all: so to bring a man into that estate, to
make his life odious, comes within the compass of this Commandment.

Come to the soul, the murder whereof is so much the more grievous, as Gods
Image is in the soul, rather then in the body: and certain it is, a
comparatis, that if the bodily blood of Abel cry for vengeance, Heb. 12.24.
then the blood of the soul much more: especially, because there is two lives
of the soul: one here, another in the life to come; if it be set in worse
estate concerning the life to come: if he that has charge of souls, Revel.
2.14. Mal. 2.8. vos scandalizastis eos in lege, ye have caused them to stumble
at the Law: or teaching them as Balaam taught Balak, to cast a stumbling block
before the children of Israel: or whether it be indirectly, by negligence.
Ezekiel. 33.6. If you watch not, and the sword come upon any, he is taken away for
his sin; but his blood will I require at thine hands: So likewise, though it
be not he that has the charge, but a brother privately, one private man
against another, if he gave counsel, dicto, or facto, by word or example; as
Peter, Matthew. 16.22. was a scandal to Christ: he had prevented Christ, if he
would have been prevented, and so have hindered the great work of redemption.
Or whether it be the example, Gal. 2.13. the same Peter by his example misled
the other Jews and Barnabas; and Paul 1 Cor. 8.12. that the weak brethren
were emboldned by the example of those that had knowledge, to eat those things
that were offered unto Idols; wounding thereby the weak conscience of others,
yet they brought guilt on themselves: for every example in deeds, and Matthew.
18.6. shall come upon them: and woe be to them, it were better that a
millstone, etc. then that he should minister this offense, to take away the life
of the soul of the least of his brethren: Concerning this we spoke before.

Come to the second life of the soul, Eccles. 6.3. Col. 3.21. that (...), that
a man begins to loath the benefit of his life, it is certain his soul is
killed: and as in Genesis the missing of Joseph, and Simeon, and Benjamin, killed
Jacobs heart; and at the news of Joseph, that he was alive, his spirit revived.

It comes three ways, according to the three benefits of the soul. 1. joy,
2. peace, 3. love.
Exodus 1.14. against joy; where it is said there, the Egyptians brought them in
amaritudinem spiritus, to bitterness of spirit; and Exodus 6.9. against peace,
by breaking their hearts, they brought them in anxietatem spiritus, into an
anguish of soul, that they would hearken to Moses; Prove. 22.25. that when a
man falls into hatred of all things, when he hates himself, it kills his
heart. None of al these must be to our brethren: especially, must not be to the
good, 2 Pet. 2.8. Lots soul is not to be grieved, and so bring him by their
wicked deeds to the first death, (...), drowsinesse of spirit: he began to
loath to attempt any good, and not to go forward: this is a great and grievous
fault, and is done, Psalm. 95.8. by provocation and irritation. So we must not
provoke him by any manner of these means. Thus much of the second point.

The third rule, concerning the spiritual law. Our Savior Christ, Matthew.
5.22. nisi sanguis sequeretur, unless blood were shed, they counted it no
murder, nor way to murder: as Christ there teaches them to go further then
the arm or blow that is given: that whatsoever are outwardly committed, and
accompany murder, are nothing else, and are but fructus irae, the fruits of
anger: and that is the root of Wormwood, Heb. 12.15. and that must be plucked
up. For when these bitter fruits come, by virtue of that which is in the heart,
Matthew. 15.19. he boldly pronounces, that out of the heart proceed murders:
and so those that lay plasters only to the armor and weapon, shall never
help the disease. For it is noted further, Deuteronomy. 19.16. this is Gods reason,
that murder is not capital of it self, if it be not that he hated his
brother before: therefore, this is to be punished.

As in the beginning it was said, so now, that as the beginning of pride was the
fountain of the breaches of this Commandment: so is it that likewise, from
which this anger comes. The wise man, Prove. 13.10. he says thas; Only by
pride, contention and anger comes; and therefore, the Apostle, Gal. 5.26.
says: Be not desirous of vain glory this is the root that makes one
envious, and provokes one against another: so that envies and murders came
here: for, as it was said in the beginning, every one sets this down with
himself, That he is good, and whosoever loves him, does his duty; and so
consequently, he must be good: as on the other side, hurting him, and envying
him, that man must necessarily be evil, so he must conceive an anger against
him: omnis ira sibi videTur justa, each froward man accounts his anger just: as
before, omnis iniquitas mentitur sibi: therefore it is that it comes to the
second, for anger is compounded of two things, 1. The grief, for whatsoever in
dignity is preferred to us. The 2. a desire to require it. The grief is the
boiling aestus irae, actualis, or (...), Gal. 5.20. It is, as Prove. 14.19. the
inward fretting: and from thence pride containing the party evil: and as the
Heathen says, there presently comes to be mala men's, an ill intent, when his
judgment will be corrupted: Ephesians. 4.3. he does reprehend that man that does it
sub malitia, out of malice: he makes (...), malice, to be that that corrupts
his understanding and his affection: 1 Pet. 4.15. he makes himself Bishop of
other men's doings: Then necessarily 1 Timothy 6.4. called (...), evil
whisperings: and Iam. 2.4. he is judex malarum cogitationum, a judge of evil
thoughts: he draws his thoughts to evil; why? he has taken an opinion of
him, and then he thinks he must be even with him. Then follows the second,
(...), as Luke 9.54. they would command fire from Heaven, because they were not
presently entertained. Now then this anger or injury, if it be conceived to
proceed from a superior, because, Iam. 4.5. so there is a spirit in us that
lusts to envy; and as Job says 5.2. that those same parvuli, etc. envy
always lays hold on the inferior: hence it comes to pass, as the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 12.20. that there will be (...), a swelling of the mind; and
either presently break forth, or if it lie long and be suppuratio, an
impostume, as Cyprian calls it, it will prove rubigo animae, the rust of the
soul: which is a fearful thing, and a great deal worse then anger, Prove.
27.4. Anger is cruel, and wrath rages, but envy goes beyond them, it
brings to murder. And as Matthew. 27.18. Pilate saw that it was for very
envy, that the Jews delivered Christ to him.

Now the occasion of it arises, 1 John 3.12. that there are some better then
we: because every one desires his own excellency: so if there be any better
then he, he thinks he stands in his light; and therefore he seeks to
discredit him, and to bring him low under-water, and we will swim above the
water, unless all swim under. John 3.26. John's Disciples come to him and
say, He that was with th^e beyond Jordan, now he has got all the Disciples,
was an envious thing to them. Luke 15.18. The elder brother came home from the
field; he saw his fathers entertainment of his younger brother, he would not
go in for envy: the reason is, because he thought himself better; and
consequently nothing can be done, but envy will make it a matter for her to
work on. But 1 Samuel 18.8. if it come once to ten thousand, then verse. 9. non
potuit rectis oculis eum intueri, he could not look right upon him: as verse.
10. on the morrow after there came an evil spirit on him. And there is none
that the Devil will sooner fasten upon, then upon such, Genesis 37.4. the making
of a better coat for Joseph, and a little more love of Jacob to him then to
the rest, was a mavelous moate in their eye; and verse. 33. it is true that
Jacob prophesies, though perhaps in another sense, bestia pessima devoravit
fill um meum, an evil beast has devoured him: for envy was that cruel beast
that devoured Joseph. The greatness of this sin one says, Invidiae, propier
magnitudinem secleris, futura poena non sufficit, ergo and hic plectitur, so
heinous is the sin of envy, that Hell alone is not a sufficient torment for
it, therefore is it punished here also: and consequently, Prove. 14.30. it is
putrido ossium, the rottenness of the bones: he that wished himself wholly an
eye, that wished himself an argus, cannot wish himself a worse evil and
torment. The Saints, Numb. 11.29. were not envious, in one envy, as Moses,
that he would have none equal or like to him, (that was Pompeys envy) and it
is there raised by Joshua; and there were some in the host that prophesied: but
Moses would it were more* he would that all the people of God were Prophets,
Deuteronomy. 1.10.11. Now I pray to God it were seven fold more: and as 1 Samuel 25.41.
Abigail said to David's messengers, she was not fit, let me be an handmaid
rather, to wash the feet of my Lords servants. A conceit of himself that he
is not meet for that God bestows on him, and that he is meeter for a lower
estate. The Saints, they can be content to have others go before them; and
others overtake them: Envy can be content with neither.

If to our equal, then if our arm have strength, he is sure to feel
presently what we can do. The wiseman Prove. 21.24. he gives him 3. servants:
1. proud, 2. furious, 3. scornful derisor; that in his pride works wrath.
Now, if he be so our equal, as we cannot presently meet with him; then we play
Absaloms part, 2 Samuel 13.22. he says nothing, sed manet alia menie repostum,
he keeps it in his mind, which afterward Amnon felt at the Sheep shearing:
and aso should David have done, if he had gone down. Prove. 10.18. The wicked
dissembleth his wrath, and Prove. 26.13. he says, Burning lips, and an
exulcerate heart it is; even as a man should over-lay a Potsheard with the
dross of silver. Genesis 26.28. Abimelech comes to Isaac with Ahuzzah and
Phicol, and they would be at a league with him: Isaac says, I wonder that you
come to me, seeing that you hate me, and have put me away from you, yet let us
be at league; till they could revnege. And it is a great part of worldly
policy to keep league with other, till such time as he can odium perfundere,
be revenged: but 1 John 3.15. qui odit frairem homicida est, he that does this,
is a murderer, and he that seeks murder. And you shall ever see, if it be
hatred, it seeks either murder, or some revenge that proceeds to murder.
On the other side, if he be our inferior, Prove. 18.3. With a wicked proud man
there comes contempt, although it be said, Prove. 17.5. that the very contempt
of the inferior, is the contempt of his Creator: we see it plain in the
wicked men, especially in those that have had more given them, then to other
that come to be more strong and mighty, elder exercised in hunting, etc. 2
King. 19.21. it is Rabshakeys humor: so basely he speaks of Hezekiah; and
Luke 23.11. Herod, and Luke 16.14. the High Priests and Pharisees, and Genesis
21.9. Ismael and Genesis 25.34. they were contemners and scorners all.

After it had thus lien inwardly, post suppurationem, after the Impostume, then
they did consider icterum peccati, the Jaundise, the breaking of it out, and
appearing in the face. It is set down in another sense, but to the same
effect, Cant. 4.9. vulnerastime ictuoculi tui, thou have wounded me with thine
eye. A wound that a man gives by the eye, Prove. 6.17. it is one of the six
things that God hates: an haughty and contemptuous eye, an eye that
over-looketh: 1 Samuel 18.9. Presently upon his envy, Saul's eyes began to be
obliqui, and Prove. 23.6. the wise man would have one avoid an evil eye: from
whence, Matthew. 20.17. Christ seems to take the same nequam oculus, invidus
and obliquus, an evil eye, envious, and winding; such as his meat should do
him no good.

Now for the other, for hatred and anger; whereas it has his right course.
Prove. 6.13. he does bend his first, and stamp with his feet, supplodere
pedibus; and Prove. 10.10. if he fall a winking, he means no good, and Prove.
16.30. of those that bite the lip, and of those that have attonitos oculos; and
look as though they would look through one. Psalm. 37.12. the ungodly look
upon him, and they gnash with their teeth upon him. Acts 7.54. there is the
practice of it to Sieven. But the Spuma, the foaming at the mouth, Mark 9.18.
it is rather the property of one possessed with a Devil, then of an angry man.
Then it is as a wound, Psalm. 120.3. he speaks of a tongue that is like sharp
arrows, that will stick in a man; and like Juniper coals, that will burn one
whole year, and Psalm. 55.21. they have war in their hearts, but their words
are buttered and oyled: but in effect they are glad^i acuti, lik^ sharp
swords, and Psalm. 52.3. they cut like a sharp razer. Here these are handled,
as they are fructus irae, fruits of anger: afterward they are to be handled in
the ninth Commandment, as they hurt a man's name.

Toward the Superior, 1 Cor. 10.10. Be not murmurers, as some of them
murmured, and were destroyed, etc. Phil. 2.14. do all things without
murmuring, as Judas ( John 12.5.) murmured: sed quid perditio haec? to what
purpose is this waste? he thought the money had been better bestowed upon the
bag which he carried. And not only that, but if it be more, it is muttering:
Exodus 14 15. the people muttered against Moses Then there is another thing, i.
Susurratio, tale-carrying: he is one that he cannot deal with; or if he should
deal with him openly, he should have small credit with it, then he carries
tales: Levit. 19.16. God, he forbids it, 2 Cor. 12.20. (...), whisperings,
Romans 1.29. (...), whisperers, they both are condemned: Prove. 26.10. if these
would cease, strife would quickly quail, and verse. 22. verba ejus sunt tanquam
contusa, his words are with a sigh: he seems to be loath to speak out; but
they pierce deep, and go down to the bowels of the belly: Prove. 6.17. he
says, there are six things which God hates, and the seventh thing he cannot
abide: and that is a whisperer, or a tale-carrier, that sows contention among
brethren. Beside this, there is another vice against Superiors, that is
deiractio, (...), backbiting, or (...), 2 Cor. 12.20. the vice (...),
backbiting, Romans 1.30. 1 Pet. 2.1. the thing it self is condemned, James 4.11.
Eccles. 10.11. They are like to Serpents that are not charmed, and yet sting,
and Prove. 25.23. he shows how they must be dealt withal, that with a sour
countenance we must drive them away; even as the North Wind drives away rain.
And the reasons alleged come to that Levit. 19.14. we are not to speak ill of
one that is deaf; De'a^s^r^ us nil ^^si b^m.
and this detraction from one that is absent, is so: he that curses a man
that is absent, does indeed curse him that is deaf; and therefore all the
Congregation curses him there: And it is one of the vices that are adjudged to
be a great punishment.

Now, when this way also is hindered, that he cannot revenge, then there is a
fourth way that envious men have: and they use to wreake themselves: Cursing;
not as necessarily, but as properly belonging hereunto. James 3.8. speaking
there of the tongue, he says, it is full of deadly poison; What is that? he
shows in the next verse, With this we curse men, that are made after the
likeness of God; this is poison: Col. 3.8. Ephesians. 4.31. it is condemned. And
there is an acquittance from curses without a cause, Prove. 26.2. that they
shall do them no hurt, against whom they are, that come of envy and rancor.

The other, where equality is, there as the first begotten wrath (as the
Heathen says) is no gentlewoman: she has a daughter like to her self, they
call (...), sedition: if it be in the heart, it is called discord: if it come
out, it is called contention; that is, indecens acrimonia, taking of parts,
Romans 1.29. (...), full of debate: Romans 13.13. (...), not in strife: 2 Cor.
12.20. (...) debates: Gal. 5.20. (...), variance, seditions: James 3.16. they
are condemned as things against the law, and 1 Cor. 11.16. he says, if you
will needs fall to it, you show your selves, that you are not of the Church;
for we have no such custom, nor the Churches of God: for, as Solomon says,
Prove. 20.3. It is the Churches honor, that is, she takes it an honorable
thing, to go from contentions: Heb. 12.2. it is said of our Savior Christ,
that he did endure the contentions of a great many. And as nothing is more to
be wished then peace in good things: so nothing is more to be wished also, then
discord in evil things: Discordia in malis, discord in things that be evil,
is as good as concordia in bonis, Dis^^^ita in malis, i^ as good as ^^nc^^^dia
i^ b^nis.
concord in those things that are good: as Acts 23.6. Paul seeing one half of
the company of the Pharisees part, and the other of the Sadduces, cried out in
the midst among them, that he was judged for the hope of the resurrection
from the dead: and so set them together, and by that means escaped himself:
And not only Paul, but Christ, he came to set discord.

Now, with this there is another, Ephesians. 4.31. (...), crying, brawling: and it
is that the Lord complains of, Esa. 5.7. he came and looked down, and there
was nothing but yelling and roaring vices bare down all: but there was no
justice. As for Christ, Matthew. 12.19. non contendet, non clamabit, his voice
shall not be heard in the earth: but these that do; Acts 22.23. when Paul
said, he would go to the Gentiles, seeing they had refused him, they made a
great shout, and rent their garments, and flung dust upon the air; this should
not be, nor sharpness of speech, nor loudness of voice should move. And if
not these, then much less the third, contumelia, ravling: and yet that takes
hold soonest, as the Heathen man says, promprissima viraicta contumelia,
railing is a most ready and easy revenge: that in Matthew. 5.22. fall into this
same Racha, vain and light brained: when as a man ad contristandum, comes to
debase a man's gift; to grieve him: the other to lose his friendship, the other
may mislike him. Romans 1.30. 1 Cor. 6.10. (...), despightfull, and (...),
revilers, are condemned, because the Saints of God are grieved; yea, and
thereupon they complain heavily; see the Prophet David, Psalm. 69. a great
world of his calamities in that respect: Ier. 20.10. they railed on him on
every side, Psalm. 79.10.13. 1. These. 2.2. at Philippi they were shamefully
handled: yet they went on to Thessalonica, and preached there the Gospel
notwithstanding. And in these three especially it stands when we do murder
with our tongue in hatred.

There be two more proceeding of contempt, if he be a Superior. Acts 9 1. Paul
breaths threatenings, and 1 King. 2.14. it is Roboams style, My father
chastised you with rods, etc. I will make my little finger, etc. and Solomon
says, Prove. 29.11. a fool in government, prosundit spiritum suum, shows all
his power at once: you shall have all at once; and as was said before, as Prove.
8. a man must not commit government to one that is furious: for he that does
give him authority, does as one that puts a pellet in a fools Crosse-bow:
and when it is put in, he shoots at him; and Prove. 27.3. he says, Stones
are heavy, sand is heavy; but a fools anger is more heavy; Prove. 17.12. he
says, he had rather meet a Bear robbed of her whelps, then a furious man:
and as 1 Pet. 4.23. testifies of Christ, that although he had twelve legions,
yet when he suffered, he used 1.0 threatening.

And a second thing, and it is the right fruit of contempt, Scornfulnesse.
Psalm. 123.4. the faithful, their soul was ever filled with the scornful
reproves of the wealthy. 1 Samuel 31.4. Saul desires his harnesse-bearer to
kill him, not that, etc. but lest the Philistims should kill him, and mock
him, and so consequently, he counted the delusion of his enemies worse then
death it self: Prove. 22.10. therefore this is the wise man's counfell, Ejice
derisorem, cast out the scorner, and contention will cease: Ephesians. 5.4. and Prove.
12.18. he condemns them there too: they are an especial means to
contristate the soul, and to bring down the countenance of good men, when
they shall see themselves a derision even to the abjects, and made (as the
Apostles 1 Cor. 4.9.) thereby (...), a spectacle to the world. Consider the
mirror of patience, Job 30.1. this is one thing that of all other grieveth
him, that the very abjects came against him: and Ier. 20.9. the same, and 2 Chronicles. 36.16. it was the lot of the Prophets; and Matthew. 27.27.31.41. they had
their fill of Christ, scorning him: first the servants, then Pilate, then
Herod, and after Herod's Soldiers, and then the high Priests, and all that went
by, had their fill of him.

Then afterward (as before) comes caedes manus, the dealing with the life and
limbs of our brethren: and if it be of more, they are called mockes, 2 Cor.
12.20. (...), tumults in Commonwealths: and not only that, but they grow,
Prove. 17.11. seditions; that is, a plain rebellion, the renting of the civil
body: and not only that, but the renting of Christ's body in the Church, 1 Cor.
1.11. These in the countenance, eyes and tongue are signs.

Means; Prove. 3.30. there be such as will strive, though there be no cause
given, and they are there condemned: but on the other side, there be some that
give cause, and that irritation is an especial means of anger. A woman; 1 Samuel 1.7. every year when Elkanah went up to the house of the Lord with his
family, she upbraided Anna with her barrenness, and she continually vexed her
soul. Prove. 30.33. he says there, Even as the churner brings forth butter,
so this provocation is the ordinary means of wrath. Eccles. 7.8. it is said,
that it will exacerbare, make bitter the soul of the righteous. It is
exemplified by Psalm. 106.33. They provoked Moses, so that he spok unadvisedly.
Take away this, and then you shall not provoke one another: Prove. 15.18. and
18.16. and 29.22. this is his badge, provocat rixas, stirs up strife: he
that is given to anger; and where a fools, or an angry man's lips come, they
bring provocations.

To the virtues; as every just anger is here condemned, (...)
Ephesians. 4.25. that (...) so it is pronounced not to be a sin; that is, when
Prove. 29.19. a superior toward those that are under him, and deserve it in
way of justice, is magnus irarum aestu: That (...), that Christ speaks of, is
specially to be regarded. Otherwise, Luke 24.25. after his resuriection he
calls his Disciples (...), fools, having a just cause. And the Apostle, Gal.
3.1. calls them insensatos Galatas, foolish Galatians: so if it be a good
cause, it is warrantable and authorized, and it is a just cause that we may.

The Fathers upon Luke 10.40. say of those plurima, many things that Martha was
troubled about, this was one thing, the untowardnesse of the servants of the
house. Secondly, for the moderation of it, the virtue opposite, (...),
mansuetudo, meekness, it moderateth it; both to those that are under us, and
to such as converse with us, all are the better for it; it begins in (...),
humbleness of mind: Romans 12.16. he would have them not to be high-minded, but
to lead with humility: and Ephesians. 4.2. Col. 3.12. the same virtue stands
before meekness, then the virtue of meekness it self, Gal. 5.23. (...),
meekness: Ephesians. 4.2. (...), with all lowliness and meekness: Col. 3.12.
(...) meekness: Romans 12.9. 1 Cor. 13.4. Gal. 5.22. Ephesians. 4.3. James 3.17. 1
Pet. 3.8. The Apostles generally, lightly set down together all the virtues
that belong particularly to the Commandment.

Now for these virtues, ut ante, we must infer to four things before these,
for this is not the first Commandment, but something must be before, Romans
12.9. Paul going to describe the nature of charity, beginnieth with hatred of
evil, and glewed, as it were, to good: and then love men, that unglew you not
from God. These two must be. A man must have odium peccati, and agglutinationem
bono, a hatred of sin, and a cleaving to what is good: and his charity must
not unglue this good, else it is not charity. A third thing is Phil. 4.8. he
wills us to follow (...), veneranda, whatsoever is grave and venerable: (...)
honesty or gravity, an especial virtue: then (...), and (...), then (...),
etc. whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things
are lovely, etc. and all contraries to be refused: and any thing that comes
contrary to these, breaks Gods order. But more of this afterward, because
(...), is the virtue of the last Commandment.

And fourthly, James 3.17. Romans 12.9. this love must be unaffected, hearty,
(...), with out hypocrisy, this gratifying must not bear a show of zeal, of
love, and be frozen in effect. Absoloms courtesy was such, but it was not
hearty, it was affected: and it was the courtesy of the Pharisees to Christ,
they made a fair show, and called him Rabbi, and said, he was a man sent from
God; and that he taught the truth without respect of persons, etc. but it was
affected. And so had Ioab, so had Judas, so had the Devil his courtesy (take
them altogether) he said to the woman (very honestly) he was sorry God had
dealt so hardly with them, etc. as if he had been greatly moved with their
estate, but it was affected: for where affection is, Prove. 17.14. he will meet
you very early in the morning, and he will salute and bless you: but I had as
lieve (says he) he should curse me; for this unjust wrath, there is opposed
unto it, one virtue of innocence, another of charity.

1. The innocence takes order that we hurt no body, and consists in 1.
(...). 2. (...).
The preservative, or the Antidote, then the Sanative, or the medicine.

The first is done by three ways. The first, avoiding of offenses, Romans 12,
18. to have peace with all men, as much as in us lies; that is, 1 Cor. 13.4.5.
to think no man any hurt, nor to do untowardly.

The second, not only this, but also backward.

And that is done to us, 1 Cor. 13.7. he speaks of a good and right
interpretation of things as they are meant: he will believe well, and interpret
it to the best: he will leave no place for suspicion. James 3.17. calls it
(...), without partiality: not standing upon his (...), discretion: he stands
not doubting what his meaning may be, but he does candide interpretari,
construe it fairly.

And the third is a willingness sometime to depart from his right. James
says, true wisdom is (...), equity: most plain, Phil. 4.5. Let your (...)
moderation be known to all men. By these three means anger is prevented.

2. Now for (...), the healing after the blow is given: there are three other
prescribed in it by the Apostles and Prophets. First, it has her rest but in a
fools bosom. It comes sometimes into a wise man, therefore that it may not
rest, Ephesians. 4.2. Col. 3.12.13. Gal. 5.22. the virtue of supporting, (...), not
to put more bitter into it, not making a bitter thing more bitter: And as the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 13.7. (...), to cover things: yea, and as the Prophet
David, Psalm. 38.13. sui tanquam surdus, I was as a deaf man: he was not deaf,
but tanquam surdus: and it is James 20. (...), the hiding of a multitude of
sins.

The second, Levit. 19.18. we must not keep in mind, but forgive and forget.

3. If we have done it our selves, Matthew. 5.23. we must seek for
reconciliation: partly Prove. 15.1. with gentle words; and partly, Prove. 21.4.
with gifts, even with redeeming it; our Savior Christ calls it an
acknowledgement: this is the way to heal wrath.

Of Charity: the fruit of Charity: of the godly, inwardly against anger: Psalm.
4.8. Ephesians. 4.3. 1 Cor. 13.4. (...), envieth not, is not puffed up: and Saint
Peter calls it (...), 1 Pet. 3.8.
a spirit loving to keep unanimity. And then outwardly to oppose to icterum
peccati, the jaundise of sin: we have that Christ says, Matthew. 6.22. simplex
oculus, a single eye: 1 Cor. 13.5.8. (...), not undecently to disdain: and for
our words, (...), urbanity, and suavity: Col. 3.12. Gal. 3.22. Heb. 13.16.

Outwardly against murder, beneficence, Gal. 5.12. (...), goodness: Romans
15.14. commended. And this according as the men are divided into several
parts; for there is a beneficence, Ruth 2.20. that stretches it self to the
dead, i. both Genesis 23.4. by burying them, and Prove. 27.30. by retaining love to
his seed: verifying that, Cant. 8.6. that it is stronger then death, the grave
will not quench it.

Now then to those that are alive, generally unto all, humanity; 1 Pet. 3.8.
Tit. 3.4. (...), Romans 12.10. yea, even to evil men; Levit. 19.17. but thou
shall plainly rebuke thy neighbor, and suffer him not to sin; correptio
fraierna, a brotherly rebuke: and praying for them. Romans 10.7. So to good men
especially, 1 John 3.14. by loving them, in Epist. ad Philem. and Gal. 6.10. to
all, but especially to the household of faith; Romans 12.2. it is called a
dignity. Now among them, to those that are ours; to our friends, Prove. 18.24. A
man that has friends, ought to show himself friendly: for a friend is nearer
then a brother. After these, we come to another sort of people, that have need;
here comes in the virtue of mercy and alms: (...), the bowels of mercy.
Col. 3.12. And it consiseth, Romans 12.13. in rejoicing with them: and 1 Pet.
3.9. (...), in suffering with them, giving them, if we have it: or if not that,
wishing them well, and giving them comfortable speeches, and praying to God for
them; and among these, (...), hospitality, 1 Pet. 4.9. Romans 12.13. last
christiana charitas, Christian charity: omnia haec fiunt illustriora; now all
these are so much the more commendable, if done to our enemies: by forgiving
them, Col. 3.13. (...), and by assisting and by praying for them, 1 Pet. 3.9.
by assisting them in their necessity, Romans 12.20. and Matthew. v. last. Be
perfect in overcomming our affections so much, as that we make our sun to
shine upon them, indifferently, not for their sakes; and that we do not let
our sun go down on them, i. that we stop not our benefits, when we are
fallen out.

That that remains, is this: The avoiding of the root of this affection: we
may refer it to the means.

The first, Gal. 6.1. It is expedient to have anticipatum animum, a mind void
of prejudice: because that men often in wrath, are corrupt in judgment; whether
it be by want of skill, or by an evil desire. For holding this principle, that
evil things are to be esteemed: and so consequently every man is persuaded,
that there is some good thing in himself, and therefore will make men see his
power: therefore let a man know, that he has to deal with men of like
infirmities to himself. And as this is good, so it is expedient, Prove. 22.24.
not to join near friendship with any angry man: 1 Samuel 25.17. such as Nabal
was: if he have (as the Heathen man said) vesparum examen, a shrewd memory for
all turns, he is to be avoided: so Prove. 22.10. his advise there, that the
scornful man that makes more account of his jest, then his friend, and does
not rather love dictum quam amicum perdere, to lose his jest, then his friend;
cast him out, and contention shall cease and go.

And thirdly, Prove. 26.20. when he would have all heart-burnings and griefs
between friends to cease; as if ye lay to no wood, the fire will cease: so
without a talebearer breaches will cease: and as he says, verse. 24. he will
outwardly in his countenance, show himself dutiful; but where he may be
believed, he will utter the gall of Aspes. Now then, beyond this, as we have
here to be avoided three persons, as Prove. 3.30. not to join with them, not to
strive without a cause: so Prove. 26.17. not to meddle with contentions that
belong not to us: unless it be, Exodus 2.13. with the contentions of our
brethren, to set them together again; else it is the next way to bring on us
anger, and the fruits of anger. This is it that the Apostles, Prophets and holy
men of God have always exhorted to, before the affection berisen. Now when
this affection is pressed upon us, and begins to rise, Prove. 18.14. that the
spirit of man is able to sustain his infirmity; or plainly, Prove. 19.11. that
he is able to defer his anger, and not to let it presently gush out; as he
said to the Athenians, If Alexander be dead to day, he will be dead to morrow,
and the next day: therefore make no bonefires too soon: so to suspend our
affections.

It is affectio ameambulo, and not affectio pedissequa, an affection which must
usher us: James 1.16. calls it to be tardus adiram, slow to wrath: and verse.
20. he gives a very good reason of it, because the superfluity of the wrath of
man does never operari justitiam dei, work the righteousness of God:
therefore, Prove. 17.14. there is good counsel: for he says, that the
beginning of a man's anger is, as if a man should make an hole in a bank, for
water to go through: at the first it is easy to stop it, but after the water
gets in more and more, and casts down more earth, then it is impossible.
Now when we speak thus of anger, we speak of it, either as we are angry with
other men; or as it is in other men concerning us: In the one ( i. if it be
ours) then resist, Ephesians. 4.27. and in the other, then cede, yield, Romans 12.1^.
as 1 Samuel 25.37. Abigail, she is there commended for it: she would not tell
Nabal his fault in the midst of the feast, (it is momentanea insania, a
momentany madness) but she deferred it to the next day, gave place to the
affection of her husband, and then he heard of it so, as his heart grew to be
like a stone within him. This will be done, if we yield not to make too much of
it; this cogitation auget (...), and minuit bilem, increases forbearance, and
slacketh wrath. And that as the Philosophers teach, with oppressing it with
another (...), passion, as with great joy or fear: one affection will smother
another. But the counsel of the holy Ghost is better, to see in our anger God
and the Devil after him: as Job 1.21. his Oxen and Asses were taken by the
Chaldeans, Camels by the Sabaeans; but yet he had a further sight, and
ascribes it to God. Better in 2 Samuel 16.11. when Shimei railed on David, he
said, peradventure it is the Lords doing to permit the Devil to incite this
man to curse me; it is Gods permission, I will hear it: and it may be that God
looking on my patience, will have mercy upon me: so David looked beyond
Shimei, and saw God: And it is certain he will permit no evil, but for a
greater good, and he permits this for patience: no greater good in this
life then patience.

A second thing, Ephesians. 4.27. to see the Devil in it: Chrysostom says, it is
a foolish thing for the Dog to run after the stone that is cast, and bite it
in his mouth, and leave the man that cast it: and when one has beaten us well
with a staff, to pray him to let us have the staff, and when we have it, to
hack it, and not hurt the man that beat us with it. So it is sure; The wicked
men of this world, and whosoever are incited by the Devil, are nothing but his
staves and stones: so then we must set against the Devil, and we cannot
scourge him worse, then with patience. Bona opera, our good works, as before,
are flagella daemonum, whips for the Devil.

If the first motion will not stay, but it come into the grief, yet if it stay
there, it is well. We said that it was mixed with grief and revenge, but if it
be ^otus in fermento, all in a fume: and if he said, Prove. 24.29. I will do to
him, as he has done to me; the not saying as Christ said, 1 Pet. 2.22. when he
was reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered, he threatened not, but
committed it to God. Deuteronomy 30.35. Mihi vindictam; and ego retribuam: his is
vengeance, he will look to it. In the mean season, as Prove. 24.27.28. when
this revenge comes, we must be so far from desiring it, that we must not be
glad when our enemy falls: lest the Lord seeing it, turn his wrath from him
to us. Job 31.29. If, says he, I have rejoiced at his destruction that hated
me; when his servants would have been at him, and desired his flesh, he would
not do so. But the practice is 2 King. 21. as the King of Israel did, when the
Syrians were brought under his hands, by the Prophet, he asked, My Father,
shall I smite them? so when they have one at advantage: but 1 Samuel 24.9. David's
practice was better, for we know, when he had Saul in the Cave, he might have
stricken him; but did it not: but cut off a piece of the skirts of his coat.
But if some had had him in this case, they would have cut his skirts so near,
that (it is Chrysostomes saying) effudissent e renibus ejus sanguinem, they
would have let out the best blood in his body. This must not be, the desire of
revenge and execution. And the reason is, for we mark in Gods creatures,
(...), there is an Ants anger, and a Flies anger: and the least creatures are
the most angry: and women more then men: and quo infirmiores, eo magis
iracundi, the weaker they are, the more subject towrath: so on the other side,
he that is magnarum virium, of great courage, does not sentire se percussum,
resent a blow: thus to deal against the desire of revenge.

If it cannot be prevented, it is to be sorrowed: but ratio irae, or
suppuratio, the measure, or impostume of the anger, must be met with, he will
now and then be angry, but he must not requiescere in ira, sleep in anger.
Ephesians. 4.26. Ne occidat Sol, let not the Sun go down upon your anger. And
the reason is, because then we must offer our evening Sacrifice; and Mark
11.25. before we open our mouth to pray, we must forgive: This in Matthew.
6.14.15. is set down, both in the Affirmative and Negative. This is a case of
necessity. It was showed us before, what we are to think, Matthew. 18.22. if we
number our forgiveness, then our forgiveness shall be delivered by taley: if
our forgiveness be sine fine and numero, then our sins shall be forgiven,
sine numero. This for Suppuratio: now for foaming of it out.

Ecclus. 28. He that does this, is a trouble, and scandalous to his friends:
and therefore men must think that they have to deal with men; and such men,
Eccles. 19.16. fall with their tongue, though not with their will; who is he
that has not offended whith his tongue? And David, Psalm. 116.10. when he was
in his anger and haste, he said, all men were liars, 1 Samuel and all because God
deferred his Kingdom: therefore, if a word pass sometime (...), knowing there
is none but offends with the tongue; the counsel of the Prophet David is
good, Psalm. 38.13. eram tanquam surdus, to be, not deaf, but tanquam surdus,
it is the best: and if not, yet Ecclus. 28.12. when a man has heard an evil
word, it is even like a coal of fire laid before him; he may blow on it, and
it will kindle: he may spit on it, and it will out. And indeed, this did the
Heathen consider by the light of nature; If he without a cause be thus angry,
quid faciet irritatus? so as the Philosopher, when one reproached him, he cast
up dust into the air: and when the other asked him why he did so? he answered,
Injicio pulverem vomitui tuo, I throw dust to cover thy vomit: and indeed it is
nothing else but vomitus bilis, a disgorging of choler: Vomitus bilis.
Prove. 29.9. Solomon says, if one man contend with another, if he be not wise,
whether you answer him in jest, or in earnest, you go by the worst: if he be
wise, you are wiser, if you forbear him: (...), the wiser for not returning
word for word: therefore, Prove. 26.4. he would not have a fool answered,
because, so we come to be like him: and we shall, as we see, when a man in
reproving a fault, will oftertimes be gone so far, as he will commit as great,
nay a greater absurdity, sometimes; therefore of fools words magnum remedium
negligentia, the best course is to neglect them: and verse. 5. he would have him
answered at sometimes, not at other sometimes, A fool sometimes must be
answered, sometimes not.
lest he make him e stulto insanum, of a fool a madman. But when he is among
such a himself, that think well of him, then answer him, lest he seem wise:
If he be among wise, then answer him not, and they will regard rather quid tu
taceas, quam quid ille dicat, thy wisdom in being silent, then his folly in
speaking: but, Prove. 25.9. there must be no secrets disclosed, and Ecclus. 8.5.
there must be no exprobration of benefits.

Come to the action it self, Requiting. They call it bringing a man to
justice, Acts 22.25. in some causes it may be. We must not be, as the Pope said
of England, that it was a good Ass to bear all. It was the error of Julian,
persecuting the Primitive Church: For if it be a case of Gods, or the truths,
Ecclus. 4.28. strive for the truth to death: but if it be a case of meum and
tuum, then it makes no great matter: as Abraham, Genesis 13.8. he would be
contented to be ordered by Lot, and to give the Law into his hands: But because
by this departing from our right, we pluck upon us a grievouser burden then we
can bear; and make them offer it the oftener: therefore, there is a Magistrate,
and we may lawfully have recourse to him for redress, yet so we observe
certain rules:

1. Exodus 18.22. Moses says, he will not have every trifle brought before him.
Now any thing that will bear an action in Law, may be brought before him, but
non quod opus est, sed quod necesse est; such as if it be not remedied, will
breed a further inconvenience; and such as nothing but the Law can remedy. 2. 1
Cor. 6.4, 5. Saint Paul's devise is there, to put up the matter first to the
Saints, and to the Brethren among whom we live; and not be brought ad formam
civil, into foreign Courts: whereas a great promise is given to two or three
gathered together in the name of God in such cases. 3. Christ upon the occasion
of having the offer of dividing the inheritance, Luke 12.15. he says, Man, who
made me a Judge, or a Divider over you? Take heed of covetousness, that is his
first note; so men must look that they do it not of covetousness. 4. That
they will have every man's tuum to be suum: and then Esa. 10.12. a man in regard
of his wealth, or strength, or alliance with Judges, must not begin to enter
suit, or over-tread the poor. 5. And last, James 3.16. that in all, we go
with charity, that our doings may not savor of gall; as the Heathen said of
the Judge: the form of words in the Law: Si jus est adversarii, habeat ille:
if it be none of mine, hear me not in these great matters.
The conclusion is, Prove. 25.8. See in thy matters thou go not forth hastily,
to strive: and his reason is, lest thou know not what thou shall do in the
end. And many there be that repent themselves, when they come to end their
strife. 1 Samuel 25.31. It is a good saying of Abigail, I doubt not but my Lord
will never repent himself, that he has not shed blood causeless: If a man
refrain himself from evil words, and has borne injury, he shall never
unwish it: but if he do the other, he shall often repent him.

6. Rule, Accessory. Exodus 2.3. for the negat. where Moses seeing two Hebrews
strive, he endeavored to set them at peace; And for the affirmative, Matthew.
5.9. Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God.

The VII. Commandment.
Thou shall not commit adultery.
IT is as the other was, in words very brief. And it pleased God here to
delineate unto us, what reckoning he makes of the vices that dispose us to
adultery, as concupiscence, etc. by the vice it self. 1 Cor. 7.4. It
contains as uncleanness, so also unjustice, and that great: because the man,
he has not power over his own body, but the woman: and contra. In this word
we see what account he makes of those vices that are subordinate unto it.

The commandment is expounded, Ord^ ma^d^^^.
Levit. 20.10. Matthew. 5.27. and 1 Cor. 6.15. and 7. tot. The order is this. The
principal cause why there must not be murder, was because man was the Image
of God. Now we see the Image of God was specially in chastity, and purity. So
one of the Heathen Poets Bacillides, Deus est men's pura, God is a pure mind:
and that is especially in this Commandment. The truth whereof is plainly
gathered, Genesis 37. by the contrary. It is the first thing our Parents did, so
soon as their eyes were open. And they saw themselves naked, and were ashamed
to see their uncleanness, etc. Which showed the Image of God was lost. So for
the end, 1 These. 4.4.

S^^pus mand^t^ vel finis quad^^plex.
1. The Commandment is availeable for the Church. Mal. 2.15.

2. For the Commonwealth; Levit. 18.27.28. the land defiled by the
uncleanness of the inhabitants.

3. And for particular persons, two kinds. 1. That every man (it is occulia lex
naturae, a Law even of nature, as of God) that whereof he is chief, he will
have it wholly and alone. Prove. 6.34. The jealousi^ of a man, often the rage of
a man, and dearer then any ransom. 2. Is his name the legitimation and
assurance of his children, Deuteronomy. 23. no bastard in sanctuario, etc. As likewise
the chastity of his wife. And these four are the end.


Now for the affection it self, and ground of the Commandment, The ground of
the Commandment.
as it was (...), heat, before for the other: so here it is (...), desire, that
this deals with. And every part of concupiscence is not evil, Col. 3.5. but
he puts (...), malam concupiscentiam, evil concupiscence: as if there were
some (...), lust not evil: Romans 13.4. he wills us to have providence or care
of the flesh, but not to fulfill the lust of it. More plain, There is in man,
as in other creatures, a desire to preserve it self: and secondly, of his
species, kind: therefore, these two desires, because they were most necessary,
it pleased God to ordain a bait for both, that men might be allured to them.
For as there is a pleasure in eating and drinking; so also in the act of
generation. Then there is a ground, In maxim necessariis maxima voluptas
maxim allicit, in things most needful, the more pleasing the delight, the
greater allective. And there is another, Quod maxim allicit, maxim corrumpit,
that which allureth most, corrupts most: and the reason is, quia appetitus
tendit ul^ra modum, because the appetite knows not what is enough.

For we persuade our selves, that if the doing of it once be good, the doing of
it oftener will be better: and so we shall come to do it too much, because the
appetite knows not what is enough. So falls in corrupt custom, for the
course of our nature is, when it avoideth any evil, it avoideth it so
vehemently, that sometime, if there be any good with it, it puts out the good
too. So if it desire the good, it will desire the evil too: therefore
temperance, to the middle: therefore they say, virtue stands opposed to
fortitude and temperance. Temperance magis in defectu, as Fortitude magis in
excessu. This concupiscence of the flesh, as it is in us, so in beasts: and
has the lowest place, and as Plato says, it is alligata ventri, tied to the
belly: as a man would tie an ass or a horse to a manger.

Now being in the lowest place, and having a necessary use; it is necessary:
and in maxim necessariis ordo est maxim necessarius, in things most
necessary, order is chiefly to be observed. The order is, that they should not
take up a man's life only; if there be a great course in the lower faculty,
then the upper is quiet. When that that is inferior, is most quiet; then that
that is superior, is most hindered. When a man has a vehement appetite, he
sets his whole mind to it. Chrysostom, Dedit Deus corpus animae, ut illud in
coelum eveheret; and dedit animam corpori, ut illam in terram deprimeret, God
gave the body to the soul, that this might carry that to Heaven; and he gave
the soul to the body, that this might keep that on earth: therefore, the
intent of God was thus: As we should have this, for the maintaining of life,
and for propagation: so we should use it, and no further then this necessity
will permit us. This is puritas; that is called purum, that has nihil alienum
immixtum, nothing else mixed with it: we must needs have some mixture in this
life: Esa. 1.22. there is water mingled with wine; but we must see that this
mixture be not so; that there be but a drop of wine in a vessel of water.
Psalm. 49. last. Man was in honor and glory, but certainly he is grown out of
understanding, he is like the beast that perishes.

Here is to be considered 1. The inclination of the mind. 2. The means.


Divisiopartium hujus mandati.
1. By Gal. 5.19. we see, and by Christ, Mark 7.21. his interpretation, that
all adulteries, and all evil thoughts and works, prooceed from the heart. And
they are there considered, either as they are in veneno naturae nostrae, in the
poison of our nature: 1 John 2.16. concupiscentiam carnis, the lust of the
flesh he calls it: or suppuratio, an inward festering of this desire, or
inward boiling of the pot: as Ezekiel. compares it, cap. 24.6. with the scumme in
it. Then after these, the first thing in regard of the means, is subactum
solum, to make our selves meet to receive this vine desire. The Physicians
call it (...), that is, when a man is disposed to an evil humor, to diseases.
Those that are given to be plethorike, have their bodies still fed with that
humor. And that is done by two means. 1. By the sin, which is gula: and
that is of two parts. 1. Crapula, a surcharging of us with meats. 2.
Vinolentia, the same in drink.


Secondly, with gula is excess of idleness, partly of Excess of sleep.
(...), flying of exercise.


Now then secondly, after this subactum solum, there is another thing in the
means, that is called irrigatio concupiscentiae, the warring of the seed in
subacto solo. And (because we stand upon diseases) it is, as when a man is
sick, and notwithstanding will give himself to those things that are (...),
incliners to wickedness: as he that is sick of an ague, will give himself to
drink wine: or he that is troubled with (...), ptissick, to sharp things; or
he that is troubled with collicke, to eat honey. Such a thing is in the
concupiscence. Solomon, Prove. 7.21. calls it illicebra concupiscentiae, an
inticement to lust: and it brings forth the sin, lascivia, wantonness; or
immodestia, immodesty: It is either in the body it self, making our selves
birds, bending our selves to those, by whom allurements only come. 2. For
without: if it be of our body, there is first (...), that is, the plaiting of
the hair: and fucus, the color of the countenance. Or else it is in apparel
and gesture. The first is called (...), garments, vestments. Gesture is either
commonly a common gate, or a second kind of gate or gesture, which they term
peculiarly for this purpose, as dansing, Chorea.

2. From without: and it is either corrupt company of men; or we fall into the
fault of them, by reading lascivious books lasciviously. And besides that,
which is an affection, by beholding pictures. i. imagines obscoenas, as Cherea
in Terence. And secondly, such plays and spectacles as contain matters of
foolish love; and are able to breed this in us. And correspondent to them, is
the hearing of them, wicked reports or books read, or songs sung, that nourish
our disease. This for the means.

Now for the signs, we will use no other then before: The jaundis of it is in
the eyes too, and so it has his some in sermon obscoen^, baudy speeches: And
not only that, but in doing and frequenting such places, actions, and times;
as indeed sometimes are not only cause of suspicion, but may justly be
suspected.

Now to the outward part, and there we have first a disposition to it. They are
called in Physic, grudgings against an ague; as it were, such as were in the
other Commandment, bloodshed, and battery, before the act of murder; such as
are there here, like to the signs, Levit. 13.4. of the leprosy before it came.

In this kind are incesta oscula, whorish kisses: and embracing of the bosom
of a stranger: and lastly, the going about to procure it, whether it be by
waiting at the door for opportunity, or by sorcery, or bloodshed, etc.

The act it self may be taken both ways. Aug. whether it be instinctu
proprio, or consensu alieno, of their own motion, or another persuasion; that
is all one: that is generally. Then afterward it is practiced in effect, either
with a man's self, corpus suum secum: which they call (...), and (...),
mollicies and impuritas, effeminatenesse, uncleanness: or with other. And if
with other; either it is that (...), an abomination not to be named: with a
beast, and is called Buggery: or with mankind. And so it is done willingly or
unwillingly, respectu patientis, in respect of the sufferer: if unwillingly, it
is Raptus, a Rape: if by consent, either of male or female: (for there is Rape
done to both) male, and so it is the sin of Sodom; female, and so it is with
one, or more. With more: if there be a pretext of marriage, it is Polygamie: if
without any such pretense, it is called scortatio, whoredom. Where it is done
with one, (and because we speak not only of adultery, but whatsoever) either it
is in wedlock, and that is fervor: (for we shall after show, that there is a
fault even in matrimony committed) or it is out of matrimony; and then either
as the party is allied to us; then it is incest: or as a stranger and removed;
and then we consider her, either as she is nupta, married, or soluta, free. If
she be married, or desponsata, betrothed, all is one; and so it is adultery,
whether she be espoused or married: and that is of three kinds. 1. Where both
parties are married, and that is worst. 2. The woman only espoused, and the
man single; The man married only, and the woman single.
And the second is less evil then the third, because in this is corruption
prolis, an adulterating of the issue begotten.

Now in the free, and not married, either we retain one peculiar to our
selves; and it is called concubinatus peccatum, to keep a concubine: which is
not a common strumpet, but a concubine: or else there is not this continual
keeping: and then the party, if she be a Virgin, or a Widow, it is sluprum,
devirgination, especially in Virgins; or if she be common, it is fornication
properly, though that be given to all. Beyond these, this act is either once
committed only, or often iterated; then it is luxuria, luxury, for
distinction: he is a whoremonger, that sets after evil: or that which is
beyond this, as Genesis 18. clamor Sodomitarum, the cry of Sodom, so clamor
adulterii, the cry of adultery; of them that impudently dare defend it: as if
casse and Artimeas should stand in defense of it. And last of all, permission,
whether it be of private men, for his daughter, or wife, or any of his
kinsfolk: and that is Prostitution. Or public in the Magistrate in suffering,
and tolerating Stews, as Rome does now adays.

The reason why adultery ought to be odious to every man, and is so to God.

1. Of all sins, it is most brutish, and that makes a man to come next to
the condition of a beast, making us to lose the excellency and nobility of our
nature, Ier. 5.8. like to equi admissarii adhinnientes, like fed horses
neighing: Prove. 7.22. he follows her straightwayes like an Ox to the
slaughter, or as a fool to the stocks for correction. Deuteronomy. 23.18. Thou shall
neither bring the hire of a whore, nor the price of a Dog into the house of
the Lord thy God for any vow, etc. The learned in this place compare an Harlot
to a Bitch that many Dogs run after.

2. This has a kind of dependancie on the first: but yet has a peculiar
consideration. There is no sin, wherein the light of man's reason is so much
extinguished, nor that does put it so much besides the pre-eminence that it
has over the affections of the mind. Hose. 4.11. aufert cor, it takes away
the heart. Ephesians. 4.18.19. By this the judgment of the Heathen men were
darkened, and their hearts hardened: and whatsoever blindness came upon them,
was ascribed to this. It is one of the Epithets they give to Venus, (...),
Venus blindes the soul. We have experience of it in Solomon, we see what a
sottishness he grew into after this; that he would fall down to every
block, and stock. David by this fell to murder, and to cover one inquity
with another: And it is just it should be so: For the light of our actions
being from God, and our anointing coming ab unctione Dei, from the anointing
of God, as Nazianzen says, he will not commit his ointment to such a stinking
box: for they do nothing but cast down, and trample the Pearls of Gods
Grace under their feet, Matthew. 7.6.

3. Cyprians: Of all sins, this is most without excuse: it has not a color:
other sins may get them a visor: For God has ordained a remedy for this
affection: 1 Cor. 7.2. Marriage, the remedy; he that will not use it, is
inexcusable.

4. God having made marriage a holy institution, and a holy resemblance of
Christ and his Church; it is a manifest contempt of his ordinance: And also,
whereas God has set to this act of marriage, a promise of the increasing of
mankind: contrary to this, Hose. 4.10. There shall be no increase to this, and
so by this means they destroy all mankind as much as in them lies. This
Sacrilegi nuptiarum, the sacriligious robbers of wedlock, as Constant, calls
them well: and delinquentes in genus humanum, trespassers against mankind:
that they take away the resemblance of Christ's Church; and besides the world
should fare the worse for them.

5. Saint Paul's: 1 Cor. 6.18. This is even against a man's own body, and by the
pollution of it, Jude. 13. they do some out their own shame. Physicians say,
it is an enemy to the life of man; It is one of the special causes that
preserves a man's life, the preserving of genitalis humor, the genitall humor:
and there is nothing that breeds a more debility to the vegetative faculty.
It is a shortning of life, and brings upon a man rotten diseases: Number. 5.27.
and so two ways he is injurious to his own body.

6. It is injurious to Christ two ways. 1. In that he having paid a price for
him, he alienateth that which is not his own: as if a man should pull down
another man's house without any right; nay, palatium regis, the Palace of the
King, Chrysostom. 2. He also, being a Christian, does as much as he can, make
his head a member of the body of an Harlot, uniting himself to her.


7. This is particular to this alone: In any other sin a man may perire
solus, perish alone; but in this he must have one to perish with him for
company. So he is also injurious to the state of his brethren.

8. The punishment allotted to it. 1. That it should be a punishment it self;
Prove. 22.14. God will not suffer any to fall into it, but only those that he
hates: and whom it has pleased him to ordain to punishment. Prove. 6.33. It
is maxim probrosum peccatum, infamous. And in regard of spiritual deformity,
Prove. 16.20. It will bring him to beggary: Job. 31.2. It shall be a fire to
pursue him and his house to utter destruction. And beyond all these, Romans 1.24.
whereas every punishment should exceed that whereof it is a punishment, it is
said, that these unclean passions were brought upon the world as a punishment
for idolatry, and 1 Cor. 7.12, 13. if any will dwell with an idolater, she may:
but not with an adulterer: and in verse. 14. that the children of an idolater
are holy; but the children of an adulterer are profane, and not holy. By this
we may in part weigh what account God makes of the heynousnesse of this sin.

Suppuratio adulterii.
Now for the vapor, the poisoning of our nature, the first motus, and
ascendenies cogitationes, motions and thoughts that arise, we will leave them
to the tenth Commandment; only we will meddle here with Suppuratio, the
festering of it. The Apostle calls it, 1 Cor. 7.9. uri, to burn: Hose. 7.4.
when a man's soul is like a Bakers Oven, then it is a sign that the spark
has been blown, where there is so great a fire: Prove. 23.33. of this sin,
and cor ejus loquitur perversa, and his heart speaks perverse things:
Outwardly he says nothing, but inwardly his heart speaks perversely. Aug.
Ego enim Domine saepe taceo, cum cogitationes meae non tacent, O Lord, I hold
my peace, when yet my thoughts are not silent: And so the Oven waxes hotter
and hotter; and then is consensus, consent.

Or when he says, utinam, would to God, Qui facturus est malum, jam fecit, he
that goes about a wicked action, has already acted it in his heart. This is
the cordial passion that is to be striven against.

Come to the Subactum solum, to the making of the soil fit: and so to gula,
and in it to crapula, feeding too much. It is well said, that gula is
vestibulum luxuriae, the gallery that letchery goes through: and that by reason
the faculties stand so; for (...), is officina (...), nu^ritiva is officina
generativae, the nutritive faculty is the shop of the generative: and so, if it
be well looked into, there is good hope that we shall the better deal with
it. Gal. 5.21. Whereas he says there, that one of the fruits of the flesh, is
(...), uncleanness, he adds (...), ban^uetting, as another. Ezekiel. 16 49.
The Prophet there says, that one of the especial motives of the Sodomits was
fullness of bread, that m^de them fit for destruction. And Ierom upon that
place says, nunquam ego edacem hominem castum putabam, pro qualitate ciborum
est ordo membrorum: for venture been pastus, cito despumat ad libidinem, I ever
thought a great eater to be unchaste, for according to the quality of the
meats, is the order of the members; a well fed belly will soon wax wanton.
There comes to this, Ingluvies, gluttony besides: that as John 6.12. it is
injurious to God, in destroying Gods creatures: Luke 15.13. a wasting of Gods
creatures in vain. It is fruges male consumere, Idly to spend grain: Prove.
23.20, 21. And it will at last beggar a man. Siracides cap. 18. verse. ult.
shows how he must make banquets, although he borrow for them; and so come in
debt. The Heathen man, foed ssimum patrimoniorum exitium culina; They cannot be
worse spent, then upon the kitchen. And besides, as Numb. 11.34. there are
graves of lusts: i. surfettings, that hasten a man's death. It is our gentile
vitium, national sin. There is an infinite sort of graves of lusts in our
Country. When they are sick, they call for sanitas: and when they have it,
they become afterward to be (...), betrayers of their health, with surfeiting.
Besides these effects in the body; Again in the soul: Luke 8.17. It makes
Sermons, and whatsoever exercise of godliness unfruitful: it is a special
means to choke it. Luke 21.34. It makes our heart so heavy, and our brains
so unapt, by reason of the fuming of the meat and drink that rises up to the
head, that a man is not fit for any thing, but to sleep. Amos 6. Greg. says,
ad ineptam laetitiam, scurrile mirth. Besides this, (...), lust, there is first
hebetudo mentis, and durities cordis, a dullness of the mind, and hardness of
the heart: Amos 6.6. They drink their wine in bowls, and they had no
compassion on Joseph's affliction, etc. There is no sympathy with these and them
that want: and it is a great preparative to the vice. After, when as Deuteronomy.
32.15. Moses in his song, my fatling well fed recalcitravit, kicked: and so
will the body, Prove. 27.2. Bring up your servant wantonly, and he will prove
stubborn: feed him delicately, and he will be check-mate with you. Eccles.
30.8. Equus indomitus, a horse not broken becomes headstrong; (...), will be
wilful: a wanton child (...), so the flesh proves stubborn, if it be like
didectus impinguatus, Iesurum waxed fat. 1 Pet. 2.11. These desideria carnis,
these concupiscences militant adversus animam. They make the enemies warfare
stronger against the soul. And what a folly is it to strengthen the enemy?
Then in this behalf, for avoiding of these concupiscences, Paul's counsel, 1
Cor. 9.27. Castigatio corporis, to keep under the body: and one manner of
castigation is per damnum, by taking away some commodity: as castigatio
jumentorum, the keeping under of laboring beasts, is by taking away their
provender. This in effect is, that we use Temperance, which is (...), the
Butler of all virtues. Naturally this is (...), Temperance, (...) as the
Philosophers call her.
the voice of the flesh; (...), let me not be hungry, thirsty, cold, etc. Esau,
when he was hungry, called Jacobs pottage, lenticulum, a little Lentill: it was
it seems then savory.

Sitis non quaerit aurea pocula, thirst cares not for drinking in gold: But it
is this, Non resistere ulli desiderio quod habet umbram naturae, when we yield
to any desire that pleases nature: that makes us wanton: he will not have it
in this dish, and he will not eat it, if it be thus dressed; and so then venture,
the belly, comes to be molestus cliens, a trouble some client. We must
necessarily have recourse to Temperance, which consists in modo, in the
mean; and that modus est in medio, and that mean is in the middle; and that
is known per regulam, by the rule. Therefore the rule of Temperance is, 1.
Necessitas vitae, Rule of temperance.
things necessary for life: 1 Timothy 6.8. (...), having food and raiment, let us
be therewith content.

2. Necessitas officii, things necessary for our duty and calling: 1 Cor. 9.25.
he that is athleia, a wrestler, must not have so much meat; so if he fast, he
detracteth: or he that will be contemplative and a student, detracteth: a
husbandman adds.

3. Voluptas, quae neutrum horum impedit, seu impediat, things necessary for
delight, which neither do, or may hinder either of the former two. If it be
against duty, or against life, it is peccatum, a sin.

According to these rules, we must bridle our desires, (...). We must make
temperance our (...), our Coachman: and give her the bridle, that she may
constringere and relaxare: Temperamia fraenos gutiuris constrimgit and relaxat;
both keep us in, and let us out; for temperance both gives the reins to, and
takes them away from the appetite, Aug. The Heathen, (...), Venus waits on
plenty. And for temperance, E^^^^^d.
if the first part be well looked unto, the other will be easy; (...), first
regulate the belly.

The rule of five branches for governing himself in this:

1. Concerning the substance: if ye respect not the substance; Luke 16.19. the
rich glutton must fare (...), s^lendide, delicately every day. Numb. 11.6. They
were weary of Manna, and they must have Quails. For certain it is, Dan. 1.12.
if a man have moratum ventrem, no dainty palate, his Pulse will serve. It is
that that served Daniel and his companions: and yet they looked never a whit
the worse. Else, as 1 Samuel 2.16. Elies sons, they must have roste, they
cannot eat sodden meat: when a man breaks not himself, as for the
substance of the meat: it is not to be dainty, nor course, so he be injurious
to the Adverbe lauie, costly: And last of all, 1 King. 17.6. by Elias his
provision: and 2 King. 4.38. by Elishah his pottage, we may learn how to
satisfy nature. 2. For the quantity. They that have taken the measure of our
throat, and the rest of our instruments; say, they are less in man, then in
any other creature; taking it answerable to the proportion of his body: so
consequently, he should eat less. Plenty, and variety tempts a man, as
Ezekiel. 16. Aug. said, when he was at a table of many dishes, he was easily
overshot. The quantity is taken, either by surcharging of our nature, Hosea.
7.3. or secondly, by ability of duty. Christ says, take heed of crapula, ne
gravet corda, surfeiting, lest it overcharge your hearts: or thirdly, in regard
of our estate; 1 Samuel 25.36. Naball was a note too high in his feast, he made a
feast like a Prince; here was superfluity. 3. Quality. Exquisitenes, it must be
so exquisitely done, Luke 10.41. Martha was partly gone with it: and Christ
gives her a modest reprehension. But Romans 13.14. we must not make (...),
provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts of it. Sapores non naturales,
exquisite sawces: for this is a way to bring Saint Paul to his tears, Phil.
3.19. that he should weep for us, because we make our belly our God: and 1
Cor. 6.13. to move God to destroy both it and them. Greg. Haec arca putrescit,
and quae in ea reponuntur, the belly will be consumed, and whatsoever is put in
it: therefore it is pity to make that our God. These are in regard of the
meat. 4. Now there be two rules in regard of us. The first is, Greediness.
Esaues fault. Aug. Ardenter profecto comedit, qui ardenter desideravi, he eated
greedily, as he hungered heartily: that he had rather fell his birthright, two
portions of his Fathers goods, then tarry. Jude. verse. 12. calls it vesci.
Ecclus. 37.28. and 31.12. in the first place he calls it (...), ardenter, hoc
est enim os porci habere, nor too greedy upon meats; greedily, that is, to have
a hoggish and swinish appetite: while he intends it; therefore, the Devil,
says Jerome, had rather come into the heard of swine: no doubt there were
other herds, but he has a special delight in them, because of their
greediness: because they were like in their especial qualities to Cormorants.
And Jerome says, ubi satietas est, ibi daemones agunt choreas, where satiety
is, there the Devils dance: take heed of satiety. Of eating and drinking.
5. The last is, to eat too often: This is to be taken by the former rules
vitae and officii. Eccles. 10.16. eating early, and Esa. 5.11. eating late:
Romans 13.13. any of these (...), and 1 Pet. 4.3. are forbidden; he tells
thereof (...), besides, (...), vinolentia, drinkings: no doubt, having regard
to our secundae mensae, second courses; and comessationes banquets, and
drinkings.
Of these five, as in some of them there is aversio a fine, an aversion from
the end: and in some nothing but proportio aberrans a fine, a proportion wide
of the end: the one is more grievous then the other. Aug. confessions, upon
comessationes, ebrietates and crapulae, surfeiting and drunkenness, Luke
21.34. Domine ebrietas long est a me, fac quaeso ne appropinquet mihi: crapula
autem nonnunquam subrepit servo tuo, fac quaeso ut long absit a me: and quis
est qui non capiatur aliquantulum exira metas necessitatis? Quisquis est
magnus, magnificet nomen tuum: ego autem non sum, quia homo peccator sum: sed
tamen ego in his positus tentationibus, cerio quotidie cum cupiditatibus:
Drunkenness, O Lord, is far from me; grant it may never approach unto me:
surfeiting sometimes creeps unawares upon thy servant, remove it far from me;
and who is he that sometimes exceeds not the bounds of necessity? Whosoever is
perfect shall magnify thy name: such a one I am not, because a sinful man:
nevertheless though environed with these tentations, I war daily against my
lusts. And this I do further, for unnecessary refections, I have clean cut
them off: and then secondly, as Prove. 23.20. homines comessatores fugi, I
shun gluttonous men: Thirdly, mihi sufficit meus apparatus, I am content with
my own portion. Fourthly, whenever I go beyond the bounds of necessity; non
dico, ut Esa. 56.12. erit cras ut body, and amplius, I say not, as it is Es.
56.12. to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant. This says he I
do. And then he comes to exhort, Et fratres mei, quam lenissime, sed tamen
quam instantissime vos oro, and therefore my brethren, most lovingly, yet most
earnestly I beseech you that you will strive to do the like.

Excess of drink.
In that we called subactum solum, a disposing of our bodies 1. To Temptation.
2. To Concupiscence.
As the first is in excess of meats before handled: so the second is the same
in excess of drink. Ephesians. 5.18. he tells us, there is a drink (...),
wherein is this fornication, and the inclination thereto. The very same we see,
Prove. 23.33. for among the effects of wine and drunkenness, there be gives
this, that he should look upon strange women, and his heart should speak lewd
things: And he shall be fitter for this sin. 1. Pet. 4.3. He removes there
from Christians, not only (...), drunkenness, which the Fathers call
voluntarium daemonem, a voluntary Devil, when a man willingly bereaveth
himself of reason; but he also adds (...), compotations: whether they have
the effect, Esa. 5.11. though they take not away reason, yet do inflame us,
and kindle our blood and spirits. Or else, as it is verse. 22. a man by using
it, gets an habit, that he is strong to do it; and that he himself can be
free from it, and can behold others infirmities with pleasure. In any of these
cases, the excess of drink is forbidden: not only because, as Prove. 20.1. he
says, it deceives: or as it is, Prove. 23.20. the man that delights in wine,
the drunkard and glutton shall never be rich: but because it disposes a man to
this, Genesis 19.33. even when he is without knowledge, and unwillingly: but most
commonly, Prove. 23.33. voluntarily, and with knowledge to be a meet mould to
receive the Devils print.

It is suth a vice, that a man entered into it, shall hardly be able to recover
himself. 1 Timothy 5.23. where Timothy is so far from excess, as that being in
great infirmity, he will not venture upon wine without Paul's direction. Then we
see by that, that the Apostle sets down, that in bodily infirmities, the
use of it is lawful. And Prove. 31.6. in heaviness of mind, whether it come
by an extraordinary chance, or by disposition of nature. And Nehem. 8.10. in a
public benefit of the Church, there may be public gratulation, civilly or
ecclesiastically: for that was the third part of temperance. And whatsoever was
not a hinderer of any of these, it was a day of public joy. There the people
were ready to mourn, therefore he says, they should go home; and he willed
them to testify by the use of the creatures, the joy of the benefit which God
had vouchsafed to his Church. But out of these three cases it must not be used.
And contrary to these, Esa. 22.13. Even as in the time when there was occasion
that they should rather mourn, they fell to joy and gladness: when they
should rather have fasted, they fell to feasting: both those are contrary to
this precept.

And a third thing whereas the Apostle reckons (...), wine, they straight
take hold of it; but where he joyneth (...), little: they take no hold of it.
There must not be redundantia, superfluity.

Amos 6.6. it is counted an especial fault of the Princes of Israel, that they
drank wine in bowls, etc. whereas wine and ointments are to be used, no
otherwise then will serve for medicines of nature, or duty; or testifying their
joy or pleasure for blessings received: if it be not used for some one of
these, we have no warrant for it; and it disposes us to this sin.

And you may apply the five rules, to the right governing your self; so both
these vices are salved by a virtue called (...), Temperance: that is here
commended. Gal. 5.23. where it is made an especial fruit of the spirit: and
Tit. 2.6. where Titus is called especially to preach it, and exhort young men
to it, and 2 Pet. 1.6. it is commanded, that virtue shall be (...), in
knowledge: and to that is joined (...), Temperance, unto young men, and to
those that bend themselves to knowledge; and in scientia abstinentia, in
knowledge is Temperance.

2. The second thing is Idleness. Idleness.
The light of nature answering to him, that asked what was luxuria: that it was
nothing else but (...), a passion of idleness: Ezekiel. 16.49. lusting after
strange flesh, it came of Idleness.

Idleness highly displeases God, as well in regard of the next Commandment,
as in regard of loss of time, which is to be carefully employed. Gal. 6.10.
and Ephesians. 5.16. when we have over-seene our selves in loss of time, we must
be careful to redeem it. It comes also under this Commandment, making us
applyable, and like soft wax for concupiscence.

Idleness is in two things. Being 1. Given to sleep. 2. Awaked, and not
exercised in our callings.


The first, in Romans 13.13. when he has been in (...), banquetings* and then
in (...), drunkenness: thirdly, he comes to (...): we translate it
chambering; but is properly lying in bed. And there is joined with it (...),
wantonness: the companion of (...), chambering, and beginning of concupiscence.

Amos 6.4. he speaks there, and upbraideth them, as with an offense, And they
lay and stretched themselves on their beds: and Mich. 2.1. that by thus
stretching themselves, they began to cogitare nequam, and to have wicked
thoughts. And we our selves see, 2 Samuel 11.2. that David after his sleep, he
was disposed to take the air in his Turret, and so was made a fit matter to
receive the impression of the sight. For which cause Solomon, Pro. 20.13. meet
for this purpose, after that he had sain, verse. 11. Those that are young, a man
may know them by their actions, whether their words be aright; And then verse.
12. thus you shall know whether they apply their ears and eyes to knowledge,
as God created them: otherwise, as verse. 13. if they love sleep, the effects
of it shall come upon them.

2. The quantity of it, Prove. 6.9. Vsque quo dormis, ultra horam? how long will thou sleep O sluggard? Romans 13.11. when the hour comes, then to be on his
bed, as the door on the hinge; so he that is slothful will never prove good.

3. The manner, as we see in Jonas, cap. 1.5. It is said there, that he was
dead asleep, when the danger hung over him; and being for his cause. Jerome on
that place. Some sleep does not seem to be requies lassi, but sepultura
suffocatt, the repose of the wearied but the burying of the dead: Esa. 29.10.
The sleep of slumber, is a certain plague of God: and, as it stands there,
is to be understood as well of (...), the drowsinesse of the soul, as of the
sleep of the body: wherein a man, is often iterating of it. It is a sign,
that as Jonas in the thickest of the tempest, slept deeply; the visitation of
God being upon him. In these regards we come to be faulty in our natural
desires.

A^o^ia, not laboring in our callings.
As on the other side, with wanting labor, and giving our selves to ease, we
come to have, Heb. 12.12. hanging heads, and loose knees, that are fit for no
good thing. And consequently, as there is none of the creatures of God, whether
it be natural, or artificial; but standing still, it grows to be corrupt:
as water (for it most properly) standing does putrify; and being putrified
once, engenders Toades and other such venomous creatures: so ease in the body
brings forth podagram, the gout: and in the mind the disease of it, Basil
calls podagram anima, the gout of the soul: Ambrose calls them creaturas
Domin superfluas, superfluous creatures of God: which do no way profit the
body wherein they live. But as the Heathen man says of the Hog, that has
animam pro sale, Salt instead of a soul: they should not else be sweet.

2. These. 3.11. Idleness there not measured by doing nothing, but by not doing
the duties of their places. They that are placed here, and do not study, if
they be (...), working not at all: then if they be (...), busy bodies: 1 Timothy
5.13. he says there, they be not (...), idle: and not only that, but (...),
idle pratlers. And upon these comes tale-carrying, lying, faining, etc.
forging: and they disquiet other; and not only that, but they are (...), busy
bodies, meddling out of their calling. These be here restrained. In each of
these, as there grows a disposition to make the body fit for the evil
motions of the soul, so the virtue, 1 Pet. 2.11. Abstinence, and fighting
against such concupiscences as do militare conira animam, fight against the
soul.

1. For the first, against sleep, 1 Pet. 1.13. he has that which he calls
(...), sobriety, properly watchfulness. 1 These. 5.6. the Apostle has the
same, (...), be sober and watch: drunkenness and sleep are in the night,
these are (...), works of darkness: but we are (...), of the light: and
therefore our desires must be of the works of light, that we may walk
accordingly. 2. For the other (...), 1 These. 4.11. A desire to set our selves
to do our own works, and to do it, etc.
Irrigatio concupiscentiae.
After this, the next is called irrigatio concupiscentiae, the meddling with
noisome meats, which are provocations to this sin. As in bodily Physic,
there be many bodies changed by the diet, coveting some one dish, that much
breeds one disease; though they be not naturally given to it, yet at the
length they come to it. So it is in the soul; As we must keep the state of it
from being a meet mould, or a fat ground for the Devil to cast in his seed:
so we must take heed of these meats, and outward objects and allurements,
that may dispose the soul to this sin.

We consider these, as they are in our selves, and as they are in others: and
as they are in the body, and about it. As namely; First, if any man do
adhibere fucum, use painting: it was one of Iezebels vices. 2 King. 9.30. It is
said, she paimed her face, tired her hair, and looked out at a window. And not
only a thing in one person, but in many persons; for setting a wrong color on
their eyebrowes, Ier. 4.30. And then Prove. 9.14. Solomon testifies of the
Harlot, she sets her down to be an allurement to men. These be things
condemned by the word of God; yet this is not so usual as the second, that is,
the strange disguising of our selves in apparel. 1 Timothy 2.9. 1 Pet. 3.3. It is
reprehended even in women: which are rather to be allowed in it, because it is
mundus muliebris, the ornament of women. Greg. Think with your selves what a
deformity it is in you, seeing it is found fault withal in women? First, they
find fault with (...), the wreathing of the hair; and the second is called
(...), the adding of gold or pearls to apparel. And the third they call
(...), rare apparel, strange and costly. Luke 16.19. It is called fine linen,
and silk. The reason, in Paul, because these become not the professors of the
fear of God. Peter has two reasons, 1. v. 4. not the utter, but the inner man
to be garnished. Caro, where is magna corporis cura, there plerunque is magna
mentis incuria, where the body is too much decked, there (it is to be feared)
the mind for the most part is neglected: for this is care with modesty. 2.
verse. 5. ab exemplo sanctorum, from the example of the Saints: Did the Saints
use apparel thus? did Sarah, did Abraham?

A third thing, Gesture. Mich. 2.3. God says, 3. Gesiu^.
he will be a swift revenger against such as go proudly in gate: Esa. 3.16.
tells what he means by it, 1. they go on tiptoe: 2. they have exerium
gutiur,
stretched forth necks: 2. nutantes oculos, the rolling of the eyes: casting
them scornfully on the one side first, and then on the other: and 4. they have
minutos passus, a mincing gate: they go as if they were compedui, shackled.
And he thundereth as pathetically as he can, even in the daughters of Sion;
much more would he in the sons of Sion. Ambr. Gesta naturam dedit, sed gratia
emendat. Aug. Prove. 30.13. some have proud gates of nature, sed gratiam
emendat, grace must amend all.

Then after these, there are other incentives and provocations from without us:
Psalm. 50.18. consortium cum adulieris; Provocation ab exira.
and Prove. 7.22. meeting and conferences with Harlots, carrying a man as an Ox
to the slaughter, and as a fool to the stocks, or a bird to the pitfall, etc.
1 Cor. 5.6. fermentum modicum totam massam, Company.
etc. a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump. It is common to all vices, but
he applies it there to this sin. This vice has an especial virtue to
leaven the company.

Company, not only notorious, but also suspicious is to be avoided, Prove.
7.8.9. he says, one of his observations was, that looking out of his window,
he saw a young man would needs go by a suspicious place; and he did it in the
twilight, in the evening, at a suspicious time: and so among the rest, you
shall see these two plainly that prepare them to this, 1. These. 5.20.22. It is
not only malum, evil: but species also mali, appearance of evil, that must be
avoided. And not only coram Deo, before God, 2 Cor. 8.21. but all evil
suspicions before men. This for company.

Now another thing is, which the Heathen man calls his comites, his
companions: that he was solus, alone, and yet had his comites: nunquam minus
solus, quam cum solus, companions never less alone, then when alone: he had a
book or two about him; so that under company come evil books, that speak
broadly, and grossly of this sin; and bring a man to have both knowledge and
affection. 1 Cor. 15.33. Paul speaking of the sayings of Epicurisme, alleges
out of Menander, (...), etc. Evil words, or evil deeds, spoken or written,
corrupt good manners. Evil words be as Prove. 9.17. stolen waters, etc. or as
Prove. 7.18. let us take our pleasure in dalliance, etc. by coloring of a
filthy act with good words. So for company.

There are annexed hereto, such two things, as by the eye and ear work the
same impression in the soul; 1. Pictures, imagines obscoenae: as of Baal-Peor,
Numb. 25.18. Hose. 9.10. they longed to look on it: and Psalm. 106.28. they
joined themselves to Baal Peor, and eat the offerings of the dead. It was
Balaams counsel, Numb. 31.16. 1 Cor. 10.8. Ne scortemur, etc. To bring them to
see the Image in the Temple. We know what he says in Eunuchus, The parlers
were hanged with the pictures of Danae, and Jupiters coming to her: you see
his conclusion. So Prove. 7.16. the Harlots chamber hanged with tapestry, very
like to be these. So whatsoever stirs up the mind by the eye or ear (by
analogy) as Mark 6.22. choreae lascivae, or ludi theatrici ( i. council. *
Agathense, Ch^^^ae las^i^ae. Ludi th^a^^i^i. (...) C^ncil. Aga^^ens. in
Cau^anz. can. 28. In C^^i^ Edition can n^^ 39. n^n C^n^^l let. 30. ^an. 23. in
Editi^n. C^ais.
can. 5.) that pertain to this point of foolish places. The reasons, as the
Councels allege them, are very good, and to be liked. And one is Psalm.
119.37. Averte oculos, nevideani vanitatem, turn away thine eyes, lest they
behold vanity. And besides these, there is loss of time, Prove. 6.27, 28. he
has Rubens fault, Genesis 49.4. as light as water. Prove. 6.27. Where this
affection is, he shall take fire in his bosom; and he shall go upon coals:
and therefore the danger can hardly be fled. Item, whatsoever may allure us,
W^nton songs.
as Esa. 53.15. Hariots songs; and a worse abuse: Amos 6.5. a conforming of
such songs as they desire to hear for their wantonness, to the instruments
and tunes of David's songs. So by what means soever the spirit of fornication
is watered, all is unlawful, whether it be by songs, or by sights, by the
eyes, or by the ears. All these Gal. 5.19. are called generally, the fruits of
the flesh: as (...), wantonness, Hose. 14.16. being faclum lasciviemium, and
the second redundantium. Amos 6.7. Concerning wantonness, both that in
redundantia, and in waxing wanton: the casting off of the cords of discipline,
1 Timothy 5.11. and verse. 6. by young widows: they are the beginning of what
wickedness soever.

The virtue of modesty is to restrain these, 1 Timothy 2.9. with shamefacednesse
and modesty; that is properly under the name of honestum. Inward beauty, and an
inward eye: and that makes the Saints to love, even as the outward beauty does
the adulterous eye; Ephesians. 5.3 and in diverse other places, he sends this
point, (...), and (...), thus it becomes us, and as it becomes the Saints:
speaking of these, he harpeth always on that.

Two sorts of likers.
For there are two sorts of likers, for 1 Pet. 4.4, 5. a kind of men, to whom
if we conform not our selves in the same excess of riot, they think it
strange: And they that are used to them, think it becomes them well. But these
shall give account to him that judges quick and dead. But Psalm. 52. last.
there is another sort that shall judge quid deceat nos, and quid offendat
sanctos. It is meet, that the Saints account meet. Sirach 19.27. When a man
sees a man, he may know him; the apparel, laughter gesture, and gate, will
declare what is in him. And Hose. 5.5. there is an outward pride that will
testify to the face of Israel and Ephraim.

Signs be either in the eye, or in the speech.

Adulterour eyes.
In the eye, by Christ, Matthew. 5.28. a glancing eye; adultery is in the heart,
and Mark 7.22. adultery comes from the heart, and (...), an eye of
fornication, thence also: and 2 Pet. 2.14. such as have their eyes full of
adultery passively.

Now of sending forth our looks, exempla: the sons of God on the daughters
of men, Genesis 6.2. and the Egyptians on Abraham's wife: and fell into this sin,
Genesis 12.14. and Genesis 34.1. Dinah, Genesis 39.7. Potiphars wife on Joseph. So
David, 2 Samuel 11.2. Prove. 6.25. in the eyes and eyelids.

2. The froth or foam of this sin forbidden under (...), Spuma.
Ephesians. 4.29. rotten speech, and Col. 3.8. Ephesians. 5.4. it must not be once
named, because, Prove. 12.14. men shall eat the fruit of their lips: and Matthew.
12.36. de omni verbo otioso, etc. of every idle word, etc. therefore much more
of those broad speeches.

The H. G. that way seeks the best names, and has choice of words for it.
Genesis 4.8. cognovit uxorem suam, he knew his wife: And, it was not with Sarah
after the manner of women; and 1 Cor. 7.3. he calls it due benevolence:
whereby it is very sure, that as impudicus oculus, is nuncius impudici animi; a
wanton eye, is the messenger of an unchaste heart: so impudicum labium, an
unchaste lip, is the sign of an unchaste heart.

These are either the vice of inverecundia, want of shame: Heb. 12.28. (...),
with reverence and godly fear: and 1 Timothy 2.9. (...), with shamefastness and
sobriety; or the means, (...), filthiness, filthy communication: and then
infers an objection, and answers it; Some will happily call it stolen
water: But let no man seduce himself; for, for such things comes the wrath
of God, though the deed be away.

Now in the outward act, the (...), the foregoing symptoms, it is either in
conatu, to compass it, Job 31.9. by lying in wait at our neighbors door,
31.10. by alluring speeches: Exodus 17.18. by sorcery, by the example of
Iezabell, 2 King. 9.22. Iezabels whoredoms and witchcrafts; when they are past
the flowers of their years, then with sorceries: and much more horrible, if it
be with murder: Prove. 7.26. are these praeludia, which are actions, etc. Prove.
5 20. he forbids complexus impudicos; to embrace the bosom of a stranger,
forbidden: Prove. 7.13. the Harlot had a strong face, and she caught him, and
kissed him: incestum osculum, an unchaste kiss: Deuteronomy. 25.12. he forbids the touch
of the hand; the woman that helps her husband, etc. shall have her hand cut
off. Habak. 2.15. A woe to him that gives his neighbor drink, to see his
nakedness. But beyond these the Apostle makes a period: There are many more
then these, but it is a shame to name them: therefore, it is a shame to do
them. Against these stands the virtue pudicina, chastity: 1 These. 4.4. (...),
in sanctification and honor: and Phil. 4.8. and James 3.4.17. that is that
part of virtue that procures the taking away of these: Deuteronomy. 22.12. he takes
order so, that that sight might not be seen, that Cham saw: and not abhorring
the sight, had a curse for it. (...)
Now of the act it self.

In the actual sin of incontinencie, in the first place was that which the
Apostle calls, (...).
Col. 3.5. Gal. 4.19. (...), uncleanness: for the affirmative of this
Commandment before, 1 These. 4.4. Every man must possess his own vessel in
holiness and honor. Opposite to sanctification, 2 Cor. 7.1. to (...),
holiness: he sets there, (...), the defiling of the flesh: so likewise, 1
These. 4.5. for there he opposes (...); For the actual sin is nothing else,
but the bringing forth of the passion of concupiscence; of that the
concupiscence longs after. So the carnal passage of the seed. But 2 Pet.
2.10. he goes plainly to it, and calls it (...), i. a desire of polluting.
With which pollution, Jude, verse. 8. (speaking of wicked men) says sopiti
inquinant carnem, these filthy dreamers defile the flesh: and verse. 23. not
only their flesh, but their garments also are defiled with their flesh, which
he would have a man to hate: that his hatred should stretch forth it self, to
the coat or garment that was defiled with the flesh: (it was one of the
members, and not all) For this, Numb. 5.27. brings in diseases and weakening
of our bodies, and the pollution of it; which stands against Baptism: which
has an outward action, and an inward.

Now because Jude, verse. 8. speaks of such as sopiti inquinant carnem,
therefore there falls into this member nocturna pollutio, nocturnall
pollution: which if it be by reason of infirmity, or secondly, ex plenitud^ne
vasorum, from the fullness of the vessels: and thirdly, by dissolution of some
great exercise, or heat, as in great journeys not tending hereto: in these
respects it comes to be no sin. So, if not being in thought of man, it
pass from him. Of Divines, to speak of it, against it: or Physicians for the
cure of it, without any affected mind: if of this thought it does proceed, it
is certain that in both these it is quit, and no sin. As on the other side,
that a man does it after excess it is sin, as in drunkenness, though he
commit it not ex ratione actus subsequentis, by reason of the act subsequent,
that is purposely to sin: yet he is punished for it ex ratione actus
praecedentis, by reason of the precedent act; that is, his drukennesse: so, if
a man give himself to surfeiting, and of that comes profluvium seminis, in
this he is not quit. Or again, if by often rolling of that cogitation in the
mind, in the day time, it is procured in the night; so it is sin: as
likewise in the former, if there be not ingraia recordat^o, a sorrow in
remembering it.

This sin, the Apostle calls it (...), uncleanness: the Fathers call it
mollities soeminea, effeminarenesse: In the Law it is called the sin of Onan,
Genesis 38.9. It is said, he spilled it on the ground; and the censure of it is,
verse. next, It was exceeding wicked in Gods eyes.

2. Cum alio, with another: and first (...), Bestialit^.
an abomination not to be named, Buggery; forbidden, Levit. 18.13. punished
with death, Levit. 20.13. the beast also. And with death of soul also, Revel.
21.8. (...), the abominable, shall have their portion in the lake, etc. ratio
est, because it is abominable confusion.

3. With mankind: 1. where violence is offered, Rapius.
as well to males as females: as Aloisius, bastard to Paulus tertius; to
females, Deuteronomy. 22.25. that if a man offer to force a Virgin, or woman, she
seeking to resist him, is innocent: but he shall die; because, beside that
sin, there is violence, breaking the former Commandment: and so there is a
double guilt, and death its reward.

4. Of those parties that yield consent, they are males, or females: Sedomie.
for so strong is our concupiscence, and so strangely affected in it, that
every thing is sufficient to stir up the coals of it. And the Heathen, quod
in foe nina sexus facit, id in puero aetas, what the sex does in a woman, that
does youth in the male: It is forbidden, Levit. 18.22. and 20.13. present death
enacted and decreed for both.

The reasons of it.

1. Ephesians. 5.11. because it is an unfruitful work of darkness: it is contra
bonum prolis, against the benefit of procreation: which is the end of
matrimony. 2. Against nature: Romans 1.26. the natural use is in the other sex:
verse. 24. it is a pollution: verse. 27. not only a sin, but also a recompense
of other sins: verse. 28. it is a sign of a reprobate mind. For the same
sin God sat in judgment, Genesis 19.5. and punished the five Cities:
therefore, that plot of ground is an unfruitful Sea to this day, called mare
morinum, the dead Sea; because it nourishes no live thing: and lacus
asphaltites, of an unprofitable work: Genesis 18.20. he faith it is an exceeding
grievous sin, and a loathsome: So there is Gods own censure for it.
5. In the other sex, 1. a man with a woman; if it be with many, and that
without all color of Law, it is scortatio: whoremongers. Scortatio.
Deuteronomy. 23.17. God says there shall be no whore among the daughters of Israel,
nor whoremonger among the children of Israel: and as verse. 18. God compares
them with a homely comparison, but good enough; the adulteress to a bitch, and
the scortatores to a great number of dogs.

The civil punishment of this sin by the light of nature, Genesis 38.24. death,
and Heb. 13.4. if the civil punishment take no hold of it, if in the Common
wealth it be forborne: yet he himself will judge it, both in the life to come,
Revel. 21.8. and in this time, with strange and extraordinary judgments, as
lues Gallica, the French pox: an abominable, and filthy disease, not heard of
in former ages.

6. Under color of Law came that vice of polygamie; Polygamy.
wherewith sundry of the Patriarchs and others were entangled, yielding to the
corrupt customs of the Countries about, where they lived, not requiring Gods
will; But both nature it self, might have taught them, that whereas the care
and foresight of both father and mother, the male and damme or female, is
required for education, there the very beasts admit but one: but whereas the
damme or female may bring up alone, there it is otherwise.

The creation is plain, and plainer, by Matthew. 19.5. They two shall be one
flesh, expressing the number; and Mark 10.11. he says plainly, that if a man
should put away his wife, and marry another wife, he commits adultery against
her: so Levit. 18.18. (as it is best understood) when he says, Ye shall not
take a woman and her sister both. The terms and names of brother and sister
are joined to any thing: in things without life, as if one half and the other
were added together, it may be called the brother or sister of it. But whether
it be so to be understood or no, yet the reason (Lest you vex her) the vexation
of the soul, and the trouble, (as in the house of Abraham, between Sarah and
Agar, and in Jacobs house, between Leah and Rachel, and in 1 Samuel 1.2.
between Annah and Peninnah) in all these we see the inconvenience that
redounds to bonum oeconomicum, the peace of the family, a motive strong enough
to evince the inexpediencie, if not the unlawfulness of it.

Polygamie, and that is to have a woman and her sister: Mal. 2.15. calling men
to that ab initio non fuit sic, from the beginning it was not so: (for we
speak not what God can permit) he shows plainly, that if ever polygamie had
been to be allowed, it had been in the beginning of the world: (for that is the
color they have, that for increase of children, and propagation of the world,
it was lawful) but he says there, that God having plenty of spirit, and power
to have made more, yet he made but one for Adam, Eve: therefore, polygamie
unlawful for any age that came after.

Again, whereas Genesis 4.19. Lamech, one of Cains race, is the first that the
holy Ghost notes to have had two wives: and that Jacob learned it in Padan
Aram, among the idolaters: and so consequently was unlawful then, and
afterward: seeing the Prophets condemn it, and Christ, and the Apostle, 1
Cor. 7.2. (...), her own husband, for a woman: and (...), his own wife, for
the man: it is flat, that it is of it self unlawful.

In matrimony, fer^^.
7. In matrimony, cum uxore sua, with his own wife: The saying of Sixtus, a
Philosopher, is greatly used of Aug. Ambrose, and other Fathers, that adulter
est uxoris suae amator ferventior, too hot and fervent a love toward a man's
own wife, is not free from the suspicion of adultery: that fervor, Levit.
18.19. is forbidden, and is punished, not with death, but with excommunication:
Levit. 20.18. no approaching permitted in mensibus, no not to his wife:
therefore we are not left to our selves in matrimony, but when in the 1. choice
of wife, in the 2. contract, and 3. solemnization of marriage in the Church (by
the Minister, Gods deputy) Gods order has been kept; then 4. does fall out
into this question, in marriage to behave our selves, 1 Co. 7.29. as if we had
them not. i. as he says verse. 5. being content to master his lusts, so that
for duties of christianity, we may separate our selves: then 5. as Christ,
Matthew. 5.32. not departing, nor willing to a divorce, but only in the case of
adultery: And lastly, 1. Cor. 7. verse. ult. after we are delivered by the death
of one party, 1 Timothy 5.11. not quickly to wax wanton again, and to fall to
our lusts: but to be contented to stay our lusts for a time, till the body be
resolved to earth, whence it came. These things being observed, and kept, the
other controversies shall not greatly trouble us.

8. If the woman be allied to us, as either cognata, or agnata, Incest.
a kinsman by the fathers side or mothers, it is Incest: Lev. 18.6. forbidden:
and Lev. 20.17. punished with death. And he takes it for such a plain case,
that he deals with it as with a principle: as if the only naming of mother
and sister, were cause sufficient in the light of nature, to restrain us from
them. No man hotter then Plato in his Commonwealth against it: as also 2 These.
4.4. Possess your vessels in holiness and honor. The honor we are to give
to them of our own flesh, is that we do not approach or come near to them.
Other reasons. 1. That the nearenesse of education, which by consanguinity (if
the same had not been removed) even by occasion of nearenesse, would have
been a great incentive, and inticement of lust, and of this sin. 2. Because
not only a family with it self, but one with another, should have friendship
and familiarity, which is procured by marriage: which if it were made within
the family, every house would have been as it were a Commonwealth within it
self: whereas now, there is unity to one family with another;
and more made of one another: therefore the difficulty of the consideration of
Adams children, makes this somewhat hard to decide; yet this is agreed upon by
all, in the right line, ( Genesis 2.24.) it has not been done, but in the
collateral lines it has been done; but there are that of this and more, that
makes doubt of it, as divorcement and polygamie, winked at for a time: but God,
Levit. 20.23. says, that the Canaanites, etc. for this abomination the land
spued them out: therefore of its own nature it is unlawful, and Genesis 49.4.
Ruben is punished for Incest: his forfeitures there, before the Law, 1. of the
right of the Kingdom to Judah. 2. of the Priesthood to Levi: and he became
like water for his fact. So for the collateral line, John Baptist, Mark.
6.18. stood in it against Herod, that he might not have his brothers wife: and
died in the quarrel.

Again, the sharp course of the Apostle against the incestuous person, 1 Cor.
5.1. and last, Amos 2.7. Gods own judgment, that if the father and son go
in to one woman, he will not spare them, etc. show the unlawfulness of it,
though for necessity tolerated in the beginning.

9. Next, Adultery.
if the party be removed, and espoused, or married, (which is all one) it is
adultery: and forbidden, Levit. 18.20. and 10. Dent. 22.22. punished with
death, and verse. 23.24. he says plainly, If a maid be betrothed, etc. and so
shows plainly, that the extension of it is not only to be understood of the
married, but of the espoused too. Now the reason why God continually likeneth
adultery to this vice; and there is no vice that he oftener sets himself
against, then Incest; and why it pleases him to name it in this Commandment:
wherein the heinousness thereof may the more easily be discovered: therefore
we are to consider it, for howsoever politic men have not punished it with
death, yet it is the joint consent of all Divines, that it is capital. We see
in it the perverting of the whole estate of these two families, of which the
parties are members: and so of every family. For if it be not known (which God
will not suffer) for howsoever he deals in all other, yet he stays not in
this for an accusation: but in Numb. 5.11. he gives reine to the jealous man,
to put his wife to it, though he cannot accuse her. If it be kept close, it is
certain that in the family of the woman there is notorious theft committed:
because the man nourishes and brings up a child that is none of his* and
lays up inheritance for him. And in regard of the brethren^ because he has
inheritance among them: and he counts him among the brethren, that is none of
his.

If it be known, God gives them a plain mark, and taking away (...),
natural affection: both from them to the parents, and between them and the
other children: they all perish at last: as Augustus to his bastards: Medea to
her children: Absalom and Adoniah to David, and Iephta and his brethren: and
between Abimelech and his brethren: they had no natural affection between
them: so he sins against his own children; and against the children in the
other family, and against that that is not: he begets one that shall not be
accounted of the congregation of the Lord, he that is excluded out of the
politic and ecclesiastical government, Deuteronomy. 23.2.

Now it is against the Commonwealth, for it is a common hurt: Levit. 18.17.
that it polluteth the land: and the pollution will spue out the inhabitants:
and the land cannot be rid of pollution, but by bloodshed: and therefore it is
certain, that adultery, if it be not punished, is a very ready way to bring
down Gods judgments upon the land, rather then those things that are
committed more against the popular estate; murders by poysonings punished with
death.

Lex Iulia, and the ground of this law, that the adulterous woman think with
the other, she has fitter occasion to mingle poison with their meats: and so
every Commonwealth upon such grounds may resolve.

To make it capital, now we see not only by that, but also by plain murder;
by David, he falls into murder: Mark 6. Herodias, Herod's wife, because John
was a reprehender of it, a cause of murder. But a good wife, Prove. 31.10. she
is a possession that a man will esteem above pearls: So, besides the former
thefts, there is another theft of the appropriety of the party here.

In this Commandment, two things go further: especially there follows
lightly of this, Incest; by keeping it close: for the party not knowing how he
is allied, he cannot tell sometimes which is his race or lineage: it falls out
that he joyneth with them with whom he is allied, and to whom he may not match
himself: and so falls into such a sin, etc. therefore not only that, but
divorces: And it is plain by the whole course of profane Histories, that the
greatest civil wars of diverse nations; yea, and foraine wars have
proceeded of misliking: for, as 2 Samuel 13.15. that the hatred of Amnon grew to
be more then his love was before: so they must needs exceedingly hate one
another.

To these, if we add the branch of the ninth commandment, perfidiam, false
measures, and not only that barely, but perjury also: for there is a solemn
oath delivered to and from the parties before the congregation, and so the
breach of the third Commandment: and besides these; that God himself
threatens, Ephesians. 4.18. that it shall change the wisdom of the wise, and
make them sottish; as we see in Solomon: and Hose. 4.11. that it shall take
away the heart of the strong. Example in Sampson, the strongest that ever was.
These are prejudicial to the Commonwealth, and the curse of God upon the
parties, and the Commonwealth: Deuteronomy. 23.2. Hose. 4.10. they shall commit
adultery, and shall not increase; hence the barrenness of the fields, Ier.
23.10. punishment of this, and barrenness of the womb, Hose. 4.10. and more,
Job 31.12. they shall be put out: for this fault the two Tribes were punished,
as the ten Tribes for Incest; so is the Commonwealth endammaged by it.

Genesis 40.22. Egypts course for it: Joseph was committed to that prison, out of
which the chief Baker was hanged: therefore it was capital among them. And
Ier. 29.21, 22, 13. the adultery of Ahab, the son of Kolaiah, and his
companion Zedekiah, son of Maaseiah, that the King of Babel should burn them
with fire. And his comparison, Prove. 6.30.32. wonderfully abjecting theft, in
regard of this. Theft tolerable in respect of this, whereas now theft is
commonly punished with death; and that not a very absurd thing.

10. Now if the parties be solutae, single, if she continue with us, it is
concubinatus, the keeping of a Harlot that is not common. How God misliketh it,
he shows by a continual threatening, Genesis 21.10. crossed first in Agar; Cast
her out, and her son. They call them Concubines, which being their servants,
or baser, they ought not to marry, for disparagement; yet it was punished with
vexing them: Genesis 35.22. punished in Jacob, by Rubens Incest with Billah, and
Judge. 19.2. a Levit took a Concubine, and she played the whore: and 2 Samuel
3.7. Saul punished in his Concubines by Abner; and David in his, 2 Samuel 16.12.
by Absalom: and Solomon's Concubines had the worst issue of all, 1 King. 11.

11. Next, if the deed be done once only, it is stuprum; Stuprum.
done to a Virgin, or Widow, forbidden; Deuteronomy. 22.21. the punishment, death.
Genesis 34.21. Gods hand on the whole City Shechem for the rape of Dinah; and on
Tamar, Genesis 38.25. upon the dishonouring of a Widow: because they be in
potestate alterius, in the power of an other: a Virgin in potestate patris, so
an injury to the father; and the Widow being in his power, that is in
possibility to marry her, etc.

12. When the deed is often used, Fornication.
it is fornication. Though it be often used for the general sin, ye it is
properly called, vaga libido, vagus concubitus, wandering lust, promiscuous:
that is, when the party is so before forbidden, Romans 1.29. Gal. 5.29. more
plainly, 1 Cor. 10.8. Numb. 25.9. punished with the death of 23000. Judge.
20.4. A whole Tribe almost destroyed at once, and that by their brethren having
warrant from God; thereby God shows plainly what account he makes of it.

Paena: hard leaving this sin.
Beyond these three, the iteration of it, that is a punishment joined to it:
Prove. 21.3. if a man be once taken with it, he shall hardly return; Prev.
5.12. at his later end, he shall wonder at himself, and say, How, etc. verse.
22. it is a sin with cords; a man shall be bound with it: Prove. 23.27. like
the falling into a deep narrow pit, wherein a man cannot help himself:
therefore hard getting up; and Prove. 7.27. like the grave. As they that are
buried in Hell, rise not again; so they that take a taste of it, shall never
return again, except by great grace of God, as Solomon: but Prove. 9.18. her
ghests, not only in the grave, but also in the bottom of Hell; showing
plainly that this experieutia cognita knowledge by experience, breeds still
more and more cords, and still deeper and deeper.

Prostitutio, Stews.
13. Beyond these is prostitutio: both of private men, Levit. 19.29. and
publicly, Ezekiel. 22.11. Every one did it, chap. 6.24. they built them stews, a
brothell-house, detested by the Prophet: and godly Princes, as Asa, 1 King.
15.12. have labored to remove them.

14. The last pitch of all, is defending of it: Defense.
as we know some by public writing have maintained: so Genesis 18.19. not the
deed, but the cry was very great: and Genesis 19.9. there is a pattern of it. For
when Lot had told them that it was not lawful; they say it is good; we will
do it, he is a stranger, etc.

And of the same with women: Agur, Prove. 30.20. she says, Non commisi
iniquitatem, I have done no wickedness: and Numb. 25.6. frons meretricis, a
whores forehead: for there Zimri brought in a strumpet before Moses and the
congregation, being at prayers, and that into his Tent: Phil. 3.19. men glory
in their shame.

Now against these, are 2. virtues, Castitas, chastity, Coelebs, single.
Conjugalis, conjugall.
1 Cor. 7.8.

Castitas ^oelebs.
The first commended, verse. 38. It is better then the other, either simply, or
else verse. 26. in regard of present necessity, which is to be weighed: that he
would have men verse. 32. to be without care. If they be married, verse. 24.
there is trouble and care of family, etc. so verse. 5. they must watch, fast and
pray with consent: which else they may do freely, without consent; thus in
regard of the troubles and cares of the married estate, coelibatus is the
better.

And consequently, in a second thing: 1 Cor. 9.15. he might do it, but he would
not be burdensome, etc. and he would not be charged with covetousness, but to
be liberal: 1 Cor. 7.35. he would have our cleaving to the Lord, to be without
separation.

Now that these (...), natural affections, beget in us a care of res
familiares, of domestical affairs, and too often do separate us from God in
our devotions, and wed us to the world; besides that of the Apostle, verse. 33.
experience verifies. Vegetius: minus malum metuit, qui minus delicias gustavit:
the less evil he tastes, the less evil he fears: so in regard of this,
he will be willinger to die, or to follow Christ: he comes to the first, and
if not that, then to the second, conjugall chastity.

Means of preserving us and^.
The manner of behaving our selves, to preserve us that we may be found
unblameable against this sin of concupiscence, 1. knowing that it is not
tentari, but uri, to be set into a heat, to be enflamed, that the Apostle
speaks against: for his meaning is not, that the gift of continency brings
with it naturalem (...), privationem sensus, natural insensibility, or
privation of sense. The inward boiling a man may examine thus, whether it be in
him a punishment for sin: It is certain that adultery, and unclean lusts
are a punishment for pride. Enoch.

It is plain, Ose. 5.5. the spirit of fornication is among them: ratio,
because the pride of Israel testifies to his face: he that can accuse himself
of pride, may fear that the spirit of fornication is upon him: as contra, if
he be assailed with the spirit of fornication, he must look back and see, if
it be not the punishment of pride: Romans 1.22. he notes, that they thought
themselves wise, etc. therefore God gave them over unto (...), vile affections:
which appeared first, Genesis 3.7. quasi Deus, to be as God, was the first
punishment that came upon him for his pride: he had first need of Fig Leaves
to cover the shame of his nakedness; as if he punished, contumeliam spiritus,
with contumelia carnis, the contumely of the spirit, with the shame of the
flesh.

2. Another, 2 Samuel 11.2. (...), that is, sadness, or heaviness, that a man
has in spiritual things; altogether unlusty to good exercises: he must
sleep, and then walk, etc. so he shall be sure to come to David's tale:
therefore, because man must have pleasure, if he have it not in the spirit, he
will have it in the body: and so when he feels it in him, then begins his
mind evagari circa illicita, to rove: and further, there comes in importunitas
mentis, importunity of the mind: whence (...), anger: then (...), injuries:
then (...), final destruction. If we find us guilty in these, it is not the
way to strive with this sin; but as with the former, and repent.

If it be a tentation only to sin, its proceeding either from a cause Without,
Within.


From a cause without, in two respects.

1. Company: Matthew. 5.29. a man shall have evil eyes that offend him, and
hands; he must cut them off, and refrain their company: Prove. 23.20. 1 Cor.
5.6. modicum fermentum, etc. 1. Pet. 4.4. a man must forsake such company, and
be content to bear their outrages. 2. And secondly, in regard of some object,
Prove. 5.8. and that is, the offending eye. If the occasion grow by a party,
keep far from thence, go not nigh the door of the house; it must be by
eschewing: therefore Job 31.1. he made a covenant with his eyes, etc.
The counsel of Paradise, you shall imperare Evae, command Eve: and cavere
Serpentem, and avoid the Serpent: and then you shall be safe, if you come not
to see the tree. Gal. 3.3. Many men's love and affection begins in the spirit,
and after, growing to a carnal delight, ends in the flesh: therefore he says,
1 Timothy 5.2. Comfort the elder women, as mothers; the younger, as sisters; in
omni castuate, in all chastity: and 1. Pet. 1.21. cum omni puritate, love with
all pureness, as far as you will: but a man must vereri omnia opera sua, be
jealous of all his actions: for most certain it is, that naturally we are
subactum solum.

2. From within us: either from the body, or soul.

1. From the body: if it be too much cherished, Impinguatus dilectus, our
beloved waxed fat: therefore Paul says, we must castigare corpus, chastise the
body, to make it chaste: 1 Cor. 9.27. that we keep it down, and physic for
it; 2 Cor. 11.28. in weariness and painfulnesse, in hunger and thirst, in
watching and fasting, in cold and nakedness, i. by avoiding excess in diet
and apparel: and as ease, so also of sleep: so must the body be kept down.
2. If it be in the soul, for anger and mistrusting: but for this, 1 Cor. 6.18.
fly from fornication: 1 Timothy 2.22. fly the lusts of youth. Ambrose, vide ne
ingrediaris conflictum, stand not resisting it with combat, but fly: and
committing himself from solitude to good company, and together with this,
because it has pleased God to warrant his word as a tree of life, and the
leaves of his word are as medicines, that the reading hereof shall be
profitable unto us in this behalf: the seeking of such places, as do ex
diametro pugnare, fight against it, cannot but be very profitable for us: as
Genesis 18.20. that he accounts it a very exceeding grievous sin: and that it is
therefore so grievous, because, 1 Cor. 7.2. he has appointed a remedy for it:
and Prove. 22.14. that in his anger he will suffer a man to fall into it: that
it is an infamous sin: that when it is known, it makes him as one of the
fools of Israel, 2 Samuel 13.13.
It bereaveth a man of his gifts, Ephesians. 4. Hose. 4. that it is a brutish
sin, and makes a man brutish: and such, as Ierom says, delectat in momenium,
and cruciat in aeternum, the delight whereof is momentany, but the pain
eternal. And the general remedy here withal, is prayer: because ( Prove.
21.6. and 6.14. and 7. the latter end, and 19.18.) it fhall be a mavelous
privilege of wisdom to keep a man's self from a strange woman: Eccl. 1.
there is a special remedy for this tentation: so James 1.5. that wisdom is
Gods gift: Wisd. 8.21. when he saw that wisdom would not come, except God gave
it, therefore he conformed himself to prayer for it: James 3.17. the first
thing, it makes a man (...), chaste: therefore ask it of God.

Where these prevail not, Genesis 20.17. as Abraham prayed for A^imelec, so if
our own prayers will not help, we must seek for other men's prayers, and we
must make them known to them: therefore we are to take Simon Magus his way,
Acts 8.24. Pray ye for me etc. Exo. 9.28. Pharaoh to Moses, etc. Pray you for
me. Ecclus. 4.9. Vae soli: nunquam autem magis quam in hoc vitio, Woe to him
that is alone: and most of all in the conflict of this vice.

And if this will not help, but there is ustulatio, burning, 1 Cor. 7.9. there
is a remedy appointed for it: he is to take on him the estate of marriage,
which is holy. This must be the last. So working continency in a man's heart;
and outwardly, giving our selves to the keeping down of the body, by avoiding
excess in diet; and as ease, so also sleep; to avoid which, give we our
selves to sobriety, fasting, prayer, and so briefly to watchfulness and
modesty in all outward means, abstaining from excess of meat, drink, and
apparel: Pe^ castitatem coelibem, or else conjugalem, by single, or conjugall
chastity, we may perform this Commandment.

The last rule, Numb. 25.18. of the enemies, he vexes the Madianites, because
they had laid this stumbling block. A setting of our selves against them, that
provoke us to it. So likewise a persuasion to virtue, Genesis 39.9. by Joseph's
example: and 2 Samuel 13.13. Thamar, Do not so; for no such thing ought to be
done in Israel.

The VIII. Commandment.
Thou shall not steal.
QVo praecepto e carne in mundum transitur, with which commandment, pass we
from the flesh to the world: because all worldliness and worldly dealings,
both whatsoever is prescribed and prohibited, is pertaining to this Command. as
the lusts of the flesh to the former.

The concupiscence, that is the beginner of this is called, 1 John 2.16.
concupiscentia oculorum, the lust of the eyes: as the other of the flesh. The
larger exposition of this Commandment, is Levit. 19.11, 13. and a 35, ad
sinem, and Deuteronomy. 15. toto, by Christ, Matthew. 5.42. and more large, Luke 12.14,
ad 46. Paul, Ephesians. 4.28. sets down both the Affirmative and Negative, Let
him that stole, steal no more: but rather let him labor, etc. So agreeable to
this is 1 These. 4.6. after the exposition of the seventh Commandment, verse. 4,
5, and 6. he says, Let no man desraud his brother, etc. So from these places
and the like, the general equity of all that shall be spoken of this
Commandment, is drawn: retaining in the beginning; that it is not the hand,
nor the civil theft, nor contractio rei alienae, the fingering of other men's
goods; but it is the mind that God deals withal. Deus cor interrogat, non
manum, God questions the heart, not the hand: and there is not only manus
aduliera, an adulterous hand, but cor adulierum an adulterous heart also: and
not only manus fur, but also (...) as the Heathen man says, The heart is a
thief as well as the hand.

To proceed in this in the same course, as in the former: For the dependence of
this Commandment, with the other it is exact. For the actions of the part of
the soul, that are conversant in the nourishment, and generation, having been
ordered in the seventh Commandment. i. the desire that every man has to meat,
drink, and apparel, and to increase in the world by propagation: they do
necessarily set aworke the concupiscence of this Commandment. For when there
is desire by hunger, desiderium elicit motum, that desire sets him awork: so it
brings us to that question, Matthew. 6.31. What shall I eat? what shall I
drink? and what shall I put on? So then, because that first for consideration
of our lives, 1 Timothy 6.8. that we need food and raiment: as secondly, for
preserving the lives of our children, 1 Timothy 5.8. that every man had need to
provide for his family; and so consequently, to labor and care in the world:
and that is, either as Eccl. 6.7. Every man's labor propter os, for his mouth:
or else, 2 Cor. 12.14. To lay up for his children: here comes the worldly
concupiscence, that makes the object of this Commandment.

1. The moderation of it.

The natural desire of riches was lawful and good: so likewise is this: and
like as in the former reduplication, so here there is a natural desire: and
then we come reduplicare amorem, double our love: and that brings forth
insaniam, madness. For there is a desire of that, that is sufficient: and
after that is doubled; then a desire for vanity; and that is doubled: and then
for unlawful desires and lusts: and so men come from foolishness to
worldliness. We see then in what consequence and order the eighth Commandment
hangs on the seventh, and how men come from foolishness to worldliness.

Wisdom 15.12. he divides man's life into two parts.

1. It is ludus, for pleasure is the zeal of young men. 2. It follows the
world, and life is counted like a market, altogether for gain. 1 Timothy 6.5.
They account godliness to be nothing else but gain. And that is their zeal:
that when years come upon them, then their zeal is gone.
Now then as first a man's appetite has relation to these: so secondly, because
Eccl. 10.19. bread is for laughter, and wine comfort the living: sed
argenium respondet omnibus, money answers all things: as the Philosopher,
(...), fidejusor pro omnibus, it is surely for every thing: then this second
affection comes in, (...), the love of money, only in regard of the first.
For this being once received in the worldly dealings, there is a promise of
(...), self sufficiency: that if they have money, they cannot want. Menander
shows that the cornu Amali heae, that the Poets talked much of, is nothing
else but money: for if you have that once, you shall have (...), friends,
auxiliaries, witnesses, company to dwell with thee, and all.

The promise of (...), selfe-sufficiencie, a great part of felicity; makes men
so doat on it; And then secondly, there is a (...), power, or grandor joined
to it: Genesis 26.16. Ismael grown mighty by it. Prove. 18.11. It is like a high
wall, and a strong Tower. This also is that that sets men forward. So that
when men are come to the first, and find not (...), selfe-sufficiencie, then
he must needs have more; then comes in (...), covetousness. And when they
have got, they must still have more: and so it proves (...) for that is the
suggestion of the Devil: if you had more it were better; and for that you are
not in estate now, the reason is, you have still too little, and so still goes
forward: Eccl. 5.9. he that loves silver, shall not be satisfied with silver:
and he that loves riches, shall be without the fruit thereof, he shall never
make an end. Now then he either goes thus, in infinitum, Eccl. 4.8. he has
nore to care for: and he yet leaves not to take thought: and that is, as he
faith, a monster: or else they return to the flesh again: and when he has
gotten that which is the right, and natural conclusion of riches: as the rich
man says, Luke 12.19. Anima mea, ede, bibe, eat and drink, O my soul: thou
have enough: and so, redit tanquam in circulo, and so he comes round like one
in a circle. So we see the proceeding of it: either that it has a monstrous
end, or that it returns to the natural end.

S^^^us r^spectu De^.
For the scope or aim that God the Lawgiver had in this Commandment; that
after a man's chastity, or pureness, which pertains to his Essence: is
principally his wealth. And that, as James, the principal effect that he
accounts, is his mercy and doing good, And in this point, Luke 6.35. that in
respect of God himself, the end is, we should be like him in mercy and doing
well, and furthering the good of our neighbors.

^. Raue^^ F^ctesiae.
Then secondly, for the Church. Because the end in regard of the Church, 1 Timothy
6.20. O Timothee, serva depositum, keep that which is committed to thy trust,
unto the end. Chrysostom. Not only Timothy had a depositum; but every man,
whether it be learning, strength, or art, it is his depositum, and is therefore
put into his hands, that he may employ it to the benefit of the whole body: as
1 Cor. 12. The sight is not received for the eye alone, but for all the body;
that there may be a communion of Saints. For when goods are detained, there is
an interverting and defrauding. So the communion of Gods Saints is the end of
this depositum, for this cause given of God to the Church.

For the Commonwealth, 1 Cor. 6.6. It is not the peace thereof that keeps
men from bloodshed, 3. Ratione ^ei^ablica.
but it is the other peace. i. a peace whereby every man is willing to do good
to his neighbor; and rato part from his right, then to do injury; whereby
that the labourer might have his hire: Matthew. 10.10. that Caesar might have his
right, his tribute and custom: Romans 13.7. that they that sow spiritual
things, of duty should reap temporal things.

4. Ratione cujusque privati.
Now for every private man, it is the defense of his possessions, and blessings
that he has. Exodus 21.22.23. cap. So soon as he had done with the moral law,
he comes to the politic law. For much suite is about that. Come to the
matter commanded and forbidden: but yet because we are commanded to deal with
right and propriety, and with alienation, we must first make this plain.
Because indeed, as we see res aliena and nostra, that other men's goods seized
upon, as if our own: and the unjust detaining and taking of them, is the
matter of this Commandment: therefore we will first speak of the object of
this Commandment, of the object of this concupiscence, Meum and Tuum, Meum and
Tuum.
Mine and Thine.

The civil Lawyers define Definitie Furt^ Justinian^ (muti^ata a Pau^o
Cast^ensi) ^ac est, Furtum est contrectatio fraudulosa lucrifacienda gratia,
vel ipsius rei, vel etiam usu^, possessionisve, quod lege naturali prehibitum
est admi^^ere. Ray mundus de penna forti (quam siquuntur Iurisperiti) hoc m^do,
Furtum est co^t^estatio rei alienae mo^^lis and ^e^p^^ralis fraudulenta invito
Domine, gratia luerandi ^em ^psam, ^el usum ejus, vel possessionem veram.
Martinus A^pilenc^a Navat ^em. 3. (in hoc praec.) in Euchar. confess. and
^oenit. hoc m^do, Fu^^um est dolosa connectatio rei alienae (...) ito Domin^
suo, ad proprietatem ejus, aut possessionem, aut usum acquirendum. Tho. Aquin
secundae secundae Quaest. 66. art. 3. in hun^ medum, Fu^tum est occulta
acceptio rei alienae; At communiter Theologi, furtum est occulia rei alienae
accepti^ imito Domin^.
Furtum, or furari, theft, or to steal, to be, Rem alienam contrectare, the
laying of hands (closely) upon other men's goods: our Divines, consentire
contrectationi rei alienae, to consent to the (close) laying of hands upon
other men's goods: In the which Commandment we shall show, that concupiscere
re^^ alienam, is furari, to covet another man's goods, is to steal. So here,
how comes it to pass, that there is Res mea and aliena, How (...) com^s that
the^^ i^ (...) mea and ali^^^.
a property of goods appertaining to me, and to another: this must first be
known.

It is therefore plain by Psalm. 24.1. he says, The earth is the Lords, etc.
i. it is his, he made it: and so consequently, he has right to it alone. After
that he made it, Psalm. 115.16. Coelum coeli Domino, and terram dedit filtis
hominum, the Heaven, yea even the Heavens are the Lords, but the Earth has he
given to the children of men. And so there is a giving over of Gods right unto
men: And the warrant hereof we have, Genesis 1.28. Fill the earth, and dominamini,
have dominion: there is the warrant for the possessing and subduing of the
earth by man. This in general.

Particularly, that if man had continued in innocence, there is none but in
the state of innocence would have been contented with that that is
sufficient: we should not have been troubled with our unruly appetites; for
the earth would have been sufficient for all. But after the entering in of
sin, it was necessary there should be a division: and so it pleased God. For
though the occasion hereof was evil, (for as good Laws come out of an evil
cause) as it was Cains persecution of Abel, that made Seth to gather together.
So that first enclosure, or impropriation of a City, Genesis 4.17. Caine chose out
a plot, and there he built a City, and called it after his sons name. This
gave occasion to the Fathers and Patriarchs themselves, seeing the usurping of
Cains government, and seeing the expediencie of it, in regard of well ordering
of private possessions, it made them to do the like. This is it, that Noah did
presently after the flood: so it began presently after the flood. So it
began jure primae occupationis, by right of the first possessing, or seizing
on it: by the right of prima occupatio: whether the allotting of Noah of the
chief parts unto his three sons: he gave Africa to Cham, Asia to Sem, and
Europe to Iapheth: or whether it were by consent and agreement among
themselves; the former, Genesis 11.31. the other, Genesis 13.9, 10, 11. It is said
there, that Abraham and Lot agreed to part the Country between them: and Lot,
though he were the younger, had the choice. So then we see how matters stood at
the first. Epictetus shows it by a familiar Simile. Where a dish is brought
to the table, before it is cut up, it is said to be common to all that sit at
the table: but after it is cut of, that every man has shared his part, then
quam quisque occupavit partem, what part soever a man has shared for himself,
it is no justice, or civility to take it off his trencher. So first, all the
earth was mankinds, and then they divided it: as Deuteronomy. 11.24. Omnem locum quem
calcaverit pes vester, every place whereon the soles of your feet shall tread,
I give it to you, it is yours. So it was pedis calcatio, or occupatio, the
treading of the foot, or occupation, that entitled every man to his first
right.

And a second right. There is a right in common, and right in proprium,
propriety: as right in common is prima occupatio, the first possession: when we
seize upon a Country, in which no body is; or if it be terra derelicto, a land
given over: whosoever is primus occupatur, the first seisor on it, has the
jus, right of it. And secondly, of things immovable, immobilium est
praescriptio, mobilium usurpatio, there is a prescription of goods immovable,
an usurpation of the movable: and there are two very good reasons for this: 1.
Because the Commonwealth does marvellously respect terrenam pacem, mutual
outward peace: and does look to bloodshed; and because infinite quarrels might
arise out of this, and men might forge evidences, therefore to cut off this,
there is Praescriptio.

But the second has more show: The Commonwealth says this: If any man
neglect his own right, (for that is our Maxim) interest reipublicae, ut
quisque re sua recte utatur, the Commonwealth is to have a care, that every
man use his goods aright: if he neglect them, that except the Commonwealth
should take order for them, they should perish; the Commonwealth takes order
to punish him for his negligence: and says, If he leave his ground without
tilth so many years, till such a prescript time, he shall lose it. And thus
every one does possess his things, in communi jure, the common Law.

The jus proprium, the right of propriety, added to the second member, that it
is done ex jure belli, by the law of Arms: because the Magistrate has gladium
exteriorem, he has authority to punish any outward offense, and him that does
it: and so consequently persisting in his obstinacy, may cast him out: as Genesis
48.22. The inheritance that Jacob gave to Joseph, he had gotten it of the
Amorite by his sword and bow; jure justi belli, by a lawful wa^rre. Now this
proprium jus, right of propriety, arises thus. For after a man is thus seized
on any thing, whether it be a public possession, or private, he takes it in
4. rights. In jure p^opr^^, a man has 4 ^^^h^s.
1. Besides his Dominion and Lordship over it, he has usum: he may use the
thing, as his horse to ride on. 2. Eructum, whatsoever comes of the horse. 3.
Consumptionem, the spending of it; he may kill it. 4. Alienationem, the making
of it from himself, to another: as selling or giving of it. This had the
Patriarch at the first.
Now according to these four things, comes in jus proprium, the right of
propriety: for having power to alienate, he has power to do it, either
liberally and freely, or illiberaliter; as in debt. I will set it etc. or it
shall go for debt. Now in this giving freely, or otherwise, he has power to
translate either the whole Dominion, and likewise the property of it, or
nothing but the use of it, or the usus fructus, the profit of it: and this,
either for a time, or for ever. See it in particulars. When a man does alienate
the property and use and all of a thing, liberally, and for ever, D^nat.
without any consideration, then it is called Donatio, a gift, or legacy: and
that is of two sorts, either in a man's life, or when he is a dying. So he
translateth the right of his succession at his death to his child. Now if he
do translate a thing liberally, and but for a time; Mutuum.
then it is called mutuum, a loan: he lends it, but without consideration.
And if he translate not the thing, but the use of it, then it is commodatum,
borrowed to be used: though commonly it be taken for that that is but for some
particular use: and then the end is named; and this is first for the fruit; so
is alienation.

Contractus inn^minatus.
Now secondly, that that is called alienatio illiberalis, in consideration it is
called donatio illiberalis, they commonly call it by the name of contractus
innominatus: and that is of three sorts. 1. Do ut des. 2. Do ut sacias. 3.
Facio ut des.
These contracts innominate are not unusual in these days. For lightly every
contract we make falls into one of these. Of them the first is a kind of
(...).

1. I let into your hands such a Farm, on the condition that you husband it,
and in regard of the properties, give me thus much. 2. And of the second,
feoda, fees for homage, when for service something is given. 3. The third, they
call contractum civilem, a civil contract.
Now then for Do ut des. The old order, Permuta^.
when men began to be weary of liberality; the first brood of it was
permutation, (...), which now is referred to two kinds: either money for money,
and that is called cambium, exchange: or else it is that they call Bartering,
Cambium. Bartering.
when one thing is given for another, out of money: and this is where there is
percommutatio.

Now, where it is pecuniae pro re, or rei pro pecunia, money for goods, or
goods for money, there comes in two: for where is commutatio rei pro pecunia,
an exchange of goods for money, it is emptio, buying: Emptio. Venditio.
and the contrary, nummi pro re, the change of money for goods, is venditio,
selling: Which is divided either into negotiationem, whole sale; or by parcels
retailing. And this is in the alienation of the thing it self.

Then besides this alienatio usus rei, making away the use of the goods, and
that illiberalis, illiberally too: not of the thing wholly, Cond^^^^.
but of the use of any thing separated from the propriety: and that if it be
usus rei pro pecunia, hiring; if pecuniae pro usu rei, then locatio, L^cati^.
letting. And out of this grows another, that is distrustfulnesse: because
sometimes we will let one have the use, whereas yet we dare not trust him
with the property of it: and so consequently, there grows another contract
out of this; the contract of words and writings, of pawnes, of pledges, and
suretiship. In regard of words, if he be content with his bare word; in regard
of him that requires it, Stipulatio, Sponsio.
it is called Stipulatio, in regard of him that gives it, Sponsio. If it be in
writing (these are proles humanae perfidiae) if he be content with his own
writing alone, it is called Chirographum: Otherwise, Chirographum. Syngrapha.
if we have other men's hands with him, then it is called Syngrapha. If it be
Rei, real, then it is either in regard of some oath; Cautio.
and then it is Cautio: or for the recovery of some thing received; and then it
is either moveable, and that is Pignus: or immovable, as lands; Pignus.
and they are called (...). If it be personal, then either in war; (...).
Obsides. Predes. Vades. Fidejussores. Ex promise.
and they are hostages, Obsides: or for a public condemning of a
Commonwealth, and they are Predes: or in a criminal cause, Vades: or else in
a matter of money, of debt, fidejussores. If he enter a band, if there be but
his bare word, they call it ex promisso. They add to this the contract of
Depositum, and that they call Fiduciare; while a man lives, Fiduciare.
or when he dies. But I cannot see how Depositum can be a contract.

Now to the appe^tite it self, how that stands affected, in regard of this
object: and then, as it falls either in his order, or in his manner, and
measure. In his order thus: that whereas there be two things that a man's desire
is carried unto; 1. The enjoying of the end it self. 2. Of those means, quae
tendunt ad finem, which conduce to the attaining of that end:
There must be (as Aristotle) a division out of the faculty, a double desire,
duplex amor, and double love, and double concupiscence; because there be two
things, and one is greater then another; 1. wherewith we desire the last
fruition, and another whereby we seem appetere, to long after that that does
further us to the end. Then whereas the end is greater, so the love of it must
be prior and major, both timelier and greater then the other love, of which the
object of this is one.

Then this is that which we hold: first, that as in the ministering of medicine
to the body, there is a certain quantity and measure, which if it fail, it
purges not all the humor; if it be more, it purges all the humor, and
somewhat else, that it should not purge: So in the affections and appetites of
the soul, there is in some a desire of these things, yet mixed with some
defect: neglect then is no regard, etc.

And in other some, there is such an excessive desire, that either they are
affected to worldly things more then they should be; or so, that they can be
content to forget their duty, as Heb. 12.16. he says he would not have one
to be as Esau, to forget his birthright, his blessing that God bestowed on him,
for a mess of pottage, or meat: therefore it is expedient that we take the
measure it self first: and that we must begin after this order, 1 Timothy 6.8.
(...). And having food and rtiment, let us be therewith content. A contented
mind, that if it please God to bestow no more on us, then these, yet we stand
contented. The reason is, because we see that God has created poor men and
rich; as having plenty of spirit, so plenty of wealth, he might have made all
rich: the reason that hindered this, was, as Ambrose says, that as the rich
might have praemium benignitatis, the recompense of their bounty, so that he
might crown the poor man, cum mercede patientiae. So says Sol. Prove. 22.2.
And therefore every man is to stand contented, if he will, to call him higher:
adding no cares which may breed noisome lusts; thus must he stand, because it
is Gods good will and pleasure: and then 2 Cor. 8.15. out of Exodus 16.18. he
that gathers much, has nothing over; and he that gathers a little, has
nothing less, when he dies: therefore making this the first part of measure,
not to seek to rise otherwise then God will. And then secondly, that it is
lawful, Prove. 6.8. to gather in Summer for the time that is to come, by honest
means, and with a sober mind. And then thirdly, that he sees his household
increase (as when Jacob saw the Patriarchs increased in his house; Genesis 30.30.
we see what care he took for them: When shall I travel for mine own house,
etc. So this desire and care he may have of them that pertain to him, being
always limited with the former conditions: Prove. 5.15. that he may drink out
of his own Cisterns, i. that he may have of his own, 2 Cor. 12.13. that he
may not be chargeable to others: and as Sol. ut habeat fonies, qui deriventur
for as, us tamen just Dominus eorum sit: the meaning is, that he may be
liberal to others, and yet have to suffice himself, that he may have to pay
his ditrachma: Exodus 30.12. to help the Church, and Matthew. 22.29. the
Commonwealth, and 2 Cor. 8.12. that he may have whereby to do good to poor
Saints: as Ephesians. 4.28. to have for himself, and to give to them that need. Thus
far if the means be kept, and a sober mind, the measure is kept. Now if he
go beyond this, 1 Timothy 6.10. then begins the root of this; 1. he murmureth
at another, in regard that he has a better condition. Exodus 16.3. They would
have tarried in Egypt still: We will go to Egypt again. They preferred the
life in Egypt, before the life in deserto, in the Wilderness: First, the life
by the fleshpots, before Gods service: And secondly, a disquietnesse also
after that. Mat. 6.31. Quid comedam? quid bibam? quid induam? what shall I
eat? what shall I drink? wherewithal shall I be clothed? And that
carfulness the rich have, Luke 12.17. the rich man reasons with himself:
and so the third, out of these: it breeds a neast of horse-leaches, a worm
with lingua bisulca, a forked tongue, crying Affer, affer: unde habeas nihil
resert, sed oportet habere: bring, bring; it is no matter how, or whence you
have it, for have it you must: upon these three stands this suppuratio
concupiscentiae, the Impostume of lust.

Now for the making of subactum solum, of the ground and soil meet: as Tit.
2. the taking of an estate above our proportion, he that will bear a bigger
sail then he is able to carry, cui plus opus est, then he needs, then he
falls unto unlawful practices, then is he a fit soil for the Devil to
cast in his seed; and he moves him to stealth, and the provocation and
allurement. Luke 15.13. he sets down, that the prodigal son fell upon a
riotous company of wasters, and sic dissipavit suum patrimonium, and so wasted
his substance: If a man follow such company, it will set him supra analogiam,
above his allowance. He must spend lawfully and orderly, and then as Prove.
1.12. he will speak as they speak. 1. The breaking forth of this is in
icterum, into a Jaundise: we have examples, 2 King. 21.2. of Ahabs eye: because
he saw a thing that served for his turn, though he had enough; he could never
be well till he had it: and when he could not by right, he got it by wrong, and
by the blood of an innocent man. And the foamings out at the mouth, there be
many set down by the Heathen man, and Menander is full, to that purpose out of
the book of the Preacher, and of Wisdom. If a man had an inheritance with
wisdom, Eccl. 7.11.12.4. The shadow of wisdom is good, but the shadow of
money will do well. Then succeeds the Act.

Now to the act of thoft, reducing all these uses that we said were lawful, to
these that are common among Lawyers. 1. The attaining, and getting of riches.
2. The use of them. In attaining is respect to justice, in the use is respect
to justice and charity.
For, as was said before, we have them given us, not only for our selves, but
as the Apostle 2 Cor. 9.11. for liberality; and so we see Deuteronomy. 16.11.12. God
takes order, that out of the substance, both the Levit, stranger, widow, and
poor should have their portions.

Of the getting justly, and of theft in getting committed. Things from the
beginning, by the law of nature were first common: and in extreme necessity by
that direction, Prove. 6.30. of the fault, and by the order that God takes,
Deuteronomy. 23.24. If he be hungry, he may eat of his neighbors Grapes: so that he
put none into his vessel, to carry away with him. And so likewise in the
profane law, whereby properties are distinguished, further then extreme
necessity it holds not. So a second right in those things that yet remain
common; as fowls, fishes, and those things that we commonly find on the
Seashore, as pearls: and further after the distribution, in prima
occupatione, in the first seizing on a Country, there was a propriety to every
man, and a part of possession of every Country allotted to remain common, for
the benefit of the poor in that measure. After, for the proprieties by public
right, we laid four. 1. Seizing on a Country. 2. those things that were left
and forsaken. Res derelictae, given over. 3. Prescription. 4. The right by the
bow and the sword, by war.


For private use: by liberality, and justice.

Illiberalis alienatio, in these alienations before mentioned.

Injury in getting is wrought three ways, so is theft: The first two be in
Levit. 19. Non extorquebis, neque fraudabis. Thou shall not extort, that is
rapina, Rapina.
robbery: Thou shall not deceive, this is furium, theft. And a third to these
may be added, as we shall show afterward. The genus to these, Habak. 2.6.
calls congregare non sua, to increase that which is not his own: and Mar.
10.19. the desire to be rich. 1 Timothy 6.9. They fall into temptations, and many
hurtful desires: and as the Heathen man says, qui vult dives fieri, vult cito
fieri, he that would be rich, would be rich suddenly: and Prove. 28.22. Surely a
man cannot be innocent, if he make haste to be rich: then his desire cannot so
soon be accomplished, but he must needs be entangled with some of these
species, kinds following. 1. They begin with rashness, that by force and
extortion take away, Prove. 11.24. he says, semper erunt in egestate, they
shall still be in want: many times God brings this most upon them, that it
stays not: and 2. Prove. 25.7. he says, that he brings a sudden death: so
that of deceitful men, Prove. 12.27. it is said; That they get in hunting they
shall never roste^ and Haba. 2.8. Vae tibi qui spolias, nam and ipse
spoliaberis, woe be to thee that spoylest others, for thou shall be spoiled
thy self: They be, as the Heathen man says, as sponges; and some tyrannous
Prince seiseth upon them: but howsoever it falls out with them, 1 Cor. 5.11.
they are not to be accounted as brethren in the Church: and 6.10. certainly
they shall never inherit the Kingdom of God.
This is for the fault in general. It receives this division: for there are
some that set themselves to spoil their neighbors in suum commodum, for their
own profit; but sometimes it is in damnum and detrimentum proximi, to do
their neighbor a mischief only: in which respect we may consider
incendiarios, ^n^endia^^^, Sorcerers and Witches.
such as will set houses and barnes on fire: so likewise Sorcerers, that wreake
themselves on their neighbors goods. Exodus 22.5.6. God takes order for this.
If any man set fire on stacks of corn, or standing corn, he shall make it
good. Now of those that do it for their own profit, we may consider them
thus: either as they do it under color of authority, or without. If under
color of authority, either as in peace, or war. In war, after he is a
soldier, he spoyleth whomsoever he meets withal: Praedo.
Praedo. That John speaks against ravening, Luke 3.14. and Ezekiel. 38.10. and so
forward. In peace we come to consider them, that Esaias speaks of, c. 1.23.
Principes tui sunt socii furum, thy Princes are companions of thieves: and so
Ezekiel. 22.27. Their Princes were like wolves ravening for their prey, yea to
destroy souls for their covetous lucre; and that is done, either by
usurpation, if to a private family: and therefore the children of Dan were
accursed, Judge. 18.25. to a family, verse. 27. to a whole City, for whether it
be for smaller matters, Genesis 25.25. there is a reproof, and objection of
injury of Abraham to Abimelech, for a Well. And a third also, Esa. 22.15. that
extorting of offices, that which was the vice of Shebnah, or if they be rightly
seized on their places, and be no usurpers, and they be called by authority,
yet then another way; Esa. 10.1. Psalm. 94.10. that they enact grievous
Statutes, and do ponere molestiam praeter statutum, vex and oppress beyond
law, which no Statute will warrant. And besides that, Nehem. 5.13. such as
their rulers were before he came, both themselves, and their underofficers.
And we speak not hear of Princes only, and Magistrates, but of pety-lords.
Aug. that Regna magna, great Kingdoms; are nothing but magna latrooinia,
remota justitia, great spoylers, if justice be not duly administered: and the
answer of the Pirate to Alexander, that he with a great army did rob great
Countries; and he did it but with one Ship only, and with a small company. And
the Lawyers make this difference betwixt great thieves and little thieves: that
the one wears a collar of iron, and the other a chain of gold: so great and
noble men, and gentlemen to tenants. Esa. 3.14.15. The spoil of the poor is
in their houses: or, as Micah sets it out more terrible, but yet truly,
cap. 3.2.3. that they plucked off their skins, brake their bones, and chopped
their flesh as for the pot: which Esa. 58.6. plainly expounds, he means
those that bind the people in hard covenants, taking more of them, then either
justice requires, or their state can bear: and consequently they are under
those, having superiority by debt, as the servant, Matthew. 18.28. met with one
of his fellow servants that ought him money, and took him by the throat, and
said, Pay me that thou owe me: there condemned. And so Deuteronomy. 24.10.11. when
any thing is lent, he will not have him that lent, go into the house, as Lord
of the house: but he shall stay at the door, and the other shall bring it out
to him. So such as Esa. 5.8. speaks of, he will be solus: they will dwell
alone, they will be Lords alone, and Rulers, and Magistrates, rich alone; they
will alone have the sale of any thing, and will be alone in any thing, by what
authority they can arm themselves.

Come to the other sort, that have no color of authority: Psalm. 62.10. Trust
not in oppression and wrong: he denies them oppression and robbery. Now for
Robbery, it is either on the sea, or on the land. On the sea, Pirates; Ezekiel.
27.26. against Pirates. On land, either such as rob in the way, and they are
latrones, such Luke 10.36. that man fell into the hands of thieves: or else
those they call fractores, Burglary. ^ Burglary.
Exodus 22.2. And so this may come to the second, Non fraudabis, thou shall not
defraud, Levit. 19.3. In this, as in the other, the first member is, either
furium manifestum, manifest theft, or conceptum, close: and in that these men
are called receptores, receivers, or succentarit, the Proverb is, It is all
one to hold the sack, and to fill it. Exodus 22.4. Look where the theft is
found, though he stole it not, he shall be brought before the Judge, and show
how he came by it. So whether he receive res raptas, or furtivas, goods taken
by robbery, or stolen, for the thieves; and themselves: And for manifest theft:
this order, that because the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.28. where the affirmative of
this is, he places two things; 1. a calling. 2. labor in that calling. Such
(...) h^^^ no calling.
Sow will begin with them first that have no calling, 1 Timothy 5.20. or an
unlawful calling: and there comes in the third member, rapina, furium, and
turpe lucrum, robbery, theft, and filthy lucre. These that have no calling, the
civil law divides thus; Into beggars, and rogues, and superfluous gentlemen:
for as the one ought not to live precario, by begging; Deuteronomy. 15.4. In that
part, by us, so much as in us lies, there shall not be a beggar in all Israel.
So likewise the other, because they stand against the good of mankind, Genesis
2.15.1. in Paradise, 2. out of Paradise; he says, they were put into the East
part of Eden, ut operarentur, that they should dress and keep it: They should
eat in care, and sweat of brows: and these do neither, but live
voluptuously and idly: and therefore be thieves; and therefore are to be
placed here. For when God gives his reward, Matthew. 20.8. he will say to the
steward, Vocato operarios, (...), call the laborers, and pay them their wages.
But Matthew. 25.30. when he comes to punish, he will punish not only servum
flagitiosum, but servum inutilem. i. superfluam creaturam, the wicked servant,
but even the unprofitable and superfluous creature; and cast him in tenebras,
into outer darkness. Call these idle fellows, that neither eat their bread
in care, nor in the sweat of their brows. So the word, Genesis 3.17. Prove.
10.10. and 15.13. he says, Care and study that, etc.

Or else he must necessarily operari manibu^, labor with his hands: his brows
must sweat for it. In 1 Cor. 12.21. he sets down an opposition between
the eye and the hand, or the head and the foot: so that if it be not the eye
that directs, nor the head that provideth and directs, nor the hand and
foot, and so labor be not at all: then certainly he is to be accounted as a
thief.

Such as have an evil calling.
Between nequam and nequaqu^m, God puts no difference: therefore, no calling
and an evil calling is all one; therefore (...), in both it is filthy lucre:
they that have evil callings, these Harlots Deuteronomy. 23.17. these lenones,
bawdes, and keepers of them, are plainly forbidden: Levit. 19.2. those that
the civil officers calls mathematici, tellers of destinies, Egyptians, and
Juglers: we may put them up in the same crew: Deuteronomy. 18.10. Because they bring
in profit: and so not see how this matter stands. Then after we come nearer
to furtum, theft: but yet so, as we show first how it comes to pass that we
may receive these things, how these things were brought first.

1. We may alienate by donation, Job. 6.22. Nunquid dabitis mihi de substantia
vestra? Did I say, bring unto me, or give a reward for me of your substance?
that is, it must not be another man's, but our own.

2. And secondly, out of that, as Abraham reasons, Genesis 15.3. in inheritance
he says, Ecce servus meus haeres erit, lo my servant shall be mine heir: and
Numb. 27.7. God has taken full order for it, that it shall go down to a man's
children, both to the sons and the daughters: so that it is a foolish show of
lex Salica in France: a thing prejudicialll both to the law of nature, and Gods
law: and John 4.38. he says, I have set you to reap there where you have not
labored, etc. whereby he shows, that we have not only authority to conveigh
lands, but also our labors unto others; and that by a good tenure, 1.
donatione, 2. haereditate,
by gift, and inheritance.

Now otherwise there must be industria, paines-taking: which is in three things
called the legitimum, viz. 1. labor, 2. cost, 3. peril.


1. For labor, Genesis 29.15. Laban says to Jacob; It is no reason that thou
should serve me, and labor for me, (though you be my brothers son) and
have nothing: tell me what shall be thy wages? and so tells plainly, that
labor comes in compensationem, to be recompensed: and Matthew. 10.10. he
says, Dignus est operarius mercede, the labourer is worthy of his hire. The
rule is Equality, 2 Cor. 8.14. (...), that there may be equality: So then there
is an equality between operarius and merces, the labourer, and the reward: and
Deuteronomy. 24.15. It shall not be detained: and if it be detained, it shall be
peccatum clamans, a crying sin: therefore he is a thief that detaineth the
reward of him that takes pains for him.

2. For peril: we see that was in estimation to Cal^b, Josh. 15.16. There was
a well fenced City, hard to be won; Caleb, he makes a Proclamation,
Whosoever can get Kiriath Sepher, and win it, he shall be rewarded: so
Othoniel got it, and had his daughter for a reward. And the same course we see,
1 Samuel 17.25. Saul says, when the Philistim came to revile Isaael, He that
will venture upon the Philistim, shall be my son in law, and shall marry my
daughter, and I will give him great riches, etc. and David slew him, and had,
etc. And so David, for the winning of Iebus, that had rebelled against him, He
that gets Iebus, (1 Cron. 11.6.) shall be Captain of the host: and Ioab
went up first, and was made Captain. And in this respect it is, because the
Merchants peril is greater then the Husbandmans; which ventureth but his
seed, and he ventureth his goods and life too: therefore his gains is allowed
to be great.

3. Now then for cost, in laying up: and so for building of houses: and
furnishing himself more then needs, only in publicum usum, for the public
use: as Joseph, Genesis 41.15. he sels the corn that he had laid up saleable to
his cost; that they call multiplicem usuram, multiplied usury.

And in the like, 2 Chronicles. 36. verse. last: God allotted to Cyrus, that they
call usum pretiosum, a most rich reward: so any of these ways a man may
receive money for it.

Now then, beyond these of Industria, industry, there are two more, first
damnum, or detrimentum, damage or loss: Exodus 22.5. Lastly, money: it is
pretium indeed, Eccles. 10.29. and so* God has appointed that the ground of
buying and selling should be by it. Levit. 25.14. and 27.18. Rules given for
buying and selling.

These thus standing, we come to say that there is furtum occultum, close
theft; In Contracts, our of Contracts.

1. Occultum furtum in Contracts.
1. In Contracts, when a thing is sold, that cannot be sold; or let, that cannot
be let: as when a man would buy the grace of God for money, as Simon Magus. But
Peter, Acts 8.20. rebuked him for it: Pecunia tua pereat tecum, let thy money
perish with thee: this is called Simony, of him that first offered it in the
New Testament.

2. And of the like nature to spiritual things, are those that are annexed to
spiritual things, and cannot be translated but to those that have those
spiritual things: as John 2.15. about Doves; but they were profane, not
spiritual things: but the other, those that sold Oxen, and the exchangers, he
threw out of the Temple. But to those that sold Doves, verse. 16. he said etc.
So Simony, even in re^sacra, in sacred things, Simon^.
is when justice is sold. Saint Ambrose and Saint August. Quid dabitis mihi ut
faciam justitiam? and quid dabitis mihi ut vendam vobis Deum? What will you
give me, that I may do justice? and what will you give me that I may sell you
God? it is all one. Also Esa. 5.23. they justify the wicked for reward.

3. And a third thing under the selling, we may account of the selling of
gratutta beneficentia, of liberality: as Iud^x nummarius, an Usurer to sell
money, being vitiosa contractio, an unlawful Contract: Psalm. 112.6. and 37.21.
and Luke 6.35. (...), nothing must be hoped for: and it should return a great
reward. Gratuitum and mutuum, a Loan; and no hope of recompense, must go
together: whosoever he be that sets a price upon that liberality, vendere
mutuum, to sell a Loan: it is a corruption of virtue: for donatio is liberalis
alienatio sine omni mercede, in aeternum, and mutuum is ad tempus, A gift is a
free alienation for ever, without any reward at all, and a Loan is but for a
time. And because two things are to be required in Contracts, labor and merces,
and res appretiata and pretium, and cura and stipendium, the labor and the
hire, the price and the thing apprized, the care and the stipend: Magistrates
tribute for his care: therefore to consider both these, and theft in both:
Ezekiel. 34.3. If they eat the fat, and clothe them with the wool, and kill them
that are fed, and feed not the sheep, he calls them robbers. i. fures
officii, thieves in the office. And a Scholar, Fives officii.
Prove. 17.16. if he have pretium sapientiae, the price of wisdom, of his
study, and if he have not curam sapientiae, a care of wisdom, he is fur, a
thief of his study: he makes not that equality. Now on the other side, if he
do labor, Deuteronomy. 24.15. the labourer must have his hire: but he must have, as
Zach. 11.13. by the contrary of that which is there set down, he must have
decorum pretium, a goodly price: i. there must be a correspondencie between
his labor and his price: as Deuteronomy. 15.14. he must give him a reward, and that a
liberal reward: i. that we see, that we neither defraud him wholly in the
reward, nor that we pinch him in it.

Now then to the substance of Contracts, and as before we considered, pretium
and rem appretiatam, the price, and the thing apprized: so here we consider,
pretium, mensura, and merx, the price, the measure, and the wares. Now in
pretio or mensura, in the measure or price, there is a double fault: for first
there is a corruption of the measure only: and then secondly, there is
anomalia, inequality or disproportion: if it be a corruption of the measure
only; they are adulieratores monetae, counterfeiters of money: and therefore
grievously punished. Genesis 23.16. It is said that Abraham weighed 400. shekels
to Ephron, and that ex argento, of silver current, apud quemlibet mercatorem,
with the Merchant.

Order must be that we know the weights. 1. Whosoever it be, Coyners.
that as it is, Esa. 1.28. mingleth a baser substance with the metal, as
dross with silver, he is an abuser of it: or as Levit. 27.25. he that makes
a shekel less weight, that clippeth it: and therefore whosoever has that
money, makes a general unproportion in all Contracts, and brings an
universal confusion, and is executed as a Traitor.

Then the next after is as good, but yet not answerable in wares: for in wares,
that they be good; first they consider the substance of them, that they be not
quisquiliae frugum, the refuse of the corn: Amos 8.6. Esa. 1.22. mingled with
substance: to mingle wine with water, is a corrupting of the wares: so if in
substance, they are false, or mingled, they are naught.

2. And for the quantity of it, Levit. 19.34. Prove. 20.10. and 11.1. be shows
plainly, that false weights and measures are an abomination to the Lord.

3. And in the quality, as God speaks, Levit. 19.11. where there is a deceit,
where a man knows that that which he sells has a general fault: and so
the buyer is to be told it; or else the price abated. If it be such as may
serve for thy use, and cannot be turned for other men's uses; if there be not
abating of the price, the counsels have made it turpe lucrum, filthy lucre.

Now besides the ware, the manner of uttering it: and then if it be to one that
is ignorant, Genesis 43.12. because happily there may be in the party an oversight,
or deceiving. Ier. 9.5. 1 These. 4.6. Every man seeks to go beyond his
neighbor; and so we seek imponere illis, to deceive them: (...), not to
overreach: and so this kind of dealing may be counted gross dealing:
cousening. Zacheus, Luke 19.8. If I have overreached (...), that he calls
cousening: Levit. 19.11. that there be no deceiving, 2 Cor. 7.2. that there be
no circumvention.

Now for the price, we must not think when they come to buying and selling,
that they come to a spoil: but avoid that dispraising and abjecting of wares,
Prove. 20.14. Malum est, malum est, it is naught, it is naught: but yet
afterward, when he is gone, he boasts of his peniworths. Amos 8.6. We must
not sell the needy for shoes: which when they come to expound, they can
interpret no otherwise, then that needy men, which must needs have money, they
will wring them so hard, that they shall have little or nothing for their
wares: Micah. 7.2. calls it a net: this ought not to be, Levit. 6.5. Ps.
15.4. Prove. 24.4. if he add an oath fraudulenter: he says, if beside
deceiving, he add an oath, he shall never recall, though it be to his own
harm: 1 Pet. 2.1. (...), lay aside all guile.

Come to theft without the Contract, Theft without the Contract.
it is done as before:

1. By a reach beyond our brother, Stellionatus. 2. Illo nescio, he not knowing
of it.
After it divides it self into sartum domesticum; it is, Tit. 2.10. (...),
F^^^tion d^^^si^^^^.
intervertere: when as they turn something into their own purse, when the
servant beguileth the Master, or the Steward him whose Steward he is: or if not
only a Steward or servant, but a Disciple; we see it was Judas his fault, John
12.6. he did privily divert out of the bag to his own spending: this is
surtum domesticum, household theft, or theft within doors.

2. To this they add servos sugitivo^, fugitive servants, because the servant
is a part of his Masters possessions; there is a detraction of somewhat from
the possession: for he detracteth himself, and so diminishes it. Philem.
verse. 12. Though Paul could have found in heart to keep Onesimus, yet he
sends him back, he would not be so bold, knowing he was none of his. And not
only this, but when they waste their goods, Luke 12.45. when they eat and
drink: and Deuteronomy. 21.20. he is a riotour and drunkard; the same is applied to
the son, if he eat and drink with sinners.

Without the family: 1. Without me ^ands.
it is either of a thing 1. Consecrated: and that is sacrilege. 2. Profane.


Of a thing consecrated, Levit. 15.15. there is a law for it. Romans 2.22. he
matcheth it with idolatry: for he says, Thou that abhorrest Idols, committest
thou sacrilege? For we see that the holy Ghost, Judge. 9.4. marketh there
Abimelech for taking our silver out of the Temple of the Idol: and Dan. 5.2.
the alienating of sacred vessels, it did procure the great and mighty
handwriting. This ought not to be; if a man convert to his own use, or divert
from a sacred use to a profane.

In profane.
In profane things, they are either, 1. public, 2. private.


Public, 1. Public.
and that is peculatus, when a thing is the Commonwealths, or stolen e loco
publico, e balneo, balnearii sures, from out of a public place, out of the
Bath; thieves that stole the clothes of such as were bathing: and to these may
be added those that receive public wages, and convert it to their own private
use: such as the Priests, 2 King. 12.5. he says, the King gave straight
charge, that they should bring in their half shekel for the repairing of the
Temple; and that the Priests should receive it: They brought it in, but there
was no reparation done by the Priests: Then another order was taken; he
provided a chest, with an hole in the corner of it; and in that it was put in,
2. Private.
and kept. And if we consider it of private things;

Then it is divided into furtum Personale, of things living 1. Men. 2. Beasts
Reale, of things not having life.


Personal theft.
Theft of men is called Plagium, and the thieves Plagiarii. Exodus 21.16. was
punished with death, if the party were found, or Deuteronomy. 24.7. if he were but
about it, it was death. And the Apostle, 1 Timothy 1.10. he continues, and is of
the same mind: and with this he coupleth Judas his sin, for betraying a
person for money, Matthew. 26.15. there is not outright selling of him.

2. Then if it be of beasts, it is called Abigeatus; and the men Abigei,
drivers away of cattle: as the Sabees, and Chaldees, Job. 1.15.17. Exodus 22.1.
Reale furtum, of things that have no life, of raiment, Real (...)
money, etc. and there is an order taken, Exodus 22. in every respect for all
these.

Aggravation of the^^.
The aggravation of these: This adds Gods curse, and makes the theft
grievous. Exodus 22.21, 22, 23. First if we vex or trouble, or take away from
fatherless, stranger, or poor neighbors, for they will cry: it is a crying
sin; And if they once cry, I will surely hear them: Deuteronomy. 24.17. he
forbids that there should be any pledge taken of the widow, And Job 24.3. he
says, Whosoever he be that drives away the Ass of the fatherless, and
takes away the widows Ox; and Prove. 23.16. Whosoever he be that enters on
the field of the fatherless, he shall be sure to be punished, and visited with
the fierce wrath of God.

Enclosing (...) comm^^^.
Now then, partly here, and partly before, comes in the enclosures of Commons:
For as when regions were first seized upon, when as the first partition was
made, each man had his peculiar lot distinct, like that of Caleb, I^sh. 14.13,
14. and so became their inheritance; so there was a consideration had of Gods
protestation, that always there should be poor, and so there was left unto
them a division of lands in common, to live upon: And for these, Deuteronomy. 19.14.
there is an order taken, that they shall not be removed, because all the
parties are not there present, they cannot alienate their right: because they
that shall be borne, cannot meddle in it: the poor from all beginning to all
ending: and yet all that have interest in it cannot, and Deuteronomy. 27.17. the whole
congregation curses them that do it: Prove. 23.10. and 22.28. there is
Solomon's censure: Hose. 5.10. he says there, when he would compare them with
as odious a comparison, as he can, Thy Princes are like them that remove the
land marks: and how odious this was, may appear from their setting up every
where of Meta Terminica, their usual bounder; the violent transgression, or
usurpation of which is by Micah. 2.2. exclaimed against. And not only these,
but Job that was without the Law of God, yet he sees it, and detesteth it,
chap. 21.2. And this for unjust getting of goods.

In the act of theft, we respected the double use of the gifts of God* and
first before the use, the getting of them, called by the Philosopher generatio
pecuniae. And in the unlawful getting of them, we divided the whole company of
unlawful means into, 1. furtum, by deceit: 2. Rapinam, by violence: They are
distinguished by Nazianzen thus: (...), is manus injecta, the laying on of
hands, or taking a thing by violence: and (...), a crafty way of compassing.
Upon the petition that pertains to temporal things in the Lords Prayer of
daily bread, Chrysostom. says, that habere convenit etiam malis: habere autem de
manu dei, sanctis tantum, the wicked may lawfully possess goods, but to enjoy
them as blessings and favors from God, is the portion of the Saints: which
God, says he, praeparare non vetat, sed cum peccato praeparare: qui enim cum
peccato praeparat, ei diabolus dat quod manducat, non Deus: forbids not to
purchase at all, but not to compass them sinfully: which whosoever does, he
has it of the gift of the Devil, and not of the gift of God, neither can
justly make that petition; and he has with it (...), some pledge that some
visitation shall come upon him for it.

On the other side, the virtue opposite, is the just getting; and that is the
object we have in hand. It is called (...), sludium honest rem parandi: Prove.
16.8. Every man ought thus to be persuaded, that a little by righteous means
well gotten, is better then great revenues without. i. as very well the Apostle
sets down both the parts, 1 Timothy 6.5. where he speaks of covetous men, he
says, they are corrupted in mind, and destitute of the truth: the reason is,
this is their position, Game is godliness, as the Heathen man says, (...),
let me put up the money in my bag, and call me a pillar and a poller, and
what you will. But in the next verse he shows, that if a man can turn the
proposiion, and say that godliness is gain; that is to account the true
gain, as indeed it is, that that is gotten by Gods prescript, not by man's
oversight Genesis 43.4. But that he may say so as Jacob said to Laban, Genesis 30.33.
call my doings to account, cras respondebit pro me justitia mea, my righteous
dealing shall be able to answer for me, and to acquit me.

Now unto this virtue, as it appertains to save and preserve us from evil
dealing: yet because the world is full of it, and men have mentem malam, they
are in a wicked and vicious race, and so run on, till stopped by conscience,
and then afterward touched: therefore is there a second virtue, that they call
Restitution; and that is necessary, if perhaps any man have over-shot himself
in getting his goods unjustly.

It is one of the greatest and principallest common places throughout the
Fathers, from the time of Constantine the great.

And August. Restitution.
he sets it down for a Canon, Non dimittitur peccatum, nisi restituatur
ablatum, The sin of an unlawful purchase is not pardoned, unless
restitution be made: the ground of it is, Numb. 5.7. For God says there, if
they have done any such thing, they shall confess the fault that they have
done, and restore the damage to him that it was done to. And agreeable to that
is the affection of Job in the law of nature; Job 20.18. He shall restore his
labor, and devour no more: the reason he adds in the next verse, For he
has undone many, and spoiled houses he never built. And as by the example of
nature, so by the example of the practice of it under the law, Nehem. 5.11. For
there Nehemiah says, Ye shall restore the people their lands and Vine-yards,
and the goods they had gotten by usury; and they said, they would: and he
called the Priests, and caused them to swear that they should do according to
this promise: and he shook his lap and said, So let God shake them, that would
not restore such things as they had gotten wrongfully, God shall shake them
off, and all the Congregation shall say Amen.

If we come to the Gospel, we shall see the rule of it, Romans 13.7. Give to
every man that which is his. And in the repentance and protestation of Zacheus,
Luke 19.8. that if he had done any wrong by cousening, forgery, or falsehood, he
would restore fourfold the value of it. And as this is in goods unlawfully
gotten: so in those things that have a lawful contract, there is a restitution
too; as in the gift, donation: God, De it. 21.15. takes order for the
conveyance of inheritance. But for that matter there is but little order to be
taken.

These things that are of the nature of a gift, as that one being wholly
commended to the necessity, liberalis donatio: so the other wholly to the
trust, depositum, the committing of any thing upon trust, to be restored: Exodus
22.7.10. verse. 7. if any man deliver money to his neighbor to keep, etc.
verse. 10. if any deliver to keep Ox or Ass: there must be a restitution of
whatsoever is delivered to our trust to keep: or else justice will be broken.

Among the depositarii, in regard of the thing committed: Depositarii.
fiduciarii (as the Law calls them) in regard of the trust that is put in
them; Those that are put in trust with children, while their fathers be alive,
as tutors, or guiders after their fathers death, they must make an account, and
give an account for their depositum, the things committed to their trust: for
we see that the holy Ghost does give an honorable witness of Mordocheus,
Hester 2.7. he was put in trust with Hester, his Uncles daughter; he says, he
brought her up as carefully, as if she had been his own daughter: that is the
extremity that can be required.

And so they that have charge during the parents lives. Whatsoever they take,
as Prove. 22.20. Solomon did, he says he had uttered and written three times,
many times in counsels and knowledge, that is, that they must diligently read
whatsoever they receive, or whatsoever comes in the bill of accounts. Luke
16.6. If 50. be put in the bill for 80. surely this must not be so of
Executors, that are put in trust with the administration of the goods of the
dead, and feoffees put in trust with the conveyance of lands; 1 Samuel 20.15.
there David is put in trust with Ionathans son, and the execution of it, and
that in good order, 2 Samuel 9.1. And for those, Luke 20.14. when as they had the
Vineyard, and the heir was sent to receive some fruit of them, they said, Let
us kill the heir, and the inheritance shall be ours. We see how grievously he
threatens them, and what a great woe the Lord pronounces against them for it.

3. After these things that go sub ratione depositi, Strayes.
under the name of trust, they join those things that come sub ratione
inventi, strayes. Exodus 23.4. God says, If we meet our enemies Ox or Ass
going astray, we shall bring him home to him: and if we be far from him, and
we know him not, Deuteronomy. 22.2. we must keep it till he come for it: And if the
owner never come for it, but by reason of ignorance, or negligence, let him
alone; then it is plain by Levit. 6.4.5. and by Numb. 5.8.9. we must not
divert it to our own uses, but restore it to the kindred: and if the party
have no kindred, it shall be given to the Lord, it shall be employed ad pios
usus, to sacred uses.

4. Then for those things that are lent us, that is, that are given freely to
us for to use for a time, and then to restore them again, August. says,
Tameisi benign dimittitur, tamen non injuste repetitur, although it were
freely lent, yet may it lawfully be demanded again: So he that does not
restore that which was lent him, is injust: therefore God has taken order for
it, Exodus 22.14. where he says, that it shall not only be restored, but in
this order: if any hurt befall it, it shall be made good: if it perish, there
shall be another given for it. Now because restitution is in conducto, in
things that are hired, he has taken order for it: the thing shall be restored,
if it perish not: and Exodus 22.15. if it perish, only the hire shall go for
it: and so he does limit us in every action. And because the unfaithfulness
and untrustinesse of man has brought in writings, as Bills and Obligations, and
pledges, and sureties, etc. therefore, even for them also has God taken order
in his word, Psalm. 15.4. If a man have once passed his promise, he must
perform it: and Exodus 22.26. and Zech. 18.7.12. of the pledge, and Ezekiel.
33.15. if he restore the pledge, he shall live, and not die: and if he do not,
he shall be, as he accounts him there, an unjust man, and hurtful, and
obnoxious.

So the surety, seeing Prove. 22.26. it was such a dangerous thing to become
surety: and that the law was so strict, Spare him not: and that the world was
now grown to make it a rule, Prove. 20.16. to take the pledge of him that is
surety, and let the other go: therefore he says Prove. 6. verse. 4. If you be
surety, be careful to discharge it: And if he that is surety must be so
careful, much more must he care for whom he is become surety: because the care
is brought upon the other by him.

And last of all, Tenacitas.
in regard of the Commonwealth, there is a detaining, and that is, as Solomon
speaks well, Prove. 11.26. to keep corn in the time of dearth, the people
shall curse him for it. So it may be said of any thing that is beneficial to
the whole, every man is bound not to detain it, but to utter it: that is of
that we call withdrawing.

Come to the use: which is, when we have neither by detaining that which is
none of ours, nor by taking away from others, which have right of them, but not
power to retain them; if we come not to generare pecuniam, increase money by
usury, after none of these ways, we are just Lords. It is well said, Vbi
justitia est condus, ibi Christus est Dominus; where justice is the layer up,
there Christ is the Lord over those goods; and we have a good tenure: the
Devil is Lord of the other. Aug. upon Luke 8. verse. 14. says, that the first
gains is thorns: Simile.
A thorn, non colligitur sine laesione: if one come to gather it, it may
chance to run him in the hand, if it be not well gathered: hereupon comes
it, that it is a Proverb, Omnis dives aut iniq^us ipse, aut haeres iniqui,
every rich man is either an unjust man himself, or the heir of an unrighteous
father. A man being rightly enstalled in the right of his possessions, and
goods, then the use of them, is either upon himself or others: the one Eccles.
6.7. the other 2 Cor. 9.11. he says he would have them rich to liberality. The
first is for sufficiency to a man's own need: the second for liberality, to
the need of others. These are the two uses of riches: they are both
comprehended in Prove. 5.15. for he says there, Drink the waters of thine own
Cisterns, and let the pipe of the fountains run forth to others; for our
use, and for the use of others. Gal. 6.8. there is a double sowing, into the
flesh, and into the spirit: for a man may sow them all into the flesh, then as
the flesh ends in putrefaction, it is a putrisving soil, and so he may reap
putrefaction: but if he sow in spirit, to that is for spiritual uses, propter
pies usus, for pious uses of the Church and the Ministry: and propter pios
civiles usus, for religious civil uses, for the poor. But they are plainest
and best of all seen in Christ's purse, John 13.29. For there he bids Judas
dispatch: Now it is said, that some thought his meaning had been, because he
carried the bag, first to buy for their own use, those things they had need
of; or else the second, that he should give something to the poor.

In the first use of these, there is a double extreme: Profusion. Niggardnesse.
Profusion (...) nigar^^^^^^.



As one may not inserre caedem sibi, kill himself: and as (...), uncleanness,
may be with himself: so this is furtum in se, theft against, or, from a man's
self: Eccles. 4.8. he says, there is a covetous man alone by himself, that
gathers with niggardnesse, and never says, Quare desraudo animan meam bono?
why defraud I my self of so much pleasure? here is a defraudation and theft of
himself: And while he does this, Iam. 5.3. his gold and his silver cankereth,
and his garments wax full of moths, and his canker and moths shall stand up in
the last day, and accuse and condemn him. Ambrose upon that place says,
Esurientium est cibus, qui apud te mucescit, and sitentium est potus, qui apud
te acesc^t, it is the bread of the hungry that grows moldy by thee, it is the
drink of the thirsty that sowres by thee. Of this man, by the consent of
interpreters, Hosea speaks, T^^ (...) o^ (...)
8. cap. verse. 7. he sows into the wind, and reapeth in the whirlewinde,
there is no profit of it: and if there come any profit, the stranger shall
reap his labor. That is the common plague, as the Heathen man says, Quodque
profunda hausit avaritia, what profound avarice has gathered together; there
shall another come Qui luxu^ pejore retundet, whose profuse vanity shall
scatter it. And indeed the hand of the Lord is upon them, that whereas their
sparing is, that they at the last day may enjoy it, and say as he says, Luke
12. (...), soul take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry; God disappointeth
them, verse. 20. or else that they may be kept, when they are sick, Psalm. 41.3.
But when they are in sponda languoris, upon their sick bed, they shall receive
no comfort, but wax worse and worse: they shall spend all their money with
Physicians, as the woman with the bloody issue, and be never the better: as the
Rabbis say, they shall not shift from the sick man's pallet, to the bed of
health: or else it is Job 20. that their children might have enough; there he
says, verse. 10. that for all that, their children shall be beggars too. And
there is nothing more commonly seen then this, that the prodigal son is the
heir of a niggardly father; this is the use of it to our selves. Now the other
use is the other extreme. Whereas he that does right is called (...), a
Steward; and his action is a dispensation: he that is prodigal, Luke 15.13.
his action is called (...), wasting: he flingeth his money from his, as though
he cared not for it, or were angry with it, as Seneca says, Ita segerit, ac si
iratus esset pecuniae, he behaves himself, as if he were fallen out with money:
Luke 12.19. and that is that that fools some rich men into an easiness of
wasting on their pleasure, what their avarice had laid up (such unnatural
ends have wretched games:) for as his desire began from the other (...),
lust, in the other Command^ment: so lightly if it have an end, it is not
natural, that the Preacher cap. 4. calls a monstrous end: this is the common
end, prosundere, prodigally to consume it: but so also, as he is fur sui, a
thief of his own: for which being profuse (...), where he should not the
steals from him (...) from whom he ought not: he wastes and consumes
himself in superfluous things. The Philosopher, (...), that are more eager
then needs upon evil things, (...) dall and heavy an good (...).
they shall be dull and heavy in good things. When there comes a good thing
to be employed in, they are wonderful sparing and needy, as in the case of
redeeming a captive, they are very near: Ten (...) he can (...).
but they are very profuse in a riotous supper. As jus^tia, justice, must be
our condus, layer up: so we must have a promus, a layer out too: and of that it
is well said of the Heathen man, (...), good temperance be thou my Steward:
that, as B^si^ says, the way to avoid them both, is this, (...), the whetstone
or riot, is nothing else but (...), vaineglory: and that (...), is the
whetstone of prodigality: which if they could take away, they could take away
the compass of their own nest: they should never fall. For howbeit that it be
true, that they say, That how much soever they spend, P^^d^^ they not excused
by piene^.
they have enough to do it: Luke 16.19. that they can (...), fare sumptuonsly
every day: yet it ought not to be. And the Heathen man could say, they that
would spend profusely, and say they had enough; why says he, it is no answer.
For if you a low your Cook a bushel of Salt, and he by putting too much in
the pot, should make the pottage too salt: and he should answer.you, he did it,
because he had enough, it were a foolish answer, and you would not like it.
(...) gal^^ (...) at ability more grievous.
And much more grievous is this sin in them that are not able, etc.

Of this (...), prodigality and excess, there are two parts: the first is
this, when they do (...), upon no occasion, daily, oftener then needs: so a
second, when they do (...), above his ability: and that may be done two ways:
the one of his faculties, that he can stretch unto: the other of his condition.
Of his saculties, Luke 14.28. for he says, there was one began a (...),
Tower, that could not go through with it. So secondly, though Naball be so
rich, 1 Samuel 25.36. yet it is above his condition to make a feast like a King:
it is not allowed though he be able, much less a man to do it, if his purse
will not reach. Therefore, David Psalm. 69.22. he prays that his enemies table
may be a snare unto him: for both it becomes a snare unto the soul, and the
body will despumare in libidinem, wax wanton: and to the body, Prove. 5.11. You
shall mourn at your end: it does bring sickness to a man's body: so here it is
a snare to a man's substance, it consumes that; Job. 20.13, 14, 15. he says,
the sin of covetousness in getting, is a very sweet sin, and he will
keep it close in his mouth, and will swallow it. And so, where he comes to
spending it, it is sweet too; but at the last his meat in his bowels shall be
turned, and he shall vomit it, for God shall draw it out of his belly again.

Come to the second use: there must be something given to the poor, or we must
sow to the spirit, or we must let our fountains run abroad; Sowing only upon
the flesh is the fault in these days: whereas we have warning given, that of
the ground comes nothing but rottenness and putrefaction: and that it shall
be destroyed, when the belly is destroyed: yet Christ's saying (we know) this is
more necessary, Beanus est dare quam accipere, it is more blessed to give then
to receive. Acts 20.35. But the other is more blessed, it was his common
saying: In omni re ditati ad liberalitarem, you are enriched in every thing to
bountifulness, 2 Cor. 9.11. therefore in this behalf it is expedrent to know,
1. how we have our riches; 2. what we are to think of the poor.


1. Deuteronomy. 16. We shall see how God commits riches to men there: whosoever
receives of God any temporal blessing, he must perform him homage; Deuteronomy.
26.5. he comes with his basket, and brings him rent, and the Priest sets
down his basket before the Altar, and then he says, etc. He does acknowledge
that there is nothing in him or his progenitors, that God should do so with
him, or them: and therefore he is come to do homage to him.

2. Before the Lord he must say, verse. 13. Sustuli quod sanctum est de
saculianbus, that is in the substance of every one, I have taken that that is
holy from my substance, and I have not spent upon it my self, but have taken
it out, and have given it ad usus ecclesiasticos, to the Levite: and secondly,
ad usus civiles, to the strangers, fatherless, and widows: and not of his
accord, but by necessity of duty; for he says, according to thy Commandment.
So every man must confess, that as he has ex libera eleemosyna, of a free and
undeserved alms: so secondly, there is a duty, a rent to be paid; that is, a
tenth at the least to be paid to holy uses: and a tenth to the poor. For the
poor, Psalm. 41.1. he says, Blessed is the man that judges wisely of the
poor. Our common fancy is, that they concern us not: that judgment must be
as God judges; and that shall never be reversed. How is that? even as he
says, Deuteronomy. 15.11. God says there, that he has taken this order, that there
shall be ever some poor in the land; and therefore I command thee (it is
strange) thou shall open thy hand to the needy, and to the poor: so some poor
are appropriated unto us, they are made nostri, ours: we cannot shake off this
affixum, hanger on us, and so consequently, verse. 3. we shall be bound to do
this, Non obfirmabis cor, heard heart: neque claudes manum, close hand; and
verse. 9. he says, Take heed there be not a wicked thought in thy heart, that
it grieve thee to look on him: And if he cry out unto the Lord against thee,
it will be sin unto thee. And the reward of sin is death: therefore he
shows what he ought not to do: therefore, verse. 8. he says, if his hand be
but weakened, open thy hand and lend him: and verse. 10. if lending will do no
good, thou shall give him. For there is a double estate of the poor: some, if
it be lent them, cannot employ it so, that they can live and pay it again:
other be so impotent, that lending cannot help them: therefore God has taken
order for a free gift for them: Matthew. 5.43. they are both joined together by
Christ.

Now this is a second thing, August. counsel is, not to let thorns grow among
seed, but to compass the seed with an hedge of thorns: that is the proper use
of them: or else, if that will not be, then we must inserere verbum spinis, as
to graft on thorn sticks: here is a science, Thou shall open thy hand and
lend him; and if that will not serve, thou shall give him: graft that, and it
shall bring forth fruits of mercy: therefore this we must do.

Christ, Luke 19.13. (as before) he says there, that he has given us our
talents, with this condition, Negotiamini dum venio, trade till I come, for his
advantage: and he says, Matthew. 25.24. that this occupying (if we will deal
with him for a reward) must be by improving our talent, and then laying it out
to the use of the hungry, naked, and sick; this is the best way of increase,
and the surest to bind him to reward us: yet is he not content to go thus
far only, but he has made a new promise in the Gospel; that that which is
done to the least of them, he will account it as done to him. Those that the
wise man, Prove. 20.10. speaks of, viscera impiorum crudelia, cruel bowels:
or else as the Apostle says, Phil. 2.1. nulla viscera, no bowels: or 1 John
3.17. and clauserit viscera, close bowels, shut up, and no fruit of mercy
comes from them: the law of God abides not in them.

In Exodus 23.11. to meet with this vice, there is a peculiar order taken: six
years the land shall be ploughed and sown, and whatsoever comes of it those
six years, thou shall gather in for thy self: but in the seventh year thou
shall let it lie, and let the poor gather of it: so likewise shall thou do in
thy Vine-yards and Olivetrees. Levit. 19.9.10. When a man reapeth his field,
whatsoever he leaves unreaped, he shall not go over the field twice: and he
shall have a corner that is for the poor, and Deuteronomy. 25.19. if a man have left
sheaves in the field, he shall not return to take them, but let the poor
stranger have them. And by an argument a comparatis, Deuteronomy. 22.1. he says, If
any see the Ass of his brother go astray, or any harm befall him, thou shall
not pass by, but help the Ass; therefore much more thy brother, if any
weakness befall him, thou shall help him.

Now for the point it self: necessitas uiplex.
there is a threefold necessity in Divinity.

1. Necessitas naturae, the necessity of nature: every man is to provide for
inward food, meat, drink, tegumenium, apparel, house-roome. 2. Necessitas
personae, personal necessity: 1 Timothy 5.8. he is bound to provide for them of
his own house: Luke 11.21. (...) that they likewise give alms of what they
have. 3. Necessitas status and conditionis, to have wherewith to live according
to our state and condition. This last comes not unto this, neither does
respect it, Aug. if a man have three hundred pounds, he has no more then will
serve him: and if a man have three thousand pounds, he has no more then will
serve him: But Christ says, after the two first be served, then (...), but
rather give alms of such things as you have: give alms, for during particular
necessities to our selves, of nature, or person, a man is not bound to give;
except 2 Cor. 8.3. it be for the common help, and good of the Church; but if
there be any surplus, he is bound also, even those that were in (...), they did
(...) otherwise. The reason of this Ch^ysostome gives: for says he, if you
do not this, you love not your money: and yet covetousness is (...), the love
of money: The covet^u loves not his money.
and yet they which are covetous, have most close bowels; he proves that they
love it not very soundly: for says he, that true love is not amor
concupiscentiae, to desire meat to eat: but the other, velle ejus bonum,
quod, and quem amamus, to wish the good of that thing, and of that person whom
we love. If we love our money, we wish, ut been fit ei, good to it: now of all
things in the world, here been esse is i^a esse, ut Deus ordinavu, the welbeing
of a thing,, is so to be as God has appointed it. Now then, if any man do
ordain an esse to his money in that order that God has ordained it, then he
wishes the good of it, and consequently he loves it; else he wishes the
evil of it, and so loves it not: (if we speak of the right love) Gods
ordinance is as we see in every thing that is good, that it should be (...),
sociable, or willing to communicate; and to make it an infallible sign of the
Church, that there is communicatio Sanctorum, the communion of the Saints: Romans
12.13. communicantes Sanctorum necessitatibus, communicating to others
necessities.
Now we become liberales, liberal and free; that is, liberare animam a vitiis,
to free our souls from vices: this is called (...), fellowship, 2 Cor. 9.13.
and there likewise to show that we are to account of it, it is called (...),
distribution: 2 Cor. 9.1. it is a service or ministry, a rent to be paid; This
is that men must think of it; and he calls it likewise (...), a free gift; 2
Cor. 8.19. it must be done gratis, freely. Now there is nothing but do ut des,
or do ut facias, I give to thee, that thou may give to me again, or I give
to thee that thou may do something for me: (...), is free, and is called
(...), a blessing. 2 Cor. 9.3. So doing this 4. fruit shall come, (...), the
poor shall bless us, and God too. God has ordained, that if a man does
appropriate that to his flesh, that he will have common, he takes away his use.

Another use, Gal. 6..8 this sowing, it must be feed: sow in the spirit, and
reap life everlasting: and so Hose. 10.12. sow righteousness, and reap
afterward. 2 Cor. 9.6. Qui parce seminat, paree metet: and qui seminat in
multis benedictionibus, metet in multis benediction ibus. He that sows
sparingly, shall reap sparingly, and he that sows bountifully, shall reap
bountifully. Now a man may love his feed foolishly, so that for very pure
love, he may set it lie in his barn: but then we know that worms will breed
in it, and consume it: and so he does amando perdere, by loving it lose it:
therefore a man is so to love his seed, as that he does projic^re semen, cast
his seed into the ground: and that is amare semen, to love his seed. And so,
if the temporal blessings of God be as seed, (as they are) then there must be
a casting and scattering of them; And yet in this casting, when a man has so
sown an acre of ground, and one ask, Whose is this seed; we say not, it is
the grounds, but his that sowed it. So if a man could be brought to this
persuasion, to think that semen is serentis, and not recipientis, the seed
belongs to him that sowed, and not to the ground that receives it, he would
sow. And that is the state of riches, whenever they are so bestowed, etc.

And therefore as the husbandmen do credere illud quod nonvident, believe that
which they see not; so that they cast in one grain, and see it rot, and
believe that howsoever showrs and snow fall, yet at the last an Autumn will
come, and then they shall reap an ear for one come: so, if God enlighten our
hearts, and give us faith, credendi ejus quod non videmus, ejuis fructus est
videre quod credimus, to believe that which we see not, we shall reap the
fruit of seeing and enjoying that which we believe. And so we shall see and
feel that semen, the seed, it is serentis, belongs to the sower: and it will
give an hundred fold ^ncrease.

For the coming to wealth, it was said it stood in two things: To come to
wealth.
1. (...), simplicity, against deceit. 2. Justice, against violence or rapine.


And whether to those that are by lawful contract, or to those that are
indirectly possessed restitution belongs, and in sundry other matters of
depositum, things committed to our trust; and things found, lent, let, debt;
and by virtue of restitution supplieth the other part of justice. And then for
the use to our selves, against prodigality: and thereby neglect of household:
and against the part of prodigality, that consists in the neglect of a man's
household; and against too great nearenesse in scraping: frugality, it answers
temperance in the former Commandment.

And for the use that we have toward other, against bottomless largition, and
against the shutting up or closeness of bowels, the virtue of liberality. So
in effect in these three virtues, and in the vices opposed to them, is all that
is forbidden and commanded in this Commandment.

The spiritual part, the heart.
Now according to the former course, how every man may be an observer of this
Commandment, which may best be done in this manner. As in the former
Commandment, so in this; Christ says, Mark 1.22. that thefts, and
extortions, and deceit, and evil gettings of a man's goods, which are of
affinity, they proceed from the heart: and therefore in them the fountain of
them must needs be damned. And so 1 Timothy 6.3. first they have the corruption of
the mind, before they come to covetousness. 1. If we had continued in the
state of innocence, man's desires both natural and oeconomicall should by no
other have been willed, but by reason; since which loss the corruption of the
mind is this, appetere (...), to covet a fullness, a satiety.

The belly (...), it has an appetite beyond that that is sufficient for it: so
likewise in the corruption of this unruly appetite we are disquieted with a
continual craving: Prove. 30.15. there is one in the mind that says, Have,
have; bring, bring. Now against this there must be one that says, there is
enough; that is, there must be an (...), a selfe-sufficiencie, or
contentedness; for as (...), the excess is become the corruption of our
wealth: so (...), is (...), the wealth of nature is selfe-sufficiencie; which
is contentedness: But now there is (...), covetousness. Now we see how the
case stands with the heart, 1 Timothy 6.9. because that men will be rich, and
because it holds in all evil things: and quod volumus, valde volumus, and
whatsoever we desire, that we earnestly desire and long after; in so much as
Prove. 21.25. if a man be never so slow, yet if he desire any thing, he will
have it quickly, he will be rich as soon as he can: then Prove. 28.20. he that
makes haste, shall not be innocent, and Prove. 20.21. of an heritage that is
soon gotten, there never comes a good end.

But to come to the heart, by occasion of this your unclinablenesse, 1 Timothy 6
9. he sets (...), a temptation a good round gain, and sum: and (...), the
snare, naught but a false asseveration, a few words, a false oath; or Luke 16.
a dash with a pen, 50. for 80. If you will come into this snare, you shall have
this bait; and then Gods judgments: when a man sets himself to it, he
suffers him to fall into it, as Eccl. 5.9. he shall love it, and not be
satisfied, and the reason is, for the mind (as has been said) cannot be
satisfied with any thing but with God. And from many desires (a it is verse.
to.) he shall have a great many cares; and as his desires shall increase, his
cares shall increase: as that that Christ says, Quid edam? quid bibam? quid
induam? What shall I eat? what shall I drink? or wherewith shall I be
cloa^hed? if he be not rich; and when he is rich, Quid sacia^? I have not
barnes enough. Rich and not rich have it. And then beside these, he says, they
shall (being thus distracted) err, even from the faith, i. they shall be
brought even to the estate, that they shall not care for the Commandments of
God, nor his threatenings: that was the punishment of Judas; that when he made
no conscience of carrying the bag, John 12.6. fur erat and loculos gerebat,
he was a thief and carred the bag; we see afterward he came to make little
account of Christ, and to sell him. And from this which is very heavy, they
fell (...), into destruction and perdition; that is, of substance it self, as
Zach. 5.3. he says, there was a book flew out, that had the curse of God, and
it should enter into the house of the thief, and swearer, and should consume
the house, and burn up timber, and the stones, and there should come no good
end of such: as the Heathen man says, if you would have your chests full of
riches, Evil gotten goods will not, prosper.
long to continue, see that you get them well; (...), whatsoever is unjustly
brought into the house, has no footing. Job. 20.15. It shall make him cast up
his gorge again: So for a man's life, Psalm. 58. verse. last. They shall not live
out half their days: as it is well said, dies Domini veniet tanquam fur,
nulli autem ita tanquam fur, ut furi, the day of the Lord will come as a
thief, but to none so like a thief, as to the thief. But this is not the
point of (...), the casting away and perdition of the soul, concerning which,
Matthew. 25.35, 40, 45. they held it for a rule, for those which have been
takers from others, non controvertitur de iis, there is no question of them:
but of those that did not give to others, is the plea: but for eripuistis, such
as have taken by violence, there is no question of them. Ezekiel. 13.19. Then they
shall see the truth of the saying of the Prophet, that they have gotten an
bandfull of barley, and have sold the Kingdom of Heaven: and they shall see,
that it advantageth them not to win the whole world, and to lose their own
soul. T^^^ cov^^ (...) man like h^^d: and like will to like.
And because the wiseman Prove 30. compares a wicked man to Hell, as if he
would hold as much as Hell: therefore there is an affinity, and just adequation
between them and Hell: so the Apostle sets down his conclusion, 1 Cor.
6.10. he says, no thief, no covetous man, no extortioner, etc. none of them
shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven.

Come now to the root or place, a contented mind, or heart: and that is the
way to avoid and destroy covetousness: Heb. 13.5. (...), Let your conversation
be without covetousness: how is that? being contented with those things they
have, i. when a man for personal or natural necessity has that that is
sufficient, 1 Timothy 6.8. that he stay and be contented with them: and for the
better supply of statuall necessity, and of our degree, which is a thing that
has not his medium in indivisibili; and therefore not so to be regarded: for
if once he be contented, he must stand upon equal conditions; if he be not
contented, Matthew. 6.25. Luke 6.22. there comes in that (...), the division of
the soul, a disquietnesse; he begins to distrust the providence of God:
which the righteous, 1 Pet. 5.7. out of Psalm. 55.23. they cast all their care
upon God: and Psalm. 34.9. they have this persuasion, that they shall not want:
a very Lion shall want before they want. Now Paul, 1 Timothy 5.8. allowing men
(...) providence and industry, for the necessity of nature, and person; and if
they have not that, he says, they have denied the faith: But he makes a
difference of (...), providence, from (...), an anxious care: for the one is
able to exempt and avoid it self clean out of the soul, so that it is a way
to give the heart wholly to God in prayer: whereas the other takes up the most
part of the heart. Ezekiel. 33.31. Worldly cares compassed their hearts, not the
exercise of religion that was preached unto them: in so much, that with their
mouths they made jests, and their heart ran after their covetousness: and
do what they can, they cannot bring it in from thence. Hosea says, cor little
divisum est, their heart is divided: which with a great desire and carfulness
and distrust withal, grows so strong, and so deep, that when they present
themselves before God, he shall not have it hole; nay many times it takes up
their heart: therefore this contentedness grounded upon Gods providence, not
excluding (...), is the first thing.

Then the second in Psalm. 128.1. Fear God, and outwardly walk in his ways.
i. he must set himself in a calling: he must eat his bread either in the care
and study of his soul, or in the sweat of his brows; either jure manus, or
jure oculi, by the labor of his hands, or of his eyes: 2 These. 3.11. he says
there, they be altogether out of order, that live idely; and they are such
persons as must be cast off: therefore it is certain that every man must keep
himself in an honest calling. Being come to this Calling, he must stand thus
resolved, 1 These. 3.8. First, to have a desire not to be chargeable to others;
Secondly, Ephesians. 4.28. not only that, but also to be helpful and beneficial
to others, if it please God. Now for the attaining of that, this we must know,
Deuteronomy. 15.11. that God will have some poor: So whosoever is rich, and without
cares and sorrows, as Aug. says, he has divitias sine verme; he must be
persuaded, that it is God that makes rich and poor: and therefore that riches
is the gift of God; that whomsoever God will have to be rich, he will also have
him to use lawful and direct means in attaining to them, 1. doing nothing,
but according to the strict rule, yet God will extraordinarily bless him: Genesis
26.12. we see it in Isaac, God blessed him strangely, so that he made him
fearful to the Philistims; which was a sign, that God would have him rich:
and so it is said of Jacob, Genesis 30.43. that he did labor in righteousness,
and increase in wealth exceedingly: and as he confesses, Genesis 32.10. that he
went over Jordan only with a staff; but came back again with two great
bands and flocks. So as God will have some rich: and they are divites dei, Gods
rich men indeed, using only lawful means: so there are other that shall not
grow up, but God will have them poor; they shall not have Isaacks increase:
he will bless their labors no further then they need. And again, of evil
men, benedictio Domini ditat, the blessing of the Lord enricheth, and adds no
sorrows with it: there are some that are rich, but with great sorrows. The
Heathen man divides (...) into (...) and (...), riches into such as are got by
violence, and such as are the gift of God, and says, that (...), such as are
the gift of God, are far the better, Hesiod. So there are some that come by
them by evil means, and use what means they can, Numb. 24 11. yet they
cannot be rich, as Balaam did: and when all came to all, he could get nothing,
but lingering there he lost his life. And so Judas, though he stole out of the
bag, and sold Christ; yet it prospered not with him. And so Witches and
Sorcerers, though they give their soul to the Devil for riches, yet not one
among many proves rich: the one is the gift of God, the other his permission.
So some, if they be poor in spirit, shall wear the crown of patience, others
the crown of beauty. So that a man standing thus persuaded, that God will have
me to be rich, he will so bless me by lawful means, that I shall be rich: if
not, then, as 2 Samuel 25.26. he says, If God will have me restored to my
Kingdom, so it is: if not, here I am, let him do with me, as pleases him: as
Phil. 4.11.12. that he had learned (...) be content; he could (...), suffer
need, etc. and stand contented with it; and (...), abound, and behave himself
as the will of God would direct him. Then this indifferency by which he
stands thus affected, and by which he stands upon Gods gift, as he is
persuaded that both these states are of God, and if he will exalt him, he will
bless him: and if he will not, possum deficere, I can suffer want: this is the
third thing that a man must be persuaded: If he be not thus persuaded, then
either God punishes him, by letting him fall into covetousness, and so dum
semper metuit ne indigeat, indiget, whiles he is continually afraid lest he
should want, he wants: he is punished with the evil that he fears; or else,
as, Prove. 5.13. and 6.2. he shows a mavelous strange judgment, it
thriveth not with him, and decays a man cannot give a reason, nor tell how:
yea, sometimes when his bags are filled, Luke 12.20. when his barnes are ready
to be filled, he dies. This standing for a man's calling, then he must take off
the whetstone, 1. of too high a sail: so Tit. 2.12. (...), soberly and
righteously. First we must keep it within our measure, and scantling, and then
we shall do justly; for justice is always racked and stretched, if sobriety
be broken: 1 Cor. 6.13. if he be brought under the power, if he must have such
meat, and such apparel, then he must have money: and if it cannot be gotten
by direct means, then justice must be racked for it by indirect means. And
therefore that is another (rule) he must set down: he must sobrie vivere, live
soberly; that he may live just, righteously: Take a note too low, rather then
too high.

Now from hence, when a man is thus affected, he comes to his business; and
there he comes to wish gifts, ex donatione, or haereditate, by legacies,
gifts, or inheritances. (as is before) It is the rule of the world, if any man
will give me any thing, I will take it: but it is an evil rule, I must not
take of every man, but ad mercedem, or debitum, from such to whom I have done
good offices, and deserved well at their hands. We have Genesis 14.23. Abraham's
practice, he might have had a reasonable good booty of the King of Sodom: and
Genesis 23.16. the field was offered him for nothing of Ephron, but he would pay
for it, and the Cave cost him 400. shekels. And in the after times in the days
of Elisha, 2 King. 5.16. Naaman he makes a good offer, he would not take it,
and 2 King. 4.11. he takes of the Shunamite. And Paul Phil. 4.15. he had a
good opinion of them, for he had not taken of any Church, but of them; that is,
as Lydia, Acts 16.15. says, If ye have judged me to be faithful unto the
Lord, enter into my house. Therefore there must be choice of those, that we are
to be bound to; as the Heathen man says, he will not only have beneficium, a
benefit from one, but judicium, he will know from whom also: as the son of
Sirach says, he will open his mouth like a Towne-cryer, to day he lends, and
to morrow will he ask it again.

Come to there oath second, industria and contractus, industry and, contracts.
And for industria, whenever a man is to have for his pains, 3 John verse. 5.
he gives Gaius a good commendation, for dealing faithfully: Beloved, thou
do faithful, whatsoever thou do: and Genesis 31.6. of Jacob, that he had
done his service truly with all his mind. In 2 Chronicles. 31.18. whosoever is
partaker of holy things, is partaker of them by his fidelity. And no doubt, if
he be not faithful, he is an usurper of them: and therefore, faithfulness and
pains in the calling wherein we live, is the second part of this that is
required.

And a second thing stands upon Sobriety, Luke 3. Be content with your
wages: when a man looks on it with an evil eye, and thinks he has not
enough, he charge himself with thick clay, and so must needs be unfaithful;
Exodus 16.3. if a man repine and say, he will go to Egypt again, and wish for
the fleshpots there.

1. Rule.
1. For Contracts. For the charge it self, before five cases, when there is any
fault in it, for the adequation of it to the price, by reason of its worth; And
it is true, that it is not the worthiness, but the need of it, that makes.
August. Vnus panis, one loaf of bread is worth twenty Flies: and one field,
better worth then a great company of Mice: not for creation; for they that are
living creatures, are more worth: and sometimes a good Horse is more esteemed
then an unprofitable Man: because there is more need of it. 2. And to the need,
they add the use: which, if it be fit for our purpose, if it be durable, or if
it have manifold uses, it increases in price.
Now because the want of things is varied wonderfully, as in regard of the
place, as in the middle of the land, seafish: therefore, they are dearer
there. In regard of time, because presently before harvest, every man is to
look to the getting in of his corn, it is dearest: and the longer from
harvest the cheaper it is. And the scarsity of the thing, because there are but
few that have it. And utentium inopia, the scarsity of such as use it: when
there are but few that will use it, and great pains to make it, those make that
there can be no certain price, and no termini indivisibiles, to make things
equal: because the need is not certain, and then a man's charges that he is
at, and the damage that he sustaineth for the getting of it, and his care for
the keeping, and the labor that he takes to polish and trim, and the danger
that he passes through in the attaining of it; these are valuable: but what
pains he takes, or what cost he is at, it is not easy to be known. And
because this justitia caniractuum, equity of bargaining cannot easily come
under compass, because men will, etc.

We must sumere medium, (...), take the mean or midst according to the
breadth: the medium is a broad thing: if a man set himself to come to the
point, though he miss a little, it is not injust: therefore if he stay too,
before he attain the medium, the point he aims at, warily declining the
extreme till that he be better informed, and learn otherwise; he is not
therefore to be censured as unjust.

This I take to be the need: if I can be informed better, I will come nearer to
the midst, I would be glad to have it certain, that I might come to the
point.

This third they call justum pretium, the just value, in two kinds, the first
of them pium pretium, an easy rate; when for public uses, either civil or
ecclesiastical, we part from it for a less price. 2. Moderatum, a moderate
price, in some proportion: and the third rigidum, a rigorous price: when a man
would have the state and price of things unknown and uncertain. But in all
these things the circumstances of it, Lev. 27. and 25. In the 27. v. 13. he
deals for the sale of cattle, and v. 15. for houses, and 19. for lands, and
27. for unclean beasts, and 31. for tithes. In all these cases, still he
keeps this, he will have the value of the thing that the thing stands in:
and for the gain, quintam partem, the fifth part. And in the Law of nature,
Genesis 41.24. we see that Joseph, by the direction of nature, took this course,
for the fifth part he remitted them all. So in equity, Levit. 25.16. and verse.
14. if the use be long, to the 50. year, the price shall be increased so much:
if it be not long, the price shall be diminished: so as the use is to be
durable, or not durable, the price, and not turning of it every year, requires
even in equity, that there should be advantage and increase, but a 100. for a
100. that can no ways be allowed; but this, because we deal with Merchandise;
a greater proportion of increase in the way of trade is to be allowed them then
others, for the dangers of times and losses, etc. therefore Merchants have
greater gains, answerable to their greater hazards in venturing their goods,
and life too many times to the boot; and then 12. or 8. in the hundred, may
seem but the guerdon of their pains.

For the restitution, there is no more to be added: but if it be unlawful, it
must necessarily go back, Numb. 5.7. if it be debt, we must not sleep,
Prove. 6.4. till we have paid it; or else if we cannot, Matthew. 18.26. we must
desire patience, and to make another day for paying it. And if it be none of
ours, though we have strength, we must not withhold it.

Come to the use, for laying of them out, or for preserving them, Prove. 27.23.
he says, that every man should know his own estate, and the estate of his
cattle; and that he should not put it over to others, to look to: for the
rule, that the Masters eye fatteth the horse, and his step the ground: verse.
24. divitiae non sunt affixae, riches are not for ever: Eccl. 5. they will not
fly into a man's mouth: and if he have them, they will away: therefore he
wills that, etc.

And then secondly, being so, that he does not by superfluous contracts
diminish it; but let it be his rule, John 13.29. (...) for buying that is
necessary: and for his sale, he might have taught his belly better manners.

Then for the use of them, John 6.12. this is Christ's rule, Gather that that is
left, that nothing be lost; nothing must be wasted: And so he protests, that
comes before the Lord to offer, Deuteronomy. 26.14. he says, though any used it,
yet it did not become him, he has not suffered ought to perish by evil
looking to, i. he had not riotously spent it upon himself; The Kites, Crows,
and Vultures have not devoured it; as one says, the prodigal man's goods are
laid upon rocks and high trees, that a man cannot come at: none eats them
but Vultures and Ravens, that a man's goods be not like these. Exodus 16.23. As
there must be a S. Bonifacius, a S. getter, Bonifacius and Servatius, must be
joined together.
so there must be a S. Servatius, S. Saver; A goood saver, a good getter, a
good keeper: If you have bonum Servatium a good Saver, you shall have bonum
Bonifacium, a good Getter: (they are the words of Luther on that place) Look
what you left of that was baked the sixth day, lay up for the seventh. He must
gather in vesperi, that will not esurire in Sabbato.
Rab. If a man do not gather in vesperi Sabbati, on the evening of the Sabbath
day; he shall esurire in Sabbato, be an hungry on the Sabbath day. And then
when we have thus done, we see to the rules then as Christ says, Luke 14.28.
(...), sit down and count the cost: that that was said for sobriety, a man
must sit down and reckon what he is able to reach with that estate; and then
that he observe the Heathens rule, yet Christ's meaning, Condus fortior promo.
to take order that his Condus be fortior promo, and promus debilior condo,
that his layer up be stronger then his layer out: and if the other be weaker,
it will go out the faster, and so he shall not sufficere rebus suis, have
sufficient for his own afffaires, and res ejus, and his goods, shall not
sufficere ei, suffice himself; and then justice must pay for it.

For the other use, toward others, we see it out of Psalm. 41. that a man must
judge wisely of the poor: and Deuteronomy. 15.11. that some poor are appropriated to
us. Matthew. 25.45. And for our goods, that we are but negotiatores, Stewards;
and so consequently, God has charged us with a rent charge out of them. Deuteronomy.
16.16, 17. Iuxia benedictionem Domini, according to the blessing of the Lord
thy God which he has given thee: and Deuteronomy. 26. by acknowledging, verse. 5.
Syrus, etc. verse. 10.13. that there is nothing in him or his progenitors; that
God should do so with him or them, and therefore he is come to do homage to
him: and 1 Cor. 13.5. that charity does not only not seek her own, but verse.
4. also gives, and is bountiful: and Ephesians. 4.28. the Apostle makes this the
opposition to stealing, to labor to have to give to others that need; showing
this, that the poor must always be in our minds, and every one must say, I
do work for them, as well as I do work for my self. 1 Cor. 29.14. David
speaking of the Temple, verse. 1. says, Quod de manu tua accepimus, damus tibi,
What we have received of thine hands, that we return to thee; speaking of the
applying of his preparations to the building of the Temple; and not that, Ad
quid perditio haec? Why was this waste? Mark 14.4. And good affection, Deuteronomy.
15.21. if there be any evil favored thing, either maimed, or blind, or lame,
or that had any other deformity, that is given to God, there is plain order
taken against it: and the affection of Solomon, Prove. 3.9. in the good part;
Honor the Lord with thy riches and tithes: and Mal. 3.9. in the evil part, Ye
spoil him, and ye shall have a curse: and as August. Date and Dabitur, give,
and it shall be given unto you, Date and dabitur, two brethren,
shall be two brethren.

Now for the second use, 1. For the poor, because as out of it, Prove. 15.9. it
is sin, if he do not give; therefore every one must give, except he himself
be in extrema necessitate, extreme necessity: 2 Cor. 8.12. his reason is, Every
one shall be accepted, not according to that he has not, but according to that
he has. As for this first part, Luke 21.4. if but two mites, there greatly
commended of our Savior Christ: and for the other, Mark 7.41. even to the cup
of cold water in Christ's name, there shall be a reward given. And giving and
lending, they are both enjoined, Matthew. 5.42. And rules for them, Acts 2.45. he
says, they parted their goods, as every one had need. 1. they had respect to
the need of every party; not as the prodigal, of whom the Heathen, male fit
ei, qui fecisti choracibus, he fared the worse for his former luxury: whereas
they are (...), Graces, thou have made them, (...), prostitutes, prostituting
them without regard.

Now then, 2 Cor. 1.13. their alms must not be so, that other men might have,
and they want: that other men might find ease by it, and they disease: whereas
others that have (...) passio, a transient passion, there is no hold in it: so
when their liberality does perire liberalitate, perish by their liberality, it
comes so; that is for the measure. 2 Cor. 9.7. God does not love (...), but
(...), a giver of necessity, but a cheerful giver, it must not be wrung out:
(...), neither searching curiously, nor with weighing and sifting what the
party is, or whether he be such a one as is worthy; for that, the Heathen could
say, that these were given not homini, but humanitati, to the man, but to
humanity: (...), a fellow-feeling compassion is due to nature, and we ought to
yield to the law our approbation; these in free gifts.

In matters of justice we are to look to the man, and Prove. 3.28. he puts
another, he will have it done out of hand: and when as a man has, he must not
bid him go away, and come to morrow, but give then. Ambrose, Pauperi dabit
potum cum acidatur, and panem cum mucidatur, he will give the poor his drink
when it is sower, and his bread when it is moldy; according to these rules.
And thus doing Psalm. 128.2. a man shall be sure to eat the labors of his
hands, Psalm. 41.3. the Lord will have a regard to him in his sickness: he will
be his Physician: Psalm. 37.25. his seed shall not beg: not only corporal
blessings, but Dan. 4.27. it shall abrumpere peccata, break off his sins.
When a man feels his bowels open, it is a good sign and symptoma, of
forgiveness. As Acts 10.2. when Cornelius gave alms, his calling was near;
and Luke 11.41. Give alms, and all things shall be clean unto you. This
outward ceremonial. But James 1.27. It is right and pure religion, and
undefiled, to visit the fatherless and widows in adversity; And not only
this, but also warranted by 1 Timothy 6.19. he says, we shall have a good
foundation against the day to come: as out of the sentence of Christ, Mat. 25.
the latter part of that Chapter, this is that that comes in rationem, to be
accounted for; I was hungry, and you fed me, or fed me not: and the reason we
may allege out of v. 27. for there it is said, he asks the unprofitable
servant, why he gave not his money to exchangers: The Exchangers to whom we
must put the Lords money be pauperes
Ambrose on that place enquireth, who be those Trapezitae, money changers he
speaks of; and finds out at last, that they be pauperes, that be campsores;
the poor that be those money changers, as he calls them: and therefore he
says, if a man be to go into another Country, and in this respect he carry
money with him, he might be met with by thieves, and so be eased of his money:
and secondly, if he carry money that will not be current and allowable in that
Country that he is to go to; and therefore he goes to the Exchanger, and
delivers him the money, and takes a bill of his hand, and carries but that
with him, and so fears neither the one, nor the other: that he is sure they
will not take; and so he shall be sure of money that will pass there: and so he
compares the state of a man's life to a Traveller, who does not load himself
with that, which may either endanger his life by Thieves, or will not pass
current in the Country, whither he goes, but lays out his money here, that
he may receive it there.

Now as Job 1.21. he says, Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and 1 Timothy
6.7. We brought nothing into this world, neither shall we carry any thing out:
if we carry any thing with us, we shall be spoiled as we go: Psalm. 76.5. The
proud are robbed, they have slept their first sleep; they shall rise in the
mornining and find nothing in their hand. And then secondly, if a man, Job
35.7. could have it in his hand, it is not gold nor silver will serve there;
for it is not current there. Then, as before, in the temporal passage it is
best to make us friends of the temporal Mammon: and to deliver here, and to
receive the worth of it there; as Ambrose says, to be dives in libro
sigillato, rich in the sealed book; that Cornelius Act. 10.4. his alms ent^ed
into (...), that is the committing of it here to his Factors, and exchangers,
that is, the poor, for whom Christ is surety. Matthew. 19.21. and 25.40. What ye
do to them, ye do to me: and I will make it good; and his bill, which is the
very Gospel, the word of God, promises, Matthew. 10.42. that if it be but a cup
of cold water, it shall be returned there: This is the warrant of delivering it
here, and receiving it there. The Heathen man says, that opera miseric^rdiae,
works of mercy, do only (...), swim out with us: Revel. 14.13. and little
opera sequuntor eos, and their works follow them: Esa. 28.9. the other swim
not, but are like to him that dreameth of a great dinner, and when he awaketh,
he is hungry. But then he will repay them that give: their work shall be
accounted of, and theirs is the Come ye blessed of my Father, etc. To conclude,
Prove. 21.21. he says, he that follows after righteousness, i. just dealing
in getting and restoring, and mercy in parting, he shall find life in this
life, and in the life to come: and his righteousness shall have a certain
sign in this life, and in the world to come, glory.

The sixth point, of the procuring it in others. 6. R^^^.
Psalm. 50.18. It is set down there, that currere cum fure, to run with a
Thief, and Prove. 29.24. he says, that he that is partner with a Thief,
destroys his own soul: therefore Genesis 31.37. we see how bold Jacob is with
L^ban; he says, Bring forth that which was stolen, let him search: and
bids him show then, if he had found them: he knew he had not brought them.
And not only for himself: but Psalm. 62.10. for the other part, he directs
himself, and speaks to all; Trust not in oppression and robbery; if riches
increase, set not your hearts upon them. And the like is, Prove. 20.17. for he
says there, My son, the bread of deceit is sweet to a man: but afterward
his mouth shall be filled with gravel: Prove. 3.3. he warns him to take this
order: that truth and mercy forsake him not, for so shall thou fi^^^ fafour.
And so we see, both in themselves and others, inwardly and outwardly concluded
of theft, of the Saints in all ages.

The IX. Commandment.
Thou shall not bear false witness, etc.
THe exposition of this is in Levit. 19.11, 16, 17. and in Zech. 8.16, 17. and
by our Savior Christ, Matthew. 12.34. and so forward: and by Saint Paul, Ephesians.
4.25.15. for so he sets it down: Cast off lying, and let every man speak
the truth to his neighbor: and the addition in verse. 15. (...), speak the
truth in love: that is the affirmative part of this Commandment.

First, to make plain the words of this Commendement: it is not of one word,
as the other: the Hebrew translated, is after this manner, Non respondebis
testimonium salsum super vicinum tuum, thou shall not answer a false testimony
concerning thy neighbor. In which the word respondebis, must be understood
after the * Hebrew phrase: (...) a rad^^ (...)
as the Evangelists often use to begin thus; Jesus answered and said, Matthew.
11.2^. where no man speaks, nor being demanded of any: so that by answering
is meant, not only when a man is demanded to speak the truth, but also when
he speaks the truth, no man demanding him; for we see, Exodus 32.18. the same
word, he says there, that he heard vocem cantantium, the voice of them that
sing: it is expressed by this word; so that it signifies to speak, whether as
of the mover of a question, or of the answerer. (...) 4 Sorts of w^^nesses 1.
^od
Now then for witnesses.

It is of four sorts in the Scriptures, for, 1. it is applied to the great and
chief witnesses to God. Job 16.19. he says, Though they did oppress him with
their eloquence, yet ecce testis meus est ia coelis, behold my witness is in
Heaven: and 1 John 5.7. he says there are three witnesses in Heaven, the
Father, the Word, and the Spirit; that there is no Person in the Deity, but it
is a witness of the truth, and of our doings and thoughts, whether good or
evil. Romans 2. verse. last. Though the name of truth be attributed to Christ:
John 14.6. yet often a wicked man shall have an applause of wicked men; and a
good man shall not: so he has his praise indeed; but that praise shall not
stand: it is not that that has the praise of men that is praiseworthy; it is
a judgment of God against them: he is not a Jew that is outwardly a Jew, but
he is a right Jew, that is inwardly one: and therefore Paul, when the judgment
lay between them and God, 1 Cor. 4.3. inrespect of true judgment he says,
Mihi pro minimo est ut judicer a vobis, he counts it a small thing what man can
judge of him.

Now after this great witness, 2. Conscience.
in the second place comes the witness that Saint Paul speaks of, Romans
2.15. attestante ipsis conscientia, their conscience bearing them witness: and
2 Cor. 1.23. he says, Now I call God to record unto my soul, etc. this is
that the Heathen man calls conscientia mill testes, conscience a thousand
witnesses. i. the knowledge that pertains to our selves, and concerns our
doings: and as the Heathen man says, that calls him miserum, miserable, that
contemns hunctestum, this witness; for he will make but small conscience of
this Commandment: or else that it is worse: for the Apostle, Romans 1.18. says
plainly, that it is the beginning of Apostasy, when a man will press down
and smother the truth in unrighteousness. When he has a wicked affection, an
unrighteous appetite to any action, for the attaining of that, though his his
heart speak unto him, and tell him, that it is not right, yet he can be
content to suppress and keep down the truth as a prisoner, and not let it
over rule: as the Heathen man says, That the foundation of the justice of God
began here, speaking in the hearts and consciences of men, and they
themselves will do the contrary: and it is a way for God, as Paul says, 2
These. 2.11. to give them over to strong delusions, that they may believe a lie.
Though this witness be great, yet as 1 John 3.20. and Paul, 1 Cor. 4.4. he
says, that God is a greater witness then our conscience: and Paul says,
though his heart acquit him, yet he is not acquitted: for a man often dreameth
of himself, and deceives himself; and beguileth himself in his purposes:
which when it comes to be ripped up, coram magno test, before the great
witness, shall be found to have been wrong, and shall not prevail: therefore
we give it the second place.

Now the third. 3. Man.
Because God will not speak from Heaven, and a man's conscience may be seared,
the third is, one man to another. Ios. 24.22. says unto the people, Vos estis
mihi testes, ye are my witnesses, that ye have chosen the Lord to serve him:
and they said, Sumus testes, we are witnesses. And concerning this part, is the
Commandment, the establishing of the truth by witnesses, Deuteronomy. 17.6.7. All
matters shall pass by this order: At the mouth of two or three witnesses,
shall he that is worthy of death, die, but at the mouth of one witness he
shall not die: the hands of the witnesses shall be first upon him to kill him.

4. The witness of a stone.
Now there is a fourth; Ios. 24.27. when he had made a covenant with the people,
he took a great stone, and pitched it under an Oak, and said, The stone had
heard all the words, and should bear witness: there is a witness of a stone:
so Habak. 2.11. says, that the stone in the wall shall cry out, and the beam
out of the timber shall make answer, and testify against the getting of that
money. And so James 5.3. the rust and canker of the gold and silver, etc. that
is as much to say, as it shows that a man is unfaithful, in so much that
there must be a refuge to other creatures, to witness against him. Esaias
begins his Prophecy with it: Moses his song, and Micah his plea; chap.
6.12. because no men are left to be Judges of the matter, he speaks to the
mountains; because no man was left from prevarication, or else because that is
Testimonium facto, a testimony in fact: as here is rust, etc. 1. There is not
only vox linguae, a voice or testimony of the tongue; but there is also vox
operis, a voice or testimony of the work. Job 16.8. he says, that the
wrinkles he had in his face, should witness: so there is falsum testimonium
facti, a false testimony in fact, (as well as falsum testimonium dicti) a false
testimony in word, which is hypocrisy. What witness is it, that is here
meant? These two witnesses that are last, pertaineto this Commandment, for the
two former pertain to the first table.

Now first for a false witness, the inde (...) A false witness signifies
three things. Falsum.
word in the original has three significations; whereof [false] in Latin will
bear but one: for we say it signifies, 1. falsum, a falsehood, 2. mendacium,
a lie, 3. vanitas, a vanity.


1. Falsum, falsehood, that is aliter quam res est se habet, which is otherwise
then the thing it self is: that is not so, sermo non adaequatus rebus, when
the speech is not agreeable, and consonant to the things spoken of. 2. Mentiri,
to lie, Mendacium.
(as the common derivation is) ire contramentem, is aliter se habens, quam ipse
sentit, is to go against the mind, that is to speak otherwise then we
think; contrary to that is the property that David requires, Psalm. 15.2. must
speak that that is in his heart. And the 3. Vanitas. Vanity.
Because the speech of man was ordained to that end that it should serve for
two necessary uses, 1. concerning this life, 2. concerning the life to come;
that is, the building up of, 1. faith in respect of God, 2. charity, in respect
of our brethren; therefore what speech soever has not this end, is signum
mendax, a lying sign; because it has not signatum, the thing signified:
therefore we exclude (...) foolish talking, with the Apostle Ephesians. 5.4. and
Colos. 3. is vain and frivolous, as he calls it, unsavory talk. For that
(against thy neighbor) is that that many have taken upon them to build up
officiosum memdacium, an officious lie: as if they might buy a lie, help a man
to save life or goods, which is unlawful: and indeed the very words of the
Commandment here will not bear it, for the word is (...) therefore, as our
English translation, Psalm. 15.6. (...)
(against) it is not well: and Tremellius he is gone too on the other side, for
he interprets it, pro innocente, for the innocent; but the common
translation, super innocentem, concerning the innocent, is the best, either for
him, or against him. Against him, it is naught and absurd; even the Heathen man
knew it to be unlawful: and Christan charity, and the Law of God, to help
him, goes against it. Therefore in translations this were onething to be
wished, that whosoever is the interpreter, A good rule in translating.
he would let the word stand in as broad a signification as it may bear; that
if need be, it may be restrained: where, if it be once set down, contra, or
pro, against, or for, the ignorant or unstable, they will take occasion to
exclude the other. Therefore rather take concerning thy neighbor, which, as it
signifies against, so it signifies with. As also Genesis 30.33. My justice shall
answer (...) for me: so the proposition has a general sense: then it is super
proximum, concerning thy neighbor; whether it be for him or against him: and
yet neither is it full enough.

Now for the mention of a man's neighbor, it is in this respect, because there
is a meeting of God and the neighbor, as it were ex aequo, the one by the
third Commandment in the first Table, the other by the ninth in the second
Table: for as there is excluded, as derogatory to God, false witnesses against
God; to the unhallowing of his name: so here the other half, i. the abuse of
our tongue, being any ways against our neighbor, to the damage of our
neighbor.

The coherence
The coherence and dependence that this has with the former; from the manner of
getting our living: some make it lying, for as the Heathen man says, (...),
where a lie must be made, let it be made. And where may a lie be made? (...),
where a man may gain by it. This consequence has some show of reason for its
dependence on the former precept, were it not for the inconveniences, which are
in the other respect comprehended, etc.

This Commandment instituted for the rectifying of the other three.
There are other that think, when God establishes authority in the fith
Commandment, he took order for promiscuall duties in the three next, 6.7. and
8. Commandments: then if it fell out that all were not well in these three, if
there were any hurt or breach, then they must come ad judices, to the Judges:
Exodus 22.8. if the thief be not found, etc. The affirmative; and so it is in
deed, for Deuteronomy. 19.12. it is said, that if a man violate the sixth
Commandment, the Elders of the City shall examine the matter, and sentence
shall be given on him by witnesses. Deuteronomy. 22.15. for the seventh Commandment;
if a man accuse his wife, they shall judge: and the father and the mother shall
witness of her virginity, etc. and Exodus 22.9. for Commandment 8. if a man
deal any way between goods and goods with his neighbor, etc. if it perish,
etc. therefore, for the rectifying of whatsoever is done amiss in the other
three Commandments, was this instituted. It is not enough to have authorities,
but there must be proofs too, and that is by witnesses: therefore, Levit.
5.1. God takes order that a man shall bear witness, and Deuteronomy. 17.6.7. the
witness being so borne, shall be received.

3. There is another sort, that upon the comparisons of the holy Ghost,
between a good name and credit, and wealth, that honesta fama, is alierum
patrimonium, an honest report, or a good name, is another patrimony,
immediately: then having dealt with patrimonium, with other patrimonies before;
now he comes to deal with a good name, which is a second or alierum
patrimonium, another patrimony.

But the second opinion de re judicata, of the matter to be judged, or, to be
referred to the Judges, carries it away: that is thought to be the best, and
the best are inclined thereunto; for Esa. 59.13. he says, that they have
trespassed in lying, i. inconceiving lies in their heart, and uttering false
matters: and his consequence he brings in the 14. Judgment is turned back,
and justice stands a far off: that is, tanqam germanum effectum, as the
proper natural effect of false witness: he brings in the breach and
overthrow of judgment and justice, as most horrible before God; therefore he
brings it as a bar: and so indeed it is, as Prove. 12.22. he says, that
lying is abomination unto him. Then this is the effect concerning the
consequence of this Commandment, that if in respect of the breach of any of
the other Commandments, Deuteronomy. 19.16. any man bring up an evil name or
accusation of his neighbor; if any says he has done that which he has not,
then as he takes order, chap. 19.21. he shall be punished: and that
punishment, whether it be penal or corporal, that he thought to have brought
upon his brother, the very same shall be upon him.

Scopus quad^^ plex.
For the scope and purpose of the Lawgiver, it is sure that the Lord being
truth, as it is expressly said of Christ, and of the Spirit, the Spirit of
truth and holiness. Secondly, mercy, justice, true dealing: 1. Gloria De^
and thirdly, truth in regard of God; so we may easily see the end in Gods
behalf: he would have the truth preferred, for which truth, as John 18.37.
Christ says he was borne to bear witness to it. And for which cause, every
man by the proportion of Christ's birth, is bo^ne to witness. And as the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.15. if we have taught a^l^e, then we are found false
witnesses against God: for we have taught and testified, that Christ is risen:
and in teaching this, we teach a lie; if Christ be not risen from the dead: And
not only in these, but also in judicial matters, Ios. 7.19. where a
confession being to be made of Achans theft, Iosuah says unto him: My son,
give glory to God, and make confession of thy sin unto him: that is as much
to say, as of the confession of truth, and the glory that comes of it, is the
end for God, because that of the confession of truth, not only in matter of
religion, but in judicial matters, there turns an especial glory to God.

2. B^^um S^^lesia.
Now for the Church 2 Pet. 2.1. he speaks there of certain (as he calls
them) magistri mendaces, lying masters, or false teachers. We speak not as it
is referred to the unhallowing of the name of God: but as it is referred to the
danger and hazarding of the souls of the hearers that hear them preach. 1
John 2.22. Quis est mendax, nisi qui negat Iesum esse Christum? Who is a lier,
but he that denies that Jesus is the Christ? he is a lier that affirms an
heretical point; and by that means brings into hazard the souls of the
hearers: And the preserving then of the truth in the Church, not in respect of
Gods glory, but in respect of the safety of the Church, it is the second end.

3. The establishing of justice and truth in the Commonwealth.
Now for the third end, for the Commonwealth, as we said, Genesis 21.30. Abraham
calls the Well Beersheba, the Well of the oath: and gave Abimelech seven
Lambs for a testimony that the Well was his. And Genesis 31.47, 48. that cumulus
testimomi, the heap of witness, was only this; because there passed a
covenant betwixt Laban and Jacob, that they would be friends and allies. So
Levit. 5.5. the cause of proceeding of justice, and the establishment of all
truth was done by this only ( Numb. 5.) except it were in the case of
jealousy.

Now for every particular man, it is the fence of his good name and credit: 4.
The fence of every particular man's good name.
for seeing, Prove. 15.30. that a good name fatteneth a man's bones; it does him
much good within and without. And Eccles. 7.1. it casts a good and sweet
savor, and Prove. 22.1. when it comes to be prised, it passes gold and
silver: and indeed it is self the cause of them, especially of the last, Prove.
22.1. because from it proceeds favor; and of that favor the smell, that men
will commit themselves unto him. Act. 5.34.40. as to Gamaliel, being a man of
name, they gave all ear unto him: as men will go to Physicians that are well
spoken of: and a cunning Lawyer shall be sure of many Clients, and a good Tutor
of many Scholars: and most customers will resort thither, where is most
credit, and best report: so we see the fourfold end of this Commandment.

The entrance into that that follows, may be thus. In respect of Gods
judgments, it makes no matter what men think of us: But then there is an
injunction to every man, Matthew. 5.16.
that his works shall so shine before men, etc. There is laid upon every man a
duty of doing good here: and there is no good to be done by that man that has
an evil report. A double necessity of truth.
So that duplex necessitas, a double necessity is laid upon us, to have bonam
conscientiam prop^er te, a good conscience for your self, and bonam samma, a
good report for your brethren, as August. you may be able to do good then
before men: And therefore howsoever, in respect of God, and duty, setting
scandalum vitae, and scandalum justitiae, the scandal of life, and the
scandal of righteousness or justice aside; a man must stand thus resolved, as
he speaks, 2 Cor. 6.8. that through evil report, and good report, he must
do good: yet if Phil. 4.8. with (...), and (...), and (...), whatsoever things
are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, a man can
join (...), those things that make a good report, it is the best course, and
that way is to be taken. For little good use will there be of men's gifts
without them. As a man must regard the witness of God, rather then the witness of
his conscience: so the witness of this conscience, rather then man's: as the
Philosopher, Malo viri boni nomen, or famam perdere, The testimony of a good
conscience.
quam conscientiam, I had rather lose the name and report of a good man, then
hazard the loss of my conscience. But yet in these things where both can
mere, there that his gifts may increase to the enlarging of the Lords
Dominion, and the Church, both ought to be followed: therefore, 2 Cor. 6.8.3.
he says, they were true, but were counted as deceivers: yet he says there,
that they gave no occasion for offense: And that for this reason, to the end
that their ministry might escape, and not run into blame, and be by that
means made less able to do good. So then, both in regard of a man's own
self, that he is more circumspect, while he has it to keep; when it is lost,
Ier. 3.3. he puts on frontem meretriciam, a whores forehead; he is impudent:
Psalm. 58.4. he stops his ear. So long as he has a good name, he is
careful to keep it: so the consideration of both these and this, and also the
former respect, it is a sin, not to look to, but to neglect his good name:
as the Heathen man, excepto probro, reliqua omnia maledicta existimo, take away
slander and reproach, and I will endure all other railings: because the wound
of a slanderer might be healed, but there will a skarre remain: and because he
is shut up to do good, and good men will be suspicious, and evil men will
never have done with it; so he ought thus to stand affected.

For the offense it self, Matthew. 15.19. it comes from the heart: Mark 7.22.
(...), etc. blasphemy, O^igo pe^^a^^ hujus pra^^^^.
(...), etc. foolish speaking.

Now then, as in the former, there is an inclination of nature, grassari ad
famam, for a man to think, when he can thrust down other, that he shall be
better thought of. But when as it comes to that that Esaias speaks of, chap.
29.15. he says, They dig deep and hide themselves* Ier. 18.18. Let us
imagine some far reaching counsel against Jeremy, let us slander him, that
none may credit him; this is beyond the root of this vice, and is the
Suppuratio, and rankling of it: 1 Timothy 6.4. (...) evil surmisings; The Apostle
there condemns evil suspicions, light suspicions, when they be upon little
or no ground. There it begins. Now we handle these, as they are enemies and
prejudicial to man's credit, not as before: James 4.11.12. he proceeds
further, for he says there, that from this light suspicion, men begin to
take upon them the office of the Law; Rash judgment of light suspicion.
whereas the Law should condemn and accuse, they take upon themselves to
judge. Thus we come to judgment: and not only to judgment, but as Paul
says, 1 Cor. 4.5. we come to judgment before the time, too hastily. And he
will not judge of outward things, so as there may necessarily grow a conclusion
of them: but of doutfull things, Romans 14.4. such as may be well interpreted; as
to deal with Christ and John Baptist: The one for not eating, but abstaining,
was said to be troubled with a melancholic fancy, the other for eating and
drinking, a dissolute fellow. That whereas these outward things may be done to
badde or good ends, they judge hastily de rebus sociis, of the things
themselves, and of their neighbors.

Testis repentinus nun ^a^n^^re jud^^at.
Now this repentinus testis, this sudden hasty witness, Prove. 12.19. he never
gives his verdict truly: Acts 28.4. they no sooner see the Viper cleave to
Paul's hand, but presently they say, he is a murderer: even at the very sight
of the Viper. Now it is not only this, but 2 Timothy 2.26. he must suspend his
judgment, for he knows not what will be hereafter: that is, God may give him
grace to see fully. And whereas he should keep his conclusion of sins,
praecedentia and consequentia, and observe the things that go before, and the
things that follow after, 1 Timothy 5.21. this will not be held: but there is no
sooner a Viper on the hand, but a verdict will be given. And not only that,
but where God takes order, that ubi malum contingit, ibi moriatur, if it be
private, let it have private death; Prove. 11.13. He is a discoverer of
secrets, as we see, that was the first augmentation of Chams sin, to tell his
brethren of his fathers folly. Matthew. 1.19. Joseph, because it was secret, and
might have been done by some that had a pure contract, in simplici actu
fornicationis: he would not (...), make her a public example. And not only
this, but as we see beyond this, 2 Samuel 13.30. when he opens it more then is
true: when the King has lost but one son, they will say all the children of
the King are dead: 2 Samuel 13.30.
as we see, it was the common rumor then: if there be but one killed, then all
are killed. And beyond all these, Prove. 17.9. when he has once told it, he
will afterward at it again: and when the wound seems to be whole, and
repentance is made, yet he will refricare cicatricem, renew it again.

These degrees and affections are the appetites of a nature lusting to envy,
but especially that of things doubtful, it is very certain that we must
strive against. But if he will reason, as Shimei, 2 Samuel 16.7. that because
Ioah and Abner were great men of blood, that so David was a man of blood; and
when we proceed ex dubiis, upon doubtful and uncertain grounds, we will open
a window to all other.

Solum subactum.
Now after this we do consider, as in the former, that which makes us Solum
subactum, soil fitted for the seed, which is called pruritus aur^um, Pruritus
^u^^^^.
the itching of ears: so the Wiseman, Prove. 17.4. says there, he is a willing
hearer: and so if there were no receiver, there would be no thieves: so if
there were no itching ears, that itched after the nakedness of their
brethren, it is certain that there would be no Chams to come to tell them of
it. Psalm. 15.3. He says, that as he will not take up a slanderer, so he will
not receive a slander: for if a man do vulium contrahere, draw his forehead
together, and shake him off, it is very certain he will not return again.
Discet non libenter d^cere, cum didicit non libenter audire, he will learn not
to be forward to speak, when he perceives others unwilling to hear him. Aug.
As on the other side, if he be willing to hear, then the other will be willing
to speak it. So there must be a delight in hearing men's imperfections, and
secondly, a credulity: As we see, the word was no sooner out of her mouth, Genesis
39.20. but presently there is commandment given, that Joseph should to prison.
Putiphars wife was believed without examining: Whereas Ier. 40.16. Aug. says,
The righteous are liker to Gedaliah, when Iohanan told him that Ismael would
slay him; yet because he did not suspect any such thing by him, he would not
believe him: that is, they are not credulous, either to admit them, or non
indulgere, not to have regard unto them; that is, when a man makes a
conclusion of it, or a action upon it, or makes a show by gesture, as if he
thought it were true without examination: and shows himself so against him
as if he were guilty.

Irrigatio soli, the watering of the soil, is that which Peter called 1 Pet.
4.15. (...), Irrigatio ^^li.
to take care of another man's Dioces; that is, a curious searching, that is a
note of an Hypocrite: Cur aspicis? why spyest thou? not cur vides? not why
look thou? that same (...), and not (...), to epsy into other men's
affairs, to look for it, and to know what they think, and what they say,
that Paul makes the opposite to the former Commandment, for indeed it is
idleness: he says, They do not only come to be idle; but (...), praters,
(...), busy bodies; an affection much mis-becomming a discreet man, and
certainly to be condemned: 2 Samuel 18.19. there is the image of this vice in
Ahimaah; many would not have stood for the best office in all Jury, to be the
tidings carrier. And so we see that it is the vice and quality, Act. 17.21.
wherewith Athens. was infected. They intended nothing in the world, but to
hear what tidings. And surely by this means, when we look only outward, it
shows either a neglect of a man's self, or else they fall in jucundum
spectaculum, into pleasing dotage in themselves. Jerome; Qui sua non ornani,
aliena eupiunt, they that are careless of their own behavior, are always
observing other men's carriages; They are still noting of other men's lives, as
to prate, asking, what shall John do? John 21.22. Christ says, what have you
to do? Care not for him, but follow me: and shows his appetite to know what
John must do; it is not for Peter to do it: he must keep himself in his
own Diocese. And so if we can (...), do our own business, 1 These. 4.11. and
search them as we ought, we shall have but little leisure to look to other
men's. And for the remedy, the Heathen, Qui confidit virtuti suae, non invidet
alienae, he that can rest confidently in the assurance of his own virtue,
needs not envy another. And so we see, both what is in the mind first, and
after the disposition; and what is that that watreth it. So we are come to the
outward actions.

Actus, evil words.
The actual sin is in words specially: which, as Christ, Matthew. 12.35. are
according to the treasure in the heart, so that there is not only an evil
treasure that brings forth evil things: but also an idle treasure, that
brings forth verse. 36. idle things, idle words.

Divisie actuum hujus mandati.
Now these two comprehend the division of false and vain. For false things; and
then either as disagreeing from the truth and essence of things, or else from
our mind. And again, both these, either as they concern either our selves,
or our brethren: for whatsoever it is, that is prejudicial to us, or to our
neighbor; it is therefore condemned, because it is against charity. But though
it do no hurt to us or to our brethren, yet if it be a falsehood, it is against
the truth of God. 1 Cor. 15 15. We are found false witnesses to God, though not
as in the third Commandment: because the falsehood that is in the truth of
doctrine, there as it touches Gods glory, here as it hurts our brethren,
Prove. 30.6. by adding to the word, by taking from, or by changing, Gal. 1.9. or
by making, alium Iesum, by preaching another way of salvation: this was touched
before. So not now only this we are to know, that as there, so here, it is a
good rule of Basils, not only (...), but (...), all lies and falsehoods; all
turnings of the Scripture: and one thing, and the special thing, he beats
against it, that making of the literal sense, typical; it gives an occasion
to an heresy: (...) placet, they so please themselves, though thus they
displease others.

Now to make man the reasonable part, and Eve the sensual, and natural part,
and thereupon to infer this maxim, as a positive doctrine deducible thence:
and Adam imperare Evae, cave Serpentem, that if reason command sense, we shall
escape temptation. A man may allude to it: but to say that by Agar and Sarah is
meant this or that, is nothing else in the world, but to make the Scripture
cothurnum, a buskin with will serve either leg, or a Welshmans hose: and
brings in an uncertainty in religion. Ezekiel makes it an opprobrie to God,
to say, that in obscuris scripsi vobis, I have written to you in dark speeches:
that as for the third Commandment, so here in regard of men, because they
shall be brought in doubt to have nothing to hold to.

Testim. in judicio, extra judicium.
We consider first the testimony, as it is given in judgment, and then as it is
out of judgment, Prove. 19.5. and the very selfsame three verses after, is
repeated, verse. 9. Solomon's division there, is this. They that speak lies, and
false witness: this is applied to the judgement-seate; and these propositions
that stand thus, Non feres contra proximum, Thou shall not bear against thy
neighbor, etc. show plainly, that there may be falsum testimonium, a false
testimony; that is not de proximo, concerning our neighbor. So it may be
resolved into two: so that this is one, to speak lies: though they do not
concern our neighbor: and the other that may, etc.

Of lies in general, Mendacium.
that seeing, John 8.44. the Devil was always a liar from the beginning, for
the first word he spoke was a lie, and they that utter lies belong to him. And
seeing Psalm. 58.3. it is a property of wicked men, even from the very womb to
speak lies; and that is not only a light fault, but as Psalm. 5.6. Perdes
omnes qui loquuntur mendacia, Thou shall destroy all those that speak lies; so
whether it concern our selves, or our neighbors, or none, yet it is false
witness to God: and as Revel. 22.15. out of Heaven, in the place of torments
shall be (...), all that make, or love to hear lies. So we see that these
things are condemned, whether they be Actively, or Passively.

Come to that that is in judgment. And for this false witness we have, In
judgment a false witness is a hammer, a sword, an arrow
Prove. 25.18. a good comparison of Solomon; for he says, A man that bears
false witness, is a Hammer, a Sword, a sharp Arrow. Now the manner how he is
these three, (and that is that that aggravateth the offense,) is because
himself, who, Ier. 3.3. writes, he grows harder, and puts on a Harlots
face. Besides that, there are three parties, as Bernard shows, that are
smitten with one and the selfsame tongue: after these three ways.

A false witness to the Judge an hammer.
1. Iudici est malleus, he is a Hammer or Mallet to the Judge: he does astonish
the Judge, as a man that gives a blow on the head to one, that he knows not
how to determine.

2. A Sword to him that hired him.
And the second, to him that hired him, he is gladius, a sword; he destroys
his soul: he gives him hope, that he has now by his purse overthrown the
truth: and so at any other time he will bring the same to pass.

3. An arrow to the adverse patty.
And the third, he is an Arrow to him, against whom he witnesses: though his
harm be least, if by patience he bear it. Yet it is a wound that sticks in
him, either in his goods, or life, or howsoever: at the least in his good name,
he receives a blemish by it.

Latitudo falsi testis in judicio.
Now this false witness bearing is not only to be referred to the witness
alone; but it takes hold also of whatsoever comes into judgment, and is a
party active in it. Deuteronomy. 19.16. The Accuser is called a Witness, and all the
rest of the parties: so both the Actor, the Accuser, and reus, the Defendant,
both these, the one by untrue accusation, the other by untrue defense, may
bear false witness; and the Judge likewise by his wrong determination: and
the Notary, 6. False witne^ses ^n judg^ment.
by inserting the sentence otherwise then it was: and the Advocate: for of
these six consists the judgment. First, there is the Judge, 2. the
Register, 3. the Plaintiff, 4. the Defendant, 5. the Witness, 6. the Advocate.


1. ^ud^^, he h^^ need to (...) wise man.
1. For the Judge, it is most perilous on his side; so he had need to be a man
of wisdom, Deuteronomy. 1.17. it is said, Iudicium est Domini, the judgment is Gods:
and so whosoever he be, that being a Judge, gives a wrong sentence, facit deum
mendacem, he makes God to speak a lie: or whosoever he be that induces a
Judge by false witness, he perverteth the course of nature, and changes as
much as in him lies, God into the Devil.

2. False Notaries.
2. And for those that make false Records and Writs, Ezr. 4.19. there is a
memory of them: whereas Darius, cap. 6.2. found that the Jews had not been a
rebellious people, against those, to whom they were in subjection, nor had
attempted any such thing, nor the buildings of the Temple, without Cyrus his
Decree: yet Artaxarxes his Notaries could find Records that made mention that
they were rebellious to the King of Assyria: and so, that these were false
Records. For when Darius, a good King, came to bear rule, they could find in
a coffer that Cyrus had made such a Decree.

3. Plaintiff^.
3. For the Plaintiff, Levit. 5.1. there is order taken, that whatsoever he
has seen or heard; he should testify, and as in verse. 5. if he do not
testify, it is sin.

4. Defendant.
4. Joshua 7.19.20. for the Defendant, that he must confess what he has done,
as it is there in the case of Achan.

5. Advocat^^.
5. For the Advocates, they are only to follow what is altogether just, Deuteronomy.
16.20. causarum cognitores, knowers and followers of causes: these officers
were Atturnies, and Counselors, that are to inform them that come to plead,
how to pursue their matters: the not wresting of the Law, not respecting
persons, nor the not taking rewards.

6 Accusers.
6. And for Witnesses, Deuteronomy. 19. If any be an accuser, or testify a false
matter, look what penalty the other should have had, if he had been proved
guilty, the same shall be inflicted on him, if he prove it not, therefore Gods
judgement-seate is established on every side.

Going to (...) (...).
Now for the Judge, seeing the Apostle has said it, 1 Cor. 6.7. that it is
(...), a fault so long as men go to Law one with another; meaning those that
begin, not those that are (...), constrained to answer: therefore it must
necessarily follow, etc. that it is his reason, for there must be always some
untruth. Both cannot be true, because they are contradictions; and therefore
much untruth must needs be uttered in the place of judgment; and this is
derogatory to God, Joshua 7. which should not be: therefore Paul's advise is,
that there be as great diminishing of it as can be: he would have it as little
as could be, and that it should not be, but when there is (...), or (...), a
most unjust action, and defraudation, a harm, that cannot be borne. Therefore
this first, the cherishing of suits and Law cases, by a Prince or Judge, it is
certain to open a wide window to the breaking of this Commandment: therefore
there must be some order taken for it, either that there be (...), Examiners
and Inquisitors, as there were in Greece, (...).
such as had the approbation of quarrels and suits; and they should judge
whether they were worthy to be taken in hand: or else as they had in Rome,
contending ex Sacramento, they should put down each his pawn, in manum
pontificis ad sacros usus, in the hands of the High Priest, to be bestowed upon
holy uses: and if his quarrel were not good, he should lose it, and it should
go ad sarta tecta templi, to the repairing of the Temple; otherwise there will
be no good done: The sea^e of judgment erected for hard matters and
extremities.
but it is (...), a fault; for the seat of judgment, Exodus 18. Deuteronomy. 1. it
was erected therefore, that hard cases, and extremities might be taken order
for. But to say that ours are matters of difficulty, it were absurd: therefore
it is abused, and there is a great bait laid to the multitude of false
witnesses.

2. Qu^^^ dispath.
A second thing is set down, Exodus 18.23. for Moses, though he were excellent
in knowledge, and therefore could better determine: yet this benefit was to be
exchanged with this, that causes might soon be dispatched; he appoints more
as his father in law counsels it. An absurdity for causes to hang from
morning to night: but now it is no absurdity for causes to hang from one year
to three, verse. 17. he says, That that thou do, is not well done: and verse.
23. if this be done, then the people shall go home quickly: That will be the
benefit that he reckons of it; for as the multitude of suits is a way to much
falsehood, for some causes are very plain, and cannot be withstood without
cavils: so that long depending of suits, the manifold non-suits, and delatory
Pleas, even for shifts, and to delude justice: therefore this is secondly
condemned, as a way furthering much to false witness.

Now in the 3.4.5. Commandments, were these three before.

Iudicium, Vsurpatum. Temerarium. Pe^versum.
Iudicium, 1. Vsurpatum. 2. Temerarium. 3. Perversum.
Judgment is either, 1. usurped. 2. rash or hasty. 3. perverse.


1. Is Romans 14.4. ov^^^ party that we have not to do with, 2. Deuteronomy. 1.17. in a
case too hard: and the 3. Deuteronomy. 19.17. Act. 25.16. until both parties be
heard, he must not give sentence: And a blemish of David, 2 Samuel 19.29. he gave
rash judgment of Mephibosheths lands; and after he had much ado to let him
have half of them, and Ziba the other half. Solomon, Prove. 18.17. says,
Look who is first, he is just: then comes his neighbor, and makes inquiry
or search after him. This is one step of rash judgment, to give such credit to
the first, that Ziba played, that though Mephibosheth prove all the lands to be
his, yet he must be content with half. And perversum, perverse judgment,
Prove. 8.8. defrauding of justice. Exodus 23.2. Perverting, for there may either
be defrauding: 1. by the exposition of Solomon, Prove. 17.15. where either the
wicked is accounted just, i. absolved: or the just is accounted and pronounced
wicked, and condemned: when as the right translation word for word is, The
unjust is justified, or the just unjustified; it is all one in case of justice
to affirm a thing to be so, or to make it so.

The last also was before touched, i. falsehood in justice, Numb. 35.32.33.
there is no reward to be taken for a murderer, but he shall die: blood will
not be cleansed but by blood; whereas in these cases God does appoint to the
Magistrate hands to do as he thinks good, yet he will make a release. But in
some cases he is appointed to his arbitriment, but yet with two conditions.
First, if it be expedient for the Commonwealth: or the second, if the other
party that is hurt, be contented therewith.

Now for the other part of condemning, Esa. 10.1. some decree wicked Decrees,
Judges: others wrrite grievous things: sometimes the record is more grievous
then the Decree: if he go not exactly to the sentence, it is a false record:
Quando justitia revertitur ad judicium, when righteousness shall return unto
judgment: Psalm. 94.15. when Christ that is the true righteousness shall come
to judgment, they shall answer for it.

Accusers offi^^
For the accuser, the breach of this office in this behalf is three ways. 1.
Calumnia, slander, when he does calumniari, slander; as Haman does, Ester 3.8.
for he says there, that the people of the Jews had laws diverse from other
Laws; and they had not been observers of the Kings Laws, and the King, he
falls into his temerarium judicium, his rash judgment too, i. when he
hears a false accusation against it.

And the next, when a man proceeds upon uncertainty; as Acts 24.13. those
that did accuse Paul, alleged many things, 1. Proceeding upon uncertainty.
but they could not prove any thing. So he is to wait till he have his full
proof.

Now the third is Praevaricatio, prevarication, or collusion in pleading: a
metaphore taken from (vari) those that have their knees out of joint, and the
convulsion is inward, so that both touch above, 3. P^aevaricatio.
and their feet are far asunder. For in the ancient commonwealths, when as
they wore long garments, a man might easily have been deceived, thinking them
to be as broad at the knees, as at the feet: so they that strive together,
whereas they are friends privily, those are called praevaricatores,
prevaricators, or accusers; when a man does accuse, and yet his friend with him
whom he does accuse: and it is nothing else but a mockery of the place of
judgment. And Advocatus actoris, the Advocate for the Plaintiff: he that
represents the party, he is so charged with the same prevarication, the
betraying of the truth with weak proofs and grounds: those that betray the
cause with weak defenses. Ezra. 4.5. it is said, that they were hired, i.
there were men about Artaxerxes, that bare the face of such as would advise him
of that that was best for him: whereas indeed they had taken a bribe against
the Jews before. That party that is to sustain one person, and is corrupted
to do the contrary, he is to be blamed for his prevarication.

Now for the Defendant, or him that is accused, Defendant.
there are three other.

The first is, if being according to the form of Law by Ioshuah demanded,
Psalm. 141.4. that he do not versare se ad agitandum actiones, practice
himself to turn off the suite commenced against him, or which is as old, ad
accusandas excusationes, to accuse other, that he may excuse himself; it was
Adams fault, Genesis 3. tergiversatio, tergiversation: the question was, whether
he had eaten or not? he answered not to it; but said, the woman which thou
gave me, etc. Job 31.33. This he says of himself, If I have hid my sin as
Adam did, concealing mine iniquity in my bosom: though I could have made
afraid a great multitude; yet if I made a fault, I confessed it. So being
lawfully commanded, we must confess: so we must not add evil to evil. To be
evil is evil: and videri malum, and to seem evil is evil too. And so a man
is not bound to open himself without the seat of judgment; and so, where
there is not a lawful course taken, as John 18.20.21. he says to them
directly, They had heard of him. And if any man would accuse him, let him come
forth. And as he there used indirect words; so he himself practiced, John
19.9. to Pilates questions he said nothing, because they did not proceed ex
publica infamia, or ex semiplena probatione, of public infamy (or rather it
should be, common fame) or probable grounds, or likely proofs: but only he
questioned with him, to see if he would accuse himself. So in these cases, a
man may answer nothing; for if it be a truth, as Paul, Act. 23.6. if there be
two things, and both true, a man may answer one truth, and occultare pariem
veritatis, and hide a part of the other truth: as he did; that forasmuch as the
council was divided, and the Pharisees held the Resurrection; he said he was
judged for that, though it was not for that alone, that he was judged for. So
if a man have diverse ways to defend himself, he may choose one which he will:
or if they proceed not aright, etc.

But if according to the form of Law there be proceeding, made of that he is
accused of, he is bound, Josh. 7.19. to answer; this is one.

And the second is, that whereas there is given for a remedy of those that are
oppressed, the benefit of Appeal: yet for a man to protract in an evil cause,
to sue Appeals, that need not, is a second fault: and against that Exodus
18.22.23. to make delays of justice, and when he has received sentence, to
refuse it: resist it ordinationi, and not obey their orders: Romans 13.2. Qui
ordinationi resistit, Deo resistit, whosoever resists the ordinance,
resists God.

For Witnesses, Witnesses.
there are three other. The 1. is Levit. 5.5. If a man being lawfully required
by his superior according to the proof, demanding his witness, if it be not
in matters out of question, he is bound to tell whatsoever he has heard. And
if it be not a superior, yet if it be for the delivery of a man; and if it be
a matter, Prove. 24. that does concern the delivery of the soul, he is bound
to answer: so says he, Prove. 24.11.12. he speaks of those that will not
deliver them that are drawn to death: If he say, I cannot say so much as I
would, and I know not of it, etc. he counts it a great fault for a man, for
the preservation of an innocent, not to give testimony, though it be not
required by authority.

But otherwise, if it be out of these, if the superior require not for
condemnation; on the other side, if he require matters out of question, or if
it be not in the case of deliverance, he is not bound to answer. And as these
2. causes, Prove. 11.21. he sets down another way for wicked persons: The
Greeks proverb is, Da mihi mutuum jusjurandum, lend me an oath: Our Savior
Christ calls it, Lend an Oath. Prove. 11.21. and 16.5.
a joining in hand in hand: The wise man he says plainly, though that they may
happily escape the hands of men, yet they shall not escape unpunished: that is,
God will be sure to punish them.

For the Advocate, there are two ways appointed to him. First, Advocate
if he take an evil cause in hand; which so as man to do, he knowing it not,
is a great sin. For Exodus 23.1.2. he says there, you shall not report for
your witness: and then for him that helps him, Thou shall not help him in
his Plea.

2 Chronicles. 19.2. Iehu said to Iehosophat, Will thou help the wicked, and love
them that hate God? And we see, he withdrew himself: for as it is, Romans 1.32.
he says, not only the doer of wicked things, but (...), he that has pleasure
in them, as our Placets are; so the voices in the Greeks suffrages: when with
(...), it pleases, (...), good-liking pleases them. Whosoever tries (...),
good-liking, and helps the wicked, it is very certain it shall be a sin
unto him.

2. And the other is set down, Prove. 17.23. that is, when a man for the
defense of a cause indifferent, does wrest the Law, or take a gift out of the
bosom to help a cause in judgment, that might be carried otherwise: yet it
is condemned, Prove. 24.24. to say to the wicked, thou art just, to join with
the wicked to help a wicked cause; or if it be not, yet by wrong means to
seek a bolster for it, so is the course of judgment.

But because there is not only judgment (...), but in (...), on the Bench,
but in the consulting place too, when we take counsel with our selves, (...),
after long deliberation, or with a purpose of perseverance in it; so no false
witness must be given in choice, because there is justice and truth in both:
for justitia, justice, as the Philosophers well define it, is rectitudo in
affectu impressa a recta ratione, so as electio dicit excellentiam, as
excellentia dicit magis aut plus; a rectitude stamped upon the affections by
right reason, so as election or choice regards excellency, as excellency
regards the more eminent and best: so there must be a magis and a plus in
excellentia and in electione; and melius est eligendum, an eminency and
meliority in excellency, and in choice; and the better is always to be
chosen, is the second rule in moral Philosophy. And if not that, he goes
against the truth, and so justice is broken.

False testimony out of judgment. Nemo Dominus sui, nisi ad licita
Now to that without judgment. For when a man is out of judgment seat, Psalm.
12.4. that he should not say, Ego sum Dominus linguae, my tongue is mine own:
Nemo est Dominus sut, nisi ad licita, no man is further master of his own,
then to employ it to a lawful use: therefore, Prove. 24.28. he says a strange
thing: When a man is not called, and there is no cause to testify, even
without a cause in common talk, he will bear false witness: therefore the
greater is his finne. Then we must put protervitatem oris and labi^rum,
Pr^tervitas or is and labiorum.
a froward mouth and perverse lips, Prove. 4.24. far from us, that we must
not breath out, etc. seeing our neighbors think us no evil.

Now this report is according as the tongue may do no harm: Words.
for first a man has favor, a credit, which is in the mind. Secondly, a good
report, in speech. Thirdly, friends. Fourthly, an estate of dignity, a
superior.
Now as any of these four may be hurt by the tongue: so are the faults of the
tongue: for there, Prove. 22.1. 1. a good name, and loving favor: for the
third, Prove. 20.6. a faithful friend is an unknown treasure: for the fourth,
Esa. 37.23. dignity. Rabshakes blasphemy, because, etc.

Against the first, good credit, they commonly oppose contumely, i. disgrace,
Sins against credit. 1 Centumelia Disgrace in presence. Sui C^nn^^^.
when he is present, Romans 1.30. (...), despightfull; when a man is disgraced to
his own face, by opprobrie: then if it be per sales oblique, glancingly by
scoffs; that is against the fourth, against his dignity, and is called
Subsannatio, a taunt: for those that are laughed at, are moriones, scoffers,
the off-skowrings of men, and we may laugh at them: But to make a man as one
of them, to set a man in that estate, that he shall be scoffed at, it is an
impairing of his estate, and it breeds a great wound: therefore, 1 Samuel 31.4.
this is Saul's reason why he will have his harreis-bearer kill him: he had
rather be killed, then mocked of the uncircumcised Philistims. And an ingenuous
nature counts only probrum to be delecti, caetera indelicta, reproach to be
a crime, all other railings to be neglected. These two may be done present.

Now there is an obtrectator, Obtrectator.
a back-biter, one behind the back, that has to do with a good name. Plautus
calls him Mus nominis, a Mouse (that is, the gnawer or eater up) of ones good
name: but Paul calls him by his true name, 2 Timothy 3.3. Diabolus, the Devil,
(...) in, lingua, a Devil in the tongue, that is, a false accuser, a
detractor: first he speaks against one, then more; and then a third one that
would have him to lose some of his friends, they call him Susurro, a
tale-beater. And indeed he so prevails, Su^^^^^
that Prove. 16.28. he says, he is able to sow discord and dissertion between
Princes, and between whole realms. Then if it come contra bonum
aestimationis, against his credit and estimation, Shemets sin, 2 Samuel 1 6
5.6.7. etc. Hamans sin.
and to his face, it is called Shimets sin: if it come behind the back, it
is called Hamans sin, Hest. 3.8. if it touch only the alienation of
friendship, 2 Samuel 16.3. it is Zibaes sin: he said to David, he was at
Jerusalem, to alienate David from the love of Mephibosheth.

And if it be only concerning the abjecting of a man, as Judge. 8.6. as of
Gedeon, by the Princes of Succoth: but it is showed afterward how he used them.
An heroical mind cannot abide this, Psalm. 69.12. and in sundry other Psalms,
the scoffing at him of his friends and neighbors, and his enemies, and the
jestings of the abjects. So says Jeremy of himself, cap. 20.10.

This may be done by letters also, Letters.
as by words: as Nebe. 6.6. there was a letter sent by Sanballat, as full of
untruths as it could hold. And as it is done in words, directly and indirectly:
so the same things may be done in writings, as Libels; and we have a
resemblance of it, 2 King. 14.9. that of the Thistle and Cedar tree was nothing
but a scoff that Iehoash King of Israel sent to Amazia; and is in action: so,
John 19.2. for it is said there, that the Soldiers platted a crown of
Thorns, and put on his head, etc. Any of these things, whether it be done
directly or indirectly, they all come under (...), (...)
foolish talking, jesting; they are called (...), jesters: that is the common
name for courtesies sake; and indeed they are (...), foolish talkers, in this
point concerning false witness it self: because 1 Cor. 13.6. love delights
in truth, and Ephesians. 4.15. truth must be in love, which is the affirmative of
this Commandment: therefore, though it have truth, yet if it have not love, it
is not right: therefore Doeg was Doeg, though he told the truth, 1 Samuel
22.9.10. It is true, David came to Nob to Abimelech, and he gave him bread, and
the sword of Goliath; all was true he said, but yet he was a Doeg still. First,
as David truly says, Psalm. 52.2. that his tongue did cut like a sharp Rasor:
for it did cut the throat of all the Priests. Yet a further degree, such as the
Apostle, Gal. 2.4. (...), false brethren unawares brought in. Jerome gives a
reason why they are so called, because they came under the table, as those in
the story of Daniel, when he destroyed the Idol of Babylon. And thus are such
as you shall see, All their lips swim with Butter and Oil: Mat. 22.16.
Magister bone, good master: Chrysostom; this is the Butter: We know that thou
teach truly; there is the Oil: but here is the sword, Shall we pay tribute
to Caesar? If he answer one way, out go the people: if the other, off goes
his head. So whether a man does it to bring into danger, or out of credit; the
wise man says, Prove. 26.22. of him that is a talebearer, his words are as
flatterings, and they go down into the bowels of the belly. Bernard in his
24. upon the Cantic. says, Video magna praemitti suspiria, you shall have him
send before great and deep sighs, and he will speak tanquam contusus, sicque
cum quadam tarditate dimissis superciliis, voce plangenti, etc. sic egreditur
maledictio, as if confounded and ashamed, and then with an affected flownesse,
casting down his countenance, with a mournful voice: and there comes out
the cursed venom of the heart. You would think it were rather done dolenti
animo, quam malitioso: vehementer doleo, quia vehemener diligo, with a
mourning, then a malicious mind, I am heartily sorry for him, because I
heartily love him: and afterward he says, compertum jam est, otherwise I
would never have told it; but now seeing it is known, I must needs say so it
is. And in this manner he does breath out cursed speeches. This is one extreme.

As in respect of excess, your slanderous tongue either plainly, or under
cover is often seen; so on the other side, because men are joined by the law
of charity, James 3.2. It falls out that we all stumble in many things, and
many times: therefore God has taken order in his law, Levit. 19.17. that as we
should not do, as before: so we should perform fraternam correptionem, the
duty of brotherly correction. Rebuke him, and not suffer him to sin: that is
as much to say, as we should as the Heathen man says, cum opus est,
contristari amicum, if occasion be even to make sad our friend by reproof. 1
These. 5.14. If any be out of order, by admonition, if it be a small matter,
without circumstances, in the spirit of meekness, Gal. 6.1. but if otherwise,
Tit. 1.13. sharply and roundly: if it be an open fault, 1 Timothy 5.20. openly
before all: if secret, Matthew. 18.15. privately in the ear: with this caveat,
except it redound to the damage and detriment of another: and then Act. 23.16.
it must be declared to him. So we see, as Aug. says well, there is a double
truth.

Veritas du^^is and ama^a.
Veritas 1. Dulcis, quae fovet dum been agimus. 2. Amara, quae curat, when as
we are in wrong.
A Truth that is sweet, and this cherishes us while as we do well; and another
Truth which is bitter, and this heales.

And therefore the Apostle 2 Cor. 7.8.9. he says there, Though I made you
sorry, yet I repent not: but I perceive the example made you sorry but for a
season: But now I rejoice, not for the act, but for your amendment by the act.
So we see it is a way to repentance: therefore for this, to make them repent,
were to perform this duty: and when we have performed it, not to repent us of
it: And so is the reason of the speech to be understood, Non amo quenquam, nisi
offendero, I love not any, till I have made him sad: and making him sad, he
has had the effect of amendment.

Now there are others against this, that say, that as the former Commandment
is mixed of frugality against prodigality; and of liberality against
covetousness; so here in this Commandment, the one is reproving against
flattery, and the other giving a true charitable report against detraction.
There are such as the Philosopher says, as when they come to do evil, a man
dealing with them, must either prodere veritatem, or amicitiam, betray the
truth, or friendship; there are such as cannot abide this contristation. And
though there be such, yet we must retain open rebuke: Prove. 27.5.6. he says
there, An open rebuke is better then close love: and vulnera diligentis, the
wounds of a friend, are better then oscula blandientis, the kisses of a
flatterer: that is in Physic, amarum dulce, a bitter sweet, is better then
perniciosum dulce, a pernicious sweet. Now there is no doubt but we shall
meet with such, as Amos 5.10. If a man reprove, they will hate him. And there
is nothing in this point but is seen to the Heathen, Veritas odium parit,
truth brings forth hatred.

There are tres optimae matres trium filiarum pessimarum, three very good
mothers, Mat^is optimae pessima filia.
which have three most wicked daughters: and among the three, the first is
Truth, which parit odium, brings forth hatred: there is matter optima, and
filia pessima, an exceeding good mother, but a most naughty daughter: therefore
begin with Demaratus his Oration, in Herodotus. And if it shall please your
Majesty, if I had spoken the truth, I should not have spoken that that liked
your Majesty: yet because non potest uti me and amico and adulatore, I cannot
be both your friend, and your flatterer: therefore I may speak to make you
sad to amendment.

Now on the other side, F^atte^y.
for the vice opposed, i. flattery, that that Jerome calls, natale malum, our
native evil; natali ducimur malo philautiae, we are transported with native
evil of self-love. And it is as Plutarch makes it, that every one is (...),
his own chief and greatest flatterer: and because we love our selves, we
think we are good, and he that loves us, does his duty, and is therefore good
ipso facto, in so doing. So he that speaks in commendation of that we do, we
think him to be a good man, and that he does but his duty, and we love him.
And on the contrary, because he grieveth us, we think he is evil, and we
consequently hate him. This natural malum, our native evil, and good opinion
that we have of our selves, makes that we do cito nobis placere, easily
please our selves: and if any be found, that will say we be learned, presently
we believe him: and ubi propitia men's est, where the mind is favorable, Psalm.
5.9. propitiae aures erunt, the ears will stand wide open. Nay, that which is
farther, as Seneca says, when they will deny that, and say it is not so, ut
enim blanditiae, cum excluduntur, placent, fair and smoothing speeches please
us, even then when we seem averse to them, that very urging we like. This
makes Esa. 3.10. that when a man is thus persuaded of himself, that he says
inwardly to those that are about him: Prophecy to us no true things, but
speak flattering things: prophecy unto us such things as we do love and
like; and as the Prophet said, Mich. 2.1^.
that he should be the Prophet unto the people, that would prophecy of the
things that they were delighted in; as of wine and strong drink. And so Jerome
says, Qui nescit adulari, he that cannot flatter with himself to the humors
of others, is said either to be superbus, or invidus, proud or envious. Thus it
comes that they do like them that sooth them up.

Now this vice consists of two kinds, for either it is of things uncertain,
as many men, This is the hasty commendation upon the very first beginning; and
at the very first sight: when any thing is well done, presently they so greatly
commend him, that they make the party think that he has done enough, and
answered all expectation: 1 King. 20.11. at the putting on of harness they go
with great applause, but it is the putting off of the armor that is commended.
It is not stadium, a part of the race well run, but the dolichus, The word
D^lichus, properly signifies 16. fur longs.
the whole race: praeclarum stadium, sed metuo dolichum, the entrance of the
race is excellent, and I like it well, but I am afraid of the length and
continuance of it: many men at the beginning, at the very first pitch, etc.
therefore while things are uncertain, there ought no praises to go out so
prodigally, nor we so liberal in commending.

If in certain things, either in evil things plainly condemned: laudatur
male, qui laudatur ob malum, or de malo, it is a sorry commendation, to be cried
up for ill: first, as Solomon says, Prove. 24.24. they say to an unrighteous
man, What you do is right and good, and justly done, you do not evil: and
Psalm. 10.3. laudare peccatorem in desideriis animae suae, to praise the wicked,
while he boasts his hearts desire. And when it is done, Esa. 5.20. they will
call darkness light; first, that which is naught, they will say it is well
done, Vae vobis qui dicitis malum bonum, and bonum malum, Woe be to you that
call evil good, or good evil. Herodotus writes of Cambyses, Cambyses his
flatterers.
that his mind standing to an incestuous marriage, he moved a question. The
question was, whether he might so do or no? They told him that they could not
tell in general, for the action, and that it seemed not good: but this they
found in particular, that whatsoever the King would, that he might do. This
flattery is abominable, and to be hated of all good men: that they will
further, and set a man forward in that wicked enterprise: Ezech. 13.10.11. he
says there are naughty men in Israel, they will needs build a wall, which God
will destroy afterward: therefore it is of no good substance, and he says,
There are some that build with untempered mortar, which for a time will hold
out a falsehood, he calls these daubers; diaboli cementarios, the Devils
daubers, that use plaistered words; but say unto them, that the wall shall
fall. i. that his wicked enterprises shall come to a wicked end. When the
unrighteous matter was in hand, they upheld it: but when it comes to an evil
end, they shrink away. But they must be put in mind of their dawbing of the
wicked, and of their ungratious speeches uttered in the beginning, verse. 18.
the Prophet seems to import thus much; when a man is asleep in a sin, till
he be sober again, he would have a man sleep with as much disease as may be,
without pillowes and curtains, for he threatens out a woe to those that sow
pillowes under men's elbowes: and hang curtains to those that slept in sin:
also in good, make a small good to be praised without measure: 2 Cor. 12.6.
this brings an error, to make men think otherwise of it, then it is: and
therefore it is not good. Also that preach peace and salvation, when there is
none such, or when contrary affection, Prove. 27.14. and 28.27. both these are a
curse: for as love rejoices with truth, 1 Cor. 13.6. so truth rejoices with
love, Ephesians. 4.15. Therefore, Psalm. 12.3. he wishes them liplesse, that speak
thus: so that they should not utter this venom; that is, in oratione, in his
speech, Paul would please all, 1 Cor. 9.22. sin set aside: but without this
condition, none that pleases men, pleases God, Gal. 1.10. Those then that
Esa. 28.15. make falsehood their refuge, love to speak thus.

So Menander says, he that flattereth best, fares best: so they Ier. 9.3.
will bend their lips, and teach their tongue to insinuate, Psalm. 141.5. David
would not be dulled and mad himself with this: so that we must not do thus,
but reprove with that warrant, Prove. 9.8. that the wise will hear us: and
Prove. 28.23. to a fool at the last, he that rebukes shall be the more the
friend.

Now for the actum reflexum in se, act which reflecteth upon it self: Proptio
laus sordet in (...).
as not only, Romans 1.18. to suppress the truth in his conscience, but also 2
Cor. 12.1. to glory and boast of himself. Paul spoke therefore of himself as
of another man: and that he should not fall into this, he had one to buffet
him: and therefore this is no light sin. And because John 18.37. only the
truth can bear witness of it self there, Prove. 27.2. os alienum te laudet,
let another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth. And as this must be
shunned of all; so especially of the Prophet, Esa. 9.15. for Job 13.7. God
needs not our lies: and this is only yea, and not nay, 2 Cor. 1.19.
therefore Romans 15.18. the Apostle durst speak nothing but that which he knew
certainly. For it is in vain to show that they have read or do know more
then indeed they have. Also to take upon him a fault: as where 1 Samuel 31.4.
Saul kills himself: 2 Samuel 1.10. one comes and says, he killed him, in hope
of a reward. Also not to deny any things of themselves, as Hierom: Mendax
humilitas, in cauta est humilitas: ne ita caveatur arrogantia, ut caveatur
veritas: a lying humility, is an uncircumspect humility: we must not so labor
to shun arrogancy, as to make shipwreck of the truth. Also, though Esa. 3.9.
we may not voluntarily tell our faults, yet being asked, we must not deny, as
did Sarah, Genesis 18.15. No untruth must be affirmed, or truth denied of our
selves.

Mendacium i^necuum.
Now after this actus reflexus, reflected act; that all these which went before,
which were perniciosa mendacia, mendacia serpentis, pernicious lies, the lies
of the Serpent; his first word, nequaquam: besides these, there is mendacium, a
lie, which they call innocuum, harmless: that, of which comes no loss. But
Aug. says, Those that say so, are not innocui, innocent for it: for though
they account loss, as of name, of goods, of life, and such like: yet Ier.
23.22. it is an error, and therefore the loss of the truth, which is worth
all these. These are in three,

1. Mendacium temerartum.
1. Contra quam se res habet, otherwise then the thing is, though he be
persuaded of it in his mind: which as Aug. says, non mendacii, sed
temeritatis accusandus est, he is not so much guilty of a lie, as of rashness
and temerity. They which have not their tongue learned to say nescio, but
speak things they know not: Iud. verse. 10. 2 Officiosum.
2. Contra quam se animus habet, otherwise then he thinks: that of the
Midwives, as they call it, officiosum mendacium, an officious lie, Exodus 1.19.
3. Iocosum, a merry lie; as of scorners, Hose. 7.3.
Aug. de mendacio. If a man should be sick, 3. Iocosum.
and know that his son is dead; which if I should tell him, it would kill him
also: What shall I then answer, if he ask me? In such a case he knew, 2 Cor.
13.8. Nihil contra veritatem possumus, We can do nothing against the truth:
and Psalm. 5.6. Perdes omnes, qui loquuntur mendacia, Thou shall destroy all
those that speak lies. And as Christ the son of God is called the the truth;
so the lier the is first borne of the Devil. And if he should account peccatum
justum, sin to be just; then, and not else, he might account mendacium
justum, a lie to be just. So might he answer to them that said, it was lawful
to lie to bring one to the truth: so it is as lawful to commit adultery. For
only the truth did command that it should not be done. So that neither for
saving of body, or life, we may depart from the truth. And this was his
conclusion; which all the Fathers, and Schoolmen, and late writers hold true.
And yet this may be better called Rahabs lie, Rahabs lie.
Ios. 2.5. occultatio veritatis, a hiding of the truth; then the lie of the
Midwives: for they said true, that some of the Hebrews were stronger then the
Egyptians: and no doubt had done as they said. So they tell no lie, but part of
the truth. And this might be allowed in Rahab, having only a good disposition,
which none of the Saints would have done. And as for Iocosum, the merry joy;
Hose. 7.3. Gal. 1.10. he will not please any man out of the truth. And though
this be less evil then the rest, yet it is not good. Now seeing we are not to
go against the truth, there be four places, where the truth may seem to be
gone against, and yet is not so.

1. As Judge. 9.8. and Christ continually by a figurative speech, that is vox
picta, a Parable. 2. As Abraham to Ab^melech, Genesis 20.12. by keeping back part
of the truth; so 1 Samuel 16.2.5. Samuel told them he went to do sacrifice, when
he went also to anoint them a King: which if he had told, Saul having an evil
spirit, might have taken it for treason. 3. If the question have two meanings,
if he answer to one, so that be true: John 18.36. Christ answers truly of
another Kingdom then Pilate asked him. So Jacob, Genesis 27.19. was in one sense
Isaacks eldest son; in that he had bought his brothers right. So Matthew.
11.14. Elias, that is, one in the power of Elias. 4. When the thing is changed
in circumstance, so Genesis 19.2. the Angels would not come in, had not Lot
changed their minds by his importunity, John 13.8. Pete^ would not let Christ
wash his feet, till he was otherwise persuaded, 2 Cor. 1.16, 17. Paul promised
to come to Corinth, had not Satan hindered him. So that all these are lawful,
and not against the truth.
^^^itas est ^^^ua^^^ is p^^^ in^^^rem, and cogitationem nostram, secundo inter
cogitationem and signa, quae sunt vel verba, v^l facta.
Now seeing that the truth is aequalitas, an equality; this aequalitas,
equality, is first betwixt the thing and our thought: and secondly betwixt the
thought and the sign of it, and that is either verba or facta, words or deeds.
And that this factum, deed or fact, is a sign, it is plain out of Matthew.
7.20. that we shall know by the fruit, as by the sign: So Matthew. 12.38. they
would have a sign, i. some miraculous work; As also for that by example
offense comes as well as by words.

If this factum, work or fact, be not equal to the thought, it is simulation:
We need not show all our deeds.
yet as in words we need not utter all our mind, Esa. 3.9. so we need not
show here all our deeds, for Ios. 8.3.4. God himself is the author of an
ambush: so that we may either openly or privily oppress the enemies of God. So
Christ himself, Luke 24.28. made as though he would have given back, and had
it in his purpose, if they had not compelled him. So Paul, Gal. 4.20. wishes
to be with them in another voice, that he might try them.

A principal part of this simulation is hypocrisy, resembling holiness, when
there is no such in the heart: but of this before.

Vanity breeds ^^s, idleness and superfluity breed theft.
Here is also besides this, that of Psalm. 26.4. vain persons that lead us into
this vice; and therefore is forbidden. For as idleness and superfluity bring
stealth: so vanity brings lies. Christ makes this vanity or foolishness,
Mar. 7.22. to be one of the three vices of this Command. pride and slander
being the other two. And therefore having spoken of this Commandment, Matthew.
12.36. he concludes that they must give account for every idle word: so that
this is (...), foolish talking; which they call falsely, urbanitas, urbanity:
but Christ calls it idle words. Esa. 5.18. Woe to them that draw iniquity
with a string. Such a string is this, that brings all idle words after it.
Then seeing that this vanity, Psalm. 144.4. is an essential mark of the
wicked, and that it comes so far, as to corrupt judgment, Esa. 59.4. and
Psalm. 26.4. David professes to slay those men: and that Prove. 21.6. they toss
vanity to and fro, with vain questions, and vain answers: and Job. 31.5. he
takes it for a comfort, that he has not used any such: therefore it is good
to forbear it. For as Chrysostom says, there is no man that keeps any
instrument, but he knows some use of it at some time: and how much more in
this art unimarum, Art of souls, art artium, the Art of Arts: A good rule.
therefore he concludes with that which we make a general rule: Quicquid est
ociosum, est criminosum: whatsoever is idle, is sinful: else should Paul's
argument be naught which he makes, Tit. 3.9. to withdraw him from questions,
etc. for the major proposition, that is, that all vanity must be shunned, must
needs be true. Also, because that as Job 11. we are as Onagri, wild Asses; and
1 Pet. 1.18. having a vain conversation; this would be no use, seeing that, A
forge of vanity in us.
Job 13.4. in us there is a forge of vanities, i. idle thoughts, whence
proceeds idle words: therefore we must take heed that we walk not as the
Heathen do, Ephesians. 4.17. that is, Psalm. 24.4. when any vanity is showed us, to
lift up our hearts after it. But Ephesians. 4.29. our conversation must be either
ad aedificationem, ad necessitatem, or ad gratiam: to edification, to necessity
and use, or to grace.

1. For that of edification for their souls: all his examples stand most of,
etc. 2. For use, as that which is not for edification, 1 Timothy 5.23. to drink
some wine, 2 Timothy 4.13. for his cloak, etc. 3. For Grace: if it cannot be
neither for edification, nor ad justam necessitatem, for our just necessity and
use; yet to engender some love etc. which are his salutations: for these
neither edify, neither are they necessary: for he leaves them out often,
Urbanity
and mentions no such thing. And that powdered speech, Col. 4.6. this is
urbanity: not with sale nitro, salt nitre, or gall; but mercurio: that is, not
to vex them, as the Heathen, but wittily to stir them: as 2 Cor. 12.13. by
craving pardon that he had not troubled them: he means that he had nothing to
thank them for. And yet this (...), gratia, Grace, may stand very well with
edification, as most wisely he joyneth them together, Phil. 3.^.
Romans 12.3. (...), etc. not to think of themselves more highly then they ought
to think. And so sharply, when they would be of the Circumcision, he calls
it Concision. And the error of all these three are opposite to (...),
thanksgiving, Ephesians. 5.19.20. where the Heretics would at every word, whether
good or bad, cry, Laudate Christum, praise Christ: but the ancient Church will
have it in no other things, then which are worthy of praise. And of all these
three, that ad aedificationem, to edification, is the best: yet in respect of
the weaker, the other are both lawful, and sometimes necessary.
Now for the means, to obey this precept. First, Mean^.
we must mark that Psalm. 62.9. where he says, that we are deceitful upon the
weights, that is, are light: and this lightness is the first thing that takes
advantage of us here: therefore 1 Cor. 15.58. we must be so steadfast, that we
must not be easily moved: for else every vanity will breed suspicion. This
suspicion is a fruit of our corrupt concupiscences. The use of it, as for a
man's self, to be at safety for his soul and life; And here that is true, A
good caveat.
that melius est nimium timidus esse, quam parum prudens, it is a great deal
better, to be a little too much fearful, then a great deal too little
provident. This did Paul practice, Act. 27. fearing that the master of the ship
should have fled. But when we make this prejudicial to others, we abuse it.
And though at some time it will arise in every man, as indeed in the Disciples
of that of John 13.27. Quod facis, fac cito, what thou do, do speedily: yet
in good men these are primitivae suspiciones, primitive suspicions: as Gal.
4.11. a divination, not the setting down of a conclusion: and they come not
into that positivam suspicionem, to set down a flat affirmative or Negative;
but though they do sometimes admitiere, admit it; yet they cherish it not: but
the wicked straight make a flat judicium, judgment of it: and some go to the
action of this suspicion. Then to keep our selves from this judgment and
action: from the judgment, first, we must know, Job 15.21. that such as we
think others to be, such we are most commonly: as the fool thinks all
fools; making himself the rule of all men. And sescondly, according to the
rule of the affection, as being good, Mar. 8.16. as they had to the bread, and
so they suspected it: so evilly affected to Joseph, Genesis 37.8. every little
dream did increase their hate: so that this must be removed.

In suspicion they note six things; which they reduce to two.

1. In respect of the manner, it arises of a small ground, as John 21.22. If
that I will that he tarry till I come: they suspected that he should never
die: so Mark 14.70. Thou art one of them, for thou are of Galilee: this is a
small ground. 2. In the respect of the^ object, in that it appertains to God:
the Heart. Providence. Futurum, that which is to come.
Men: the Act. Person.


1. The Heart, which appertains only to him, which God has to deal with
all. 2 Chronicles. 6.30. Yet man's meanings must be sought out. To such Chrysostom,
Romans 14.4. that my heart is not your Senate, then judge it not.

2. The providence of God, by that which Nazianzen calls (...), casual: whereas
Eccles. 9.2. all those things come alike to the good and to the bad: so that
John 7. affliction, etc. come from his providence, therefore they ought not to
say, Ezekiel. 18.2. that because the fathers have eaten sower grapes, the
childrens teeth are set on edge: and Mal. 3.14. vani sunt, qui serviunt Deo, it
is in vain to serve God. For those that are afflicted, are according to his
povidence, etc.

3. That which is futurum, to come: as 2 Timothy 2.25. They think that if we
sleep once in sin, we shall never wake. Which they are not to think, as
August. Multi sunt fures intus, and Oves foris, so multi inserti refringendi,
and multi refracti inserendi, there are are many thieves within, and sheep
without, so are there many ingraffed, that will be broken off, and many broken
off, that shall be ingraffed: so that they may turn to God.

2. In that which appertains unto man.

1. Of the act or thing. And in this, if he that judges, err, he hurts
only himself. 2. Of the person: and here we may do injury, to make others
report the worse by him after: But if he hurt not in his judgment, that
judgment is not evil: and if he err, so it is not injury: for if we err in
thinking well of any, it is error in singularibus, but an error concerning
particular persons or things, and imputed to the good affection of charity, 2
Cor. 13.5. which suspecteth not evil.
Now this, if it be not a determination, but a supposition, then the rule is,
to suppose the worst: as if we should cure a sin, lest we should apply
over-weake a plaster, it is better suppose it the greater: and so not to leave
any thing that may tempt one, as money; for so we may say, contrary to that
which is said, that we may not commit our selves to men, because we know them.
John 2.24. So that here we may suppose the worst.

And if it be a determination, in manifestis, in things that are manifest; it
is plain that we may conclude: But in dubtis, in things that are doubtful,
when it may be both well and evil, the rule is, That judicium moralium pendet
a fine: ergo dubia sunt in meliorem partem sumenda, the judgment of moral
things depends upon the issue, and end of them; and therefore things doubtful
are always to be construed to the best sense. And in good things, that there
be not haste: but as God would ask the cause, though he knew it, Genesis 3.9. to
teach us to do so before we judge: neither must we report the truth, lingua
prodiga, with a lavish tongue: but as he Matthew. 9.9. calls himself the
Publican; whereas others called him not so; but the son of Alpheus: and he
sets not down his own liberality, which is set down, Luke 5.29. Mark
14.71. (which Peter is thought to have penned) sets down Peter's abnegation
most plainly; I know not this man: whereas the other have, I know not the man.
So that the rule is here, that we say the worst of our selves, and the best of
others: so we must behave our selves in our good or evil, against hearing: the
countenance, and Psalm. 58.45. we shall be as deaf Adders to the hearing of
evil, as evil are to the good, reports augment it: as Doeg, 1 Samuel 22.20. he
gave but bread, and he told it was victuals: so did the false spies augment the
strength of the Country, Numb. 13.32. as we may say by them which report
truly. Numb. 14.9. Flattery, mellea strangulatio, is but as the choking of
one with honey: Against that of himself, Prove. 28.4. To keep himself low,
and not to hate others that speak against, as did Achabs suspicion. Romans 6.
consider that they condemn themselves: therefore 1 Cor. 11.31. Look to
themselves; which will make them say, Esa. 51.7. fear it not, but esteem the
witness of our own conscience, and the witness of God, more then man's
witness. But if it be in a known thing, wherefore we are committed, then take
heed of a brazen face, to set our selves against it without shame, and not to
fear the punishment; for that will last but nine days: but to have a
confusion in our minds, and wish again to be in the favor of God, and his
Saints.

2. In unknown things, seeing no body can prove ought: and not retegendum
peccatum, nisi sine peccato id fieri possit: a secret sin is not to be
discovered, unless it can be done without giving offense or scandal: yet with
David, Psalm. 51.4. we must say to God, Tibi soli peccavi, against thee only
have I sinned. And this suspicion, if we have given any by suspitiously
behaving our selves in any sin, we must think it Gods goodness to put us
in mind, that we wander not in error, and delight in it.

If we never give occasion of it, but always detested it, yet because we may
fall into it by negligence, this may be a warning: as many fall into these
sins, by not taking heed, which before they have most hated: so Prove. 28.14.
bonum est timere omnia, happy is the man that fears always.

When therefore this sin comes, we must consider whether we have ever said
to God, as they do, Judge. 10.15. hear us but this once, and we will serve
thee: or Hose. 7.13.14. in our sickness promise more obedience after health
restored, and yet with this in the Israelites, Psalm. 78.36. lie unto God: And
therefore justly they that do this, lie also unto men; and therefore the
Vineyard shall lie unto them. And when they depart from the truth, for mighty
men looking for help of them: those axioms shall deceive them, and it shall
be contrary.

The last rule, to procure this to others: Psalm. 101.6. veraces terrae, the
faithful of the Land shall be his, and verse. 7. The lier shall not tarry in
his sight. And thus much of the ninth Commandment.

The X. Commandment.
Thou shall not covet, etc.
IN this Commandment the Papists are against us, and make it two, which it
cannot be. Our reasons (as we said in the general division) are these.

1. Because there is but one period. 2. Because there should be a Law of
particulars, which in least of all is Gods Laws. 3. Because only these two
concupiscences should be forbidden. And whereas they say, all other ought to be
referred unto these, they teach not how. 4. Because Romans 7.7. the Apostle sets
it down in one word, non concupisces, thou shall not lust. 5. The consent of
the Hebrews before Christ, and the Fathers since. 6. The inconveniencie that
they are driven to, to transplace this Scripture, and say, sensus est
perturbatus, that the sense thereof is perplexed. 7. They themselves cannot
speak of it distinctly, as they divide it, but confound it.
Now for the Commandment, Deuteronomy. 5. Esa. 55.7. Ier. 18.11. Mar. 7.14. Romans 7.7.
Ephesians. 2.3.4. whence we must take all that we speak herein.

The dependence.
The dependence, as Aug. says, si quis caetera facere studeat, hoc maxim
faciat, if any man endeavor to observe the other Commandments, let him much
more labor to fulfill this. Prove. 4.23. As life issues from the heart, so
good and evil life. And Esa. 59.5. comes the Cockatrice egg, which if it be
not broken, James 1.15. will be sin, whence comes death.

The end,
The ends, 1. That God may show himself to look further, and his Law to reach
further then man's Law. For though man's Law say, Bind the hands, and stop the
mouth: yet it says, cogitationis poenam nemo patiatur, let no man be punished
for his thoughts. But Gods Law says not so, Act. 8.22. but the very thought
must be prayed for. 2. Propter Pharisaeos, for your Pharisaicall justiciaries:
that though in the other Commandments we may flatter our selves; yet this,
Romans 7.14. will make us see that we are wretched.


The consent is in the other Commandments. But the thought, which in respect
of the consent, is called partus imperfectus, an imperfect birth, is forbidden
in this. For as in the other, intentio, the intention is forbidden; etsi non
consequaris, although ye accomplish it not: so here, cogitatio, etsi non
consentias, the thought, although ye consent not: as Aug. magnum fecit, qui non
sequitur, sed non perfecit, he has done much, and gone a great way, who bath
never assented to lust. This Paul, Romans 6.12. calls sin reigning in us, and
Romans 1.2. dwelling in us.

For as Aug. says, transivit in affectum cordis, and impetravit consensum
rationis, ut faciat si adsit occasio and facultas, this (reigning) sin has
built his nest amongst the affections of the heart, and has obtained the
consent of reason to fulfill its lust, whenever occasion and ability presents
the opportunity. So that it is here whilst it is in question: but when it
comes to that Faciam, I will (or would) do it, it is done before God.

This concupiscence is of two sorts. 1. 2 Pet. 3.3. proper. 2. Gal. 5.17. of
the spirit against the flesh.


This of the spirit, is good, and Ephesians. 1.18. causes good motions in us; and
1 Pet. 4.1. armeth us to perform them: and checketh us, Psalm. 44.5. and is
opposite to us, Matthew. 5.22. from this comes our prayer, and makes us to
love those things so much the more, Prove. 3.9. And that of our own,
Concupiscentia naturae.
which is (...), naturae, natural, is not evil: for so Christ desired to eat
when he was hungry, Matthew. 24.18. and rest when he was weary, Concupiscentia
corruptionis.
John 4.6. But that which is (...), corruptionis, from corruption, 2 Pet. 1.4.
which is not an hand to the understanding as it ought to be, but choketh it up,
and makes us to be men of concupiscences. And of this corrupt concupiscence 1 Timothy 5.19. some is foolish, and some is hurtful.

1. Foolish concupiscence.
Foolish concupiscence is, Colos. 3.1. earthly desires, when the natural
desire, transit lineas, passes the bounds, wholly to seek those things, and
set their heart on them.

2. Hurtful concupiscence.
Hurtful concupiscence is that which is against the spirit: Gal. 5.7. 7.
opposite to the spirit. This is that praeputium, uncircumcision, Act. 7.51.
which hinders the ears and heart from that which is good. And this in good
things corrupts our understanding, making it, Eccles. 10.1. like a fly in a
barrel of honey; and provokes us to evil by these things, which though they
are good, yet will work in us an evil humor, 1 Cor. 6. (i.) to make us
subject to evil: to need to have it: then the Devil will bring such a
condition, as Mat. 4. he did to Christ. And in evil it will bring us per
malum, aut ad malum: an evil way, or to an evil end: as to make us use evil
means to a good end, or an evil end to good means. It is called the old man,
Ephesians. 4.22. Col. 3.9. peccatum inhabitans, sin dwelling in us, Romans 7.5. the
sting, 1 Cor. 15.16. the prick, 2 Cor. 12.7. virus Serpentis, the poison of
the Serpent. The Scholemen call it, fomitem peccati, the fuel of sin: the
late writers (...) virium, a want of power and strength to rule the passions
and affections: for when man would make his concupiscence above his
understanding, Hose. 8.11. God permitted it to be. And this is that giving up,
Romans 1.24. delivering to themselves; And whereas the giving to Satan has a
return, 1 Cor. 5.1. 2 Cor. 2. this, (to be given up to himself) has no
return: so that it is better to be delivered up to the Devil.

We see then what this concupiscence is, and how we are affected to it.

Now for the danger, and the means to it, though we come not so far, as
suppuration, i. the consent, which is the lowest degree in the other
Commandments: we must not yet once cover for this desire, being in us, Ephesians.
2.23. as also of the world and of the Devil.

Suggestions from conen piscence.
Per hanc concupiscentiam carnis, by this lust of the flesh, there is two
suggestions: the one in regard of this alone, and the other as it is applied to
us of the Devil.

1. Alone, as Matthew. 9.5. in the dialogue, Mar. 7.2. those ascending thoughts:
for nothing in us is good, but that which descends. Ascending thoughts.
2. The Devil seeing this, as he did with Christ when he was hungry, Matthew.
takes occasions to cast thoughts into us, as he did into them, Luke 9.49. and
together, Ephesians. 2.2. the world carries them away. For as Nazianzen says, The
spark is in us, and the Devil does only blow it up. Now those that arise,
are sin indeed: but those that are cast into us are no sin, if they infect
us not.
1. Now we are infected of those, six ways, 1. for the fruit, (when sin
began) Genesis 3.6. was holden out to be (1.) profitable, and (2.) pleasant, and
(3.) to be desired, in regard of the knowledge or preferment it should bring.
And so the first thing was, and is, to turn our selves to Satan, 1 Timothy 5.15.
Gal. 4.9. to entertain him: this is prostitution of the soul to his
temptation, when they would have it.

2. Which affection, if it be sudden, Jerome on Matthew, calls it (...), the
first passion or motion (that is) desires upon sight; but if it be more
impressed, he calls it (...), passion, that is a settled lust. This is, Job
20.13. poison to the mouth: which if it be spit out, hurts not, but if it be
retained under the tongue, it breeds woe.

3. And this retentio seminis, consensus in delectationem, retentation of the
fuel, is a consent to the pleasure of sin, (for consensus in opus est
suppuratio, for the consent to the lust is the very impostume of sin) to
delight in it: And this is conceptio peccati, the conceiving of sin.

4. Morosa delectatio, a lingering delight, to stay in it, and to consider every
circumstance: and this is articulatio foetus, the forming of this deformed
issue.

5. Aberratio cordis in peccato, the wandering of the mind in sin: reasoning
of it: and after it once left, to call it back again, and to make a contrary
covenant to Job, that is, to look still upon it; or else to make, figmentum
cogitationis, a wicked imagination in the heart, Genesis 4. of that which was
never seen. And this vita peccati, is the life of sin, for here it moves.

6. Nixus, the endeavor: and as the fathers call it, (...), laying hold on the
occasion: si tanta voluptas in animo, quid si potiar? if there be so much
pleasure in the imagination, what in the fruition? And these six are in every
sin, though many have not the spirit of God to watch them all: for that saepe
iniquitas mentitur sibi, wickedness often cousens it self.

The Devil^ fetches.
Now James 1.14. we are brought into this two ways, 1. by the esca, the bait,
the allurements: 2. by uncus, the hook, force.


1. For this concupiscence will make pleasure, libido, a sensual delight, and
libido, and this delight, will make consuetudo, custom, and consuetudo, and
custom, will make necessity: for the concupiscence is like an hot Oven, Hose.
7. which will ever have matter. So the Devil has those two also, by these two
special terms, unto the which the rest may be brought, as to allure, Revel.
20.6. which does not as they cogge a Die, but has, Ephesians. 4.14. methodum
decipiendi, a cunning craftiness, or the art and method of deceiving by
subtilty. And this distinguishes his allurements from ours. And this his craft
extraordinarily the Apostle could know, 2 Cor. 2.11. (...), his fetches.

2. To draw by force, 1 Pet. 5.8. a roaring Lion: and Matthew. 8.31. cast them
headlong, as he did the Swine: 2 Cor. 7.5. his thrusting sore, that if he
might, he would cast us down: and this also could Paul perceive, 1 These. 2.18.
that Satan hindered him.

Mund^ ill^^^^ae.
So the world also has these three to allure us, 1. profit, 2. pleasure, 3.
preferment.
And contra, if they will not prevail, it will be violent, with, 1. loss, 2.
grief, 3. reproach.


As Aug. says, aut amor erit mali inflammans, aut timor mali humilians, either
love shall be the inflamer and kindler of evil, or fear the humbler, and
bringer down to evil: so that these two means are in our selves, the Devil,
the world, to bring us to the danger of this fin.

^^itas quid.
After simulationem dicti, simulation in words; we come to consider simulationem
facti, simulation in words and deeds: for first, the truth is nothing but an
agreement or equality betwixt the heart and mind, and that which we conceive
in our mind: 2. a consent of the mind with the tongue: 3. a consent of our
mind, with our deeds and actions.
If there be agreement betwixt these, then are we witnesses of the truth: for
as veritas oris, truth is in the mouth, if the speech and heart go together:
so is veritas vitae, truth in our life, if it be agreeable to the word, which
is signum ejus rei, quae menie signata est, the sign and fruit of that thing
which is sealed up in the mind: which is plain by Christ's assertion, By their
fruits ye shall know them: Mat. 7. and Matthew. 12.36. the Scribes require a
sign from Heaven to testify to them the greatness of Christ's power.

And works, and not only words, but deeds may be called, signa ejus rei quae
in mente est, signs of such things as are in the mind. This also is manifest
by common experience: For we see not only by precept and speech, but also by
example and action, good and hurt done: therefore we must express the truth as
well in action as in word: and avoid simulation in both: which opposite in this
place, for this cause God takes order, that neither in deed nor in word men
should counterfeit to be, that which they are not.

Notwithstanding, as before, a man may lawfully occultare partem veritatis in
dictis, conceal a part of the truth in his discourse: so also, so, he may do
it in factis, in his actions, except it be manifest to the eyes of all men, as
that of the Sodomites, Genesis 19. or of the Benjamites, Judge. 19. and that of
Zimri, and Cozbi, Numb. 25. who were not ashamed to make their sin manifest,
even to the sight and view of all men: and not to this end, to make them loath
and detest their sin, but rather to glory in it.

Also there may be significatio ejus quod deest, an intimation and
signification of what is wanting.

As he is not bound to tell that forth in word, which he knows, so neither is
he bound by conscience to utter that by countenance which he knows.
Otherwise, in time of war, to oppose our selves to such as resist the truth,
a man may with Joshua 8.15. simulare fugam, make as if they fled.

As also for trial, as our Savior Christ did, Luke 24.28. he made as though
he would have gone further, if entreaty had not stayed him: and it is plain by
Gal. 4.20.

A principal part of this vice, is hypocrisy, which is an outward
resemblance, or cloak of religion, without any ground of it in the heart: of
this we have spoken heretofore, we will therefore pass it over: and come to
that which the Prophet has, Psalm. 26.4. he says he has not kept company
with vain persons.

For as in Commandment 8. not only injury was forbidden, but also
superfluity, as a special means thereto: and in Commandment 7. not only
adultery, but also all wantonness: so here is forbidden not only falsehood,
but also vain and foolish speech.

Our Savior sets down three heads of the sins against this Law. 1. Slander.
2. Pride, the occasion of flattery and boasting. 3. Foolishness, which is the
root of vain speech.


Our Savior, Matthew. 12.36. and verses before going treats of this
Commandment, and concludes it thus: of every idle word we must account.

Besides, false witness in judgment, and out of it, of flattery, boasting,
and simulation; notwithstanding this (...), foolish talking and jesting: and
(...), which he distinguishes, not as he did in (...), and (...), filthy
communication, and filthy: but he says (...), and (...), foolish talking and
jesting: though it be accounted of nothing in the world but urbanity. Whereas
indeed they do but abuse that word: for in truth it is nothing but a foolish
and idle babbling, as our Savior calls it: and after shall appear, and as Job
34.35. words of no value.

The Prophet Esa. 5.18. Woe to them that draw iniquity with cords etc. woe to
them: and Prove. 30.8. he prays to be removed far from vanity and lies. By
which two places it is manifest, that vanity brings lies, and with them the
catalogue of those sins that belong unto this Commandment. As wantonness is
forbidden in the seventh, and superfluity in the eighth Commandment: so here
vanity of speech. Concerning which Psalm. 144.8. he makes it an especial part
of a wicked man: And Esa. 59.4. they trust in vanity, which is the first step
to lies: and they proceed further to iniquity. David, Psalm. 26.4. glories that
he had not kept company with dissemblers, and vain men, or as Solomon says,
Prove. 21.6. among such as toss vanity like a Tennis-ball. Such as make
questions, and receive as vain answers, and reply again as vainly. And this
Job. 31.5. by the light of nature saw among the rest; that this was one thing
wherein his conscience bare him witness, that he was free, that he had not
walked in vanity, which is good for no use. And then as Chrysostom says well
upon Ephesians. 4. what workman is there, that will have any tool, that will
serve him to no use? and therefore he concludes, that this ars animarum, this
art of saving of souls, being ars artium, and scientia scientiarum, the Art of
Arts, and Science of Sciences: there must not be any thing in it belonging to
vanity. And hereupon the Fathers say, that Quicquid est ociosum, est
criminosum, whatsoever is idle is sinful. For this cause the Apostle bids us
stay foolish questions, Tit. 1.8.9. and his reason is, because they be vain.
Now except the major proposition be this, which must be general, whatsoever is
vain, is to be avoided: it were no syllogism.

And we see this is to be avoided: so there is in us, says the holy Ghost, an
untowardnesse, as is pullus onagri, the wild Asses colt: so is man from his
youth. A forge of vanities.
1 Pet. 1.18. Romans 13.4. For as Job says, there is a forge of idle thoughts,
which bring forth, Ephesians. 4.17. vain conversation; therefore we must in the
beginning take heed of this, that we will not as the Gentiles do, that we
lift not up our heads to vanity. Both which we shall do, Psalm. 24.4. if we
have our conversation idle and vain: Ephesians. 4.29. he shows us what this is,
(...), Let no corrupt communication proceed, etc.

He will have our conversation to be to edification, that God may have praise,
our neighbor may be built up in his knowledge and affection by our example. If
not this, then a second, that there be a necessary use of it: or if not that,
yet it must be such, as may give grace to the hearer. And if we will take Paul
for example, we may best learn ex verbis ejus in Epistolis, from his own words
in his Epistles, what his speech was. For we doubt not but he showed himself
like in his common speech.

For the first, we know his examples are plentifully to edification, That we
may do it ad necessitatem, for our necessary use: it is manifest by 1 Timothy
5.23. he bids him for the health of the body, drink wine, which no man will
say, was done ad aedificationem, but ad justam necessitatem, to edification,
but yet it was done upon just and necessary grounds.

Thirdly, if not this, yet that, whereas he bade him bring the cloak which he
left at Troas, 2 Timothy 4.13. etc. and so verse. 20. he says, Erastus abode at
Corinthus, Trophimus I left at Miletum sick: which do not directly serve to
edification, though indirectly it do all other things.

And therefore those narrations which concern a man to know, being not things
of necessary use, take a second place: for (...), salutations, this is a third:
whither Romans 16. wholly, may be reduced. Now in these Salutations there is no
edification, nor yet just necessity; for in diverse examples they are omitted:
but they serve to increase love and savor among men.

Col. 4.6. he exhorts every man, that his speech be powdered with Salt: not
with scurrisity and profane urbanity, non nigro sale Momi, sed can^^nte sale
Mercurit, not with that black Salt of Momus, but with the white Salt of
Mercury. Whereby our wits being dulled, and our spirits condensated, they may
be sharpened again; which often have a good and necessary use.

To this end serves that 2 Cor. 12.13. where he says, I have not been
chargeable to any of you. I pray you forgive me this wrong. Surely there was no
cause why he should crave pardon for this fault: but no doubt this pierced
deeper then if he had uttered it in direct words and terms. Now, but that
grace must concur with edification: Romans 12.3. a fruitful speech, and
profitable to edification; and none in the world could have expressed it more
wittily: and Phil. 3.3. he calls the circumcision, concision. Ephesians. 5.4. The
Apostle disswadeth us from foolish talking, and exhorts us to thanksgiving:
whereupon the Heretics called fratricelli, the poor humble brethren, would
have no word in answering, but laudate Deum, praise God. Who, when they were
demanded any question, said always, laudate Christum, praise Christ. But the
old Church understood well enough, per metonym. effecti, by a metonymy of the
effect, thanksgiving for that which was thankworthy.

Then whatsoever speech it is, that may be brought to one of these three
kinds, is not evil, but good. Albeit that that which is lawful be not kept,
for we are to strive after the best things: that is, that it may be done ad
aedificationem, to edification: so that though these terrene consolations,
these pety comforts be lawful; yet exultations in Psalms and spiritual songs
are better. Yet these are not unlawful, but expedient, and likewise necessary.
And thus much of the actual offenses of this Commandment. For the obedience
hereunto, how we are to behave our selves toward our selves, we are to learn
these few precepts.

1. That we may learn out of Psalm. 62.9. the Prophet says there, The children
of men are deceitful upon the weights; that is, they are too light. This is
that beginning indeed. For it is vanity by which he has the first vantage upon
a man: and therefore he must learn and labor to be steadfast, 1 Cor. 15.5.8.
he must be so grounded that every little suspicion will not put him out of
tune: for if he want this, every vanity in respect of himself, and every
affection toward his neighbor, will set him out of the way.

For suspicion is one of the fruits of concupiscence, and the rising of it is a
thing that cannot be resisted: but the principium, beginning of it must be
suppressed, 1 Timothy 6.4.

The first use of this suspicion, was to procure our safety: and to preserve
our souls: therefore, for the safeguard of our own lives and souls, it is
better to be nimium timidus, quam parum prudens, it is better to be
solicitously fearful, then securely improvident. We have the example and
practice of it in Paul, he suspected the worst, and yet the truth, Acts 27.30.

Now, when these things, given us for help of our selves and others, are
turned to the hurt and detriment of our selves and others; this must be a great
sin, wherewithal even the Godly may be attainted, but there is a
difference. For though the they arise, as John 13.19. when Christ said to
Judas, quod facis, fac cito, what thou do, do speedily, there was suspicion
in the hearts of the Apostles: some thought he bade him buy such things as he
stood in need of, against the feast; other, that he should give something to
^lep^o^e: but these were privative suspicions, they do not prevail, etc.

Gal. 4.11. These suspicions prevailed so fame in the Galatians, even beyond
positive suspicion, that he said, metuo ne srustra laboraverim, I am afraid,
least I have labored in vain.

They prevailed to diminish his opinion of them, and yet possessivam
suspicionem, a positive or possessive suspicion had the Apostle of them that
his pains were not so fruitful as they might have been. An argument of the
Pharisee, to prove Christ a sinner, Luke 7.39. If he had not been a sinner,
he would have known who, and what manner woman, etc. but he answered quickly,
and he was reproved. So we see what difference is betwixt the highest and the
lowest: the suspicion of the best goes not into judgment: they do suppress
it, and do not lay sticks upon it, to increase it.

The lowest have a diminution of their good opinion that they had conceived:
and cherish the evil conceived opinion, not suspending their judgments.

But in those that are evil, they grow to say, he is a sinner, they make
judicium ex sasp^cione, and trabem ex festuca, a judgment upon their
suspicion, and out of a sprig a beam: and some also proceed to action.

To keep himself from judgment, he must abstain from two things: 1. that is
in Job, he enterpreteth every thing after his way, stulti omnes sibi similes
esse putant, fools think all men like themselves, so are other men: if they
be evil, they cannot keep themselves from suspicion. 2. The other is, as
every man is affected, so he judges: and every small thing will increase this
affection in him. As if he have concealed a jealousy of any thing, every small
action will augment.
An example we have, Mar. 8.16. their mind ran upon leaven, etc.

If the other, Genesis 37.8. after they had conceived an ill affection of Joseph,
even his dream made them to hare him.

If we do not remove evil, and avoid suspicions, every thing will cause us to
make this conclusion, that the Barbarians did of Paul, Surely he is a murderer.

Six things to be noted in the conclusions, they reduce them to four heads.

1. That it is most natural to suspicion to arise upon a slender ground. In
good part, as that, If I will that he tarry till I come, etc. For the evil,
Mar. 14.6* 7. the maid reasoned, Thou art of Galilee, thou sr^ly art one of
them. When an affection has possessed the heart; the being of Galile will make
him a Disciple of Christ. But let every man when he is tried with a suspicion,
try the ground.

From this they come to the object: sundry things pertain to God, which men
will scanne, and make conclusions of it; whereas Solomon says, God only
knows the secret of thoughts. 2 Chronicles. 6.30. Yet we must be concluding that
men thought thus and thus: even of their meaning.

Chrysostom says, that that, Romans 14.4. is most fitly applied to this, Quis
in es qui servum judicas al^enum? Who art thou that judge another man's
servant? our suspicions must not go into men's thoughts, which are no men's
servants, but only ought to be judged of God.

The second thing, the condition in which men live: in whom we will be judging
of the secret judgments and predestination of God: so that if we see any man
fall into sickness, or any other calamity, we straight conclude that he is a
wicked man, a murderer, with the Barbarians: although the Preacher 9.2. says,
All things come alike to all, etc. In those kinds of suspicions ye have one
thing not to do, not to suspect. John 9.2. For neither was it the father of
him that was borne blind, that had sinned, neither yet he that was borne
blind. This was a conclusion of Christ's Disciples, That either he or his
father must needs be a sinner: whereas indeed the judgments of God are
abyssus, a great deep, and cannot be searched.

Or else we enter into the secret counsel of God: saying, as Mal. 3.14. vanus
est qui servit Domino, it is in vain to serve the Lord: because John Baptist,
and others have lost their lives for serving of God.

The third is concerning things to come. They will affirm if a man be cast
down once, and forsaken of God, he can never recover again. Whereas we ought
2 Timothy 2.25. to enstruct them with the spirit of meekness. And then so we
come to give oftentimes foolish, rash, and preposterous judgments of good men:
not knowing that multi sunt intus Lupi, multi etiam sunt Oves soris, etc. many
Wolves are within, and many Sheep also without. And these are Gods matters,
and are to be judged by him, and not of us; for his hand is long enough.

The fourth thing is in matters pertaining to men.

Sometime we judge of an 1. Act. 2. Thing it self. 3. Person.


When de re, we judge of the thing it self, then if we judge amiss, we hurt
not the thing which cannot be allowed by our judgment, or opinion, but our
selves. So that in what thing soever it be, we must strive to come to the
truth of it.

When it comes to the judgment of the person, it is not so, for the person may
be hurt by my judgment. For if either I make him contemptible, or of less
credit, when he does not discern it, I offend grievously. If I hurt him by
judging him, I do him injury. If I do not impair his credit, or good name, I
do not if I judge well, etc.

But if thus again, when it grows not to determination, but to supposition,
we must suppose the worst that may be: for if I minister a medicine unto a
sin, not strong enough to take away the sin, I rather increase it. If it be
too forcible, I shall be sure to take it away, which is the less.

John 2.22. Our Savior will not commit himself to any, because he knew them
all: A good reason it is therefore, that we should not trust all men, because
we do not know them.

In determinations we are to respect two things. 1. Suspicio violenta, a
violent suspicion. 2. Res dubia, a thing that is doubtful.


From suspicio violenta, this violent suspicion, there may be a conclusion
drawn. As duty may be done, 1. well, or 2. evil:
therefore we must take heed, and advisement in giving of our opinion of them:
and have respect to the end, for moralia sortiun^ur speciem a fine, the
judgment of moral things depends upon the issue and end of them; and are
always, in meliorem partem determinanda, to be construed in the better sense.

The last is that, 1 King. 20.11. Let not him that girdeth his harneis, etc.
Precipitation of judgment is noverca justitiae, the step mother of justice: it
is not good, etc. More plainly, Genesis 18.1.2. When the cry of the Citizens of
Sodom and Gomorra came up into the ears of the Lord: yet God says, I will
deliberate, etc. Although he know all things, yet he will not precipitate his
sentence.

Thus are we to keep our selves from judgment.

From judgment let us come to the action, which is more unlawful. 1 Samuel
22.22. David says, I thought thus much, when I saw Doeg there, that he would
tell: yet would he not proceed unto action.

The common action is the telling forth of that conclusion that we make unto
our selves: he must tell every one, that he goes withal by the way, that he
himself is a fool: he will tell every one of ^is own faults; Prove. 10.3.

The repression of the speech is the next thing.

When we have a truth to report of our selves, we must take heed: knowing that
our tongue is prodiga, and running over. This may teach us here to use our
tongues in repeating to our own good or evil: and all the good or evil of
our brother. As we should not speak, so we should not hear the hurt of our
brother, nor the praise of our selves: if we shall first shut our ears, Psalm.
58.5. or show a cloudy countenance. It were to be wished that good men were as
forward to good things, as evil men are to evil things; 1 Samuel 22.10. a
reporting augmentation of Doeg, and Numb. 13.32. of the Spies.

For flattery, we shall not use it our selves, if we do not forsake the word
of God, Prove. 28.4. for hearing if we be not strangled with it, if we can say
the contrary of that that Ahab said of Micaiah, 1 King. 22.18. I hate him
because he never prophesied unto me any good.

Another help, and a good one, Romans 2.1. In quo alium judicas teipsum
condemnas, wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self. 1 Cor.
11.31. Si nos ipsos judicaremus, if we would judge our selves, we should have
no leisure, either to judge other men, or to hearken to flatterers. They would
say as the poor man says, They say I am poor, but I can scarcely believe
them.

How to behave our selves in reproaches; Esa. 51.7. he bids them hearken unto
him, and not to esteem the reproach of men, for his own conscience will be a
witness unto him that he is free.

Sometime in a matter known, when we are convicted for it, we must take heed
of the forehead of an Harlot: if the discipline of the Church will do no good,
it is a dangerous case: for we see how few come to repentance by the civil
policy. For it is not the punishment and shame that will avail with us, for
they may be both wiped off in 9. days.

But we must be humbled in the confusion of our souls, that is, if we can say,
this shame is befallen me, the which I bear patiently with grief that I have
deserved it.

And sometime is man reproached for a sin unknown, which he is not bound to
disclose, reiegere peccatum nisi cum possit sine peccato, a sin is not to be
disclosed, unless it can be done without giving offense or scandal.

Psalm. 51.5. David confesses, Tibi soli peccavi, against thee only have I
sinned: though I could set my self against all the world, yet thou know it.
In this case there must be a traveling with a man's mind, as if he were in the
shame of the world, though it cannot be proved; either if he has given some
occasion, as a man may be suspected to have committed some sin, which is far
from him. And knowing that the love of God is great toward him, that he has
not committed it; that he may be thereby withdrawn far from it, it is an
effectual way to preserve us, that we wander not into such an error, neither
delight in it.

It is often seen, that when a man has detested a sin, he falls again
into it; as sick men make fair promises to God, Hose. 7.13. And this lying
unto God, makes us ly unto men, Psalm. 78.36. Also it makes that vineae
mentiuntur nobis, the Vineyard and Vines lie unto us. In the Spring time it
shall be fair to look to, but the Harvest shall deceive our expectation,
Hose. 9.2. And as Micah. 1.14. says, The houses of Achzib shall be as a lie
unto the Kings of Israel: that is, in those men whom they trusted, they shall
find no succor.

For the procuring of it in others, ut supra, etc.

FINIS.
A PREPARATION TO PRAYER.
The I. SERMON.
2 COR. 3.5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of
our selves: but our sufficiency is of God.


TOuching our hope which we have concerning the performance of Gods promises,
the Apostle says, Heb. 6. that unto the full assurance of hope, there must be
diligence showed, and that we are to prepare our selves to receive Christ, and
also having received him, with all his benefits, to strive to hold him fast,
and never suffer our hope to be taken from us.

Upon which points, the Doctrine that is to be delivered out of this Scripture
does follow by good consequence, for of these points of holding fast our faith
in Christ, two questions may arise, which may be answered by the Apostles words
in this place, where it may be demanded, First, Whether we be able of our own
strength to show forth that diligence that is required to assure us of our
hope. The Apostle resolves us of that doubt in saying, We are not able of our
selves to think any good as of our selves.

Secondly, because it may be objected, If we be not able of our selves, from
whence then may we receive ability? he adds, that our sufficiency is of
God, from whose goodness it comes, that we are able to do any good thing
whatsoever: to the end that when God stands without, knocking at the door of
our hearts, Romans 3. for the performance of such duties as please him, we, in
regard that of our selves we cannot do the least thing that he requires,
should knock at the gate of his mercy, that he will minister to us ability to
do the same, according to his promise, Mat. 7. Knock and it shall be opened to
you. That as by the preaching of the Law there was opened unto us the door of
faith, Act. 14. And as the Creed is unto us a door of hope, Hos. 2.15. So the
consideration of our own insufficiency might open unto us a door unto
prayer, by which we may sue unto God for that ability which we have not of our
selves. So this Scripture has two uses, first, to preserve us from error,
that we seek not for that in our selves, which cannot be found in us:
secondly, for our direction, that seeing all ability comes from God, we should
seek for it, where it is to be found.

Both these things are matter very necessary to be known; the first serves to
exclude our boasting, Romans 3.27. We ought not to boast of our ability, because
we have none. The second is a means to provoke us to call upon God by prayer,
that from him we may receive that which is wanting in our selves.

To speak first of the negative part, both Heathen, and holy Writings do
commend to us that saying, (...), but in a diverse sense: the Heathen use it as
a means to puff up our nature, that in regard of the excellency which God
has vouchsafed us above other creatures, we should be proud thereof; but
Christian Religion labors by the knowledge of our selves, and of our misery,
to cast down every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of
God, and to bring into captivity all imaginations to the obedience of Christ, 2
Cor. 10.5.

Which as Heathen Philosophers will us to consider the excellent virtues
wherewith man's nature is endued, the Scriptures all along put us in mind of our
insufficiency, and tell us, That if any man seem to himself to be something,
when he is nothing, he deceives himself in his own fancy, Galat. 6.3. And
if any man thinks that he knows any thing, he knows nothing yet as he
ought to know, 1 Cor. 8.2.

Amongst the places of Scripture, which the Holy Ghost uses to show our
insufficiency, none does so much disable our nature as this place of the
Apostle, which denies unto us all power ever to conceive a good thought, so
far are we off from fulfilling that good which we ought.

In this negative, we are first to consider these words, whereby the holy Ghost
does disable us, We are not able to think any thing: Secondly, the
qualification, in these words, as of our selves.

In denying our ability he sets down three things, 1. Not able to think:
2. any thing: 3. this want of ability is imputed, not to the common sort of men
only, but even to the Apostles themselves, who of all other seemed to be most
able.
The Apostle to show our insufficiency, tells us, We are not able so much as
to think any thing; therefore much less are we able fully to perform that
good which is enjoined us. For whereas there are seven degrees to be considered
in the effecting of any thing, to think that which is good is the least, and
lowest degree; which being denied unto us, does plainly show, what is our
imperfection.

The first thing to be observed in undertaking any good, is the accomplishing
of it: secondly, the working, or doing of the thing required: thirdly, the
beginning to do it: fourthly, to speak that which is good: fifthly, to will,
and desire it: sixthly, to understand: seventhly, to think. But the Scripture
does deny all these unto us. The perfecting, or bringing to pass of that which
is good, is not in our selves. To will is present with us, Sed bonum perficere
non invenio, Romans 7.8. Deus est, etc. It is God which enableth us to perform,
Phil. 2.7.

This we find by experience to be true, in things that are evil. The brethren
of Joseph, when they sold him to the Egyptians, had a purpose to work their
brothers hurt, but they had no power to perform their wicked attempts; For God
turned their wicked purpose to good, Genesis 50.20. When Paul was going to
Damascus, with purpose to persecute the Church, it pleased God in the way to
stay his purpose, so that he could not perform that evil which he intended,
Act. 9.9. Thus much the Wiseman shows, when by an example he proves, That
the strongest does not always carry away the battle, Eccl. 9.13.

The Heathen themselves say, that heroical virtues are in the mind of man, but
if any singular thing be done, it is the gods that give that power: and the
Pelagian says, though we be able to begin a good work; yet the accomplishment
is of God.

Secondly, we are not able, facere, no more then we were able to effect, for so
says Christ, Sine me nihil potestis facere. The Prophet says, Scio quod viri,
non est via ejus, Jer. 10.23. If it be not in man's power, to order his way, and
to rule his own steps, much less is he able to hold out to his journeyes end,
but it is God that orders and directs man's steps, Prove. 16.9. Therefore
Paul says, The good I would do I do not, Romans 7.17. And if we do any good,
that it be not effected; yet it is the work of God in us, as the Prophet
confesses. Domine, omnia opera nostra operatus es in nobis, Esaias 26.12.

Thirdly, the inchoation, or beginning of that which is good is denied us,
though we purpose in our hearts to perform those duties of godliness that are
required, yet we have not the power to put them in practice. Filii venerunt ad
partum, and non sunt vires pariendi, Esaias 37. The children are come unto the
birth, and there is no strength to bring forth. If we begin to do any good
thing, it is, Deus qui coepit in nobis bonum opus, Phil. 1.6. In consideration
of which place, Augustine says of the Pelagians, Audiant qui dicunt, a nobis
esse coeptum, a Deo esse eventum. Here let them learn of the Apostle, that it
is the Lord that does begin, and perform the good work.

Fourthly, the power to speak that which is good is not in us, for as the
Wiseman says, A man may well purpose a thing in his heart, but the answer of
the tongue comes from the Lord, Prove. 16.1. Whereof we have often experience.
They that have the office of teaching in the Church, albeit they do beforehand
prepare what to say, yet when it comes to the point, are not able to deliver
their mind in such sort, as they had purposed: as on the other side, when God
does assist them with his spirit, they are enabled on a sudden to deliver that
which they had not intended to speak.

Fifthly, as the ability of effecting was attributed to God, so is the will,
Phil. 2.14.

Sixthly, for understanding the Apostle says, The natural man perceives not
the things that are of the spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2. For the wisdom of the
flesh is enmity with God, Romans 8.7.

Seventhly, the power of thinking the thing that is pleasing to God, is not in
us, so far are we from understanding or desiring it, as the Apostle in this
place testifies. And therefore where the Prophet speaks generally of all
men, Psalm. 94. The Lord knows the thoughts of men, that they are but vain;
the Apostle affirms that to be true, of the wise men of the world, that are
endued only with the wisdom of the world, and the flesh, that their thoughts
are vain also, 1 Cor. 3.19, 20.

Secondly, that we should not think, that the want of ability stands only
in matters of difficulty and weight, the Apostle says not, we are unable to
think any weighty thing, but even, that without the special grace of Gods
spirit, we cannot think any thing. So Augustine understands Christ's words,
Joh. 15. where he says not, Nihil magnum and difficile; but, sine me nihil
potestis facere.

This is true in natural things, for we are not able to prolong our own life,
one moment; the actions of our life are not of our selves, but from God, in
whom we live, move, and have our being, Act. 17. Therefore upon those words of
Christ's: Ego a meipso non possum facere quicquam, nisi quod video Patrem, I of
my self can do nothing, but what I see my Father do, etc. Joh. 5.9. Augustine
says, Ei tribuit quicquid fecit, a quo est ipse qui facit.

But the insufficiency of which the Apostle speaks, is not in things
natural, but in the ministration of the Spirit: So he says, that God of his
special grace has made them able Ministers of the new Testament, not of the
letter, but of the spirit; his meaning is, that no endeavor of men can endue
us with the grace of repentance, with faith, hope, and Christian charity,
except the inward working of Gods spirit.

As the Apostle speaks of the gift of tongues, of the understanding of
secrets, and of all knowledge without charity; Nihil miht prodest, 1 Cor. 14.
So all our endeavors are unprofitable to us, unless God by his spirit do
cooperate with us, for, He that ^abideth in me, and I in him, the same
brings forth much fruit, Joh. 15.5. that is, the fruit of righteousness, the
end whereof is eternal life, Romans 6.22.

Thirdly, the persons whom he charge with this want of ability, are not the
common sort of natural men, that are not yet regenerate by Gods spirit, 1 Cor.
2. but he speaks of himself, and his fellow-Apostles. So these words are an
answer to that question, 2 Cor. 2.16. (...); unto these things who is
sufficient? he answers himself, Not we, for we are not able of our selves to
think a good thought, much less are we fit of our selves, to be means, by
whom God should manifest the favor of his knowledge in every place; So that
which Christ spoke, Joh. 15. he spoke it to his Disciples, who albeit they were
more excellent persons then the rest of the people, yet he tells them, Sine
me nihil potestis facere.

The negative being general, we may make a very good use of it, If the
Apostles of Christ were unable, how much more are we: If Jacob say, I am
unworthy of the least of thy blessings, Genesis 32. If John Baptist say, I am not
worthy, Mat. 3. If S. Paul confess, I am not worthy to be called an Apostle, 1
Cor. 15. much more may we say with the Prodigal son, that had spent all, I
am not worthy to be called thy son, Luke 15. and with the Centurion, I am not
worthy thou should come under my roof, Mat. 8.

The reason of this want of ability is, for that the nature of men cannot
perform that which the Apostle speaks of, neither as it is in an estate
decayed through the fall of Adam, and that general corruption, that he has
brought into the whole race of mankind; nor as it is restored to the highest
degree of perfection, that the first man had, at the beginning. Adam himself,
when he was yet perfect, could not attain to this, for he was but a living
soul; the second Adam was a quickening spirit, 1 Cor. 15. And it is not in the
power of nature to elevate, and lift it self up, to conceive hope of being
partakers of the blessedness of the life to come, to hope to be made partakers
of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1. and of the heavenly substance: if men hope for
any such thing, it is the spirit of God that raises them up to it.

As the water can rise no higher then nature will give it leave, and as the
fire gives heat only within a certain compass, so the Perfection, which
Adam had, was in certain compass, the light of nature that he had, did not
reach so high as to stir him up to the hope of the blessedness to come; that
was without the compass of nature, and comes by the supernatural working of
grace.

As we are corrupt, it never comes into our minds, to hope for the felicity
of the life to come; for all the thoughts of man's heart are only evil, and
that all the day long, Genesis 6.

That is true, which the Apostle witnesses of the Gentiles, Romans 2.13. That
they by nature do the things of the Law; if we understand it of moral duties
(for the very light of nature does guide us to the doing of them.) But as the
Prophet says, Ps. 16.2. My goodness does not extend to thee. So whatsoever
good thing we do, by the direction of natural reason, it is without all
respect of God, except he enlighten us before. Therefore in our regeneration,
not only the corruption of our will is healed, but a certain divine spark of
fire, and zeal of Gods Spirit is infused into us, by which we are helped to do
those duties of piety, which otherwise naturally we have no power to do.

Now follows the qualification of this general negative sentence. For where
the Apostle has said, We are not able to think any thing of our selves; the
Scripture records diverse good purposes, that came into the hearts of Gods
servants. The Lord himself said of David: Whereas it was in thine heart to
build an house to my name, thou did well in thinking so to do, 1 Reg.
8.18. The Apostle says of unmarried folks, that they care for the things that
belong to the Lord, how they may please the Lord, 1 Cor. 7.32. But the Apostle
shows, that if we have any such thoughts at any time, they do not proceed
from us.

By which words the Apostle, no doubt, makes this distinction, that there are
some things that come of us, and are of our selves: again, there are other
things that come from us, and yet are not of us, that is from, and of our
selves, that grows in us naturally.

That is said to be from our selves, but not of our selves, which is ingrafted
in us: It is the true Olive, that from it self, and of it self yields
fatness; and the wild Olive being ingrafted in it, does from it self yield
fatness, but not of it self, but as it is by insition made partaker of that
fatnes, which naturally is in the true Olive, Romans 11.

Figmenta cogitationis, are from, and of our selves; but if any divine, and
spiritual thoughts come into our hearts, the Lord God is the Potter that
frames them in us, Jer. 18.6.

The Apostle says, Scio quod in me, hoc est, in carne mea, non habitat bonum,
Romans 7.18. But sin dwells in me, v. 17. therefore sin, that dwells in us, is
from us, and of us; but the grace of Gods spirit, which dwells not in us, but
does tarry guest-wise, is that, which is from us, but not of us.

Our Savior says, Luke 24.38. Why do thoughts arise in your hearts? such
thoughts are from us, and of us; but those thoughts, that come from the Father
of light, James 1. are from our selves, but not of us.

All that we have by the strength of nature, is said to be of our selves, and
from our selves, but the power, wherewith we are endued from above, to the
doing of heavenly, and spiritual things, of our selves, but not from our
selves: Perditio tua ex te Israel, Hos. 13. that is from us, and of us;
Tantummodo salus ex me; that is neither of us, nor from us.

The Apostle says, 1 Cor. 15. I persecuted the Church: that was from himself,
and of himself; but when he says, yet I labored more then they all, he
corrected that, and says, yet not I, but the grace of God with me: Because
that was of himself, but not from himself, but from the grace of God, which
did cooperate with him.

Sins are of our selves, and from our selves, but not good actions. Hoc
piarum mentium est, ut nihil sibi tribuant, this is the part of godly souls,
that they attribute nothing to themselves. Aug. It is dangerous to ascribe too
little to the grace of God, for then we rob him of his Glory; but if we
ascribe too little to our selves, there is no danger: for whatsoever we take
from our selves, it cannot hinder us from being true Christians: but if we
ascribe that to the strength of our own nature, which is the proper work of
Grace, then do we blemish Gods Glory.

The affirmative part is, our sufficiency is of God. So that albeit, in regard
of themselves he said, Who is sufficient to these things? yet, having ability
from God, he is bold to say, Omnia possum in eo qui me confortat, Phil. 4.13.

The Apostle wills Titus to choose sufficient men, such as were able to
exhort with wholesome doctrine, Tit. 1.9. That is, such as God has made able,
so he speaks of all in general, that God the Father has made us meet to be
partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light, Col. 1.12.

As none are meet, but such as are made meet, so there are none (...),
worthy, but (...), such as are made worthy, Luke 20.21. The Apostle says, I
was indeed to come to you, that ye might receive a second grace, 2 Cor. 1.15.
Whereby he shows that to be true, which Saint Peter affirms, That the grace
of God is manifested, 1 Pet. 4. And so much we are to understand, by the words
of the Evangelist, when he says, That from the fullness of Christ we received
grace for grace, Joh. 1.

As Noah is reported to have found grace in the sight of God, Genesis 6. So many
do find grace with God: first, he works grace in men, by the means of his
Word, when before they were void of grace, The grace of God has appeared to
all, teaching them, Tit. 2.12. Also by the means of the Cross, Job. 33. Psalm.
119. and by that he works a second grace that is inherent, whereby they are
enabled to do the duties of holiness.

In which respect, as he is said to give grace, Prove. 3. Humilibus dat gratiam:
so we receive grace, 2 Cor. 6.1. After God by his spirit has thus enabled us,
we are said to be able, and meet, to do those things which we are commanded;
so that, though our righteousness be but menstrualis justitia, Isay 64. he
will not reject it: though our zeal in godliness be but as smoking flax, or
the broken reed, he will not quench, nor break it, Isay 42. and though the
measure of our charity exceed not the cup of cold water, yet we shall not lose
our reward, Matthew. 10. And though the affictions of this life, which we suffer
for Christ's sake, be not worthy of the glory that is to be revealed; yet, as
the Evangelist speaks, (...), Luke 21. For if we suffer together with Christ,
we shall be glorified with him, Romans 8.17.

So then, the sum of all comes to this, where the Apostle exhorts, Let us
have grace, Heb. 12. The question is, from whence we may have it? It is
certain we have it not of our selves, (for it is a divine thing) therefore we
must have it from him, that is the Well of grace, Joh. 1.14. If we come to him,
out of his fullness we shall receive grace for grace.

He is not a Well locked up, but such an one as stands open, that all may
draw out of it. Therefore the Apostle says, that the grace of God is, (...), 1
Pet. 1.13. And as Solomon says, bonus vir haurit gratiam, Prove. 12.2.

The means to obtain this grace at the hands of God, is by prayer; who has
promised to give his holy spirit to them that ask it, Luke 11. And having
received grace from God, we shall likewise have bonam spem per gratiam, 2 Thessalonians. 2. He has promised that those that seek shall find, Mat. 7.

If in humility we seek for grace from God, knowing that we have it not, of
our selves, we shall receive it from God, for he gives grace to the humble, 1
Pet. 5.

Seeing then that in us there is no ability, so much as to think any thing,
and all ability comes from God, we are to learn from hence, that if God say,
Turn to me, and I will turn to you, we must pray, Convert thou us O Lord,
and we shall be converted, Lam. 4. If he say to us, Make you clean hearts,
Ezekiel. 18: Because that is not in us, we must pray, Create in me a clean heart,
and renew a right spirit in me, Psalm. 51.10.

When Christ says, Beleevest thou this? Joh. 11. for as much as Faith is the
gift of God, Ephesians. 2. we are to pray with the Disciples, Domine, add nobis
fidem, Luke 17.5. When the Apostle exhorts, Perfect sperate, 1 Pet. 1.13. we
should say with the Prophet, Lord my hope is even in thee, Psalm. 39. And where
our duty is to love with all our hearts; because we cannot perform this,
without the assistance of Gods Spirit, we are to pray that the love of God may
be shed in our hearts, by the holy Ghost, Romans 5.5.

THE SECOND SERMON.
JAMES 1.16, 17. Err not my dear brethren.

Every good giving, and every perfect gift, is from above, and comes down
from the Father of lights; with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of
turning.


AS Saint Paul 2 Cor. 3.5. tells us, that we are not sufficient to think a good
thought, but our sufficiency is of God: So the Apostle says, ^t is God only,
from whom every good giving, and every perfect gift comes: And that we shall
err, if we either think, that any good thing, which we enjoy, comes from
any other but from God, or that any thing else but good proceeds from him; so
that as well the ability which man had by nature, as our enabling in the state
of grace, is from God. He is the Fountain, out of whom (as the Wiseman says)
we must draw grace by prayer, which is, Situla gratiae, the conduit or bucket
of grace. Therefore he promises, in the old Testament, To pour upon his
Church, both the Spirit of grace and of prayer, that as they sue for grace, by
the one, so they may receive it in, by the other, Zach. 12.10. Unto this
doctrine of the Apostle, in this place, even those, that otherwise have no care
of grace, do subscribe, when they confess themselves to be destitute of the
good things of this life, and therefore cry, Quis oftendit nobis bona? Psalm. 4.

As before the Apostle showed that God is not the cause of any evil; so in
this verse he teaches, there is no good thing, but God is the author of it; If
he be the Fountain of every good thing, then he cannot be the cause of evil;
for no one Fountain does out of the same hole, yield sweet and bitter water.
Iam. 3.11.

Secondly, if every good thing be of God only, then have we need to sue to
him by prayer, that from him we may receive that, which we have not of our
selves. Wherefore as this Scripture serves to kindle in us the love of God, for
as much as he contains all good things that we can desire; so it is a special
means to provoke us to the duty of prayer.

This proposition has two parts: first, an Universal affirmative in these
words, Every good giving: secondly, a prevention; for where it may be objected,
that howsoever some good things come of God, yet evil things also may
successively come from him; even as the Heathens say, that Jupiter has diverse
boxes, out of which he does power both good and evil: the Apostle preventeth
that objection, and says, that with God there is no variableness, nor shadow
of changing: So that as the meaning of these words in the Prophet Hosea 13.9.
Salus tua taniummodo ex me, is both, that salvation is only of God, and that
nothing else but salvation comes from him; so the Apostles meaning in these
words is, both, that God is only the cause of good, and that he is the cause
of nothing else but good, lest when we are tempted unto evil, we should make
God the Author of all such temptations.

The former part of the proposition called subjectum, is, Every good giving,
etc. The latter part, called praedicatum, is, descends from above.

Where the heathen call all virtues and good qualities which they have, (...),
of having, the Apostle calls them, (...), of giving, to teach us that
whatsoever good quality is in any man, he has it not as a quality within
himself, but he receives it from without, as it is a gift.

Esau, speaking of the blessings bestowed upon him, says, I have enough, Genesis
3.3. And the rich man Luke 12. (Anima) soul thou have much good, as though
they had not received them from God; but the Saints of God spoke otherwise,
Jacob says, These are the children which God has given me, Genesis 33.5. Again,
when Pilate without all respect of God, of whom the Apostle says, There is no
power but of God, Romans 13. said, Know thou not, that I have power to
crucify, and to loose thee? our Savior said again, Thou should not have
any power over me, except it were given thee from above. John 19.10.

The consideration hereof serves to exclude our boasting, Romans 3. That the
Wise man boast not of his wisdom, Ier. 9. seeing wisdom, strength, and
whatsoever good things we have, it is the good gift of God, as the Apostle tells
us, Quid habes, quod non accepisti? 1 Cor. 4.

Secondly, this division is to be marked, that of the good things which come
from God, some are called Donationes, others Dona: and to these two
substantives, are added two adjectives, whereof one does answer to the givings
of Gods goodness, the other to the gifts of God ascribes perfection.

The first error the Apostle wills them to beware, is, that they think not
that God is the cause of any evil, because every good thing comes from him:
the second error is, that they should not conceive this opinion, that the
maine benefits are from God, and the lesser benefits are from our selves; not
so, for the Apostle tells us, that as well, every good giving, as every perfect
gift is from above.

That which the Apostle calls Donatio, is a transitory thing: but by gift, he
means that which is permanent and lasting.

Joseph is recorded to have given to his brethren, not only corn, but
victuals to spend ^y the way, Genesis 45.21. So by giving, the Apostle here
understands such things as we need in this life, while we travel toward
our heavenly Country, but that which he calls gifts, are the treasures which
are laid up for us in the life to come; and thus the words are used in these
several senses.

Of things transitory the Apostle says, No Church dealt with me in the matter
of giving, Phil. 4.15. there the word is (...), but speaking of the good things
that come to us by Christ, he says: The gift is not as the fault, Romans 5.16.
where the word is (...)

By Givings he understands, beauty, strength, riches, and every transitory
thing whereof we stand in need, while we are yet in our journey toward our
heavenly country; such as Job speaks of, Dominus dedit, Dominus abstulit, Job
1.21. By gift he means the felicity that is reserved for us after this life,
the Kingdom of Heaven, that whereof our Savior says to Martha, Luke 10. Mary
has chosen the better part, which shall not be taken from her.

That which is a stay to us in this life, is (...), but the things which
neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, all which are reserved for them that
love God, 1 Cor. 2. these are (...), and as well the one, as the other, come
from God. So much we are taught by the adjectives that are joined to these
words. Givings are called good, and the Gifts of God are called perfect: In
which words the Apostles purpose is to teach us, that not only the great
benefits of the life to come, such as are perfect, are of him; but that even
that good which we have in this life, though it be yet imperfect, and may be
made better, is received from him, and not else where, Who does despise little
things? says the Prophet, Zach. 4.10.

God is the Author both of perfect and good things: as the Image of the Prince
is to be seen as well in a small piece of coin, as in a piece of greater
value; so we are to consider the goodness of God as well in the things of this
life, as in the graces that concern the life to come, yea even in this, To
think that which is good, 2 Cor. 3.

Of him are the small things, as well as the great. Therefore out Savior
teaches us to pray, not only for that perfect gift, ut advenia: Regnum, but
even for these lesser good things, which are but his givings, namely, that he
would give us our daily bread.

Under Good, is contained all gifis, both natural, or temporal. Those givings
which are natural, as to live, to move, and have understanding, are good, for
of them it is said, God saw all that he made, and lo, all was good. Genesis 1.

Of gifts temporal, the Heathen have doubted, whether they were good, to wit,
riches, honor, etc. but the Christians are resolved that they are good, 1 John
3. So our Savior teaches us to esteem them, when speaking of fish, and
bread, he says, If you which are evil, can give your children good things,
Luke 11. And the Apostle says, He that has this worlds good, 1 John 3. For
as Augustine says, That is not only good, quod facit bonum, sed de quo fit
bonum, that is not only good that makes good, but whereof is made good. so
albeit riches do not make a man good always; yet because he may do good with
them, they are good.

The gift which the Apostle calls perfect, is grace and glory, whereof there is
in this life the beginning of perfection; the other in the life to come, is the
end and constancy of our perfection, whereof the Prophet speaks, Psalm. 84.12.
The Lord will give grace and glory.

The Apostle says, Nihil perfectum adduxit Lex, The Law brought nothing to
perfection. Heb. 7. that is by reason of the imperfection of our nature, and
the weakness of our flesh. Romans 8.3.

To supply the defect that is in nature, grace is added, that grace might make
that perfect which is imperfect.

The person that gives us this grace is Jesus Christ, by whom grace and truth
came. John. 1. And therefore he says, Estote perfecti sicut Pater vester
coelestis perfectus est. Matthew. 5. And by this grace not only our sins are
taken away, but our souls are endued with inherent virtues, and receive grace
and ability from God, to proceed from one degree of perfection to another, all
our life time, even till the time of our death, which is the beginning and
accomplishment of our perfection, as our Savior speaks of his death. Luke
13.32.

In the latter part of the proposition we are to consider the place, from
whence, and the person, from whom we receive these gifts; the one is superne,
the other, a Patre luminum: Now he instructs us to beware of a third error,
that we look not either on the right hand, or on the left hand, that we regard
not the persons of great men, which are but instruments of God, if we have any
good from them, all the good we have it is de sursum, the thoughts of our
hearts that arise in them, if they tend to good, are not of our selves, but
infused into us by the divine power of Gods spirit, and so is whatsoever good
thought, word, or work, proceeding from us. This is one of the first parts of
divinity, Iobn Baptist taught; A man can receive nothing, except it be given
him from above, John 3.27. This was the cause of Christ ascending into Heaven,
Psalm. 68. He went up on high, and dedit dona hominibus: and the Evangelist
faith, the holy Ghost (which is the most perfect gift that can come to men) was
not yet given, because Christ was not yet ascended. John 7.39. Therefore if we
possess any blessing, or receive any benefit, we must not look to earthly
means, but to Heaven.

The thing which is here mentioned excludes the fourth error: we think that
things come to us by fortune, or customably: he says not, that good things
fall down from above, but they descend, and qui descendit, proposito
descendit. Our instruction from hence is, that they descend from a cause
intelligent, even from God himself, who in his counsel and provision
bestows his blessings as seems best to himself: for as the Heathen man
speaks, God has, sinum facilem, but not perforatum, that is, a lap, easy
to receive and yield, but not bored through, to let things fall through without
discretion.

When the Prophet says, Tu aper is manum, Psalm. 145.15. he does not say that
God lets his blessings drop out of his fingers. Christ when he promised to
his Disciples to send the Comforter, says, Ego mittameum advos. John 16.7.
Whereby he gives them to understand that it is not by casualty, or chance,
that the holy Ghost shall come upon them, but by the deliberate counsel of
God; so the Apostle postle speaks, Of his own will begat he us, by the word of
truth.

The person from whom, is the Father of lights. The Heathens found this to be
true, that all good things come from above, but they thought that the lights in
Heaven are the causes of all good things, therefore is it that they worship the
Sun, Moon, and Stars. James says, Be not deceived, all good things come
not from the lights, but from the Father of lights. The natural lights were
made in ministerium cunctis gentibus, Deuteronomy. 4. and the Angels, that are the
intellectual lights, are appointed to do service unto the Elect. Heb. 1.13.

It is the Father of lights, that gives us all good things; therefore he only
is to be worshipped, and not the lights, which he has made to our use.

God is called the Father of lights, First, in opposition to the lights
themselves, to teach us, that the lights are not the causes of good things, but
he that said, fiat lux, Genesis 1. Secondly, in regard of the emanation, whether
we respect the Sunne-beames called radii, shining in at a little hole, or the
great beam of the Sun, called Iubar, he is author of both, and so is the cause
of all the light of understanding, whether it be in small, or great measure:
Thirdly, to show the nature of God: nothing has so great alliance with God, as
light: The light makes all things manifest, Ephesians. 5. and the wicked hate the
light, because their works are evil, John 3. But God is the Father of lights,
because as out of light comes nothing but light, so God is the cause of that
which is good. Prove. 13.

Again, light is the cause of goodness, to those things that are good of
themselves; It is a pleasant thing to behold the light. Eccles. 11. On the
other side; howsoever good things are in themselves, yet they afford small
pleasure, or delight, to him that is shut up in a dark dungeon, where he is
deprived of the benefit of light. So God is the Father of lights, for that not
only all things have their goodness from him, but because he makes them good
also.

Light is the first good thing that God created for man, fiat lux, Genesis 1. But
God is the Father of lights, to show that he is the first cause of any good
thing, that can come to us.

Again, because he is that only cause of the visible light, which at the
first he created, and also of that spiritual light, whereby he shines into
our hearts, by the light of the Gospel, 2 Cor. 4. the Apostle says of the
whole Trinity, Deus lux est, 1 John 1.5. More particularly Christ says of
himself, Ego sum lux mundi, John 8.

The holy Ghost is called light, where he is represented by the fiery tongues,
Act. 2.3. The Angels are (...), Heb. 1.7. David also, as a civil Magistrate,
was called the light of Israel. 2 Samuel 21.17. Ecclesiastical Ministers are
called light, Vos estis lux mundi. Matthew. 5. And not only they, but the people
that are of good conversation, are said to shine, tanquam luminaria in mundo.
Phil. 2. All these lights have their being from God, and for this cause he is
worthily called lux mundi, and the Father of lights. A again, this name is
opposed unto darkness, God is light, and in him there is no darkness. 1 John
5.5. Therefore the ignorance of our minds is not to be imputed unto him. He is
the light that lightneth every one, John 1.9. and cannot be comprehended of
darkness: Therefore it is not long of him, that we, through ignorance, are
said to sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, this comes of the Devil,
the Prince of darkness, who blinds men's eyes. 2 Cor. 4. God is the Father of
lights.

Secondly, he is so called to distinguish him from heat.

The lights which we make for these private uses, do not only give light, but
heat also; but God gives light without heat: wherefore such as are of a fiery
spirit, as the Disciples that said, Shall we command that fire come down from
Heaven, and consume them? are not like God. Christ is called the day star,
not the dog-starre, 2 Pet. 1. God is said to have walked in the cool of the
day, not in the heat of the day, Genesis 3.8. When God would speak to Eliah, he
showed himself neither in the strong wind, nor in earthquake, nor in fire,
but in a small still voice. 1 Reg. 19.12. To teach men, that, if they will be
like God, they must be of a meek and quiet spirit. He is said to dwell in the
light, 1 Timothy 6. not that he is of a hot fiery nature, as our lights are, but
because he gives us the light of knowledge.

In respect of the number, he is not called the Father of one light, but Pater
luminum. It was an imperfection in Jacob, that he had but one blessing, Genesis
27. God is not the cause of some one good thing, but as there are diverse
stars, and one star differs from another in glory, 1 Cor. 15. so as we
receive many good things, and of them some are greater then others, so they all
come from God, who is the Author and fountain of them all.

Our manifold imperfections are noted by the word tenebrae, which is a word of
the plural number, and in regard thereof it is needful, that God, in whom we
have perfection, shall not be Pater luminis, but Pater luminum. Our miseries
are many, therefore that he may deliver us quite out of miseries, there is with
the Lord Copiosa redemptio, Psalm. 130. The sins which we commit against God
are many; therefore he is the Father, not of one mercy, but Pater
misericordiarum, 2 Cor. 1. The Apostle Peter tells us, that the mercy of God is
multiformis gratia, 1 Pet. 4. So that whether we commit small sins or great,
we may be bold to call upon God for mercy, According to the multitude of thy
mercies, have mercy upon me, Psalm. 51. For as our sins do abound, so the
mercy of God, whereby he pardons and is inclined to pardon us, is exuberans
gratia, Romans 5.

The darkness that we are subject to, is manifold: there is darkness inward,
not only in the understanding, Ephesians. 4. where the Gentiles are said to have
their cogitations darkened, but in the heart, whereof the Apostle speaks, He
that hates his brother is in darkness. 1 John 2.

There is the darkness of tribulation and affliction, whereof the Prophet
speaks, Thou shall make my darkness to be light, Psalm. 18. and the misery
which the wicked suffer in the world to come which our Savior calls utter
darkness, Matthew. 22. God does help us, and give us light in all these
darknesses, and therefore is called the Father of lights.

As the Sun gives light to the body, so God has provided light for the
soul, and that is first the light of nature, which teaches us, that this is a
just thing, ne alii facias quod tibi fieri non vis, from this light we have
this knowledge, that we are not of our selves, but of another, and of this
light the Wiseman says, The soul of man is the candle of the Lord. Prove.
20.27. They that resist this light of nature are called, rebels Lumini. Job
24. With this light every one that comes into this world is enlightened. John
1.9. Howbeit this light has caught a fall, as Mephibosheth did, and thereupon
it halteth, notwithstanding, because it is of the blood royal, it is worthy to
be made of.

Next, God kindles a light of grace by his word, which is, lux pedibus; Psalm.
119. and lux oculis, Psalm. 19. and that we may be capable of this outward
light, he lightneth us with his spirit, because the light of the law shined but
darkly; therefore he has called us into the light of his Gospel, which is his
mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2.

He lights the outward darkness of affliction, by ministering comfort, There
springs up light for the righteous, and joyful gladness for such as are
true of heart. Psalm. 97.11. In the multitude of my sorrows, thy comforts have
refreshed my soul. Psalm. 94. He gives us everlasting consolation, and good
hope through grace. 2 These. 2. And that we should not be cast into utter
darkness, he has made us, meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the
Saints in light, yea he has delivered us from the power of darkness, and has
translated us into the Kingdom of his beloved Son. Col. 1.12.

Of these things it follows: first, if all good things be gifts, we may not
boast of them; if they come from God, we may not forget him, from whom we
receive them.

Secondly, because Gifts are rather Commendata, quam data, because there is
(...), Phil. 4. Seeing God will come, and take account of the Talents, Matthew.
25. we must neither wast-fully mis-spend them, Luke 16. nor have them without
profit. Matthew. 25. Vt crescit donum, sic crescat ratio donati.

Thirdly, seeing they come from above, we must not be like blind Moses, nor as
Swine grovelling upon the earth, which ea^e the acorns that fall from the tree,
and never look up, but it may teach us to look up; Sursum cor, qui habes
sursum caput.

Fourthly, seeing God is Pater Luminum, we must walk as Children of light. 1
These. 4. For we are not darkness, but light. Ephesians. 5.

Fifthly, seeing God has diverse good things in his hand to give, we must
desire to receive them from him by prayer.

THE THIRD SERMON.
MATTHEW. 7.7. Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find;
knock, and it shall be opened unto you.


AFter the consideration of our own unability, mentioned by Saint Paul 2 Cor.
3. And the examination of the manifold goodness of God, from whom, as Saint
James says, every good giving, and every perfect gift comes: Because we see
that of our selves we cannot so much as think any good, and yet that from the
Father of lights we may receive that grace which shall enable us to do all
things; Now it follows by good order, that we repair to God for that power,
which we have not of our selves. Christ will not have holy things given to
dogs, nor pearls cast to swine, that is, to such as make no account of them;
and therefore if we esteem of the grace of Christ, or make any reckoning of
it, we must come to him for it; now we cannot come to God, but by prayer, as
Augustine says, Non passibus, sed precibus, itur ad Deum: and nuncius noster
oration est, quae ibi mandatum nostrum peragit, quo caro nostra pervenire
nequit: It is not with pases, but with prayers we go to God; and our messenger
is prayer, which there does our errand, where our flesh cannot come. Therefore
Christ says: Do not wait as swine, till the grace of God be cast unto you,
but if you will have it, ask, and it shall be given to you.

The tenor of this Scripture has this coherence: first, knowing our own
insufficiency, and the goodness of God, from whom every good thing comes,
presently we wish with our selves that he would admit us to be suitors unto
him. Therefore Christ in the word Ask, tells us, that God has his Courts of
requests, that we may be bold to put up our supplications.

Secondly, whereas earthly Princes may perhaps afford a good countenance, but
will not grant the thing that is sought for at their hands; Christ says, that
the Father of lights, is not only affable, but liberal; so that albeit we be
not only dust and ashes, and therefore unworthy to pray to God, Genesis 18. but
also wretched sinners, unworthy to be heard, because as the Blind man says,
peccatores non exaudit Deus, John 9. Yet he will not cast out our prayers, nor
turn his mercy from us, esal. 66.18. But if we ask, it shall be given.

Thirdly, that we should not think, that as in the world there are many
suitors, but few obtainers; so howsoever all do pray unto God, yet we are not
in the number of those that speed; therefore Christ adds, Whosoever asks,
receives: whosoever seeks, finds: and to him that knocks, it shall be
opened: No unworthiness of our own can exclude us from the mercy of God, for
he receives the prayer, not only of the Publican, Luke 18. but of the
prodigal son, Luke 15. and promises mercy to the Thief hanging on the
Cross, Luke 23. if at the last hour he seek it by prayer.

Of these two verses there are three parts, first a precept, petite, quaerite,
pulsate: ask, seek, knock: secondly, a promise, it shall be given, ye shall
find, and it shall be opened: thirdly, an enlargement of the promise, which is
made not only to such as are of just and holy conversation, but to sinners;
For whosoever asks, receives.

As on Gods behalf we see first his affability: secondly, his liberality:
thirdly, the largeness of his liberality: so on our own parts we are taught,
first, that we may boldly power out our desires before God: secondly, we may
conceive hope to be heard in the thing we crave: thirdly, not an uncertain
hope, confounded through our own unworthiness; For whosoever asks,
receives: and as Christ speaks, Him that comes to me, I will in no wise,
cast out. John 6.37.

In the precept four things are to be considered: first, the necessity:
secondly, the vehemency, signified by a threefold petition, which implies an
instancie, as Solomon speaks: Have I not written three times to thee? Prove.
22.20. thirdly, the coherence of these three terms, asking, seeking, and
knocking: fourthly, the distinguishing of them.

Touching the first, the example of our Savior might be a sufficient motive to
stir us up to prayer, who in the morning very early before day went into a
solitary place, and there prayed, Mark 1.35. and in the evening, prayed
himself alone in the Mountain, Matthew. 14.23.

Secondly, whereas he sets down a form of prayer, Matthew. 6. He shows
that prayer is necessary, but when unto both he adds a precept, we may not
think any longer it is a matter ind^fferent, but of necessity, a commandment
is a thing obligatory. So when Christ commands us to pray, he does not leave it
as a thing in our own choice; but binds us to the performance of it, for
prayer is not only required as a thing supplying our need, (for when we feel
want, we need not be provoked to prayer;) the bruit beasts themselves being
pinched with hunger, do seek their meat at God, Psalm. 107. and the Ravens
call upon him for food, Psalm. 147. but it is required as a part of Gods
service. Anna being in the Temple, served God by prayer, Luke 2.37. By prayer
the Apostles performed that service to the Lord, which the Apostle calls (...),
Acts 13.1. Therefore so often as we resort to the house of God, to put up our
petitions to God, then we do him service properly, and not only when we are
present at a Sermon, for then God rather serves us, and attends us, and
entreates us by his Ministers to be reconciled to him, 2 Cor. 5.

As prayer is a part of Gods worship: so the neglect of prayer is a sin, as
one says, peccatum non orandi. Therefore the Prophet among other sins
wherewith he charge the wicked, reckons this to be one, that they call not
on the Lord, Psalm. 14.9. The neglect of this duty was the beginning of Saul's
fall, as all the Fathers interpret that place, 1 Samuel 14.19. where it is said,
that Saul commanded the Priest to withdraw his hand from the Arc. For this
has been commanded ever from the beginning, that we should pray unto God; not
only in the law of nature, Job. 8.5. But also in the law of Moses, Deuteronomy. 10.12.

In the time of the law a special part of the service, which the people
performed to God, was the offering up of incense, and therefore the Prophet
compares prayer to incense, Psalm. 141.2. And it is most fitly resembled to
incense, for the use of incense was to sweeten those places which are unsavory:
Even so the wicked imaginations, and unchaste thoughts of our hearts, which
yield a stinking smell in the nostrils of God, are sweetened by no other means
then by prayer: and therefore to show how the one is resembled by the other, it
is said, that while the incense was a burning, the people were without upon
their knees in prayer, Luke 1.10. neither was it a thing usual in the law
only, but also in the Prophets. Call upon me, Psalm. 50. and aperi os tuum and
implebo, Psalm. 81.

Touching the effect and fruit whereof it is said, Whosoever calls on the
name of the Lord, shall be saved, Joel 2. Secondly, albeit God have little
Commandments, as Christ speaks, Matthew. 5. He that breaks one of these
little Commandments: Yet this, touching the duty of prayer is not a slight
Commandment, but of great instance, and so much we are to gather from hence,
that Christ is not content once to say, Ask, but repeates it in three several
terms: ask, seek, knock; which as Augustine says, shows instantissimam
necessitatem.

From the vehemency of this Commandment we are to consider these three
things: first, it lets us see our want and need, in that we are willed to
ask: secondly, by seeking, Christ does intimate thus much to us; that we have
lost our selves: thirdly, in that he would have us to knock, he would have us
to learn that we are as men shut out of the presence of God, and his Kingdom,
where is the fullness of joy, and pleasure for ever.

The first shows man what is the misery of his estate, in regard whereof he
is called Enoch: secondly, his blindness, which is so great, that when he does
pray, he asks he knows not what, Matthew. 20. If he would pray, he knows not
how to pray, for which cause the Disciples desire Christ to teach them, Luke
11. Their blindness is such as they know not the way to come to the Father, as
Thomas confesses, John 14.5. Thirdly, it shows our slothfulness in seeking
our own good, which appears herein, that we have need to have a
Commandment given us to stir us up to pray to God.

The third thing in the precept is the dependence of these three word, petite,
quaerite, pulsate. For there is no idle word in Gods book. Therefore as they
that have to do with Gold, will make no waste at all, but gather together the
least paring: so we must esteem preciously of Gods word, which is more
precious then Gold. We must be gone hence, and there is a place whither we
desire all to come, which we cannot do, except we knock: and because we know
not at what door to knock, therefore we must seek the door; But we have no
will nor desire to seek, therefore Christ wills in the first place that we
ask it, and the thing that we must ask, is the spirit of grace, and of
prayer: and if we ask it, then shall we have ability and power, not only to
seek the door, but when we have found it, to knock at it.

Fourthly, as these words depend one upon another, so they are to be
distinguished one from another: they that are suitors for any earthly benefit,
do occupy, not only their tongue in speaking, but their legs in resorting
to great persons: they that seek, do occupy not only their legs, in going
up and down, but their eyes to look in every place; and they that knock, as
they use other members, so especially they use their hands: But when our
Savior enjoyneth us the use of prayer, he expresses it not in one word, but
in three several terms; to teach us, that when we come to pray to God, the
whole man must be occupied, and all the members of the body employed in the
service of God; for Christ will not have pearls cast unto swine; and we may not
look to have the gifts of God cast into our mouths: but if we will obtain,
we must first, open our mouths to ask it, Psalm. 81. Secondly, they are not so
easily found, as that we shall stumble upon them: but we must seek diligently,
with the lifting up of our eyes. Psalm. 1.20. And to God that dwells in the
Heavens. Psalm. 123. Thirdly, because the door is shut and locked up, therefore
we must knock, for which end we are willed, To lift up our hands with our
hearts to God which is in Heaven, Lam. 3.

The lifting up of our hand is that which the people call the Evening
sacrifice, Psalm. 141. As the body, so also the soul may not be idle, but
occupied with these three virtues: first, it must petere, which notes
confidence and trust: secondly, quaerere, which signifies diligence: thirdly,
pulsare, which implies perseverance: If we join these three virtues to our
prayer, doubtless we shall be heard.

As the second cause of our life here is, sudor vultus: (for we live arando, ac
serendo) by plowing, and sowing; so the second cause of our living is another
sudor vultus; which consists in asking, seeking, knocking: As in the sweat
of our brows we eat the bread that feeds our bodies, so by these spiritual
pains, and endeavors we come to the bread of life, which feeds our souls
eternally.

Now if we ask that question that is made Job 21.15. What profit shall we have
if we pray unto him? It is certain that God having created us, may justly
command us: but he does not only constrain us to pray by his commandment,
but allure us thereunto by his promise: he says, if we ask the life of grace,
we shall obtain it; if we seek it, we shall find it; thirdly, having found
the way, we shall intrare ingaudium Domini, enter into our Masters joy, Matthew.
25.

If we ask, we shall have grace, whereby it shall appear, we have not
received our soul in vain, Psalm. 24. secondly, seeking we shall find the
help and assistance of Gods spirit, so that we shall not receive grace in
vain, 2 Cor. 6. thirdly, by knocking, the way of entrance shall be opened unto
us, so that our labor shall not be in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. as Aug.
says, Non dicitur quid dabitur, Christ names not what shall be given to you:
to let us know, that that gift is a thing supra omne nomen, above all that can
be named.

It is as great a gift as an earthly Prince can give, to promise half his King
dome, Mark 6.23. but God has promised not half his Kingdom, but all his
Kingdom; we shall receive of God, not only whatsoever we desire, (For
desiderare nostrum, as one says, is not terminus bonitatis Dei, our desire is
not the limit or bounds of Gods goodness) but above all that we can ask or
think. Ephesians. 3.

In the confidence of this promise the Saints of God in the time of their
misery fly unto God by prayer, as their only ready help. In the days of
Enoch, which were full of miseries and troubles, men began to call upon the
name of the Lord, Genesis 4.26. and Abraham in every place where he came, being
departed out of his own Country, and living in exile, built an Altar, and
called on the name of the Lord. Genesis 12.8. David says, that his only remedy
which he used against the slander and injuries of his enemies, stood herein,
that he gave himself to prayer. Psalm. 109. Iosaphat being besieged with
enemies on every side, used this as a bulwark against them: Lord we have no
power to with-stand this great company that are come against us, and we know
not what to do, but our eyes are toward thee. 2 Chronicles. 20. The like comfort
did Ezechiah find in prayer, both when Senacherib threatened his destruction,
and in his sickness: and it is indeed the City of refuge, whither the godly in
all times have used to fly for safeguard from their miseries. It is rete
gratiarum, and situla gratiae, the net of graces, and bucket of grace, Prove.
12.2. by which a good man draws the grace of God.

The special gift that we can desire of God is Christ himself, who is Donum
illud Dei. John 4. Now forasmuch as indeed nothing can be a greater benefit,
then to enjoy the presence of God, as the Prophet says, Whom do I desire in
Heaven but thee? Psalm. 73. and Philip says, Ostende nobis patrem, and
sufficit, Show us the Father, and it is sufficient, John 14. we are to
consider how we may come to it.

Christ says, I am the way, John 14. and ego sum ostium, John 10. If he be
both the way and the door, then no doubt but if God bestow Christ on us, we
shall both find the way to God, and enter into his Kingdom, by Christ, who is
the door: for the obtaining of this gift we must be instant with God in
prayer, which if we do, he will give us that we ask: therefore Augustine
says, Domine cupiote, da mihi solumie, out non dimittamte, Lord I desire thee,
give me thee alone, or else I will not let thee go.

In the third place our Savior enlarges the promise, lest we should doubt
that God will not hear all manner of persons, that pray to him, or that he
will not grant all our suites, therefore in regard of the persons, Christ
says, Quisquis, whosoever asks, receives, whosoever join these three
virtues in their prayer, Confidence, Diligence, Perseverance, and occupy all
the parts of their body in this service of God, they shall be sure to receive
the thing they ask, for the promise is made only to them that perform Gods
Commandment, petenti dabitur, we must ask, and we shall have it: for God
uses not to cast holy things upon them that make no reckoning of them, Matthew.
7.

Touching the things themselves, He that is the truth has said, Whatsoever
you ask my Father in my name, he will give it you. John 16. Therefore it is
impossible he should lie, especially when he confirms it with an oath, as in
that place, Verily, Verily, I say unto you, whatsoever you ask the Father in
my name, he will give it you. But we must take need what we ask: we may not
(...), ask without a cause. If we ask any thing according to his will, he
hears us. 1 John 5. Therefore our prayers must be grounded upon some just
cause: we may not ask any childish petition of God, for he will revert them.
If we like children ask we know not what, we cannot assure our selves to be
heard, for unto such prayers he answers, Ye ask you know not what, Matthew.
20. Much less will he grant hurtful petitions.

As he is our Physician, he will not give us cold drink when we are sick of an
ague, though we cry for it never so much. They that ask vengeance of God, and
would have him to be the executioner of their wrath, shall not be heard, Prove.
26.13. but their prayer is turned to sin, Psalm. 109. So far is it from the
service of God.

If the child ask fish, the Father will not give him a Scorpion, no more will
God hear us in those things which we ask of him, if he know they will be
hurtful.

He only is wise, and knows what is good for us, and if we receive not the
thing which we ask, yet he (as Jerome says) non accipiendo accepit, in not
receiving, he has received. Christ says not, ask, and ye shall receive the
thing ye ask, but ask and it shall be given unto you, that is the thing that
you desire. We all desire those things that be good, though outwardly we are
not able to discern what is good, but God our heavenly Father, as he knows
best what is good for us, so he will give us good things, though we be not able
always to ask that which is good for our selves.

Secondly, we must pray in such manner and form, as he requires; God does
hear us many times even quando petimus malum: in as much as he does not give
us the hurtful things, which we ignorantly ask. But he will not hear us, cum
petimus male, Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss. Iam. 4.
Therefore we must beware how we stand affected at the time of prayer: if we
pray coldly, without any great desire to attain the thing we ask; we ask
like swine, that esteem not of pearls, but trample them under their feet: If
we draw near with our lips, but our hearts be far from God, Esa. 29. then it
is not like we shall be heard: If we pray as Peter, and the other Disciples,
who being heavy. with sleep, asked they knew not what, Luke 9.32. we cannot
receive the truth. But if, as Moses speaks, we seek the Lord with all our
heart, Deuteronomy. 4.29. If we do with Paul, orare spiritu, and orare mente, 1 Cor.
14. then we may conceive hope to be heard, for the commandment to ask is
given Cordi, non pulmoni, to the heart, not to the lungs; Id quod cor non
facit, non fit, that which the heart does not, is not done.

Secondly, touching the manner, as with fervencie, so we must pray with
reverence, not having our heads covered, as we see many do: which behavior,
how rude, and unbeseeming it is, we may easily discern, as the Prophet
speaks, Offer this kind of behavior to thy Lord or Master, and see whether
he will accept it? Mal. 1.

If thou, having a suite to an earthly Prince, dare not speak but upon thy
knees with all submission; how much more ought we to reverence the Lord God, in
comparison of whom all the Princes in the earth are but Crickets and
Grasshoppers, Esa. 40. Therefore the manner of our prayer to God must be in all
reverence.

Solomon prayed upon his knees, 2 Chronicles. 6. Daniel fell down upon his knees,
Dan. 6. So did Saint Peter, Acts 9. So Paul, Ephesians. 3.14. And not only men
upon earth, but the glorious spirits in Heaven cast themselves and their
crowns down before him that sits upon the Throne, Apoc. 4. Yea Jesus Christ
the Son of God fell down upon his knees, and prayed to his Father, Luke 22.
and exauditus propter reverentiam. Heb. 5. So did Paul serve God (...), Acts
20.19. Secondly, If we would obtain any thing at Gods hand, we must not only
ask it, but seek for it. He that having prayed, sits still without adding his
endeavor, shall not receive the thing he prays for, for he must not only
orare, but lahorare, pro quibus enim orandum, pro eis laborandum est: to this
end the Apostle would have us to pull up our faint hands and weak knees, Heb.
12. And when we have asked grace, we must be careful that we our selves be not
wanting unto grace, as well as we were careful that grace should not be
wanting unto us.

This diligence is noted in the word petite, which as it is used in the first
place, so also it signifies to go to, or to hit, and knock: so that it
contains all the three virtues that are required unto prayer, but for our
instruction our Savior has expressed them in three several terms.

Thirdly, having found the way, we may not rest there, there is a door whereby
we must enter, and that shall not stand open for us against we come, we must
knock at it. It pleases God to entreat us, 2 Cor. 5. to seek and find us,
when we are lost, Luke 15. He stands and knockes at our door, Apoc. 3.
Therefore as Moses speaks in Deuteronomy. We are to consider what he does require at
our hands.

The service that we owe him, is likewise to entreat him, to seek for grace
at him, to knock continually, till he open the gate of his mercy. If God
hear us not so soon as we ask, we may not cease to knock, as Saul did, who
because that God answered him not, neither by dreams, nor by Urim, nor
Prophet, asked counsel of a Witch, 1 Samuel 28. Importunity, as our Savior
speaks Luke 11. is a means whereby often times men obtain their suites. The
unjust Judge will be content to hear the Widows cause at length, even because
he would be rid of cumber: if she be earnest with him, she shall at last
obtain her suite by importunity: So howsoever God be not inclined to do us
good, and have his ears open to our prayers, yet he is much delighted with our
importunate suites.

If the unjust Judge that neither feared God, nor reverenced man, may be
overcome with importunate suite, much more will God revenge them which give not
over their suites, but cry to him night and day, Luke 18. Let us not be weary
of well doing; for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not.

These conditions being performed, that we seek in the desire of our heart and
in humility: secondly, that we be not wanting to grace, but work with it:
thirdly, if we do it with continuance, not giving over, then we shall find it
true, which Christ says, Omnis qui petit accipit.

The sum is, as when God said, Seek ye my face, David answered, Thy face O
Lord I will seek, Psalm. 27. So when Christ says to us, ask; our answer must
be; we will, at least dispose our selves thereunto, especially seeing he does
not only praeire exemplo; but dicere ut petas, seeing he does not only by his
commandment, permitiere, but praecipere ut petas.

Lastly, seeing by his promise he does not only allure them, ut petani, but
does minari si non petas, threaten if thou ask not: for if we ask of any but
from him, he is angry, as he was with the King of Israel, that required of
Baal-zebub when he should recover, 2 Reg. 1. Is there not a God in Israel? And
Christ was offended with his Disciples for the neglect of this duty. Hitherio
ye have asked nothing, John. 16. And when we come to ask of God, we must not
cease our suite, if he grant us not our suite at the first; but say with Jacob,
Non dimittam te, Genesis 32. We must be instant, as the Canaanite was, Mat. 15. We
must be earnest, as he that came at midnight to borrow bread, Luke 11. and
importunate, as the Widow with the Judge, Luke 18. and then we may assure our
selves of a comfortable effect of prayers.

THE FOVRTH SERMON.
ROMANS 8.26. Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities: for we know not
what to pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes request for us
with sighs, which cannot be uttered.


OUt of Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 3. we may see first, that of our selves we are not
sufficient at all to do good: and that all good comes from the Father of
lights, Jam. 1.17. and that, in that regard, we must ask, and receive at his
hands from whom it comes, Matthew. 7.7. Now the Apostle meets with another
difficulty, which is, how we may pray: for as we cannot perform any good thing
of our selves, unless God minister power, so we know not how to ask this
grace at his hands. Therefore to answer that question of the Disciples, which
desired that Christ should teach them how to pray, Luke 11. the Apostle says,
that because we know not what to pray for, as we ought, therefore the Spirit
does help our infirmities.

The Apostle begins at our infirmities, which he lays down in such sort, as
we may plainly see that our defects and wants are many: for as there are
infirmities of the body, which the Scripture calls the infirmities of Egypt,
Deuteronomy. 7.15. Whereunto the Saints of God are subject as well as other, as the
Apostle speaks of Timothy, that he had Crebras infirmitates, 1 Timothy 5. So the
soul also has certain infirmities; and that is the infirinity whereof the
Apostle speaks; for albeit our soul be the stronger part, as our Savior
speaks, when he says, The spirit indeed is strong, Matthew. 26. yet it is
subject to many infirmities, and weaknesses, when it doubts of Gods mercies,
saying: Will the Lord absent himself for ever? has God forgotten to be
gracious? which the Prophet acknowledges to be signs of his infirmities,
Psalm. 77.10. And as the spirit is weak, so there is a weakness of conscience,
1 Cor. 8.7. and no marvel if there be such infirmities in the bodies also; for
life it self is but weak, in regard whereof it is said of God, that hereby
he is content to spare us, for that he remembers that we are but dust,
Psalm. 103. and considers, that we are but even as the wind that passes away,
Psalm. 78.

The difference is that, as Christ says, Haec infirmitas non est ad mortem,
Joh. 11. and the dropsy, palsy, and such like diseases, and infirmities of
body are not mortal.

The second thing which the Apostle teaches is, that howsoever we be, as the
Apostle speaks, compassed with infirmities, Heb. 5.5. yet they are not past
cure, for the Spirit helps our infirmitie^ so that albeit we are subject to
fall through weakness, yet there is hope concerning this thing, Esaias 10.2. and
our error may be healed, Dan. 4. For there is balm in Gilead, Jer. 8. which
serves to cure all our spiritual diseases.

Now the cure of the infirmities of our soul is not performed by any strength
of our own, nor by our own spirit, but by the Spirit of God: for so long as
our infirmities are but bodily, the spirit of man will sustain them, and there
is help to be found; but when the spirit it self is wounded, then who can
help it? Prove. 18.

The spirit of man must have help from a higher thing then it self, as from
the Spirit of God, which only is able to minister help.

The Apostle ascribes to the Spirit of God two benefits, first, in regard of
the life to come: secondly, in respect of this present life: For the one, as he
is the Spirit of Adoption, assures us of our estate in the life to come;
namely, that as God has adopted us to be his children, so we shall be
fellow-heires with his own Son, of his heavenly kingdom. Touching the
other, because we are subject in this life, to fall through infirmity, we have
this benefit from him, that he stays and upholds us, and therefore is called
spiritus (...).

As our infirmities are manifold, whether we respect the body, o^ the soul, so
the weakness and defects of our souls appears, not only in good things,
which we cannot do, because the flesh ever lusts against the spirit, so that
we cannot do the things that we would, Gal. 5. but in evil things, which we
should bear and are not able.

The evil things that we should bear, are not only afflictions, and the
crosses which we are subject to, which the Apostle proves to be more
tolerable, because they are not worthy of the glory to come: but dilatio boni,
wherein we need the virtue of magnanimity, because it is a great cross, as the
Wiseman says, Spes quae differtur affligit animam^ Prove. 13. Touching which
affliction and crosses, because in this life we cannot obtain that which the
Prophet wishes, namely, to fly away (as it were) with the wings of a dove,
that sow might be at rest, Psalm. 55. therefore we must betake our selves to
the mourning of the Dove, Esaias 38. waiting patiently when God will give us time
to escape.

The means and ways whereby the Spirit does help us, are many; but he only
means prayer; to teach us, that howsoever it be not esteemed as it ought, yet
it is the chief prop, and principal pillar which the holy Ghost uses to
strengthen our weakness. Therefore when the Apostle wills, that first of
all, prayers and supplications should be made for Kings and all in authority, 1 Timothy 2. the reason is, as Augustine notes, because both man's salvation, the
honesty of life, knowledge of the truth, quietness of kingdoms, duties of
Kings, and whatsoever tends to the public benefit, comes by and from
Prayer: So that not only the Church, and spiritual matters, but the
commonwealth, and temporal things are stayed upon the pillar of Prayer.

Wherefore as prayer is aspeciall help: so we are not only exhorted by
religion to use it, but nature it self binds us unto it: for so long as we can
either devise any help of our selves, or receive it from any other, so long we
lean upon our own staff; but when all help fails, then we fly to prayer as
our last refuge: and therefore when God is said to feed the ravens that call
upon him, Psalm. 147. that cry of theirs is the voice of nature; so that albeit
men for a time, lean to their stays and help, yet there is a day, when all
flesh shall be made to come unto him, who only it is that hears prayer,
Psalm. 65. that is, when they lie howling upon their beds, Hos. 7. then they
shall be feign to call upon God for help: so, howsoever Pharaoh in the pride of
his heart say, Who is the Lord that I should hear his voice? Exodus 5. Yet he
made him come to him, when he plagued him with thundering, and rain, and hail,
which made him send to Moses and Aaron, that they might pray unto God for him,
Exodus 9.28.

But here the Apostle means the prayer of the spirit, which always reckons
prayer to be the first and chiefest help in all trouble, and not the last, as
the prayer of the flesh does.

Therefore as we must discern simulacra virtutum, from virtues themselves, and
that which is natural, from that which is of grace; so we must distinguish the
prayer of the spirit, from the carnal prayer; and be sure that the virtues
which we have, if they be any, are not natural, as those in many of the
Heathen, but that they proceed from grace, and the working of Gods Spirit.

To the right framing of our prayer it is required, that we do not only orare
mente and spiritu, 1 Cor. 14. but as the Psalmist says of the praising of God;
so we pray to God with understanding, Ps. 47. Both our heart, our
understanding, our affection must concur in making intercession to God.

For a second point, if prayer be a stay to us in our infirmities, then we must
be careful that our prayers be not faint and weak, but that they proceed from
the fervencie and vehemency of the spirit, for as Christ says, If the light
that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness? Matthew. 6. If our
prayer be nothing else but infirmity, as it is for the most part, how great is
our infirinity?

But the Apostle shows our weakness in prayer, in that he denies men two
things: first, that we know not what to pray for: secondly, that we know not
how to pray: for both these defects we have a double supply; for Christ, as he
is the light of the world, Joh. 8. has directed us what to pray for, by that
form of prayer which he has prescribed unto us; and the holy Ghost, who is
compared to the wind that blows where it will, instructs us how to pray,
for that it stirs up our affections, so that we pray with fervencie of
spirit, and utter our desires unto God with sighs that cannot be expressed:
for as a man that travelleth must have a knowledge of his way: so he cannot
take a journey in hand, except he have a good wind to set him forward: to this
end we are taught, not only by the wisdom of God the Father, what to pray
for, but from the power of his Spirit we have those motions kindled in us,
whereby our prayer is made fervent.

Touching the persons, whom the Apostle charge with this twofold ignorance,
they are not the common sort of men, but even the Apostles themselves, for he
includes himself in the words, We know not: So Christ said, not to the Heathen
men, Nescitis quid petitis, Matthew. 20. but to his Disciples, James and John: so
that this is generally true of all men, that they know not what to ask, (...),
as they ought, except Gods Spirit help them.

It is true that we have a diffused knowledge of good and evil, and a desire
to be partakers of the one, and to be delivered from the other, for Ignoti
nulla cupido; but we must have a distinct knowledge, that is, whether the thing
we desire be good or no: There is an estate of life, which is contemplative,
and another Active, and our infirmity is such, as we know not which of them to
take our selves unto, but oftentimes we think that course of life to be good
for us, which albeit it be good in it self, yet turns to our overthrow: so
that when we desire of God to place us in any such course of life, we speak
after the manner of men, Romans 6. taking it for a contented course for our
selves, whereas it falls not out so.

This will appear more plainly, both in things temporal, and spiritual. The
sons of Zebedee in their suit to Christ, Matthew. 10. had a desire to obtain
some good thing at our Saviors hands, and they could not bethink themselves
of any thing better than to be exalted to some place of honor, and therefore
desired that one of them may fit at his right hand, and the other at his left
hand: but Christ told them, they asked they knew not what, for honor it not
fit for all men: they were the Disciples of Christ, and were to drink of the
cup of affliction, and therefore willed them to be mindful of it, and not to
affect that which was not for their good.

Likewise in spiritual things we may err, and hereof we have example in Saint
Paul, whom a man would think to have knowledge enough, so that he would not
ask the thing that was not good for him; he had the messenger of Satan sent
to buffet him, and he prayed that it might be removed from him, which seems
to have have been a reasonable petition, but God answered him, that he asked
he knew not what; it was more necessary for him to be exercised withthe
temptations, then not: and whereas he desires to be so pure, as not once to be
driven to evil; God told him, that his grace was sufficient for him, for it
was his will to perfect his strength in his weakness, 2 Cor. 12. Therefore if
we have any revelation from flesh and blood, Matthew. 6. that persvvadeth us,
that this or that is good for us, we must know that all such are false, and
that we must suffer our selves to be directed by Gods Spirit, who knows
better what is good for us, then we our selves.

But to the end that we should not err, the Spirit of God makes intercession
for us, and therefore we may be sure, that although we know not how to pray, in
such sort as may please God; yet the Spirit of God, who knows the secrets of
the counsel of God, will make that prayer for us, which shall be both for our
good, and also according to Gods will, 1 Cor. 2.

It cannot be verified of the holy Ghost, which is God, that he either prays
or groaneth, but the Apostles meaning is, that he makes us to make
intercession, and has that operation in our hearts, that he makes us to
groan. So when the Apostle, Galat. 4.6. says, that the Spirit cries Abba,
Father, his meaning is, that by it we cry Abba, Father, Romans 8.15.

Again, the Spirit is said to make intercession for us, because it sheds
abroad the love of God in our hearts, Romans 5. for from the love of God proceeds
this love and affection in us, that we desire him and all his blessings, and
therefore make our prayers to him to that end, which is nothing else, but
explicatio desiderii: so that we do not so soon desire any good thing, but we
are ready to pray for it: So says the Prophet, Lord thou know my desire,
and my groaning is not hid from thee, Psalm. 36.

Likewise when our desire is delayed, so that we obtain not the thing we
would have, then we are cast into sorrow, which is wrought in us by the Spirit
which is in us, and by prayer; for it is the Spirit of God which kindles this
fervencie of desire in prayer, as Augustine says, Tepida est omnis oration,
quam non praevenit inspiratio, every prayer is lukewarm, which is not
prevented with inspiration.

The first thing that the Spirit of God works in us, is, that he inclines our
hearts to pray to God for the good which we lack, which is a thing not in our
own power; and therefore David thanks God that he found in his heart to pray,
2 Samuel 7. for when we would settle our selves to pray, Nihil tam long abest a
nobis, quam orare ut decet.

Now being thus untoward in our selves, the Spirit of God comes and helps our
infirmity, and as the Psalmist says, He opens our hearts to pray: By this
means it comes to pass, that a man having his affections cold, shall on a
sudden feel in himself a desire to pray, and shall say, Domine, paratum est
cor meum, Psalm. 108.

Secondly, whereas the Lord says, Open thy mouth and I will fill it, Psalm. 87.
We find this infirmity in our selves, that when we have found an heart to
pray, yet we cannot open our mouths: and therefore David says, Open thou my
lips, Psalm. 51. and so must we sue to Christ, that he will give us words to
speak; for God has a key both to our tongue and will.

Thirdly, having begun to pray, that falls out many times which David
complains of, Cor meum dereliquit me, Psalm. 40. So our heart will be gone, and
our mind will be wandering abroad, not regarding what our tongue speaks.

It falls out often, that as Abraham had his sacrifice ready, he was no sooner
gone from it, but the fowls of the air did light upon it, Genesis 15. So while
we offer up to God the calves of our lips, Hos. 14. and our course is past,
Psalm. 141. it comes to pass through our wantonness many foul thoughts be got
upon our sacrifice, and dispoyle it; and the remedy that the spirit of God
affords us against this infirmity, is, that it calls us home, and tells us, we
are kneeling before the Majesty of God, and therefore ought to take heed what
we speak in his presence. Therefore Bernard to keep his mind in the
meditation of God, when he would pray began thus, Let God arise, and let all
his enemies be scattered, Psalm. 68. and Augustine to the same purpose began
thus, Save me, O God, for the waters overflow, Psalm. 64.

Fourthly, though we have our meditation still on God, yet we shall find in
our selves, that our spirits are dull and heavy, and have no manner of vigor
to help our infirmity; herein the Spirit helps and puts these meditations in
our hearts, whereby it kindles, as the Prophet says, a fire burning within
us: so that God shall be feign to say to us, as he did to Moses, Dimitte me,
let me alone, Exodus 32.

Fifthly, albeit we pray but faintly, and have not that supply of fervencie
that is required in prayer, yet we have comfort, that ever when we most faint
in prayer, there are of Gods Saints that pray for us with all instancie, by
which it comes to pass, that being all but one body, their prayers tend to our
good as well as their own, for the faithful, howsoever they be many, and
dispersed into diverse corners of the world, yet they are but one dowe; and as
they are the members of one body, so they pray not privately for themselves,
but for the whole body of the Church: so that the weakness of one member is
supplied by the fervent and earnest prayer of the other. Therefore when the
Apostle says, The Spirit makes intercession for us, gemitibus
inenarrabilibus, Augustine asks, what groanings are these? are they thine, or
mine? no; they are the groanings of the Church, sometime in Me, sometime in
Thee, and therefore Samuel (to show that the Ministers of God do the people no
less good when they pray for them, then when they teach them) said, God forbid
I should cease to pray for you, and so sin against God, 1 Samuel 12.23. for he
was an help to them, not only in preaching to them, but in offering burnt
offerings for them. Therefore the people pray to Esaias, Lift thou up thy prayer
for us, For as the offering of the Minister is to put the people in mind, 2
Pet. 1. so they are Gods remembrancers: they are Angels as well ascending
upwards by their prayer in the behalf of the people, as descending to teach
them the will of God.

But if the Spirit that quails in us, do quail also in the whole Church; yet
we have a supply from the tears, which our head Christ shed on his Church,
Luke 19.41. and from the strong cries which he uttered to God his Father, in
the days of his flesh, Heb. 5.7. by which he cease not to make request to
God still for us, so that albeit the hardness of our heart be such as we
cannot pray for our selves, nor the Church for us, yet we may say, Conqueror
tibi Domine, lachrymis Jesu Christi.

Lastly, because we cannot pray, (...), we have two helps also in that behalf
from the Spirit: first, that the Spirit teaches us to submit our will unto
Gods will, because as we are men, so we speak after the manner of men, Romans 6.

This submission we learn from the example of Christ his prayer to God his
Father, Transeat calix isle a me, Let this cup pass from me; yet not my will,
but thy will be done, Matthew. 26. So David qualified his desire, If I have found
favor with the Lord, he will bring me again, but if not, let him do what
seems good to himseife, 2 Samuel 15.

Secondly, when we look back upon our prayer, and see, that by reason of
want of fervencie and zeal, it is but smoking flax, then the Spirit stirs
us up to desire God, that according to his promise, Esaias 42. He will not quench
it, but that his grace may be sufficient for us, and that he will make perfect
his strength in our weakness, 2. Cor. 12.

The other thing wherein the Spirit helps our infirmities, is, that he
works in our hearts certain groans that cannot be expressed, which is a
plain opposition to drousie and sloathfull prayer: for a devout prayer, plus
constat gemitibus, quam sermonibus; it is not fine phrases and goodly
sentences, that commend our prayer, but the fervencie of the spirit from whom
it proceeds.

It is well if we do orare mente and spiritu, 1 Cor. 14. but if our prayers
do draw out sighs and groanings from our hearts, it is the better, f^r then it
appears that our prayer is not a breath, coming from the lungs, but from the
very depth of the heart, as the Psalmist says of his prayer, De profundis, out
of the deepes have I cried to thee, O Lord, Psalm. 130.

What the Apostle means by groanings which cannot be expressed, is plain,
for when the grief of the heart is greatest, then are we least able to utter
it, as appears by the Shunamite, 2 Reg. 4. Notwithstanding as it was God that
wakened in us the desire of good things; so though we be not able to utter them
in words, yet he does hear, etiam vocem in silentio.

There are mutae preces, and tamen clamantes: such as are the silent prayers of
Moses, which he made in his heart to God, though he expressed it not in words;
to this God said, Cur clamas ad me? Exodus 14.

Now as Martha was loath to serve alone, and therefore would have Mary to help
her, Luke 10. So the spirit does not pray alone, but does (...), bears
together, or helps us, whereby the Apostle gives us to understand, that man
must have a cooperation with Gods Spirit. So we see the Saints of God, albeit
they acknowledge prayer to be the work of Gods Spirit in them; for as much as
we are not able to call Jesus Lord, but by the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 12. Yet
they are not themselves idle, but do add endeavor, as David, Lord open thou
my lips: So he affirms of himself; I have opened my lips, and drew in my
breath, Psalm. 119.

But that we may have the help of Gods Spirit (without which our endeavor is
but vain) we must still think upon our own weakness, and humble our selves
in the sight of God, as the Publican did, Luke 18. So the Spirit of God will
rest upon us, as the Lord promises, Esaias 66. For this end fasting is commended
to the Church, for it has been an use always among the faithful, to humble
their souls with fasting, Psalm. 35.

Secondly, as we must pray in faith, so we must also be charitably affected to
our brethren, first, by forgiving them, if we will have forgiveness at the
hands of our heavenly Father, Mar. 11.25. Secondly, by giving them that need;
this commended Cornelius his prayer, that he gave alms, Act. 10.

If our prayer be thus qualified, we shall have Gods Spirit to assist us in
prayer; whose help if we obtain, and unto our prayer add a patient
expectation, so that we be not in have to obtain the thing we crave, but we
wait upon Gods leisure, as the Prophet says, Qui crediderit, non festinabit,
Esaias 28. He that believes makes not have, thus we shall find that the Lord
will not cast out our prayer.

THE FIFTH SERMON.
LUKE 11.1. And so it was, that as he was praying in a certain place, when he
ceased, one of his Disciples said unto him, Master, teach us to pray, as John
also taught his Disciples.


WHich words do bring us to that form of invocation, to which by degrees we
have been approaching; for first out of Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 3. we learned, that
of our selves, we are not able so much as to think a good thought, much more
unable to do that which is good: Secondly, from Saint James, that albeit we
have no power in our selves, yet our want may be supplied by the Father of
lights: Thirdly, that therefore to the end we may obtain this ability, we are
to seek for it by prayer, as Christ counsels: Petite, and dabitur vobis.

But then we meet with another difficulty, and that is as Paul confesses,
Romans 8. that albeit grace may be obtained at the hands of God by prayer; yet we
know not how or what to ask, except the Spirit of God supply our infirmities:
and therefore as then it was said, that as the Spirit of God makes
intercession for us, so here the same Spirit does move the Disciples to seek
for a form of prayer of Christ, whereby we are taught, that if we know not how
or what to pray for, our duty is to repair to Christ, with the Disciples, that
he would direct us.

This Text has two parts: first, the Petition of the Apostles; secondly,
Christ's answer thereunto, verse. 2.

In the first part we are to consider, first, the occasion of the Petition:
secondly, the petition it self, Domine doce nos.

Touching the first point, the Disciples took occasion of this petition from
Christ praying, for seeing him not only pray now, but at sundry other times,
presently they conceived thus within themselves, that doubtless prayer was a
matter of great inportance, and a means of no small benefit, otherwise Christ
would never have prayed so often.

Before we considered two special motives to prayer: The first was Christ's
commandment: the second Christ's promise, Matthew. 7.7. Ask and it shall be
given you; and here again we have other two motives: first, the provocation of
Christ's example, whom the Disciples found praying in a certain place:
secondly, the mould and set form of prayer, which he has given us for our
better direction, in this duty, Say, Our Father, etc.

Concerning the first of these, no doubt the examples of holy men ought to move
us to pray, much more when Jesus Christ himself, who is the Holy of Holies,
Dan. 9.24. does by his own example stir us up hereunto.

King David, when he had his Crown pulled off his head, by his own son, and
was driven out of his Kingdom, said to the Priest, If it please God he can
bring me again, and show me both the Arc, and the Tabernacle, 2 Samuel 15.25.
Declaring hereby, that he was more careful to have the liberty to come into
the house of prayer, to power out his supplication before the Lord, as he was
wont, then to be restored to his Crown, so great account did he make of prayer.
The like account did the holy Prophet Daniel make, for when by the commandment
of the King it was proclaimed, that whosoever made any petition to God or men,
save only to the King, should be thrown into the Lions Den; he chose rather
to adventure his life, then not to pray, Dan. 6. Whereby we may gather, both
how acceptable to God, and also how necessary for us, this duty of prayer, and
invocation is: So that these examples of these holy men, ought to be of no
small efficacy to persuade us hereunto; and especially if we consider the
example of our Savior Jesus Christ, who is greater then either David or
Daniel. Of whom it is reported, that he went into a solitary place alone, not
only in the morning, Mark. 1. but also in the evening, Joh. 6. not for an
hour, but to spend the whole night in prayer, Luke 6.12. he prayed not only
in deserto, which was a place of distress, but in horto, Joh. 18.2. which was
a place of pleasure: as he prayed when he was in his agony, Luke 22.46. so
also, when he was to be made King, Joh. 6. to teach us, that as well in
prosperity as in adversity, we have need to pray, for hereunto our Savior does
exhort us in plain words, not only by precept, Matthew. 7. Luke 21.40. Pray
that ye enter not into temptation, because prayer is a mean to keep us from
evil, both a malo culpae, and a malo poenae; as well from sin, as from all
manner of plagues, which are the effects of sin; as one says, there would
none adversity come upon us, unless there were perversity in us: but secondly,
by promise of reward, Pray unto your Father in secret, and he will reward you
openly, Matthew. 6.6.

We think it sufficient if earthly Princes will vouchsafe to hearken to our
prayer; but God promises us more, he will reward us for the same. Therefore
seeing God both commands us to pray, and promises to grant us that we pray for:
seeing he does not only by his example teach us, that Prayer is requisite, but
prescribes us also a Form of Prayer; we ought not to be negligent in this duty.

Besides, out of this occasion, we are to consider this, That Christ prayed
though he needed nothing, as he was the only begotten Son of God, he was
full of grace and truth, Joh. 1.16. He had received the Spirit without
measure, Joh. 3. Yet for all that he prayed.

There are three uses of prayer: First, there is an Use of Necessity: for God
has left prayer to be our City of resuge, to the end, that when all means
fail, we should sly unto God by prayer. In which regard the Wise man says,
Prove. 18. Turris altissima est nomen Domini. But Christians should have a
further use of this duty: for unreasonable creatures, as Lions, and Ravens, are
provoked (in regard of their necessity) to call upon God.

Secondly, the Use of Duty: for prayer is an offering: The Prophet compares it
to Incense, Psalm. 41. a Reasonable service, Romans 12. Our Spiritual sacrifice,
1 Pet. 2. It is compared to Incense, which gives a sweet smell to all our
works, words, and thougths, which otherwise would stink, and be offensive to
the Majesty of God. This use of prayer we have not only for the supply of our
wants in the time of adversity, but at all times, as Job says, Chap. 27.

Thirdly, there is the Use of Dignity, when a man does abstract himself from
the earth, and by often prayer does grow into acquaintance, and familiarity
with God: for this is a great Dignity, that flesh and blood shall be exalted so
much, as to have continual conference with God.

Now as Christ was the Son of God, he had no cause to pray in any of these
three respects, but as he was Principium omnis creaturae, Col. 1. as he was the
head of the Church, Ephesians. 1. he had use of prayer in these three respects: as he
was a creature, he stood in need of those things, which other creatures of God
were wont to desire. Again, as he was a creature, though the chief of all
creatures, he ought this duty of Invocation unto God his Creator: and as he
called on God in these two respects, so he was heard, as Christ speaks; I know
thou hear me always, Joh. 11.41. But as he was in the state of a Creature,
the last use does most of all concern him; for which cause having told Martha,
that one thing was needful, Luke 10. because the obtaining of the same is not
in our power, he presently withdraws himself unto prayer in the beginning
of this Chapter, teaching us to do the like.

Before we come to the Petition, these words ut cessavit, are to be considered:
for there are some with Saul, will call for the Arc, and will presently cry,
Away with it, 1 Samuel 14. that is, will begin their prayers, and will break
them off in the midst upon any occasion: but the Spirit of God does teach us to
be of another mind, when he wills us to avoid whatsoever may be a means to
interrupt our prayer, 1 Pet. 3.

The Disciples forbear to make their petitions to Christ, till he had done
praying, and therefore from their example we are to learn, so to settle our
selves to prayer, as that nothing should cause us to break off, and so to
regard others that are occupied in this duty, as by no means to interrupt them.

In the Petition we are to consider, first, the thing that they desire:
secondly, the reason why they make this Petition. First, whereas they make
request that Christ would teach them how to pray, they do by implication
acknowledge as much as Saint Paul speaks of, Romans 8. that they know not what to
ask: not that they were without that general institution which we have from
nature, that is, to desire that which is good, but because they know not how to
limit their desire: as in temporal things, they know not whether it were good
for them to be the Chief men in a Kingdom; that was the ignorance of the
sons of Zebedee, Matthew. 20.

In spiritual matters they will be like Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 12. who thought it
good for him to be saved from the temptation, whereas God told him, that his
grace was sufficient for him; and yet that the temptation should continue still.

As James and John made a request ignorantly for themselves, Matthew. 20. So they
make another in the behalf of Christ, Luke 9. Lord, will thou that we command
that sire come down from Heaven? and therefore were reproved by Christ for it:
and as we see both by examples of Christ's own Disciples, that we may pray
amiss, Jam. 4. So in the old Testament, David says, We may pray so, as prayer
(which is a part of Gods service) shall be turned into sin, Psalm. 109. For
prayer is nothing else but an interpreter of our desire, as one says: Ea
petimus quae appetimus: and as our desires are many times not only vain and
unprositable, but dangerous and hurtful: so it falls out likewise, that our
prayers are vain, and so are turned into sin.

The Disciples therefore being privy to their own infirmities in this case,
are stirred up by Gods Spirit, to seek for a perfect form of prayer of
Christ, in whom all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hid, Col. 2.
And this they do to the end they might not fail, either in the matter, or
manner of their prayers, and that, having received a platform of prayer from
Christ, they might use it as a pattern and complement of all their petitions.

The Pharisees were great prayers, Mat. 6. but they under a pretense of long
prayers did devour Widows houses, Matthew. 23. and therefore their prayers turned
into sin. The Heathen used also to make long prayers, Matthew. 6.7. but they
erred, for they thonght that they should be heard for their long babbling.
Therefore the Disciples, that they might not pray amiss, do make their request
to our Savior: Lord teach us to pray: which Petition was therefore acceptable
to Christ, because profitable for themselves: for thus he professes of
himself: Ego Dominus Deus tuus, docens te utilia, Esaias 48.17. Not subtilia,
(says August.) So Saint Paul confirms, that he withheld nothing from the
Church, that was profitable for them to know, Act. 20.

The world is full of curious questions: The Pharisees move questions totching
matrimony.

The Sadduces asked, what should come to pass after the end of the world,
whether we shall know one another, Matthew. 22. These were unprofitable and
curious, the inventions of flesh and blood, not those that proceeded from the
holy Ghost: The Disciples question is here, how they may serve God, and how
they may perform that duty, for which they came into the world; Curious things
are those abscondita, which belong to God, with which we may not meddle, Deuteronomy.
29. we must enquire of things which concern us. Of the sons of Cain and Abell,
who were inventors of tents, some devised to work in brass and copper: others
found out Music, as they thought it most profitable for the publique-weale.
The trade that the sons of Seth used and professed at the same time, that they
thought to be most profitable, was the calling upon the name of the Lord, Genesis
4. and they were occupied therein, as an Art no less profitable then the
building of houses, or making of armor; and ever since howsoever the worldido
addict themselves to other things, that serve to make most for their private
profit: yet the Church and City of God are busy in studying how they may by
prayer receive mercy, and obtain grace, to help them in time of need, Heb. 4.

The reason whereby they urge their suit is, as John taught his Disciples;
which reason in the judgment of flesh and blood, might seem of small
efficacy; for whereas John confessed himself unworthy to unloose Christ's
shoe, Mat. 3. he might have took it in scorn that the Disciples of John
should teach him his duty after the example of John: but Christ to commend his
humility, is content both in his preaching and praying to follow John: John
said, Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, Matthew. 3. And Christ, though
he were the wisdom of God, and furnished with all manner of doctrine, yet was
content to borrow that sentence from John Baptist, as appears in his Sermon,
Matthew. 7. So he was content to follow him in prayer; So that the example of
John's diligence in teaching his Disciples that duty was a motive to him to do
the like unto him.

Whereas the Disciples of Christ tell him, that John was wont to teach his
Disciples to pray, they speak by experience, for diverse of them were
before-time Disciples unto John, as appears Joh. 1.37.

The ordinary prayer that was used in the Synagogue among the Jews, was that
prayer which is entitled the prayer of Moses, Psalm. 90. and as Christ says,
The Law and the Prophets were until John, Luke 16. So that prayer of Moses
continued in the Church of the Jews, until John's time; when he was come, he
used another form of prayer which endured to the coming of Christ, who having
taught his Disciples a third form of prayer, John's prayer ceased; the reason
was, because as the Apostle speaks of Moses, Heb. 3. Albeit both Moses, the
Prophets, and John, were faithful in the house of God, yet they were but
servants, but Christ was that Sun of righteousness, and the day star, that
was long before promised, and therefore seeing he being come, has taught a
more perfect form of prayer, he being only wise, all other forms ought to
give place to his.

Secondly, according to the rule of John Baptist, a man can receive nothing
except it be given him from above, Joh. 3.2. Then if we will obtain any
thing, we must put up our supplications to God for it; but in making our
prayers we may offend: for he that is of the earth is earthly, and speaks
earthly things: Therefore John, according to his own confession, may mingle
some corruption with his prayer: But Christ that is from heaven is above all,
Joh. 3. and therefore if he teach us to pray, it shall be in such sort as God
shall accept it: and for this cause Christ's prayer does excel the prayers both
of Moses and John, and all the Prophets.

Touching which form of prayer, as before he had given them an abridgement of
that obedience, which the law requires, Luke 16. So here he does briefly set
down a form of prayer.

As it is said of him, that grace and truth is by Jesus Christ, Joh. 1. so when
in the other Chapter, he had showed them the truth of the Law: so now he tells
them that grace must be sought for of God by prayer, whereby we may be able to
obey that Law.

The suit of the Disciples being both profitable to themselves, and no subtle
question, Christ is content presently to grant their request, and therefore his
answer is, When ye pray, say, etc.

Wherein we are to observe two things: first, whereas there are certain
practicke spirits, that cross that saying of our Savior, and tell us, we may
not use this prayer which Christ gave, saying, Our Father: but that we are to
frame our prayers of our own, as our state shall require, these words are a
contradiction to their ne dicite.

Christ himself has commanded us to use this form of prayer; and therefore
we may be bold to say: Our Father; whatsoever prayers we make of our selves,
they have some earth, because we our selves are of the earth; but the prayer
instituted by Christ is free from all imperfection, because it was penned from
him that was from above, Joh. 3.

In this prayer there is not one word wanting, that should be put in, nor any
word more then ought to be. Therefore both in regard of the Author of it, and
the Matter, we may safely use this form of Prayer.

Secondly, these words are an opposition betwixt Cogitate, and Dicite. It is
not enough to think in our minds this prayer, but our prayers must be Vocal;
so that, as in this Christ casts out the dumb devil; so here he casts out
the dumb prayer. It is true, that the life of prayer and thanksgiving stands
herein, That we sing praises with under standing, Psalm. 47. that we do or are
mente and spiritu, 1 Cor. 14. Herein stands the soul of prayer; but as we our
selves have not only a soul, but a body also: so our prayer must have a body:
Our tongue must be the pen of a ready writer, Psalm. 45. We must at the time
of prayer, bow our knees, as our Savior Christ did, Luke 22.41. We must lift
up our hearts with our hands, Lam. 3. Our eyes must be lift up to God, that
dwells in the heaven, Ps. 123. And as David says, Psalm. 135. All our bones
must be exercised in prayer.

The reason why we must use this form of prayer, is taken from the skill of
him that has penned it, and from his favor with God.

We are not acquainted with the phrases of the Court, and we know not what sure
to make unto God. But Christ, who is our Advocate, in whom all treasures of
wisdom and knowledge are hid, Col. 2. He can form us a bill, and make such a
petition for us, as shall be acceptable at the hands of God: None knows the
things of God, but the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2. So none knows what pleases
God, but Christ, who has received the Spirit from God: and in this regard, as
he knows Gods will best, so he is best able to frame a form of prayer, so as
it may be agreeable to Gods will.

Secondly, touching the Authority which Christ has with God his Father; it was
such as God proclaimed from Heaven: This is my beloved Son: and Christ says,
Thou hear me always, Joh. 11. So greatly was he respected with God.

In both these respects we may be bold to say, Our Father, etc.

We have the promise, that if we ask any thing in the name of Christ, he gives
it us, Joh. 16.17. Much more may we have confidene to be heard, Si non modo in
nomine ejus, sed verbis ejus.

The Apostle says, If I had the tongue of Men and Angels, 1 Cor. 13. His
meaning is, that the tongues of Angels were more glorious then the tongues of
men; and therefore that song of the Angels, Holy, Holy, Holy, Esaias 6. is
magnified in the Church: But this prayer was formed by the tongue of Christ,
who is the Lord of Angels.

The Cherubims hid their faces before the Lord of Hosts, Esaias 6. And he that
made this prayer was the Lord of Hosts, of whom it is said: Os Domini
exercituum locutum est.

This prayer, as one said, is (...), the Engaging of our charity and love: for
we desire to have remission of sin no otherwise then as we forgive our
brethren, whereby the love of our brother is continually increased. And this
prayer is breviarium fidei, it teaches us to believe those things which we
pray for.

Lastly, our perfection in obeying the Law, and in believing those things which
we ought to entreat, with such a hope by prayer: Legem implendi, and legem
credendi, lex statuit supplicandi.

THE SIXTH SERMON.
LUKE 11.2. And he said unto them: When ye pray, say: Our Father which art in
Heaven, hallowed be thy name: thy Kingdom come: Let thy will be done, even in
earth as it is in Heaven, etc.


IT is the answer of our Savior Christ, to that Disciple of his, which in the
name of the rest desired to be taught a form of prayer.

Concerning prayer, among other things already noted, we te to know, that it is
the doctrine of the Fathers; that God not prayed unto on our parts, and his
holy Spirit not yet possessing our souls, has notwithstanding promised, that
he w^ll pour his Spirit upon all flesh, Joel 2. as it was poured upon the
Apostles after Christ's Ascension, Acts 2. Namely, that Spirit which he calls the
Spirit of Grace and Prayer, Zach. 12.10.

When he thus vouchsafes to send the Spirit of Grace into our souls, then
from thence there do run two streams into the two several faculties of our
soul, that is, the Spirit of Grace has a working on our Understanding by the
light of Faith: and secondly, in our Will, by inspiring us with holy desires:
of which holy desires, the interpreter betwixt us and God, is Prayer: For that
as the Apostle speaks: Our requests are made known to God by prayer and
supplication, Phil. 4.6.

Now as prayer is properly the effect of Grace; so whatsoever we obtain of
God by prayer, it is the gift of Grace; which prayer is therefore our
reasonable service of God, because we do therein acknowledge, not only our
own wants and unworthiness, but also that as God has in his hands all manner
of blessings to bestow upon us; so if we sue to him for them, he will with hold
no good thing from us. Psalm. 84.12.

Before we can pray for good things, it is required, that we do conceive a
love of them; which if it be in us, then we shall not only be inflamed with a
desire of them, which is an effect of love, but shall be stirred up to pray for
them: But it is the peculiar work of the holy Ghost, to shed in our hearts the
love, not only of God, Romans 5. but of all other good things, which work he
performs, not in all in differently; for he is compared to the Wind, that
blows where it will, Ioh. 3. But those whom it pleases the holy Ghost to
inspire with a love and affection toward good things, they do not only
desire them, but withal do pray earnestly for them unto God; for as it is the
work of Jesus Christ, the eternal Word, to enlighten every one that comes
into the world, so it is the office of the eternal Spirit, to inspire our
hearts with holy desires.

In this answer of our Savior, we are to consider three points: first, a time
limited for prayer: secondly, the contents of the word, Oration: thirdly, what
is to be noted out of the word, Discue.

Touching the time limited for prayer, we have heard already, that there are
three uses of prayer, one was the use of dignity and persection, when men do
converse and enter into familiarity with God, by abstracting their minds from
humane affairs, and sublevating them into Heaven by a continual meditation of
God, and things pertaining to the life to come, which because it is peculiar to
them that have already attained to some perfection, we must say of it, as
Christ did of another matter: Qui po^est capere capiat, Matthew. 19. Our
weakness is such, as cannot by any means come to this use; yea the infirmity
of the Disciples themselves was so great, that albeit Christ had so many other
things to tell them of, yet they were not able as yet to bear them, John 14.

Therefore we are to consider the two other uses, which do more nearly
concern us; whereof the one is, the Use of necessity, which stands either
upon fear, or upon want; and when necessity lies upon us, in either of these
respects, they are so forcible, that they make all flesh to come unto him that
hears prayer, Psalm. 65. Of fear the Prophet says: Lord in trouble they
visited thee, they powered out a prayer when thychastening was upon them, Isa.
26.16. And the want of outward things is so vehement a motive, as when nothing
else can move men to prayer, yet they will assemble themselves before the Lord
for corn and oil, Hos. 7.14.

These two, the one being as Solomon terms it, Plaga cordis, 1 Reg. 5. the
other, Defiderium cordis, Psalm. 5. do point to us two times of prayer; namely,
when either we are oppressed with misery, as the effect of sin, or disquieted
with our selves with the conscience, and guilt of sin it self, which is the
cause of all our miseries.

Touching sin, the Prophet says, While I held my tongue, my bones consumed
away; but after he had confessed his sins unto the Lord, and craved pardon,
he forgave his wickedness: And because it is not his case only, for as much
as we have all sinned, his counsel is in this behalf; pro hoc orabit omnis
pius, Psalm. 32. Which being done, as the Prophet speaks, the weakest of them,
that is, every sinner, shall be as David: Neither are we of necessity to pray,
that God will forgive the guilt of our sins past, but that he will prevent us
with his grace against temptations of sins to come; for in this regard, our
Savior Christ would have his Disciples occupy themselves in this holy duty,
Orate, Pray ye that ye enter not into temptation, Luke 22. For the effect of
sin, which is adversity.

Then is prayer necessary in the time of affliction, when outwardly through the
malice of our enemies we are in misery: In which case the Prophet says: when
the ungodly, for the love he bare to them, requited him with hatred, Then he
gave himself to prayer. Psalm. 109.3. Or else inwardly, by reason of crosses,
which it pleases God to bring upon us, against which, the only remedy is to
use prayer, as the Apostle exhorts, James 5. Is any afflicted? let him pray. A
timore iuo concepimus spiritum salutis, Esa. 26.8. That is, for fear.

And when we consider our own wants, the troubles that are upon us, though for
a time we hold our tongues and speak nothing, yet a fire will kindle in us, we
cannot long be silent, but the desire of our heart must have a vent by prayer,
as the Prophet had experience in himself, Psalm. 39. So that as well the fear
of danger to come, as present want and affliction, will lead us to prayer.

But when we are rid of all adversity, yet there is another use of prayer,
which is the Use of Duty.

We are to pray, not in regard of our selves, but in obedience to God, who
commands prayer to be made by us, as a part of his service and duty, which we
oweto him.

Prayer made of duty, is of two sorts, both in regard of time and place.

Job in the Law of nature tells us, that it is our duty: Invocare Deum omni
tempore, Job 27.10. and our Saviors charge unto his Disciples is, that they
should semper orare, Luke 18. which the Apostle interprets by (...), 1 These.
5. But this cannot be performed of us, by reason of our infirmity, therefore we
must expound this otherwise, and as Saint Paul speaks, we must speak after
the manner of men, propter infirmitatem, Romans 6. and so we are commanded to
pray always; the meaning is, that it is our duty to appoint certain hours
for prayer; for as Augustine says, Semper orat, qui per certa intervalla
temporum orat, the reason of this exposition is, for that our service to God,
must be a reasonable service, Romans 12. and the preaching of the word must not
be done negligently; for it must be (...), 1 Pet. 2. which cannot continually
be performed of man without some respect.

Touching the set times appointed to the service of God in the Law, it is
appointed and required, that there should be both morning and evening sacrifice
day by day, and that upon the Sabbath there should be twice so long service as
upon other days, Numb. 2.8.

This public service was performed by the Jews, among whom the book of the
Law was read four times a day, Nehem. 9.3.

For private devotion the Prophet says, In the evening, in the morning, and at
noone day, will I call upon thee, Psalm. 55. and Daniel was for praying three
times a day, cast into the Lions Den, Dan. 6.

In the new Testament this duty of prayer was by the practice of Saint Peter
limited to the third hour, Act. 2.15. to the sixth hour, Acts 10.9. to the
ninth hour, at which time Peter and John went up to the Temple together to
pray, Acts 3. whose diligence and care ought to stir us up to the like.

Further the Disciples desire to be taught a right form of prayer: not only
as here, as a Christian, but as an Apostle and Minister sent forth to preach
the Gospel: whereby we learn that prayer belongs not only in general to
every Christian, but more particularly and specially to those that have any
Ecclesiastical authority over others.

So that is an opinion very erroneous, that we have no other use of the
Apostles of Christ, and their Successors, but only for preaching: whereas, as
it is a thing no less hard to pray well, then to preach well: so the people
reap as great benefit by the intercession of their Pastors, which they
continually make to God, both privately and publicly, as they do by their
preaching.

It is the part of the Ministers of God, and those that have the charge of the
souls of others, not only to instruct the flock, but to pray for them.

The office of Levi and his posterity, as Moses shows, was not only to teach
the people the Laws and Judgments of the Lord, and to instruct Israel in the
Law, but also to offer Incense unto the Lord, Deuteronomy. 33. Which Incense was
nothing else but a type of prayer, made by the faithful. Psalm. 145.

Therefore Samuel confesses, that he should sin no less in ceasing to pray
for the people, then if he were slack to show them the good and right way, 1 Samuel 12.23.

This duty the Ministers of God may learn from the example of Christ's own
practice, who went out early in the morning to pray, Mark 1.35. So he prayed
for Peter, that his faith should not fail, Luke 22. also from the example of
the Apostles, who albeit they did put from them the ministration of the
Sacraments, yet gave themselves continually to prayer, and the Ministry of the
word, Acts 6.4.

In which regard Paul says, he was sent not to baptize, but to preach the
Gospel, 1 Cor. 1.17. which they did refuse to do, not as a thing impertinent
to their office, but that they might with more attention of mind and fervencie
of Spirit apply themselves to make intercession for Gods people.

Thus much they are to learn from hence, that the Priests are Angeli Domini
exercituum, Mal. 2.7. If Angels, then they must not only descend to the people
to teach them the will of God, but ascend to the presence of God to make
intercession for the people; and this they do more cheerfully, for that God
is more respective to the prayers which they make for the people, then the
people are heedfull to the Law of God taught by them.

For this cause the Priests are called the Lords remembrancers, Esa. 62.6.
because they put God in mind of his people, desiring him continually to help
and bless them with things needful; for God has a greater respect to the
prayers of those that have a spiritual charge, then to those that are of the
common sort. Thus the Lord would have Abimelech deal well with Abraham, and
deliver him his wife, because he is a Prophet, and should pray for him that he
may live, Genesis 20.

So to the friends of Job the Lord said: My servant Job shall pray for you, and
I will accept him, Job. 42.

This office was appointed to the Priests in the Law, Levit. 5.6. orabit pro
iis sacerdos: Thus Ezechia sent for Esaias: so says he, Lift thou up thy prayer,
Esa. 37.4.

Men, as they are Christians, ought to pray three times a day, as David, Psalm.
55. but as they are Prophets, and have a special charge, they must pray to God
seven times a day, as the same David, Psalm. 119.

This day of prayer, made by the Priests in the behalf of the people, was so
highly esteemed, that they took order that prayer should be made continually:
and because the same Priests are not to do all one thing, but to pray;
therefore some were appointed for the first watches, others for the second, and
others for the third watches, that so while one rested, the other might pray,
whereof David speaks, when he says, Mine eyes prevent the night watches,
Psalm. 119. So Christ speaks of the first and second watches, Luke 22.

Touching David's diligence in performing of this duty for the good of the
people, he says, At midnight I will rise up, to give ^hankes to thee, Psalm.
119. So did Paul and Silas, rise at midnight to sing praise to God, Acts 16.
And it were to be wished that the like order were taken in the Church, that the
sacrifice of prayer were continually offered among Christians, as it was in the
Synagogues of the Jews.

Secondly, in regard of the place, we are every where to lift up pure hands, 1 Timothy 2. and so the Psalmist extends this part of Gods service to all places
generally of his Dominion, Psalm. 103. Howbeit though it be not to be neglected
in no place; yet especially we must offer this sacrifice of prayer and praise,
in the assembly, among the faithful in the congregation, Psalm. 111. and so we
must learn to distinguish the Liturgy, and the public service of God in the
Church, from that private devotion, which our Savior would have us to perform
daily; when he says, when thou prayest, enter into thy chamber, Matthew. 6. For
God has promised to accept that worship which we tender unto him in the place
consecrate for that purpose: In every place where I put my name, th^ther will I
come and bless thee; Exodus 20.24. Non solum quod cratis, sed quod ibi oratis,
that is, the public place whither the Saints of God from time to time assemble
themselves to call upon God together. In his Temple does every man speak of
his praise, Psalm. 29. Our Savior Christ did therefore tell them that it was
domus orationis, Isa. 56. to teach us, that the chief end of our meeting there
should be, not to make it a pub like school of Divinity, and instruction, but
to power out our prayers to God; for private prayers were not enough, unless
at times appointed we meet together to pray publicly.

So the Apostle Saint Peter does teach us by his example, who not only when he
was at home went up to the top of his house to pray, Acts 10. but to the Temple
also, Acts 3.

Saint Paul did not content himself to bow his knees to God when he was at
Rome, and Ephesus, and other places; but he went to Jerusalem, and prayed in
the Temple, Acts 22.11. which thing as he did for himself; so no doubt, he did
it in the behalf of the Church of God, to which he was sent to preach; and it
were to be wished that in the Church there were minus oratorum, and plus
orantium.

The second general point is, touching the contents of the word, Oratis.

Our necessities are manifold, and the grace of God, which we sue for to God,
is, multiformis gratia, 1 Pet. 4. Besides, the Apostle says, Pray with all
manner of prayer, Ephesians. 6. therefore it is meet that we should take notice
how many kinds of prayer there are, wherein the Apostle guides us, when he
says, Let supplications, prayers, thanksgiving, and intercessions be made, 1 Timothy 2. These four contain all those sorts of prayer, which are contained in
the body of this word, Orate.

Prayer, or Invocation, consists of Confession and Petition, Confession is
divided into confessionem fraudis, which the Greeks call (...), that is, the
confession of sins, whereunto they add supplication to God for pardon, like
that of the Publican, Luke 18. God be merciful to me a sinner.

The other kind of Confession is, Confessio laudis, that is, Thanksgiving to
God for his goodness in pardoning our sins, and bestowing his benefits upon
us, which kind of Confession is called (...). This also is a part of prayer,
and ought to go with it, as appears, Phil. 1.3. Col. 1.3. where the Apostle
does thank God always for the Churches in his prayer.

Both these the Jews gather from the words Judah and Israel; for Judah is
Confession, and Israel is the name of prevailing in wrestling with the Angel,
as the faithful do strive with God in prayer, Romans 13.

The one they call Tehillah, the other Tephillah.

They had both these, Hosanna, and Hallelujah.

Petition stands upon Comprecation and Deprecation.

Deprecation is, when we desire that evil may be removed, which kind of
prayer is (...) and Techinah.

Comprecation is, when we would have our want supplied with good things, which
is (...) and Tephillah.

Intercession, is in another kind of prayer proceeding from charity, as the
other came from faith, when we do not only confess our own sins, but the
sins of others, when we pray not only for our selves, but for others; when
we praise God not only for his goodness on our selves, but for others.

So it was the charge which God gave by his Prophet to them in captivity, not
only to pray for themselves, but to pray for the prosperity of the City where
they were prisoners, Ier. 29.7.

As they were to have a care of the Common wealth, so the like is to be had of
the Church. Therefore when Peter was in prison, there was prayer made
continually of the Church to God for him, A^^^. 12.5. Pray for all Saints,
says the Apostle, Ephesians. 6. and for me especi^lly, that utterance may be given
to me, etc. and as for them that have any special place in the Church or
Commonwealth, so we are bidden to pray for all such as are in misery, as David
teaches us by his example; who when his enemies were sick, ceased not to pray
for them, no less then for himself, but put on sackcloth, and humbled his
soul with fasting, Psalm. 35.

Unto these kinds of prayer, some add two more; the first is, when upon
condition that God will grant us our desire, we vow that we will faithfully
serve him afterward, as Jacob prayed, Genesis 28. The other is a simple prayer or
petition uttered in short words, as, Lord have mercy on me, and such like,
which are nothing else, but sparks of that fire, which kindles within us,
whereof David spoke, Psalm. 39. Hear me Lord, and that right soon, for my
spirit fails, 143.

In regard of this our weakness, our Savior has in a short prayer
comprehended whatsoever is needful for us, which brevity he used, lest if he
had set a large form of prayer, our spirit should be dead, and our devotion
key-cold before we could come to the end; and for the same purpose the Church
has prescribed collects, prayers answerable to that short petition of our
Savior Christ.

All these kinds of prayers were used by our Savior Christ in the days of
his flesh, as he took our nature, and was the head of a body, Factus pro nobis
peccatum, 2 Cor. 5. and so did not only confess himself a sinner, but
suffered the wrath of God for it; which made him cry, Deus mi, Deus mi, My God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me? Mat. 26. The rebuke of them that rebuked
thee, fell on me, Romans 15. Psalm. 69.

Also he was an example to us of thanksgiving, I thank thee O Father, etc.
Luke. 10.21. I thank thee that thou have heard me, John 11.

For Deprecation, as he was a man. Let this Cup pass from me, Matthew. 26.

The good he prayed for at the hands of his Father, was, Pater glorificame ea
gloria, quam habui apud te, etc. John 17.

Touching Intercession, he prays, Pater ignosce eis, Luke 23. I pray not for
them only, but for all them that shall believe by their preaching, John 17.

As he used all these kinds of prayer, so he set them all down in this form
of prayer.

The Confession of sin, and the supplication for remission, is in the five
petitions; The thanksgiving is that (...), for thine is the Kingdom, power,
and glory; and the good which he desires is, the sanctification of Gods name,
the accomplishment of his Kingdom, and fulfilling of his will, as also a
continual supply of all things needful for this present life.

The evil from which he prays to be delivered, is first, from sin it self:
secondly, from the temptations of sin: thirdly, from evils, which are the
effects of sin.

The third and last point in this Text is, that we observe something in this
word Dicite; whereof the first is, that here Christ does not say, Say thus, as
Matthew. 6. whereof some gather, that we may frame prayers after the form of the
Lords prayer, but not use the words themselves: But he says to his Disciples,
Dicite, Pater noster, etc. that is, we may boldly use the very words of this
prayer; and albeit; to set forth the desire of our hearts, we use other forms
of prayer, and that in more words, yet we must conclude our prayers with this
prayer of Christ.

Secondly, when he says Dicite, he does not say cogitate, or recitate, or
murmurate, but intus dicite and cum ore, for there is a mouth in prayer, and
non est oration sine ore, therefore he allows vocal prayer; and as he will
have us express the desire of our hearts in words, so the chief thing is,
that our prayers be from the heart; for invocation is a spiritual sacrifice, 1
Pet. 2. A reasonable service, Romans 12. So both the understanding and reason
must be occupied, and also the spirit or inward affection of the heart: Our
Savior requires both in express words, Worship him in spirit and in truth,
John 4. Sing with understanding, Psalm. 47. I will pray with the spirit, and I
will pray with the understanding also, 1 Cor. 14.

We must not only have a spiritual servencie and zeal, but also must know
what we pray for, which is belonging to the understanding: So that if both do
not concur, our service is not reasonable, nor our sacrifice of praise,
spiritual.

As for that prayer that comes only from the lips, it may be said of it, as
God spoke of hypocrites, Is that the Fast that I required? Isa. 58. So,
assembling to hear the word, as a people uses to do, Ezech. 33. Is that this
which God requires? Is this to eat the Lords Supper? 1 Cor. 11.

It is not enough to make long prayers, and use many words, there is a
spiritual prayer which God will have with our vocal petitions, and therefore,
that we may pray with understanding, we have need to be instructed in the
sense of the Lords prayer.

The excellency of this prayer is in regard of him that made it, who is come
from above, who has mixed nothing with this petition that savoureth of the
earth; for they are all heavenly, as he himself is heavenly. Secondly, in
respect of the form, which is a most perfect form, it was compiled by him who
was the wisdom of God, and therefore cannot be but perfect, quia perfecta
sunt opera Iehovae, Deuteronomy. 33. Thirdly, in regard of the excellent benefits that
are procured to us by it, which are so many as can be desired at the hands of
God. Fourthly, for the order which Christ keeps.

If man did make a prayer, he would begin at daily bread: but Christ in this
prayer teaches us first to seek the Kingdom of God, Matthew. 6.

Our first petition must be for the glory of God, and then for our own
welfare, chiefly in the world to come; and also in this life: for as we may not
pray at all for things that are evil, so in things that are good and lawful,
we must take heed that we ask not amiss.

The petitions being seven, are divided thus: The first, concern God himself,
the other six concern us.

They concern us in a threefold estate, first, of Glory: secondly of Grace:
thirdly, of Nature.

In these petitions that concern us, the evil that we would have removed from
us, is: first, sin: secondly, temptation: thirdly, evil.

The good we desire to be granted us, is, first, that Gods Kingdom may be in
our hearts: secondly, that his will may be performed of us: thirdly, that he
will give us things necessary for this present life.

THE SEVENTH SERMON.
LUKE 11.2. Our Father.


THis Prayer, penned by our Savior Christ in the behalf of his Disciples and
his Church unto the end of the world, stands first upon an Invocation, then
upon certain Petitions.

The invocation is the style or word of salutation, wherein we call upon the
Majesty of God. The Petitions contain the sum of those things we seek for at
the hands of God.

That which we have generally to note out of this Preface is, that this is one
benefit which God vouchsafes us, that we may pray unto him and be heard;
whereby we are to conceive of him that he is not like the great Monarchs, to
whom no man might presume to speak, except he hold out his golden Scepter to
him, as it is in Est. 4.

The heavenly Majesty vouchsafes every man this honor to speak to him, and
the Golden Scepter of his word does allure us thereunto.

Secondly, it is a greater benefit to pray to God on this manner, that is by
the name of Father; and therefore by that which he promises the faithful,
Isa. 65. Before they call I will hear them, we are taught that we are so
assured of Gods good will and favor toward us, even before we open our
mouths to ask any thing of him, that we doubt not to call him Father; from
whence we may reason as the Apostle does, Romans 8. Seeing he has given us his
Son, how shall he not with him give us all things? So seeing God takes us
for his children, how shall he deny us any thing, whereby he may show himself
a Father?

In the first we consider the perfection of Gods goodness, in these words, Our
Father: In the second, the excellency of his power, expressed thus: Which art
in Heaven.

Both these are attributed unto God, not only of the Christians, but even by
the Heathen, that are strangers to the Church; for they attribute this unto
God, that he is optimus, maximus, and therefore where these two doubts arise in
our hearts, Domine si vis, Lord, if thou will, Matthew. 8. and Domine si quid
potes, Mark 9. they are both taken away by these two attributes.

By that term which sets out the perfection of Gods goodness, he assures
us that he is willing, and by that which expresses the excellency of his
power, we are taught that he is able to perform our requests.

His goodness gives us fiduciam, that in regard of it we may boldly come to
the throne of grace, Heb. 4.

The consideration of Gods power breeds in us devotion and reverence, (for
both must be joined together) neither fear without the consideration of his
goodness, nor bold confidence that is not tempered with a dutiful regard of
his power, is acceptable to him.

So that which we learned in lege credendi, that God is the Father Almighty, is
here taught again in lege supplicandi; where we are instructed in our prayers
to ascribe both these unto God: first, that he is our Father; secondly, our
heavenly Father.

The consideration of these two, are the pillars of our faith, and there is no
petition wherein we do not desire, that God will either show us his goodness,
or assist us with his power, and no Psalm or Hymn, that is not occupied in
setting forth one of these.

The titles which express Gods goodness have two words, the one a word of
faith, the other a word of hope and charity.

Of both these words of Pater, and noster, Basil says, that here Lex
supplicandi, non modo credendi, sed operandi Legem statuit, The Law of prayer,
does not only establish and confirm the Law of belief, but of working also,
For where in the word Father, is expressed the love of God to us, it
comprehends withal the love we bear to him.

Where we call God our Father, and not my Father, therein is contained our love
to our neighbor, whom we are to love no less then our selves, Upon these two
hang the Law and the Prophets. Matthew. 22.

Again, the word Father, is a word of faith, and our, a word of charity; and
the thing required of us in the new Testament is, Fides per charitatem operans,
Faith, which works by charity, Gal. 5.

So that in these words Our Father, we have a sum both of the Law and the
Gospel.

Christ might have devised many more magnificent and excellent terms for God;
but none were apt and fit for us to assure us of Gods favor. Our Savior
says, Luke 11.13. That earthly fathers which many times are evil men, have
notwithstanding this care for their children, that if they ask them bread,
they will not give them a stone: much more shall our heavenly Father give us
the holy Spirit, if we ask it.

Wherefore Christ teaching us to call God by the name of Father, has made
choice of that word, which might serve most to stir us up unto hope, for it
is Magnum nomen sub quo nemini desperandum, a great name under which no man can
despair.

There may seem an opposition to be betwixt these words, Father and Our, if we
consider, first, the Majesty of God, before whom the hills do tremble, and the
Angels in Heaven cover their faces; Secondly, our own uncleanness and
baseness, both in respect of the mould whereof we be made, which made Abraham
confess himself unworthy to speak unto God, being but dust and ashes, Genesis
18. And also in regard of our pollution of sin, in which regard we are
called, The slaves of sin, and children of the Devil, John 8.

Herein we find a great distance between God and us, and so are we far from
challenging this honor to be the sons of God in regard of our selves. Who
durst (says Cyprian) pray to God by the name of Father, if Christ our Advocate
did not put these words in our mouths? He knows how God stands affected
toward us, for all our unworthiness; and therefore seeing he has framed this
patition for us, we may boldly as he commands, say thus, Our Father.

Therefore albeit of our selves we cannot conceive hope, that God is our
Father, yet we may call him Father by the authority of Christ, and say with
Augustine, Agnosce Domine stilum advocati Fil^i^ui, Lord take notice of the
style of our Advocate, thy Son.

We know not Gods affection toward us, but by Christ we take notice of him,
for he has declared him unto us, John 1.18. and being taught that God in
Christ vouchsafes to admit us for his children, We do with boldness come to
the throne of grace, Heb. 4.

Therefore we have thankfully to consider unto what dignity we that live under
the Gospel are exalted, not only above the Patriarchs in the time of the Law,
but above the heavenly Spirits.

Before the Law was given, Abraham says, Shall I speak to the Lord? Genesis 18.
In the Law Christ says, Ego sum Dominus Deus tuus, Exodus 20. then he was not
called Father. But if we ask that question which the Apostle makes, To which
of the Angels said he, Thou art my Son? Heb. 1.5. It will appear that God
has honored us in a degree above Angels, for that he gives us leave to call
him Father.

Thus we see what pre-eminence we have from God, above, as well the Saints on
earth in time of the Law, as the heavenly Angels; that we may not only pray,
but pray thus, Our Father.

In the word Father, we are further to note, not only that God is the cause of
all things, for that he brings forth all things, but also his (...), or
natural affection, to those things that are produced.

Gods Paternity is first generally to be considered in all creatures, which for
that they have their being from God, he is said to be their Father, So Job
called God Pater pluviae, The Father of the rain, Job 38. Also he is called
Pater Luminum, Iam. 1.17. and this is a motive sufficient to move God to be
favorable to our prayer, if there were no more, that we are his creatures: so
David spoke, Despise not the work of thine own hands, Psalm. 138. But men have
another use of Gods paternity, for whereas of other things God said, Producat
terra, Ger. 1. When man was to be created, he said, Let us make man, giving us
to understand, that how soever other creatures had their being from God
immediately, God himself would be his Father, and frame him immediately with
his own hand.

Secondly, when God created man according to his own Image, he breathed into
him life immortal, he gave him the sparks of knowledge, and endued his soul
with reason and understanding, in which regard it is called the candle of the
Lord, Prove. 21.

Thirdly, when man was fallen from his first estate, God opened to him a door
of repentance, which favor he has not vouchsafed to the Angels that fell,
and so we may crave Gods favor, not only as we are the works of Gods hands,
but as we are his own Image.

Fourthly, God is our Father, as we are Christians: that which Moses says; Is
he not thy Father? Deuteronomy. 33. and, Doubtless thou art our Father, Isa. 63. is
to be understood of our generation; but we have a second birth, called (...),
or Regeneration, which sets us in a degree above mankind, and makes us not
only men, but Christians, which if we be, then we are the sons of God, not as
the rain, or lights, or they that are created to the Image of God, but for
that we are borne of God, John 1.18. that is, borne again of the Water and of
the Spirit, without which Regeneration, no entrance is into the Kingdom of God.

And our dignity in being the sons of God, in these three sorts is to be
considered: First, in that we are the price of Christ's blo^d, 1 Cor. 6.
Secondly, we have Characterem, that is, the stamp of the sons of God, when
we are called Christians, Acts 11. Thirdly, we are the Temples of the holy
Ghost, 1 Cor. 3.
By means whereof he gives us holy desires, and makes us sorry that we have
offended his Majesty; the assurance of this, is that which the Apostle ca^s the
Spirit of Adoption, which he sends into the hearts of Christians, to certify
them both that they are the sons of God, and may call him Father, Romans 8. in
a double sense, both in respect of nature and grace, not only by generation,
but by Regeneration.

In the natural affection that God bears us, we have two things, 1. the
immutability of it, 2. the excellency.

God does teach us, that his love to us is unchangeable, in this that he
expresses it by the name of Father; nam pater, e^tansi offers^s, est pater;
and filius, etiamsi nequam, tamen filius, A father, though offended, is a
father; and a son, though naught, yet is a son.

The Master may cease to be a Master, so may a servant: The husband may cease
to be a husband, so may the wife by means of divorce; but God can never cease
to be our Father, though he be never so much offended, and we cannot cease to
be his sons, how wicked soever we be; and therefore God does by an
immutable term, signify unto us the immutability of his affection, Heb. 6.

And indeed whether he do bestow good things on us, or chasten us, his love
is still unchangeable, for both are to be performed of a father toward his
children, and therefore whether he afflict us, or bestow his blessings on us,
we are in both to acknowledge his fatherly care, howsoever To flesh and blood
no affliction seems good for the present, Heb. 12.

This immutability of his love, as it ministers comfort in time of affliction,
so does it comfort and raise us up in sin and transgression, so that
notwithstanding the greatness of our sins, we may be bold to seek to God
for favor, and say, Etsi amisi ingenuitatem filii, tamen tu non amisisti
pietatem patris: Although Lord, I have lost the duty of a son, yet thou have
not lost the affection of a father.

The excellency of Gods love appears herein, that he is not described to be
God under the name of a King, or great Lord, as Mat. 18. There we have an
example of great goodness in pardoning ten thousand Talents; but yet a doubt
will arise in our minds except we know him to be good otherwise then as he is
a King: for so look what mercy he shows to us, the like he will have us
show to others, but we come short of this. But this is it that contents us,
that he describes his goodness under the term of Father: in which regard how
wickedly soever we deal, yet still we may say with the evil child, I will
go to my Father, Luke 15. He had cast off his father, he had spent all his
patrimony; yet for all that he resolves to go back, and his father is glad
to receive him, he went, and met, and entertained him joyfully; such affection
does God bear to his children.

The benefits that we have by the fatherly love of God is of two sorts: First,
Fructus indulgentiae paternae: Secondly, Fructus liberalitatis paternae: that
is, the fruit of fatherly compassion, and the fruit of fatherly bounty.

Fathers stand thus affected toward their children, that they are hardly
brought to chasten them, and if there be no remedy, yet they are ready to
forgive, or soon cease punishing: Pro peccato magno panlulum supplicii satis
est Patri, for a great offense, a small punishment is enough to a father.

And for their bountifulness, the Apostle says, that there is naturally
planted in fathers a care to lay up for their children, 2 Cor. 12. they are
both in God; for facility ad veniam, to pardon, and readiness to forgive,
makes him Patrem misericordiarum, 2 Cor. 3. not of one, for he has a multitude
of mercies, great mercy and little mercy, Psalm. 51.

The affection of David toward Absolon, a wicked son, was such, that he
forgave him, though he sought to deprive his father of his Kingdom, 2 Samuel 12.
and though we offend the Majesty of God, yet he assures us, that he will be
no less gracious to our offenses, then David was, For David was a man after
Gods own heart, 1 Samuel 13.

Touching the care which God has to provide for us, the Prophet says, and
also the Apostle, Cast your care upon the Lord, for he cares for you, 1 Pet.
5. He cares for us, not as he has care of Oxen, 1 Cor. 9. but such a tender
care as he has for the Apple of his eye, Zach. 2. He provideth for us, not
lands and goods, as earthly fathers; but, an inheritance immortal,
incorruptible, and that fades not, reserved in Heaven for us, 1 Pet. 1. and
has prepared for us, an heavenly Kingdom, whereof we are made co-heires with
his Son Christ, Romans 8.17. and this is the fruit of his fatherly
bountifulness toward us.

Out of these two, the immutability, and excellency of Gods love, showed both
in forgiving sins, and providing good things, arises a duty to be performed
on our parts, for (...), in all comfort: and nomen patris, ut explicat, sic
excitat charitatem: the name of a father as it shows, so it stirs up love:
as it shows quid sperandum, sic quid* sit prastandum, what is to be performed
of us: the name of a father does promise unto us forgiveness of sins, and
the blessings not of this life only, but especially of that that is to come,
and this duty lies upon us, that we so live as becomes children: we may not
continue in sin, but at the least must have virtutem redeundi, the virtue of
returning, Isa. 63. Why have thou caused us to go out of the way?

A child though he have wandered never so far, yet at length will come to that
resolution: I will return to my father, Luke 15.

But if we consider the dignity whereunto we are exalted, we shall see on
earth, Si filii Dei, quodammodo Dii simus: if we be sons, we are after a sort
Gods: and Divinae participes naturae, 2 Pet. 1. partakers of the divine nature,
as the sons of men are men.

But the Apostle sets down this plainly; Behold, what great love he has
showed us, That we should be called the sons of God, 1 John 3. This dignity
requires this duty at our hands, that we reverence our Father, Mal. 1.6. If I
be your Father, where is my love? If ye call him Father, without respect of
persons, etc. Then pass the time of your dwelling here in fear, 1 Pet. 1.13.

Our, is a word of hope, as Father is a word of faith, for he that says
noster, our, includes himself, and by hope applies Gods favor in particular
to himself, which by faith he apprehends to be common to all, neither does
appropriate it to himself, saying, My Father, but includes them with himself;
and so the word our is also Vox charitatis, the voice of Charity.

As the first word did teach us the Father-hood of God, so the word our,
implies the fraternity we have one with another: for God, to show what great
regard he has of the love of our neighbor, has so framed and indicted this
prayer, that there is neither Ego, nor mi, nor meum, nor mea, neither I, nor
mine, nor my, but still the tenor of it is, Our Father, our bread, our
trespasses, us from evil.

Therefore one says, that prayer is not only, breviarium fidei, an abridgment
of our faith, but (...), a mutual pledge of our love toward our brethren,
which is then especially testified, when we pray to God for them: For this
prayer which our Savior sets down for us, and all Christians prayers; are not
the prayers of nature, pro se orat necessitas, necessity stirs up men to
pray for themselves: but the prayers of charity, when we are to commend the
state of our brethren to God as well as our own, quia pro ali is charitas, for
charity prays for others; for in this prayer there is matter not only of
supplication for the avoiding of evil, and comprecation for the obtaining of
good in our own behalf; but of Intercession also, to teach us, that whether
we desire that evil be removed, or good be bestowed upon us; we should desire
it for others, as well as for our selves.

The use of this doctrine is of two sorts: first, against Pride, for if God be
not the Father of one man more then another, but all in common do call him Our
Father, why then does one man exalt himself above another? Have we not all one
Father? Mal. 2. and the Apostle says, Ye are all the sons of God, by faith
in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3. and our Savior says, Vos omnes fratres estis, Ye
are all brethren, Mal. 2.3.8. Therefore we are not only to love one another as
brethren, but to honor one another, because we are the sons of God; for this
end the Apostle exhorts, In giving honor to one before another. Romans 12. So
far ought we to be from despising one another, Cur enim non pudeat aspernari
fratrem, quem Deus non aspernatur filium? Why are we not ashamed to scorn him
to be our brother, whom God scorneth not to be his son?

Secondly, it serves against malice, we^e were all in the loins of Adam when
he fell, and all one in the body of Christ; so that whatsoever he, as our Head,
has done or suffered, the same all men do, and suffer in him.

And lastly, we are all included in this word, to teachus, that we ought to
wish the same good to others, which we do to our selves, for this is that
which Christ commends in our Christian practice in the duty of prayer, Vt
singuli orent pro omnibus, and omnes pro singulis, that each should pray for
all, and all for each other.

He has taken order, that no man can pray this prayer, but he must pray for
others, as well as for himself, and so do good to all, and the mends that is
made him is, that they also for whom he prayed, do likewise at another time
pray for him; and though we cannot always pray in such fervencie of Spirit as
is required in prayer, yet the holy Ghost does supply our infirmity, by
stirring up others to pray, and make intercession in our behalf, cum gemitibus
inenarrabilibus, with unspeakable groans, Romans 8. even then when we cannot do
for our selves; and this is a special benefit, which the faithful have in the
Communion of Saints.

The Apostle says, that God, to assure us that he takes us for his sons,
has sent his Spirit into our hearts, whereby we cry Abba Father, Gal. 4. the
one of these words has respect to the Jews, the other to the Gentiles,
teaching that it is our duty to pray both for Jews and Gentiles, and so for
all though they be strangers to us.

Secondly, we are to pray for sinners, be their sins never so great, in hope
that God will give them the Grace to repent, and to come out of the snare of
the Devil, 2 Timothy 2. and that he will translate them out of the state of sin
into the state of grace, for this life as long as it lasts is, tempus
praestitutum poenitentiae, a time ordained for repentance.

Thirdly, as for our brethren, so for our enemies, as our Savior wills,
Matthew. 5.44. for they also are comprehended under the word noster; For God has
shut up all in unbelief, that he may have mercy upon all.

Neither are we to pray in general for all, but for some in particular as
need requires.

Not in general for all good things, but for some special blessings.

As we are to pray generally, that Gods will may be done, so, for that this is
Gods will, our sanctification, 1 These. 4. we may pray in particular for those
things that we have need, as to be delivered from all temptations generally,
so specially from those sins, whereunto the corruption of our nature is most
inclined.

THE EIGHTH SERMON.
Which art in Heaven.
WHich words contain the second part of this invocation; for as in the word
Father we call upon the bowels of Gods mercy, so by these words, Which art in
Heaven, we do invocate the arm of his power, (for so it is termed by the
Prophet in the Old Testament) Stir up thy strength and help us, Psalm. 80.2.
Rise up thou arm of the Lord, Esaias 51.9. So that as the Lepers doubt, Matthew.
8. is taken away by the consideration of Gods fatherly goodness: so that when
we know that this our Father has his being in heaven, it takes away that
doubt which we use to make of his power, Domine, si quid potes: Lord if thou
can do us any good, Mark. 9. For the style of God in respect of our
necessities, consists of his goodness and greatness, which as they are both
expressed by the Heathen in the title Optimus, Maximus: so the power of God in
these words which they use, (...), Dwelling in heavenly habitations.

Christ willing to express the greatness of Gods power, does it by that
place, where his glory and power are most manifest, and that is heaven, whereof
the Prophet says, The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament
shows his handy work, Psalm. 19.1. For when we see a poor cottage, we
presently guess, that the dweller is no great person; but if we meet with
some great house, we conjecture that some person of account dwells there, and
therefore Job says, that the baseness of man, in respect of the Angels, is
great, for that he dwells in the houses of clay, whose foundation is of the
dust, Job 4.19. But here our Savior tells us, that God our Father, has his
dwelling in the stately Tabernacle of Heaven; whereby we may gather what is the
greatness of his power.

But before we come to these things, which are particularly to be considered in
these words: First, we are to take heed that we run not into their error,
which so confine and compass God in Heaven, as if he had nothing to do in
earth, such as they, who say: How should God know? can be judge through the
dark cloud? the clouds cover him that he cannot see? Job. 22.14. For when he
is said to have his being in heaven, the Holy Ghost thereby does not express
his presence, but his power, therefore we are to know, that God is not so in
heaven, that he is not in earth also; for so does the old Testament witness of
him, Coelum and terram ego impleo, Jer. 23. Behold the heaven, and heavens, and
the heaven of all heavens, are not able to comprehend thee. 1 Reg. 8.27. and
the Prophet David says, If I go up to heaven, thou art there: if I go down
to hell, thou art there also, Psalm. 139. Whereby it appears that we may not
limit Gods power and presence to any one place, who is every where present, for
when God is said to be in heaven, we learn thereby what his excellency is,
which does especially show it self there; for as the glory and Majesty of
earthly Princes, does chiefly appear in their thrones; so the glory and
Majesty of God, does especially show it self in heaven, which is his Throne,
Esaias 66. Matthew. 5.34. He has not his denomination from earth, a place of
worms and corruption, but from heaven, a place of eternal glory and
happiness.

Secondly, the use of this is, to temper our confidence in God; for albeit we
love him as he is our Father; yet withal we must fear him, for as much as he
dwells in heaven; as we may in regard of his goodness, pray unto him with
confidence, so withal, considering his power, we must pray with due devotion
and reverence unto his Majewy, for he is not as an earthly father, that
dwells in houses clay; but his dwelling is in heaven, and therefore as he is
a Father, and consequently will be honored, so because he is our Lord, he
requires fear at our hands, Mal. 1.6. With thee is mercy that thou may be
feared, Psalm. 130.4. Whereby the Prophet would have us so to esteem of Gods
mercy; that withal we be bound to fear him; and that we be not like those
that contemn the riches of Gods mercy, the more that he labors with his
bountifulness and goodness to bring us to repentance, Romans 2. for as sweet
things have an obstructive power to stop the passages which are in our bodies,
and on the other side sour and bitter things do fret and consume, and so open
the veins: So it fares with the soul, for it is stopped when we consider
nothing but the mercy of God, and contrariwise, when we cast our eyes too much
upon the Majesty and power of God, the force thereof casts us into an
astonishment, and brings to desperation, and therefore, that we neither have
Nimiam trepidationem, nor Nimiam ostentationem, too much terror, nor too much
security; we must know that God is so in heaven, as that yet he is a Father,
and as he is a Father, so not an earthly, but an heavenly Father: and we cannot
but fear and reverence God, if we in humility consider our baseness in
respect of him, for though he be our Father, yet so long as we be on earth, we
are strangers and exiles from him, and howsoever it please him to account us
sons; yet as it fared with Absalon, we cannot see our Fathers face, 2 Samuel
14. until he take us hence, that we may be at home with him in his kingdom of
Glory.

Thirdly, these words lead us also to a confidence in God, and serve to raise
up our faith: There is Paternitas both in heaven and earth, Ephesians. 3.16. There
are Fathers of the flesh, and Fathers of the spirit, Heb. 12. But when the Holy
Ghost says, that God our Father has his being in heaven, we are thereby to
distinguish him from other fathers. If he be an heavenly Father, he is of a
more excellent nature, then other fathers that are earthly and carnal, for
they are mortal; as they live on earth, so by death they shall be brought sub
terris, and do forsake us, but our heavenly Father is immortal, his years
change not, Psalm. 102. and though our Fathers, and mothers forsake us, yet the
Lord will take us up and succor us, Psalm. 27. Secondly, though earthly fathers
were immortal, yet they are not able, and their affections are turned away,
either by means of some lewd parts in the children, or for that they bear not
that natural affection toward their children which they ought. But God is
immutable in his love: so that although Jacob will not acknowledge us, and
Abraham will not know us; yet God will be our Father, Esaias 63.16.

The Apostle says, There are wicked parents that are (...), without all
natural affection, Romans 1. And it falls out that sometime a woman will deal
cruelly with her own child; but though she forget it, yet God our heavenly
Father, will not forget his children, nor turn his fatherly affection from
them, Esaias 49. and therefore Tertullian says: Nullus pater tam pater: no
father so fatherly. Thirdly, though they wish us never so well, yet many times
they cannot do us that good they would, for want of ability, yea though they be
never so able, yet they cannot deliver from sickness and death, for the sons
of Princes die daily, they can give us bread and fish, Luke 11. they have a
care to provide and lay up for their children, 2 Cor. 12.14. but it is such
treasure, as the moth and rust will corrupt, Matthew. 6.19. But God our heavenly
Father can deliver us from all evil, he can give us, not only bread and fish,
and other things necessary for this life, but his holy Spirit if we ask it,
Luke 11.

The treasure that God lays up for us, is not earthly, but an inheritance
incorruptible, and undefiled, 1 Pet. 1. such things as neither eye has seen,
nor ear has heard, Esaias 64. 1 Cor. 1. For God is not only careful in this
life for our well doing; the knowledge of that is spes mortua: but his care
extends to the life to come, and therefore the Holy Ghost says not Pater in
coelo, sed in coelis, in the heavens, whereby he has begotten us unto a lively
hope, 1 Pet. 1.4. Quaecunque optant vel timent homines, Whatsoever things men
either with for, or are affrayd of, all things come from heaven, whether it be
rain, drought, or contagion, or plague, and from the first heaven, Ubi
vultures coeli, Matthew. 6.

From this heaven Saint Paul tells the heathen that God sends us rain, and
fruitful seasons, Act. 14. And when Job says that God sends rain, and
frosts, and snow; and thundreth, and works mavelous things, etc. Job 37.
that is done in Primo coelo. But in the second heaven are the Eclipses of the
Sun and Moon, there he works in the signs of heaven, He binds the seven
stars together, Job 38.31. whatsoever wonders are wrought there, it is God
that works them, and therefore he says to his sons, Nolite timere a signis
coeli. Jer. 10. he is in the second heaven, and will not suffer any thing to
hurt them.

The third heaven is that whereunto the Saints of God shall be received in the
life to come, where Saint Paul heard things that were not lawful to be
uttered, 2 Cor. 12. So that as God will not suffer the first or second heaven
to do us hurt, so he will bring us to the happiness of the third heaven: for
he is Pater noster in coelis: whereby we have hope and comfort not in this life
only, which is but a dead hope, but a lively hope touching the life to come.
For Christ does not express Gods power by an action, saying, Our Father which
made heaven and earth, Psalm. 121. nor, which ridest upon the heavens, Psalm.
68. But by a local word, to show, that as God is in heaven, so we have an
interest in the same place, and that he will at the length bring us to the same
place where he is.

Fourthly, this word Heaven serves to prepare us to prayer, to the end that we
should lift up our hearts and affections, from earth to heaven, seeing we
speak not to an earthly father, but to one that is in heaven, and this is that
(...), or sursum corda. Touching which thing one says, Aquilarum est hoc
negotium, this business belongs to Eagles, which as they fly highest, so they
look most steadfastly upon the Sun; non Talparum, not belonging to moules, nor
of such as are blind and will not open their eyes; nec Milvorvm, neither of
Kites, which albeit they fly aloft, yet cast their eyes still downward to the
dunghill: we must wish with the Prophet, O that I had the wings of a Dove,
Psalm. 55. and labor more and more to fly up with the Eagle into heaven, into
the presence of God the Father, and his Son, who sits at the right hand
bodily, for, ubi cadaver, ibi congregantur aquilae, Luke 17.

As the consideration of Gods Majesty, who is in heaven, does bring us down
and make us bow our knees before God our Father. Ephesians. 3. So it must cause us
levare manus and corda, Lam. 3. and to lift up our eyes to the hills, Psalm.
121. and to have such a continual meditation of his power, that we may say
with David, Providebam Dominum in conspeclu meo semper, I have set the Lord
always before me.

Fifthly, this word does admonish us, what things we should sue unto God for,
he is a heavenly Father, therefore we must ask of him heavenly things; his
answer to the sons of Zebedeus was, Matthew. 20. Ye ask ye know not what,
honor and wealth are not things proportionable to him that is in heaven, and
an earthly Prince will count it a disgrace, if a man ask at his hands mean
things, such as may be had of every man.

The gifts we are to ask of our heavenly Father, are the eternal salvation of
our souls, this gift of the holy Ghost, which he has promised to them that
ask it, Luke 11. and all spiritual blessings in heavenly places, Ephesians. 1.3.

God is a Father, as Abraham was, and as he had moveable goods, which he gave
to the sons of Keturah; so he bestowed the inherinance, which was immovable,
upon his son Isaas, Genesis 25. So we that are the children of the promise, as
Isaac was, Gal. 4. must seek for the inheritance of Isaac, and not content our
selves with that portion which was given to the sons of Keturah.

Solomon says not amiss, Two things have I desired of the Lord, Prove. 30. But
David says better, Unam perii a Domino, I have sought one thing of the Lord,
Psalm. 27. That I may dwell in the house of the Lord, that I may be partaker of
Grace in this life, and may be received into glory in the life to come.

Unto Martha that was troubled about many things, our Savior said, Unum est
necessarium, Luke 10. and this is the reason why it is not said, qui es in
terris; For God shows himself a Father, rather in heaven then in earth, Deus
pater est in coelis, he is in heaven by assuring us of Gods heavenly blessings:
for they are the signs of Gods fatherly bounty to such as are his heirs by
promise; as for earthly things he shows himself in them rather to the sons
of Keturah then to Isaac, and in respect of this world, Martha is said to have
chosen the better part, Luke 10.

Sixthly, as it teaches us, what we must pray for, so also we learn hereby
what we are to judge of our selves, and how we are to dispose of our minds,
when we come to pray; if God our Father be in heaven, then because we are yet
on earth, we must esteem of our selves as strangers and pilgrims. This did all
the Fathers acknowledge, I am a stranger, and sojourner upon earth, as all my
Fathers were, Psalm. 39. and therefore having a longing to be in our City, Woe is
me that I am constrained to dwell in Meshech, Psalm. 120. The Apostles Peter
and Paul confessed the same, the one writing to the Church of God calls them
Pilgrims and strangers, 1 Pet. 2. the others reports of the Fathers that they
confessed themselves strangers and Pilgrims upon earth; and in saying these
things they show that they sought a country, not the land of Canaan from whence
they came, for they had time to return thither if they had been mindful of
it; but they sought a better, that is, an Heavenly City, Heb. 11.13. and we
have no abiding City here, but do look for one to come, Heb. 12.13.

These show us that albeit we have our dwelling in earth, and be subject to
many calamities, yet for this our exile, we do, genus de coelo ducere, we take
our pedigree from heaven: When therefore as the Poet says, os homini sublime
dedit; it is a shame for us to have our hearts downward; we must remember that
we are of a more excellent nature then other creatures, (...) for we are his
kindred, Act. 17. we have received from God a soul and spirit endued with many
heavenly qualities, which being dissolved from the body, returns to God that
gave it, Eccles. 12.

During this our exile and pilgrimage, we are not only to consider, that we
look upwards with our faces, (which moved the Heathen to meditate on heaven)
but chiefly, that in our souls we have the Image of God imprinted, ought to
move the people to think of God, and to set our minds onthings above, Col. 3.

Albeit we be here in a far country far from our fathers dwelling; yet we
must not forget our fathers dwelling house, Luke 15.

The poition is in heaven which our Father will give us, and that we seek to
be acquainted with the laws of that country, where our inheritance lies, that
we may guide our lives according to the same, lest being rebellious, we deprive
ourselves of our right and be disinherited.

Secondly, seeing we know that we are not in our own country, we must say as
Absolon did: Why am I come hither, if I may not see the Kings face? 2 Samuel 14.
He being an ungratious son, was desirous to see his father: then it shall be
a shame for us, that are all the Sons of God, by faith in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.
if we have not a longing desire to come before the presence of God our Father,
Psalm. 42. and except we have a desire to enter into the Courts of the Lord,
Psalm. 84. except that with the Apostle, we desire to be dissolved and to be
with Christ, Phil. 1. the first begotten of many brethren; and if with our
Father God, we lay up our treasure in heaven, and count it our chief felicity
to be there, then would we think upon heaven more then we do: For, where our
treasure is, there must our hearts be also, Matthew. 6. But because we altogether
set our hearts on earthly things, therefore it falls out that our heart is as a
heavy clodde of earth, and unable to lift it self up to heavenly meditation.

Thirdly, as we desire to be in heaven in our Fathers house: so our
conversation must be (...), Phil. 3. we must not live by the laws of earthly
Princes, and Acts of Parliaments, but by an heavenly law: though we be
strangers on earth, yet we are Citizens of heaven, and must carry our selves
according to the laws of our country, being always desirous to do that which
pleases our heavenly Father, though there were no humane law to compel us
thereunto; and whereas natural men have for the end of their civil actions,
bonum commune, a common utility, we that are spiritual, must make bonum
coeleste, the heavenly good, our end: we must do well, because God will behold
our well-doing favorably, and the Angels of heaven will be glad of it, Luke 15.

Christ, who is the Lord from heaven, did subject himself to the will of God
his Father; Not my will, but thy will be done: and as he that is heavenly, so
must they that will be heavenly: as we now bear the Image of the earthly, so
shall we port are imaginem coolestis, 1 Col. 15.

He while he lived on earth, did guide himself by an heavenly law, and we that
remain on earth must express his image by the imitation of his obedience. It
is true which both our Savior Christ, and John Baptist said, That that is
borne of the flesh is flesh, and so, that that is of the earth is earthly, and
speaks of the earth, Job. 3. But there must be an imitation, and we must set
our selves forward toward our heavenly country. But because it is not in our
power to do this of our selves: for that, as Christ says, No man can come to
me, except the Father draw him, Joh. 6. therefore we must pray with the
Church in the Canticles, Cant. 1.4. Trabe me, and to this end does the holy
exercise of fasting and mortification serve greatly, that we may, as it were,
with Doves wings, fly up into Heaven.

As the word Father does show us not only our dignity, but our duty also; so
the word Heavenly, does not only give us a hope of heaven, but also teaches
us, that seeing our Father is heavenly, we must live by the laws of Heaven.
As we are careful to be made partakers of the inheritance which God has
prepared for us; so we must be as careful to please him, and to do those
things which are agreeable to his will. We must not only know, Quid sperandum,
what is to be hoped for, but Quid praestandum, what is to be performed of us.
If we pray not only with confidence, because God does take us for his sons,
but also with invocation, with devotion, and reverence, knowing that our Father
has his dwelling in heaven, and we are pilgrims in earth; Thus shall we be
very adoratores, Joh. 4. true worshippers. As we know we shall have our part in
heaven, so we must begin our heaven here on earth: and this shall be done, if
we add our endeavor to those things which we pray for at the hands of God, as
August. prays: Da Domine, ut pro quibus oramus, pro iis laboremus: Grant
Lord, that the things we pray for, and crave of thee, for them we may also
labor.

THE NINTH SERMON.
Hallowed be thy Name.
HAving ended the first part of this prayer, which we called Invocation,
consisting upon the power and goodness of God, we come to the petitions
themselves, which are seven, of which the first concerns God, the other
concern our selves: or they may be divided as the days of the week, whereof,
as one falls out to Gods portion, the other to be employed in our own
affairs. So, of these petitions, the first does immediately concern the glory
of God, the other six the supply of our own necessities: in the beginning we
heard that it is expedient to know not only what we are to ask, but in what
order; what first, and what second; touching which point we are taught by this
form of prayer, that that petition which concerns the sanctification of Gods
name, is Caput votorum; and that all other things that we either desire, or
pray for in our own behalf, ought to stand after it: and that we must both
desire and pray for the sanctification of Gods name, before any thing that we
desire, either for our selves, or for our brethren; whether it be for the
removing of evil, or for the obtaining of good: for as before we learned what
his love is to us, in that he vouchsafed to be our Father; so hereby we shall
express our love again to him, if when we come to pray to him for our
necessities, we be carried away with such a desire of the glory of our heavenly
Father, that we forget our own selves, and desire only that his name may be
sanctified, which duty Christ does by his own example commend unto us.

In this form of prayer, we are put in mind of that which before was required
in the law of works; for as there we learned, that God is not honored aright,
except he be loved above all things, because he created all things: and for his
wills sake they all were created, Rev. 4.11. So we cannot pray to him aright,
except above all things, and in the first place we seek for the sanctification
of his Name.

In respect of God himself there is no cause why we should make this petition
on his behalf; for as the Prophet says, Thou have no need of any goods, Psalm.
16.1. So he stands not in need of any thing that can come to him by our means:
if we would wish him any profit, the earth is his, and all that is therein,
Psalm. 24. If pleasure, there is with him torrens voluptatis, a River of
pleasure, Psalm. 16.11. Wherefore albeit that in his own essence and nature he
be perfect, yet extrinsecus assumpsit sibi nomen, he took himself a name from
without, he calls himself the Lord Almighty: not that any term can
sufficiently express him and his essence, but to the end, that while we have
a reverend regard of his Name, he might receive some service at our hands.

The account that men do make of their name, is such as Solomon says: A good
name is more to be desired then great treasure; it is more worth then precious
ointment, Eccles. 7.1.5. God accounts, that we do not only greatly profit him,
but do procure great delight and pleasure to him, when we reverence his holy
name; which how precious it is, it does appear hereby, that he sets the
hallowing of his name before his kingdom.

Many of the Kings subjects that are in the farthest parts of the land, never
see his face all their life time, and yet in reverence to his name are ready to
make long journeyes, to appear when they are commanded in his name; and so it
fares with us that live on earth: for, Deum nemo vidit unquam, Joh. 18. Nay,
very few are admitted to see his back-parts, Exodus 33. But though we cannot
see his face, yet as those are counted dutiful subjects that do not only
reverence the Princes person, but obey such commandments as come in his name:
so look what duty we do to Gods name here on earth, he reckons it to be as
good service, as that which is performed by the Angels in heaven, that always
behold his face, Mat. 18.

And reason it is that we should esteem of Gods name, for as in time of
trouble, Turris altissima nomen Domini, the Name of the Lord is a strong Tower,
Prove. 18.10. So being delivered once of danger, yet we are sure of the
salvation of our souls, and sanctified in the name of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 6.

Besides there is no other name given under heaven, by which men can be saved,
Act. 4. And therefore ought by good right to receive sanctification of us.

Howbeit we may not hereupon ground that error, which some gather upon these
words, Ephesians. 1. where it is said, That God has thosen us in Christ to the
praise of the glory of his grace: not that God is desirous of vainglory, he
is not to receive any thing from us; but contrary-wise as he is good, so he is
desirous to communicate his goodness to us: but the care that he has for the
sanctifying of his name, arises from the duty which man owes unto him: In
which regard such as have been most religious in all times, have reared up
Altars, and set up Temples in honor of Gods Name.

The account of this Petition is that which makes the difference betwixt the
Papists and religious people, between Heretics and the true worshippers of
God, that the one esteems highly of the Name of God, the other does not.

We usually account of men's names, according to the worth of their persons: but
God himself is holy, therefore he tells us, that his name also is holy: as the
Prophet says, Holy and reverent is his Name, Psalm. 111.9. and Psalm. 9.9. and
it is not only holy in it self, but it gives holiness unto all things that
are holy.

The word of God is holy, because it is published in nomine Dei, wherefore the
name of God being holy in it self, needs not be hallowed by us, that can
neither add holiness to it, nor take any from it; but when God wills us to
hallow his Name, it is to prove us, that by glorifying his Name, we may show
how we glorify God himself, and what reckoning we make of him, that God may
have proof how we do with the Virgin magnify God our Savior, Luke 2. and how
we do glorify God in our bodies, and in our spirits, 1 Cor. 6.

The Name of God must be considered in two sorts, either as it is expressed by
the term of Lord, Father, Lord Almighty, or else as it is expressed in such
things as bear his name, as he speaks of Moses, Exodus 23. Behold I will send
my Angel before thee, beware of him, and hear his voice, etc. quia nomen meum
est in eo.

Touching the expressed name of God, whether it be Father, which imports his
goodness, or Lord, which implies his power, as we may not account basely of
them, so we must not use them lightly and negligently, but upon just occasion.

The things that have the name of God impressed and imprinted in them, are
either those persons which have their denomination of God, either jointly, as
the Church, which is called sancta Ecclesia Dei, or severally, as the Priest,
of whom Moses says, Let thy Urim and thy Thummim be with thy holy one, Deuteronomy.
33.

The Priests are called holy, because they are consecrated to the Lord: In
which respect, as in the old Testament they are called viri Dei; so in the New,
they are vasa nominis Dei, vessels of the name of God, as the Lord speaks in a
vision touching Saul to Ananias, That he was a chosen vessel to bear the Name
of God among the Gentiles, Act. 9.15.

Secondly, those places are said to be Gods, which are consecrated to holy
uses, as the Sanctuary, which is Domus Dei, and all those places, where he puts
the remembrance of his Name, and whither he promises that he will come to
bless his people that are assembled there for his worship, Exodus 20.

Thirdly, those times which are kept holy to the Lord, as the Sabbath, which is
dies Domini, Rev. 1.

Fourthly, the Word of God preached in Gods name.

Fifthly, the Element consecrated in the Sacrament, for a holy use, called
therefore, panis Dei, Joh. 6.

In all these there is an impression of Gods name, and therefore we must not
lightly account of them, but show great reverence to them, that thereby we may
testify the high and reverent regard and estimation we have of God himself,
for sanctification is when God is said to magnify or glorify.

It signifies to make great and glorious: so when sanctification is given to
him, it betokens to make holy, but when we are said to sanctify, that is, to
account holy; when we magnify God, that is magnifacere Deum, to esteem
greatly of God; and our glorifying of God is to account him glorious: so that
when we pray, Hallowed be thy Name, our desire is, that Gods name which is holy
of it self, may be so accounted of us; and be holily used by us.

And whereas he says not glorificetur, or magnificetur nomen tuum, glorified,
or magnified by thy Name, but sanctificetur, hallowed, or sanctified be thy
Name, it is to the end, that we receiving the sanctification of Gods spirit,
might have a holy regard of his Name; for things may be accounted great and
glorious by those which are accounted neither great nor glorious: but
sanctificetur cannot come from any persons that are profane, but only such
persons as are holy: therefore the Angels in heaven cry not, Glorious,
Glorious, but Holy, Holy, Holy, Esaias 6.

The title that Aaron ware upon his breast, was not Glory, but Holiness unto
the Lord, Exodus 28. And the four beasts ceased not to cry day and night, Holy,
Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, Rev. 4.8.

The duties which pertain to the sanctifying of Gods name, are two. First,
that against which we do Deprecari, or pray to be removed: secondly, that for
which we do pray, or desire to be granted.


First, we are to pray, that we may not use the name of God, which is
Wonderful and Holy, either contemptuously to Magic, or cursing, or
negligently abuse it upon any slight occasion; because that holy things are to
be separated from a common use, and are not to be used but when necessity
requires.

We see by experience that the holy name of God has not that reverence which
it ought to have, and therefore the persons which do take it in vain, do
oftentimes pull upon themselves the plagues and vengeance of God by that sin:
for God does in justice punish such offenders, not because the name of God can
receive any pollution by men's default; but because we do, quantum in nobis
est, as far as in us lies, pollute the holy name of God, even as he that
looks after a woman to lust after her, has already committed the sin of
uncleanness, although she be not a whit the less chaste for his lust, Mat. 5.

The Heathen fail in this duty, because they do appropriate the name of God to
foure-footed beasts, Romans 1.23. And change the glory of God, who is
incorruptible into the similitude of mortal man.

The Jew sins, because he contemnes the name of JESUS, which is a name above
all names, Phil. 2. and despises the name of CHRIST, the preciousnesse whereof
appears herein, by that that it is Oleum effusum, an ointment powered out,
Cant. 1.

But as we are to pray against the contemptuous abuse of Gods name, so we are
to pray that we do not negligently, or carelessly use it, without that reverent
estimation, and regard, that is due to it; that we tread not under feet the
Son of God, nor account of the blood of the Testament, whereby we are
fanctified, as a common thing, Heb. 10.29.

Secondly, Moses and Aaron were debarred from entering into the land of Canaan,
not because they polluted Gods name; but for that they did not sanctify the
Lord among the children of Israel at the waters of strife, Deuteronomy. 32.51.

Therefore as we pray against the contempt and negligent use of Gods name; so
we must pray, that we may have a due regard of it: First, that we sanctify
Gods name in our hearts, 1 Pet. 3. Secondly, we must not use the name of God
with our tongues but seriously, and therefore we are forbidden to take it in
vain in the third Commandment. Thirdly, in all our actions we must not begin
any thing that is extraordinary, but in the Name of the Lord that made heaven
and earth, Psalm. 124. and men must refer the end of them to the Glory of his
name, 1 Cor. 10.

God, whose name is called upon by us, is holy, and Christ, of whom we are
called Christians, Act. 11. is holy; therefore we must sanctify God in our
actions.

Neither do we pray, that we our selves only may sanctify Gods name, but that
others also may do the same, for Christ says not, Sanctisicemus, let us
sanctify: but Sanctificetur, let thy name be sanctified.

This is it whereunto the Prophet exhorts, Laudate Dominum omnes Gentes,
Laudate Dominum omnes populi, Psalm. 100. and Psalm. 117. Praise the Lord all ye
Nations, praise him all ye people; that is for persons.

For places, The Lords name be praised from the rising of the Sun to the
going down of the same, Psalm. 113.

Thirdly, for the time, Blessed be the name of the Lord from this time forth
for evermore, Psalm. 113.

But because it cannot generally be sanctified, except it be known, we must
desire that all may know God, and pray with the Prophet, Let thy way be known
upon earth, and thy saving health among all Nations, Psalm. 67.

Secondly, not to know it only, but cheerfully to go forward in the profession
of Gods truth, and in the worship of his name: Thou have multiplied the people,
but not increased their joy, Esaias 9.2. But we are to pray that as all Nations
know his name, so that they may so carry it and profess it, as that the
Heathen may not have occasion to say scoffingly, Populus Dei est iste, Ezekiel.
36.20. We must desire of God that all that profess his name may so carry
themselves, that for their sakes the name of God may not be evil spoken of
among the Gentiles, Romans 2. But contrariwise, that they may shine as lights in
the world, among a froward and crooked generation, Phil. 2. That they may by
their good works stir up all men to glorify our heavenly Father, Matthew. 5.
and by their good conversation, without the word, win those that obey not the
Word, 1 Pet. 3.2.

We are to desire that such as have not yet cared to perform this duty, may
now begin, that such as have begun to sanctify Gods name, may go forwards,
and that such as are fallen away from God, and pollute that holy Name, which
sometimes they did highly esteem, may resipiscere, that being renewed by
repentance, they may recover themselves out of Relapses, that they may be of
the society of Angels, that cry continually, Holy, Holy, Holy, Esaias 6. Rev. 4.

We must be careful not for our selves only, but for those over whom we have
power, that they may sanctify Gods name and account it holy; that the Heathen
may not take occasion to pollute the holy name of the Lord, saying, Are these
the people of the Lord? but that while they behold our good conversation, they
may have occasion to say, Verily God is in you, 1 Cor. 14.1 Cor 14.25.

Thirdly, Tuum nomen, thy name; men are given generally to give a kind of
honor to God, but in the mean time they will have themselves honored, but
here they are taught otherwise. It is our duty to ascribe all glory to God; Non
nobis, sed nomini tuo da gloriam, Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but to thy
name give the glory, Psalm. 115. So that all men are no less desirous of their
own honor and glory, then the builders that built Babell, that said, Let us
get us a name, Genesis 11.

But such as are thus affected, and carried with the love of themselves, are
not fit to sanctify the name of God, as our Savior speaks, How can ye
believe, seeing ye receive glory one of another, and seek not the glory which
is of God? Joh. 5.44.

As we may not usurp Gods honor for our selves, so we may not defy Princes:
for we see how ill that voice was taken, V^x Dei and non hominis, the voice of
God and not of man, Act. 12. neither may we give divine honor to the Apostles
and Prophets of God. The Heathen people said of Paul and Barnabas, Gods are
come down to us in the shape of men, and they would have sacrificed unto them,
but the Apostles, not willing to admit this sacrilege, rent their clothes and
cried, We are men subject to the same passions that you your selves be, Act.
14. for we are desirous to give honor, if not to our selves, yet to others;
but here Christ tells us, that no other name is to be sanctified but the name of
God; whereof we should be so careful, that we ought to pray, that Gods name
may be sanctified by others, if not by our selves, though we in our own
persons cannot hallow it, yet sanctificetur nomen tuum, Let thy name O Lord be
sanctified.

Hereby, as we pray for the gift of the fear of God, which is one of the seven
virtues which are set down, Esaias 11. because we do truly sanctify God, when
we make him our Fear and Dread, Esaias 8.13. So we pray against the vice of
pride which is the contrary to the virtue of Fear, so shall we obtain the
blessings, Matthew. 5.23. Blessed are the poor in spirit, etc. And upon this
petition is grounded, not only whatsoever Hymn or Psalm is sung of the
Congregation, but even the end of all Assemblies is to ascribe Holiness to
God, and to sanctify his Name for his benefits bestowed upon us.

And in this they acknowledge, first, their own unworthiness: secondly, they
bless him for his goodness extended toward them: thirdly they do not
acknowledge it in themselves, but do tell it forth as the Psalmist speaks: O
come hither and hearken, all ye that do fear God, and I will tell you what he
has done for my soul, Psalm. 66. Fourthly, to this end they lift up their
voices in singing, to the end they may make the voice of his praise to be
heard, Psalm. 66.

And among other benefits, we are to praise and bless his name for the benefit
of Sanctification, which we have in the name of the Lord Jesus: secondly, for
the Means whereby this Sanctification is offered and wrought in us, which is
the Word, as Christ says: O Father sanctify them in thy truth, Joh. 17.13.
For the perfection of sanctification that we shall have after this life, when
we shall be Partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light, Col. 1.12.
when we shall continually sing with the heavenly Angels, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord
God of Hosts, Esaias 6.

And howsoever, when we desire of God that his name may be sanctified, we seem
like natural children to forget our own necessities in respect of the care we
have to Gods glory; yet even then, we pray no less for our selves then for
God, for the Lord has promised: Them that honor me I will honor, 1 Samuel
2.30. and Christ says: That if the Name of the Lord Jesus be glorified in us,
we also shall be glorified in him, 2 Thessalonians. 1.12. Et sanctificando nomen,
adveniet Regnum: In sanctifying his name, his kingdom shall come, as the next
Petition is.

If while we remain on earth, our whole desire be to sanctify Gods name, we
shall at length come to the place where we shall day and night sing as the
Cherubims do, Esaias 6. And with the heavenly Host of Angels, sing Glory to God
on high, Luke 2. we shall fall down before his Throne, saying always, Thou art
worthy O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and praise for ever, Rev. 4.11.

THE TENTH SERMON.
Thy Kingdom come.
HAving entreated of the first petition, touching the holy estimation of Gods
name, we are consequently to speak of those six that concern our selves,
whereof the first three are spent in praying for that which is good, in the
other three we pray for the removing of evil; The first two petitions, or the
sum of them, is excellently expressed by the Propher, Psalm. 84.11. And by our
Savior, Matthew. 6.33. for agreeable to the words of David, and of Christ our
Savior, in the first petition we ask for glory, and seek for the Kingdom
of God; in the second, for grace and righteousness: in the third, for the good
things of this life, which shall not be withheld from them that lead a godly
life, but shall be ministered unto them that upon earth do seek Gods Kingdom,
and the righteousness thereof.

Wherefore as of things which concern our good, the first, both in order and
nature, is the Kingdom of God; for the first thing in our desire ought to be
the Kingdom of God, according to the commandment of our Savior, and we are
to account all things but dung in respect of it, Phil. 3.9. Hereunto is
required the spirit of Wisdom, and Understanding, Isa. 11.2. that may teach
us to contemn all earthly pleasures, in respect of the heavenly Kingdom.

Here our Savior condemns that capital vice that reigns in those men which
in the world live of their own, and take no further care but to establish for
themselves a Kingdom upon earth. But if (according to his direction) we fix
our desire upon the Kingdom of Heaven, and by despising the world, do labor
for the virtue, which consists in the purity of the heart, then shall we have
the blessing that is promised to the pure in heart, Matthew. 5.8. that is, they
shall be exalted to see God.

Now when he says, None shall see my face and live, Exodus 33. they that truly
make this prayer shall behold his face in the Kingdom of glory.

These two first petitions have relation to the Invocation; for as God by the
word Father does express his love to us, and for that he is in Heaven, does
give us hope for an heavenly estate; so we in these petitions do first desire
that whereby our love toward him may appear, while we prefer the sanctifying
of his name before the regard of our own good: secondly, we declare our
heavenly Hope that may come of being partakers of his heavenly Kingdom.

Howsoever God will not have any man's name Hallowed, or Glorirified but his
own, as he speaks of himself, Esa. 42. My glory will I not give to another:
yet he will communicate his Kingdom to us: and therefore in our own behalf
wear taught to pray: Thy Kingdom come.

In the petition we are to consider two things: First, the Kingdom it self:
secondly, the Coming of his Kingdom.


Touching the first point it may be objected, how it is that Christ teaches us
to make this petition: for Gods Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and his
Dominion endures throughout all ages, Psalm. 145.13. How then is it said to
come? For the answer of this doubt, the Kingdom of God must be distinguished.
First, God has an Universal Kingdom, such a Kingdom as ever was, and for
ever shall be; of which it is said: The Lord is King, be the people never so
impotent: he rules as King, be the people never so unquiet, Psalm. 99.
Secondly, there is a Kingdom of Glory, that whereof our Savior speaks,
Matthew. 25.34.
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, etc. And
the thief upon the Cross said, Lord remember me when thou come into thy
Kingdom, Luke 13. and this is the Kingdom which in the first place Christ
teaches us to pray for: we pray for this Kingdom, that it may come: we pray
for our own good, for it is a Kingdom of power, and therefore able to defend
us: and therefore our Savior in the conclusion of his prayer, adds this, For
thine is the Kingdom, Matthew. 6. According to which the Prophet David says:
Thy Saints give thanks to thee, they show the glory of thy Kingdom, and talk
of thy power, Psalm. 145.11.

The government of his Kingdom is committed to Christ, of whom it was said by
God: I have set my King upon my holy Hill of Sion, Psalm. 2. In which regard he
doubts not to affirm of himself, Matthew. 28: Data est mihi omnis potestas,
etc. All power is given ^e in Heaven and in Earth. And notwithstanding God
reigns as King; yet that is verified, which the Prophet complains of, Isa.
26.13. O Lord God, other gods besides thee have ruled over us: for Satan
takes upon him to be King, and has played the Tyrant, and has prevailed so
far, as that the greatest part of the world are subdued unto him, in which
regard our Savior calls him the Prince of the world, John 14.30. And by the
Apostle he is termed the God of this world, for that he blinds men's eyes, and
makes them subject to the Kingdom of darkness, 2 Cor. 4.

Secondly, there is a Kingdom of sin, against which the Apostle exhorts:
Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies, Rom 6 ^2. which he means, when
he says: That sin has reigned unto ^^^ath, Rom* 5.21.

Thirdly, the Apostle shows, that Death has a Kingdom, when he says, that
by means of sin death reigned from Adam to Moses, Romans 5.14.

These are enemies to the Kingdom of God; for while the Devil reighneth by
means of sin, as he does so long as he works in the children of
disobedience, Ephesians. 4. he takes away the glory of Gods Kingdom, and Death
takes away the power of it.

And in regard of Satan's Kingdom, he is said to be a King over all the
children of pride, Job 41.34. For he makes the whole world rebel against God,
so that they are not ashamed to deny him to his face; and that is true not
only of the common sort of the world, but even of a great many of the Church,
of which number are those that stick not to say, We will not have Christ to
rule over us, Luke 19.14.

Again, there are many stumbling blocks for the hinderance of Gods Kingdom,
Matthew. 13.41. that the Kingdom of God cannot come; and therefore we do
worthily pray as well that the Kingdom of Satan and sin may be overthrown,
as for the removing of those offenses.

God having exalted his Son into the highest Heaven, says unto him, Sit thou
at my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy footstool, Psalm. 110.

The last enemy that is to be destroyed, is death, 1 Cor. 15.16. Wherefore our
desire is, that there may be such a Kingdom, as wherein the Law of God may be
exactly kept, and that it would please God in this Kingdom to tread down
Satan under our feet, Romans 16. that not only death it self, but he that has
the power of death being destroyed, Heb. 2.14. God may be all in all, 1 Cor.
15.28.

When we behold the state of the world, and see that good men are trodden under
feet, and the vessels of wrath and sin are exalted and prosper, then we may
know that that is not the true Kingdom, and therefore we pray that God will
set up his Kingdom in our hearts, and govern us by his Spirit.

And therefore this point does not only concern our selves, but also God, for
unless his Kingdom come, his name cannot be sanctified of us.

As there are temporal Kingdoms, so there is a spiritual Kingdom, called
the Kingdom of Grace, whereof our Savior speaks, The Kingdom of God is
within you, Luke 17.21.

As before we prayed for the Kingdom of Glory, so now for this Kingdom of
Grace; for, without this we shall never be partakers of that other Kingdom.

The glory of other Kingdoms is the reformation of things that were before
amiss; but the glory of the Kingdom of Grace is, that, as during the tyranny
of Satan, Sin reigned unto death, so now under this Kingdom, Grace may
reign through righteousness by Jesus Christ, Romans 5.21.

That we may have interest in both these Kingdoms, we must hearken to that
which Christ proclaims, Matthew. 4.27. Repent, for the Kingdom of God draws
near: as it draws near to us, so we must draw near to it, else we shall
never enter into it, for, except a man be borne again, he cannot enter into
the Kingdom of God, John 3.2.

And that we may begin to draw near to it, there is an outward regiment to
be used, which is a token of the grace of God bearing rule in our hearts; we
must by the Kingdom of God within us, cast out Devils, Matthew. 8. We must
entreat God by the power of his Spirit to plant in our hearts that which is
good, and to root out, and remove out of them that which is bad, Matthew. 13.48.
We must displace Satan and sin, that they set not up their thrones in our
hearts, and in stead of it, we must set up Gods Kingdom, ruling in us by his
Spirit, for the Kingdom of God stands in righteousness, and peace, and joy in
the holy Ghost, Romans 14.17.

If we find these virtues in us, they are sure pledges of the Kingdom of
Grace, and we may assure our selves, that after this life is ended, we shall be
received into the Kingdom of Glory.

And how soever he has appointed Kings and Rulers over us for our outward
safety and defense, yet they have their Scepter from him, and the end of their
rule is, to further Gods Kingdom, as the Apostle speaks, That we may live
under them, in all godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2.

Touching the coming of his Kingdom, it may be demanded why we pray that it
may come to us, seeing that it were meeter that we should come toward it? But
hereby Christ gives us to understand what our corruption is: It is with us, as
with the Israelites, that were so addicted to the flesh-pois of Egypt, that
they cared not to go into the promised land, likewise we are so in love with
this present world, as that we have no mind of Heaven.

Besides, there are so many stumbling blocks in our way, as that the Kingdom
of God must come unto us, or else we shall never possibly come unto it.
Therefore, as we pray that God would lighten our blind eyes, and inflame our
hard hearts with a love of his heavenly Kingdom, so also, that he would send
his Angels to gather out of his Kingdom, all things that offend, Matthew. 13.41.

The things that we pray against, are the Kingdom of Satan, darkness, and
sin, that they may depart from us, and that the inward Kingdom of Grace may
take place in our hearts, but the principal Kingdom that we desire is the
Kingdom of Glory, whereof our Savior said, Behold, I come quickly, Revel.
22.7.

This is the Kingdom which the Saints desire, saying, Come quickly, Lord
Jesus, Revel. 22.20. and all creatures do wait for this Kingdom, looking
when they shall be made free from the bondage of their corruption, Romans 8.20.
For whereas now all things are subject unto vanity, then there shall be a
Kingdom that shall not perish.

It is not for the wicked to desire the coming of his Kingdom; Woe be to you
that desire the coming of the Lord, it is darkness, and not light, Amos 5.18.
The wicked shall say to the Mountains, Fall upon us, for the wrath of the Lord
no man is able to abide it, Revel. 6.16. But to the godly, it is a day of
comfort, Lift up your heads, for the day of redemption draws near, Luke
21.33. Howsoever, he will render vengeance to the ungodly that have not known
nor obeyed the Gospel of God, 2 These. 1.8. Yet he comes to make a garland to
crown the godly, and to set them in his throne, they shall be received into
his Kingdom of glory, where they shall enjoy the things, which neither eye
has seen, nor ear has heard, nor has ever entered into the heart of man,
which he has prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 1.

Therefore Saint Paul says, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ,
Phil. 3. Simeons desire is, Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace,
Luke 2.29.

Thus the remembrance of the day of our redemption is a joyful remembrance to
them, and the chief thing that they desire, so that they are willing to
depart, in regard of their future hope, rather then to tarry here: and howbeit
that Christ deferres his Kingdom and coming, yet we are to be watchful, for
it will come as a snare, Luke 21. and 1 These. 5. and when he comes he will
rather be for us, then against us.

THE ELEVENTH SERMON.
Thy will be done.
THe sum of all our desires, is set down by those words of the Prophet,
Psalm. 84. where he says, The Lord shall give glory and peace, and no good
thing shall he withold from them that live uprightly; And our Savior does
excellently express the same, Matthew. 6. Seek the Kingdom of God, and his
righteousness, and all other things shall be ministered.

The Petitions of glory, and Gods Kingdom, have already been handled: Now in
this third (which is the second of those which concern our selves) we are
suitors for the grace of God in this life, whereby we may be enabled to do his
will here, that so we may obtain the Kingdom of glory in the world to come:
for the Kingdom of God, and of glory is the Heaven that we desire all to
arrive at, and grace and righteousness is the gale of wind that drives us
forward thereunto, and our suite to God in this petition is, that by doing of
his will here on earth, Grace may reign in our hearts by righteousness, Romans
5.21. that so hereafter we may reign with him in glory.

He does not only will us to seek Gods Kingdom, Matthew. 6. And tells us that
there is one prepared for us before the foundation of the world, Matthew. 25.34.
but also how we may find it, and attain to it, Matthew. 7. Not every one that
says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of God, but he that shall do
the will of my Father which is in Heaven.

Therefore touching the order of this prayer, as of those things which concern
our good, the first is, that Gods Kingdom may come to us: so the door whereby
we must enter into the same, is the doing of Gods will, and therefore in the
second place we are taught, that the Kingdom of God shall come, not by wishing
or desiring, but by doing of Gods will, as Christ says, The Kingdom of God is
come near you. So Christ tells us, If we draw near to God, he will draw near
to us, James 4.

Touching the Will of God, it may be demanded, Why we should demand, and ask
this petition; For as the Psalmist says, Our God is in Heaven, he does
whatsoever he will, Psalm. 115. Whatsoever the Lord willed, that did he, in
Heaven, in the earth, and in all deep places, Psalm. 135.6. and who has
resisted his will? Romans 9.19. No counsel or wisdom can prevail against the
Lord, Prove. 21.30. And if any do oppose themselves against his will, yet they
do but kick against the pricks, Acts 9.

The answer to this objection is, that we pray not so much that Gods will may
be done, but rather, that, what God wills, may be our will; for there is one
will of God which we may resist, another which we may not resist.

For the distinction of Gods will, it is either hidden and secret, or revealed
and open, the one is that which the Prophet calls the counsel or thought of his
heart, Psalm. 33.11. The other is that will of his word, wherein the declares
and opens to men what his will is.

His secret will is, voluntas beneplaciti, the good pleasure of his will; his
revealed will is, voluntas signi, which is disclosed to us.

Gods secret will is, voluntas quam Deus vult, that will which God wills; his
revealed will is, voluntas quam ipse nos velle vult, that will which he wills
us to will; the secret will of his heart is, voluntas adoranda, non scrutanda:
He that curiously searches the glory of Heavenly things, shall not enter into
glory, Prove. 25.27. How unsearchable are his judgments? Romans 11. and who has
known the will of the Lord? or who was his counselor? But the open and
revealed will of God is, voluntas scrutanda, and sacienda, both to be searched
out, and to be done of us. Be not unwise, but understand what is the will of
God, Ephesians. 5.17. The knowledge of his will is not enough, but as Christ says,
If ye know these things, blessed are ye if ye do them, John 13.17.

Of the secret will of God, that is true which the Apostle says, Who has
resisled his will? Romans 9. and therefore we pray not that that will may be done.

Of his revealed will, that is verified which Christ complains, Matthew. 23.
Quoties volui congregare vos, and noluistis? How often would I gather you
together, but ye would not? God often times wills when we will not, and
therefore we have need to pray that his revealed will may be accomplished in
us.

Moses thus distinguishes Gods will, Secreta Deo nostro, quae autem revelavit,
nobis, and filiis nostris, Deuteronomy. 29. The things that are secret belong to God,
but the revealed are for us, and our children. The secret will of the Father
is, that of all that he has given me, I should lose nothing, John 6.39. The
revealed will of him that sent me is, That every o^e that sees the Son, and
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.

Gods judgments, which are the fountain of Reprobation, are abyssus magna,
Psalm. 36.6. and his mercy extended to all, that by faith apprehend the same,
is abyssus and profunditas, a great depth, Romans 11.37. Therefore we are not
curiously to enquire and search out of Gods secret touching Reprobation or
Election, but to adore it.

His revealed will does especially concern us, which is expressed in his
Commandments; whereby he declares whatsoever he desires at our hands, and
therefore our study must be to frame our lives and actions according to that
will.

Unto both these wills, we must give a fiat; but severally.

The first will is passive, and for as much as the secret will of God shall be
done whether we will or no, we crave that with patience we may submit our
selves to whatsoever he in his secret will has appointed to bring upon us.

The other will is active, and therein we desire, that we may willingly
practice that which he wills in his word.

There is voluntas de nobis, and voluntas in nobis; for the first, we desire
that we may approve of it, though it be done without us: in the second, we
desire not only an approbation, but a cooperation.

Touching his secret will, when we say fiat voluntas tua, we pray that Nihil
Dei displiceat nobis, that nothing which God commands displease us, and in
respect of his will declared, our desire is, that nihil nostrum displiceat Deo,
that nothing we do, do displease God.

Touching his secret will, so long as it is not plain (within his own
counsel he will compass) we may dissent from it, for a man may bona voluntate
velle, quod Deus non vult; he may with a good will, will that which God wills
not, so Samuels will was good, when he wept for Sa^l whom God would not have
him to bewail, 1 Samuel 26.

Secondly, we may bona voluntate nolle quod deus vult, with a good will not
will that which God wills: as a child may be unwilling of the death of his
Father, whom notwithstanding Gods will is, shall not recover.

Thirdly, men may mala voluntate velle, quod Deus non vult, with an ill will he
may will that which God wills not: The Patriarchs in a corrupt will would
go into Egypt, whom God would not to go thither.

And fourthly, they may in a corrupt will be unwilling to that which God
wills: So it was Gods will that Saul should be King, when as the people were
unwilling to it; and this is the state of the will of the creature, so long as
it is not acquainted with the will of his Creator.

But when once it pleases God to reveal his will, then we must say with the
people, fiat consilium Domini, Let the counsel of the Lord come to pass, Isa.
46.10. We must not wrestle nor struggle against it; but patiently submit our
wills to his, not only when Gods will is voluntas dulcis, when his will is to
do us good, as Bethuel spoke concerning the marriage of his daughter, Genesis
24.50. but when it is Amara and aversa voluntas, we must submit our wills to
his, when it pleases him to cross us, either outwardly, by taking away those
that are bereficiall to us: in which case it was said by some, that bewailed
the departure of Saint Paul, The will of the Lord be done, Act. 21.14. or in
our selves, in which case we may say with Christ, Luke 23. I would have this
cup pass from me; yet O Father, if thy will be other ways, not my will, but
thy will be done.

This lesson had David learned; for albeit he had complained of the great
affliction that he had suffered; yet he says, Tacui tamen Domine, Psalm. 39.
And as he was content to bear this, so he gave God thanks for them,
acknowledging, That is was good for him that he had been in trouble, Psalm. 119.

We must learn Jobs fruits, Job 1. as well as Bethuels, and these being
joined, we shall perfectly conform our wills to Gods secret will.

Concerning the will of God declared, or the will of his word, the Lord by his
Prophet says of his Church, My will is in it, but David speaks more plainly
of this revealed will, Thou have charged that we should keep thy Commandments
diligently, Psalm. 119.

The Apostle speaks more particularly, haec est voluntas Dei, sanctificatio
vestra, 1 These. 4. and this is the will of God, that by well-doing, ye should
stop the mouths of ignorant and foolish men, 1 Pet. 1.15.

This is the revealed will of God, and we must not only take notice of it, but
labor to practice that which in our understanding we know is meet to be done.

As the Apostle says, Oslende mihi fidem ex operibus tuis, James 2. Show methy
faith by thy works: So we must show our desire that we have unto Gods
Kingdom, by obedience of his will; for not they that sing, or say, or wish,
that Gods will be accomplished, but qui secerit, He which does the will of God,
shall enter into the Kingdom of God, Matthew. 7.

To the doing of Gods will, two things are required: first, that we lay aside
our own will: For as they that will sanctify Gods name, must say with David,
not to us, but to thy name give the praise. Psalm. 115. So that Gods will may be
done, we must say with Christ, not my will, but thy will be done, we must
abridge our selves of our own will, that Gods will may take place.

The better sort that are regenerate, do assent to the Law of God, that it is
good, and have a delight to it, Romans 7.22. but yet they see another law in
their members, which leads them unto the law of sin and death.

Every man finds that to be true in himself, that the flesh lusts against
the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, Gal. 5.

The will of the flesh wills one thing, and the will of God another, therefore
that Gods will may take place, we must renounce our own will, and as Christ
says, willingly deny our selves, Matthew. 16.24. We must oppose Gods will to the
will of the flesh, and the will of man, John 1.13.

We must pray unto God, Converte meum nolle in tuum velle, convert my froward
and unwilling will into thy will; and because thy will is the true will,
Insereolem voluntatis tuae oleastro voluntatis meae, ingraft the true Olive of
thy will into the wild Olive of my will.

If our will be contrary unto Gods will, and will not be subject unto it, then
we must scatter it, and pull it up by the roots, Psalm. 32.9. In chamo, and
fraeno constringe maxillas meas, (says an ancient Father) and upon the words
of Christ, Compel them to enter, that my house may be full, Luke 24. says
he, Compelle me Domine intrare, si vocare non est sais.

Secondly, that Gods will may be done in us, we must be possessed with a base
conceit of our will, and have an high, and reverent opinion of Gods will: we
must be persuaded that our own will is blind, and childish, and perverse, and
therefore Solomon says, Ne innitaris, etc. Do not lean to thine own
wisdom, Prove. 3.1. Every man is a beast by his own knowledge; and to
express the fault of man's will, Job says, that man is tanquam pullus asini,
like an wild Asses colt, Job 11.12. which of all other beasts is most foolish.
But be he never so wise naturally, yet he is but a fool in heavenly things,
as Saint Paul witnesses, 1 Cor. 2.14.

Men speak evil of things which they know not, yea, even in those things
which they know naturally they are but beasts, Judge. 10. All our reason and
understanding has not in it self sufficient direction for our will: and
therefore Christ says of Saint Peter, that flesh and blood did not reveal to
him that knowledge, that is attained by Gods Spirit, Matthew. 16. and in
spiritual things, Saint Paul he counseled not with flesh and blood, Gal. 1.16.

Lastly, our will is wholly inclined to that which is evil, Ier. 4. wherefore
one says truly, Toll voluntatem tuam, and ego extinguam inferaum: take away
thine own will, and I will quench hell fire.

They that are given over to Satan, as the Incestuous Corinthians, 1 Cor. 5.
may be restored, but those whom God gives over to their own will, Romans 1.24.
their case is desperate, and therefore we have the more cause to think the
more humbly of our own will, and willingly submit our selves to the holy will
of God.

Touching both, Saint Paul says, The Law is holy, and the Commandment is
holy, and just, and good, and the Law is spiritual, but I am carnal, sold
under sin, Romans 7.14.

But we must think honorably of Gods will: and this we cannot but do, if we
consider, that his will is so perfect, as it needs no rule to be guided by:
but our will being crooked, and perverse, must of necessity be directed by the
rule of his holy will, or else we shall swerve out of the way.

Our will is blind and foolish, but his will is full of counsel and wisdom;
our will is crooked, and perverse, and froward, but his will is full of all
goodness; which we are to understand hereby, that he shows himself a Father
to us: if a child be left to his own will, it is as much as his life is worth,
therefore withold not correction, but strike him with the rod, and he shall
not die, Prove. 22.13. and our will being childish, we must be abridged of it,
or else, we shall fall into danger: therefore we do pray, that we may not
only submit our will to Gods, but that we may utterly deny our own will,
being foolish: that Gods most holy will may take place in us: but we do not
only pray, that we may have a will, and desire to do Gods will, but also
ability, and power; for of our selves we have no strength to do it; that
appears by the petition it self, Nam quid stultius, quam petere id q^od
penes nos est? What is more foolish then to ask those things that are in our
own power? and the Apostle says, We are not sufficient of our selves to
think a good thought, 2 Cor. 3. Such is our corruption, That though God will,
yet we will not, Matthew. 23.

We cannot speak unto God; for no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by
the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12.

We do not find either will, or ability, but it is God that gives both,
Phil. 2. and though the Spirit be willing, yet the flesh is but weak, Matthew.
26.41.

Therefore we are petitioners for the grace of God, and for power from him,
without which we cannot do Gods will, so that our desire is, to obtain
something from God, whereby his will may be accomplished in us, for it is not
said, faciamus, or fac it is tuam voluntatem, let us do, or do thou thy will;
but, fiat voluntas tua, thy will be done.

Wherein we are to consider, a quo, and per quem fiat, from whom, and by whom
it is to be done, we pray not that we of our selves may do the will of God;
for no man can rise up to Heaven, unless he first receive a grace from
Heaven; He that is of the earth, speaks of the earth, John 3. Therefore our
suite is not only for good thoughts, and heavenly desires, but also for
ability of grace; but this grace is either passive or active.

The passive grace is that, which proceeds from God toward us; which stands
in offering grace, as God is said to do, 1 Pet. 1.13. or when he causes his
grace to appear to all men, Tit. 1.2.11. and that is not enough, unless we be
made capable of it; as it is invaine, that light does shine, unless we have
eyes to see it; and therefore as he offers grace, so he must give us grace,
and enable us, to draw grace from him, Prove. 12.2. That he would power grace
into us, Zach. 12. That he would sow in our hearts good thoughts, change our
affections, and make them conformable to his will; and so though the thoughts
of his heart seem hard to flesh and blood, may for all that please us.

And last, our desire is, ut induamur viriute ex alio, Luke 24. and he does
offer his grace, and does power it into us.

Then we must have that active grace, by which the will of God may be done in
us, of which the Prophet says, Omnia opera nostra operatus es in nobis, Thou
Lord have wrought all our works in us, Isa. 26. God must not only, sanare
cogitationem, and mutare affectum, heal the thought, and change our affection,
but perducere ad actum, that is, he must bring to pass, that as he gives us
ability to do his will, so his will may be done by us; we must say with the
Prophet, Psalm. 27. Thou art my help, for sake me not, O God of my salvation.

As he prevents us with his grace, by giving us both a will, and a power, so he
must still follow us with his grace, that we may go forward in doing of his
will, for our case is compared to the state of the Israelites, which in their
fight with Amalek, did prevail, as long as Moses held up his hand; but when he
let is down, they were put to the worse, Exodus 17. we may see it in the case
of Saint Peter, who was able to walk upon the water, while Christ held him up,
but when he was left to himself, he sunk, Matthew. 1.4. therefore we must have
not only a preventing, but also an accomplishing grace, that may still follow
us in our works: ne cessent in effectum, that they fail not in the upshot,
whereof the Evangelist makes mention, that from him who is full of grace, We
must receive grace for grace, John 1.14.

It was not the grace of God only, that wrought in Saint Paul, stirring him up
to ho linesse: but also gratia Dei, (...), The grace of God with me, 1 Cor. 15.
And when the Angels say (...), Toward men good will, Luke 2. they do not
only wish, that God will show good will toward men, but that he would
accomplish it in them, by infusing grace into their hearts.

Our desire therefore is, that the will of God may be done and sulfilled in
us, but yet by his grace, and the assistance both of his preventing and
follovving grace: And as for sanctifying of Gods name, our desire was, that it
may be sanctified of us; but if not, yet that it may ut fiat quovis modo, that
it be done hovvscever, that it may be done in others: but especially in our
own behalf, that when we are either unwilling or unable, to do his
revealed will; it may please him to give us the knowledge of it, and to put
into us the obedience of it, that being assured in our consciences, that we
have done the will of God, we may have that peace, and joy of the holy
Ghost, wherein the Kingdom of grace stands, which may be to us a pledge of
the Kingdom of glory, whereunto we shall be exalted after this life, if we
be careful both to submit our wills to Gods secret will, and to frame our
vvili and the actions of our life to that declared and open will of God,
which for our direction he has revealed in his word.

THE TWELFTH SERMON.
In Earth as it is in Heaven.
WHich words are an appendix to the three first Petitions; for though it be
added to the third, which concerns the doing of his will, yet the ancient
Fathers refer it also to the two former; So that we are to pray no less,
that Gods name may be sanctified in earth as it is in heaven: and that his
Kingdom may be consummate in earth, as i^ is in heaven, then that his will be
accomplished on earth, as it is in heaven.

Wherefore we may observe by this complement of the three first Petitions, that
God respects not only the doing of that which he requires, but chiesly the
manner of it; for it suffices not simply to do Gods will, as others do on
earth, but we must do it as it is done in heaven; for adverbes please God
better then verbes, and he respects more in the doing of his will, the manner
of the doing of it, then our doing it self.

The Greeks distinguish the will of God by both the words of (...) and (...)
when we do Gods will without any regard how, so it be done. that is his (...),
but when Gods will is done with a sicut, and in such fort as he requires, that
is his good pleasure, and (...).

Gods will was done of the people, when they sacrificed any beast whatsoever,
but if they chose out the fittest, then the sacrifice was the more acceptable,
so in this prayer, we do not only desire to do Gods will utcunque, without
regard how, whether with willingness and cheerfulness, or against our wills:
but we desire to do it in the best manner, as it is done in Heaven; wherein we
offer that sacrifice, or service to God, which is as the fat of Rams, for the
sanctifying of his Name.

The Apostle says, that at the Name of Jesus every knee shall bow, both of
things in heaven, in earth, and things under the earth, Phil. 2.10. But our
desire is so to reverence the Name of Jesus, as the things in heaven reverence
it.

Of Gods Kingdom it is said, that Christ is Ruler both in the midst of his
enemies, and also that in the day of his power the people shall as friends
offer free will offerings with an holy worship, Psalm. 110.2. But we pray that
Gods Kingdom may come among us, not as among his enemies, but that we may
willingly submit our selves to his will and government.

Lastly, for the doing of his will the Prophet said: Whatsoever the Lord
pleased that did he, in heaven, in earth, and in the Sea, Psalm. 135.6.

We desire that his will may be performed in us, not as in the deep places,
but as in heaven, for this prayer contains two Sicuts the one pertaines to
God, teaching us how to love him; the other concerns our neighbor, where we
pray so to be forgiven, as we forgive our debtors: so that as heretofore we
have noted, lege operandi lex statuitur supplicandi, though there were no law
to require the love of God, and our neighbor, yet this form of prayer does
teach us how to love God, and what perfect love we owe to our neighbor.

In the thing it self, we are to observe three points: first, a qualification:
secondly, an Elevation of the soul: thirdly, an application.

In the qualification we are to enquire what is meant by heaven, and earth,
either tanquam continentia, or else we may understand them as things contained
therein; then how Gods will is done therein.

Howso^ver our tongue or dialect speaks of heaven singularly; yet both Greek
and Latin imply a plurality of heavens, for there are three heavens: first,
the air where the birds fly, whence they are called volucres coeli, Matthew. 6.
Secondly, the heaven of heavens, where the Sun, Moon, and Stars are set to
give light: thirdly, that which the Apostle calls the third heaven, whereunto he
was taken up, which is the place of blessedness, where Gods Majesty is
especially resident, 2 Cor. 12.


In all these heavens which contain other bodies, in them we shall find that
Gods will is done.

Of the lower heaven the Prophet says, that it is obedient to Gods will, and
fulfills his word by sending down snow, and fire, and wind, Psalm. 148.

In the second heaven which Solomon calls the heaven of heavens, 1 Reg. 8.27.
Gods will is done, for there at Gods Commandment the Sun and Moon stood
still, contrary to their usual course, till the people of God avenged
themselves of their enemies, Josh. 10.13.

Thirdly, the earth it self, and things contained in it, do yield obedience to
heaven; for if the heaven be favorable in sending down rain and fruitful
seasons, Act. 4.17. Psalm. 65. the earth answerably will bring forth her
increase for the good of man; but if the heaven be brass, the earth also will
be Iron, Deuteronomy. 28.

Lastly, as the powers of the heavens are such, as that they can draw up clouds
from the earth, Psalm. 13.5. which do distill rain upon the earth, to water the
Furrows thereof; so we desire, that the spiritual heaven may transform us
into an heavenly nature, not setting our minds on earthly things, but on things
above.

For the things contained in heaven, as they are heavenly; so we desire, that
we living on earth, may have our conversation in heaven: that earthly man, to
whom God said, Terra es, Genesis 3. may by this means be made heavenly.

In the third heaven is contained, in respect of his humanity, first Christ
himself, who is both in heaven and earth: for as he is called the head, Ephesians.
3.23. of his Church, he is in Heaven: but in respect of his body, which is
called Christ, 1 Cor. 12. he is on earth. Therefore we pray, that Christ on
earth, that is, the Church, may do Gods will, even as Christ the head, who is
in heaven, has done it: that as Christ our head came not to do his own will,
but the will of him that sent him, Joh. 6.38. so the whole body of Christ may
labor to fulfill the same.

Secondly, in heaven thus are Angels, which fulfill his Commandment, and
hearken to the voice of his word, Psalm. 10. So our prayer is, that men, to whom
God has made the promise, that they shall be (...), Luke 20. may labor to be
like the Angels, in doing Gods will, as they hope to be like them in nature.

Thirdly, in heaven there is the Congregation of the first borne, Heb. 12.23.
that is, the Saints departed: wherefore our prayer is, that as they have, and
still do carefully fulfill Gods will, so the Saints on earth, and Church
militant, may do the same.

Again, whereas Saint Cyprian out of the 16. Psalm. 2. and 19.1. says, that
heaven is here upon earth; for when the Psalmist says: The Heavens declare the
glory of God, the Apostle applies that to himself and to the rest of the
Apostles, Romans 10. of whose preaching he says: No doubt their sound went out
into all Lands, and their words unto the ends of the World: So that the
Apostles were heavens living on earth: So our prayer is, that as they living on
earth, lived an heavenly life, and began heaven here, so our carnal heart may
be applied to the meditation of heaven, that we may be Saints on earth, Ps. 16.

The Wiseman says of the body, That it being dust, at the hour of death,
turns it self to dust, from whence it came, and that the spirit returns to
God that gave it, Eccl. 12.17. Thus must the spirit return to God in our
lifetime, and we must, while we be on earth, and bear the Image of the
earthly man, seek still to be in heaven: and here labor more and more to
bear the Image of the heavenly, 1 Cor. 15.49. As the heavenly part of man,
that is, his spirit, is willing, and does not only consent that Gods Law is
good, but delight in it, Romans 7. so must we be careful to bring our flesh in
subjection, that our old man, and outward man may conform himself to the
inward and new man, 2 Cor. 4. Ephesians. 4.

Secondly, touching the question; How Gods will is done in heaven? the answer
is, that where his will is both dulcis, and amara voluntas, a sweet and a
bitter will, it is there obeyed and performed in both kinds: for the heavens do
not only at Gods commandment keep a continual motion, which is agreeable to
nature, but against nature, Sun and Moon stand still at his will, Jos. 10.
whose obedience tells us, that our duty is to do his will, not only in things
agreeable with our nature, but when his will is contrary to our liking.

This obedience was performed in Christ: Not my will, but thine be done, Luke
22. and in the Angels, which at Gods commandment are ready not only to
ascend, but also to descend, Genesis 28. to show, that they are content, not only
to appear in heavenly glory, which is their nature, but also to be abased,
according to the Apostles rule, I can abound, and I can want, Phil. 4.

The heavenly bodies do service to all Nations, and the Angels are ministering
spirits, Heb. 1.

As naturally they have a desire to ascend to bear rule, so at Gods
commandment they are content to descend, to do service here below, they do
altogether fulfill Gods will, Psalm. 104. whereas the nature of man does hardly
grant to obey Gods will, in that which seems strange to flesh and blood, as
Agrippa affirms of himself, Thou somewhat perswadest me, Act. 26.25.

The Saints in heaven confess to God: Thou have created all things, and for
thy wills sake, they are, and were created, Rev. 4.11. And therefore refuse not
to subject their will to the will of God, be it pleasant to them or not: but as
our Savior speaks, Ye seek me, not because ye saw the miracles, but for
that ye did eat of the loaves and were filled, Joh. 6.26. So if we do that
which God requires, it is rather for our own sake, with regard to our own
private profit, then to do Gods will.

The heavenly Angels do Gods will with willingness, and readiness of mind,
which is the fat of their sacrifice: and therefore they are said to have every
one six wings, Esaias 6. From whose example we must learn to do all things
commanded of God, without murmuring or disputing, Phil. 2.14. and that because
it is Gods will we should do it.

In earth when God wills any thing, that is not pleasant to our wills, we make
excuse, Luke 14. or we post it off to others, as Peter said to John, Joh. 21.
Quid autem hic? We are ready to communicate with flesh and blood, Gal. 3.16.
and to say with the Disciples: Durus est hic sermo, this is a hard speech, Joh.
6. If we cannot shift it off from our selves, yet as the Devil reasoned; Cur
venisti ante tempus? Matthew. 18.29. and as the people say, It is not time yet to
build the house of the Lord, Hagg. 1.5. So we are ready to defer and prolong
the doing of Gods will, as much as may be, when we do it, as the unclean
spirit would not come out of the child, but with much crying, and renting of
him, Mark. 9.26. so we cannot do Gods will, but with great murmuring, and
grudging; and when men do Gods will in this sort, they do it not as it is done
in heaven by the Angels and Saints, that willingly obey it: but as the Devils
in hell, which against their wills are feign to do it. Therefore our rule in
this behalf is, that we do Gods will, not (...), 2 Cor. 9. but (...), Col. 3.
not grudgingly, but cheerfully from the heart, accounting it our meat to do the
will of our heavenly Father, Joh. 4.

Secondly, for the Elevation, it is true, that the qualification is signified
by (...), not (...), and our prayer is, that we may do Gods will as it is done
in heaven, but not as much, with like readiness of mind, but not in like
measure: (for that is impossible for earthly men) we desire to fulfill Gods
will in the manner, but not in the same degree of obedience, which may be
expressed by the words Image and likeness, Genesis 1. Our obedience may be the
likeness of the Angels; but not the Image.

The Character or Stamp of the Angels obedience, is that which is equal in
proportion; but such obedience is not to be found; there may be a beam of it,
answerable in likeness and quality, not in quantity; so in likeness we are,
Conformes imagine Christi, Romans 8. and bear the image of the heavenly Man, 1
Cor. 15. as endeavoring thereunto, but yet we cannot attain to it.

But albeit, it is hard for flesh and blood, which our Savior required: Be ye
perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect, Matthew. 5. yet there is an use of
such precepts: first, ut feramur ad perfectionem, that we may be led on to
perfection, Heb. 6.1. Secondly, we must have an Heroical and free spirit,
Psalm. 51. which may stir us up to wish that we could do more then we can,
which consists of Aspiration, and Suspiration. We must aspire to the greatest
perfection, with David: Concupivit anima mea, My soul has lusted to keep thy
righteous judgments for ever, Psalm. 119.20. And, O that my ways were so
directed* Psalm. 119.5.

This is an Angelical perfection, which we cannot attain unto in this life:
therefore we must suspirare, when we consider that the Law says, Thou shall
not lust, and yet find that we do lust, we are to sigh and say with the
Apostle, Who shall deliver us from this body of death? Romans 7.

If we find that we cannot love our God with all our heart, and soul, as we
ought, then to say with the Prophet, Vae mihi, quia prolongatus est incolatus
meus in terra! Woe is me that my dwelling is prolonged in the Tents of Kedar,
Psalm. 120.5.

We must desire to do more then we can, and grieve that we cannot do so much as
we ought; that as we do what we can, so what we cannot do, we should supply it,
Voto, desiderio, animo, with our hearty wish, desire, and mind.

Thirdly, the supplication is of two sorts, Real, and personal: Touching the
first, as the grace of God is multiformis gratia, 1 Pet. 4. So the will of God
being one, is of many sorts and contains diverse particulars: therefore, as we
generally pray that the will of God may be done, so when by the word of God we
understand, what is the will of God in particular, we are to desire, no less,
that it may be performed: This is the will of God, even your sanctification, 1 Thessalonians. 4. Therefore our desire must be, that this will of his may be done and
fulfilled in us. This is a special remedy against the temptations of the
flesh, which oppose themselves against Gods will.

There is another will of God for patience, for he would have us suffer for
Christ's sake, without murmuring, that so we may stop the mouths of ignorant
men, 1 Pet. 2.6. Therefore we are to pray, that this will of God also may be
done in us.

As Joseph was careful to do Gods will, touching sanctification, and Job to
obey Gods will in suffering patiently; both which are now Saints in Heaven; so
must we after their examples be both holy, and careful and patient.

It may be we are willing to obey Gods will in particular, but we will say,
Nondum venit hora, it is not yet time; Therefore we must learn to practice the
Prophets resolution, I made have, and prolonged not the time to keep thy Law,
Psalm. 119.

When God reveals his will to us, we must presently put it in practice, and
as Saul did, Act. 9. and not counsel with flesh and blood, and this is the
real application.

The persons to whom the doing of Gods will is to be applied, are not only the
whole earth (which is also to be wished, as the Prophet shows) Set up thy
self, O God, above the heaven, and thy glory above all the earth, Psalm. 57.
But the earth or land wherein we dwell (as the Prophet speaks) that glory may
dwell, interra nostra, in our land, Ps. 85. So we pray that Gods will may be
done in all lands, but especially in our land, and country, that so he may
bestow his blessings upon it, but yet we are every one of us particularly to
apply to our selves, for to man it was said by God, Terra es, Genesis 3. To man it
was said, Earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord, Jer. 22. So we
desire that Gods will may especially be done, and fulfilled, in that part of
the earth, whereof God has made us, that is, that in these our earthly
vessels, which we carry about with us, we may be careful to do that, which God
requires at our hands.

THE THIRTEENTH. SERMON.
Give us this day our daily bread.
OUt of the words of our Savior, in the sixth of Matthew. verse. 33. we have
elsewhere set down the order of these three Petitions, which concern our
selves, for the first is the Petition of Glory, and of Gods Kingdom, which our
Savior wills us to seek in the first place. The second is the Petition of
Grace, and of Gods righteousness, wherein we pray that Gods will may be done.
The third Petition tends to this end, that as the Prophet speaks, God would
not withold any temporal blessing, needful for this life; but that he would
give us all things that are necessary for us.

The things pertaining to Glory, for which we pray in the first place, are
Eternal; those that concern grace, are Spiritual; and the blessings of this
life, which we desire may not be withheld from us, are natural and temporal.

This is Natures prayer, for not only we, but all creatures above and beneath,
make the same suit to God, by the voice of Nature; the ravens of the air call
upon God, that he would feed them, Ps. 147. The Lions beneath roaring for their
prey, do seek their meat at God, Psalm. 104.21. and therefore no marvel that
we, in as much as we are creatures, do seek to God, who is the God of Nature,
to supply the defects of nature that we find in our selves, as other creatures;
and yet there is a difference betwixt us and them, for they call upon God only
for corporal food, that their bellies may be filled; but the prayer that we
make for outward things, is not without respect to things spiritual, and this
Petition follows upon the other, by good consequent, and order; for (as the
Heathen man says) Haud facile emergunt, quorum virtutibus obstat Res angusta
domi; So we shall be unfit to seek Gods Kingdom, and to do his will, unless
we have the helps of this life.

Therefore we desire that God will give us the things of this life, those
things without which we cannot serve him; that as we desire the glory of his
Kingdom, and the grace of his Spirit, whereby we may be enabled to do his
will, so he will minister to us all things for the supply of our outward
wants, in this life; the want whereof has been so great a disturbance to the
Saints of God in all times, that they could not go forward in godliness as
they would.

Abraham, by reason of the great famine that was in Canaan, was feign to go
down into Egypt, Genesis 12.7. The same occasion moved Isaac, to go down to
Abimelech at Gerar, Genesis 26. and Jacob to relieve his family in the great
dearth at this time, was feign to send his sons, the Patriarchs, into Egypt
to buy corn, Genesis 42. The children of Israel, when they wanted bread or
water, murmured against God and his servants, Exodus 16. Numb. 20. the Disciples
of our Savior were so troubled in mind, because they had forgotten to take
bread with them; that they understood not their Master, when he gave them
warning to beware of the leven of the Scribes and Pharisees, Matthew. 8. So the
want of outward things, does distract our Savior were so troubled in mind,
because they had forgotten to take bread with them; that they understood not
their Master, when he gave them warning to beware of the leven of the Scribes
and Pharisees, Matthew. 8. So the want of outward things, does distract our
minds, and makes us unfit for Gods service.

Therefore that we may in quietness of mind, intend those things that go
before in his prayer: our Savior has indicted us a form of prayer, to sue to
God, as well for things temporal, as spiritual, and eternal: for it is
lawful for us to pray for them, so that we do it in order.

The first Petition that the natural man makes, is for his daily bread, but
our care must be first for the Kingdom of God, next for the fulfilling of Gods
will and doing that righteousness which God requires at our hands: and after,
we may in the third place pray for such things as we stand in need of during
our life.

This blessing the Fathers observe out of the blessings which Isaac pronounced
upon his sons; Jacobs blessing was first the dew of heaven, and then the fat
of the earth, showing that the godly do prefer heavenly comforts before
earthly. Esaus blessing was, first the fatness of the earth, and next the dew
of heaven, to teach us, that profane persons do make more reckoning of earthly
commodities, then of heavenly comforts, Genesis 27.28. and 39.

Therefore in regard of the Spiritual account we are to make of Gods Kingdom,
and the doing of his will; we are to wish them in the first place, and then
David's Unam petii a Domino, One thing I have required of the Lord, Psalm. 27.
And that which Christ says to Martha, Unam est necessarium, one thing is
needful, Luke 10. would bring us to Salomons two things, Prove. 30. Give me
not poverty, nor riches; but feed me with food convenient for me; lest being
full, I deny thee, and say, who is the Lord? or being poor, I steal, and
take the name of my God in vain. And that is it which we are bold to do, by
Christ's own warrant; for he has taught us first to pray for his Kingdom,
then for the working of righteousness, or for the doing of Gods will, and
lastly, for daily bread.

If we do first pray for the two former, then we may be bold in the third place
to sue to God for the latter, for he has promised to withold no good thing
from them that lead a godly life; if the doing of Gods will be our meat, then,
Requiem dedit timentibus se, He has given rest to them that fear him, Psalm.
111.

In the Petition we are to observe from six words, six several points:
first, the thing that we desire, that is, bread: secondly, the attribute, our
bread: thirdly, daily bread: fourthly, we desire that this bread may be given
us: fifthly, not to me, but nobis, to us: sixthly hodie, and as long as we say
hodie, to day, Heb. 3.


To begin with giving: hitherto the tenor of this prayer ran in the third
person, now we are to pray in the second, saying: Da tu, whereupon the Church
has grounded a double dialect of prayer, which comes all to one effect; for
that which the Church prays for, Psalm. 67. God be merciful unto us, and
bless us, is no less a prayer, then if we should say, in the second person,
Miserere nostri, O Lord be merciful to us: and bless us, and that which is
added, and lift up his countenance, is all one, as if the Church, speaking to
God, should say, Lift up the light of thy countenance.

This change, or alteration of person, proceeds from the confidence, which
the Saints are to gather to themselves, in prayer: for having prayed for the
sanctifying of Gods name, for the accomplishment of his Kingdom, and for grace
and ability to do his will, Christ assures us, that we may be bold to speak
to God for our own wants.

Out of the word of Giving, we are to note three things: first, our own want;
for if we had it of our selves, we would not crave it of God: this confession
of our want, and indigence, is a great glory to God, that all the inhabitants
of the earth usque ad Regem Davidem, to profess to say, Give us, Psalm. 40. I
am poor and needy but the Lord cares for me; they do profess themselves to
be his beggars, not only by the voice of nature, which they utter for outward
things, as other unreasonable creatures do, but by those prayers, which they
make for the supply of grace, whereby they may be enabled to do Gods will, so
that not only regnum tuum is Gods gift, but also panem nostrum, we acknowledge
to be his gift. It is from God from whom we receive all things, as well the
good givings as the perfect gifts, Jam. 1.17. he is the author, not only of
blessings spiritual, but of benefits temporal; he gives us not only grace to
obey his will, but as the Prophet speaks, dat escam, Psalm. 104.

The idolatrous people say of their Idols, I will go after my lovers, that
give me my bread, and my water, my ^oyle, and my wine, but God says after, It
is I that gave her corn, and it is my wine, and my flax, and my oil, Hos.
2.8. Ipse dat semen sementi, and panem manducanti, 2 Cor. 9.10. We are
destitute of the meanest blessings that are; it is God only from whom we
receive all things, therefore to him we pray, acknowledging our own want, Da
nobis panem.

Secondly, we must consider the word Da, as it is set in opposition to Veniat,
or habeam panem, it must not content us that we have, bread, but labor that we
may have it of Gods gift; Esau said of things temporal which he enjoyed, I
have enough, Genesis 33. not acknowledging from whom: Balaam cared not how he came
by promotion, so he had it, and therefore he is said to have loved the wages of
unrighteousness, 2 Pet. 2.15. but we must labor, not so much to have good
things, as to have them from God: and Pilate is to acknowledge that the power
which he has, was given him from above, Joh. 19. and not to vaunt of any
usurped power.

It is said of God, Tu aperis manum tuam, Psalm. 104. Thou openest the doors of
heaven, Psalm. 78. So we are not so much to labor for temporal things by our
own endeavor, as that we may have them from God.

Thirdly, Da, opposed to rendering, teaches us, that it is not of our own
endeavor, but it is of Gods free bounty and liberality, that we have bread,
and other things: which while we seek for of Gods gift; we confess that to
be true which Solomon says, Non est panis sapientis, Be a man never so wise,
yet he has not always to supply his need, Eccles. 9.11. As he that is highest
gets not always the goal, nor the strongest man the victory: so says our
Savior, Which of you by taking thought can add one cubit to his stature?
Matthew. 6.

All our endeavors for the things of this life, are unprofitable, without Gods
blessing; It is in vain to rise up early, and to go to bed late, Psalm. 127.

And when he blesses our labor, then he is said to give us bread; and
therefore we are to confess with David, that whatsoever we have received, we
have received it at his hands, 1 Chronicles. 29.14.

Now the means of Gods giving, is of four sorts: First, God gives bread when
he blesses the earth with plenty; when he gives force to the heaven: When
the heaven hears the earth, the earth hears the Corn, the Wine, the Oil,
and they hear man, Hos. 2.21.

Secondly, he gives, when he sets us in some honest trade of life, and
vouchsafes his blessing to our endeavors therein, that we may get our living,
and eat the labor of our hands, Psalm. 128. without which the first giving
will do us no good.

Thirdly, he gives us bread, not only in his blessing the earth with increase,
and by blessing our honest pains in our vocation, but when he gives us Baculum
panis, the staff of bread; for at his pleasure he uses to break the staff
of bread, Levit. 26. and to make it of no power to nourish us: then are they
but beggarly elements, When we eat and have not enough, Hag. 1. Therefore our
prayer is, that he would cause the earth to yield us bread, so that to the
bread he would infuse a force, to strengthen man's heart, for which end it is
ordained, Psalm. 104.

Fourthly, because Moses says, Man lives not by bread only, but by the Word
of God: therefore we pray, that as our bread by his blessing, is made to us,
panis salubris, so it may be panis sanctus, Deuteronomy. 8. that he will give us grace
to use his creatures to the end that we may the better serve him; otherwise,
howsoever they nourish our bodies, yet they will prove poison to our souls.

God performs these three former givings to the Heathen, so that their
bellies are full with bread, but withal he sends leanness into their
souls, Psalm. 106. But Christian men have, not only the earth to yield her
fruit, Gods blessing being upon their labors, and a blessing upon the creature
it self, that it is not in vain, but nourishes; but also it is sanctified to
them, and that bread is properly theirs, because they are Gods children, Et
panis est filiorum, it is the childrens bread.

Secondly, the thing we desire to be given, is Bread, concerning which, because
the decays and defects of our nature are many, so as it were infinite to
express then severally, therefore our Savior Christ does here comprehend them
all under the term of Bread, using the same figure which God himself uses in
the law, where under one word, many things are contained.

Howsoever our wants be many, yet the heathen bring them all to these two
Pabulum, and latibulum, food and covering: and as they do, so does not only
Moses in the Law, where all that pertain to this life, is referred to victum,
and amictum, Deuteronomy. 10.18. but also Saint Paul, in the Epistle, 1 Timothy 6.8.
Hebentes victum and amictum, his contenti sumus.

So then, under this petition is contained, not only that God would give us
bread, by causing the earth to bring forth corn, and all good seasons for that
purpose, but that withal he will give us health of body, and not plague us
with sickness, as he did the Israelites, Psalm. 31. Then, that we may have
peace, without which these outward blessings will afford us no comfort: and
that as he fills our bellies with food, so he will give us Laetitiam cordis,
Act. 14.17. that is, all manner of contentment in this life.

Howbeit this petition stays not here, for the prayer of Christian men must
differ from the Lions roaring, and the Ravens crying: the end of their praying
is, that their bellies may be filled: but we must have as great a care for the
food of our souls: therefore where we call it panem nostrum, we do not mean
panem communem, such bread as is common to us with other creatures, but that
Spiritual bread, which is proper to men, which consists not only of body, but
of soul and body, which must be both fed: and where we pray that God would
give (...), we ask such bread as is apt and meet for our sustenance: that is,
not only Earthly, but Heavenly Bread, because we consist not only of a
terrestrial, but also of a celestial substance: so then our desire is, that
God would give us, not only, panem jumentorum, but panem Angelorum, Psalm. 78.
The bread of Angels; and our suit is as well for panis coeli, Joh. 6. as for
earthly bread.

The bread of the soul is Gods word, which has a great reference to earthly
bread: and therefore speaking of the sweetness of that bread, Job says, I
esteemed of the words of his mouth, more than my appointed food, Job, 23. and
David says, Thy word is sweeter then honey, and the honey comb, Psalm. 19.10.

In the New Testament the Apostle, to show the nourishing force of Gods word,
says, that Timothy was enutritus verbis fidei, 1 Timothy 4.6. To show the taste
or relish that it has as well as natural food, says, Gustaverit bonum
Deiverbum, has tasted the good word of God, Heb. 6. So the food of the soul
is to be desired at Gods hands as well as the bodily food.

There is a Famine as well of Gods word, as of bread, Amos 8. There is an
hungring and thirsting after righteousness, Matthew. 5. therefore we are to
pray, that God would supply the wants, not only of the body, but of the soul
likewise.

But there is a Spiritual food, both for Body and Soul, that which our
Savior promises, Joh. 6. He that comes to me shall not hunger, and he that
believes in me, shall never thirst: that is the hidden Manna that God has
promised for us in heaven; whereof it was said: Blessed is he that eats bread
in the Kingdom of God, Luke 14.

Thus, by how much the leanness of the soul is worse then bodily famine, so
much the more earnestly are we to pray for the spiritual food, then for the
food of the body.

Thirdly, for the first attribute, we pray not simply for Bread, but for our
Bread.

The word Our, has respect not only to Use, but to Property and right.

This right or property is double: First, that which was appointed in the
beginning: In sudore vultus tui comedes panem tuum, Our request to God is for
that food, which is gotten by honest pains taken in our calling, whereunto God
has made a promise, Thou shall eat the labor of thy hands, Psalm. 128. And
without which we have no right to this bodily food: For 2 Thessalonians. 3. Qui non
laborat, non manducet: He that labors not, let him not eat. Now we would
have God supply our wants with bread by right, and this right is general to
all adventurers.

Secondly, as we would have it made Ours, by the labor of our vocation, so by
the duty of invocation, that this corporal food, which is common to other
creatures, may be proper to us by calling upon God for his blessing upon it,
which if we do, we have a promise, it shall be truly ours. Open thy mouth, I
will fill it, Psalm. 81.11. For, the creatures of God are sanctified to us by
the Word of God and prayer, 1 Timothy 4.

This puts a difference betwixt the Christian man's bread, and that which the
profane man eats: for first, those slothful persons, whom the Apostle calls
slow-bellies, Tit. 1.12. cannot say this prayer as they ought: for they are
nothing but idle upon the earth, and Fruges consumere nati, borne to eat and
drink: they labor not for their living, but eat panem alienum, not suum;
which the Apostle requires, 2 Thessalonians. 3.12.

Secondly, those that eat the bread of violence, Prove. 4.17. and feed upon
bread, that is gotten by deceit, Prove. 20.17. do not eat panem suum, but
subdititium: they eat not panem datum a Deo, but a Daemone.

Thirdly, Esau having filled his belly, rose without giving God thanks after
he had eat, as without calling upon God for his blessing before, Genesis 25. For
the which also he is said to be profane, Heb. 12. So are all those that eat
of Gods creatures, without praying to him for his blessing, and for a
sanctified use of them; which thing if they refuse to do, as Atheists, and
profane persons, their bread may be panis salubris, but not sanctus, it may be
able to nourish their bodies, but it shall bring leanness to their souls.

Fourthly, the other attribute of bread, is Daily, concerning which we must
consider four things.

First, from the Latin word quotidianum, which has relation to the time; by
which word, as we acknowledge our daily want, and Gods continual care and
providence for the supply thereof, of whom it is said, Thou give meat in due
season, Psalm. 104. So Christ teaches us daily to praise and magnify Gods
care, daily extended toward us, and to use that Psalm of thanksgiving,
wherein the Church confesses Gods goodness in that behalf, Psalm. 145.

Secondly, for the Greek word (...), which signifies, bread apt and meet for
our substance.

Now, for as much as man consists of Body and Soul, his prayer to God must not
be only for such meat as is meet to nourish the Body, but also for the food
which agrees with the Soul: for it is in vain to have food, except it be
nutritive, and convenient for us.

Thirdly, the Syriack word used by our Savior signifies panem necessitatis
meae, which has relation to the quaility of the bread, teaching us not to pray
for Dainty meat, but such as is fit to relieve our hunger: Tribue victui meo
necessaria: not meat which is above my estate: Da panem necessitatis, non
lasciviae, bread of necessity, not wantonness.

The Israelites lusted after the Fleshpots of Egypt: and therefore God gave
them quails from heaven, but (which was the heavy judgment of God upon them)
they perished while the meat was in their mouths, Psalm. 78.

The Apostle wills us therefore, not to set our minds upon supenfluity: but
contrarily, (...), Food and Raiment, let us therewith be content.

Fourthly, the Hebrew word used, Prove. 30. has relation to the quantity: for
it signifies panem dimensi mei, non gulae; and it teaches us not to seek
abundance, but to desire of God to measure us out so much as he knows to be
meet for us, and as Christ speaks, to give us our portion of meat in due
season, Luke 12.22. For the Scripture tells us what inconvenience comes of
abundance of meat: Dilectus meus impinguatus recalcitravit, Deuteronomy. 32.15. My
beloved when he waxed fat, spurned with his heel; and the sin of Sodom was
fullness of bread, Ezekiel. 16. and the people by excessive eating and drinking of
wine, made themselves sick, Hos. 7.5. Therefore Christ diligently warns his
disciples to take heed of surfeiting and drunkenness for this cause: Ne
graventur corda, That your hearts wax not heavy.

Fifthly, in the word Nobis we must consider two things: First, a Reason:
secondly, a Limitation: For the first, we desire that this bread should be
given us.

First, because we are Gods creatures, he refuses not to hear the Lions and
Ravens in this behalf, when they cry to him. And our Savior says, that our
heavenly Father feeds the fowls of the air, Matthew. 6.26. And therefore we,
in regard we are his creatures, as well as they, we may by right make this
prayer to him.

Secondly, in as much as we are men, we may be bold to crave that favor at his
hands which he shows indifferently to all men: for he suffers the Sun to
shine on the evil, and on the good, Matthew. 5. And as David says: Oculi omnium
suspiciunt in te, The eyes of all wait and look up to thee, Psalm. 145.
Therefore we are to pray, that God will give bread, not only nobis animalibus,
but nobis hominibus, not only as to living creatures, but as to Men.

Thirdly, the Gentiles and Heathen people, which only seek after these
things, Matthew. 6. do obtain them at Gods hands; much more will God grant them
to us, which profess our selves Christians, and his Children.

Secondly, for the Limitation, it is not mihi, non meum, but give us, and give
our: the reason is, that as Solomon says, Prove. 5.6. Our wels may flow out
abroad, and that there may be rivers of waters in the streets, and that not
only we may not be burdensome to others, but that we may have to give to them
that have need, Ephesians. 4.

Sixthly, for the word Hodie, our Savior teaches us to pray, Give us bread
this day, and as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 3. Dum dicitur hodie; the reason is,
because life is but only dies, not seculum. And the Wise man says: Talk not
of to morrow, for thou know not what a day may bring forth. We may not say
to our soul: Soul, thou have store of goods laid up for many years. We see
by his example what may fall out, Luke 12. For as much as the continuance of
our life is uncertain, our desire must be, that God would give us sufficient
for our present want.

Howbeit this makes not for them that are careless for the time to come: for
such are sent to learn wisdom of the Ant, Prove. 30. which provides for
Winter: and not only the Saints at all times, have been careful and
provident for outward things, as Joseph who counseled Paraoh before hand to
lay up corn to feed him for seven years space during the famine, Genesis 41. But
our Savior himself gives charge, that that which remains should be saved,
and nothing lost, Joh. 6. And it was his pleasure that Judas should bear the
bag, for his and their provision, to teach us, that he allows provident
care for things earthly.

But by this word daily our Savior condemns (...), or immoderate care for
worldly things, whereby the soul is rent and divided, and not that (...), 1 Timothy 5. which is required of every man for his own household, and is both
lawful and honest.

Here arises an objection, how a man having filled his belly, or being ready
to leave this world, may say this prayer. The answer is, first, Multi
dormierunt divites qui surrexerunt pauperes: therefore our desire is, that as
we have enough now, so we may be preserved in this estate, and that God would
not change plenty into poverty. Again, though we have bread, and it continue
with us, yet it is nothing without that beata pax; therefore though we have the
thing it self, yet we are to desire that which is the life of bread, which is
a power to nourish; then, that God will give us the sanctified bread, which is
the heavenly Manna, and grace, that as we work for bread in our vocations, so
we remember to sanctify it by invocation; for else it is usurped bread.

THE FOVRTEENTH SERMON.
And forgive us our Debts.
AUgustine interpreting our Saviors words, of the shutting of Heaven in Elias
time, Luke 4.23. compared prayer to a key, that has power to open Heaven, from
whence all blessings descend unto us, and to shut the bottomless pit of Hell,
from whence all evils proceed. Prayer, is a means not only to draw all grace
from God, Prove. 12.2. but it is obex mali, and flagellum daemonis: as the name
of Christ is Oleum effusum, Cant. 1. because by it we receive all good; so the
name of the Lord is Turris fortissima, Prove. 18. for that it saves and defends
us from all evil.

As these are both truly affirmed of Gods name; so by the Invocation of the
name of God, we have this double benefit, that we do not only receive all
good by it, but also are delivered from all evil.

In the three former Petitions, our Savior has taught us to draw grace from
God; in these three latter we are taught to use that kind of prayer that
concerns the removing of all evil, called Tekinah, (...), and deprecation.

The evil is of three sorts, of sins past, and to come, and of the evil of
punishment.

In the first of these three Petitions, we pray against the guilt of sins
past, that God would not charge us with them: in the second, against the
running issue of sin to come, that God would not suffer us to sin
hereafter: in the third, that God would turn away from us all those plagues
that our sins deserve, both in this life, and in the life to come, and these
three Petitions are fitly opposed to the three former.

To the Kingdom of glory we oppose our sins: to the doing of Gods will,
temptation: to natural good things, the evil of the world to come: and the
miseries of this life; from both which we desire to be delivered, when we say,
deliver us from evil.

The Petition consists of debts, and forgiveness, but before we handle them,
we are to speak, first, of the necessity of this Petition: secondly, of the
goodness of God that penneth the Petition for us.

What need we have to pray to God for remission of our sins, appears hereby,
because our sins do make a partition between God and us, Esa. 59. the effect
whereof is, that our mis-deeds do turn Gods blessings from us, and do keep
good things from us, Ier. 5.25.

Now having already desired at Gods hands the glory of Gods Kingdom, the good
of grace, for the doing of his will, and all outward good things necessary for
this life: we are of necessity to pray that God will forgive us our sins,
which otherwise will hinder us of these good things: and as our sins do
hinder Gods graces that they cannot come to us; so they hinder our prayers,
that they cannot come to God, for our sins are as it were a cloud to hide
God, so that our prayers cannot go through, Lam. 3.44. So that except we
desire the forgiveness of our sins, we shall in vain pray for the three
former good things.

Besides, our sins are a plain hinderance to Gods Kingdom, for none shall
come thither, but such as are incorrupt, and void of sins in the whole
course of their life, Psalm. 15. Et nihil impurum ingreditur ill^c: no unclean
thing shall enter thither, Revel. 21.

Therefore the Prophet says, hic est omnis fructus, and auferantur peccata,
Isa. 27.9.

Secondly, the goodness of God appears herein that he has endited us a
prayer to ask remission, telling us that it is possible to obtain remission
of sin. It is true, that by our sins, we have made our selves incapable of
all good things, but yet we see the goodness of God, that as we have still
dona, so he teaches us to say, condona.

Where he teaches all men to pray for good things, we learn that we are all
mendici Dei: but in that we are taught to ask forgiveness of sin, we see
that we are malefici Dei, the malefactors of God, such as have need of pardon:
and the goodness of God toward us appears to be the greater in this behalf,
because there is no Angel nor spirit to whom he vouchsafes this favor, to
have their sins remitted, save only to man.

Of them it is said, he found no truth in his Angels, in his servants, and in
his Angels there were folly, Job 4.18. that is, they had trespasses, but yet
God will not forgive them, nor receive any supplication for pride; but
contrariwise, he keeps the Angels that sinned in everlasting chains to the
judgment of the great day, 2 Pet. 2. he that is the God of the spirits of all
flesh, Numb. 27.16. and 16.22. will not hear the spirits that sinned against
him: but thou that hear prayers, to thee shall all flesh come, Psalm. 65.

There is a way for man to escape the danger of sin, if he ask pardon: but
the sins of the wicked Angels shall not be forgiven. The elect Angels do
make the three first Petitions as well as we; and the Petition for the supply
of natural defects is common to all living creatures, but this which prays
for pardon of sins is proper only to man; so we see how God exercises his
goodness, and shows it; not only in exercising of liberality to them that
have need; but his long suffering in pardoning them that have sinned against
him.

To come to the Petition it self; by Debis, our Savior means sins,
expressly so called Luke 11.4. and sinners are called debtors, Luke 13.4. for
the Scripture speaks of them, Matthew. 18.24. one was brought that owed ten
thousand Talents, that is, which had committed a great number of sins, and
Luke 7.31. a lender had two debtors, by which are meant sinners; the reason
hereof is, because there is a resemblance betwixt sins and debts.

In the affairs of men, the case is thus, that if the condition be not
performed, they are bound to endure the penalty, and so become double indebted:
so it is between God and us, the sins that we commit by the breach of Gods
Law, is Chirographum contra nos, an handwriting against us, Col. 2. So they
are called in the old Testament, Thou writest heavy or hard things against us,
Job 13.26. and Ezech. 2. Our sins are compared to a book written in both sides;
for we are bound to keep Gods Commandments, because he made us, and not only
so, but he still does nourish and preserve us, therefore we ought to do his
will; he gives us Talents* Matthew. 25. which we ought to employ to his glory;
he gives us dwelling places in the world, as to the Israelites, he gave the
land of the Heathen, that they might keep his Statutes, and observe his Laws,
Psalm. 105. If we fulfill them, we discharge our duty to God, and are free from
all penalty, but if we do it not, there is an obligation, Deuteronomy. 27. Cursed is
every one that continues not in all things that are written to do them. If he
place us in the Vineyard, he will look to receive fruit of it, Matthew. 21. If
he give us Talents, he will have us so to employ them, as that he may reap
gain thereby, Luke 19. The gifts, and graces that God bestows upon us, must
be employed in hallowing his name, in enlarging his Kingdom, in
accomplishment of his will; if we fulfill this, the penalty of the Law takes no
hold on us, but if we do not only not use them to his glory, but abuse them,
and turn them to the breach of the Law, by serving sin, then are we in a
double sort indebted to God, and make our selves guilty of his wrath, Et quis
intelligit, etc. Who understands the power of his wrath? Psalm. 90.

If we consider how grievous plagues God threatened for the breach of the Law,
we would be more careful, and heedfull that we do not offend him, which
because we consider not, we become indebted to God.

We are debtors to the flesh, to provide for it only, so much as is meet for
the releeving of it, Rem. 8.12. And the rest of our care must be for the
spirit: but because all our care is for the flesh, to satisfy it, in
fulfilling the lusts thereof, and are careless of our spirits, therefore we
become indebted to God in a third sort, by breaking his Commandments, in that
which concerns our self, but this the Apostle says, I am debtor to the wise,
and the unwise, Romans 1.14. That is, we must be careful of others, as God said
to Caine, Where is thy brother? Genesis 4. But because omnes, quae sua sunt
quaerunt, all seek their own, Phil. 2. and seek not the good of others,
therefore they grow further indebted to God.

These debts, or sins, are properly said to be ours, because they proceed
from us, (for there is no member of our body that is not guilty of some sin)
and not in that sense, that bread is said to be ours, which comes to us, and
is made ours, by Gods gift; and when we pray forgive us our debts, we learn
that it is our duty to crave forgiveness for others, as for our selves, for as
the Apostle by these words, The rebukes of them that rebuked thee, fell upon
me, Romans 15.5. shows, that Christ was carried with the same zeal against
sin committed against God, as if it had been against himself; so he
teaches, that we must be moved with the like compassion toward others, when
we consider their sins, that we find in our selves for our own; and that we
ought no less to pray for them, then for our selves, and to suffer others to
pass over the bridge of Gods mercy, as well as we.

In the words debts, three things are to be noted: first, where Christ teaches
his Apostles, that were baptized, and the most perfect Christians that ever
were, to pray for remission of sins; it should work in our nature an
humiliation, for they in making this prayer, acknowledge themselves sinners,
much more ought we.

The Apostle Peter confesses of himself, Luke 5.3. I am a sinful man, Saint
Paul says of himself, peccatorum primus sum ego, I am the chief of sinners,
1 Timothy 1.15. Saint James including himself, and the rest of the Apostles,
says, in multis offendimus omnes, In many things we sin all, James 3.2.
Saint John says, If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, 1 John
1.9. He says not exaltamus nos, as the Apostle spoke of modesty, or non
humiliamus nos, we do not humble our selves: but decipimus nos, and if we
deny it, the truth is not in us: Seeing it is so, we must not say with the
Pharisee, I am not as this man, but with the Publican, God be merciful to me a
sinner, Luke 18.13.

Secondly, we are not only sinners, but daily sinners, as appears by this,
that we are taught, no less to pray daily for forgiveness of our sins,
then for bread; To confirm this, Solomon says, Septies in die cadit justus,
the just man falls seven times a day, Prove. 24. and as man eats and drinks
every day, so he drinks iniquity like water, Job 15.

Thirdly, we run into such debts, as we are not able to discharge: for if
we were, we needed not to say, Dimitte nobis, Forgive us our debts; but,
Have patience with me, and I will pay thee all, Matthew. 18.

To signify to us the greatness and number of our sins, one was brought
that ovved 500. pence, and another that ovved 50. Luke 7. and another that
ovved to his Master ten thousand Talents. By which we perceive, that we
cannot make satisfaction to God, therefore he must remit them.

The consideration whereof ought to work in us humiliation: First, that as
Job says, our hearts do not excuse us, and that we seek not to justify our
selves, that as God requires, we confess our mis-deeds, Levit. 26.40. that we
acknowledge our sins to God, and hide them not, Psalm. 32. For, if we confess
our sins, God is faithful to forgive our sins, 1 John 1.

Secondly, that we do not only confess, but be sorry for them, Psalm. 38.
that while we are in danger to God for our sins, we go and humble our
selves, and entreat him, and suffer not our eves to sleep, till we be sure how
we may obtain forgiveness, Prove. 6, 3.

The consideration of sin made David forget to eat his bread, Psalm. 102. so
greatly was he disquieted, till he was assured of pardon.

For the second point, if our sins be debts, they must be paid. Owe nothing
to any: but we are not able to answer one of a thousand, Job 9. and for the
penalty of malediction we are not able to endure it, Psalm. 90. Who knows the
power of his wrath? therefore our prayer must be to God, that our misery may
prevail more with God, to move him to compassion, then our unworthiness, to
stir up his indignation: and that he will Cancel the handwriting, Col. 2.
which thing, for that he is full of the bowels of compassion, Ier. 31.20. he
is moved to do, when he sees us sorry for our sins; howbeit his justice
must be satisfied, else his mercy cannot take place: but Christ by his death
having done that, God says of the sinner: Deliver him, for I have received a
reconciliation, Job 33. Qui circumcisus est, debtor est totius legis, Gal.
5.3. But Christ was circumcised, and therefore fulfilled the law for us, ad
ultimum quadrantem, to the utmost farthing: and not only so, but he says of
himself: Exolvi quae non rapui, I restored that which I took not, Psalm. 69.4.
He not only perfectly fulfilled the Law, but suffered the curse of the Law,
which he had not deserved, with this condition: Sinite istos abire, Let these
go, John 18. that is, he was content to be the reconciliation for us, that he
might draw us out of the hands of Gods justice.

The estate of our debts may be compared with the Widewes state that was left
in debt by her husband, 2 King. 4. for as the Lord blessed her Oil in such
sort, as she did not only pay her debts, but had enough to live on after; so
Christ is our Oleum effusum, our Oil powered out, that is of power not only to
satisfy Gods wrath for ous sins, but also to give us an estate in the Kingdom
of Heaven, and for his sake it is that we may be bold to pray for remission of
sins, and are taught to believe, that for his merits, our sins are
forgiven: so that is true, Legem operandi, and legem credendi, lex statuit
supplicandi, the Law of prayer stablished both the Law of obeying and believing.

Our of Dimitie, arise three things for our comfort: First, that even these
sins which we commit after Baptism, after our calling, and when we are come
to the knowledge of the truth, are remissible.

In teaching the Apostles to pray, he assures them of this favor, that the
same party that says peccata nostra, our sins, is taught to say, Pater
noster: Our Father. Our comfort therefore is, that still we are the children of
God, though great sinners: for though we lose the dutiful affection of
children, yet God cannot lose, Viscera patris, the tender bowels of a Father.

David, to a rebellious son, could not but show a fatherly affection: Do
good to the young man Absolon, 2 Samuel 18.5. So though the prodigal son had
offended hainously, yet the Father is ready to receive him, Luke 15.

Secondly, another comfort, that albeit we commit sin daily, yet he will
daily forgive us: for God should mock us, says Augustine, if bidding us pray
for forgiveness, he should for all that shut up the bowels of his mercy: he
bids us pray for pardon of our sins, putting no difference, whether they be
peny-debts, or Talents; whether fifty, or a thousand; if we ask forgiveness,
he tells us, be is ready daily to remit them.

Thirdly, that be our sins never so great, so great as cannot be satisfied by
us, yet he will forgive them, prop^er seipsum, for his own sake, Isa. 45.
Christ has made himself a satisfaction for the sins of the whole world, 1
John 2.

We must labor how we may soundly apply his satisfaction to our selves; and
among other means whereby we apply the satisfaction of Christ to our selves,
prayer is one: They shall confess their iniquities, then I will remember my
covenant, Levit. 26.40.41. He shall pray unto God, and he will be merciful
unto him, Job 33.26. I confessed my sins unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the
wickedness of my sin. Propter hoc, orabit omnis sanctus, Psalm. 32. For this
cause shall every one that is holy pray, etc.

By virtue of this prayer, Solomon says, that the people having committed any
sin, if they come into the house of the Lord, and pray for pardon: God, who
is in Heaven, will hear them, 1 King. 8.47. But this is more plain in the new
Testament, Matthew. 18. Did I not forgive thee? quia rogasti me; and to Simon
Magus: Pray to God, if he will forgive thee the thoughts of thy heart, Acts
8.22. that is, if we confess, and be sorry for our sins, and ask pardon, he
will forgive us; How long will thou be angry with thy people that prays to
thee? Psalm. 66. But we must be of the number that is meant by Nobis, that is of
the Apostles, that is, such as are baptized into Christ's death, Romans 6. We must
die unto sin, as he died for sin, Vt, sicut is demisit peccata, so we must
d^mitiere peccata, he has suffered in the flesh, and has ceased from sin, so
must we, 1 Pet. 4. We must have a care that hereafter we fall not into sin,
more then our infirmity compels us: For sins of infirmity, Gods grace is
sufficient, 2 Cor. 11. But if we willingly sin after remission, there is no
more sacrifice for sin, Heb. 10. We are therefore to crucify the flesh, with
the lusts and affections thereof; if we will be Christ's, and receive benefit
by his satisfaction, Gal. 5.

THE FIFTEENTH SERMON.
As we forgive them that trespass against us.
IN this Treatise it has been noted, that there is a double Sicut, annexed to
two several Petitions: the one concerning God, and our duty we owe to him, in
the third Petition: The other concerning our Ne^ghbour, and the charity that we
ought to show toward him, in this fifth Petition: wherein we are to consider
this, that as this law of Prayer, which our Savior prescribes to us, does
establish the law of works and faith, so these two Sicuts do comprehend the
sum of the Law, and the Prophets. The Law says, Thou shall not hate thy
brother in thy heart, Levit. 19. and the same is confirmed by this Petition,
wherein we are taught, that if we desire to have our sins forgiven of God, we
must not only not hate our brother without cause, but if he offend, we must
likewise forgive him. Neither does this Petition concern our Neighbor and
Brethren only, but our selves likewise: for hereby we have a pledge of
Remission of sins, if we acknowledge, that we have forgiven others: and as
the taking away of our sins, is the great fruit and benefit we desire of God:
so the subordinate means that God has appointed for the end, is the forgiving
others that offend us. Now God has laid upon us this blessed necessity of
forgiving one another, not only that he might establish peace in earth among
men; but that by this means glory might redound to God on high.

In respect of our selves, this is our estate before we become true
Christians: To be hateful, and to hate one another, Tit. 3.3. and that has a
sorrowful effect: For if we bite and devour one another, we shall be consumed
of one another, Gal. 5.15. To prevent this, Gods will is, that we should not
hate, but forgive one another, which unless we do, we cannot live peaceably;
so that this Petition has a respect to our benefit also, as well as our
Neighbors, and God himself also has his part in it: for when we have
forgiven our brethren, and purged our hearts of all hatred, we are more fit for
his service; and contrariwise, as without forgiving others we cannot live
peaceably one with another: so neither can we live devoutly toward God: and
therefore our Savior charge, If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and
remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee, leave there thy gift at
the Altar, and go thy way first, and be reconciled, Matthew. 5. and the Apostle
gives express charge, that man and wife should live quietly, ne interrumpantur
preces, 1 Pet. 3.7. lest their prayers be interrupted.

Thus it pleased the wisdom of God, in this Petition, to add this Sicut, not
for our neighbors sake only, nor for our selves only, but also in regard of
God.

The first Sicut, pertains to the imitation of the Saints in Heaven, this
does not imply an imitation: For God forbid, that God should no otherwise
forgive us then we forgive our brethren; but it is a mere condition, teaching
us, that if we forgive those that are indebted to us, we shall obtain
forgiveness of God: for we do not always subscribe to Gods commandment,
Forgive one another, as God for Christ's sake forgave you, Ephesians. 4. Col. 3. But
by saying this Petition we bind our selves to this condition: so as we would
no otherwise be forgiven, then as we forgive them.

At the first we became bound to keep his Law, which he did deliver in ten
Commandments, Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5. and for not fulfilling of it, we fall into
the penalty of Maledictus, Deuteronomy. 27.

Now, because we have not obeyed the Law, we are to undergo the penalty: and
therefore it is said to be Chirographam contra nos, Col. 2.

God having the Obligation in his own hands, might require the forfeiture of
us: but it pleases him to enter Bond to us by another Obligation, wherein he
binds himself to forgive our sins upon this condition, that we forgive
others: for if we forgive not, then his bond is void, as appears by the
parable wherein our Savior shows, that if we will have forgiveness of God,
we must forgive our brethren, and have compassion on our fellow servants, as
God has pity on us, Matthew. 18.

It is Christ that freeth us, both from the Obligation of the ten
Commandments, and of the twelve Curses and therefore as he that receives a
benefit does, as it were, become bound to the thankful: so we enter into a new
bond of thankfulness unto God, the condition whereof is, that we should
forgive our brethren, even as we desire to be forgiven of God.

By the words of this Petition, we see what our estate is, to wit, quil^bet
homo est debtor, habens debitorem, every man is a debtor, having a debtor: for
so it appears by the parable, Matthew. 18. wherein as one was brought that
ought a great many Talents to God; so he had another that ought an hundred
pence; but there is a great difference. The debts that man owes to God, are
great sins; but the debts that man owes to man, are of small value; we are
debtors to God, not only to keep the whole Law, but also to undergo the
curse of God, which is due, even to the least breach of the same, Deuteronomy. 27.

Secondly, we are indebted, not only for not using his Talents to his glory;
but for abusing them in the service of sin; even so we are debtors one to
another, Romans 1.14. not only when we neglect the duties of charity, and
justice; but, when we of purpose do wrong one to another.

Now we can be content that others should forgive us, and therefore if we will
have forgiveness of God, for the debts that we owe him, we must forgive our
brethren, For what you would that men should do to you, and in what measure,
even so do to them, Matthew. 7.

Therefore our Savior in penning this Petition, tells us, that if we make to
our brethren a release of our debts, he will release us of his; and this
condition is very reasonable; for Caine has no reason to hope for favor of
God, though he serve him never so devoutly one day, when notwithstanding he
has a purpose to kill his brother the next, Genesis 4. neither is it reasonable,
that he should say to God, Dimitte mihi, that will not say to his brother,
Dimitt^ tibi.

The difference betwixt Gods forgiving and ours is, first in the persons that
forgive; when we forgive, then one fellow servants forgives another, as duty
binds them, Matthew. 18. But when God forgives us, there Dominus dimittit servum.

Again, as I have a debtor of my fellow servants, so I may be indebted to him,
and therefore I ought rather to forgive him: but God cannot be indebted to us,
but we are all deeply in his debt, and therefore it is a reasonable condition
that he requires at our hands.

Secondly, in the things to be remitted, the number of Gods debts are
thousands, ours are but hundreths: his Talents, ours are but pence, Matthew. 18.
The condition therefore is reasonable on Gods behalf, if we consider the
excellency of his person, and the vileness of ours: If we regard how greatly
we are indebted to God, more then our brethren can be to us; ut pudeat alia
lege petere remissionem, that we may be ashamed under any other condition to
ask forgiveness.

Then we may not think much, that he requires this forgiveness at our hands,
but magnify his mercy, that having forfeited our first bond, it has pleased
him to remit it, and only to tie us to this: we are to thank him that he
vouchsafes, accipere stipulam, pro margaritis, to accept our stubble, for his
pearls; for the forgiveness of our sins (which was bought at so dear a
rate) to accept the forgiveness we show to our brethren.

Some would give thousands of Rams, and ten thousand rivers of Oil for this
great benefit, Mich. 6.7. Much more ought we condescend to God, when he
offers us so great a benefit, upon so easy a condition: and thus we see that
to be true in some part, which some of the Heathen have observed, De utilitate
capienda etiam ab inimicis: It is not altogether for our hurt that they wrong
and injury us, for unless there were some to offend us, we should not have
occasion to exercise this part of our mercy, in forgiving: and therefore,
where David compares his enemies to Bees, and not to Waspes, Psalm. 118. the
reason is, for that albeit Bees have stings; yet they yield honey also, and so
no doubt David received great comfort inwardly, by means of his enemies;
though outwardly they persecuted him, with all the malice they could; for he
that can master his own affections so far, as quietly to put up a wrong,
offered by an enemy, and to forgive the same, may be assured that his sins
are forgiven of God.

Wherein we are to consider the goodness of God, that vouchsafes to set men
in his own place, and to give men a power to forgive, even as he himself does
forgive; whereby it comes to pass, that one man is to another even in Gods
place, so that if we would know whether God do remit our sins, or no, we
need not to climb up to Heaven, to be certified of it, nor to go down into
the deep, for the word is near, even in our heart, and in our mouth, Romans 10.

If thy heart tells thee, that thou forgivest thy brother, doubt not, but God
does likewise forgive thee, and it is his mercy, that he vouchsafes to frame
his pardons after our pardon, to assure us that as we forgive one another in
earth, so God forgives us the sins that we have committed against him; and
he lays this necessity upon us, not only to show that he is careful to have
peace among men, but also that he would have us to be perfect as himself; for
God is said to be Proclivis ad misericordiam, tardus ad iram, and vindictam,
Prone to mercy, slow to wrath and revenge, Psalm. 145.

So Christ requiring of us, that we should forgive our brethren that offend us,
wills us to be slow to anger, and long suffering, as God is, for it is not
(as man judges) an honorable thing to be revenged. Wicked Lamech thought it
an honor, to take revenge, seventy times seven times, of any that offended
him, Genesis 4.24. but contrariwise Christ tells Saint Peter, that it should be a
greater honor for him, to forgive until seventy times seven times, Matthew. 18.
Therefore it becomes a Christian, rather to follow Christ, then wicked Lamech:
for as Christ says, It were better to lose the right eye, and the right hand,
then to have the whole body cast into hell fire, Matthew. 5.29. So it were better
for us, to suffer wrong for righteousness, then for worldly honor seek to
deprive our selves of the remission of our sins, which cannot be obtained of
God, except we be content to put up injuries offered to us.

If we will have true honor, let us imitate our heavenly Father, he is so
far from taking revenge of them that offend him, that he lets his Sun
shine upon them, Matthew. 5. So let us account it the greatest honor for us, to
aspire more and more, to resemble our Father herein, for the nobler sort of
creatures are not desirous of revenge, but only those that are vilest and of
lowest power, and of all creatures unreasonable, none so angry, as Flies, and
Waspes, and Bees, and of them that have reason, Women are more testy and
fretting then Men; and of Men, none more subject to anger then such as are
sick; in their greatest weakness, then are they most angry; which is no sign
of an honorable quality.

Let us therefore count it a shame to be like the weakest things, in this
behalf, and rather let us imitate the nobler creatures, which are more flow to
anger.

If we will be honorable, let us learn to get it by the example of such as
have true honor, Joseph in the Court of Pharaoh, no doubt was an honorable
man, and yet he placed not honor in taking revenge of his brethren, that had
rewarded him evil, but in forgiving them, and doing them good for evil, Genesis
50.21. David was an honorable man, and yet he placed honor in pardoning
Shimei, 2 Samuel 19. and to do good to Mephibosheth the son of Saul, that was
his deadly enemy: Solomon knew, no doubt, what was true honor, and yet he
gives us counsel, not to seek honor by revenge: Say not, I will do to him,
as he has done to me, Prove. 24. and the honorable King, that was angry with
the unmercifull servant, thought it more honor, to draw near the honor of
God, in pardoning, then in revenging, Matthew. 18.

The benefit that insueth upon this condition, is of two sorts, first, outward,
for by virtue of it, we have a covenant on Gods part; where in he binds
himself tous, that he will forgive us, if we forgive our brethren; so that we
may be bold to challenge him for his promise, so that we keep the condition.

Secondly, inward, for when we love the brethren, not in word, and tongue
only, but in deed and truth, that is a means for us, to persuade our hearts
before him, 1 John 3.19. If we forgive our brethren from our hearts, we may be
assured that God will forgive us. So our Savior affirms of the woman,
because she loved much, she had many sins forgiven her, Luke 7.27.

Some when they came to this Petition, left out this Sicut, and so passed on to
the next Petition: but we must use this prayer orderly; Christ is not mocked,
he penned the prayer for us himself, and therefore he can quickly espy, if we
leave out any of his words, and to teach us, that we should pray in true
charity, he has not only enjoined us to forgive our brethren, as we would be
forgiven; but wills us before we begin to pray, to bethink our selves
whether we forgive: Cum stabitis ad orandum, Mark 11. when ye stand to pray,
forgive: Secondly, as we must use this Sicut, so not with our lips only, but
with our heart, for otsterwife, we do imprecari nobis, we pray for vengeance
against our selves, and Christ may say to us, Ex ore tuo te judicabo serve
nequam, Luke 19. We cannot curse our selves more bitterly, then if we say to
God, forgive us, as we forgive our debtors, unless we d^e indeed forgive them.

As we run in debt with God daily, and so need daily forgiveness, the same
measure of charity we are to show to others that offend us: by forgiving them
their trespasses.

We must not think it enough to forgive them, till seven times, but until
seventy times seven times, and as we would not have a counterfeit forgiveness
of God, so we must be careful to forgive our brethren from our heart,
otherwise he will call back his word and promise made to us touching the
remission of our sins, Matthew. 18.35.

Whereas some count it a sufficient forgiveness to forgive only, though they
do not forget, they must know that it is only, Semiplena remissio, a
forgiveness by halfes: for we desire God by the Prophet, that he will not
only forgive, but forget our sins; and remember not our old sins, Psalm.
79.8. Therefore we must perform the same measure of charity in this behalf
to our brethren: and whereas the messenger of Satan does so buffet us, 2 Cor.
12. and our own corruption so prevails with us, that we cannot utterly forget
an injury, yet so long as we show not a revenge in deed, nor in word, nor in
look, but strive to master our corrupt affection, we shall be accounted
according to that we have, and not according to that we have not, 2 Cor. S. 12.

As for that which some object, that so the law of justice is overthrown by
this kind of mercy, Romans 3.31. It is not so, for mercy triumphs over
justice, Iam. 2.

Now, as prayer is a means to apply Christ's benefits and mercy to our souls,
as Christ shows, I forgave thee, because thou prayedst me, Matthew. 18. So that
is not enough unless we use charity and mercy; to dimitte tu, we must add,
nos dimittimus, the want whereof caused the King to deal so severely with the
unmercifull servant, Matthew. 18.

Now, mercy which is the second means of application, slands in giving, and
forgiving, Quicquid praestatur indigenti Eleemosynae est. Therefore because
these have need of forgiveness which offend, we should do a work of mercy
in forgiving them when they do us wrong, and both those kind of alms and
mercy are alike accepted of God, and therefore in the Law he ordained as well
peace offerings, as meat offerings.

That mercy is a means to us to apply this benefit unto our selves, which
Christ offers, appears by these places, Prove. 16.6. with mercy and
faithfulness sins are forgiven, Isa. 58.7. Dan. 4.27. and Luke 11. Date
Eleemosynam, and omnia sunt munda.

This is that which makes both prayer and fasting acceptable before God, and
without which all prayer is rejected as hypocritical, Mat. 6.16. Thus must we
have oil from him, and the vessel to receive it in us, dimitte and
dimittitis, that is both prayer and mercy.

As we pray to God for pardon of our sins, so we must forgive others, now
Christ makes choice of that kind of mercy, which stands in forgiving,
because it is common to poor and rich, for all cannot give, but the poor may
forgive as well as the rich, and therefore it is the duty of us all to forgive
one another, if we will be forgiven of God.

Secondly, he makes choice of this mercy, as the greatest and excellentest,
for nature will move us to give him that is in need, and we cannot in such
case hide our selves from our own flesh: But when we do not only forgive him
that has done us wrong, but also offer kindness to him that did provoke us to
anger, that is a supernatural work.

Thirdly, it is the fittest mercy, for we desire to be remitted, and
therefore the fittest means to obtain remission is, that mercy which stands
in remission, and forgiving of others.

The mercy that we show in this behalf, is active mercy; that which God
promises us, if we forgive our brethren, is a passive mercy.

Of the active mercy, our Savior says: Blessed are the merciful, for they
shall obtain mercy, Matthew. 5. But contrariwise, here shall be judgment
merciless to him that shows no mercy, James 2.13. Wherefore we must so
deal with those which offend us, that we may say to God: Ecce misericordiam
activam, praesta mihi passivam: Behold my active mercy, perform to me thy
passive mercy.

And to show you the necessity of this duty on our parts, Christ having penned
this Petition upon this condition, is not contented therewith, but having ended
the prayer, he returns to the same matter, and shows why we should forgive
our debtors: For if ye (says he) forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly
Father will forgive you yours, but if you will not, neither will God forgive
you, and hereof he has given an example in the parable of the King, Matthew. 18.
who to show to us, what we are to look for at Gods hands, is said to have
been loving and merciful, at the first, to him that was indebted so far
unto him: But when the same party having the debt which he ought, pardoned,
would notwithstanding have present payment of his fellow servants; then the
Kings affection was turned, and he became severe and rough, and committed him,
till he had paid all that was due.

THE SIXTEENTH SERMON.
And lead us not into tentation.
THis is the Petition that concerns sin to come: for Remission, which was the
thing we prayed for last, is referred to sins past, Romans 3.25. and we are no
less to desire of God, that he will give us ability to resist sin to come;
then to be gracious to us in pardoning our sins already committed: thus much
we are given to understand, by this, that this Petition is chained to the
former, with the copulative, And, as if that were not perfected, without this,
no more in deed is it, for as God lets go his hold, so must we let go ours;
and if we will have God to remit our former sins; we must beware, that we
do not willingly sin against his Majesty afresh; but that we strive against
temptations to come: For as the Psalmist speaks: If I incline to wickedness in
my heart, the Lord will not hear me, Psalm. 66.16. If I purpose still to
continue in sin, I shall in vain pray, Forgive me my sins. But
contrariwayes, he that does not only confess, but also forsake his sins, he
shall have mercy, Prove. 28.13.

If accounting it sufficient, that we have spent the time of our life past in
sin, we shall resolve henceforth to live, so much time as remains for us in
the flesh, after the will of God, 1 Pet. 4.3. Then may we assure our selves,
that God will be merciful unto us; and will remember our sins and iniquities
no more. And that which we are to perform in this behalf, is, the second part
of Remission, which is opposed, both to retention and intention: that is, as we
would have God not to retain our sins, but freely to pardon them, so our
care must be, that sin be more remiss in us: for whereas in the last
Petition we considered a Double debt, one of Duty, another of Forfeiture, our
desire was, not to have both forgiven, but we desired to be forgiven, quia non
prestitimus; non ne praestemus: because we perform it not; not that we might
not at all perform it.

Howsoever our prayer to God is, that he would not lay upon us the penalty,
which we have run into, by not keeping his Law, yet we are still bound to do
our duty.

Now, whereas the Prophet says, Hic est omnis fructus, ut auseratur peccatum,
Isay 27. We may not think, that sin is taken away, when God, for his part,
does remit the guilt of our sins past, for sin consists not only of an
offense, or guilt, but of an issue, or inclination to sin: so that our care
must be, as well that we pray, that this running issue may be stopped, as that
punishment due to us for sins past be remitted: and to this end, both parts
of repentance are required of us: that is, Sorrow for sins past, and a
provident care to avoid sin to come: we must by prayer seek for grace of
God, non modo qua deleatur debitum, sed ne contrahatur debitum: not only, that
our debts may be done away, but that it may not be contracted; as the widow, by
the blessing of God, had sufficient oil, not only to pay her Creditors
withal, but also to live upon afterward, 2 King. 4. So we must seek of
Christ, the oil of his grace, both for the discharging of our sins, and for
an holy life.

As we would be glad to hear this voice from Christ, Remissa sunt tibi
peccata, Luke 7. So we must be content with this: Vade, and noli amplius
peccare: Go thy way, and sin no more, John 8.

As God on his part does covenant with us, that he will remember our sins and
iniquities no more, Ier. 31. So, that which he requires of us, Haec est via,
ambulate inea, Isa. 30.21. For it is not enough for us to confess our sins
and be sorry, Psalm. 38. nor yet to perform our active mercy by giving and
forgiving, except we have a resolute purpose to forsake the sins we have
heretofore committed: for if being washed from our old sins, we shall wallow
in the mire like swine, and return to our vomit, then shall our latter end be
worse then our beginning, 2 Pet. 2. This is one reason, why this copulative
conjunction is set before this Petition.

Another is, in regard of the fickleness of our estate: we may not think our
selves secure when we have forgiveness of our sins. The Apostles of our
Savior Christ having received the Sacrament, which as Christ told them, was a
seal of the remission of sins, purchased by the shedding of his blood, fell
into a sleepiness, so as they were not able in time of greatest peril, to
watch with their Master one hour: therefore he was feign to warn them: Pray,
that ye enter not into tentation, Matthew. 26. the reason is, because the Devil
is most malicious against them that are recovered out of his thraldom: For
when the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he is never quiet, till he
return again, and that he may, he will use all the means he can, Mat. 12. So
that they (of all others) are in most danger, and most subject to the malice
and rage of the Devil, that are restored out of the state of sin, into the
state of grace: and therefore we pray, that as God in his mercy does vouchsafe
to pardon our sins past; so it will please him to strengthen us with his
grace, that we may withstand the temptations of Satan.

The Petition has two things to be considered, the Temptation, and the
Leading. Temptation (that we may know what we ask, Matthew. 20.) is a Trial or
Proof, and is of two sorts: (...), and (...), the one good, the other evil,
the one is made by God, the other by Satan.

God is said to tempt us, when he makes trial of our faith, which trial is
more precious then gold, 1 Pet. 1.7. as in Abraham, or when he tries our
patience, James 1. as in Job: for while we live in this world we are
spectaculum Angelis, and hominibus, 1 Cor. 4.

God therefore in his wisdom thinks it good to try our faith, and patience,
by laying affliction upon us, that albeit he know us sufficiently, yet that
both Men and Angels may have a proof of our faith, he tries us: for as the
dross is consumed with fire, and the pure gold remains behind: so the
pureness of our faith is tried with the fire of affliction: this is that Fan
which Christ is said to have in his hand, whereby he purges his flower, and
separateth the good Corn from the Chafe, Matthew. 3.

The other proof or trial is, that which Satan makes: for as God tempts
Abraham, Genesis 22. for his good: so Satan tempted Adam, Genesis 3. but not for his
good, but only to draw him away from his God: as Christ has his Fan, so Satan
has his, Luke 22. Satan has desired to sift and winnow you. The difference
is, that whereas God by affliction thinks good to prove how steadfastly we
believe in him, and how willingly we will undergo the cross for his sake: The
Devils purpose is, that by all means he may quench our faith, and dash our
patience.

The Devils trial therefore is, tentatio ad detrimentum, non ad experimentum.
Gods tentation makes us happy: Blessed is he that endures temptation, James
1. but the Devils temptation brings us to misery, and this latter is that
against which we pray, and it is of two sorts: first, that which the Apostle
calls, tentatio humana, such as is incident to the nature of man: secondly,
tentatio Satanica.

Humane temptations are such as are hecessary, and cannot be avoided, by reason
of the corruption of nature; of which the Prophet speaks, when he prays,
Libera me de necessitatibus meis, Psalm. 25.16: The Apostle does more plainly
express it, when he calls it the infirmity of the flesh, Romans 6. and the sin
that dwells in us, Romans 7. which causes this necessity, that while we remain
in the body, the flesh will ever lust against the spirit, Gal. 5. But there is
another kind of temptation, which is Devilish; when we do not sin of
infirmity, or through the necessary weakness of the flesh: but of malicious
purpose, that whereof the Prophet speaks, Be not merciful to them that
trespass of malicious wickedness, Psalm. 59. and, Keep thy servant from
presumptuous sins, Psalm. 19. These sins proceed not from that necessity of
sinning, which does accompany our nature: but from that corruption of nature,
which the Apostle does call the superfluity of wickedness, James 1.2. These
proceed not from sin that dwells in us, but from that sin, which reigns in
us, Romans 6. And as we desire, that God will pardon our necessary tentations: so
especially we are to pray, that we may not fall into these superfluous sins,
as the Prophet does pray, Psalm. 19. Keep thy servant from presumptuous sins,
that they get not the Dominion over me. And, Order my steps in thy word: Ne
dominetur mihi omnis iniquitas, Psalm. 119.

For the better understanding of this point, we are to consider what are the
tentations, and tentamenta: that is, the things whereby we are tempted.

The Tentations are either without us, or within us.

Without, first the Devil, that is, the Tempter, 1 These. 3. Secondly, the
corruption that is in the world through lust, 2 Pet. 1.
The Tempter within us is, our own concupiscence, James 1.14. without which
the outward Tempters should not only not hurt us, but also greatly profit us:
for the Devil shall in vain tempt us, and the evil examples of the world
shall not allure us, unless we, in the lusts of our hearts, do suffer our
selves to be overcome: and therefore one says well: Teipsum vince, and victus
est mundus and Satanas. If there be neither covetousness in us, nor the lust
of the flesh, the Devil shall not be able to prevail against us, but we shall
stand unconquered, both of worldly lusts and of the lusts of the flesh.

The things whereby the Devil tempts us, are Massah, and Meribah, Psalm.
95.8. whereby is understood, Prosperity and Adversity. One while, as a Serpent,
he allureth us by pleasures, and if he prevail not that way, then, like a
roaring Lion, he terrifieth with violent danger: and that he may have his will
of us, by one of these means, he bewitcheth our understanding, Gal. 3. so
that we either make great account of those things, which indeed are of least
value, or else judge the danger which he threatens, to be more terrible then
it is.

From this Petition, we are to acknowledge, that where we pray, that God will
deliver us from tentation: first, in regard of our selves, we are unable to
encounter with these temptations, and to withstand the least temptation, and
yet the grace of God is sufficient for us: so that albeit, in the light of our
own understanding, we cannot discern what is true pleasure, or what is in
deed to be feared; yet as the Prophet speaks, In lumine tuo videbimus lumen;
In thy light we shall see light, Psalm. 36. and though the messenger of Satan
buffet us never so much, yet Gods grace shall make us to have the victory,
without which we are not able to resist the first temptations.

Which considerations serve to keep us from pride, and to work in us
humility, 2 Cor. 12.

Secondly, in regard of our tempters, we are to acknowledge, that the Devil,
much less any thing else, cannot be able to tempt us, without Gods permission:
so he was not able to touch Job, until he had leave of God, nor the heard of
swine, till Christ had permitted him to enter, Matthew. 18.

Thus we see that Satan is chained by God, so that he cannot go further then
God will give him leave, which makes for our comfort.

Temptation is necessary, and therefore we pray not, ne tentet nos Satanas, but
ne Deus nos inducat: For it is Gods will to use Satan's service in this work,
and that if we feel that our corruption does yield to sin, we are to say
with the Prophet, Let God arise, Psalm. 68. and, Save me O God, Psalm. 69. Also
with Ezechiah, Domine vim patior, responde pro me, Isa. 36. O Lord I suffer
oppression, comfort thou me.

Touching the leading into tentation, we desire not to be led, which has two
expositions: first, that God, who knows our weakness, will not give leave to
the Devil to tempt us at all, by any of those means, because the issue of
tentation is doubtful, for many excellent men, even the Saints of God have
been overcome thereby.

Secondly, at the least ne inducat, that he lead us not into them, which have
three differences: first, in respect of God, that albeit the Devils desire be
to sift us, Luke 22. yet, ne inducas tu, though the lying spirit be ready to
entice us, that we might fall, yet, that God would not command him to go
forth, 1 King. 22. yet that he would not deliver us over in Satan's hands, and
leave us to our selves.

Secondly, in regard of us, that we commit not sin that leads thereunto, for
qui ducitur volens ducitur: but that if we needs must yield to temptations, it
may rather lay hold on us by violence against our wills, then lead us: so the
Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 10. Tentatio vos non apprehendit, Tentation has not
taken hold of you: and when our Savior says to his Disciples, Orate ne
intretis intentationem, pray that ye enter not into tentation: his meaning is,
that willingly and wittingly, and of delight of your selves, otherwise then as
the infirmity of your flesh does compel you: for if any willingly enter into
tentation, these God suffers to be led into it, so as they cannot get out any
more; that is, the Gentiles till they be effectually called, are said to commit
all uncleanness with greediness, Ephesians. 4.19. So we do not devour the
temptations that are incident to our nature, and that as the Syriake word, used
by our Savior, is, we take not pain to satisfy the tentations of Satan, as
it were to climb up into an high tree.

Thirdly, in respect of the nature of the Greek word, which is rather ne
inferas, the ne inducas.

Of Christ's leading into tentation, Matthew. 4. it is said, (...), that is, so
led, as that he was brought back again, but our leading by the Devil, is, so
to be carried into temptations, as that withal we are left there to our selves.

Christ's tentation had an issue, 1 Cor. 10. nostra non habet exitum, ours has
no issue: but our prayer is not only, that it be against our will, if at any
time we be tempted, but that in the tentation he would so hold us by the hand
that we may get out of it, that albeit we be led into it, that we may be
brought back again.

From whence this question arises, Whether God lead any into tentation, so as
they never get out of it again: The answer is, that there are some such, but
they are those that first suffer themselves to be led, even as he hardens no
man's heart, but his that first hardens his own heart.

Of Pharaoh it is said, that albeit Aarons rod eat up the inchanters rods,
that yet he hardened his heart, Exodus 7.13. After Exodus 8. when the Sorcerers
told him, Digitus Dei hic est, this is the singer of God: yet he hardened his
own heart; and then God seeing his obstinacy, Induravit corejus, hardened his
heart, Exodus 12.

So when Ahab had first sold himself to work wickedness, 1 King. 19.20. then
it pleased God to deliver him to the lying spirit, to deceive him, that he
might fall, 1 King. 22. Because Ephraim would have many Altars to serve, God
gave them many Altars, Hos. 8.11.

That we be not led into tentation, the means that we are to use is, that we
put from before our face the stumbling blocks of iniquity, Ezekiel. 14. that we
restrain our eyes and mouths from beholding, or speaking that which is evil,
that we restrain our feet, as the Wiseman says: Keep thy way far from
her, and come not into the door of her house, Prove. 5.8. For can a man take
fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be burnt? Prove. 6.

Therefore if we will not be led into tentation, we must not lead our selves,
nor tempt our selves, nor grope for sin, for the Devils tentation cannot hurt
us: it shall be a means to grace us, if we withstand it: but if we will be
drawn away of our own lusts, then we cannot but be led.

As we must forbear the occasion of sin, so must we use the means that may
keep us from it, that is prayer.

We must make a covenant with our eyes, Job 31. so we shall not be tempted.

As we prayed, that Gods will, touching sanctification, 1 These. 4. and
suffering, may be done of us, so we are to pray, not generally to be delivered
from the temptations of sin; but particularly, from the temptation of any
several sin, whereunto we are inclined: if to worldly lusts, Tit. 2.12. that
he would keep us from them; If to the lusts of the flesh, 1 Pet. 2. that he
will not suffer us to be tempted of them neither, that as our tentation
increases, so his strength may increase, and if not increase, then that he
will cause his tentation to decrease.

THE SEVENTEENTH SERMON.
MATTHEW. 6.13. But deliver us from evil.


THis last Petition concerns the last of those three evils, which we desire
to have removed from us; under which we comprehend all miseries and calamities
of this life, for that is it which our Savior understands by the evil of
the day, in the last verse of this Chapter.

So there is a plain opposition betwixt this Petition and the fourth.

As there by daily bread, we understood all things necessary for this present
life: so when we say, Deliver us from evil, we seek to be delivered from all
such things as are laborious and troublesome to us in the same.

There are that make but six Petitions of this Prayer, saying, that the two
last are but one, but they have no warrant for it.

The ancient Church has always divided it into seven, and this division they
grounded upon the motive, which caused our Savior Christ to pen this prayer,
which was the avoiding of that (...), used by the Heathen, Matthew. 6. v. 7. into
which they cannot choose but fall, which affirm, that these two last Petitions
contain but one thing, wherein they are deceived; for temptation, and evil
are not of one scantling.

Every evil is not tentation, neither is every temptation evil.

Some things are evil in their own kind, as wolves, and Kites: other things
are not only evil in themselves, but bring forth evil effects, for our
sins are not only evil, but the calamities and miseries which our sins
bring upon us, are also evil: and therefore we are to pray no less against
the one, then against the other.

Touching the misery of this life, we are to pray as the Prophet wills us, for
the deliverance from them, Psalm. 50. Call upon me in the day of thy trouble.

That this and the former cannot be one Petition, appears, for where we pray
that we be not led into temptation, we desire that we may do no evil, when we
pray that we may be delivered from evil, our desire is that we may suffer no
evil.

In the first we pray against malum culpae, in the second against malum poenae.

The first is an evil of our own doing, the other of Gods doing, as the
Prophet speaks Amos 3. Non est malum in Civitate, quod non facit Dominus.

As before sin committed, we desired non induci: so here, when we have
committed sin, our desire is, that God would not deliver us to our Ghostly
enemy, that he may afflict us in this life with temporal plagues, nor in the
life to come keep us in eternal torments.

When we desire that God will deliver us from the miseries of this life, and of
the life to come, we have these things to consider: first, that the case of
Christian men is not like the state of the Heathens, for they had Joves white
gods, from whom they received good things, and black gods, whom they called
depulsores malorum: but Christians have but one God to fly to, whom they
acknowledge to be both (...), and (...), a God that does not only give us good
things, but takes from us those that are evil: so God testifies of himself
to Abraham, that he is not only his exceeding great reward, but also his
shield, Genesis 15. both which we are to consider in this, that in Scripture he is
compared to a rock.

Secondly, that the devil has a desire to carry us away into sin and
transgression, to the end he may endanger our souls, and if he cannot hurt us
that way; then he will labor to do us some outward mischief: if he cannot
prevail as a tempter, yet that he may hurt us as a tormenter.

So he dealt with Job, who for that he was a just and perfect man, so as Satan
could not tempt him to sin against God, therefore his desire was, that he
might touch his body, and torment him with outward losses, for his delight is
evermore in doing of mischief; if he can no longer vex the soul of man, yet
he will crave this leave, that he may torment the poor hogs, Luke 8.32.

Thirdly, that we have two kind of helps against this evil: first, that
precaution which our Savior tells us of in the former Petition, that before we
commit sin, we pray, non induci; that neither temptation come at us, nor we at
it. Secondly, that albeit we by sin are fallen into evil, yet there is a
(...), or salving to be looked for of God, who will deliver us after that we
are delivered into the hands of our adversary, as in the first Petition, we
pray that we may not fall into evil by yielding to temptation: so here, if we
be fallen, yet God would deliver us out of it. Both these helps are ascribed
to God.

Of the first it is said to him, he that makes his prayer for his help, the
enemy shall not be able to do him hurt, and the son of wickedness shall not
come nigh him, Psalm. 89. Of the other, Let not the waterflood drown me, nor
the deep swallow me up, and let not the pit shut her mouth upon me, Ps.
69.16.

Touching the evil from which we desire to be delivered, Chrysostom, and the
rest of the Greek Church, expound it of the devil, who is Lerna malorum, or
the greatest evil that can befall us, which exposition is grounded upon the
Article, (...) but this exposition is too narrow: and for the holy word is best
expounded, when it is most enlarged: so that we shall have a full
understanding of this matter, if under the word Evil, we include whatsoever is
evil, and so desire generally to be delivered from it: but if we desire to be
delivered from whatsoever is evil, then from our selves, (says Augustine:)
for we are evil, and so we have need to pray: for as, when we ask
forgiveness of sins, it is from those sins, unto which our lust has
already drawn us away into sin: so when we say, Libera nos a malo, that is,
ab abstrahente, from that infirmity of the flesh, and necessity of sinning,
which does accompany our nature, in regard whereof the Apostle says, Quis me
liberabit de hoc corpore mortis? Romans 7.24.

So Augustine under the word, Evil, does include, not only (...), but (...).

But Cyprians exposition is, when we pray, libera nos a malo, we desire not to
be delivered from this, or that evil, but generally from all evil, by which
he means not (...), nor (...), but (...): that is, all manner of trouble, and
calamity, and whatsoever turns away good from us, especially that evil which
keeps us from God, which is the chiefest good thing: so then our desire is not
only to be delivered from the devil, who is the beginning of all evil, as
that which is opposed to our chief good; but from that which may turn away
from us the meanest blessing which we stand in need of outwardly, which also
are bona data, Luke 11.

If we understand by evil, Satan, then we pray to be delivered from him, not
only when he plays the subtle serpent, and changes himself into an Angel
of light, 2 Cor. 11. but when he plays the Lion, 1 Pet. 5. First, to be
delivered from his jaws, that he swallow us not down: for then there is no
help for us: that is, that God would save us from the nethermost hell, Psalm.
86. that which is called The second death, Apocal. 20. and (...).

Secondly, from his claws, under which are comprehended all temporal
calamities: first, the loss of life, against which the Apostles, being in a
great tempest, pray unto Christ, that he would save them: Master, carest thou
not that we perish? Mark. 4.

Secondly, of good name, whereof the Prophet says, Libera me a contrariis
hominibus, Psalm. 114.

Thirdly, the loss of goods, concerning which, when the Lord had formed
Grasse-hoppers to destroy their fruit, the Prophet prayed, O Lord God, spare I
beseech thee, Amos 7.2. And this is the remedy in all outward afflictions, as
Solomon says: If there be dearth in the land, through blasting, caterpillar,
or grasse-hopper: then if the people come into the Temple, and say, Libera nos
a malo, God will hear their prayers and deliver them, 1 Reg. 8.37. Therefore
in that dearth which is spoken of, Rev. 6. where corn was given by measure,
and weight, the remedy they had, was prayer: How long Lord do thou defer to
avenge our bloods? The reason why we pray to be delivered from these miseries,
is, that we may the better intend Gods service; so said David: Deliver me from
the slanders of men, that I may keep thy commandments, Psalm. 119.

Christ does not expressly name tribulation, affliction and calamity, though
they be comprehended under the word Evil. wherein we are to observe, that in
this Petition, as in the rest, he tempers his style with great wisdom.
Therefore outward trouble may cooperate to our good, and therefore he teaches
us not to pray, that God will deliver us from them absolutely, but from that
evil which is in them; and in this sense we may pray to be delivered, a malo
panis, as well as a malo famis: for bread, which of it self is good, may turn
to our hurt: and therefore Solomon prays, Give me not riches, lest I be
full, and say, Who is the Lord? neither give me poverty, lest through want I
be driven to steal, and take the name of my God in vain, Prove. 30.

There is both evil and good in both, and therefore we pray to be delivered
from the evil: for if God see that it is good for us to be humbled with want,
then we are not to pray against it.

Where we desire to be delivered, first, we acknowledge how little we are able
our selves; an hair, or a crumme of bread oftentimes is enough to cast away a
man: for the meanest creatures are able to hurt us, except God deliver us: and
as we cannot help our selves, so if we look about us, there is none to succor
us. So will the King himself tell us, who of all others seems most able to
help: If the Lord do not succor thee, wherewith can I help thee? 2 Reg. 6.27.

Wherefore we may not trust to our selves, nor to any other foreign help, or
power, but to God the great deliverer, to whom Christ has taught us to pray:
Libera nos a malo.

Secondly, herein we acknowledge our desire, which is to be delivered: the
word is (...), which implies such a deliverance which does rid us from
bondage, or captivity: wherefore we use this word as a motive, that God will
the rather deliver us; because, if the evil, which lies upon us, continue
long, it will make us the devils bondmen, and we are his servants, and desire
that he may not take us captives at his will, but that we may come out of his
snare, 2 Timothy 1. to do God service, and not only so, but that our service may
be done freely, and with cheerfulness, for that we are his children, and he
our Father: that is, as the Prophet speaks: When God has set our hearts at
liberty, we may run the way of his Commandments, Psalm. 119.

But if we will be delivered from the devil indeed, we must have this freedom
of Christ the Son of God, of whom it is said, Si filius vos liberaverit, vere
liberi eritis, Joh. 8. for he only is able perfectly to save us out of the
thraldom of Satan.

The devil indeed is subtle, and plays the serpent, but Christ is the
wisdom of God, and knows well enough to keep us from temptation.

The Devil is cruel, and roareth like a Lion, but Christ, who is the power of
God, is able to free us from evils, to save us from him, 1 Cor. 1.29. 2 Pet.
2.9.

The means and ways whereby the Son of God, who is his wisdom and power,
does free us from evil, is first, non inducendo, that is, not to suffer us to
be tempted at all, for so we should be freed both from the evil of sin, and
from the evil of punishment, which is the effect of sin, but for as much as
there is none upon whom the devil has not at least laid his nails, and as it
were scratched with his claws by outward afflictions, we are not to look for
that means of deliverance: the Apostles themselves had not this privilege:
for Saint Paul, that was a chosen vessel, had the messenger of Satan to
buffet him: even the corruption of his flesh, which did still tempt him to
sin, 2 Cor. 12. And for outward affliction, it is the case of all Christians
generally, All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution,
2 Timothy 3.

So that the godly may not look for their paradise on earth, Christ has
foretold, In the world you shall have trouble, Joh. 16. as for their joys and
comfort, it is elsewhere to be had: Merces vestra magna est in coelis, Mat. 5.
But if they be without tribulation in this life, if they be in the state of
those that come into no misfortune like others, Ps. 73. it is an evil sign,
and they little differ from the world, which have their portion in this life;
whereas the troubles and miseries of this world, are to the godly, a pledge of
the joys that are to come: and yet sometimes he gives them a taste of his
future mercy, by blessing them on earth: I have set before thee an open door,
because thou have a little strength, Rev. 3.8.

But we pray here for a deliverance after we are fallen into evil, and this
deliverance is performed four ways: First, when God does quickly take the
evil from us, and not suffer it to continue to our utter overthrow. Such a
deliverance is that when he suffers his wrath to endure but a little season,
when, though he send heaviness over night, yet he causes joy to come in the
morning, Psalm. 30.

It was a great cause of grief to the Apostles, that Christ speaking of his
departure from them, said, A little while, and ye shall not see me; but he
delivered them out of this grief, by comforting them with the hope of his
speedy return, when he said, And yet a while and ye shall see me again,
Joh. 16. and as Saint Paul says: This is a great means to deliver us out of
our afflictions when we know, that it is but (...), a tribulation, that as it
is but light in it self, so it is but momentany, 2 Cor. 4.17.

Secondly, God does deliver us from evil, when he does mix some comfort with
our affliction, that may make us to bear it the better. Such comfort it
pleased God to mix with Joseph's trouble, who was first sold to be a slave by
his own brethren, after cast into prison, by means of his wicked Mistress;
but in the midst of his affliction, God did not only bring him out of prison,
but brought him into favor with Pharaoh, which made him forget all his labor
and travel. Wherefore he called his first son Manasseh, of forgetting, Genesis
41.51.

Thus God tempered the afflictions of David, as himself confesses: In the
multitude of the sorrows of my heart, thy comforts have refreshed my soul,
Psalm. 94. And the Apostle says: Blessed be God, for he gives us comfort in
all our tribulation: so as we are able to comfort others with the same comfort
that he ministered to us, 2 Cor. 1.4.

Thirdly, when he gives us patience to endure our affliction, which is a
greater benefit then the former: for if we suffer wrong, and take it patiently,
then there is thanks with God, and we follow the example of Christ, who
suffered for us, though he had done no sin, 1 Pet. 2.20. and as it is a thing
thank-worthy with God, so the Prophet says, Blessed is the man whom thou
chastisest, O Lord, that thou may give him patience in the time of
adversity, Psalm 94.13.

Wherefore the Apostle exhorts, Let patience have its perfect work, that we
may be perfect and entire, lacking nothing, Jam. 1.4.

Christ was for a time forsaken of his Father, that he might comfort himself
with patience; and so it is required of us, that in our afflictions we possess
our souls with patience, Luke 21.19. for so we shall apply our selves to be
found in Faith, and the love of God, and to be lacking in no duty which God
requires at our hands.

Fourthly, when out of evil he brings good, and turns the evils that are come
upon us, to our greater good: for to this end God afflicts his children; and
therefore Christ says not, deliver us from calamity, or tribulation, but from
evil: for God in his wisdom does so dispose of the afflictions of the godly,
that they shall have cause to rejoice, and glory in tribulations, Romans 5.3. 2
Cor. 11.

Now they have cause to rejoice in their tribulations in two respects.

First, quando crux liberat a cruciatu, when the cross delivers from
anguish, or vexation: for so the Apostle says; that God does chasten his
children in this life, that they should not be condemned with the world, 1 Cor.
11.

Secondly, quando crux convertitur in coronam, when their cross is turned into
their crown: for so Saint Paul says, That the afflictions of the godly, which
they suffer here, are but light and momentany, and yet procure unto us a
surpassing, and everlasting weight of glory, such as cannot be expressed, 2
Cor. 4.17. And the same Apostle, Romans 8.18 says, I have made my reckoning, and
now find, that the afflictions of this life are not worthy, or comparable to
the glory that shall be revealed in the world to come.

Now we may not limit God to any one of these ways of deliverance; but our
desire must be, that he will deliver us from Evil, that way which seems best
unto him.

Lastly, seeing it is Gods will that we shall undergo the cross in this life,
our prayer to God must be, that of the crosses that were on mount Calvary, Luke
23.33. ours may be like to Christ's cross, that we may suffer innocently for
the name of Christ: For this is thankworthy, if a man for conscience toward
God endure grief, and suffer wrong undeserved, 1 Pet. 2.19.

Secondly, if not innocently, yet that our suffering may be like the good
thief, that confessed he suffered worthily: for he repented of his sin, and
by faith conceived comfort, that albeit his body were crucified, yet his soul
should be received with Christ into glory: but in any ways our desire must be
that we suffer not like the wicked and reprobate thief, that blasphemed
Christ, and dyed without repentance.

The persons to be delivered are expressed in the word nos, which implies a
twofold reason, the one in regard of the word libera, We are thy servants,
therefore make us free, and suffer us not to be slaves to Satan. So the Prophet
reasons, Psalm. 116. and 143.

Secondly, again, deliver us, for we are thy children; those whom thou have
taught to call thee Father, therefore though we be Mephibosheths, for our
deformity, and Absolons for our ungraciousnesse, yet show thy self a Father to
us; and of servants, though we be not only unprofitable, Luke 17. but evil and
wastfull, Luke 16. yet because we are thy servants, deliver us.

Thirdly, we are thy workmanship, therefore despise not the works of thine
own hands, Psalm. 138.

Fourthly, We are thy Image, Genesis 1.

Fifthly, the price of thy Sons blood.

Sixthly, Vessels to carry thy Name: we are they upon whom thy name is called,
therefore deliver us, else we shall be a reproach to them that are about us,
Dan. 9.18.

Seventhly, we are the members of thy Church, which is the body of Christ Jesus
our Savior, our head, Romans 12.5. Ephesians. 1.22.

The other reason is from the word mala, the devil as he is our enemy, so he
is Gods, and he hates us, because we are thine, and therefore labors to
draw us from thee; but save thou us that we fall not from thee, as he has
done.

Lastly, (us) for we may not pray for our selves alone, but for our brethren
also, that God will be good to them likewise; and though we be out of trouble,
yet because we be of the body, we may truly say, deliver us, when we pray in
the behalf of our brethren that are under the cross.

Until the last enemy, death, be destroyed, 1 Cor. 15.26. we shall never be
fully freed, but have one evil or other: Therefore we are to pray for that
time, when we shall hunger and thirst no more, when God shall wipe all tears
from our eyes, Rev. 7.16. at the least, if he take us not presently out of the
world, yet to keep us from the evil of the world, Joh. 17.15. till that day,
when there shall be no more death, nor sorrow, nor crying, nor pain, Rev.
21.4. but God shall be in all to us for ever.

THE EIGHTEENTH SERMON.
For thine is the Kingdom, Power, and Glory, for ever and ever.
SAint Paul wills that all things in the Church be done orderly, 1 Cor. 14.
which no doubt he took from Christ, whose answer to John Baptist, Matthew. 3.14.
was; Sic enim decet, for so it becomes, whereby we see, that both Christ,
and his Apostles, have always observed a decorum or decency in all things.

So touching prayer, our Savior Christ, to show that it is an undecent thing
for any, having done his Petitions to break off suddenly, or to begin his
prayer without any introduction, has not only made an entrance to his prayer,
wherein he acknowledged Gods goodness, but also adds a conclusion wherein
he confesses his Kingdom, Power, and Glory, which the Fathers call (...),
and he took the pattern of this conclusion out of the old Testament, where
King David acknowledges, Thine O Lord is greatness, power, and glory, and
victory, and thine is the Kingdom, 1 Chronicles. 29.11.

In the beginning we heard, that all Prayer and Invocation is nothing else but
a testimony, and confession. The Petitions that are severally made in this
Prayer, are; confession of our weakness, want, need, and unablenesse to do any
thing that may please God. The beginning and end of it are, an acknowledgement
of Gods riches, power, and goodness, whereby he is inclined to supply our
wants, for that he is not only willing, as a Father, but able as a King; so
that whatsoever prayer we make, whether Tekinnah or Tehillah; whether we pray
that we may receive some good thing of God, or praise him for good received, is
a confession and both these confessions make for Gods glory; not only to him
that was to make confession of his sin, it was said, Da gloriam Deo, Josh.
7.19. but the blind man that had received a benefit by the recovery of his
sight, was said, to give glory to God, Joh. 19.24.

The beginning of this prayer was a confession of Gods goodness, the end of
his power, for unto doing of good is required not only willingness, but power
and ability.

To show that God is willing, we are taught to call upon him by the name of
Father; for any father is willing to do his child good, but with this
willingness, there must concur an ability to do good, which howsoever it be
wanting in earthly Fathers, yet it is not wanting in our heavenly Father: for
whereas nothing does more express power, then the name of a King, Christ
acknowledges God to be such a Father as has Kingdom, power, and glory, and
therefore is able to do us whatsoever good he will. So God himself affirms
of himself, I am a great King, Mal. 1.14. Rev. 19.16. he is called King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, so that if we will pray to God the Father, we have
cause to conceive hope that he will hear our Petitions, and help us, because
he is not only willing, as a Father, but able, as a mighty, glorious, and
powerful Prince.

Secondly, if to God the Son, his dying for us does assure us, of his good
will and readiness to do us good, and his rising again from the dead, when he
has broken the iron bars, does assure us of his power.

Thirdly, if to the Holy Ghast, we shall not need to doubt of his willingness,
for he is the essential love of God, which is shed in our hearts, Romans 5.
Besides he is the spirit operative, by whom God works all good things in the
hearts of his people, and therefore able to do whatsoever good for us: and
those two, to wit, the assurance of Gods goodness, and power, are the two
parts of the anchor of our hope, Heb. 6.18, 19. and he gives us not only
audaciam petendi, but also fiduciam impetrandi, not only boldness to ask, but
also assurance to obtain.

The make requests in our own behalf, and acknowlegement to God of his love
and power, are both confessions, but the principal is the acknowledgment of
his gooodnesse, and Kingdom, and power; for to make request to God for good
things that we want, concerns men, but to confess Gods power and goodness,
is that wherein the heavenly Angels are occupied in, they feel no want of any
good thing, and therefore they have no ne^d to make petition to God as we on
earth, and therefore all the confession that they make, is of Gods goodness
and power, whereof they cry continually, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts,
the earth is full of his glory, Esaias, 6.3. The same is done by the Saints in
heaven: Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanks, and honor, and power,
and might, be unto our God for evermore, Rev. 7.12.

Whereby we learn, that we concerning whom Christ says, That we shall be
(...) equal, or like to the Angels, Luke 20. ought while we live on earth, not
speak only with the tongue of men, but of Angels, not only to confess our
own wants, and to crave a supply from God, but to acknowledge Gods riches,
goodness, and power.

Again, the Petitions that we make for our selves, is a taking; and
sanctification of his name, by ascribing Kingdom, power, and glory, unto God,
is a giving, and therefore as the Apostle says, It is a more blessed thing to
give, then to receive, Act. 29.35. So the confession of Gods goodness and
power, is a better confession, then that which we make of our own weakness,
and poverty; and this is the only thing which God receives from us, for the
manifold benefits that we receive from him.

Neither is this confession and acknowledgement left to our own choice as a
thing indifferent, but we must account of it as of a necessary duty, which may
in no wise be omitted, seeing God enters into covenant, that he will hear us
and deliver us out of trouble, when we call upon him, Psalm. 50. therefore God
challenges this a duty to himself by his servants, Ascribe unto the Lord
worship and strength, give unto the Lord the glory due unto his Name, Psalm. 29.
All Nations whom thou have made shall come and worship thee, and glorify thy
name, Psalm. 86.9.

Therefore our Savior commends the Samaritan, because he returned to give
glory to God for the benefit received; wherein he blames the other nine, that
being cleansed of their leprosy were not thankful to God, in that behalf,
Luke 17. For God, for this cause does hear our prayers, and grant our
Petitions, that we should glorify and honor his name.

But this is not all that we are to consider in these words, for they are not
only (...), but (...), not only an astipulation, but an allegation, wherein
as we acknowledge Gods goodness and power, that has heard and granted our
requests, so we allege reasons, why he should not only hear us, but also
relieve and help us with those things that we crave for at his hands: we do
not only say, hear our Petitions, for so shall thou show thy self to be a
King, but a mighty and glorious King, and we for our parts shall acknowledge
the same; but we use this confession as a reason, why our former requests are
to be granted; for it is in effect as much as if we should say; Forgive thou
our sins: deliver thou us from evil: hallowed be thy Name: thy Kingdom
come, for Kingdom, power, and glory is thine, and not ours.

The reason why we would have our requests granted, is drawn from God himself
in two respects: first, that we may by this humble confession make our selves
capable of the graces of God, which do not descend to any but those that are of
an humble spirit, For he gives grace to the humble, 1 Pet. 5.

If we would have our desires granted, because it is the nature of God to be
good and gracious; to be of power, to do what he will for the good of his
people, we must desire him to be gracious, propter semetipsum, Esaias 43.25. Our
motive unto God must be, For thy loving mercy, and thy truths sake, Psalm.
115.1. Help us for the glory of thy Name, deliver us, be merciful unto our
sins, for thy Names sake, Psalm. 79.9. By these motives we must provoke, and
stir up God to hear us. This is the difference that is betwixt the prayers
of profane men, and those that are sanctified, Heathen and profane men refer
all to their own glory, so says Nabuchadnezzar, Is not this great Babell
which I have built by my great power, and for the honor of my Majesty? Dan.
4.30. Such a man thinks himself to be absolute Lord, and will say, Who is the
Lord over us? Psalm. 12. Therefore are they called the sons of Beliall: But
the Patriarchs that were sanctified, frame their prayers otherwise: Jacob
acknowledged, I am not worthy of the least of thy mercies, Genesis 32. by which
humility he made himself capable of mercy. To us belongs shame (says
Daniel, chap. 9.) but to thee belongs compassion and forgiveness, though we
have offended: So Christ himself in this place does teach his Disciples to
pray, that God will give them the things they desire, not for any thing in
themselves, but for his names sake: for thine is Kingdom, Power, and Glory,
whereby we perceive that humility is the means to obtain at Gods hands our
suites.

The other respect is in regard of God, for he makes his covenant with us, that
he will be our God, and we his people. And when the Prophet stirs up the
faithful, to worship the Lord, and to fall down before the Lord our maker:
he adds this as a reason, For he is the Lord our God, and we are his people,
and the sheep of his pasture, Psalm. 95. Wherefore one says, Commemoratio, est
quaedam necessitas exaudiendi nos, quia nos ipsius sumus, ipse noster est: It
is a necessary motive to God to hear us, because we are his, and he ours.

Therefore in all the Prayers and Psalms which the Saints of God make, they
ground their Petitions upon this: in regard of God the Father, who is the
Creator, they say, We are thy workmanship created by thee, therefore despise
not the works of thy own hands, Psalm. 138. Besides, we are the likeness of
Gods Image, Genesis 1. therefore suffer not thine own Image to be defaced in us,
but repair it.

Secondly, in regard of Christ, We are the price of Christ's blood. Empti estis
pretio, 1 Cor. 6. Ye are bought with a price, therefore suffer not so great a
price to be lost, but deliver us and save us. Again, We carry his Name, for as
he is Christ, so we are of him called Christians: seeing therefore that his
name is called upon us, Dan. 9.19. be gracious to us, and grant our requests.

Thirdly, in respect of the Holy Spirit, the breath of his Spirit is in our
nostrills, which is the breath of life which God breathed in us at our
creation, Genesis 2.7. Again, the same Spirit is to us an Holy Spirit, and
sanctifies us, we are not only Vaginae Spiritus viventis, the sheaths of the
living Spirit; but Templa Spiritus sancti: The Temples of the holy Spirit, 1 Corinthians. 6.19. And therefore for his sake we are to entreat him to be gracious
to us.

We are Gods Kingdom, and therefore it belongs to him to seek our good:
all the world is his kingdom by right of inheritance; but we that are his
Church, are his Kingdom by right of purchase: we are (...), 1 Pet. 2.9. a
people peculiar, or gotten by purchase, he has redeemed us to be (...), Tit.
2.14. A peculiar people: and the price whereby we are purchased, is his own
blood, 1 Pet. 1. Act. 20. He says, He will be our God, and we his people,
Levit. 26. He will be our Father, and we his Children, 2 Cor. 6. he our Lord,
and we his servants: Therefore we may challenge at his hands that favor which
Kings vouchsafe to their subjects, which Fathers show to their children: that
is, to love them, to defend them, and to wish them all the good things they
need.

If he have purchased us to himself by his blood, then we pertain to him,
and we may say to him as his Disciples said to Christ, Mark. 4.38. Carest thou
not for us that pertain to thee, but suffer us to perish?

These words, Kingdom, Power, and Glory, being jointly considered, are a
representation of the Trinity.

As Moses, speaking of the Author of our creation, reckons up the name of God
three times, Genesis 1.27. as in the blessings of the Law, the name of God is
there repeated, Numb. 6.6. and as the Angels cry there, Holy, Holy, Holy, Esaias
6. to teach that there are three Persons in the Godhead, which the Heathen
themselves have compassed; So Christ in the New Testament does by these words,
Kingdom, Power, and Glory signify those three Persons, which afterward he
expresses by the name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Matthew. 28.

If we consider them severally, although they may all be ascribed to any Person
of the Deity, yet the Kingdom is to be ascribed unto Christ, 1 Cor. 15.35.
Power, to the Holy Ghost, Romans 15.13.19. and Glory, to the Father, Romans 6.4.
that we setting our selves in Christ's Kingdom, that is, his Church, by the
power of the Holy Ghost, may be partakers of that glory which God the Father
has prepared for us.

Again, these words are set to distinguish Gods Kingdom from earthly
kingdoms. Each King has not power, as the King of Israel says: If the Lord
do not succor thee, how can I help thee? 2 Reg. 6.21. But Gods Kingdom is a
Kingdom of power.

Secondly, there are Kingdoms of Might, but not of Glory: such was the
Kingdom of David, he had a Kingdom of Might, but not of Glory: for he spent
all his time in troubles; but the Kingdom of Solomon his son, was both a
powerful, and a Glorious kingdom, and there was a figure of the perfect
Kingdom of Christ.

Wherefore we are taught by these words, that as the Kingdom is the Lords, so
he has not only a Kingdom of power, whereby he is able to defend, but of
glory, whereby he can also reward his servants and subjects: Moses desired of
God, that he would show him his glory, Exodus 33. But he that is of Christ's
Kingdom, shall see the glory which Christ had from the beginning with the
Father, Joh. 17.21.

To consider these words severally: upon these words of the Prophet, Knit my
heart unto thee, Psalm. 86. one says, Religio dicitur a religando: as there is
a mutual bond between the King and his people; so is there between God and
us. The Kings duty is to defend his subjects from injury and wrong, and to
bestow on them all manner of benefits. The duty of subjects is to be dutiful,
and yield all ready service to their Prince: so God for his part is ready, not
only to defend us from all danger, but to bestow all good things upon us: and
therefore we are bound to be religious and dutiful to him, as to our King and
Sovereign: we must not only love him, as a Father, but fear him, as our
Lord and King, Matthew. 1.6. And this mixture shall keep us in the way of
salvation, we shall neither too much despair, nor presume of his goodness;
this fear we must testify both by a reverend regard of his Law, and of his
Officers. He is no good subject that rebelleth against the laws of his
Prince; no more are we, when no more can be gotten at our hands, but by the
precepts of men, Esaias, 29. when the statutes of Omri are kept for fear of
temporal punishment, Mich. 6. and the laws of God are had in no price, then
it is a sign that we are not so dutiful and loyal to our heavenly Prince, as
we ought to be.

Secondly, we must testify our fear of God, by a reverend regard of his
Prophets and Priests, which are the Ministers and Officers in his kingdom.
When the Jews mocked the messengers of God, and mis-used his Prophets, they
showed their contempt of God himself; and therefore the wrath of the Lord
arose against that people, 2 Chronicles. 36.16. Contrariwise, if we have an
honorable conceit of them, and receive them as the Angels of God, Gal. 4. then
we show our selves to be dutiful vassalls to our heavenly Lord and King.

Next, for power, as S. Peter says, God is able both to respect the righteous,
and to show vengeance upon the wicked, 2 Pet. 2.9. So whether we respect the
power of his grace inward, whereby he works all good things in the hearts of
his people, or the outward power, whereby he defends them from evil: whether
it be the power of his holy Spirit, or of his right hand, we must confess
with the Saints that all power, and strength, and might belongs to God, Rev. 7.
And therefore whatsoever power we have, whether inward or outward, we must
employ it all in his service. Fortitudinem meam ad te servo, I will keep my
strength, or reserve it unto thee, Psalm. 59.9. So we must not spend our
strength in thoughts of vanity, but employ it to his use, and to the setting
forth of his glory, to whom only all power belongs.

Thirdly, Christ teaches us to ascribe all glory to God, that whatsoever
praise or commendation does come unto us by any thing we do, we should make a
surrender of it to God, to whom all glory is due, and say with the Church, Non
nobis Domine, etc. Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but to thy Name give all
glory, Psalm. 115. For as the Prophet says, The Church is a place wherein the
voice of gladness is heard, and the voice of them that sing, Praise the Lord
of Hosts, for he is loving, and his mercy endures for ever, Jer. 33.11.

The faithful are taught to return all glory to God, which is given to them.
God himself says, Gloriam meam alteri non daho, Esaias 42. If he gives his
glory to any other, it is to such as deserve it, and have all power of
themselves; but there is no creature which has any power, but what is given of
God, and therefore God does by right reserve his glory to himself, and we
ought willingly yield all glory to him alone, because he promises, them that
honor me, I will honor, 1 Samuel 2. that we glorifying him here with a verbal
glory, we may be glorified of him with a real glory, when he comes to judge
the world, 2 Thessalonians. 1.12. and with an exceeding weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.

But yet we do not fully see wherein the glorious Kingdom of God differs from
the kingdoms of this world: for both power, and glory may be ascribed to an
earthly Prince; and it is certain, that Solomon had them all: and therefore as
he is distinguished from earthly fathers, for that he is said to be in heaven:
so he differs from earthly Kings, in that his Kingdom is said, to endure for
ever and ever.

There is another difference employed in the Article; earthly Princes have a
Kingdom, a Kingdom of power, and a certain glory in this world, but it is
not the Kingdom.

This prepositive Article imports two things, a Generality and a Superiority:
for the first point, he that has but a piece of the earth to bear rule in, is
not an universal King; but God is King over all the earth, Psalm. 47. Therefore
if we be so careful to behave our selves aright in the presence of an earthly
King, whose Kingdom is limited within certain bounds, which if he exceed, he
is no more King; much more ought we to praise and glorify him, whose Kingdom
is universal.

Secondly, for the superiority of Gods Kingdom, there are a great number of
Kings on earth: but of this Kingdom it is said: All Kings shall fall down
before him, all Nations shall worship him, Psalm 72. For he is said to be King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Rev. 19.

Touching the other difference signified by the word (for ever.) Though a man
had all the earth for his Kingdom, yet it could not be a Kingdom for ever and
ever: no Prince ever reigned the whole age of a man, and so long time as a man
naturally may live, which the Philosophers say, is the space of an hundred
years; but his Kingdom indures not only the age of a man, but In seculum,
For ever: Thy Kingdom, Power and Glory endures for ever and ever, whereas
man's Kingdom, Power, and glory, lasts but a few years, and sometimes but a
few days.

Jezabel had a glorious Kingdom, but within a few years it was said of her,
Ubi est illa Jezabel? 2 Reg. 10. when it was fulfilled which the Prophet
Jeremiah foretold, 13.28. Tell the King and Queen: Humble your selves, for
your dignity shall be taken away, and the crown of your glory shall fall
down. And the like is the greatness of all earthly Kingdoms: and therefore
Christ teaches us to direct our Petitions to him, whose Kingdom is
everlasting, Psalm. 145. whose power endures for ever and ever: not to a
mortal King, but to God, Qui solus habet etc. which only has immortality, 1 Timothy 6. who being himself an everlasting King, and incorruptible, is able to
bestow upon us both a Crown, 1 Pet. 5. and an inheritance incorruptible, and
that fades not, 1 Pet. 1.4. This is our hope and the perfection of our
desires, and therefore as the Creed has his period in Life everlasting, so
last of all we are taught to pray for Glory everlasting.

THE NINETEENTH SERMON.
Amen.
WE are now come to the last word of the Lords Prayer, the power and efficacy
whereof at this time is to be considered, for there is in it every way, matter
worthy of our consideration; and we cannot perfectly accomplish our duty in
prayer, except we understand this word aright: For after we have laid out our
several petitions to God, and made our allegation to God, why we desire to be
respected by him; namely, because we are of his Kingdom, and Jurisdiction, for
that we have no power of our selves to do any thing; Lastly, because that we
confess, that all glory is to be ascribed to him; then it remains that we
desire of God, that those Petitions, and allegations made by us, may by him be
ratified, which is done in the word Amen.

Wherein the ancient Writers consider two things: First, Jerome says, it is
Signaculum consensus nostri, that by it we acknowledge that whatsoever we can
desire is contained in this form of prayer.

Secondly, as S. Cyprian says, it is votum desiderii nostri, that as we allow
of this form of Prayer, and the Petitions made therein: so we desire that it
will please God to perform, and accomplish them: so in this word is employed
the consent of our mind to allow of the things which we are taught to pray for
in this Prayer: and secondly, the desire of our heart for the obtaining of the
same.

The one is the seal of our faith, in as much as we acknowledge those things
to be true. The other is the seal of our love, whereby we testify our desire
for the accomplishment of these Petitions. The one is referred to Truth, the
other to the fervencie of the spirit: in which two things, as our Savior
affirms, Joh. 4.24. the right worship of God consists: concerning which
word, to be added in the end of our supplications, there is an absolute
commandment, not only in the old Testament, Let all the people say Amen, 1 Chronicles. 16.33. Ps. 106. but in the New, as appears by S. Paul's question, 1
Cor. 14.16. who to show the necessity of this word, he says, How shall the
unlearned say A men to thy thanksgiving? for indeed it concerns every one, as
he will answer the transgression of dicet omnis populus, all the people shall
say, which is a flat commandment, not to be omitted, to add this word to
their prayer. The word it self is originally Hebrew, but used by the
Evangelists, and retained still in every language and tongue, without
translation, or alteration, either in Greek, Latin, or any other; the reason
of the retaining of it is, that is might appear, that the Synagogue of the
children of Israel, and the true congregation of the Church of Christ,
gathered out of all Nations, is but one mystical body, whereof Christ is the
head: the same we are given to understand, by this, that the Spirit of Adoption
is said to cry non only Abba, in the hearts of the Jews, but also (...) and
Father, in the hearts of the Gentiles, Romans 8.20. Therefore our Savior would
not have his name to be either entirely Hebrew, as Jesus, Messiah, or entirely
Greek, as (...), but the one in Hebrew, the other in Greek, Jesus Christ, to
show that he is our peace, who of two has made one, that has reconciled us
both in one body, and that he is the corner stone, whereby the Church
consisting both of Jews and Gentiles, is coupled together, and grows to be
one holy Temple to the Lord, Ephesians. 2.14. Though they be as the Apostle speaks,
Congregatio primogenitorum, Heb. 12.23. yet we are the Church of God as well as
they; we, I say, that are borne after them: we, that are of the Gentiles, have
none other law for our direction, then that which the Jews had, as the Apostle
says, I write no new commandemem, but an old commandment, which you have
heard from the beginning, 1 John 2.7. We have no other faith, but as the
Apostle says, eundem spiritum fidei habentes; 2 Cor. 4. The same grace is
offered to us, that was offered to the Fathers, for we believe to be saved by
the faith of Jesus Christ, as well as they, Act. 15.11. and we have no other
Sacraments, then those which the Jews had, of whom Saint Paul says, They all
did eat the same spiritual meat, and drank the same spiritual drink, 1
Cor. 10. and therefore it is meet likewise that we should make the same prayer
that they made: and indeed there is no Petition in the Lords Prayer, which is
not found in the Old Testament, used by the Church of the Jews. For, that
which the Prophet prays, Psalm. 57.6. Lift up thy self, O God, above the
heavens, and thy glory above all the earth, Psalm. 67. That thy way may be
known upon earth, etc. is nothing else, but the hallowing of Gods Name.

Secondly, Remember me O God, that I may see the felicity of thy chosen, Psalm.
106. It is nothing else but an exposition of the second Petition, where we
pray, Thy Kingdom come.

Thirdly, these words of the Prophet, Psalm. 143. Teach me to do the thing that
pleases thee, is a full comprehension of the third Petition, where we desire
that his will be done.

Fourthly, the eyes of all things do look upon thee, and thou give them meat
in due season, Psalm. 145. and the prayer of Solomon, Prove. 30. Give me not
poverty, nor riches, but feed me with food meet, is a full expressing of the
fourth Petition.

Fifthly, My misdeeds prevail against me; O be merciful to our sins, Psalm.
65.3. is a sum of the fifth petition, and the condition of this Petition is
found, Psalm. 7. wherein the Prophet says, If I have done any such thing, or if
there be any wickedness in my hands; If I have rewarded evil to him that
dealt friendly with me (yea I have delivered him that without a cause was my
enemy) then let my enemy persecute my soul; whereby he desires no otherwise
to be forgiven of God, then as he does forgive his brother.

Sixthly, that which the Prophet prays, Psalm. 119.37. Turn away my eyes,
that they behold not vanity, and Psalm. 143. Set a watch before my mouth, and
keep the door of my lips, is that which Christ teaches us to pray, Lead us
not into temptation.

Seventhly, Redeem Israel from all trouble, Psalm. 25.20. in affect is as much
as, Deliver them from all evil, which is the seventh Petition.

Lastly, look what reason Christ teaches us to use here, the same does David
use, 1 Chronicles. 29.

Therefore having the same prayer that the Jews had, it is meet that we
should have the same conclusion that they had, and the same is, they said Amen,
and so do we.

Touching the use of this word, it is found in Scriptures to have two seats or
places, and accordingly two several expositions, to wit in the beginning, and
in the end, before, and behind. In the beginning, as in the doctrine of the
Sacrament of Baptism, concerning which our Savior says, Amen, Amen, except a
man be borne of the water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God, Joh. 3. And touching the Sacrament of the holy Eucharist,
Verily, verily, except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his
blood, ye have no life in you, Joh. 6.33. And touching the effect of prayer,
Christ says also, Verily, verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask the
Father in my name, he will give it you, Joh. 16.

In those places, the word (Amen) is used, and thereby our Savior labors to
express the truth of that which he does teach. In the end likewise it is said,
as Psalm. 41.13. Psalm. 72. Psalm. 87.50. Praised be the Lord for evermore, Amen,
Amen. And in the New Testament, when the Apostle shows, That of the Jews
according to the flesh came Christ, who is over all, God blessed for ever,
Amen, Romans 9.5. Here the word is used, and set behind, to signify that we
desire that that may be performed, which God before by his Amen has affirmed
to be true. Therefore David, having received promise from the Lord, by the hand
of Nathan, says, Let the thing that thou have promised be Amen. Let there be
an accomplishment of the same, 1 Chronicles. 17.25. So when the Prophet Hananiah had
prophesied in the name of the Lord; I have broken the yoke of the King of
Babell, and after two years will I bring again, into this place, all the
ornaments of the house of the Lord: Jeremy the Prophet said, Amen, the Lord do
as thou have said, Jer. 28.6.

As in the beginning it ratifieth the truth of Gods promise, so being set in
the end, it signifies the desire of our hearts for the accomplishment of the
same, and this desire always follows, and is grounded upon the promise of
God, and the truth thereof: In which regard the Prophet says, Remember me O
Lord concerning thy word, wherein thou causest me to put my trust, Psalm. 119.
and therefore, to Christ's A non, in the beginning, where he promises, Verily,
verily, whatsoever ye ask in my name, John 16. we may boldly add our Amen in
the end, that his Amen may be performed; and by right do we ground our Amen
upon Gods Amen, for he is called Amen, that is truth, Esa. 65.16. So the
Apostle expresses it, when speaking of Jesus Christ, he says* Thus says
Amen, the fault fall and true witness, Revel. 3.14.

Therefore S. Paul says of Christ, that in him all the promises are made to
us, yea, in the beginning, and Amen, to us in regard of the certain
accomplishment, 2 Cor. 1.

The reason of our Amen is, because not only faith, but trust and confidence
does proceed from the truth of God: fides, has relation to Gods truth, but
fiducia, or confidence, is settled upon Gods faithfulness, and both are
affirmed of God.

Moses says of God that he is, verus and fidelis, Deuteronomy. 32. and Esaias, The Lord
is faithful, Esa. 49.7, 8. Paul in the new Testament, He is faithful that
promised, Heb. 10. He deemed him faithful that promised, Heb. 11. For there
are two things required in faithfulness, without the which a man cannot be
said to be faithful: the one is ability, of which Abraham doubted not of Gods
faithfulness, being fully persuaded, That what he promised, he was able to
perform, Romans 4.21. the other is will and readiness to do, touching which
the Apostle says, Faithful is he that called you, and ipse faciet, 1 These.
5.24.

These are the parts of faithfulness, and they are both found in God, and
therefore not only God the Father is true, but Christ is said to be the truth,
John 14. and the holy Ghost is called the Spirit of truth, 1 John 5.6. So that
albeit men deal so untruly that it is verified of them; ad men are liars, Romans
3. Yet God abides faithful, and cannot deny^h myself, 2 Timothy 2.13.

So much the Prophet teaches, when he says; the mountains shall be removed,
but the thing which be has spoken shall not fail, Esa. 58. And our Savior
faith, Heaven and Earth shall pass, but one joy of my word shall not pass,
Matthew. 5.18. that is, in regard of his power and ability.

For the other part of his faithfulness, which is his will and readiness, he
is said to be a faithful Creator, that will have care of the souls committed
to him, 1 Pet. 5. and to this purpose serves that which S. John affirms;
Behold what love the Father has showed us, that we should be Sons of God, 1
John 3.

There is in God that faithfulness that is in a mother toward her children,
for as a woman cannot but pity her own child, and the son of her womb, so the
Lord will not forget his own people, Isa. 45.15. As his arm is not shortened,
but is still able to help; so his affection toward us is such, that he is
most willing to help.

In this regard, as has been observed, he is both a King and a Father, the
one showing his power, the other his willingness and goodwill toward us; upon
both these we do ground our Amen, and do learn, not only, Credere vero,
believe God which is true, but fidere fideli, trust him which is faithful,
upon this faithfulness we may ground all our Petitions, if we seek
forgiveness of our trespasses, as Christ teaches us to pray, then God is
faithful to forgive us our sins, 1 John 1. If we will pray against
tentation, the Apostle says, God is faithful, and will not suffer us to be
tempted above that we are able to bear, 1 Cor. 10. If to be delivered from
evil, which is the last Petition, the Apostle tells us, The Lord is faithful,
and will stablish us, and keep us from all evil, 2 These. 3.

Thus we see, both what is our Amen, and whereupon it is grounded.

The last thing is, the right saying of this word, which is a thing to be
inquired, for the Apostle as though he took care for the right saying of it,
says, How shall the unlearned say Amen? 1 Cor. 14.16. Teaching us, that it is
not enough to say Amen, unless it be said in right form and manner.

The right saying is reduced to four things: First, that as the Apostle says,
We pray with the Spirit, 1 Cor. 14. For of the four evil Amens, which the
Hebrews note, one is, when our Amen does not come from an earnest desire, We
must power out our hearts before him, Psalm. 62.8. So our Amen must come from
the heart: we must be so disposed, that we may say: As the Heart brayeth for the
rivers of waters, so thirsts my soul after thee O God, Psalm. 42.1. My soul
thirsts for thee, and my flesh longs for thee in a barren and dry land
where no water is, Psalm. 63. without this Amen, our Amen is evanime, a dead
Amen.

Secondly, a man may desire a false thing, so did the Prophet give his Amen to
the false prophecy of Hananiah, Ier. 28. but we must be careful that it be
true that we pray for, therefore the Apostle says, He will not pray with the
Spirit only, but with his understanding also, 1 Cor. 14.25. So our Savior
tells us, We must worship God, not in Spirit only, but in Spirit and Truth:
That is, we must have understanding that our Petitions be true and agreeable to
Gods will, Ioh. 4. for as in thanksgiving it is requisite, that we sing praise
with understanding, Psalm. 47. So the like must be done in prayer; they are both
good; both to pray with the Spirit and with the mind, therefore it is better to
pray with both, then with but one alone. Therefore it is a marvel that any
should think it enough to pray with the Spirit, though they do not know in
their mind what they pray for, but pray in an unknown tongue, as the Church of
Rome does; seeing the Apostle says, He will pray both with the Spirit and with
the understanding, 1 Cor. 14.15. and this understanding is not of the words
only, but of the matter that we pray for.

We may understand the words wherein the prayer is made, and yet not understand
the thing that is prayed for.

The sons of Zebedee prayed in their own Language, and yet our Savior tells
them, Ye know not what ye ask.

The Eunuch that was reading the Prophet Esaias, no doubt, understood the
Language of the Prophet, and yet when Philip asked him: Understand thou what
thou read? he answered, How can I, except I had a guide? Acts 8.31.
Therefore we must pray, not only Intelligenter, but Scienter: we must know
what we ask, we must be careful, that whatsoever we ask, be according to
his will: for then may we be assured that he will hear us, 1 John 5. we must
ask in Christ's name, John 16.

Lastly, to a good end: for otherwise our prayers shall not be heard: Ye ask
and receive not, because ye ask amiss, James 4. But this is not all that is
required, that we may pray with the Mind and Understanding: for we must intend
the thing that we pray for with out heart, that the Lord may not have cause to
complain of us, as of the Jews, that honored him with their lips, while
their heart was far from him, Isa. 29.14. That we may with more attention of
heart address our selves to pray, our Savior bids us to gather our selves
from all things that may carry away, or distract our minds, and to enter into
our chamber, there to pray to our ^ather, which is in Heaven, Matthew. 6.6. This
did not Saint Peter observe, when he prayed: Master, let us make here three
Tabernacles: and therefore the Evangelist says, He knew not what he said, Lake
9.33.

Thirdly, that we may say Amen aright, we must not only understand in our
mind, and desire in our spirit the thing that we pray for, but must
confidently look for the performance of that we desire: for unto this
confidence there is a promise made on Gods part, of whom the Prophet says,
That the Lord is nigh to all that call upon him in truth, Psalm. 145. that is,
in faith and confidence, that they shall obtain the thing that they pray for:
therefore our Savior says, whatsoever ye pray for bel^eve, and it shall be
done, Mark 11.24. and the Apostle says, If we will obtain our requests, we
must ask in faith, without wavering: or else we shall be like the waves of the
sea, that are tossed with the wind, and carried about with violence, James 1.6.
And we shall not need to doubt, but we shall be heard, if we pray in a right
manner, if we pray for a right end, that we may say, Tua est gloria.

This confidence and trust has certain Limitations: first, we may assure our
selves, that God will grant our requests, if it be expedient for us: and
therefore we must not limit God, nor appoint him his time, but as the Psalmist
says, We must direct our prayers early to him, and wait for his pleasure,
Psalm. 5.3. We must tarry our Lords leisure, Psalm. 27.

Secondly, though he grant not the same thing we desire, yet he will grant us a
better. The Apostle prayed Christ, that the prick in the flesh, the messenger
of Satan, might be taken from him: but he had another answer: My grace is
sufficient for thee, that was better, then if God had said, Apage Satanas, 2
Cor. 12. For if we pray to God in such manner and sort as he requires, we may
assure our selves, our prayers shall not return into our own bosoms, Psalm.
35.3. But he will either grant the thing we desire, or else that which shall be
better for us.

Fourthly, that our Amen be indivisible, that is, we must say Amen to every
Petition of the Lords prayer: for naturally our corruption is such, that we can
be content to desire the accomplishment of some of them, but not of others: we
do willingly say Amen to Thy Kingdom come; but as for Hallowed be thy name,
we give no Amen to that, as appears by the whole course of our life, which is
nothing else but a profaning and polluting of Gods most glorious and fearful
Name.

We would gladly pray for daily bread, but as for doing of Gods will, and
obeying his Commandments, we agree not to that.

We like well of the last Petition, Deliver us from evil, but as for that goes
before it, Lead us not into temptation, we will not subscribe to that: for we
do seek by all means to tempt our selves, and to draw our selves unto sin.

We can be content to pray, that he will forgive us our trespasses, but as for
the condition, which is, the forgiving of those that trespass against us, we
give no Amen to that, as is clear by the wrathful and revenging spirit that
carries most men into all manner of outrages, while they will not learn to
put up wrong, as they are taught by Gods word. Therefore in regard of this
Petition, and the condition annexed, our Savior says: Take heed ye say Amen
to this entirely: except ye forgive one another, your heavenly Father will not
forgive you, Matthew. 6.15.

Therefore we must have a care as well to hallow Gods none in this life, as to
be partakers of his Kingdom in the life to come: we must labor as well for
the fulfilling of his will, as for the obtaining of daily bread.

If we will be freed from evil, which is the effect of sin, we must take
heed that we do not tempt our selves; and as we would be forgiven of God, so
we must forgive our brethren.

Lastly, we must say Amen to the reason which our Savior uses in the
conclusion of the prayer. As the Apostle says: How shall the unlearned say
Amen to thy thanksgiving? 1 Cor. 14. For there are many that will say with the
Leapers, Jesus Master, have mercy upon us: but being cleansed, few, or none
will return to give God thanks* and to say as our Savior teaches: Thine is
Kingdom, Power and Glory, Luke 17. We must not only pray to him when we lie
sick upon our beds, that it would please him to comfort us, and to make our
bed in our sickness, Psalm. 41.3. but to sing praises to him when he saves us
from adversity, and delivers us out of our enemies hands, Psalm. 106.129. Our
Hallelujah must be sounded as loud as Hosanna. The Saints in Heaven have no
other prayer but Thanksgiving; they cry Amen, Blessing, and Glory, and
Wisdom, and Honor, and Power, be to God, Revel. 7.12. All their song is
Amen, Hallelujah, Revel. 19.4.

Therefore if we will come where they are, we must sound out the praises of
God, as they do; If we will be like the heavenly Angels, we must speak with
the tongue of Angels; If we say Amen to his praise and honor, he will ratify
his word toward us; so that his promise to us, shall be Yea, and Amen.

FINIS.
SEVEN SERMONS ON THE VVONDERFVLL COMBAT (for Gods Glory, and Man's Salvation)
BETWEEN CHRIST AND SATAN.

DELIVERED By the Reverend Father in God, Doct. ANDREWS, Bishop of Winchester,
deceased.

JAMES 1.12. Blessed is the man that endures Temptation: for when he is tried,
he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord has promised them that
love him.

(...)

LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes. 1642.

SEVEN SERMONS UPON The Temptation of Christ in the WILDERNESS.
The first SERMON.
MATTHEW. 4.1. Then was Jesus led aside of the Spirit into the Wilderness to be
tempted of the devil.


OUR Savior Christ by his Nativity, took upon him the shape of man; Gal. 4.4.
by his Circumcision, he took upon him, Phil. 2.7.
and submitted himself to the degree of a servant. By the first, he made
himself in case, and able to perform the work of our Redemption: By the
second, he entered bound for the performing of it. All was to this end, that he
might restore the work of God to his original perfection. In the bringing of
which to pass, it was decreed by God in the beginning (as a thing necessary)
that the head of the Serpent (by whose means it was violated and defaced)
should be bruised. And For this cause (says John) appeared the Son of God, 1
Ioh. 3.8.
that he might loose the works of the Devil: whereof this was the first. For
in Genesis 3. we read, that his first work after his fall, was enviously to tempt
our first Parents, and thereby to overthrow all mankind. And here, straight
after our Savior was baptized, he with like envy sets on him. Christ
therefore first begins with the overcomming of that: and for that purpose he
is here led forth to be tempted, that so being tempted he might overcome.

Our Savior makes this question, Matthew. 11.7. upon their going out to see John
Baptist; What went ye out to see? As if he should have said, They would never
have gone out into the Wilderness, except it had been to see some great and
worthy matter: and behold a greater and a worthier matter here. If there be any
thing in the Wilderness worthy the going out to behold, this is a matter much
worthy of it. Or if there be any matter worthy the hearing, it is worthy our
attention to hear; not Michael the Archangell, disputing about the body of
Moses with the devil, Jude 9. but our own matter, argued by two such cunning
adversaries; to see the combat betwixt our grand enemy, who goes about like a
roaring Lion seeking to devour us, 1 Pet. 5.8.
and our Archduke: for so he is called, Heb. 12.2. to see our King of old,
Psalm. 74.12. the pawn of our inheritance, and our Prince of new, or Prince by
usurpation, the Prince of this world, John 4.30. enter the lists together; to
see the wisdom of the new Serpent, John 3.14.
match the craftiness and subtilty of the old serpent, Rev. 12.9. to see the
Lion of the Tribe of Judah, combating with the roaring Lion, 1 Pet. 5.8. If any
thing be worthy the sight, Apoc. 5.5.
it is this.

Though there should come no profit to us by the victory, yet were it worth the
sight, in this respect, only to behold how these Champions behave themselves;
that so we may be warned beforehand, by seeing the strength of our Adversary:
and that also seeing the manner of his fight, and of our Saviors defense, we
may be instructed how to arm our selves, and how to ward accordingly. For let
us be sure, that since the Devil spared not to tempt our Savior, he will be
much more bold with us: If he have done this to the green tree, what will
become of the dry? Luke 23.31. If he have sought our overthrow in Christ, how
much more will he do it in our selves? If our days here be but as the days
of an hireling, Job 7.1. and our whole life be but as a continual warfare, 2 Timothy 2.4. then is it behoovefull for us, to have some intelligence of our
enemies forces and drifts. It is said, his darts are fiery, Ephesians. 6.16. Here we
may see the manner of his casting them, that so Satan should not circumvent
us, 2 Cor. 2.11. Let us mark how our Savior wardeth and defends himself,
that so we may be armed with the same mind, 1 Pet. 4.1. Let us therefore go
out into the Wilderness to see it.

[Then Jesus.] This is the description of the entry into the temptation, and it
contains (as a weighty History) many circumstances, importing great matters,
which may be reduced to seven branches or heads. First, the two Champions,
first, Christ, and Secondly, Satan: Thirdly, the leader of Jesus into the
lists, who is said to be the Holy Ghost: Fourthly, the end, which was the
conflict it self, that is, to be tempted: Fifthly, the day of the battle,
expressed under the word Then: Sixthly, the lists themselves, that is, the
Wilderness: Seventhly, Christ his preparation to it, that is, his fasting.


I. First, for the party defendant, Christ; who (as God) gives food to every
living creature, Psalm. 136.25. and (as God and man) with five loaves and two
fishes fed 5000. men, besides women and children, Matthew. 14.21. He that is said
to be the very meat it self, whereby we live eternally, John 6. is here said
to be hungry. He, before whom thousand thousands are said to minister, and ten
thousand thousands are said to stand before him, Dan. 7.10. has here for his
companions the wild beasts: for so says Mark Chap. 1.13. He to whom the
Angels minister, verse 11. is here assailed with devils, which offer unto him
matter of great indignity; and the indignity which he suffered, leads us to the
consideration of the grievousnesse of our sins, and of the greatness of his
love, both which are measured by the greatness of those things he suffered for
us; as that he was cast out from among the company of Angels (for so Mark,
chap. 1. ver. 12. has it) into the Desert, to be a companion of beasts, and so
led forth to be tempted; where he suffered in his body hunger, in his soul
temptation: what is it else, but a proclaiming of his great love toward us? As
if he should (exulting) say, What is it that shall separate me from the love of
men? Shall temptation? shall solitariness? shall hunger? shall wearisome
labor and travel? shall watching? shall anguish of mind, and bloody sweat?
shall mockes? shall whippes? shall nails? shall spears? shall principalities?
That we also might use the same challenge which Paul does in the 8. Chapter of
his Epistle to the Romans the 35. verse, What shall separate us from the love
of Christ? shall tribulation? shall anguish or persecution? These two
profitable points grow out of the consideration of the person of the defendant.

II. Secondly, the party assaylant is the Devil, who is so called, by reason
of his foul mouth in defaming: for so does the word Diabolus import, where by
we have occasion to detest the sin of infamy: and it shows what name they
deserve, and how to be esteemed of, in whom that quality is found. Saint Paul,
2 Timothy 3.3. foretold, that in the latter days there should be men devils,
foule-mouthed men, evil speakers: and 1 Timothy 3.11. he speaks of women
devils, because of their calumnious speeches. In the tongue wherein Christ
spoke these words, namely, the Syriacke, the fittest word that he could find
to signify the devils name, is a word that signifies Divulgator: so that a
publisher of infamous reports, is good Syriacke for the devil; as when a man
lightly conceives a reptoach, either forging it himself by misconstruction, or
credulously receiving it upon the report of others, and then is not sorry for
his brothers ill, Mat. 5.22. but rather insulteth; not considering, that he
himself may fall into the like temptations, Gal. 6.1. and so becomes puffed
up, 1 Cor. 5.2. and at last, falls a blazing his brothers imperfections, 3 John
10. These come right to the devils quality, they take upon them the abetting of
the devils quarrel.

It is the devils occupation to defame us first with God, as he did Job, as if
he had been an hypocrite, and had served God only for gain, Job 1.9. and so
stands he continually accusing us, Apoc. 12.10. and he also defameth God with
us, as if he were a God that did envy our good, Genesis 3.1. and so he here
defameth God to Christ, as if he were careless in providing for him, in
suffering him to be hungry. And from these two defamations proceeds all evil
whatsoever, as well that which the Divines call Malum poenae, as Job. 1.12.
accusing Job, that he would curse God if he handled him roughly, and so got
power over his goods: as that which they call Malum culpae. For his defaming
God with us, was the cause of all sin: and every where still we see he
labors to persuade us, that God is an unkind God; that so we may burst
forth into those terms, This good did I get at Gods hand, 2 King. 6.33. to
wit, hunger. To this does he tempt Christ, verse 3. And as to desperation, so
sometimes to the contrary, presumption; as verse 6. Cast thy self down, etc.
by bringing us to have a base conceit of God, defaming him as if he were a God
of cloutes, not to be reckoned of, as if he were a man to wait upon us, and to
take us up as often as we list to throw our selves down, that we may say in our
hearts, as they that were frozen in their dregs did, Sophon. 1.2. He neither
does good nor hurt, it is all one to serve him, and not to serve him. He tells
us (as ver. 9.) that he will give us all this, if we will fall down and
worship him, as though he were very liberal in rewards, and as though God were
unkind or ungrateful, not once regarding us for all our service, but suffers
us even to starve. which brought men to that pass, as to say, Mal. 3.14. that
It is but in vain to serve God, what gain is in his service? If he cannot
prevail this way against us, then he will try another way: for, when (seeing
that this temptation succeeded not) the devil left Christ, he departed not for
altogether, but went to come again (as appeateth in Luke 4.13. He departed for
a time.) Christ was too cunning for him in disputing: he meant therefore to
take another course; for as James notes, chap. 1. ver. 14. there be two sorts
of temptations, one by inticement, as a Serpent: another by violence, as a
Lion: if he cannot prevail as a Serpent, he will play the Lion. He had also
another hour at Christ in the garden, the hour of darkness, Luke 22.53.
there he bruised his heel.

III. Thirdly, we are to consider the leader, He was led by the Spirit. In
which we are to note five things: not making any question, but that it was the
good Spirit, for so it appears in Luke 4.1.

First, that the state of a man regenerate by Baptism, is not a standing
still, Matthew. 20.6. He found others standing idle in the market place, and he
said to them, Why stand ye idle all day? We must not only have a mortifying and
reviving, but a quickening and stirring spirit, 1 Cor. 15.45. which will move
us, and cause us to proceed: we must not lie still like lumpes of flesh, laying
all upon Christ's shoulders, Phil. 3.16. We must walk forwards, for the
Kingdom of God consists not in words, but in power, 1 Cor. 4.19. Secondly, as
there must be a stirring, so this stirring must not be such, as when a man is
left to his own voluntary or natural motion: we must go according as we are
led. For having given our selves to God, we are no longer to be at our own
disposition or direction: whereas before our calling, we were Gentiles, and
were carried into errors, 1 Cor. 12.2. we wandered up and down as masterlesse
or careless, or else gave heed to the doctrine of devils, 1 Timothy 1.4. or else
led with diverse lusts, 2 Timothy 3.6. But now being become the children of God, we
must be led by the Spirit of God: For so many as be the Sons of God, are led
thereby, Romans 8.14. We must not be l^d by the Spirit whence the Revelation
came, Matthew. 16.22. from whence revelations of flesh and blood do arise: but
by the Spirit from whence the voice came, This is my beloved Son, in whom I
am well pleased. It came not by the spirit that ministered wife counsel, but by
that which came down upon them. Thirdly, the manner of leading, is described
to be such a kind of leading, as when a Ship is loosed from the shore, as Luke
8.22. it is called launching forth: so in the 18. of the Acts, the 31. verse,
Paul is said to have sailed forth. The Holy Ghost driving us, is compared to a
gale of wind, Joh. 3.8. which teaches us, that as when the wind blows, we
must be ready to hoyst up sail: so must we make us ready to be led by the
Spirit. Our hope is compared to an Anchor, Heb. 6.19. which must be haled up to
us; and our Faith to the Sail, we are to bear as great a sail as we can. We
must also look to the closeness of the vessel, which is our Conscience: for,
if we have not a good conscience, we may make shipwreck of Faith, Religion,
and all, 1 Timothy 1.19. And thus are we to proceed in our journey toward our
Country (the spiritual Jerusalem) as it were sea-fating men. Act. 20.22. Now
behold, I go bound in spirit to Jerusalem; to which journey the love of Christ
must constrain us, 2 Cor. 5.14. Fourthly, that he was led to be tempted. His
temptation therefore came not by chance; nor as Job speaks, chap. 5. v. 6.
out of the dust, or out of the earth, nor from the devil, not only over Jobs
person, but not so much as over his goods, Job 1.12.14. He had no power of
himself, no not so much as over the Hogs of the Gorgashites, who were
profane men, Mat. 8.31. Hence gather we this comfort, that the Holy Ghost is
not a stander by (as a stranger) when we are tempted, Tanquam otiosus
spectator; but he leads us by the hand, and stands by as a faithful assistant,
Esaias 4.13. He makes an issue out of all our temptations, and will not suffer us
to be tempted beyond our strength, 2 Cor. 10.13. And, he turns the work of
sin, and of the devil too, unto our good, Romans 8.28. so that all these shall
make us more wary after to resist them: and hell (by fearing it) shall be an
occasion unto us, to avoid that might bring us to it; and so they shall all be
fellow-helpers to our salvation. So that temptations, whether they be (as the
Fathers call them) rods to chasten us for sin committed, or to try and fist
us, Mat. 3.12. and so to take away the chafe, the fan being in the Holy
Ghosts hand: or whether they be sent to buffet us against the prick of the
flesh, 2 Cor. 12.17. Or whether they be as matters serving for our experience,
not only for our selves, that we may know our own strength, Romans 5.3. and to
work patience in us: but to the devil also, that so his mouth may be stopped,
as in Job 2.3. Have thou marked my servant Job, how upright he is, and that in
all the world there is not such an one? Howsoever they be, the devil has not
the rod or chain in his hands, but the Holy Ghost, to order them, as they may
best serve for his glory and our good: and as for the devil, he binds him
fast, Rev. 20.2. Fifthly, by the Greek word here used, is set forth the
difference between the temptations of the Saints, and Reprobates. In the Lords
Prayer one Petition is, Lead us not into temptation: but there, the word
imports another manner of leading, than is here meant. We do not there pray
against this manner of leading here, which is so to lead us, as to be with us,
and to bring us back again, Heb. 13.20. but we pray there, that he would not
cast or drive us into temptations; and when we are there, leave us, by
withdrawing his grace and holy Spirit, as he does from the reprobate and
forsaken.
IV. The fourth point is the end, that is, the Conflict, as it concerns
Christ; insomuch, that he was led to be tempted. In which temptation, Augustine
says, Habemus and quod credenies veneremur, and quod videntes imitemur: There
be two things for faith to adore, and two things for imitation to practice.

First, for faith, that the temptations of Christ have sanctified temptations
unto us: that whereas before they were curses, like unto hanging on a tree;
now, since Christ has been both tempted and hanged on a tree, they be no
longer signs and pledges of Gods wrath, but favors. A man may be the child
of God notwithstanding, and therefore he is not to receive any discouragement
by any of them. Secondly, besides the sanctifying, it is an abatement, so that
now when we are tempted, they have not the force they had before: for now the
Serpents head is bruised, so that he is now nothing so strong (as he was) to
cast his darts. Also the head of his darts are blunted, 1 Cor. 15.55. Death,
where is thy sting? Hell, where is thy victory? For as his death and
resurrection had a mortifying force against the old man, and a quickening force
toward the new man: * so has his temptation a dulling force to the devil, and
a strengthening force to us.
For our life and imitation, there are also two.

First, Compassion: for Christ knowing in what sort we were tempted, as having
felt by experience, both how strong the assaylant was, Psalm. 118.13. who thrust
sore at him that he might fall; and how feeble our nature is to make
resistance, being nothing but dust, Psalm. 103.14. He is moved thereby to lay
away severity, and to put on the bowels of compassion. So that, Now we have not
a high Priest which cannot be tempted with our infirmities, but was tempted in
like sort, Heb. 4.15. So we, (which were before stony Judges, and too rough for
Physicians) ought in like sort, (having been tempted our selves) to look upon
others defects with a more passionate regard.

The second thing we are to imitate, Christ is our fellow-helper, in all our
necessities and temptations; who, as he shows us his sleights and darts,
Ephesians. 4.14. so he teaches us how to avoid them. This is no small comfort to
us, when we consider that he is with us, and will be, till the end of the
world, Matthew. 28.20. who has overcome the world, Joh. 16.33. and the devil:
if any temptation happen, that he will bear us out, we may be of good cheer.
This was it that did so animate Job, Do thou but take my part, and who shall
touch me? Job 17.3. When as both Christ and we draw together in one yoke,
Matthew. 11.29. what can hurt us? Yet if we be afraid for that we see the enemy
coming; let us call for the help of our assistant, and as it is said in Psalm.
68.1. we shall see God will arise, and his enemies shall be scattered: they
shall vanish like smoke, and melt like wax. When they are ready to attache us,
let us say, Save me O God, for the waters are entered even into my soul, Psalm.
69.1. When we are feeble, then let us say with Ezekiel, O Lord it has
oppressed me, comfort me, Ezekiel. 38.14. Or though they have wounded us, let us
say with David, Bring out thy spear, and stop the way against them that
persecute me, Psalm. 35.3. Say yet to my Soul, I am thy Salvation. So that we
have not only an example, but a comfort too.

V. The fifth point, is the day and time when this was done, in which we are to
note two things. The word [Then] relates as well to the end of the Chapter
next going before, as to the present instant.

First then, when as Christ was but newly come out of the water of Baptism,
and immediately after the heavens had opened unto him, and the Holy Ghost
descended upon him in the likeness of a Dove, and while he was yet full of the
Holy Ghost; did the devil set upon him. When as the voice from Heaven had
pronounced, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; the devil
straight adds; in whom I am ill pleased: and so addresseth himself against
him. And it is Gods property to look for much at his hands, to whom he has
given much. When he gives a man a large measure of grace, he gives the devil
withal a large patent. Our Savior had great gifts, and the devil is like a
thief, that will venture most for the greatest booty. Secondly, in regard of
the present, we are to note, that in thirty years, the devil did nothing to
our Savior: but now when he goes about to gird himself with our salvation,
according to Psalm. 45.3. then does the devil gird on his sword also; that is
as much to say, as the better the work is, the more resistance it shall have.
Ten repulses did the Israelites suffer, before they could get possession of the
promised Land of Canaan: and as many did David endure before he was invested in
the promised Kingdom. Many lets came before the Temple was re-edifyed, as is
to be seen in Esdras and Nehemiah. Yea, (says the devil) Has God anointed
him with the oil of gladness above his fellows? I will see if I can annoint
him with the oil of sadness above his fellows. Has he been baptized of
water and the Holy Ghost? I will provide another Baptism for him, namely, of
fire. Has God sent down the Holy Ghost upon him in likeness of a Dove? I
will cause tribulation, and a crown of thorns to light upon his head. Has a
voice come down from Heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son? I will provide
a voice for him, that shall ascend from the foot, that shall say, If thou be
the Son of God, come down from the Cross.
VI. The sixt^s the place, the Lysts; to wit, the Wilderness, that so he
might be alone, and that there might be no fellow-worker with him in the matter
of our salvation, that he alone might have the treading of the Wine Press,
Esaias 63.3. So, in the Transfiguration in the Mount, he was found alone, Luke
9.36. So in the garden in his great agony, he was in effect alone; for his
Disciples slept all the while, Matthew. 26.40. that unto him might be ascribed
all the praise.

Secondly, we will note hear, that there is no place privileged from
temptations. As there be some that think there be certain places to be exempt
from Gods presence, (as was noted in the dream of Jacob:) so the Monks and
Hermites thought, that by avoiding company, they should be free from
temptations; which is not so. For, although Christ were alone in the
Wilderness, and fasting too, yet was he tempted we see. And yet it is true,
that he that will live well, must shun the company of the wicked, Genesis 19.7.

When the Angels had brought Lot and his family out of the doors, they charged
them not to tarry, nor to stand still, nor once to look back. So after the
Cock had crowed, and put Peter in mind of his fall; he went out of the doors
and wept bitterly, Matthew. 26.75. his solitariness was a cause to make his
repentance the more earnest, and helped to increase his tears: and company is
commonly an hinderance to the receiving of any good grace, and to the
exercising and confirming us in any good purpose. But as true it is, that
temptations are, and may as well be in the deserts, as in public places: not
only in the valleys, but in the mountains, ver. 8. and not only in the
country, but even in the holy City, ver. 5. yea, and sometimes full, and
sometimes fasting, yea, in Paradise and in Heaven it self; for thither does
the devil come and accuse us before God: we are therefore always to stand
upon our guard. For in Luke 11.24. he is said, to walk through dry places,
lest happily some might be escaped from him thither: and though we could go
whither he could not come, we should not be free: for we carry ever a Tempter
about with us. And when we pray to be delivered from temptation, it is not
only from the devil, but from our selves: we carry fire within us. Nazianzen
and Basil were of that mind once, that by change of the place a man might go
from temptation: but afterward they recanted it, affirming, That it was
impossible to avoid temptation, yea, though he went out of the world, except he
left his heart behind him also.

THE SECOND SERMON.
MATTHEW. 4.2. And when he had fasted forty days, and forty nights, he was
afterward hungry.


NOw come we to the seventh and last circumstance. It may seem strange, that
being about to present himself to the world, as Prince, Priest, and Prophet,
that he would make his progress into the Wilderness, and begin with a Fast:
for this was clean contrary to the course and fashion of the world, which
uses, when any great matter is in hand, to make a Preface or Praeludium, with
some great solemnity. As when Solomon came first to his Crown, he went to the
chief City, and gathered a solemn Convent. So Christ should rather first have
gone to Jerusalem the holy City, and there should have been some solemn
banquet. But Christ from his Baptism began his calling, and fasted forty days
and forty nights. This his Fast (by late Writers) is called the entrance into
his calling: by the ancient Writers it is called the entrance into his conflict.

The manner of the Church has always been, that at the first institution, or
undertaking of any great and weighty matter, there has been extraordinary
Fasting. So Moses, Deuteronomy. 9.9. when he entered into his calling at the receiving
of the Law, fasted forty days. So Elias, 1 King. 19.18. at the restoring of
the same Law, did the like. And so when they went about the re-edifying of the
Temple, as appears Esdras 8.49. So in the New Testament, at the separation of
Paul and Barnabas, Act. 13.3. And (as Jerome reports) Saint John would not
undertake to write the divine work of his Gospel, until the whole Church (by
Fasting) had recommended the same unto God.

So likewise, at the entrance into a Conflict, for the obtaining of some
Victory, as Jehoshaphat did when he overcame the Amorites, 2 Chronicles. 20.3. So
did Hester when she went about the deliverance of the Jews, as in Ester 4.
ver. 16. And Eusebius reports, that when Peter was to enter disputation with
Simon Magus, there was Fasting throughout the whole Church generally. Whether
at the entrance into a Calling, or to resist the devil, Saint Peter's rule,
mentioned in his first chapter and fifth verse, ought to take place, we must
use Prayer and Fasting. And as at all times we are to use watchfullnesse and
carfulness: so then especially, when we look that the devil will be most
busy; and the rather, for that in some cases there is no dealing without
Fasting, as Mark 9.29. there is a kind of devil that will not be cast out,
without Prayer and Fasting.

As for the number of days wherein he fasted, just forty; Curiosity may find
it self work enough; but it is dangerous to make Conclusions, when no
certainety appears. Some say, there is a correspondency between these forty
days, and the forty days wherein the world was destroyed by the Deluge. But
it is better to say, As Moses fasted forty days at the institution of the Law,
and Elias forty at the restoration; so Christ here. And because he came but
in the shape of a servant, he would not take upon him above his
fellow servants. Contrary to our times, wherein a man is accounted no body,
except he can have a quirke above his fellows. But it is more material, to see
how it concerns us. It is a thing rather to be adored by admiration, then to
be followed by apish imitation.

This Fast here, was not the fast of a day, as that of Peter and of Cornelius,
Acts 10.9.30. but such as Luke 4.2. describes, He did eat nothing all that
time. Saint John the Baptist, though his life were very strict, did eat
Locusts and wild Honey, Matthew. 3.4. Ours is not properly a Fast, but a
provocation of meats; and therefore there can be no proportion between them.
But as it is, what is to be thought of it? Socrates and Irenaeus record, that
at the first, the Church did use to celebrate but one day in remembrance of
Christ's Fast, till after, the Montanists (a certain sect of heretics, who
thereupon are called Eucratitae) raised it to fourteen days; the zeal of
the Clergy after increased it to forty, after to fifty: The Monks brought it
to sixty, the Friars to seventy; and if the Pope had not there stayed it, they
would have brought it to eighty, and so have doubled Christ's fasting. When the
Primitive Church saw the Heretics (by this outward show) go about to
disgrace the Christians, by this counterfeit show of holiness; they used it
also: but (says Augustine and Chrysostom) they held it only a positive law,
which was in the Church to use or take away, and not as any exercise of
godliness.

Only a doubt rests now, because of the hardness of men's hearts, whether it
were better left or kept. Some would have abstinence used, and one day kept for
the Sabbath, but left to every man's liberty, what time and day, and tied to no
certainety: but that were (upon the matter) to have none kept at all.
Notwithstanding, the Reformed Church (as that of France) have used their
liberty in removing of it, for that they saw an inclination in their people to
superstition, who would think themselves holyer for such fasting; like the
Pharisees, Luke 18.12. The Church wherein we live, uses her liberty in
retayning it, and that upon good reasons: for since God has created the fishes
of the sea for man, and gives him an interest in them also, Genesis 9.2. as well
as in the beasts: Since the death of fish was a plague wherewith God plagued
Pharaoh, and so contrariwise the increase of fish is a blessing: God will have
fish to be used, so that he may have praises as well for the sea, as for the
land, Psalm. 104.25.

If we look into the civil reason, we shall see great cause to observe it.
See Numb. 15.22. the abundance of flesh that was consumed in one month. The
mainetenance of store then is of great importance, and therefore order must be
taken accordingly. Jerusalem had fish days, that Tyrus, and such like, living
upon Navigation, might have utterance for their commodities, Nehem. 13.16. (for
Tyrus was the maritine City, till after Alexander annexed to it another City,
and made it dry.)

The Tribe of Zabulon lived by Navigation, Genesis 49.13. which is a thing
necessary both for wealth, 2 Chronicles. 9.20. and made Solomon richer than any
other King, and also for munition, as Esaias 23.4. that Tribe therefore had need
of maintenance. And therefore our Church and Commonwealth have taken order
accordingly; and the rather, for that our times require it: (for the times that
forbad marriage and the abstinence of meats, 1 Timothy 4.3.) There is more fear
of a pottingerfull of gluttony, than a spoonefull of superstition. This is no
Fast, but a change of meat.

Verse 3. Then came to him the Tempter, etc.
BEfore we come to the particular temptations, we have four general points to
be considered. First, the changing of the devils name, from devil to Tempter:
Secondly, that it is said, He came unto him: Thirdly, that he came when he was
fasting: Fourthly, the diversity and order of the temptations.

I. First, in Jam. 1.13. it is said, that God tempts no man; and yet in Deuteronomy.
13.3. it appears, that God does tempt some; we must then make a difference
between Gods temptations, and the devils. The devil indeed tempts us, but
God (as our English translation has it) tries us. The latter is to commend
us, Romans 3.5. or rather that our tribulation may bring forth patience, and
patience hope, Romans 4.3. It makes us know that to be in our selves, which
before we knew not, as we see in Job. So the Lord proved the Israelites, to
see if they loved him or no, Deuteronomy. 13.3. The devils temptation is to know our
corruption: for knowing the innocence of Adam, he went about to corrupt him.
It is like the Israelites proving of Manna, to try conclusions. Gods is like
the trial of gold, 1 Pet. 1.7. which the oftener it is tried, the purer it
waxes: the devils, like that of Manna, which stinketh and corrupts by
trial. Gods is like the trial of the fan, Matthew. 3.12. the devils like that
of the scive, Luke 22.31. which lets go the flower, and keeps the branne.

II. Secondly, the devil has two shapes; in the one, he tempts and
allureth, (and in that he came now to our Savior:) in the other, he assayleth
us, that is, by assault and violence, Ephesians. 6.11. The first is the temptation
of hypocrites, Matthew. 22.18. Shall we pay tribute to Caesar? The second, of
Judas, who in the garden assaulted our Savior, John 6.70. So Satan sets on
Christ by violence. He came unto Christ by casting sparks of fire into him;
for he was devoyd of any wicked and vain thoughts coming forth of him.

Two ways may a man be tempted: either by doubts arising in our hearts out of
us, Luke 24.38. or by a sop entering into us, John 13.27. Christ could not be
tempted the first way: for he was devoyd of any wicked and vain thought,
coming forth of him. To us the devil needs bring but a pair of bellows, for
he shall find fire within us: but to Christ he was feign to bring fire too.

III. Thirdly, he then came to him when he was fasting, which discovers the
devils desperate boldness, as also his craftiness, in that he waited his
time, to stay till he was hungry. Notwithstanding, Christ was newly come from
his Baptism, and was full of the Holy Ghost, and even now in his exercise of
mortification; yet had the devil courage to set upon him. There is no place so
holy, nor exercise so good, as can repress his courage, or give a stay to the
boldness of his attempts: as we see, Mark 4.14. The word is no sooner sown,
but Satan comes immediately, and takes it out of their hearts: which must
needs be done in the Church. For the word is out, before they be out of the
Church: so that he is not afraid of hearing the word, but can abide it well
enough, yea, better than many. And though they carry the word out of the
Church, he will wait on them home, and choke the word with cares, and riches,
and voluptuous living, like the seed that fell among thorns, Luke 8.14.

And no more does he care for the exercise of prayer: for even then immediately
after the repetition of forgiveness, when we have made even with all the
world, when God has forgiven us, and we others; then does the devil give us
occasion to say, Lead us not into temptation, as standing by there ready to
tempt us.

And as little cares he for the Sacraments: for presently after they had
received the Sacrament, and sang the hymn, Christ tells them, they shall all be
offended in him that night, Matthew. 26.1. Thus we see his courage serves him at
all times, nothing is able to quail it.

As this ought not to discourage the children of God, having so faithful an
assistant to take their part: so it gives them this caveat, that they be at no
time secure, but always to keep a sure guard. Saint Bernard in the midst of
a Sermon was solicited to vaineglory, because he thought he pleased his
auditors, and thereupon brake off his speech, and turned it to the devil,
saying; Non propter te hoc opus coeptum est; nec propter te, nec in te finitur.

And as he is courageous, so he is subtle: for notwithstanding his eager
desire, he staid the fittest time, wherein consists a chief point of
wisdom. So when he tempted Eve, he staid till her husband was away, and till
he could show her the fruit which was so pleasing to the eye. So when David
lay with Bathsheba, Vriahs wife, he tempted him in the evening, and after his
sleep, 2 Samuel 11.12. a very fit time for the purpose. So when they were
asleep, the enemy sowed tares, Matthew. 13.

And as he is wary in choosing his time, so is he as cunning in choosing the
means, observing the dispositions of men. For wanton and voluptuous men, he
has the daughters of Moab, a bayte fit for their humors, whereby to tempt them
to idolatry, Numb. 15.1. For men secure and careless, he has a net that
suffices to throw over them, (2 Timothy 2.26.) and snare them in. For others,
that have more care to seek and inquire into things, he has quils to blow
them up, as knowledge which puffes up, 1 Cor. 8.1. Yea, even the best things
can he make serve for his purpose, and to be occasions of temptations; so that
he may find better entertainment, for the good exercises sake that come with
him. He will come sometimes shrouded in the necessity of nature, as here; for
when a man is hungry, nature requires somewhat to assuage it.

Prayer, no man doubts to be a godly exercise; yet thereby he tempted them
that loved to pray in the Synagogues, and make much babbling, and repetition,
Matthew. 6.5.7. In like sort does he abuse the name of good counsel, as in Peter
to Christ, Matthew. 16.22. who (as a friend) wished him to spare himself, and
live out his time.

Thus can he put on a fair show, the sooner to beguile: and for good reason,
for if he should come unmasked in his own likeness, he would be rejected; as
if Jehoram the King of Israel had come himself without Jehoshaphat, Elisha
would not have looked on him: so by a good pretense, the temptation shroudes
and insinuates it self; otherwise, it would not be looked on.

IV. Now we are to consider the diversity and order of the temptations, and
then will we handle them particularly. And first we are to note, that though
there are but these three recorded, yet he endured diverse others. His whole
life was full of temptations, as may appear by Luke 22.28. It is said, Luke
4.2. that he was tempted forty days of the devil, whereas these three
temptations here set down, were not till after the end of forty days. These
only are mentioned, but there were other not written, as diverse of his
miracles are unwritten, John 20.25. Only, so much was written as was expedient.

These three are a brief Abridgement of all his temptations. As it is true
that Paul says, that Christ resembled Adam, and was made a quickening spirit,
as Adam was a living soul, 1 Cor. 15.45. And the bringing of the children of
Israel out of Egypt, by being called our of Egypt, Matthew. 2.15. So may Christ
and Adam be compared in these three temptations. For they both were tempted
with concupiscence of the flesh, concupiscence of the eye, and pride of life, 1
John 2.16. In Adam the devil first brought him into a conceit, that God
envyed his good. As we see Faulconers put hoods over Hawks eyes, to make them
more quiet and ruly. Secondly, he lulles him on to a proud conceit of himself,
by persuading him that by eating he should be like God. Thirdly, he shows the
fruit, which was pleasant. So in Christ's temptation: First, he would have
brought him to murmr against God: Secondly, to presume: and thirdly, to
commit Idolatry; all which are set down in the 1 Cor. 10.5, 6, 7. verses. And
under these three heads come all temptations, Number. 14. and 21. and Exodus 32.

To some of these extremes will the devil seek to drive one. First, by
distrust he will seek to drive us to use unlawful means, for the obtaining
of necessary things, as bread is when a man is hungry. Or if we be in no such
want, that that temptation cannot take place, then (through superfluity) he
will tempt us to wanton and unnecessary desires, as to throw our selves down,
that the Angels may take us up: and having prevailed so far, then he
carries us to the devil and all. All this will I give thee; there is his
[All:] Fall down and worship me, there is the devil with it: so that (in this
respect) it may well be said, that The way of a Serpent is over a stone, Prove.
30.19. He goes so slily, that a man sees him in, before he can tell what
way, or how he got in. First, he wraps himself in necessity, and thereby
winds himself in unperceived, then he brings us to make riches our God.

Now let us see his darts. The first is, of making stones bread: This may well
be called, The hungry Temptation. The stream of the Doctors, make Adams
offense the sin of Gluttony: but Bucer thinks, that this temptation is
rather to be referred to distrust and despair. There is small likelihood, that
one should sin in gluttony by eating bread only. The devils desire was
only, that the stones might be turned into bread, and that after so long a
Fast: and then, if the temptation had been to Gluttony, Christ's answer had
been nothing to the purpose, the Devil might well have replied against the
insufficiency of it. For gluttony is to be answered by a Text willing sobriety:
whereas this Text which Christ answers by, contains rather an assertion of
Gods providence: and therefore our Savior should have seemed very unskilful
in defending himself. The temptation therefore is to distrust.

This stands well with the devils cunning in fight: for by this be shoots
first even at the throat, and at that which is the life of a Christian, to
wit, his faith; as a man would say, Iugulum petit, even at that which
overcommeth the world, 1 John 5.5. He tempted him to such a distrust, as was in
the Israelites, Exodus 17.7. when they asked if God were with them, or no? So he
made Adam think, God cared not for him: so here the devil premiseth a doubt
to shake his faith, wherein Christ made no doubt, Si filius Dei es.

Indeed you heard a voice say, you were the beloved Son of God, but are you
so indeed? or was it not rather a delusion? You see yon are almost starved for
want of bread: well, would God have suffered you so to be, if you had been his
Filius dilectus? No, you are some hunger-starved child, So Luke 22.31. Christ
prayed, that Peter's faith might not fail. It was that the devil shot at. He
is a roaring Lion, seeking to devour us, whom we must resist by faith, 1 Pet.
5.8. It is our Faith that he aims at, 1 These. 3.5. For having overthrown
that, disobedience soon will follow. Having abolished the stablisher of the
Law, Romans 3.31. the breach of the Law must needs follow. He has then fit time
to set us aworke, about making stones into bread, that is, to get our living by
unlawful means. First, shipwreck of faith, then of obedience.

The devil here seeing him in great want and hunger, would thereby bring in
doubt, that he was not the Son of God; which is not a good argument. For
whether we respect the natural tokens of Gods favor, we see they happen not
to the wisest and men of best and greatest knowledge, as appears in Eccles.
9.11. or the supernatural favor of God. We shall see Abraham forced to fly
his Country into Egypt for famine, Genesis 10.12. So did Isaac, Genesis 26.1. And
Jacob likewise was in the same distress, Genesis 43.1. Notwithstanding that God
was called, The God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; yet were they all three like
to be hunger-starved. Yea, not only so, but for their faith many were burned
and stoned, of whom the world was not worthy, Heb. 11.37. So fared it with the
Apostles, they were hungry, naked, and a thirst, 1 Cor. 4.11. But what do we
speak of the adopted Sons of God, when as his own natural Son suffered
as much, nay, far more? Here we see he was hungry, also he was wearied with
travail, and feign to rest, John 4.6. he had no house to hide his head in,
whereas Foxes have holes.

If thou be the Son of God, etc.
THe Heathens have observed, that in Rhetoric it is a point of chiefest
cunning, when you would outface a man, or importune him to do a thing, to
press and urge him with that, which he will not or cannot for shame deny to be
in himself, As by saying, if you have any wit, then you will do thus and
thus: if you be an honest man or a good fellow, do this. So here the devil
(not being to learn any point of subtilty) comes to our Savior, saying, If
thou be the Son of God, (as it may be doubted, you being in this case) then,
make these stones bread. No, no, it follows not: a man may be the Son of
God, and not show it by any such Art. So when Pilate asked, who accused Christ?
they answered, If he had not been a malefactor, we would not have brought him
before thee, John 18.30. They were jolly grave men, it was a flat flattery: and
in John 21.23. there is the like. This ought to put us in mind, when we are
tempted in like manner, that we take heed we be not out-faced.

In the matter it self, we are to consider these points: First, the devil
sets it down for a ground, that (follow what will) bread must needs be had.
Therefore Christ first closes with him. Admit he had bread, were he then safe?
No, We live not by bread only: so that bread is not of absolute necessity.
Well, what follows of that? Bread you must needs have, you see your want, God
has left off to provide for you. Then comes the conclusion, Therefore shift
for your self as well as you can. First, he soliciteth us to a mutinous
repining within our selves, as Heb. 3.8. Harden not your hearts, as in the day
of temptation, etc. whereby he forces us to break out into such like
conceits, as Psalm. 116.11. I said in my distress that all men be liars: and
Psalm. 31.22. I said in my haste, I am cast off. Thus closely he distrusted God,
in saying, his Prophets prophecy lies, till at last, we even open our mouths
against God himself, and say, This evil comes from the Lord: shall I attend
on the Lord any longer? 2 Kings 6.33. Hunger and shame is all we shall get at
Gods hands. And so casting off God, betake themselves to some other Patron, and
then the devil is fittest for their turn. For when we are fallen out with
one, it is best serving his enemy, and to retain to the contrary faction. Then
we seek a Familiar (with Saul) to answer us, 1 Samuel 28.7.

But what did the devil then tell him? did he bring comfort with him? No: he
tells him, that to morrow he and his sennes should dye. So here does the devil
bring a stone with him. What Father (says Christ) if his Son ask him bread,
would give him a stone? Matthew. 7.9. yet the devil does so; Christ was hungry,
and the devil shows him stones.

Here is the devils comfort, here be stones for thee, if thou can devise any
way to make these stones bread, thou art well; whereas we do not use to make
bread of stones, but of wheat, to work it with the sweat of our brows; to
get it so, we learn Genesis 3.19.

By extortion and usury we may make stones into bread, that is the devils
Alchymistry: or happily we may make bread of nothing, when a man gets a thing by
another oversight, Genesis 43.12. Or else, what and if we can overreach our
brother in subtilty, and go beyond him with a trick of wit or cunning? Let no
man defraud or oppress his brother in any matter: for the Lord is avenged of
all such, 1 These. 4.6. The one is called the bread of violence and oppression,
Prove. 4.17. The other, The bread of deceit.

They are indeed both made of stones, for they still retain their former
property, as the event will declare. For though in the beginning such bread be
pleasant, Prove. 20.17. yet after, his mouth is but filled with gravel. After
which will consequently follow, gnashing of teeth.

THE THIRD SERMON
MATTHEW. 4.4. But he answering, said; It is written, Man shall not live by bread
only; but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.


IT was a good service that Elisha (2 Reg. 6.9.) did, to tell the King of the
trains laid for him, when they lay in ambush against him. And even this is the
first use that we have of our Saviors Temptations.

It warnes us aforehand of the devils coming, so that we may have time to
prepare our selves accordingly. For as at that time the devil came upon Christ
when hunger pinched him: so where we are in any distress, we are to look for
temptations.

This temptation has two parts, First comes (Si,) a distrust: Secondly
follows unlawful means.
Having laid this foundation, that bread is necessary to be had when one is
hungry; he infers, that God helps not, nor supplyeth the want: therefore
God is not the Father, Matthew. 7.6. and therefore depend no longer on him, but
shift for your self. This is the effect of the devils argument.

The Fathers upon the words, Ephesians. 6.16. (Take the shield of faith, to quench
all the fiery darts of the devil) do note, that about every one of the darts
or temptations of the devil, there are (as it were) bals of wild fire. For
being to assault our obedience, and knowing that faith is our shield: to that
end he uses the arrow head, which is, distrust in God, about which is fire; to
wit, the using of unlawful means, to consume our obedience, which will
consume our shield of faith, and so make way for the dart to kill or wound us.
So that his drift is, to bring our adoption or Sonship, to a Si.

There is no doubt but Christ was able to have turned stones into bread: but
why would he not then follow the devils advice? The devil by saying, Say unto
these stones, seems to acknowledge, that he had the force to have done it,
even by his bare word: for even stones are said to hear the voice of God, and
obey his commandment, and not only Gods, but even Gods servants, as 1 Reg.
13.5. when the man of God had pronounced, that the Altar should rent in sunder,
it did so. And Matthew. 27.5. when Jesus cried out with a loud voice, the veil
of the Temple rent in twain, the earth did quake, and the stones were cloven.
The dead men are worse than stones, yet they in their graves heard his voice.

And not only was he able to turn stones into bread, but into men also: as
Children to Abraham of stones, Matthew. 3.9. If therefore it had pleased him, he
was as well able at this time to have turned stones into bread, as after he
turned water into Wine, John 2.10.

It was no less possible to him (no doubt) to have saved himself, when the
Jews scoffingly bad him, Matthew. 27.42. as to have saved others; and to have
come down from the Cross being alive, as it was after for him, not only
being dead and buried, but a great stone being over him, to remove it, and come
out of the grave, Mat. 28.2. He had power to both, but not will alike to both.

But why would he not here use his power, for the satisfying of his hunger, and
follow the devils advice? In setting down the History of turning water into
Wine, it is thus further said, that he did it, That his Disciples might believe
in him, John 2.11. That was the reason that moved him to the working of that
miracle: and because there was no such cause here, he did it not. For the
devil would not believe in him (he knew) though he had done it. The devil
desired him, but to have him show what he could do for a need only, for a
vaunt of his power: wherein we see the humor of pride, that made him at the
first to fall.

It is the same temptation that his kinsfolks used, No man does any thing
secretly, that seeks to be famous; if thou do these things, show thy self
to the world. But see how unfitly the Temptation hangs together. He should
rather have said, If you be hungry; then, If you be the Son of God: and then
rather have bid him fast forty days more, then turn the stones into bread. If
it had been to have made a Son of God, Christ would have done it: but not to
have showed himself to be the Son of God.

But it may be asked, why did Christ vouchsafe to give him any answer at all;
whereas he might have commanded him to silence, and tormented him before his
time, and have punished him for his sauciness? When Peter tempted him, he cut
him up very sharply, saying, Come behind me Satan, Mark 8.33. Why did he not
answer the devil so? He might have enjoined him, and thrown him into the
bottomless pit, Luke 8.31. or at the least bidden him, Avoid Satan, verse 10.
Augustine answers this doubt, that Christ answered in the like time, to teach
us to answer: willing us thereby (as Abimelech did his soldiers) to do as he
had done before: Judge. 9.48. So Christ is our example, John 13.15. and bids us
do as he has done. Christ is our Captain, he has gone before us, and
showed us how to behave our selves in fight: when the devil assaulteth us with
distrust, then are we to ward it off with a Text of Gods providence: and so to
the rest, as he has done before us. Our Saviors shield, whereby (we see) he
bears off all the devils darts, is covered all over with Scriptum est. We
have here a brief view of the Churches Armory, Cant. 4.4. of the Tower of
David, built for defense. Here be the shields wherewith Solomon's Temple was
hanged, and which Paul calls, The weapons of our warfare, 2 Cor. 10.4. not
carnal, but mighty (through God) to cast down holds.

They are in number five: First, a preparation of our selves by the use of Gods
Sacraments, that we may be the more strong to sustain and bear off
temptations, and to hold out to the end without fainting. Secondly, a
withdrawing our selves into the desert, or some other solitary place, there (by
Meditation) to kindle good thoughts, Psalm. 39.3. Thirdly, fasting. Fourthly,
watchful prayer, Matthew. 26.41. Fifthly, the perfecting our selves in the
Scriptures. These be the five shields wherewith Solomon's Temple was hanged.

Now as for the Scripture, we are to note, that where God speaks of any good
that we are to receive out of it, it is commended to us as a storehouse,
whither we are to make our resort for the bread of life, and the water of life,
whereof he that tastes, shall never thirst, John 6.35. And from thence are we
to draw the waters of comfort, out of the fountains of salvation, Esaias 12.3.
When there is any ill spoken of, which we are to resist, then it is commended
to us as an Armory, whence we may fetch any kind of weapon which we shall
need, either offensive, as a sword, Heb. 4.12. or defensive, as a shield, Prove.
30.5.

The Scripture is the broad plate that is to bear off the darts: our faith is
the braces or handle whereby we take hold, Ephesians. 6.16. and lift it up to
defend our selves withal. For the Scripture is a shield, Non quod dicitur, sed
quod dicitur. Dicitur; there is the strong and broad matter, fit to bear off:
and Creditur, that is the handle or braces to it, God spoke once or twice, I
have heard it, Power belongs unto God, Psalm. 62.11. So that it suffices not
that it be spoken only by God, but we must hear it too: neither must we hear
it as the voice of a man (as Samuel at the first did; who when God called him
thought it the voice of Eli:) but as the voice of God, that we which were dead
in our sins, he has quickened and forgiven us all our trespasses, 1 These. 2.13.
This is the perfection of our faith.

Generally of the Scriptures, this is Christ's opinion, confirmed by his own
practice; that if the devil come as a Serpent, here is a charm for him,
Psalm 58.5. Or if he come as a Lion, here is that is able to prevail against
him, 1 Peter 5.8. And that the devil knows well enough, as appears by his
malice that he has always borne it, before it was Scripture, when it was but
only Dictum. For so soon as God had said, Let us make man in our likeness,
that word was straight a whetstone to the devils envy. And after the fall, when
the seed was promised, that was, and is the cause of all the devils enmity,
Genesis 31.15. So when the promise was reiterated, Genesis 22.18. that was the cause
he so turmoyled all the Patriarchs.

But when the word was to be written, and to become Scripture, then his malice
began to grow very hot, insomuch that he caused it for anger to be broken,
Exodus 32.19. For the Fathers are of opinion, that all the devils busy
endeavor, in making the Israelites to commit idolatry with the golden Calfe,
was to the end, that he might so heat Moses in his zeal, as that in his anger
he should break the Tables of the Law, by casting them hastily out of his
hands. We are to note therefore; that there is a forcible sound in the word,
which the Devil cannot abide; and not only the sound, but the sight also.

It is written of Augustine, that lying sick on his bed, he caused the seven
penitential Psalms to be painted on the wall over against him, in great
Letters; that if after he should become speechless, yet he might point to
every verse when the devil came to tempt him; and so confute him. Blessed is
he that has his quiver full of such arrows, they shall not be ashamed.
Blessed is he that has the skill to choose out fit arrows for the purpose, as
the Fathers speak out of Esaias 49.2. Christ says affirmatively of the
Scriptures, that in them is eternal life, John 5.39. Negatively, that the
cause of error is the not knowing of them, Mark 12.24. David says, it was
that that made him wiser than his enemies, than his teachers, and than the
Ancients, Psalm. 119.98.99. and 110. Knowledge of the truth, is the way to
amendment after a fall, 2 Timothy 2.26. There is much calling now adays for the
Word, and others find fault as fast, that it is no better harkned unto. For as
the want of obedience, and all other abuses (which are so much cried out
against) proceed not only from the not hearing of the Word, but as well from
the not mingling of faith with it, (without which mixture, it is nothing worth)
it profits not, Heb. 4.2. So the error of the former times was, in yielding
too far to the devils policy, by sealing up the Scriptures, and locking the
storehouse and Armory of the people. It is the policy Christ tells us of in the
11. of Lukes Gospel, ver. 22. A strong man puts the strong armed man out of
his house, and takes away his armor from him: then he needs not fear him.

The like policy we read of, 1 Samuel 13.19. when the Philistims had taken away
all Smiths and Armor, then they thought they were safe. So in the time of
darkness, the devil might let them do their good works, and what they
list, and yet have them still under his lure: that he might offend them at his
pleasure, that had no armor to resist him. All the Children of God, had a
right and property in the Law of God, as appears by Christ's words, John
10.34. he answered them, that is, the common people, Is it not written in your
Law? As though he should say, the Scripture is yours. To the young man (in the
tenth Chapter of Saint Lukes Gospel, and 26. verse) that asked Christ, what he
should do to be saved? Christ answers: What is written in the Law? how
read thou? Whereunto to answer, that we cannot read, or that the book is
sealed up, Esaias 29.11. is as the devil would have it. Then has he a fit time
to offer us stones to make bread of. But this answer with our Savior Christ
will not be allowed of.

Now come we to the special point of Christ's answer, It is written, Man lives
not by bread only, etc. Deuteronomy. 8.3. There is no better kind of reasoning, than
that, when one grants all that has been said by his adversary, and proves it
to make on his part; and upon a new conceit, avoyds all that his adversary
said. Here our Savior might confess all that the devil objected; as that he
is the Son of God; and admit the stones were made bread, and that bread were of
absolute necessity, and that it were so to be come by (which is untrue) were we
then in good case?

This indeed is the devils position, wherewith he would persuade all those that
have animam triticeam, (as the Fathers call it) that those external things are
necessary to be had: and that if they have enough thereof, they are well
enough; as we see it to be the mind of the rich man, Luke 12.19. This man
having a wheaten soul, having corn enough, bade his soul take rest, and live
merrily for many years. But Christ goes further, and says; Though the stones
be made bread, it will not avail, except it please God (by the blessing of his
word) to give virtue, and (as it were) life unto the bread, there is no
difference between it, and a stone.

It is not the plenty or quality of victuals, howsoever some dote upon such
external means, as they did, which sacrificed to their net, and burnt incense
to their yerne, Habak. 1.16. because by them their portion was fat, and their
meats plenteous. For what says Job 31.27. If I had rejoiced because my
substance was great, this had been an iniquity. So that our life is not
mainetained by bread only, descended out of the mould of the earth. The nature
of bread and stones are not much unlike, they come both out of one belly, that
is to say, the earth, Job 28.5, 6. and of themselves, the one of them has no
more power than the other unto life: for we know that the Israelites dyed, even
while the flesh of Quails was in their mouths, Numb. 11.33. and Manna
(heavenly fare) being far better than our bread. It is the devils crafty
policy, to bury a man's life under a loaf of bread: and (as it were) to fetter
the grace of God to the outward means; whereas they of themselves are of no
more efficacy, without the operation and grace of the word, than a hammer and a
saw, without a hand, able to employ them.

David says ( Psalm. 104.28.) The eyes of all things wait on God for their
meat in due season, and thou fillest them: With what? with bread? No, but with
thy blessing and goodness. Our hearts must be stablished with grace, not with
meats, Heb. 13.9. It is Gods prerogative, that as all things had their
beginning from him, Colos. 1.17. so he supporteth and sustaineth them, Heb. 1.3.

This is a further point than all Philosophy teaches us. For they having laid
down the four elements, bare and simple essences, tanquam materiam, by
compounding and tempering of them, they bring forth a certain quintessence or
balm full of virtue. But Divinity leads so to a quintessence, without which,
all the quintessences and balmes in the world can do us no good.

To the question that Jeremie propounds, Jer. 8.22, Is there no balm at
Gilead? Is there no Physician there? The answer may be. Man's health is not
recovered by balm or physic only, but by every word that proceeds out of
the mouth of God, if we weigh Christ's argument aright. For we may see, 2 Chronicles.
16.12. Asa dyed for all his Physicians that were about him. So if it be asked,
Are there no horses nor chariots in Gilead? We may answer, warlike victory
consists not in warlike furniture only, but in remembering the name of the
Lord God, Psalm. 20.7. A horse is a vain thing to save, without the power of
this word. And so when a man thrives not, or prospers not in his actions; it is
not often for want of labor or care: Psalm. 127.1. tells him, Except the Lord
build the house, etc. Augustine advises his Auditory to believe it in time,
lest (by woeful experience) they find it to be true; when as they shall have
such a consumption, that no meat shall do them any good; or such a dropsy,
that no drink shall avail them. The power and virtue of this word is called,
The staff of bread, Levit. 26.26. and it is meant of a chief staff, such a
one as is set in the midst, to bear up all the Tent. The plainest similitude
I can use, to make you understand the force thereof is this: When we go to
Physic for any disease, we are bidden feeth such herbs in running water, and
then to drink the water, we know it is not the water which helps, but the
decoction of infusion. So it is not the bread (considered barely in it self)
that nourishes us, but the virtue and grace of the word infused into it. We
are not therefore to stick to the means, like the Glutton, Luke 12.19. but to
pray for this blessing. And to this end, God (in the establishing of nature)
has thereout reserved four special prerogatives to his Word.

As first, with a very little of the means to go far in operation, 1 Reg.
17.14. with a little oil and a little wheat, he fed Elias, the poor widow,
and her son a great while. And Matthew. 17.14. Christ made five loaves and two
fishes serve five thousand persons. The heathen man thought no certain
proportion was to be set down for a family, because when a heavenly hunger
comes on men, they eat more at one time, than at another. But whatsoever the
heathen have spoken wisely, we have far more wisely uttered by the Holy
Ghost, in one place or other. In Psalm. 17.14. this is set down, where there is
mention made of a certain hidden treasure, wherewith men's bellies be filled,
and Hagg. 1.6. says, Men eat much, yet have not enough; drink much, but are
not filled: This is the first prerogative.

His second is, he takes order as well for the quality, as for the quantity;
course meats and fine are all one with him; for the Israelites
(notwithstanding their Quayles and Manna) dyed; and Daniel and his fellows,
that fed upon course meats, looked better than all the children that were fed
with the Kings own diet, Dan. 1.15.

Thirdly, without means he works sometimes. Therefore Asa had said little or
nothing to the purpose, 2 Chronicles. 14.11. If he had said, God helps by many or
few (if he had not put in too) and sometimes by none. For there was light
before any Sun or Moon, Genesis 1.3. though after ( verse 14.) it pleased God
to ordain them as instruments. And so Genesis 2.5. the earth was fertile, when as
then no rain had fallen on the earth, not any such ordinary means. Let Moses
be on the Mount, and but hear God, and he needs no bread.

The fourth is, that he can bring his purpose to pass, even by those means,
whose natures tend to contrary effects; as to preserve by stones.
Colloquintida, being rank poison, (in eating whereof is present death) was (by
the Prophet) made matter of nourishment, 2 King. 4.40. So Christ, by those
things which were fit to put out a seeing man's eyes, as dust; made a blind man
recover his sight, John 9.6. And so does he make light to shine out of
darkness, 2 Cor. 4.6. One contrary out of another. Thus we see the devil
answered. Now let us apply these things to our selves.

Christ's answer does import two words, and so two mouths, and two breaths, or
spirits: and these two be as two twins. He that will be maintained by the
one, must seek after the other. The first word is the same decree, whereby the
course of nature is established, according to Psalm. 147.15. He sends forth
his commandment upon the earth, and his word runs very swiftly: he gives
snow like wool, etc.

Secondly, the other is that whereof James 1.18. speaks: to wit, the word of
truth, wherewith (of his own will) he begat us. The one proceeds from the
mouth of Gods providence, creating and governing all things, Psalm. 33.6. He but
spoke the word, and it was done. The other proceeds out of the mouth of Gods
Prophets, who are (as it were) his mouth, Jer. 15.19. Thou stand before me,
as if thou were my mouth. From the first word, all things have their beginning
and being; as when he sent forth his spirit or breath, they were created and
had their beginning: So Psalm. 104.29. He teaches us, that so soon as God
hides his face, they are troubled. And if he takes away their breath, they dye,
and return to dust. The other spirit, that is, the sanctifying Spirit,
ministers unto us supernatural life, Esaias 56.21. Now therefore to set them
together, every man is thus to think with himself. If I get my living
contrary to Gods word, that is, by any unlawful means; surely Gods other word
will not accompany such gotten goods. That is, these two words be twins: if
we get not our goods by the one word, we shall want the blessing of the other
word, and than we were as good eat stones: it will be but gravel in our
mouths, or Quails. We are then to use the means, according to the second
word. Abraham (we see) went forth to sacrifice, according to Gods appointment,
Genesis 22. the Word was his direction: therefore when Isaac asked, Where was the
Sacrifice? he might boldly answer, God would provide one; as we see even at the
very pinch he did: whereupon it came to be a proverb, that even In monte,
Jehova providebit. The Israelites went out of Egypt, by the warrant and
appointment of Gods Word. How then? First, they had a way made them (where
never was any before) through the Redsea, Exodus 14.21. they had bread downward
out of the clouds, whereas it uses to rise upwards out of the earth: their
garments in forty years never waxed old, Deuteronomy. 8.3, 4. they had water, whence
water uses not to come; by striking the Rocks, water gushed forth: So that it
is true, which the Prophet David says, Psalm. 34.9. There is no want to them
that fear God. Though (peradventure) he will not use the same means he did
for the Israelites; yet the Children of God (walking after his will) shall have
some way of relief always. And therefore Christ would not distrust the
providence of God: for he knew he was in the work and way of God; For we
read, That he was led into the Wilderness by the Spirit, and therefore could
not lack; as indeed he did not, for the Angels came and ministered unto him: as
it follows in the 11. verse of this Chapter. So either the Crows shall
minister to our wants, as they did to Elias: or our enemies, as the Egyptians
did to the Israelites: or else the Angels themselves, as they did here.

But to grow to a conclusion, Let us seek the Kingdom of God, and all other
things shall be ministered unto us. And in all like temptations, we may learn a
good answer out of Dan. 3.17. That God that we serve is able to relieve and
deliver us, even from the burning fire: But, if it should not be his will so to
do, yet we will not use unlawful means, or fall to Idolatry, or turn
stones into bread. In this answer (again) Christ would teach us hear to be
resolute, howsoever Gods blessing does not concur with our gettings, as it
does not when we get them by indirect means, contrary to Gods word. To goods
so gotten, God will add sorrow: for The blessing of the Lord makes rich, and
he does add no sorrows with it, Prove. 10.22. When God gives riches, he gives
quietness withal: but if God give them not, we were as good be without them,
whether they be gotten by oppression or violence, Prove. 4.17. or by fraud and
deceit, Prove. 20.17. For these two be the quicksilver and brimstone of the
devils Alchymistry. God will add sorrow to them, for though they be pleasant
at the first, Prove. 20.17. and money gotten by stinking means, smells like
other money (as an Emperor said:) and bread so gotten, tastes like other
bread: yet in the end a plain conclusion and experiment will make it manifest,
that it was made of stones, and had sorrow mingled or added to it. And
therefore it shall be either an occasion or matter of the disease called the
Stone: or it shall turn his meat in his bowels, and fill him with the gall of
Aspes, Job 20.14. or as Asaes oppression by delicacy, became an occasion of the
dropsy or gout: or else shall the executioner catch all that he has, and the
stranger spoil him, Psalm. 109.11. or spend them upon Physicians, Mark 5.26.
or on Lawyers: or else, though God suffer them to enjoy them quietly all their
life time, and even to dye by their flesh pots; yet on their deathbed, they
shall find such a grudging and torment in their conscience, that they will
wish that they had starved for hunger, before they had begun to use any such
means. Or if God in his judgment (for their greater torment) suffer them to
dye in their beds, without any remorse of conscience, like blocks, or like an
Ox dying in a ditch; at the last day they shall feel a gnashing in their
teeth, and then they will know it was made of stones.

THE FOVRTH SERMON.
MATTHEW. 4.5, 6. Then the devil took him up into the holy City, and set him on
a pinnacle of the Temple,

And said unto him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down: for it
is written, that he will give his Angels charge over thee, and with their hands
they shall lift thee up, lest at any time thou should dash thy foot against
a stone.


THE manner is, after one has taken a foil, his courage will fail. The
Angel would have been gone, when he saw he could not prevail over Jacob,
Genesis 32.26. But it is not so here with the devil. For when he saw that his
first temptation would not prevail, he tries another. And even so he played
with Job: for when he could do no good upon his first Patent, by taking away
all he had, he comes and sues for a new Commission, that he might touch his
flesh and bones, Job 2.5. and thereby he gives us to learn, That it is not
one foil that can make him give over. He is one of those, whom a Father says,
to have courage above their strength; and of that nature be many in our days,
whose daring is above their skill; and have courage to undertake much more than
their ability is to perform. Not like David, who did as much as he undertook
in killing Goliath: nor like him of whom Esaias speaks in the seventh verse of
his third Chapter, that when they would have made him Prince, he had no bread
nor clothing, and therefore refused: but they will take it upon them, though
they have not wherewithal, and thereby become Authors of trouble, wanting
ability to go through withal. But as Augustine says; Is it not all one not
to be able to answer, nor to be able to hold their peace? We see here the
devil is a great undertaker.

Secondly, he is not only content to take a foil, but even out of the same
thing wherewith he was foiled, makes he matter of a new Temptation, a new ball
of fire: Out of Christ's conquest, he makes a new assault; that is, since he
will needs trust, he will set him on trusting; he shall trust as much as he
will. As the former tempted him to diffidence; so this shall tempt him to
presidence. As before the devil brought him to the waters of Meribah ( Exodus
17.7.) where the Children of Israel did murmr and tempt God: so now he brings
him to the temptation of Massah, ( Deuteronomy. 6.16.) that is, to presumption,
wantonness, and delicacy: for then with bread they were not content, but they
must have flesh and other dainties, Psalm. 78.20. As the first might be called
the hungry Temptation, so this may be called, The wanton Temptation. That which
was in the old Testament the Temptation of Meribah, is here in the new
Testament the Temptation of the Wilderness; and that which was there the
Temptation of Massah, is here the temptation of the Pinnacle.

In the first, by want of things necessary, he thought to drive them to
vexation and bitterness of spirit, and to distrust Gods power and goodness.
In the second, by unnecessary matters, he draws us on to wantonness, and to
put God to try what he can do, and to set him about base services: by the one,
he drives us unto unlawful means, by the other, he draws us from the use
of things lawful: by the one he brings us to this conceit, that we are so
abjected of God, that if we trust in him, he will in the end fail us; by the
other to think we are so dear in Gods eyes, and such darlings, as throw our
selves into any danger, and he will not forsake us. By the one, he puts us in
fear, (as Augustine says) Deum defuturum, etiam si promisit; by the other, in
hope, Deum adfuturum, ubi non promisit: by the one, he slandereth God unto us,
as if he were a God of straw, of base condition, and subject to our beck; by
the other, as if he were a God of iron, that would not incline, though we
requested him.

Now to the Temptation: wherein we are to consider three things. First, the
ground the devil chose for the working of this temptation. Secondly, the
temptation it self; to wit, the devils speech. Thirdly, Christ's answer to it.
In the place, three things are to be noted: First, the place it self:
Secondly, the devil chose it: Thirdly, that our Savior followed him thither.
For a new temptation he makes choice of a new place. Indeed for a temptation to
presumption, the Wilderness was not a fit place: First, it was not high
enough, and then it was not populous enough. It was a melancholy place: when a
man is under the cross in affliction, or in some anguish and sorrow for want,
death of friends, or otherwise, and generally for all solitary men, the hungry
Temptation is fitter than this of Presumption. As long as Noah was in the Arc
in the midst of the waters, he had in him no presumptuous thought: but sitting
under the Vine in his Vineyard, he was overcome therewith. And just Lot (2 Pet.
2.8.) in Sodom, had no fit time or place to be presumptuous; but when he dwelt
in the mountain in security, then he committed incest with his daughters,
being made drunk by them. David, so long as he was persecuted by Saul, and
tossed up and down from post to pillar, had no leisure to be presumptuous: but
in the top of his Turret, when he was at rest in his Palace, 2 Samuel 11.2.
presumption gave him a blow. So here the Wilderness was no fit place, but the
Pinnacle is a very fit place for one to be presumptuous on. It is as good as a
stage to show himself upon, to see and to be seen.

In the Wilderness there was small warrant for one that would be presumptuous:
but from the Pinnacle he might discern far and near, both the inner Court
and outward Court, and see a whole Cloud of Witnesses, and have some warrant of
example of all estates, high or low, wise or noble. For what abuse soever be in
him, be he never so presumptuous, he shall see some as proud, stout, and
high-minded as himself: be his hair never so long, or his ruffes never so
great, he shall find some as far gone therein as himself.

If we mark the four gradations that it has, we shall find it to be a very
fit place. As first, before he could come to the Pinnacle, he must go out of
the Wilderness into the City: Secondly, not any City, but the holy City:
Thirdly, into the Temple of the City: And fourthly, out of the Temple up to the
Pinnacle.
First, (having got him to leave the Wilderness) he brought him into the City,
that there he might say unto him: You see such and such grave men, how they
behave themselves: why should you seek to be holier than they? This was a good
civil temptation: he brought him not to Cesarea or Samaria, but even to
Jerusalem the holy City: for that addition is given it, Luke 4.9. and Dan.
9.24. Thirdly, he brought him into the Temple, where even the very ground was
holy. Fourthly, not to any other place of it, but the very top and Pinnacle,
which was over the Sanctum Sanctorum. Who would not tread hard there, and take
upon him, being in such a place? where if a man will be carried away with
example, he may see Ananias the High Priest, renting his clothes, at the
hearing of things that sounded like blasphemy, Mark. 14.63. and yet buying his
Bishopric for money; who will not then be bold to do the like? And Herod a
Prince, such a one as heard John Baptist Preach; yea, and with much delight, to
commit adultery, Mark 6.20. who would fear to do the like? There he may see
the Pharisee, under show of great holiness, tything Mint and Cummin, and under
color of long prayers, devour Widows houses, bringing in by extortion, and
sending out by excess, Matthew. 23.14.21. And so in this City, one may see some
men, both great frequenters of Sermons, and yet great Usurers; Gentlewomen,
misshapen in their attire. Seeing this, who will not be as bold as they, the
place being so holy? And being thus warranted by example, surely we must needs
commend the devils wit, for his choice.

Out of this, arise two notes. First, against some fantastical spirits, who
say; Can that be an holy City, where there be dumb dogs? There were so in
Jerusalem, Esaias 56.10. Where the leaders be blind; Matthew. 15.14. They were so
where Judas ministered the Sacrament; where there is div^sion and debate amongst
themselves, Phil. 4.2. Can this, (say they) be the holy City? And thereupon
upon they forsake the fellowship, Heb. 10.25. Whereas they (notwithstanding the
former abuses, and notwithstanding the eleven Tribes were Apostates) did yet
name it the holy City.

Secondly, on the other side we are to be instructed, though a man be on the
battlements of the Church, yet has he no sure footing, or cause to be secure;
but rather to fear the more: for even there does the devil stand at his
elbow, watching his overthrow. There is no place we see privileged from
temptations, no Desert so solitary, but the devil will seek it out: no
Pinnacle so high, but the devil is a Bishop over it, to visit and over-looke it.

To conclude, though in Jerusalem sits the abomination of desolation (whereof
Daniel spoke;) yet it is the holy City still. And though the place be never so
holy, yet is that no cause of privilege; but even there may sit the
abomination of desolation. Both are proved out of Matthew. 24.15.

The second thing that we observed in the circumstance of place, is; that the
Devil assumpted Christ: which, to those that are weak (as Gregory also
collecteth) may be offensive, in giving them to think, that the devil had
such power over Christ, as to carry him whither he listed. But when they shall
consider, that even the limbs of the devil haled and harrowed him to and fro,
from Annas to Caiphas, from Caiphas to Pilat, from Pilat to Herod, and from him
back again to Pilat: and how spitefully and contemptuously he was used in all
these places, and at last carried to execution: what marvel will it be to see
him (as Augustine speaks) In monte duci a capite, qui amembris traditur, etc.
These things do indeed (as all other his sufferings) set forth the greatness
of the love of God toward us. Of God the Father, that he would give his only
Son; yea, appoint him this work of our salvation, and give the devil such a
power over him, Luke 22.53. Of God the Son, that he would be content to
suffer such indignity, Phil. 2.7. as to be obedient to the death of the Cross.

The reason of all these his sufferings, as also that he would be baptized of
John, a weak and sinful man; was (as himself declares it) to fulfill all
righteousness, Matthew. 3.15. So here he was to suffer it, else Gods
righteousness would not have been fulfilled, nor the work of our salvation.
And as he suffered this Assumption, so afterward, Luke. 9.51. his second
Assumption was, to go to Jerusalem to suffer: and so at the last he came to
his third and last Assumption, to be received up into glory, 1 Timothy 3.16. And
by the very same steps and degrees, must we be assumpted. And this is the
assumption of suffering, which brought him to glorifying.

The third thing is, that our Savior followed; whereby we are to mark, not so
much his courage, that he durst encounter with the devil, in any place
wheresoever he list to carry him: and that he was not only the God of the
valleys, but a God of the mountains also, contrary to their surmise, 1 King.
20.23. That (I say) is not so much to be marked, as that our Savior would at
all stand upon a Pinnacle. There be some that would make us believe, it is a sin
to stand upon a Pinnacle: but then if that had been so, Christ would never have
stood there. And since Christ stood there, it is no more sin for any man else
to stand there, than it is to stand in the Wilderness: for it is lawful for
us to follow his footsteps, and to tread wheresoever he has trod before us;
yet such places be not privileged. For, as it is true, that many men's table
and wealth is their snare, Psalm. 69.22. even so the good gifts and graces of
God, be turned to a man's hurt: as knowledge may serve for a quill to puff him
up and make him swell, 1 Cor. 8.1. Nay, even that godly sorrow, which is so
much to be wished for, has in it matter of temptation, lest men be swallowed
up with two much heaviness, 2 Cor. 2.7.

The Scriptures themselves (we see) are subject to the abuse of the devil:
whereby it should follow, that they are to be refused, if every thing be
refused which brings matter of temptation. But as Augustine says, Non est laus
stetisse in pinaculo, sed stetisse and non cecidisse. In every place to answer
the devil, is praiseworthy. Indeed it is dangerous for one that has a light
and giddy brain, for such as are drunk, Esaias 51.22. (though not with wine) to
stand so high. Job could stand there without falling, for he had a more settled
brain, Job 31.27. Such places are for the wisest and sagest men. Saint Paul
stood not there, but yet he could have stood there, for he had the trick, or
skill of it, as himself confesses, Phil. 4.12. I can be abased, and I can
abound, etc.

Now come we to the Temptation it self, which has three general heads.
First, the ball of wilde-fire; which is to consume his faith. Secondly, the
dart, Cast thy self down; which is to pierce the soul. Thirdly, he tempereth
the head of his dart with some stronger metal; which is, Scriptum est.

I. First, Si filius Dei es. This is a great moate in the devils eye, he uses
the same term in the former temptation, and here he is up with it again. And
all is to this end, that by often bringing it into question, whether he be the
Son of God; he may at last make it out of question or doubt, that we are not
the Sons of God: that by, and from Si sis, he may bring it to Ne sis; and so
we may be like himself. For to this end is all his compassing of Sea and Land,
to make one Proselyte like himself, according to the endeavor of the
Pharisees, Matthew. 23.15. who did in like sort; and when he is made, ye make
him twofold more the child of hell, than your selves. As on the other side,
Christ would have us the Sons of God like him. But see what a dexterity the
devil has, in making things serve for his purpose: he makes one selfsame
thing serve for two several, yea, contrary purposes. What a goodly grace he
has in the first Temptation? He uses it there to procure us to desparation:
He makes it here to serve for presumption. But indeed there be two manner of
Si es, or Ifs: the one is a questioning or doubting [Si;] as, If thou be the
Son of God, show us a sign, Mark 8.12. Lord, if thou will, thou can make
me whole, Mat. 8.2. The other is a plain affirmation, as, Phil. 3.11. If by
any means I might attain to the resurrection of the dead, where we are sure
he made no doubt thereof. So here the devil says, If thou be the Son of
God, as I now grant indeed. I was in some doubt, but now. I confess thou art:
I am of that voices mind, that deonounced thee so at thy Baptism.

The devil (in the former temptation) came out like a malecontent, or a
murmurer: here he comes like a flattering parasite, he will pinguare caput ejus
oleo, make his head even swim in the oil of ostentation. But though it be not
the same temptation, yet it is the same devil in both places. For both by the
one and the other, he seeks the downfall and destruction of man: and though
his two Ifs be contrary in themselves, yet are they both also contrary to the
will and Word of God: for he would not in any case we should distrust him,
neither would he that at any time we should cast our selves down. And
therefore has he caused battlements to be made on every house top, that none
might be slain with falling down; Deuteronomy. 22.8. Now he would have him show
himself (thereby) to be the Son of God, for he is now in the sight of all
Jerusalem.

It is said, that Christ comes now to put to a spark of fire, that is of
faith, and that his will was, it might burn and be maintained. The devil on
the other side, labors by all means possible to quench and put it out: and
seeing water would not do it in the former temptation; he goes now about to
see, if he can make the very oil it self to put it out, even that very thing
whereby it was to be maintained: as indeed it will, if we power out too great a
quantity. Or if he cannot quench it, either with water or oil, he will see if
he can blow it up with gunpowder. As, seeing the water of distrust will not
extinguish his faith, but that he would trust in God: he endeavors now by
Scriptures (that magnify the providence of God, and the confidence we are to
put in him) to set him as far gone in the other extreme, by presuming or
trusting too much, that so the fire, which before he would have quenched, may
now so flame out, as not to keep it self within the chimney, but to set the
whole house on fire. This is the ball of wilde-fire of this second Temptation:
and so both we see tend to the consuming and nullifying of our faith.

II. The dart it self is, [Cast thy self down:] which consists of two
points. First, the casting down. Secondly, that he himself was to cast down
himself. For the first, it is general, the neglect of ordinary means, as
here. Whereas the ordinary way was down the stairs, he would have him leap,
or throw himself over the Battlements. And here a man may see to what end the
devils halting comes: he brings a man up by little and little to some high
place, that so he may send him at once with his head downward. All the
preferments that he bestows on a man, is not to any other intent, but that he
may do as the devil himself did, (who being on high did cast himself down)
and so be like him, John 8.23. that is, from beneath, not from above: who fell
from heaven like lightning, Luke 10.18. So that howsoever in outward show he
may seem to befriend us, yet this is inward intention and scope. As the
Edomites in time of the prosperity of the Israelites, pretended great good will
to them: but in the day of their great calamity, they were they that cried,
Down with them, down with them, Psalm. 137.7. Gods manner is, when he means
to exalt a man, he will first humble him, and make him low, Matthew. 23.12. The
devils manner is (we see) clean contrary, Esaias 14.14. to lift them up to the
clouds, that he may bring them down to the grave, yea to the lowest grave,
Psalm. 86.13. He carries them the higher, to throw them down with the greater
violence. He lifts up Adam with a conceit, to be like God, to the very top of
perfection, to the intent he might be like the beast that perishes, Psalm.
49.20.

The second has some matter of comfort: the devil is here a suitor to him, to
do it himself. Why does not the devil cast him down? First, it was not in
his power; or, if he had, yet would not that have served his turn: then there
had been no sin of presumption in it. There must be two persons that must
concur in our downfall: well may the devil induce and move us to it; but
unless we our selves be consenting, and cast our selves down, there can be no
downfall to hurt us. For as Chrysostom says, Nemo laeditur nisi a seipso:
so, Nullum praecipitium nisi voluntarium. The devil did not cram Eve with the
forbidden fruit: but when she saw it, she took it, and eat it, Genesis 3.6. So
the devil, when he enters into the soul of a man (which he counts his
palace) he does not break open the door; no, nor so much as draw the latch;
but when he comes, he finds it swept and garnished, Luke 11.25. and so
goes in. There must therefore be a reaching out of the hand, and an opening of
the door by our selves, and so a casting down of thy self, or else, though
the devil thrust sore at thee that thou may fall, the Lord will help thee,
Psalm. 118.13. In Deuteronomy. 22.8. God has caused battlements to be made on every
house top, by which we may stay our selves. The devil tells God, that he had
made a hedge about Job, Chap. 1.10. so that unless Job step over it, or break
it down, he is safe.

III. The devils dart is, Cast thy self down: but he bestows some great
cost on this. With the selfsame armor that Christ bare off the other dart,
does the devil sharpen and harden this: he does not so in any other of the
temptations, therefore we are to look for some great matter: he brings
Scripture, that he may be the better credited. He speaks not now after the
manner of men, 1 Cor. 9.8. so that it is not he now that speaks, but
Scripture, as Paul reasons there, You see (says he) I counsel you to
nothing, but that the Psalms will bear you out in. The devil knew well by
his own fall, how dangerous the sin of presumption is, it cost him dearly:
and so did it David likewise, and therefore of all other, he prays God to
keep him from presumptuous sins, Psalm. 19.13. He knew also what it was to
abuse the goodness, patience, and long suffering of God, Romans 2.4. Therefore
he avoucheth it by Scripture, he tells him, it will be too long to go down the
stairs, and withal teaches him a nearer way, but to jump, or to cast himself
down, and to fear no hurt, for the Angels have charge of him. And even so he
persuades men now adays; that they need not go down fair and softly, in
fear and trembling, but to defer all till their dying hour, and then
commend themselves to God, and throw themselves upon Gods mercy, and that fiery
Chariot that took up Elias, shall come and fetch up them; or else, an Angel
shall carry them up, let them be sure they shall have no harm, for they be
Gods darlings, and God does so dote on them, that he will not suffer them in
any case to receive the least hurt that may be.

If ever the devil came in his likeness, it was here, In the first of Sam.
28.18. he came but in the guise of a Prophet: so that in stead of saying, Is
Saul among the Prophets? it might have been said; What, is the devil among
the Prophets? But here he has used himself so cunningly, that if ever he was
transformed into an Angel, here it is verifyed, 1 Cor. 11.14. For he comes
here like a white devil, or like a Divine; he comes with a Psalter in his
hand, and turns to the place, and shows our Savior the 91. Psalm, the 11,
and 12. verses. Wherein first we are to note, that the devil reads Psalms,
as well as we, and has the words of Scripture in his mouth. And 1 Samuel 28. he
counterfeited Samuel so right, and used the very words that he had used, that
they could not know him from Samuel: so here he counterfeited the voice of
David, Act. 19.15. This will make us shake off security, considering that God
does (for our trial) sometime deliver the adversary the key of our Armory,
whereby he is able to hold argument with an Arch-angell, Jude 9. yea, with
Christ himself, as we see here. How careful therefore had we need to be, to
find out a fit answer for him? For only to assault us does he read the
Scriptures: yea, but not to any good end, but even thereby to deceive the
simplicity of men; as here to make them put their souls in adventure to the
last hour. He has indeed a grace with some vain youths of the Count, and
ungodly Atheists, to set them a scoffing at the Scripture, as Esaias 28.22. But
with others, that have the Scriptures in more high reverence, he goes another
way to work, making it to them the favor of death, Romans 7.10.

The words which he uses in the name of Samuel, he uses to make Saul
despair: and here he uses David's words to cause presumption, and to make them
our bane. And not every Scripture: but if there be any Scripture more full of
heavenly comfort than another, that of all other will the devil abuse; as
indeed the Psalms are; and of all the Psalms, this 91. especially: and in
that part, if any one sentence be sweeter than another, that of all other will
the devil abuse. Mark the second verse here cited: He shall give his Angels
charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. These last words the devil
leaves out, because they make not for his purpose. They shall bear thee in
their hands, that thou dash not thy foot against a stone. And we shall see
nothing can be spoken more comfortable: as first, in that it is said, that the
Angels have charge over us in all our ways, Exodus 23.20. Behold, I send my
Angel before thee, to guide thee in the way; and to comfort, and confirm us.
As when Jacob was in fear of his brother Esau, the Angel met him, Genesis 32.1.
and to defend us in all dangers, and succor us in all necessities, spreading
their wings over us, and pitching their tents about us; Psalm. 34.7. Secondly,
this charge not only concerns our head and principal members, but also our
feet: yea, Gods providence reaches even to the hairs of our head, for they
are numbered, Mat. 10.30. Thirdly, this charge of theirs is not only to
admonish us when danger comes, but they are actually to help us, as it were
putting their hands between the ground and us, Matthew. 13.14. They shall take
the rubs and offenses out of our way. Fourthly, this do they not of courtesy,
as being creatures given by nature to love mankind, but by special mandate and
charge, they are bound to it, and have a praecipe for it, yea, the very beasts
and stones shall be in league with us.

This Psalm, and these verses containing such comfort, has the devil culled
to persuade men, that being such sweet children of God, they may venture
whether, and upon what they will; for the Angels attend them, at an inch. He
bids them put the matter in adventure, and then but whistle for an Angel, and
they will come at first: he carries them up to the top of the Pinnacle, and
shows them their own case in Annas and Herod; and tells them God will require
no more of them, than he did at their hands: and all the way as they go up, he
sings them a Psalm of the mercies of God: he carries them up with a song,
that Gods mercy is above al his works, Psalm. 145.9. And with Psalm. 103.8. How
gracious and long-suffering God is, who rewards us not according to our
deserts, And Psalm. 136. That his mercy endures for ever: God therefore being
so full of mercy, will take all things in good part. But this mercy the devil
tells them of, differs from the mercy David meant. For the mercy David
speaks of, is coupled with judgment, Psalm. 101.1. I will sing mercy and
judgment to thee, O Lord. and Psalm. 85.10. Mercy and Truth are met together,
Justice and Peace have kissed each other. Thus, I say, they shall have music
all the way, and if any at the height think it a great way down: no (says
the devil) you need but a jumpe from your baptism into heaven, you shall need
no stairs at all.

THE FIFTH SERMON.
MATTHEW. 4.7. Jesus said unto him; It is written again, Thou shall not tempt
the Lord thy God.


Considering that Saint James says, Chap. 4.5. The Scripture speaks nothing
in vain: and that as our Savior Christ says, John 10.35. No Scripture can be
disappointed; it may seem strange that the devil coming armed with The Sword
of the Spirit, (for so is the Word of God termed, Ephesians. 6.17.) Christ gives
not place, but opposes himself to answer. We see that a message coming in
the name of the Lord, this very name abashed Nehemias, ( Neh. 6.10.) at the
first hearing, till he perceived it was contrary to the Law of God, and so came
not from him: which here we see to be the cause, why Christ does not yield by
and by, upon the hearing of the Word, but sets himself to make answer:
for so much as the word is not of, Quia dicitur only, but Quia creditur, as
Augustine notes. If there be not the mixture of faith with it, (whereof Paul
speaks, Heb. 4.2.) it is nothing worth. And therefore the bad spirit was
nothing abashed or daunted at the hearing of the bare names of Jesus and Paul,
Act. 19.15. but answered, I know them, but who are ye? They did not believe,
and therefore could do them no good, but were wounded themselves: glorious
names would not serve the turn. So was it here used without faith. When the
Scripture is here urged against one, a man would think it were not to be
answered by citing another place of Scripture, but by some tradition of the
Elders, Mark. 7.1. or some gloss, or other shift; but we see our Savior
answers here no other way but by Scripture. Because, the Woolfe comes
sometimes disguised in a sheep skin, it is no reason that therefore the
very sheep should lay away their fleeces: so here, because the devil uses
the Word, as the slaying Letter, 2 Cor. 3.6. or as the sword to kill men with;
it is no reason why Christ may not therefore use it in his own defense. Why
then (will some say) one of these two inconveniences will follow; that hereby
we shall think the Scripture is of the devils side, as well as of Christ's side;
and so divided; as in like sort they make a division of Christ, when one holds
with Paul, another with Apollos, 1 Cor. 1.13. No, it is not so, Christ
alleges not this Scripture in that sort, as one nail to drive out another:
but by way of harmony and exposition, that the one may make plain the meaning
of the other. For, albeit the devil shows himself to be the devil, in
citing that Text so, as might best serve for his purpose: in that, whereas the
Psalm whereout he takes it, has it thus; That he might keep him in all his
ways; which words he leaves out. For if he had cited that, he could not
thereby have enforced any casting down. For the Angels have no charge over a
man, but in his ways; and from the top of the Pinnacle there was no way, but
down the stairs on his feet. He was not (relying on the Angels) to cast
himself down with his head forward. But the devil has a wrest to make the
string sound high or low, as he list; or if that will not serve, he has a
rack to stretch them out, as some did Saint Paul's Epistles, 2 Pet. 3.16. He
can set them on the tenters, to prove, that down the stairs, or over the
battlements, all is one, the Angels shall safeguard him. Though this (I say)
be the devils corruption, which the late writers have well spyed: yet Christ
(we see) is not willing to take advantage of that, but uses a wiser course;
for so are we to think, that he went the best way to work; that is, the
conference of Scripture with Scripture, which Christ here practices, and
commends unto us.

In every Art, all propositions are not of a like certainty, but some be
grounds and principles, so certain, as that no exception is to be taken
against them. From them are others derived, by a consequence called Deduction,
not so certain as the other: from these again others, to the twentieth hand.
So is it in Divinity. Christ here reduces the devils argument and place, to a
place most plain to be confessed. For the Jews valuing of the meaning, had to
consider, that God fed them with Manna, which they knew not, to teach them that
Man lives not by bread only, Deuteronomy. 8.3. contemning the same: and in Deuteronomy.
6.16. bade them, They should not tempt their Lord their God, as in Massah, when
they cried for bread. The Lord curses him, that makes flesh his arm, and
with-draweth his heart from God, Jer. 17.5. They sacrificed unto their yarne,
because their portion was plentiful, Habak. 1.16. Job condemns the making
gold our hope, or the wedge of gold our confidence, Chap. 31.24. As then we
must not defy the means, attributing all sufficiency to them: so we may not
nullify them, and think too basely of them, but use them that we tempt not
God, according to his word.

Out of these two grounds, may every question be resolved: for every
proposition must be proved out of the ground. So that, as we may not think the
arm of God to be so shortened, that he cannot help without means: so are we
not to think basely of God, for ordaining means. Secondly, we heard, that the
devils allegation was taken out of the Psalm, and one of the most comfortable
places of the Psalm. Christ, by not standing in Disputation about the words
and meaning of the Text, commends to us the safest and wisest way to make
answer in such like cases. Our Savior would warn us, that the 91. Psalm is
not fit matter for us to study on, when we are on the top of the Pinnacle: he
therefore chooses a place of a contrary kind, to counterpoise himself standing
in that fickle place. The Law (we know) is a great cooler to presumption. If
one tamper much with the Psalms, being in case of confidence, he may make the
fire too big. Faith, is the fire which Christ came to put on the earth, and
it is seated between two extremes, Distrust, and Presumption. Distrust is as
water to it, which, if it be powered on in abundance, it will make it to be
smoking flax, or utterly quench it. Presumption (on the other side) is as
Gunpowder to it, which being thrown into it, it will blow it up, and make it
fly all about the house. Christ was to take heed of over-heating his Faith.
Luther upon the Galatians says, the 91. Psalm is no meet study for many men's
humors in our days: they had more need of a corrosive, to eat out the sore
from the root and bottom.

Now to the answer, which consists of six points. First, what it is to tempt
God. Secondly, wherein. Thirdly, the manner how. Fourthly, this proposition,
Thou shall not tempt. Fifthly, the reason why we may not. Sixthly, though he be
our God, and we on the Pinnacle, these be no arguments for us to presume.


I. First, whosoever will not use such ordinary means as God has appointed,
tempts God: If he use extraordinary, (as here the devil would have Christ
do) when no body went about to thrust him down, wilfully to have cast
himself down, were great madness: or when a man has a fair pair of
stairs to go down by, to call for a Cherub to carry him, or for the wind, to
fly down, Psalm. 18.10. were as great wantonness.

There is an humor in man, that we are all given unto by nature; to be
marvellously desirous to try conclusions in matters that are rare and unknown
unto them; contemning things common, and to be fond after strange novelties. It
was told them as plain as could be, that they should not reserve of the Manna
till morning, and they needed not to have reserved it; they had fresh every
day: and yet forsooth, they would needs keep it, if it were but for an
experiment sake, to try whether it would stink or no, Exodus 10.20. And though
they were forbidden to gather on the Sabbath day, and on the Eeven had enough
for two days, and it was told them, they should find none; yet they must needs
try. When a thing cannot be had without great difficulty, it is our manner to
have a vehement longing after it: as when David was in a Hold, and the
Garrisons of the Philistims were in Bethlem, then being thirsty, no water would
serve his turn, but that in Bethlem, 2 Samuel 23.15. But when three mighty men
had broken into the host of the Philistims, and had brought him of it, he cared
not for it,

II. For the second, we are to know, that where need is (as the Heathen
speaks) there a man may commit himself to the providence of God, and rely
upon him. For we have heard, that where the means fail us, God has yet in
store his four Prerogatives: therefore when it comes to a dead lift (as we
say) then to have a strong confidence in God, is thanke-worthy: and it is the
practice and property of Faith, to say boldly with Abraham, when he saw nothing
present, that even on the hill God will provide, Genesis 22.14. When our enemies
are behind us, and the red Sea before us, then to look for a way through the
Sea, and to expect Manna out of heaven, and water out of the Rock, is much
worth. So our Savior, when he and his company were in the Desert, where no
meat was to be had, fed them miraculously: but being near to the Town where
they might have it, he dismissed them. When Elias was in distress, and all
meats failed him, then the Angel brought him meat, 1 Kings 19.6. When Hagar
and Ismael were in the Wilderness, and the water in the bottle spent, and she
in great heaviness, then God comforted her from heaven, Genesis 22.17. When the
Israelites were in the Desert, then they had an Angel to lead them, Exodus
22.20. When Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, were cast bound into the fiery
Furnace, then God sent them an Angel to be their deliverer, Dan. 3.25. And so
when Daniel was thrown into the Lions den, (not when he put himself in) God
sent his Angel to stop the Lions mouth, Dan. 6.22.

When we are deserti indeserto, and all means fail, it is time to trust in
God, as Job did. Our conversation therefore must be without covetousness, and
we must be content with those things that we have; for he has said, He will
not fail us, nor forsake us, Heb. 13.5. This is out of the compass of
tempting God, and this is as much as the Psalm could warrant him to look for.
Look upon it, and you shall see, that it expresses such dangers, as could not
be prevented by man's care and industry. As, from the snare of the hunter, ver.
3. who uses to lay it so as we cannot see it to avoid it, Verse. 5. Thou shall
not fear the arrow that flies by day. An Arrow (we know) will reach a man
far off, before he be aware. And so throughout the Psalm, they are things
out of our defense, therefore they had need of Angels help: but when we have
means to help our selves, Gods omnipotency is for the time discharged.
Eutichus that fell out of a window by heaviness of sleep, was restored to
life by Paul, Act. 20.9. This then is Christ's answer. If there were no stairs,
and he must needs go down, it were a good Scripture to meditate on.

III. Thirdly, as it is a point of Gods power to help without means: so has
he in his wisdom appointed means: there be degrees, whereby we ascend to the
effect: they are as a pair of stairs. Where these are, we must use them; but
when he offers as a strange sign, it is scrupulous and foolish niceness to
refuse it. As when God bade Ahaz ask a sign, Esaias 7.21. and he would not for
tempting God, he was too precise, he was but an Hypocrite. Moses asked a sign
and had it, and God was well pleased with it. And so did Gedeon also, to assure
himself of delivering Israel by him, Judge. 6.36. In great, weighty, and
extraordinary callings, it was allowable to request a sign: but, when there is
no need, or when there be otherwise sufficient, as Matthew. 16.1. where many
miracles were daily done before their eyes, and where (though they had never so
many more) yet they would not have believed on him. Such were the Scribes and
Pharisees, that for every trifling occasion, they much have a sign from
Heaven. Thus to grate upon Gods omnipotent providence, is saucy malepertnesse.
For ordinary matters, there be ordinary means to serve our turns: and for
extraordinary, there be extraordinary ways and means reserved, that we need
not let fall our trust in matters corporal. We all confess there be means,
as they which will not work, may not eat, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. In warfare there is
no victory to be hoped for, without fight, building of rampires, and making of
darts and shields, 2 Chronicles. 23.5. only in spiritual matters we think to do
well enough, though we never p^^^oo our endeavor; we lay all upon God, and
trouble not our selves.

There is but one degree or step in all Christianity; it is no more but out of
the font to leap straight into Heaven; from Predestination, we leap straight
to Glorification: it is no matter for Mortification, there be no such mean
degrees. But Saint Paul tells us, it is so high, that we had need of a ladder,
in which be many steps: insomuch, as he puts a [How shall] to every step,
Romans 10.14. How shall they call on God, on whom they have not believed? etc.
There must be calling on God, believing on him, hearing his word. There must be
ordinary means; and there is a ladder of practice, as well as of speculation,
or contemplation, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6. Join virtue with your Faith, and with virtue
knowledge, and with knowledge temperance, and so patience, godliness,
brotherly kindness, and love. If these things be in you, you shall not be idle
and fruitelesse in the knowledge of Christ: for he that has not these things,
is blind: he goes blindfold to the wood, and may chance hap beside heaven, or
step besides the ladder. A great many say as Balaam did, O let my Soul dye
the death of the Righteous: but they care not for living the life of the
Righteous. He went but blindfold, he knew not the Angel that stood with a
sword drawn in the way, but would have gone upon it, if his Ass had been so
foolish. A great many think, that presumption in being secure of their
salvation, is good Divinity. Balaam thought he went well, when he went on the
point of a naked sword. So, one entised by the flattery of a harlot, thinks he
goes to a place of great pleasure: but he goes, as one that goes to the
slaughter, and as a fool to the stocks, Prove. 7.22. Those whom it pleases
God to have partakers of his Kingdom, he puts them in mind To remember their
Creator in the days of their youth, before the evil days come: He gives the
grace of timely Repentance, and suffers them not to defer it till the last
cast, and then to think, that with the turning of a pin (as it were) they
shall with a trice be in heaven, with Elias in a whirle wind. Augustine says,
We may in some cases advise men to have great hope that they shall be saved,
but in no case give them warrant of security. So, in Ephesians. 5.6. This we know,
that no whoremonger, nor unclean person, has any inheritance in the Kingdom
of Heaven. Let no man deceive you through vain words, he that does
righteousness is righteous, and he that does unrighteousness, is of the
devil, Joh. 3.7.

Now therefore, to neglect the hearing of the Word, or when he comes to hear
it, to clap down in his place, without desire or mind to bear it away,
thereby to be bettered in his life; and without purpose after by meditating on
it, to chew it, and so to kindle a fire within himself, whereby it may be
digested, and turned into the substance of the mind: this is to tempt God. So
also, to bear a greater countenance, and make more show of holiness, than
indeed is in one, is to lay a greater yoke on himself than he need; as Act.
15.10. is a tempting of God. Again, he that sins must look for evil to
follow, Psalm. 91.10. He therefore that sins, and yet thinks to escape
punishment, tempts God. They that by often experience have found, that such
and such things, have been to them occasions of sinning, and yet will presume
to use the same again, tempts God. And those which set up their Idols in their
heart, and put the stumbling block of iniquity before their face, EZech. 14.3.
and think not they sin, such tempt God. He that comes to ask forgiveness
of God, and will not perform the condition of the Lords Prayer, that is,
Forgive others, tempts God. Generally, he that seeks for good of God, and
will not perform that which he is to do; or does evil, thinking to escape
scot-free, without endeavoring to avoid or resist it, both these tempt God: and
to these two, may all other be referred.

IV. The fourth is, we must not at all tempt God at no hand: we must not think
but God is able to bring water even out of a Rock, Numb. 20.11, when there is
nothing but rocks, and stones; but when we may hope to find it, we must dig
for it. So, when the soil will bear Corn, we must Till it. When Elisha was
in a little village, not able to defend him from the Assyrians, he had chariots
and horses of fire to defend him, 2 King. 6.17. but when he was in Samaria, (a
strong walled City) then when the King of Israel sent to fetch his head, he
said to those which were with him, Shut the door, ver. 32. Christ in the
Wilderness miraculously fed many: in the City he sent his Disciples to buy
meat, as John 4.8. In the beginning, when the Gospel was published, there
wanted sufficient men for the purpose: the Apostles had the power, as appears
Acts 8.29. that on whomsoever they laid hands, he received the holy Ghost, and
was straight able and meet to Preach the Gospel: but after, every man to his
study, 1 Timothy 4.5. These things exercise, etc. We see, that notwithstanding
Paul was told by an Angel, that there should be no loss of any man's life in
the ship, yet he caused the Mariners to cut the ropes, and to cast Anchor, Act.
27.23, 24.29, 30, 31, 32. Nay, when some would have gone out by boat, he would
not let them: so here Christ answers, that howsoever Angels attend on him, he
may not tempt God.

V. Now follow the reasons why we may not tempt God. There be two sorts of
tempting; the one, by ignorance; the other by unbelief. It is the manner of
Chirurgions, when they are to dress a wound, and know not how far, nor which
way it goes, to tent it: In the same manner is God (after the manner of men)
said to tempt us; sometimes to prove what is in our hearts, and whether we will
keep his Commandments, Deuteronomy. 6.2. as he did the Israelites forty years. To
this end, he both made them hungry, and fed them with Manna. We sometimes tempt
God, as if the arm of his power had received a wound, or his eye a hurt; as if
he could not help or discern our wants as well as before, because he brings
us not water out of the Rock, Numb. 20.10. but such miracles now are not
agreeing with his will, which content us. He will have mercy on whom he will
have mercy, Romans 9.19. And we must not despise the riches of his
bounteousnesse, and patience, and long-suffering, which leads to Repentance,
Romans 2.4. The Lords hand is not shortened, that he cannot save; nor his ear
heavy, that it cannot hear: because he does not reprove us, we think him like
us, Psalm. 50.19. When God holds his peace, we think his tongue is cut: But I
will not always hold my peace, says God, Mal. ult. But how shall I know this,
say men now adays? as Zacharias knew his wife was with child, Luke 1.18. who
(when he would not believe the Angel that told him so, but would needs have a
sign,) was stricken dumb. Behold thou shall be dumb till the day. Here is a
sign for incredulity: he had been as good have believed without a sign.

The second kind of tempting, proceeds of overmuch familiarity, when as we
think we may be bold with God, and that he will take it in good part, and
therefore we will put him to it, (as we say:) we will try both him and his
Angels, what mettle is in them and what they can do. We are to think upon the
name of God, as of a heavy and weighty thing, that is, not upon every small
occasion to be taken up and removed. We are not to account it as a feather,
that we may lightly toss up and down at our pleasure; and even so are we to
esteem of the mercy of God. It is not to be advocated upon every vain trifle,
for that were to use God as we are wont to use our Juglers. Come on, let us see
what you can do, show us a miracle, say they, Exodus 7.11. So Herod desired to
see Christ, that he might see some miracle of him, as in Luke 13.8. It is a
heavy case when men stand thus affected toward God: when afterward, in Luke
22.64. they blind-folded him, and bade him read who struck him. We our selves
would not be so used, we could not endure to see our friends used so: how much
less ought we to use God in that manner? especially, that attribute, quality,
or property of God, which of all others, he would have to be most magnifyed,
that is, his mercy? He must needs take it very hainously to see that abused,
since (of all the rest) be makes most account of it. Howsoever he could be
content to serve, yet would he not be a servant to our sins in any case, Esaias
43.24. especially not to be made a packe-horse (if I may so say) for our
sins, to lay load on, even till his back ache. He says, Amos 2.13, that he
is pressed under us, as a cart is pressed that is under sheaves. Let us not make a
dung-cart of Gods mercy, let us forbear him that service of all other.

VI. The sixth is, that none of these Dominum Deum tuum, neither Lord, nor God,
nor that he is thine, are fit arguments to prove, that we may presume upon him.
The devil belike had perceived, that there was some acquaintance between
Christ and God, and peradventure had said unto him; You may be bold with him,
and with his Angels. What? he is your Father, and (as Caesar's daughter
answered) that though he forget himself to be Caesar, yet do not you forget
to be his Son. No says Christ, these be no good arguments to make one
presume. As for Dominus we will all grant (I am sure) there is small matter of
presumption in that. In Deus there may be some more color: but yet very
little. It is no good dealing with one that is mightier than our selves, lest
he happen not to take it in good part, but fall to earnest, and so we feel the
smart. We were not best to make sport with Sampson, least he pull the house
about our ears, and so make us pay dearly for our pastime. Paul says, Do we
provoke the Lord to anger? Are we stronger than he? 1 Cor. 10.22. If we will
needs tempt, we were best tempt with our matches. There is no dealing with
fire, for it will burn all that touches it, Heb. 1.7. his Angels and
Ministers are a flame of fire: but Heb. 12.29. it is said, Our God is even a
consuming fire. Indeed, if he were like Dagon the Philistims god, he might be
set up and taken down, and we might break his neck and hands at our
pleasure: but being the strong and mighty God of Hoasts, we were best take heed
how we deal with him.

Tuum, what say we to that? An ungracious child might make that an argument of
presumption, but whosoever is of a good nature, will make it an argument of the
contrary. Isaac was Jacobs father, but was Jacob more bold to abuse him for
that? No, but rather more timorous, Genesis 27. My father (says he) may chance
feel me; and so I shall seem to him a mocker, and so bring a curse on me, and
not a blessing. Is God merciful? yea truly, Mercy is with thee, but that thou
may be feared, Psalm. 130.4. We may not abuse his mercy, as to sin that
grace may abound, Romans 6.1. Is he bountiful and long suffering? We must
therefore the more fear to displease him. When the Pharisees tempted him, and
would adventure their souls in seeking a sign, it is said, Matthew. 8.11.
Christ sighed: and why did he sigh? Because God swear in his wrath, that they
should never enter into his rest, whose Fathers tempted him in the Wilderness,
Psalm. 95. What rest? He does not mean the rest in the Land of Canaan only,
but that which shall be in the Kingdom of God, Heb. 3.10. These two
temptations of the devil, may fitly be compared to those two rocks, between
which Jonathan was to pass, which are said, 1 Samuel 14.4. to be sharp. One is
called Bozez, which signifies dirt; the other Seneh, which signifies a
Bramble, or some sharp prick; between which, he and his Armor-bearer were
feign to clamber up, ver. 13. Between two such Rocks lies our way, that is,
Presumption, and Desperation: therefore blessed is he that so loves God, that
he can be content to creep on hands and feet to him.

THE SIXTH SERMON.
MATTHEW. 4.8, 9. Again, the devil takes him up into an exceeding high
Mountain, and shows him all the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of
them.

And says unto him: All these things will I give thee, if thou will fall down
and worship me.


AT the first overthrow, we had the first Again: and when Christ overthrew him
then also, yet would not the devil leave then neither, but he comes with his
second Again: he comes Again, and Again. The first Again, was an argument
of his courage and stomach: this second, is an argument of his importunity.
The first repulse could not drive him away, nor the second neither; no, nor
this third for altogether: for Luke says, He departed for a season, Luke 4.13.
So that as Christ says, John 16.16. After a while ye shall see me, and after a
while you shall not see me: so says the devil also, After a while you shall
not see me, and again, after a while you shall see me. Which teaches us this
lesson; that it is not enough to have prevailed against his temptations twice
or thrice, and so become secure; but we are always to stand upon our guard,
knowing how the devil will successively, every turning of a hand, be with us;
and that while we live, we shall never be at rest with him: or if he tempt us
not, we shall be in as bad or worse case. For so long as the Lord left other
Nations among the Israelites to prove them by, and to be pricks to their
sides, it went well enough with them, Judge. 3.1. but when they began to live in
some security (having for the most part subdued them) then grew they to mutual
dissension. It is the greatest temptation to be without temptation. Therefore
Paul had the messenger of Satan to buffet him, 2 Cor. 12.7. for then follows
the pressing of God by prayers. But whether we join hands with Satan, or
resist him, we shall be sure he will set upon us, and try by fair means what
he can do; or if we say nay, yet in the end he will weary us, as Dalila did
Sampson, Judge. 16.16. who because she was importunate, his soul was pained to
the death, and then he told her: or if we will be obstinate in rejecting his
temptations, giving him at the first a peremptory refusal; then he will go
another way to work, as to imagine some devise against us, and smite us with
the tongue, Jer. 18.18. he will be rough with us. If none of these will
prevail, he will persuade us, we must be like other men, and that is as
profitable or pleasant to us, and then say Samuel what he can, we will have a
King, 1 Samuel 8.19. And when we have yielded once, then goes he to fetch
company, and takes unto him seven worse spirits than himself, Luke 11.26. So
the last state of that man is worse than the first. Give but an inch, and he
will take an Ell: if he can get in but an arm, he will make shift to shove in
his whole body. As we see, if the point of a nail have once made entry, the
rest will soon in. We see an example of his encroaching even in David, 2 Samuel
11.4. after he had once made him commit adultery by some mean degrees with
Bathsheba, see how he draws him on from one wickedness to another. She was
with child, her husband being in the service of God and the King, was by the
King murdered to hide her shame, and satisfy his lust. So did he draw on
Peter; first, he made him follow a loofe off; secondly, flatly to deny Christ;
thirdly, to forswear him; and fourthly, to curse himself if he knew him.

The Hebrew writers note, that the Devils name Beelzebub, signifies a great
flesh Fly, or a master Fly; flap him away never so often, he will still fly
thither again. So the devil will never cease molesting us, till the smoking
flax be quite quenched, and the bruised reed clean broken, Esaias 42.3. First,
he twists certain small threads together, and so makes a little cord of vanity,
to draw us unto him: afterward with a cart-rope or cable of iniquity, he seeks
to bind us fast unto him for starting; either by the vice of lust, or of envy,
or at least covetousness. But if all should fail, pride is sure to hold; O
Lord, I thank thee, I am not like such and such, nor like this Publican, (a
degree farther,) nor like this Pharisee, Luke 18.11. This may be a good caveat
unto us, that we stand always upon our guard, and that we be sure that we make
strong resistance in the beginning, and break it (if we can) while it is but a
whip-cord. And to use the like policy in a good matter, that the King of Egypt
did in a bad; who took order that every male child should be killed, to keep
the Israelites down betimes: and against the succession of temptation, to
entertain the succession of Prayer.

Now to the matter. The Devil deals a with a City. In the first, he tells him
he must be famished, except he can turn stones into bread. Secondly, he comes
to make a train of Scripture to entrap him. Now he comes to the ordinary
means of dealing, that is; when men strive about any thing, and both parties
are loath to yield, there will be some parley of composition and sharing
between them. So here, the devil seeing that he cannot overthrow his faith,
offers him to compound: and (on his part) he is content to give Christ all
the Kingdoms of the world, if our Savior (for his part) will but fall down,
and worship him. The devil before came disguised in the shape of a
malcontent, as that Christ should be in such hunger. Next, he came in the
habit of a Divine, and that very demurely, with his Psalter in his hand. Now he
comes in all his Royalty, like the Prince of this world, as he is so called,
John 4.30. He does not stand pedling with Christ, but goes roundly and frankely
to work: he offers all that he has, (and that is no small matter) to bring
Christ but to one sin, that so he might overthrow all mankind. He comes no
more now with Si filius Dei es: for that we see is here left, he would not have
him think on it: he would have him now, filius seculi. This is called by Saint
Paul, the bewitching temptation, whereby men become so foolish, as that after
they have begun in the Spirit, they will end in the flesh, Gal. 3.3. Where the
devil cannot prevail, either by our own concupiscence, or by his enticings,
he will see what he can do with his Dragons tail, and by that means (say the
Fathers) he did more hurt, than by the other. Secondly, his tail is said to
draw down the third part of the stars of heaven, and to cast them to the
earth, Apoc. 12.4.

We are here to consider: First, the preparation that the devil makes, by
taking him up to an high hill, to make the offer, ver. 8. Secondly, the
temptation it self, ver. 9. Thirdly, our Saviors answer, and the shield he
opposes to it, ver. 10. Fourthly, the issue of the conflict. the victory, ver.
11. First, the preparation that the devil makes, by taking him up to an high
hill, to make the offer, ver. 8. Secondly, the temptation it self, ver. 9.
Thirdly, our Saviors answer, and the shield he opposes to it, ver. 10.
Fourthly, the issue of the conflict. the victory, ver. 11.
In the first, we are to consider: first, the devils method; secondly, the
place and ground: thirdly, his policy, in not only telling what he would give;
but in showing thereof: fourthly, the things themselves which he offers, which
are two:
the kingdom of the earth, and the glory thereof.

I. First, of his method, Ephesians. 4.14. we are warned not to be wavering, and
carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the deceit and craftiness of
men, whereby they lie in wait to deceive. Craftiness and deceit then, be the
instruments which the devil uses; he brings Christ from the Wilderness to
the Temple, and from the Temple to the Mountain, to destroy the Temple, which
Mountain is prosperity. So in adversity we vow to God, that we will serve him;
but after help, we break it. II. Secondly, the lists where this temptation
was used, was the Mountain. The reason why he chose this place rather than any
other, is the fitness of it, in regard of the prospect. The wilderness (we
know) was a melancholy place, and in no wise fit for this temptation, so,
neither was the Pinnacle: for besides that it might have hindered the working of
this temptation, being the Pinnacle of the Temple; the prospect was not good
enough. For though it were high, yet there were diverse hills about Jerusalem,
which would have hindered the sight of many things. And though Sion were a
Mountain, yet in respect of Mount Hermon, and Libanus, it is said to be a
little one, Psalm. 42.6. And Psalm. 68.16. Basan is said to be the great Hill.
Therefore as God chose a convenient Hill, both for height and neemesse, where
Moses might behold the whole Land of Canaan, Deuteronomy. 32.49. So here the devil
chose an exceeding high Mountain, where a high mind might best take view and
comtemplate: such, where his horizon might be as spacious as was possible, and
where his sight might not be hindered by any mean object. III. Thirdly, he sets
before his eyes, all the kingdoms of the earth. There is nothing so soon
enticed and led away, as the eye: it is the Broker between the heart, and all
wicked lusts that be in the world. And therefore it was great folly in
Hezechias, to show his robes and treasure, Esaias 39.2. as he was told by the
Prophet: it stirred up such coals of desire in them that saw them, as could
not be quenched, till they had fetched away all that he had, and all that his
Ancestors had laid up, even till that day. It is the wisdom that is used now
adays, when men would have one thing for another, to show the thing they would
so exchange: as the buyer shows his money, and the seller his wares in the
best manner that he can, each to entice the other (by the eye) to the desire of
the heart. It is the devils ancient slight, he would not go about to persuade
the matter in words, till he might withal present the thing to the eye. So he
dealt with Eve, Genesis 3.6. First he showed her how pleasant the fruit was, and
the woman saw it. So the cause of the deluge was, Genesis 6.2. that the Sons of
God saw the beauty of the Daughters of men. Achabs seeing of Naboths vineyard,
1 King. 21.2. for that it lay near his house, was the cause of all the
mischief that followed. This same foolish vanity of apparel, (whereof I have
given so often warning out of this place,) comes from hence: I saw a fine
Babilonish garment, and desiring it, I took it, says Achan, Joshu. 7.11. So
the seeing of the bribe, blinds the eyes of the Judge, Deuteronomy. 16.19. So still
the sight of the eye, allureth the heart to desire. The Heathen man therefore
wished, that virtue and honesty might as well be seen with bodily eyes: for
then he thinks, that Admirabiles amores excitarent suo. So if we could as
well see that which God has for us as that the devil here offers us: we
would not regard the devils largess. Moses and the other Patriarchs saw him
which is invisible, which had provided a better thing for them: Therefore he
refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, Heb. 11.27. And to enjoy
the pleasure of sin. But you are not so to take it, as though it were a thing
simply ill to behold such things, or to look on a cup-boord of plate, or to
stand on a Pinnacle, it is dangerous, but no sin; especially; it is unfit for
an unstayed, and an ungoverned eye. Therefore Lot and his wife were forbidden
to look back at the destruction of Sodom, Genesis 19.17. To Abraham it was left
at large, without any restraint; for that he was a man of better ruled
affections. For, as there must be one without, to take view and to entice: so
must there be one within, to hearken to it, and to condescend. Be sure of that
within, that it be upright; and then thou may the better look with that
which is without. But ever be wary, for the tinder of thy nature will soon
take fire. Job said, Chap. 31.1. He made a covenant with his eyes: why then
should he think on a maid? and that he had not been deceyved by a woman,
verse. 9. and that his heart had not walked after his eyes, verse. 7. Paul knew
how to use want, and how to use abundance or plenty, how poverty: both to be
full, and to be hungry: he had stayed affections, Phil. 4.12. IV. Omnia Regna.
This was no small offer, but even all the wealth and honor that may be: two
such things as are most vehemently desired of all men. So that as Jerome says,
Prae auri sacra fame nihil sacrum. The desire thereof also is so unsatiable,
that it is like the dropsy; which, the more liquor is ministered to it, the
more it thirsts; it is perpetual and unnatural. The less time a man has
to live, and so needs the less; the more he covets to abound. These two do
never wax old; of all vices, gray hairs do never grow on these. This is the
bait the devil laid for Christ, and lays for youth, and minds lasciviously
given, he lays a bait on live flesh; to choleric natures, he ministers
matters that may increase their wrath; for melancholy, he lays baits of envy:
and so for every one, according to their natural inclinations and humors,
such baits as may entice them soonest. Which if he can get them once to
swallow his hook that is within, it will hold them sure enough, and by his
line he will draw them to him when he list; so that he cares not to let them
play with the line: then, though he go to twenty Sermons; it is no matter:
with an Apple he caught Adam and Eve, and all their posterity. Well, we must be
as children, weaned from this world, though it bring weeping with it, Psalm.
131.2. Genesis 27.38. When Eve was Lady and Mistress of all the world; yet
because there was a Godship, a higher degree than hers, she was not content.
Princes, because they can go no higher by any earthly dignity, aspire to be
gods, and so would be accounted; as was said to Herod, that it was the voice of
God, and not of Man. But, as they that are above, can abide to have no equals,
but will be alone by themselves; so they that be below, can abide no
superiors. As when Saul was chosen by lot from amongst the Israelites, to be
King over them, some wicked men said, There is a goodly wise King: nay, I would
I were King, I would they might come to me for Justice, 1 Samuel 10.27. 2 Samuel
15.4. Every one has this conceit of himself, that he is worthier to bear
rule, than they which are in authority: not so much as the silly Fur-bush, but
it thought it self a fit person to make a King, Judge. 9.15. and the Thistle
would have the Cedars daughter married to his son, 1 King. 14.9. The Spider,
a silly poysonfull thing, will yet be in the top of the Kings Palaces, Prove.
30.28. The Gourd starts up in one night, and was gone in the next, Jon. 4.6.
Goodly Zebedeus wife, could find no less thing to ask of Christ, for her two
sons, that came the last day from the cart, but that the one might sit at
Christ's right hand, and the other at the left in his Kingdom, Matthew. 20.20.
Balaam could never think his Ass went half fast enough, when he rode toward
preferment, Number. 22.17. The Disciples also longed for the Kingdom of Israel to
be restored.
The devil did not show all his Kingdom to Saul, when he was coming from
keeping his Fathers sheep, 1 Samuel 9.24. and Samuel feasted him: nor after Saul
was chosen King, 1 Samuel 11.5. and he followed his cattle: neither did he show
them to the King, bidden to Absalons sheep-shearing, 2 Samuel 13.24. nor at such
time as Princes withdraw themselves to be private, Dan. 6.18. But he shows
them at such times as they are in their greatest glory and ruff, when
kingdoms were grown to the top of jollity and Majesty, as the Kingdom of
Israel was in Solomon's time: and chooses such a time, as when they were in
most triumph and pomp, as they were wont to be at the day of the Kings birth,
or inauguration, Hosea 7.5. Cant. 3.11. or at a Coronation, or at the receiving
of Ambassadors; or at the entertaining of foreign States, as when the Queen
of Saba was in Solomon's Court, 1 King. 10. To conclude, he showed them not when
they are in a base estate, but when they are in greatest pomp. Act. 25.23.

Now come we to the second point: to wit, the Temptation it self: En haec
omnia tibi dabo, ver. 9. Having prepared Christ's mind (as he thought) by
showing him that he would give him: now he comes in with a short and pithy
Oration; [All this will I give thee.] Here thou see all thou can wish for;
without thee shall no man lift up his hand or his foot in all Egypt, as
Pharaoh said to Joseph, Genesis 41.44. so as he might make all Captains, and give
to every one fields and vineyards, 1 Samuel 22.7. that he might say to every one
what he list; Speak thou to me? See thou not that I have power to crucify
thee, or to let thee go? John 19.10. that his favor might raise a man so
high, as Haman was exalted above all the Princes, Hest. 3.1. and his disfavour,
or the least word of his mouth quite overthrow him, as Haman was, verse 7.8. by
picking some small quarrel against him. But this is not all neither: for the
same gayish apparel, wherein many do delight, is contained under this Haec
omnia: Not only embroydered with gold, but even gold it self, and smells of
the finest scent, Psalm. 45.8, 9. And as for the delights of the flesh, if he
can see any that delight him better than other: it is no more than with David,
2 Samuel 11.4. to send for her and have her, she was straight at his command.
Neither must any say, it was unlawful: no, not John Baptist, if he love his
head, Mark 6.17. He may command what he list; if any gainesay it, he may
dispatch him out of the way: for he may kill and wound whom he list, Dan. 5.19.
He may command all men's tongues, 2 Samuel 14.10. that they dare not once open
their mouth to speak against him. Nay, he shall have all men's tongues and
pens, ready to extol all that he does, and say; The King is like an Angel of
God, 2 Samuel 19. or that it is the voice of God, and not of man, Act. 12.22.
Why, then to have all men's hands, feet, bodies, faces, tongues, and pens: this
may be well said All, to have not only one Kingdom, but all: to have all the
power and glory of those Kingdoms: here is even all the kingdom, the power,
and the glory. He comes not after a pelting manner, he shows himself a frank
chapman: he says not, that Godliness is great gain, and a mind content with
his lot, 1 Timothy 6.6. and wills him to be content with food and raiment, ver. 8.
He comes not with Illa, which we shall not once behold till another world come;
and whether there be any such or no, many doubt. He shows him a mount that may
be touched, Heb. 12.18. he comes with haec, that is, with ready money in his
hand: he not only offers, but stakes down: and whereas God says, that in the
sweat of our forehead we shall eat our bread, Genesis 3.19. the devil requires
no such thing. This is a donative, Haec amnia dabo. What say ye now? Shall
Christ take it, or no?

The Heathen man says, if a man be to violate his faith for any thing, it is
for a Kingdom: Christ has here offered him all Kingdoms, a very enticing
bait: but is there never a hook hidden under it? The woman was fine and
brave, and had a cup of gold in her hand, but it was full of abomination, Apoc.
17.14. So here, for all these fair shows, if you will gain any thing by the
devil, you must worship him; that is the condition annexed to the grant, it is
no absolute gift, the devil is not so kind, as to part from all that for
nothing. It is such a gift as the Lawyers call Excambium, that is, Exchange: I
will give you this, if you will give me that. But yet one would think it a
very large offer, to give so great a lieu for so small a service; it is but a
little external reverence, the bowing of the knee; you may (notwithstanding)
in heart think what ye list. Well, we may think there was somewhat in it,
that the devil offered so much for so little, and yet Christ refused it.
Indeed Christ had great reason to refuse it: for he should have been a loser
by the bargain. I will stand to it, he had been better to have yielded to
either of the two former temptations, than to this: he should full dearly have
bought all his kingdoms, he had been better to have cast himself down from
the Pinnacle. For that which the devil here demands in lieu, is as much
worth, as both the glory of God, and the redemption of man. Of his glory, God
says, That he will not give it to another, Esaias 42.8. If to no other, then
not to the devil of all other. And therefore the Angel would not have a burnt
offering offered to him, but to God, Judge. 13.16. The Angel would not let John
fall down and worship him, but bad him worship God, Rev. 19.10. For he knew
that God was very jealous of his honor, and stood precisely upon that point.
If he would not impart this honor with the Angels, much less would he with
the devil: for there are degrees in idolatry, Romans 1.23. It is not so ill to
turn the glory of God into the image of a man, as into birds and beasts.

Secondly, if we look into the desire that he had to satisfy his ancient
envy, by the destruction of mankind: we must needs commend the devils wit, in
making such a bargain. It had been the best penny worth that ever was bought.
For if we mark how Christ rateth one only soul, we may see, how he, that to
gain all the kingdoms of the world, shall lose his own soul, Matthew. 16.26.
makes but a foolish bargain; Then what rate shall be made of all men's souls,
if one be worth kingdoms; all which had been lost, if Christ had consented to
that which the devil here requires: for then he could not have said, I
restored that which I took not, Psalm. 69.4. By his death he paid the price
for the sins of the whole world; he should then have had a score of his own
to have paid, and his death could have been sufficient but for himself only.
If he had fallen down, and worshipped him, he could not have said, That the
Prince of this world had nothing to say against him, John 14.3.

Now let us apply this to our selves.

But we will peradventure say, the devil never made us any such offer; and
therefore what needs any admonishment in this behalf? But I answer, though the
devil come not in person to us, as he did to Christ, yet he comes by his
instruments. When Balak sent to Balaam, to come and curse the Israelites, and
promised him great rewards, Numb. 22.17. it was not Balaks messengers that
spoke, but the devil used them as instruments to speak. So when Simon Magus
would have bought the Holy Ghost with money; the devil therein tempted the
Apostles with Simonie, Simon was but the trunk, through which the devil
spoke, Act. 8.

Again, there be some that will say; they were never tempted with Kingdoms:
It may well be, for it needs not, when less will serve. It was Christ only,
that was thus tempted: in him lay a Heroical mind, that could not be allured
with small matters. But with us it is nothing so; we esteem far more basely
of our selves: we set our wares at a very easy price, he may buy us even
dagger-cheape, as we say: he need never carry us so high as the Mount, the
Pinnacle is high enough; yea, the lowest steeple in all the Town would serve
the turn. Or let him but carry us to the Leads or gutters of our own houses,
nay, let us but stand in our window, or in our doors; if he will give us but
so much as we can there see, he will tempt us thoroughly, we will accept it, and
thank him too. He shall not need to come to us with Kingdoms, one Kingdom is
too much, what say ye to half a one? Mark. 6.23. No, will the devil say, I
will give ye half a one? If he would come to us but with thirty pence, Matthew.
26.15. I am afraid many of us would play Judas. Nay, less than so would buy a
great sort, even handfuls of Barley, and pieces of Bread, Ezekiel. 13.19. and
Prove. 28.21. Yea, some will not stick to buy and sell the poor for a pair of
shoes, as Amos speaks, Chap. 8.6.

When he comes then to tempt us, he may abate a great deal of this that he
offers Christ; he may strike out Omnia and Hac too, and instread thereof of put
in Hoc, and say; Hold, ye shall have this to worship me, I will give ye no
more; I fear me we will make short work, and take it, Hoc aliquid, a matter
of half a crown or ten groates, a pair of shoes, or some such trifle, will
bring us on our knees to the devil. Is there a pretty commodity to be had? It
makes no matter for breaking faith and promise. This is that that makes the
devil so good a husband and thrifty, and to go near hand: what need he give
more, when so little will serve? Whereas, if we will stand hucking with him, we
might get a great deal more.

In this temptation (as in the former) there is both fire to consume our faith,
and a dart to wound our consciences. The fire is the motion of discontent, that
God is either a poor God, not able sufficiently to reward those that serve
him: or else an unkind God, that will not reward the duties that are performed
by those that serve him. By this we come to say: Who is the Almighty, that we
should serve him? Job 21.15. The wicked are they that prosper and increase in
riches. I have cleansed my heart in vain, for daily have I been punished,
Psalm. 73.12. Then this dart makes us weary of well doing; and then follows,
that we will serve the devil. Being discontent with Gods service, we undertake
the service of his enemy: he requires nothing but a little falling down, and
then if Simon shall come, and require any unlawful thing at our hands, we are
ready (with Judas) to meet with him, and say; What will ye give me, and I will
do it? Matthew. 26.15. though it be to the betraying of Christ. The devil here
opens his meaning in this Temptation plainly, (that he would have him fall
down and worship him) with a bare and bold face: before, he came disguised,
and spoke in Parables. His meaning is not when he says Dabo, to give them; but
to barter or exchange one thing for another. It is no gift, but a flat
bargain: men use not to account it a gift, except it be without rendering back
either money or service. If he render here service back, he may well think I
have sold my soul for Hoc aliquid, Matthew. 16.76. He may think, as Esau sold
his birthright for a mess of pottage, Heb. 12.16. so has he sold his soul,
his birthright, and freedom: for we were all bought with a price, 1 Cor.
7.23. the same great high Priest redeemed us all with his blood. No sins are
so carefully to be taken heed of, as these, that have annexed to adoration,
donation: he has Malum with a joynter. If he should have cast himself down
from the Pinnacle, here is all he should have had: they would have talked of it,
and have wondered a while at it.

Well, we must be thus persuaded, that God is as well able and willing to
reward us for any service, as the devil, and better too. It is he indeed that
reigns over the kingdoms of men, Dan. 5.21. and places in them whom
pleases him: but when he gives or disposes, he gives indeed freely,
exacting nothing back again, unless it be such things, as he were to have
without any such gift: such things as are due of mere right, without any
stipulation or hire, Jam. 1.5. The devils Dabo, is, as Offices and Parsonages
are given amongst us; that is, as usually sold as horses in Smithfield. But if
we could be content to give indeed, let that heroical mind that was in
Abraham be in us, Genesis 14.23. that as he would not take any thing of
Melchisedech, so we will not be a shoo-lachet the richer by the devil. If he
offer to make us wealthy, let us answer him; Pecunia tua tecum pereat.

THE SEVENTH SERMON.
MATTHEW. 4.10, 11. Then Jesus says unto him; Get thee hence behind me Satan:
for it is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve.

Then the devil leaves him, and behold the Angels came, and ministered unto
him.


THe answering of this Temptation, if some had had the answering of it, would
have been facto, by the doing of the thing that the devil required: and not
in words, standing upon terms in disputation. Insomuch, as they would never
have cared for a cushion to kneel on; but have fallen down straight on their
very faces, and have thanked him too. If Balaak should say unto one of them, I
will promote thee to great honor, Numb. 22.17. an Angel standing in the way,
should not hinder him from going. The manner of flesh and blood is, in cases of
preferment, to respect nothing that may bring them out of their conceived hope
or desire thereof: and therefore, whatsoever it is that stands in their way, be
it never so holy, down it shall for haste, to make the way nearest. In regard
of this, one brother respects not another. When Joseph had had a dream of his
brethren, and told it them, all brotherly affection was laid aside, Genesis 37.5.
The son and subject Absolon, forgets his duty as to his father, and
allegiance as to his Prince, seeking his life, 2 Samuel 16.11. The mother of
Ahaziah, Athalia, when she saw her son dead, makes no more ado, but
destroys all the Kings seed, 2 King. 11.1. Jehu makes no bones, nor is abashed
at the sight of heaps of dead men's heads, of Kings sons that he had caused
to be slain, but adds more murders to them, 2 Kin. 10.8. What Is a basketfull
of heads to a Kingdom? And Herod stacke not to kill all the male-borne
children in Bethlem, Matthew. 2.16. So that Gregory might well say, Ambitio est
vita, cui etiam innocents nocent, such is the vehement desire of a Kingdom.
So that a great many would have made no scruple at the matter, neither would
they have counted it a temptation, but good counsel: Neither would so have cut
up Peter as Christ did, to bid him go behind him, and turn their backs on
him; but they would rather have turned their backs to God, and their faces
after Satan, Jer. 2.27. 1 Timothy 5.15. And indeed it must needs be, that either
our Savior was unwise in refusing so good an offer, or else the World (in
these days) is in a wrong byas.

Our Savior (we see) does not only refuse the thing, but also gives him hard
words, for making the offer and motion. For he does not only confute him here,
by saying, Scriptum est: but he adds words of bitter reprehension, saying,
Avoid Satan. He might have given fair words, as he did before: but here he
seems to have left his patience. The reason why he was more hot in this, than
in the former, is, for that this touches the glory of God, and the redemption
of mankind: the former Temptations touched but himself in particular, as the
turning of stones into bread, but for miracle: and the casting himself down,
was but to try God, what care he had of him. But this so much touches the
glory of God, as he can hold no longer. Also, his longing to redeem man,
caused the same. Neither did he only answer the devil so; but when his
blessed Apostle, who meant friendly to him, moved him to the like matter, he
rebuked him sharply.

Two causes there are, wherein Christ is very earnest; one in counsel
ministered to him, tending to the impairing of Gods glory; the other in
practices, tending to the impairing of Gods Church, Joh. 2.15. there he was not
only vehement in words; but made a whip to scourge them out. And so in the Old
Testament, it is said of Moses, Numb. 12.3. That he was a meek man, above all
the men of the earth; yet when he came to a case of Idolatry, Exodus 32.19. it
is said, He threw the Tables out of his hands, and brake them. And so far
did he lose his natural affection to his people and Countrymen, that he caused
a great number of them to be slain. And so in a case of the Church, when Corah
rebelled, Numb. 16.15. then Moses waxed very angry; for Glory be to God on
high, and peace on earth, is the Angels song and joy, and the devils grief: as
on the other side, the dishonor of God, and dissension of the Church, is the
devils joy, and grief of the Angels.

Now, besides that he does in words rebuke him sharply, he does no less in
gesture also; as by turning his back upon him, (as it is most like he did, in
saying, Avoid Satan) which is such a despitefull disgrace, as if that one
should offer us the like, we would take it in very great disdain. Which is to
us an instruction, that as there is a time, when we are to keep the devil
before us, and to have our eye still upon him, and his weapon or temptation,
for fear lest unawares he might do us some hurt: so is there a place, a time,
and a sin, that we are to turn our backs on, and not once to look at his
temptation. In affliction, patience is to be tried; there resist the devil,
stand to him and he will fly from ye, Jam. 4.7. Here we are to set the devil
before us. But in a case of lust, or filthy desire, then do ye fly from him,
1 Cor. 6.18. So in 2 Timothy 2.22. we are exhorted to fly from the lusts of
youth, and to follow justice: there is no standing to gaze back on the devil,
and his temptations.

Now to the answer: Scriptum est.

The disputing or deciding of the Devils Title: that is, whether the Kingdoms
of the earth were his to give or no, Christ stands not upon; nor upon this,
whether the devil were a man of his word or no. Indeed, it might well have
been doubted, whether the devil be as good as his word: his promises are not
Yea and Amen, as the promises of God are. We may take example by Eve, to whom
he promised, that if they did eat of the forbidden fruit, that they should be
like Gods; but were they so indeed, after they had eaten? No, but like the
beasts that perish. And as true it is, that the Kingdoms are his. If the
Kingdom of Israel had been at his disposition, we may be sure David should
never have been King; as well appears by the troubles he raised against him.
No, nor Hezechias neither, of all other he would never choose such. We may see
his good will in Job, Chap. 2.7. he could not only be content to spoil him of
all that he had, but also he must afflict his body, and so upon the Gergasens
hogs, Matthew. 8.30.

The Kingdoms are none of his, but they are committed to him in some sort to
dispose, as himself says, Luke 4.6. He has (as it were) an Advowson of them,
to present unto them: but yet, not as he there says, to give to whom he list,
but to whom he is permitted. God must first put all that Job has in his hands,
or else he can do nothing. Abimelech, Judge. 9. and Herod, Matthew. 2. came to
their Kingdoms by the devils Patent, they be the devils Officers. So we see
daily in our days, that he bestows Offices, and presents to Churches. So that
as Brentius says, Many have Panem quotidianum, that cannot come by Da nobis:
they come not to it by Gods gift: yet all the interest that the devil has, is
but to present Pro hac vita tantum. As therefore it may be true, that in some
sort they may be given him: so yet, not to dispose as he will. It is God only
that can say so, for his only they are absolutely. The earth is the Lords, and
all the fullness thereof, the round world and all that dwell therein, Psalm.
24.1. It is he (the most high God) that divided to the Nations their
inheritance, Deuteronomy. 32.8. By him Kings reign, and Princes have dominion, Prove.
8.15. He brought Nebuchadnezzar to know, That the most high God bare rule over
the Kingdoms of men, Dan. 5.21. He indeed may well say, Cui voluero, do ea:
and to whomsoever God gives, he gives liberally, and reproacheth no man, Jam.
1.5. The devil (we see) exacteth more than the thing is worth, and straineth
the benefit of his grant with unjust convenants. But Christ goes not about to
answer the devil that way: but by flying to the Scriptures, as to his surest
hold. Therefore David prays, that his mind may be inclined to Gods Law, and
not to Covetousness, Psalm. 119.36. For there is a medicine for every disease,
and power as well against this Temptation of Covetousness, as against the
former: the Law of God can as well keep a man from Covetousness, as from
Desperation: Heaven and earth shall pass, but no one jot of this, Let
therefore Haec omnia give place to Scriptum est: marry Omnia illa, which both
we now enjoy, and which are laid up for us hereafter, are come to by Scriptum
est. So that Omnia haec is not all we must care for; there be things to come
(besides these things which we lay hands on) far more precious. Though here
be all the Kingdoms of the earth: yet they are said to be showed in the
twinkling of an eye, so cannot the other Kingdom of exceeding glory. All the
power of all the Princes on the earth, have not power over one silly soul to
destroy it, Matthew. 10.28. All the glory of them, is called but a great big
fan, or pomp, Act. 25.23. Solomon was the most glorious Prince that ever
was, yet he was not clothed like a Lilly, Matthew. 6.29. Nor all the Lillies in
the field, nor Stars in heaven, nor the Sun and Moon it self, are
comparable to one soul.

The Scripture whereby Christ answers the devil, is in Deuteronomy. 16.13. Thou
shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him. If any fantastical spirit oppose
it self against Moses, let it be accursed. There is in this answer two things
set down; Worship, and Service; both which are due to God only. Covetousness
ends in Idolatry, and fitly is so termed: if Christ had been covetously
minded, then he must needs have fallen down and worshipped the devil; for
Covetousness and Idolatry being joined together, we would not have parted from
so great a benefit. Christ has here changed a word, which the Septuaginta
Translator has; which signifies a service with an open testimony. So that,
will ye know if a man do believe? He believes unto righteousness with the
heart, that with the mouth confesses to salvation, Romans 10.10. Such as
glorify God as well in their members, as in their spirit, 1 Cor. 6.20. As
Saint James says of Faith, Show me thy faith by thy works: so may it be said
of fear. You say you have fear, can you show me your fear? If it be not a
dead fear, it is to be seen: as Dan. 3.5. it must be showed by falling down,
and worshipping. The servant that feared, fell down and besought his master,
Matthew. 18.26. Do you fear? then where is the outward reverence? The inward
affection must appear by the outward action: Religion is outward, as well as
inward, 1 King. 19.18.

There be two ways whereby we may have traffic with the devil, either of
both will serve his turn: first, homage: secondly, service of the body; and
both these does God require, even when we are in the dark, or in our chamber,
Ezech. 8.12. Indeed might the devil say, this Mountain is very open; but how
say ye? will ye be content closely in a corner to worship me? If ye will not
wear my cognizance on your forehead, yet ye may take my mark in your hand;
then shutting your hand, no body can perceive it. If ye will not take the
mark, yet take the number of the Beasts name; that is, six hundred threescore
and six, Apoc. 13.17, 18. Will ye do none of these? What then? will ye serve
me? Romans 16.18. Thus ye see what glorious terms he uses: but if one should
seem to do one of these on courtesy, he will not be content till he do it
of duty.

Now let us see first what it is to Worship. It is that which Cornelius did to
Peter, he met him, fell down at his feet, and worshipped him, Act. 10.25. And
that which John did to the Angel; that is, he fell down before his feet to
worship him, Apoc. 19.10. It is, when one on the knees does a bodily worship. I
will show it you in David's words: for I cannot tell it ye better. When Michol
scoffed at David, for being bare-headed before the Arc, he says; I will be
more vile than thus, and will be low in mine own sight, 2 Samuel 6.22. A man can
never be too reverent to God: we think it a great disgrace, and debasing of
our selves, if we use any bodily worship to God. It may be said to them, as it
was to him, that feared to do too much reverence to Caesar, Hic homo timet
timere Caesarem. Our religion and Cultus must be uncovered, and a barefaced
religion: we would not use to come before a mean Prince, as we do before the
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, even the God of heaven and earth. The four
and twenty Elders fell down before him that sat on the Throne, and worshipped
him that lives for ever, and cast their crowns before his Throne. The
wandering eye must learn to be fastened on him, Luke. 4.20. and the work of
Justice and Peace, Esa. 32.17. The worship of the knees to bow, Ephesians. 3.14.
and kneel before the Lord their Maker, Psalm. 95.6. Our feet are to come before
his face: For the Lord is a great God; and a great King above all Gods, Psa.
95.2, 3. Jacob, though he were not able to stand, or kneel: yet (because he
would use some corporal service) leaned upon his staff, and worshipped God,
as appears, Genesis 49.33. and Heb. 11.21. This must be done as duty due unto
God, and in regard of those that be strangers.

Secondly, what it is to Serve. This is to bow the soul, as the other is to
bow the body. For the King to serve and speak kindly to the people, that they
may serve him for ever after, 1 King. 12.7. is not the service he means, nor
to do all that the King commands, 2 Samuel 15.15. For God must be above all: and
of whomsoever a man is overcome, to him he is in bondage, 2 Pet. 2.19. We must
serve God with our sacrifices, but not with our sins, nor weary him with our
iniquities, Esaias 43.23. We may not make a dung cart of him, to load him with
our sin and filth, Amos 2.13. and when he comes again to have as much more
for him.

[Onely.] The devil himself would grant, that God is to be served; his
meaning was, that a man might serve God, and him too: but Christ says, God
only. But it may be said, this word [Onely] is not in the Scripture whence
Christ cites this sentence, and so Christ has added to the word of God.
Indeed, in Deuteronomy. 6.13. Alone is not, but in the next ver. it is said, Do not
follow after other Gods, which is in effect, God only.

The Papists ask, where we find Only in justification by faith? Indeed we do
not find it, but we do find, that by faith and nothing else we are justified,
Romans 3.28. and so we may well collect it, by faith only. By grace we are saved
through faith: and that not of our selves; it is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.7.
And on this warrant have many of the Ancient Fathers been bold, to add the
word Only: as Origin upon Romans 3.28. Hilary upon Matthew. 8. and diverse others
say, Faith only justifyeth.

God is only to be worshipped and served, and none besides him. Zephaniah
prophecyeth against them that serve the host of heaven upon the house top, and
swear by Malcham, Zepha. 1.5. But Jacob swear by the fear of his Father
Isaac: and it is said, They feared the Lord, and served their Idols also, Genesis
32.53. 2 Kin. 17.41. It is the property of Aarons rod, that being turned into a
Serpent, if the Magicians turn theirs also into Serpents, Aarons will devour
the rest, Exo. 7.15. Bring the Arc into the Temple of Dagon, Dagon will fall
down and break his face, and though it were lifted up again, yet it fell down
again, 1 Samuel 5.3. The stories bear witness, that the gods of the Hebrews
would not come into Pantho. Samuel bade the people, If they were come again to
the Lord with all their hearts, to put away their strange gods from amongst
them, 1 Samuel 7.4. If there were any other (beside him) that were able to help
up, we might have some reason to serve other: but since it is he that must
help us in all necessities, we must worship him alone: otherwise, when we pray
to him, he may send us to the gods which we have chosen to serve, for our
help, Judge. 10.14. If we could find an equal, or a better than God, we had
some reason to make him a partner in his worship: but if none be worthy once to
be named with him, (so far is all beneath him) we shall offer him too much
disgrace and injury in so doing. It is an embasing of gold to have any other
metal joined with it: yea, though it be silver: The Son (says Malachi,
Chap. 1.6.) honors his Father, and the servant his Lord: if I be your
Father, where is your honor which you do me? if your Lord, where is your
reverence? Whether we account of God, as of our Lord and Master; or whether we
take him for a Father, a man can have but one father, except he be a bastard,
Esaias 2.14. and so be Filius populi: if for a husband, not two husbands, for he
is a jealous God, and cannot abide that. No man can serve two masters, but he
must love the one, and despise the other; no man can love God and Mammon.

Verse 11. Then the Devil left him.
BLessed is the man (says Saint James, Chap. 1.12.) that endures temptation:
for when he is tried, he shall receive the Crown of life. Christ has endured
the temptation, now follows the blessing. Jacob would not let the Angel
depart (with whom he strove,) before he had blessed him, Genesis 32.26. Job (after
his afflictions) received his twofold blessing, Job 42. the woman of Canaan
first hears her self accounted a dog: but at last she heard, Fiat tibi.
Paul was first buffeted by the prick of the flesh: and after heard, My grace
is sufficient for thee. So here at last, when the devil saw it was bootlesse
to stay any longer, there was no good by him to be done, he leaves our Savior:
but yet he went not away willingly of himself, but was sent away with an
Avaunt. Which is a comfort to us to think we stand not at the devils courtesy,
and that he shall not attempt us so long as the list, for God has the devil
in a chain, Apoc. 20.2. and will not suffer him to tempt us above our
strength, 1 Cor. 10.13. For the rod of the wicked shall not rest on the lot of
the righteous, lest the righteous put forth their hand to wickedness, Psalm.
125.3. To have the devil not to come to us is a great favor, but to have him
come, and go away conquered, is exceeding mercy. For tribulation brings
patience, and patience experience, and experience hope, and hope makes not
ashamed, Romans 5.4. As God said of Job, 2.3. Have thou marked my servant Job,
who keeps still his integrity?

And behold, the Angels came, and ministered unto him.

And as Luke says, Chap. 15.10. There is joy with the Angels in heaven, upon
the conversion of every sinner. For we are made a spectacle unto men and
Angels, 1 Cor. 4.9. Before God, are said to stand, ten thousand Angels, Dan.
7.10. and to minister before him. He has a greater pre-eminence, but we are
also herein partakers of the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. either because we are
fed by Angels, as Elias was, 1 King. 19.5. or defended by them, or watched of
them. But says Esaias Chap. 18.18. He that believes makes not haste. Christ was
not hasty, but stayed Gods good time: he would not make his own bread, but
stayed till the Angels ministered unto him. Then there appeared an Angel to
comfort him, Luke 22.43. This wisdom must we learn by holding our tongue; Job
33.33. otherwise one of these two extremes shall we come to: either Extremum
luctus gaudium occupat: or Extrema gaudii luctus occupat, says Bernard, Luke
16.25.

The world is like Jael, who meets Sisera, Judge. 4.19. and entertaines him at
first very friendly, she allures him to her, and gives him drink, and lays
him down: but so soon as he was asleep, she smites a nail into his temples:
The world begins with milk, and ends with a hammer. But our Saviors meaning
is clean contrary. The world first utters good wine; and when men have well
drunk, then that which is worst, Joh. 2.10. But Christ has kept back the
good wine till now, Chap. 2.9. Matthew says, Chap. 13. v. 14. The Son of man
shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of his Kingdom, all
things that offend, and them which do iniquity: and shall cast them into a
furnace of fire, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth: Then shall the
Just shine as the Sun, in the Kingdom of their Father. Our Saviors method
is, to give bitter first, and sweet afterward. Wherefore we are to wish, that
here we may suffer affliction, that we may after be Crowned by him.

FJNJS.

