THE COPY OF A LETTER FROM COLONEL FRANCIS ANDERSON To Sir Thomas Glemham,
JANUARY 30. 1643. touching the Invasion of SCOTLAND.

The Copy of a Letter from the MARQVES of ARGYLE and Sir WILLIAM ARMYNE, to Sir
THOMAS GLEMHAM the 20. January 1643.

THE COPY OF SIR THOMAS GLEMHAMS Letter in Answer to the Lord Marquess of
Argyl's, and Sir William Armyne's.

Printed at the Desire of the Members of both Houses now assembled at OXFORD.

Edw. Norgate.



By Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the University. Anno Dom. 1643.

The Letter from Colonel Francis Anderson to Sir Thomas Glemham.
Sir,
THe Last night I had notice that Weltons Regiment was quartered in Warke
Barony at Preston, Leermouth, Wark, and Mindrum, it was twelve of the Clock at
night before the intelligence came to me, whereupon I immediately caused the
guards to be strengthened and doubled, my Scoutes attending until this morning
for more perfect information, that I might advertise you of it; it is now
confirmed by one that was this morning amongst them, that there is six Colors
of Horse, which were drawing out, and the Drums beating for the calling out of
some Companies of Foot, which also are come over, but the certain number of
foot, I cannot as yet learn, but suppose them to be a part of the Lord
Maltlands Regiment, which lay at Calstreame. I shall endeavor to keep my
Quarters hereabouts, until I receive farther orders from you. I am now drawing
my whole Regiment into Wooller, having heard for certain as I was now writing,
that a great body of the Enemies Foot, and very many Troops of Horse advanced
over Barwick Bridge yesterday, and were as far as Haggeston; it is conceived
they will forthwith march toward Bellforde, for they are Quartered on the
English side; you will please to take these things into a present
consideration, and afford a present answer to,

Sir, Your very humble servant FRANCIS ANDERSON.
Wooller. 20. Ian: 1643.
The Copy of a Letter from the Marquess of Argyle and Sr William Armyne, to
Sir Thomas Glemham.
Gentlemen,
ALthough we justly presume, that the solemn mutual Covenant entered into by
both Kingdoms, has long since come to your hands, and likewise that you have
had notice of the raising of this Army desired by the Parliament of England for
the prosecution of those ends therein expressed, viz. The preservation and
reformation of Religion, the true Honor and happiness of the King, and the
public Peace and liberty of His Dominions; yet that it may appear both to
you and all the World, how unwilling we are to make a forcible use of those
Arms we have been constrained (by the disappointment of all other means of
safety) to take up; We the Commissioners and Committees of both Kingdoms have
thought fit, besides that Declaration (a Copy whereof we herewith send) lately
emitted in the name of the Kingdom of Scotland for the satisfaction of the
people, concerning the entrance of this their Army, to take more particular
notice of you the chief Gentlemen and Commanders, hoping likewise, that things
of so great and considerable consequence will find with you, such entertainment
as may answer the weight and importance of them.

We will not so much wrong the cause we have undertaken, as to go about, after
so many evident demonstrations of the necessity of our present posture, to
dispute it with you, but rather instead of arguments, we think it reasonable to
acquaint you with our well weighed resolutions, which are, through the
assistance of that God in whose cause we are engaged, and whose strength alone
we trust in, with our utmost industry and hazard, to endeavor the prevention
of that imminent danger not only of corruption but of ruin, which we see
evidently intended to the true Protestant Religion by the Popish and
Prelaticall faction, who never wanted will, but now think they want not
strength and opportunity to accomplish it, as also the rescuing His Majesty's
Person and honor so deeply and unhappily entangled in the Counsels and
practices of them, whose actions speak their ends to be little better then
Popery and Tyranny, and the redeeming the Peace and Liberty of his Dominions;
in which the Irish Rebellion, and the sad and unnatural divisions in England
have made so great a breach.

To the accomplishment of these so just and honorable designs, we have reason
to expect the concurrence of all men who either owe or pretend a due love to
their Religion, King, and Country, and shall be very sorry to want yours; but if
misinformation, or any other unhappy grounds, shall so far prevail with you,
as to reckon us in the number of your Enemies (which certainly we are not, if
you be friends to those ends mentioned in our Covenant) and if instead of that
concurrence with us, which we wish, and hope to deserve, we find from you
opposition and Acts of hostility. The Law of nature, and your own reason will
tell you what you are to expect.

We only add, that though it will not a little trouble us, to see men
withstanding not only us but their own good and happiness. Yet it does in
good measure satisfy us, that we have not neglected this or any other means
to the best of our power, or understanding, to prevent those inconveniences and
mischiefs that may arise from those Acts of force, which we shall be
necessitated unto.

Subscribed at Barwick, the 20th of January, 1643. by the warrant and in the
name of the Committees of both Kingdoms by us Your Friends Argyll. W. Armyne.

Sir Thomas Glemhams Letter in Answer to the Marquess of Argyl's and Sir
William Armyne's.
My Lord,
I Have this day received yours, together with one to the Gentlemen of the
Country, and having communicated with them, we return you this Answer.

That without the sight of that Letter we could not have bin induced by any
flying rumors to believe, that the Scottish Nation, or the prevailing party for
the present in that Nation, would have attempted an Invasion of England: so
contrary to the Laws of God, of Nations, of both Kingdoms, and especially to
the late Act of Pacification: so opposite to their Allegiance and gratitude to
His Majesty, to that neighbourly love which they pretend, to that discreet care
which they should have of their own safety.

We could not otherwise have imagined that they who by His Majesty's goodness
enjoy a settlement of their Church and State, according to their own desires,
should needlessly and ingratefully imbroyle themselves in a business that
concerns them not, forfeit their Rights, disoblige His Majesty, and hazard the
loss of their present happiness.

No Order of any Committee or Committees whatsoever of Men or Angels, can give
them power to March into the Bowels of another Kingdom, to make offensive
War against their natural Sovereign, upon the empty pretense of Evil
Counselors, who could never yet be named. And for the English agents, we
cannot believe them to be any Commissioners Lawfully authorized, either by the
Parliament, or by the two Houses, or yet by the House of Commons, whence so
many of the Members are expelled by partial Votes, so many banished by
seditious tumults, so many voluntarily absent themselves out of Conscience,
where desperation or want of opportunity to depart, or fear of certain
Plunder, are the chiefest Bonds which hold the little remnant together from
dissipation, where the venerable name of PARLIAMENT is made a stale to
Countenance the pernicious Counsels and Acts of a Close Committee.

For Subjects to make foreign Confederacies without their Sovereigns assent,
to invade the territories of their undoubted King, to go about by force to
change the Laws and Religion established, is gross Treason without all
contradiction; And in this case it Argues strongly, who have been the
contrivers and fomenters of all our troubles. No Covenant whatsoever, or with
whomsoever, can justify such proceedings, or oblige a Subject to run such
disloyal courses. If any man out of Ignorance, or Fear, or Credulity, have
entered into such a Covenant, it binds him not, except it be to repentance.
Neither is there any such necessity, as is pretended, of your present posture,
your selves cannot allege that you are any way provoked by us, neither are we
Conscious to our selves of the least intention to molest you.

Those ends which you propose are plausible indeed to them who do not
understand them, the blackest designs did never want the same pretenses; if by
the Protestant Religion, you intend our Articles, which are the public
Confession of our Church, and our Book of Common Prayer established by Act of
Parliament, you need not trouble your selves, we are ready to defend them with
our Blood: If it be otherwise, it is plain to all the World, that it is not the
Preservation, but the Innovation of Religion which you seek, how ever by you
styled Reformation. And what calling have you to reform us by the sword? We do
not remember that ever the like indignity was offered by one Nation to another,
by a lesser to a greater, That those men who have heretofore pleaded so
vehemently for Liberty of Conscience, against all Oaths and Subscriptions,
should now assume a power to themselves by Arms to impose a Law upon the
Consciences of their fellow Subjects. A vanquished Nation would scarce endure
such Terms from their Conquerers.

But this We are sure of, that this is the way to make the Protestant Religion
odious to all Monarchs, Christian and Pagan.

Your other two ends, that is the Honor and happiness of the King, and the
public Peace and Liberty of His Dominions, are so manifestly contrary to your
practice, that We need no other motives to withdraw you from such a Course, as
tends so directly to make His Majesty Contemptible at home and abroad, and to
fill all His Dominions with Rapine and Blood.

In an Army all have not the same intentions, We have seen the Articles agreed
upon, and those vast Sums and Conditions, contained in them, as if our
Countrymen thought that England was indeed a Well that could never be drawn
dry, and whatsoever the intentions be, We know right well what will be the
consequents: if it were otherwise, no intention or consequent whatsoever can
justify an unlawful Action. And therefore you do wisely to decline all
disputation about it, it is an easy thing to pretend the Cause of God, as the
Jews did the Temple of the Lord, but this is far from those evident
demonstrations, which you often mention, never make.

Consider that there must be an Account given to God of all the blood which
shall be shed in this quarrel. The way to prevent it, is not by such
insinuations, but to retire before the Sword be unsheathed, or the breach be
made too wide; you cannot think that we are grown such tame Creatures, to
desert our Religion, our Laws, our Liberties, our Estates, upon command of
Foreigners, and to suffer our selves and our Posterity, to be made Beggars and
Slaves without opposition. If any of ours shall join with you in this Action,
we cannot look upon them otherwise then as Traitors to their King, Vipers to
their native Country, and such as have been Plotters or Fomenters of this
design from the beginning. But if misinformation or Fear, has drawn any of
yours ignorantly or unwillingly into this Cause, We desire them to withdraw
themselves at last, and not to make themselves accessaries to that deluge of
Mischief which this second voyage is like to bring upon both Kingdoms.

FINIS:

