AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST MELANCHOLY. OR, A Treasury of 53. Rare Secrets and Arts
Discovered, by an Expert Artist, RICHARD AMYAS.

Licensed, and Entered according to Order.

Tooth or Stump without pain.



London, Printed for the Author, 1659.

I Have often heard, a Bow still bent, grows weak,
And too much Worldly Care the Heart does break.
Pleasure with Profit any one can brook,
Which you may find both in this little Book:
And if it may but kind acceptance find,
These harmless Lines will recreate your Mind.
THE TABLE.
1. A Most Excellent Receipt against Melancholy; Comforts the Stomach, opens
the Liver, helps headache, breeds good blood takes away faintness of the
Heart, Swoonings, expells Melancholy, prevents Madness, makes a man merry, and
a cheerful countenance; and taken at night, takes away all Fancies and
Melancholy Dreams. 2. A most rare Powder to keep teeth from perishing, to
fasten loose teeth, to restore the Gums wasted, to keep teeth white, or prevent
toothach, and make a sweet breath; It is the same I sell and use. 3. For the
Toothache. 4. Toothache of a hot Cause. 5. A Remedy to take away Corns. 6.
Another absolutely for Corns. 7. How to take away Warts. 8. An easy way to
take away Hair from any place without cutting. 9. How to make Hair to grow. 10.
How to clear your feet from sweating. 11. How to take spots of Oil or Grease
out of Clothes. 12. For to make a red Face fair and clear. 13. For to make a
most excellent ^all to take away the Spots, Freckles, Red-Pimples, and heats
out of the Face and Hands: It also takes spots out of Linen or Woollen* It is
the same I make and sell. Prob. 14. A good way to make your Hands fa^r and
smooth. 15. A Receipt to make a Horse have a good hoof. 16. How to make a
Powder that will make good Ink in an instant and holden between the Teeth, will
ease the Tooth ache. 17. A Receipt how to write your name on a piece of Paper
and to burn that piece of Paper and the same letters to appear on the back of
your hand. 18. How to make Rats forsake a House. 19. A Receipt to make Pigeon
come to your Pigeon-house. 20. A good powder to lay among clothes; to make them
have a gallant scent. 21. A Remedy for any that are troubled with Lice, or
Nits, or Itch. 22. To make a Light that will continue always. 23. How to roast
a Capon carried in a Budget at a saddle bow, in the space of riding 5 or 6
miles. 24. A Receipt for a Cook, with one spit, and one fire, to keep one Capon
raw, the second boiled, the third roasted. 25. To make Pease leap out of the
pot as if they were mad. 26. A device to make a Chamber to appear full of
Adders and Snakes. 27. A notable way to catch Fleas in a trap. 28. How to make
one that he shall not sleep but tumble and toss all night. 29. How to make
yellow Ink. 30. How to make green Ink. 31. An excellent Receipt for an ache or
strain in Horse or Man. 32. A good Drink for a Cough or Cold. 33. To purge the
Breast from Rheum. 34. An approved Medicine for the biting of a mad Dog. 35. A
very good Ointment for Ache or Pain. 36. A very good Plaster for an Ache,
Bruise or Strain. 37. A Salve to heal a cut or broken Head. 38. To make Fish
drunk, so that they will tumble to the side of the water; so that you may take
them, if you be but nimble enough; else not. 39. How to catch Crows, Kites,
Magpies, Jackdaws, alive with your hands. 40. To make a blown Bladder dance and
skip about the Room. 41. To make a Penny-loaf tumble, and skip up and down of
it self. 42. To make a Ring dance on a Table of it self. 43. How to make an
Apple to move on a Table of it self: A fine secret. 44. A fine Conceit, to
clear a Room of drunken or rude company. 45. An excellent Receipt, for
clearing, and preserving; and also to cure the Pin, Web, or Pearl in the Eye.
46. To clear the Eyes of Pin, Web, or Blood-shotten; and to clear the Eyes. 47.
A fine Receipt to make Gentlewomens Faces fair smooth, and youthful. 48. A
special Receipt to make Hens lay Eggs all Winter long. 49. A notable Receipt,
to make a Tell-tale or Gossip, to trump about the house an hour or two,
shooting off the great Guns. 50. A pretty Conceit, to fright the people of a
house, and make them believe there are Spirits walking in a Room. 51. An
excellent approved Rece to make a lean Horse fat quickly. 52. For to make an
admirable good Balsome for green Wounds, Aches, Bruses, or Straynes. 53. To
make the Ointment for, Burns and Scalds, and for all inflammations, coming of
hot Causes.
An Antidote against Melancholy.
1. A most Excellent Receipt against Melancholy; Comforts the Stomach, opens
the Liver, helps headache, breeds good blood takes away faintness of the
Heart, Swoonings, expells Melancholy, prevents Madness, makes a man merry* and
a cheerful countenance; and taken at night, takes away all Fancies and
Melancholy Dreams.
R. Purging syrup of Apples 3. ounces. Syrup of Bawme 2. ounces. Syrup of
Epithimum 2. ounces. Syrup of Hart's-tongue 1. ounce. Syrup of Rheubarb 1.
ounce. Venice-Treacle half an ounce. Oil of Nutrugs 1. dram. Gold 8. grains.
Borage-water 2. ounces. Beazer-water 1. ounce. Mix all together, and take half
a dram of Saffron, and Seena, and 2. or 3. grains of Ambergris, and lay it
in a little clean linen Cloth, and let it lie in the bottom of the glass,
and slop it close; you may take a spoonful at Night, or more, and 2. or 3.
spoonfulls in the Morning, in a glass of White Wind warm, and walk an hour
after it.

2. A most rare Powder to keep teeth from perishing, to fasten loose teeth, to
restore the Gums wasted, to keep teeth white, or prevent toothache, and make a
sweet breath; It is the same I sell and use.
Take Pomistone 1. ounce, red Coral half an ounce, Mastich a quarter of an
ounce, Cortix Granitorum a quarter of an ounce, Hartshorn burnt half an ounce,
Pearls a quarter of an ounce, Cynamon half an ounce, 6. Cloves, Cuttle-bone
half an ounce, Benjamin a quarter of an ounce, Crystal a dram, Myrrh a dram,
Ambergris, grains; make this into fine powder, and keep it close stopped in a
box, and when you use it, wet a cloth in white Wine, or Vinegar of Squills, or
in Rose Water, dip it into the powder, and rub the teeth morning and evening,
and after meat wash your mouth with white Wine, or Rofe-water after it; or for
lack of either, Spring Water: it preserves the teeth from perishing, causes a
sweet breath, hardens the Gums, fastneth the teeth, and keeps them always
white and sound. Probatum.

3. For the Toothache.
If the Tooth be hollow, wet a little Cotton in the essence of Cloves, or in
the Oil of Sulphur, or Originum, and put it into the hollow tooth, it eases.

4. Toothache of a hot Cause.
Boil the root of Henbane in White Wind Vinegar; bruise the root, and hold it
between the Teeth, as hot as the party can suffer it, and hold your head over
the fume of it, and keep your head warm, it wonderfully eases.

5. A Remedy to take away Corns.
Take black Soap and Snail; of each a like quantity; stamp them together,
spread it on Leather, and renew it every fourth day for a fortnight; it cures.

6. Another absolutely for Corns.
Pare the Corn very near, but fetch no blood; then drop a drop of Oil of
Sulphur upon the head of it; then dress it with the Oil of Balsom; bind it
close with a piece of thin Leather. Dress it often till it be whole.

7. How to take away Warts.
Take Orpiment, Quicklime, and Vinegar; make a Plaster, and lay it on the
Wait; but make a defensative about the Wart, that it touch not the skin.

8. An easy way to take away Hair from any place without cutting.
Take unslaked Lime; sleep it in a little water; then take two parts of the
said Lime, and one part of Opimentu^: make them together in form of a Paste,
apply it to the place till it be somewhat dry: then take it off, and the Hair
will come away with them very easily, then wash the place with Rose water, and
anoint it with Oil of Roses, or Unguentum Album.

9. How to make Hair to grow.
Take half a pound of Aqua-Mellis, in the Spring time of the year; warm a
little of it every morning when you rise, in a Sawcer, and tie a little Sponge
to a fine Box-comb, and dip it in the said water; and therewith moysten the
Roots of your Hair in combing it, it will grow thick and curled shortly.

10. How to clear your feet from sweating.
Take Pin-dust, and the Moss of an Oak dried, made into fine Powder, of each
like quantity; a fourth part of Sanguis Dragonis, a little burnt-Allum, a
little Bolarmoniack; make it into Bals with the White of an Egg and Rose water:
and when you have occasion, grate a little of it, and strew it in the bottom of
your Socks, it dries the sweat up presently: It Is the same I sell for that
purpose.

11. How to take spots of Oil or Grease out of Clothes.
Take the bones of Sheeps-feet, burn them almost to ashes: and bruise them to
Powder, and put it upon your spots, and lay all before the Sun when it shines
hottest: when the Powder becomes black, lay on fresh in the place, till it suck
out the spots, which is done in very short time.

12. For to make a red Face fair and clear.
Distill the Spawn of Frogs in March in a common Still: wash the Face often
with the water, it cures the same.

13. For to make a most excellent Ball to take away the Spots, Freckles,
Red-Pimples, and heats out of the Face and Hands: It' also takes spots out of
Linen or Woollen: It is the same I make and sell. Prob.
Take a pound of Castle-soap* scrape it thin, Camphire 3 Ounces; 4 Ounces of
Fullers-Earth, Bitter-Almonds 2 Ounces, clean pilled and beaten, 6 yolks of
Eggs, balf an ounce of Mercury-water, the juice of a Lemmon or two,
Damask-Rosewater, as much as suffices; work it well into Paste, and roll it up
recording to Art, and put them to dry in the shade.

14. A good way to make your Hands fair and smooth.
Steep bitter-Almonds a Night in Rosewater and Vinegar; and peel them, and heat
them very well in a Mortar with 3 or 4 yolks of Eggs; use this Paste to wash
your face and hands often, it will make your skin smooth and fair; Also to wear
Dogs-Leather Gloves fine and thin, rubbed well before a fire with some sweet
Oils: as Oil of Herodium, Oil of Roses, Oil of Almonds, is very good to keep
your hands white and smooth.

15. A Receipt to make a Horse have a good hoof.
Take Cow Dung, Dogs-grease, and Chimay-foot; mingle them, and beat them,
anoint and bind them on to the Horse hoof, and stop the Foot with the same
cold, it will both cause the Hoof to grow, and also make it tough.

16. How to make a Powder that will make good Ink in an instant, and holden
between the Teeth, will ease the Toothache.
Take Galls and Copporas, as much of one as the other, beat it into Powder, put
into water, and on the sudden it will be very good Ink. Likewise, if you strew
of the same Powder upon the white Paper, and write thereon with fair water, the
Letters will appear presently black.

17. A Receipt how to write your name on a piece of Paper, and to burn that
piece of Paper and the same letters to appear on the back of your hand.
To do this, first write the Name on a small piece of Paper; then privately
write the same Letters on the back of your hand, with a Pen-ful of your own
Urine, which none can perceive: then burn that Paper* and as it is almost
burnt, clap it upon the back of your hand, and rub it, and there will strangely
appear the same letters on the back of your hand, with admiration to the
Beholders.

18. How to make Rats forsake a House.
Burn Assafettida in the Roof of the House often, and the Rats will forsake and
fly from the House in a short time.

19. A Receipt to make Pigeons come to your Pigeon house.
Roast a salt Bitch, her belly being stuffed with Cummin-seed, Bay Salt, and
Assafettida, put in a Pan in your Pigeon-house.

20. A good Powder to lay amongst Clothes, to make them have a gallant scent
Take an handful of dried Roses, an Ounce of Cypress, an Ounce of Beng-wine,
and Storax, Cinnamon and Cloves, an Ounce; Lignum Aloes, half an Ounce; Lignum
Rodium, half an Ounce; Flowers of Lavender, half an Ounce, Musk three grains,
Sivet two grains.

21. A Remedy for any that are troubled with Lice or Nits, or Itch.
Take Laurel Oil, or Oil De-bay, an Ounce; half an Ounce of Quicksilver well
killed: mix it together, and anoint where the Vermin is, and you shall be
suddenly cleared from all such things.

22. To make a Light that will continue always.
Take the Liquor of Glowworms, mix it with a quarter of the quantity of
quicksilver, and put it into a Vi^l, hang it up in the Room, and you may see
all night long by the light.

23. How to roast a Capon carried in a Budget at a saddle bow, in the space of
riding 5 or 6 miles.
Having made it ready and larded it, stuff it with butter, then heat a piece of
steel, which may be formed round, according to the length of a Capon, and big
eno^gh to fill the belly of it, then step it with butter, and wrap it up well,
and enclose it in a budget, and you shall have your desire. I have heard that
Count Man^field was served most times with such made ready in this manner, for
that it loses none of its substance, and is dressed very neatly.

24. A Receipt for a Cook, with one spit, and one fire, to keep one Capon raw,
the second boiled, the third roasted.
Provide a long Spit, and put thereon 3. Capons, or 3. Fowls, then make a long
fire, and lay them thereto, and let one turn the Spit; then on that you would
keep raw, put continually cold waters, and on that which you would boil, pour
scalding water: and that you would roast, baste it with butter, and so bread it.

25. To make Pease leap out of the pot as if they were mad.
Put a Quill or two of Quicksilver into the pot, and all the Pease shall leap
out of the pot.

26. A device to make a Chamber to appear full of Addors and Snakes.
Kill a dozen Adders and Snakes, and take the oil of them, and mix it with wax,
and make a Candle, light it in a Chamber where rushes are, and the rushes will
appear to be Adders and Snakes about the Room.

27. A notable way to catch Fleas in a trap.
Take a piece of Tin made like a dripping-pan, the length and bigness of a
small trencher, then put over it 5 or 6 small wires made fast to the Tin, bowed
like the hoops over a wagon, then fill the Tin with Venice Turpentine mixed
with a little honey, then put this Trap in the Bed in the morning when you
rise, between the sheets, and there you shall find the Fleas stick in the
Turpentine, as thick as Wasps in a Honey-pot.

28. How to make one that he shall not sleep, but tumble and toss all night.
Pound Roch-Allome very small, and cast it into the Bed: or else take a little
Cowitch, and rub the Collar of the shirt. Or cut Horse-hair very short, cast it
into the Bed: white hairs will not be seen.

29. How to make yellow Ink.
Take Saffron and Argil, and temper it with Gum-water, and it will appear
perfect yellow.

30. How to make green Ink.
Take Verdigrease and Argile, grind them together on a Marble stone with a
Moldor, temper it together with Gum-water, and it will be a perfect green.

31. An excellent Receipt for an ache or strain in Horse or Man.
Take a Bullocks Gall, black Soap, Aqua-vitae, oil of Spike, boil it together,
and rub it in warm. Probatum.

32. A good Drink for a Cough or Cold.
Take a quart of Ale, and put thereto a good sprig of Rosemary, another of
Hyssop, a little Liquorice and whole Ginger, boil it, and put to it half a
quarter of Sugar, as much butter as an egg, and brew it together, and let the
party drink thereof going to bed-ward, and keep warm.

33. To purge the Breast from Rheum.
Take Hyssop, Figs, and Honey, boil them in White Wind, from a pottle to a
quart; Drink it in the Evening, hot; in the Morning, cold.

34. An approved Medicine for the biting of a mad Dog.
Take Garlic, Salt, and Rue; stamp it together, and in manner of a Plaster,
lay it to the Sore: Give the Party the Powder of Crabs claws mixed with Treacle,
in manner of Pills; often wash the Wound with Plantain water and the Powder.

35. A very good Ointment for Ache or Pain.
Take Rosa-Solis, Sallet-Oyl, and Neats-foot-Oyl, a little Oil of Spike; boil it

36. A very good Plaster for an Ache, Bruise or Strain.
Take an ounce of Oxycrotia, half an ounce of Burgandy-pitch, half an ounce of
stone-pitch, a dram of Galbanum, a quarter of an ounce of Deer-suet, a quarter
of an ounce of Wax, a dram of Euforbium, half an ounce of Neats-font Oil; melt
it gently together, and make a Sear cloth.

37. A Salve to heal a cut or broken Head.
Take a handful of Valerian, a handful of Plantain, a handful of Mouse-ear,
a handful of Comfry, a handful of Hyssop, a handful of Bettony, and Clowns,
Ale-heal; stamp it small, boil it in a pint of Oil, and strain it, and add to
it Frankincense, Deer-suet, and Turpentine; Beeswax and Colophony 1. ounce,
make it up according to art; it cures almost any green wound. Prob.

38. To make Fish drunk, so that they will tumble to the side of the water; so
that you may take them, if you be but nimble enough; else not.
Take Occulus Inde, make it into paste with Wheat slower, Suet, Honey, and the
juice of Henbane, a little red-lead to color it; throw it into the water, and
as many as take it, tumble up; so you may have dainty sport.

39. How to catch Crows, Kites, Magpies, Jackdaws, alive with your hands.
Take a piece of raw-flesh, or Liver, make it in small pieces, that they may
swallow it, then take the Powder of Nux Vomica, make holes in the flesh, put in
the same, and lay it where they haunt; and presently after they have eaten of
it, they will take to a Tree as soon as they can, suddenly totter and fall
down, where you may with your hands easily take them; but they will quickly
recover again.

40. To make a blown Bladder dance and skip about the Room.
Take Quicksilver in a Bladder, and lay the Bladder in a hot place; and it
will afterward skip from place to place.

41. To make a Penny-loaf tumble, and skip up and down of it self.
Take a Quill of Quicksilver, and put into a very hot loaf, and it will tumble
and skip about the Table of itself.

42. To make a Ring dance on a Table of it self.
Fill a hollow Ring with Quicksilver, and heat it in the fire, and throw it on
a Table, and it will dance and skip about the Table, without touching.

43. How to make an Apple to move on a Table of it self: A fine secret.
Cut an Apple in the midst, and in the one half make a round hole, putting
therein a black Beetle, and so lay the half on the table, and it will move
about the table.

44. A fine Conceit, to clear a Room of drunken or rude company.
Take a Chafingdish of clear Charcoals, or live Wood-coals; throw Giney Pepper
on it, and put it under the table, and they will both cough, sneez, fart, and
spew, if they have drunk hard. You may do the like with Assa-foetida, and
Euforbium. The same put into a hollow Tooth, eases the pain.

45. An excellent Receipt, for clearing, and preserving; and also to cure the
Pin, Web, or Pearl in the Eye.
Take the Juice of Rue, the juice of Pearl-wort, the juice of Eyebright, the
juice of Fenel, and drink this first in the morning, and last at night: it
clears the fight mightily.

46. To clear the Eyes of Pin, Web, or Blood-shotten; and to clear the Eyes.
Take the Gaul of a Cock, and the Gaul of a Hare, a little clarified, or
Maiden-honey, 3 or 4 drops of the juice Sullendine, Dasies, and Housleck; mix
as much white Sugarcandy as a great Pease, white Cop^as as much, and Allom as
much, in fine Powder: mix these with a spoonful of white Rose Water; put it
into the Eyes with a feather; it cures the Pin and Web, Pearl, or Inflammation
in the Eyes, and mightily cleare^h the sight. Approved.

47. A fine Receipt to make Gentlewomens Faces fair smooth, and youthful.
To do this, take Whelps before they can see; beat them all to pieces in a
Mortar: then put it into a Still before they be cold, with half a pint of good
Femetory water, or the juice of Femetory, the juice of a Lemon, half an ounce
of Oil of Almonds, or 20 Almonds bruised; the yolks of 4 Eggs hard roasted and
bruised; distill this, and keep the water close stopped in a Vial, wash the
Face often: its excellent to take away the Morphew and Freckle, and to make the
Face look fresh and lovely,

48. A special Receipt to make Hens lay Eggs all Winter long.
To do this, take the tops of Nettles when they be seeded, and keep them dry,
and give a little of the same with Bran, or Barley ground, wet with Beef-broth,
or strong Beer: and mix good store of Hemp Seed with it, and give to your Hens,
and they will lay you Eggs all the Winter long.

49. A notable Receipt, to make a Tell-tale or Gossip, to trump about: the
house an hour or two shooting off the great Guns.
Take the Liver of a Hare dried in an Oven, and made into fine Powder; mix it
with the Eggs of yellow Ants, or Pismires, put it into the Parties broth, or
into Beer with Sugar and Nutmeg to discolor it: then an hour after employ the
party to draw off a straight pair of Boots, or the like Exercise, and he will make
cracking off about bravely.

50. A pretty Conceit to fright the people of a house, and make them believe
there are Spirits walking in a Room.
To do this, take a black or gray Cat; then take 4. Walnut-shells, put Pitch in
them, beat it, and put on every foot one; and tie a certain piece of rotten
wood, which you shall find to shine in a dark night about the Cats Neck, and
put her in a boarded Room, she will so trample about the Room, to the amazement
of them that know not what you have done; and the moist piece of rotten wood
(if they peep in at the keyhole, or chink of the door) it will seem to be like
fire.

51. An excellent approved Receipt to make a lean Horse fat quickly.
First, let him have his fill of the best Hay that can be had, often changed,
not long to be blowed before him. Secondly, let him be very well dressed twice
a day, and gently rode a quarter of a mile at a watering; then let him have his
fill of sod Barley, with good store of Hemp Seed mixed with it twice a day, and
once a day his fill of Oats and Hemp Seed mixed with the best Beer or Ale; and
doubtless your horse will be suddenly fat: always provided the horse be but
sound: and for that, take-advice of the Farrier, for I will not hinder his
Trade.

52. For to make an admirable good Balsome for green wounds, Aches. Bruses, or
Straynes.
Distill the Berries of the Wood-bind in September, when they be ripe, take a
pint of the Water, 3 Ounces of the Oil of Hipericon, a dram of Oil of Wax, a
dram of Oil of Terpentine, a dram of Olium Philosophorum, gum climy an ounce
Olibanum an ounce; Bees wax 3* Ounces, melt them gently together: drop it warm
unto the wound.

53. To make the Ointment for Burns and Scalds, and for all infl^mations,
coming of hot Causes.
Poplar buds 1 pound, flowers of Violets and Navel-wort ana. 3* Ounces, fresh
Swines-grease 3 pound, the tops of Rasb^ries, the leaves of black Poppies,
Mandrake, Henbane, Nightshade, Le^tce, Housleek, Burdake; of each 3 Ounces,
Sheeps dung a handful, Dwarfe-Elder a handful, stamp all together in a Mortar,
infuse it in a pound of Rose Water; boil it, and strain it, put an Ounce of
Bees wax to it, make it an Ointment according to Art.

I have many things, and some extraordinary, which I cannot communicate, but
them that have need of my help, and will make use of me, I glory not in knowing
or doing much, but in doing well that little which I undertake.

1. I take forth hollow teeth or roots, though never so short, with wonderful
dexterity and ease. I make smooth and even teeth that are uneven. I put in
artificial teeth in the fore part of the mouth. Hollow teeth that you would not
have drawn, I can stop them. I can fasten loose teeth.

I have as good a secret as the world affords, infallibly to make teeth
perfectly white and clean, be they never so black or rusty, in half an hour. I
cannot choose but convince their ignorance, that are against drawing of hollow
teeth or roots, by reason that all the art in the world cannot make a hollow
tooth sound again, nor hinder it from infecting the next adjoining teeth in
time. Hollow teeth breeds stinking breath, a Canker in the mouth, and other
infirmities, and their intolerable aching is able to bring one into a dangerous
Fever; all which may be shunned, by taking forth such teeth and stumps neatly:
if it be true, that it is good to take the broken from the whole; or that one
scabbed sheep may spoil a whole flock; or, it is good to repair imperfections
of nature with Art; then all that I have said herein is true.

I have a most singular Art in the Drawing forth Corns from the Feet or Toes in
a most excellent manner, with the whole substance in length of a Clove, or a
Barley-corn, without the appearance of blood, or putting the party to the least
pain at all; applying to them a Plaster to hinder the growing of them again.

Some will say, There is danger in cutting of Corns: The Professor says so
too. But you must conceive it is by those of no Judgment; for they miss the
Corn, drow blood, cut the Nerves, and so it Gangrenes: which no Patient can say
by him, he having performed this Art to thousands in most parts of this Land.

He has a Remedy for the Itch, no ways offensive to the Party, but sweet and
pleasant.

The Professor has likewise several Remedies which are profitable for all
sorts of people, and good for all these Infirmities here mentioned: which if
you know the goodness of them, you would not be without them for ten times the
price of them: And with every one of them you have a printed Note to apply
every Remedy in its right use and manner. These Remedies will held good 40
years. If you take them together, you shall have them for a shilling: but any
one single will cost six pence. The Balsome you may have from a six-penny-Box,
to a Five-shillings Pot, etc.

1. The first is a most rare and precious approved Balsome, which is excellent
good for the curing of these Diseases following, It is most excellent for all
green wounds, and cuts where no bone is broken. Also for all Aches and pains of
the Joints, numnesse or stiffnesse of the Limbs, chaps in the Lips or Hands,
Skoats or Bruises, broken-heads, Gouts, Sciatica, or Cramps, old or new.

2. Is an Ointment for Burnings and Scaldings, and re cool all pains coming of
Hot cause, it dies and cools all kind of Scabs, Sr. Authonie's Fire,
Kingworms, sore Breasts, red Faces, Shingles, good to make one sleep, the
Temples being anointed with it.

3. Is a Sear-Cloth or Plaster for Corns, to give ease to such as cannot come
to have them drawn: it is good for Bruises, Squots, Boyls, Imposthumes, good to
draw out Splinters of Woods, or Thorns in the flesh.

4. Is an excellent Remedy for the Toothache, to harden the Gums, to fasten and
preserve the Teeth, and make a sweet Breath.

5. Is to purge the head of superfluous Humors to strengthen the Memory, and
to clear the Sight, and good for Hearing.

6. It is a Powder to make Black and Yellow Teeth White, to preserve them from
perishing, and to cause a sweet Breath.

7. It is a Powder for sore Eyes that itch and burn by reason of hot Rhumes;
also for the clearing and preserving of the Sight.

8. Is to clear your Feet from Sweating or Chasing.

The Professor has likewise that most excellent Purging powder, called
Panchimagogum, or General Purge, good in all sorts of Agues Leprosies, Scabs,
Itch, Worms, Dropsies; for the Heaviness or Giddiness of the Head; it holds
good sixty years.

He has that excellent Licoratia Magistralis, invented by the Eamous Doctor
Butler of Cambridge; It Is excellent against Consumptions, Tissick, shortness
of Breath, Rising or Wind in the Stomach; good upon Travel.

He has excellent Balls for Heats in Face or Hands, 10 fetch out Spors of Oil
or Grease out of Linen, Woollen, or Silk, or lay amongst Clothes.

Also curious Pomanders, to wear or lay amongst clothes, made in manner of a
Heart: And small Cramp-Rings to wear for the preventing of the Cramp.

To conclude, as there is no man free from aspersions and slanders of envious
tongues, I shall think my self sufficiently vindicated, that the discreeter
sort will suspend their Judgments at the first view, until they hear what
others will say that have been under my hands; for I desire no other praise but
what they can justly give me.

And hough some Rusticks there be ^ut of ignorance or malice, or not for lack
of both, speak their pleasure of me behind my back, because I use some civil
recreation to recreate my self, my friends* and sometimes when my Patients are
melancholy through pain, to make them merry, with some few feats of slights of
hand. I have here discovered many Secrets for your recreation at your leisure;
so I wish all men to speak as they find by me, I shall rest your loving friend
to serve you in what I may.

Richard Amy^^

FINIS.

