An Account of the late Great and Famous Victory Obtained over Two Thousand
High-Land Rebels, In the North of Scotland, by His Majesty's Forces, Commanded
by Sir Tho. Levistone, WITH A particular Relation of the Killing Five Hundred
of the Enemy, and the Taking of One Huodred Prisoners; of which Number, were
several Officers of Note.
Licensed, and Entered according to Order.

JUst now the Council received the following Account, by an Express from Sir
Thomas Levistone (who Commands a part of our Forces in the North) that he
having intercepted some Letters which discovered some Intriegues of the Rebels,
and the measures they designed to take; he immediately assembled his Forces,
which consisted of Eleven Hundred Men, and marched all Night after the Enemy,
who were to the Number of Two Thousand: And, in their March, were forced to
Ford a River up to their Armpits; Colonel Levistone, and other Officers, (to
encourage the Soldiers) went in first: Our Men came up to the Enemy before day,
and Attaqued them in their Camp; which was so great a surprise to them, that
they immediately fled; and, in pursuit, there were Killed about Five Hundred of
the Rebels, and One Hundred taken Prisoners, (among which were many
considerable Officers of Note) with little loss on our side. The Prisoners gave
Sir Thomas an account, That they expected daily to be joined by a great many
more; of whom the Colonel designs to go in pursuit of; and doubts not, but in a
very little time, to be able to give a very good account of them.

On Saturday advice was brought to Edenbrough, from the West, giving an
account, That a Ship Landed in Gallaway, near the Mouth of the Water of Oar,
sent from the late King James, from the Bay of Dublin, with Men, Arms, and
Ammunition, etc. they Landed some Men in the Night, undiscovered, who have gone
through the Country with several Letters from the late King James. The Country
People in that Place being in a posture of Defense, the next day seized the
Vessel in the River, with the Arms and Ammunition, etc. and Sixteen Officers,
who are sent for by the Council. This Ship carried but Four pieces of Cannon.

As the happy News, which almost daily arrives from Ireland, of the good
Success His Majesty's Forces meets with there, both by Sea and Land, is
sufficient to encourage the hopes all good Protestants, and Well-wishers to the
Interest of great Britain have, of a speedy and entire Reduction of that
Kingdom, to the subjection of the Crown of England; So the no less happy
Accounts we have received of His Majesty's Affairs in the Kingdom of Scotland
confirms all good Men in their Belief of the speedy and entire Settlement of
that Kingdom, in the true Foundations of Peace and Unity; notwithstanding the
Roman Catholics and other Jacobites, Enemies to the Interests of their
Majesty's, and these Kingdoms, by their no less Impudent than false and
scandalous Reports, which they daily spread abroad, with design to Poison the
Minds of many well-meaning People, and persuade them to the contrary: For as
hitherto Almighty God has blessed His Majesty, and His Arms with Success, in all
His no less Just and Righteous, than Great Undertakings; so we doubt not but He
will continue his Blessing unto Their Majesty's, and Their good Subjects, and
frustrate all the Designs of their Enemies. For a continuance of whose Blessing
is, and ought to be the Prayers of all good Men.

London, Printed for W. D. in Bartholomew's. Close. 1690.


