THE Ancient Legal Course AND Fundamental Constitution OF THE PALACE-COVRT OR
MARSHALSEA.

Together with the several Charges of all Proceedings there; And its present
Establishment: Particularly set forth and Explained.

Whereby it will appear of what great Authority this Court has been in all
Times.

London, Printed for Robert Crofts at the Crown in Chancery Lane. 1663.

To the READER.
IN order to a satisfactory account of this Court and of this endeavor in this
Treatise, to show the nature of its Jurisdiction, its method of Proceeding, and
the Clients (both Paintiffes and Defendants) Charge therein, it will be
requisite, though in a preposterous way, first to show the annihilation or
nulling of it in late Times of the Usurpation, and the beginning of its
constitution, and the reason thereof.

Indeed, that Disauthorizing By-blow of the Independent Anarchy, might very
well be forgotten here, were it not that the injurious continuance of that
Illegal Suppression, had almost defaced the Memory and Record thereof, and the
ruin of this Judicature changed into and become its crime; which was imputed
to be its chargeableness, uselesness, dilatoriness and vexation; whereas indeed
it was guilty of none of those, nay of nothing less.

All the fault was, this Court was one of the nearest Appendixes of the
prerogative of the Crown; and if continued in its primitive use, would be a
remain and relic of Monarchy and Majesty, which they could by no means endure
should be in the eyes of the People; which for the accomodateness and benefit
of its Jurisdiction, did seek for speedy redress from thence rather than
elsewhere. They likewise enviously knew, that this Court was a standing
Monument of that respect and reverence all Parliaments and the Laws have
throughout all Times had for the King, allowing His Court the circuit and
compass which is now called the Verge of Twelve Miles round about it; so that
in effect there is no Potentate or Prince in the World can show a Palace of
such an extent, nor can any the most magnificent Seraglio compare with it; as
my Lord Bacon has most elegantly observed in his Charge to the Grand Jury of
this Court.

Nor did they take care alone for the outward State and Splendor of the Kings
Palace in these dimensions, but for the inward Honor and Glory thereof, by
preserving it as much as was possible, free from disorder and all manner of
Enormity, by erecting this Judicature, appointing and giving extraordinary
power and authority to the Steward of the Kings Household, the principal Judge
here, to determine all manner of Causes criminal, judicial or capital arising
within the Verge; and this they strengthened and backed with several laws as you
will perceive in the ensuing Treatise; which said power is now again happily
returned into the same channel And so much may suffice to be spoke of its
Original Institution.

As to the Practice, the Disuse thereof having made it something difficult, and
the charge of Suit there suspectful of innovation, I have given an account of
the several Rates thereof, that by a due compare it may appear they are the
same as ever; and also to let the Reader see the easiness of them beyond the
charge of other Courts; its dispatch and present ending of all Suits; and that
finally its Authority is as Authentic and as sovereign as any other, it being
a kind of peculiar King's Bench.

Both the Name, Nature, and Proceedings thereof, are fully declared in the
ensuing Tract, to your Perusal and Acceptance whereof we Commend it.

Vale.
THE PALACE-COVRT.
IT is requisite first, that the Nature of this Court be understood, and that
more especially, because the late Usurpation had endeavored to race out and
obliterate the Jurisdiction thereof, merely for being consistent and suited to
the English Laws, and more especially to the Kings Person, His Court, and His
Royalties, the soul and intrinsic matter of Government.

First, of the Antiquity thereof.
FOr the Antiquity of this Court, it is as ancient as any other of the Kings
Courts, if not ancienter: Curia sequitur Regem, The Court follows the KING;
and it is therefore peculiarly called the Palace Court, referring to the KINGS
residence; and this Court does more especially concern Him, as appears by the
Statute of 4 H. 6.8. directing us to the Statute of the Twenty eighth of Edward
the First, Coke cap. 18. Jurisdiction of Courts.
Articuli super Chartas; wherein several Provisions were made for the advantage
thereof. No doubt it is of as long standing as the Monarchy of ENGLAND. Fleta
says it is next to the High Court of Parliament.

The Marshal and Marshalsea, whence so called.
FOr it will appear by the term and name of this Court, that it was of the
same near beginning with the British Sovereignty: For as to the derivation of
the terms Mareschallus and Marescalcia, they are Saxon words, which
nevertheless tend much to the proof of the Antiquity and Honor of our Nation,
seeing other Nations have the same Offices and Officers; so that in respect the
name is derived from our Language, as tha^ of our Ancestors, i^ is apparent
other Nations took the same from us

My Lord Justice Coke says further, That th^s Court has its Foundation from
the Common Law, and the Jurisdiction thereof is original and ordinary.

The Jurisdiction and authority of this Court, and first of its Name.
ALbeit in this Court the Steward and Marshall are Judges, and the Steward has
the precedence, yet the Court is called the Marshalsea for three causes.

First, the Marshall is not only a Judge, but sees that Execution, which is
the Life of the Law, be done.

Secondly, his Office is in force both in time of War and Peace.

Though the Constable of England be the chief Nobleman (which from the Family
of the Bohuns Earls of Hereford, descended by Inheritance upon the Person of
Edward Duke of Buckingham, Attainted the thirteenth Year of Henry the Eighth,
in whom that too masterly an Honor fell) and has the precedence in other
places, of the Marshal of England, yet notwith-standing though their Power and
Authority were so untempered, yet the Marshal-sea carried it through the
Current of the Laws.

The Authority of the Court.
THe Authority of this Court was larger formerly then now, according to the
Prerogative of our former Princes, but in the Twenty Eighth year of that noble
Prince Edw. the First, by an Act entitled Articuli super Chart as, the
Jurisdiction was limited and divided into three Qualifications;

First, to determine all Covenants, Contracts, and Trespasses, wherein both
Plaintiff and Defendant were of the Kings Household.

Secondly, all Contracts and Covenants, which should arise in Controversy, if
either of the Parties were of the said Household.

Thirdly, for all manner of Trespasses and Personal Actions arising within the
Verge of the Kings Household.

Several Variations have been made by Acts of PARLIAMENT since, but now the
Establishment is as follows;

This Court is kept every Friday in the Courthouse on St. Margarets hill in
Southwark, and may be held in any other fit place within 12. Miles of
White Hall.

The Judges, are, the Lord Stewards of the Kings House, and the Knight Marshal
for the time being, and the Steward of the Court or his Deputy.

The proceedings in this Court is by Capias or Attachment, which is to be
served upon the Defendant, by one of the Knight Marshalls men, who takes Bond
with such Sureties for the Defendants appearance at the next Court as he will
answer for, at his peril, the Bail are to be sufficient Housekeepers within
the Jurisdiction of the Court, sufficient to the Action.

And these Processes are to be had at the Office of the same Court, appointed
by the Steward, which every Minister of the Court or Marshalls-man can direct
you to.

The Defendant upon his appearance must put in two sufficient House keepers,
living within the Jurisdiction of the Court, to pay the Condemnation in Court,
which if he neglect to do, the Plaintiff may have the Bond taken for his
appearance Assigned over to his use, and so Arrest the Defendant and his
Sureties.

The next Court after the Babyle taken and accepted of by the Plaintiff, the
Plaintiff ought to declare and set forth the cause of his Action, and if he do
not declare the Defendant may have an Execution against him for his costs and
charges, but if the Plaintiff do declare against him then they go on to Issue
and Trial by a Jury, who live within the Jurisdiction of the Court, according
to the course of the Common Law.

In four or five Court days, commonly all your Actions come to Trial, so the
proceedings of this Court are very quick and speedy, and at small Charges.

The Actions tried there, are of Debt, Trespass, Battery, Slander, Trover, and
all other Actions personal whatsoever.

The Fees of this Court I have here set down as they are inserted in the
Letters Patent.

The ordinary Fees of the Palace Court of Westminster, to be paid by the
Plaintiff.

IMprimis, for every Writ or Precept of Capias or Attachment to the Steward and
Marshal, One Shilling.

To the Prothonotary for Writing the Writ, Two Pence.

To the Marshalls man for executing or serving it, One Shilling Four pence.

The Attorneys Fee upon every Declaration, Issue, Venire Facias, and Habeas
corpora Juratorum. One Shilling Eight pence.

For the Warrant of Attorney to the Prothonotary. Four Pence.

For making of every Declaration, and Entry thereof to the Prothonotaries
Clerks, One Shilling.

For the Fee of the Court upon every Declaration, Issue, and knowledge of
Satisfaction to the Steward and Marshall, One Shilling four pence.

For the marking and Filing of every Declaration, and Entry of every
Sasisfaction to the Prothonotary, eight pence

To the Prothonotary for entering of every Issue, and every Verdict and
Judgment, One shilling.

The Cryers Fee upon every Issue, Four pence.

For every Writ of Venire facias, Habeas corpora, distringas Juratores; and for
every other Writ of Execution and others, One shilling and eight pence.

To the Prothonotary for writing of every of them, Four pence.

For the Return of every one of them to the Prothonotary, One shilling.

To the Marshalls Man for executing every Venire facias, Two shillings.

For the executing of the Habeas Corpora, and distring as Juratores, to the
Marshalls man, One shilling and six pence.

To the Crier for warning of the Jury, Six pence.

For every Verdict and Judgment thereupon, to the Steward and Knight Marshall,
Three shillings and Four pence.

To the Prothonotary for entering every Bail, Five pence.

To the Keeper of the Prison thereupon, A Penny.

For the Attourneys Fee upon every Bill of Issue, Venire facias, and Habeas
Corpora Juratorum, One shilling and eight pence.

For the Copy of every Declaration to the Prothonotary, One shilling.

For every Issue on the Defendants part, to the Steward and Marshall, One
shilling and Four pence.

For every Warrant of Attorney for the Defendant, thereupon to the
Prothonotary, Four pence.

Accidental Fees.
FOr every Rule of Court to the Prothonotary, Four pence.

For the Drawing of every Declaration, Plea, Rejoinder, Sur-rejoynder, Moratur
in Lege, for every Sheet to the Prothonotaries Clerk, Four pence.

For the Inrolment thereof, to the Prothonotary for every Sheet, Eight pence.

For every Writ of Subpena to the Steward and Marshall, Two shillings.

For the writing thereof, and of every december tales, and of every Retraxit to
the Prothonotary, Six pence.

For the allowing of every Writ of Procedendo, to the Steward and Marshall, One
shilling and eight pence.

For the Entry thereof, and of every Continuation, and for the Assigning of an
Obligation for Appearance on Record to the Prothonotary, Eight pence.

To the Marshalls man for keeping the Jury, One shilling.

To the Hall-keeper, One shilling.

To every Councellor at Law for his Fee, Five shillings.

To the Crier for Proclamation of every Jury, Six pence.

To the Attourneys Clerk for every Bill of Costs, Eight pence.

For ordinary Fees to be paid by the Defendant.
FOR the Knight-Marshalls Fee upon every Arrest, Three shillings and Six pence.

To the Prothonotary thereupon, Ten pence.

To the Keeper of the Prison thereupon, Four pence.

To the Turn-key thereupon, Four pence.

For every Bail in Court, and every Bill to the Steward and Knight Marshall,
One shilling and Four pence.

For executing every Writ of Scire facias, to the Crier, One shilling.

For the Copy of every Record, to the Prothonotary for every Sheet thereof,
Four pence.

To the Crier for every non pros, four pence.

For every Venire facias, Habeas corpora, or Distring as Juratores per proviso,
to the Steward and Knight Marshall, One shilling and Eight pence.

For writing thereof to the Prothonotary, Four pence.

For executing thereof, to the Crier, Two Shillings.

For the Return thereof to the Prothonotary, One shilling.

For the keeping the Jurors thereof, to the Crier, One shilling.

For every Non pros, and every Allowance of Habeas Corpus, Writ of privilege,
Supersedeas, and every other such like Writ, to the Steward and Marshall, One
shilling and Eight pence.

For the Entry of every one of them, on Record, to the Prothonotary, Eight
pence.

For the Return of every such Writ to the Steward and Marshall, One shilling
and Four pence.

For writing the Return thereof, for every Action to the Prothonotary, One
shilling.

For the Allowance of every Writ of Error, to the Steward and Marshall, One
pound.

For the Prothonotary for Entry thereof, Two shillings.

For every Writ of Supersedeas, Two shillings and Six pence.

For Certifying of Records to the Prothonotary for the writing of every Roll of
Parchment thereof, Six shillings and eight pence.

For Correction of every Prisoner, in Execution, to the Keeper of the Prison,
One shilling and Six pence.

For the Prothonotaries Clerk's Fee thereupon, One shilling and Six pence.

To the Turnkey thereupon, One shilling Four pence.

For the Prothonotaries Clerks Fee for the Entry of the Cause of Suit, and
Release of every Prisoner, Four pence.

Upon every Obligation of Appearance of the Prisoner to the said Clerk, Six
pence.

HAving thus set down the Fees of this Court, that all Clients may know their
certain charge without the trouble or danger of Exaction, and to show the
reasonableness and easy Rates thereof to what is used in other Courts, it
will not be amiss after this litigant part of this Court is thus described, to
speak a little of its Jurisdiction by way of Indictment, and reference to to
the Peace.

You may know therefore, as the Learned Lord Bacon says in his Charge given to
the Verge, that these four things are cognizable and Inquirable in this Court,
as well as in any other of the Kings Courts at Westminster or else, for all
Matters and Trespasses committed within the circuit of the Verge

First, All manner of Offenses against God and the Church, contrary to the
Statutes made against them, as Sacrilege, Blasphemy, Recusancy, Separation, and
the like.

Secondly, All manner of Offenses against the King and the State, (more
particularly the Person of the King) as Treasons, Conspiracies, Riots, Tumults,
and other lesser Offenses of the same kind and nature, and Generally whatever
disturbs the Public Peace.

Thirdly, All manner of Offenses that are capital, and reach to the Life of the
Offender.

Fourthly, All manner of Offenses not capital, extending to Fines,
Imprisonment, and Loss of Limbs, Pillory and Whipping.

All these particulars were usually heard and determined at Set times in the
Year, by the Lord Steward himself in person, but of late by Commission, which
as it has taken something from the Honor, so has it added to the Strength
and Execution of its Authority; so that you may see, as has been said, that
this Court has always been had in great veneration and respect.

It remains that something should be said touching Attatchments, Sequestrings,
Distresses. Replevins, etc. as likewise of Wagers of Law, Demurrers, and other
such Legal Defenses; and the Method and way of Proceeding in this Court in such
Cases; but because there is little variation here, from other Courts in the
same Matters, save a due disproportion in Fees, not very considerable; and
because the practice is more frequent in Corporation-Courts than here they are
omitted in this little Treatise, which is intended for no prolix Repetition of
that which every person is supposed to have some understanding in, or may
easily attain it by former Directions.

Thus have I concluded the Account of this most Ancient and most Honorable
Court, having been the larger in deducing its Jurisdiction, because of the
petty mean conceit and estimation people generally have had thereof, (though
its Decrees are as valid and binding as of any of the Benches of Law at
Westminster) desiring the Reader to accept of this Endeavor in good part, and
wherein it is not fully satisfactory, to help it by his own observance, which a
small practice or Suit will enable him to make therein. But before I have done,
you must note, that as to Juries and Jurors this Court is not limited to
Freeholders, but may be served by any sufficient Inhabitants within the Verge;
which also is not limited and confined in this or any other Residence of the
Kings person, which alone makes the place he stays at a Court; but wherever it
shall happen for pleasure, convenience, or other causes, as Sickness,
Infection, and the like, this Jurisdiction follows His abode, and may be
executed in as full and ample manner within any 12 Miles of His abode and
habitation; though for the Honor of the Kings ancient Mansion, near this His
Imperial Chamber, the Cities of London and Westminster, in all removes of the
King and His Court, the Law proceeds here, and Trials are had, and Judgment
and Execution as of course, and as used before.

But there must be a special care used by the Marshals men and other his
Officers, that they pass not the Verge in doing or executing any Process or
Judgment; for there is a Statute to the contrary, made upon complaint of the
exorbitant actings and unwarrantable proceedings in former times: And as it is a
Maxim and chief Sanction of the Law, that the King can do no wrong, so
especial care is to be had in the administration of this Judicature, that His
Subjects receive none, being so nearly under his eye and protection, and his
Court supposed by the Law to be a sanctuary and shelter from all injustice and
oppression: So that there is no fear of injury and Fraud in this Court, in
regard the King is in some sort more personally present here than in other his
Judicatures.

I thought to have added the Names of the dictinct Offices and Officers
belonging to this Court for further satisfaction, but I must not swell the
Book, which has exceeded its first designement.

FINIS.

