EFFIGIES R. P. LANCELOTI ANDREWS Episcopi Wintoniensis


Holy Devotions, WITH Directions to Pray; ALSO A brief Exposition UPON The
Lords Prayer, The Creed, The Ten Commandments, The 7 Penitential Psalms, The 7
Psalms of Thanksgiving.


Together with a Letanie.

By the right Reverend Father in God Lancelott Andrews, late Bishop of
WINCHESTER.

The Fifth Edition.

LONDON, Printed for A. Seile over against St. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet.
1663.

Christian Reader.
THou art here presented with another Manual from the Dead. I need not tell
thee who it is, that being Dead, thus speaks; For, when thou shall have
perused these Pious and Holy Institutions, this Dove with Silver Wings, and
whose Feathers are gold, Thou will easily conclude what Hand it was, and who
the Noah that sent it forth of the Ark, to find out the dry Corners of this
Land, that so, there it might build a Nest, not for it self, but for others,
with that Olive Branch which it carries in its Mouth.

Or if happily thou may not here know the Parent by the Child (because
indeed the Child has been educated under a kind Foster-Father, who dressed it
up in three former Editions, and might have done in a Fourth, but that he now
sleeps in the Lord.)

Know now; that the True Father, and primary Author of these Devotions, was the
Glory of this Church, the Great and Eminent Andrews; a Person of such
Learning, Charmingness, and Sanctity, that in aftertimes there will be some
to make it their VVish, O that they had lived in those Days, when they might
have seen Dr. Andrews, in the Schools, Bp. Andrews, in the Pulpit, St.
Andrews, in the Closet.


And thus the Parentage of this Book, (which like that of Cyrus) was, for
diverse years, concealed under a Shepherds Cottage, (a good and faithful
Shepherd he was that concealed it) comes now to be vindicated to its own
Nativity; And the Child being of full Age, desires to be known abroad in the
World for her Fathers Daughter, the Daughter of her True, not Supposed Father.

If it were not too great a Presumption for so sacred a Person to be commended
by so mean a Pen, I should be ready to say of our Lancelott Andrews, as
Erasmus said of his Ioannes Vitrarius, that had he lived in the Infancy of the
Gospel, and been a known Contemporary to Saint Paul, he would (happily) have
chosen Him, even before Barnabas or Timothy, to have been his Companion in his
Labors and Ministry.

O the vast interest which this great Luminary had in those two Equal Sisters,
Prayer and Preaching. Preaching and Prayer!


I am bold to call them Equal Sisters, because the use of Preaching is to teach
us all how to Pray; And the Benefit of Prayer, is to enable some, after what
manner to Preach: Though, it will here be Confessed, that as the times now
stand, the best Weapons of the Church are Tearfull Prayers.

And therefore, since the Press of late has grown even Wanton in the Printing
of Sermons (which serve to make Plagiary-Preachers of such that never would,
never could be Scholars.

So now, I shall endeavor an expiation of that Crime, by making it sweat under
the Happy Dew of Penitential Prayers and Devotions. And

A Devout Heart and Tongue has much the Advantage of a Ravenous Ear.

But Christian Reader, not to keep thee longer from being upon thy Knees, Know,
that This Preface is no way intended as a project to advance the sale of this
Edition. No, This Hallowed structure is a work of more sanctity, than to allow
of any Brokage. What is just Policy elsewhere, would here be Simony. I now
intend not my own Benefit, as Thine. It Is a work of Charity more than of
Merchandise.

And the Design is chiefly, that whilst our Churches are become Schools of
Disputation, My shop may be converted to an Oratory.

Wherein yet I hope, amidst the many Conditions of Persons which thou art here
invited to pray for, thou will not leave him, whose endeavors are at thy
service,

Thine, Henry Seile.
Holy Devotions, OR DIRECTIONS To Pray, etc.
A General Exhortation to Gods service.
THe minds of many (I will not say of most men) are so distracted with the
cares of this world, and so much addicted to the pleasures thereof, and the
thoughts of God and goodness are so far from them, that they seldom or never
think, either of the danger they are obnoxious to, or the loss they are like to
sustain, by the neglect of those things which tend to their Salvation. So that
the saying of our Savior to Martha, may well be applied to them, Thou art
troubled with many things, One thing is necessary. And if they would take into
serious consideration what they hazard, nay what they lose by neglecting this
unum necessarium, that one thing necessary, without doubt they would withdraw
themselves from the immoderate cares and pleasures of this transitory world,
and in due time bend their thoughts to that course, which in the end would
bring rest to their Souls. Cicero.
The Heathen man could say, Tempus est de illa perpetua jam, non de hac exigua
vita cogitare. It is now high time, not to think of this short life, but of
life eternal. And Longum illud tempus cum non ero, magis me movet, quam hoc
exiguum, quod mihi tamen nimium longum videtur. That length of time when I
shall cease to be, more moves me, than this short time, which yet seems too
long. In our temporal estate we are careful enough, in the beginning of our
days, to settle our selves in a course of life, for our maintenance and
preservation. Why should we be so backward, so remiss, in those things which
concern us nearer, even the eternal good and happy estate of our souls, but
look to that betimes too? For if our beginning be good, there is good hope of
the time succeeding. Let us therefore lay a good foundation, like wise
builders, Esa. 55.6.
and seek the Lord while he may be found, and fix our cogitations wholly upon
him, love, honor, obey him, and apply our selves wholly to his service. This
we are bound to do in diverse respects.

For the excellency of Gods Divine Perfection.

Being defective in nothing.

Perfect in knowledge. Job: 37. 16.11.17.


Past finding out.

Be perfect, Mat. 5.48.
as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect.

Which Perfection though no Heart can comprehend, or Tongue express fully; Yet
we may make some estimate of it, by some of his Attributes, whereof we shall
give you a brief sight.

S. Augustine speaking of his perfection, says, that

He is immutable, yet changing in all things. Always in action, ever quiet.
Filling all things, not concluded in any thing. Great without quantity. Good
without quality.

Patet quam sit admirabilis, cum omnibus linguis sit indicibilis, omnibus
cordibus sit incogitabilis.

Excedit supereminentia Deitatis, non solum usitati eloquii, sed etiam
intellegentiae facultatem.

It appears how admirable it is, since no tongue can express it, nor any heart
conceive it.

The Transcendency of the Godhead exceeds not only the usual strength of
eloquence, but of understanding likewise.

He is Absolute or Simple. Without Composition. Without Body.

Spiritual.
He is all Eye, He is all Ear, Tert. 1.
He is all Hand,
Invisible.
Because he sees all things. Because he hears all things. Because he works
all things.
He is all Foot, because he is every where,

When you hear him named, conceive him to be a substance without beginning or
end. Simple without mixture.

Infinite.
Not to be circumscribed to time or place.

Whither shall I go from thy presence, etc. Psalm. 139. 6, etc.


Heaven is my Throne, Esa. 66 1.
etc. Where is the place of my rest?

Do not I fill Heaven and Earth, says the Lord? Jer. 23. 24.


The Spirit of the Lord fills all the world. Wisd. 1.7.


Deus ubique est, and totus ubique est. S. Hier.


AEterna stabilitate in seipso manens, S. Aug.
totus adesse rebus omnibus potest, and singulis totus.

God is every where, and wholly every where.

By eternal stability remaining in himself, he is wholly in all things, and
wholly in every thing.

Immortal.
I live for ever. Deuteronomy. 31.4


Dan. 4 34.
I honored him that lives for ever.

Apoc. 4 9
He only has immortality.

1 Timothy 6. 16.
Solus Deus est immortalis, quia non est per gratiam, S. Hier.
sed per naturam.


Without beginning.

Ps. 90. 2.
Thou art God from everlasting.

Without end.

102. 27.
Thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail.

Dan. 7.13.
He is called the Ancient of days.


Not to be changed.

1. In his Nature.

Ps. 102.26
Thou shall endure.

Mal. 3. 6.
I am the Lord, I change not.

Jam. 1. 17.
Every good and perfect gift comes from the Father of lights, with whom is no
variableness, neither shadow of changing.

2. In his Promises and Decrees.

Pro. 19. 21
The counsel of the Lord shall stand.

Esa. 46. 10
My counsel shall stand.

Heb. 6. 17.
The immutability of his counsel, says the Apostle.

Tit. 1. 2.
God has promised, who cannot lie.

Non mutatur Deus, qui unus atque idem est, and mutari non potest. S. Hier.


God is not changed, being one and the same, incapable of change.

Wise.
Nothing hid from him.

The Lord knows the ways of the righteous. Psalm. 1. 7


The Lord knows the thoughts of man. 94. 11.


His wisdom is infinite. 147 5.


No searching of his understanding. Esa. 40 28


Lo, thou know all things. Joh. 21. 17


Known unto God are all his works. Act. 15 18


O the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God. Romans 11.
33.


The Spirit searches all things. 1 Co. 2. 10


All things are naked and open to his eyes. Heb. 4. 13


God knows all things. 1 John 3. 20


Holy.
No evil or iniquity in him.

Who is like unto thee, O Lord, glorious in holiness. Ex 15. 11.


None holy as the Lord. 1 Samuel 2. 2


The holy One of Jacob. Esa. 29. 23


The holy One. 40. 25.


Abac. 1.13
Of purer eyes, than to behold evil.

Esa. 6. 3.
Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord of Hosts.

Apoc. 4. 8. Josh. 24. 19.
He is an Holy God.

Lev, 11. 44.
I am Holy, says God himself.


1. In himself.

Whatsoever is in him is Truth.

Jer. 10.10.
The Lord is the true God.

Joh. 17.3.
It is life eternal to know thee true God, etc.

Romans 3.4.
Let God be true, and every man a liar.

1 These. 1.9
Ye turned from Idols to serve the true and living God. Apoc. 15. 3. 16. 7.


2. In his works.

Dan. 9.14.
Just and true are thy ways.

Psalm. 119. 137. 75.
Righteous in all his works.

Just art thou, O Lord, and righteous are thy judgments.

3. In his words.

Psalm. 12 7. 117. 2.
The words of the Lord are pure.

The Truth of the Lord endures for ever.


Absolutely.

Not participating from any other.

1. In himself.

1. There is none good, but God. Thou art Good. Mat, 19. 17.
2. Author of all good to others. Ps. 119 68
2. Every good and perfect gift comes from the Father of lights. Jam. 1. 17.

The Earth is full of his goodness. Psalm. 33. 5.


Glorious.
Ye shall see the glory of the Lord. Exo. 16.7. 10.


The glory of the Lord appeared.

The sight of his glory was like consuming fire. Exodus 22. 17.


The glory of the Lord appeared to all the people. Lev. 9. 23.


The glory of the Lord filled the House of God, 2 Chro. 5. 14.


The whole Earth is full of his glory. Esa. 6. 3.


His glory is above the Heavens. Ps. 113.4.


Powerful.
Working all things in all.

Almighty. Genesis 17.1. 43 14.


He does great, unsearchable, and mavelous things without number. 2 Cor 6. 18.


The fabrique of the Universe is the work of his hands.

The Heavens beautified with Stars. Job. 5. 9.


The Earth spacious and adorned. Ps. 104.24.


The Sea Full of variety of his riches,

The Sea Stored with Fish, etc.

Psalm. 33.6. 74. 17.
All made of nothing, but by his word.

Thou have prepared the Light and the Sun.

102. 25.
Thou in the beginning have laid the foundations of the Earth.

Heb. 11.3.
Through Faith we understaud that the World was ordained by GOD.

Clem. Alex
Mundus hic est veluti magnus liber, divinae Majestatis and gloria opera
explicans.

This World may be compared to a great Volume, wherein are contained and
expressed the works of the Divine Majesty and Glory.

Apo. 19. 16.
He is King of Kings, Lord of Lords.

Upholding all the Pillars of the Earth.

Moving the Heavens.

Changing the Seasons.

Dividing the Waters.

Bringing forth the Winds, as out of his Treasury.

S. August.
But in this, and all other his Attributes, Verius cogitatur quam dicitur, We
may better couceive of them than express them: And we speak best of his worth,
when with a silent admiration we hold our peace, according to that of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 65. 1. which St. Hierom has translated, Tibi silet omnis laus
DEUS in Sion.

Yet though the custom of the world is to respect men and things, either for
the goodness in them, or for the benefit which accreweth by them; Yet the
latter works most: For let a thing be never so good, if it bring no profit,
it is the less regarded.

Let us therefore take a view of some other of Gods Attributes, and consider
whether we have not sufficient cause to serve him, for the benefits we reap by
him.

And first of that which comes by him by the

I. Creation.
In which he made Man, and all things else for his service.

1. He made him his chief delight.

He made him after his own Image. Genesis 1.27.


He made him little lower than the Angels, and crowned him with glory and
honor, putting all things in subjection under his feet. Psalm. ^ 5, 6.


This wrought admiration in David.

When he was not, he made him a Man, not a Beast, but such a Creature as may
enjoy Eternity with Him.

He made the Heaven and rested not. He made the Earth and rested not. ^. Ambr.
He made the Sun and rested not. He made the Moon and and rested not. He made
the Stars and rested not.
But when he made Man he rested, that he might have one Creature whose sins he
might remit.

2. He made all things for the service of Man.

For him The Sun rises and goes down. For him The Moon increases. For him
The Stars arise. ^ Psalm. 8.
For him Beasts, Fowl and Fish. For him Corn and Herbs. For him Hills and
Mountains. For him Valleys and Fields. For him Rivers and Flowers. For him
Times and Seasons. For him Angels and Archangels. For him Principalities and
Powers. ^
For him Thrones and Dominions. For him Cherubim and Seraphin.
If therefore every one be a debtor for that which he has received, Arist.
and that (with the Philosopher) Dii and Parentibus nunquam reddatur
aequivalens; A Man can never render that which is equivalent to that which he
receives from GOD, or his Parents; Man ought to remember his Creator with
thankfulness as often and as long as he breaths.

If I be a Father, where is my honor? Mat. 1. 5.


Hac condition gignimur, ut generanti nos Deo justa and debita obsequia
praebeamus. We are begotten upon this condition, to behave our selves in all
due respect and observance to God who begat us.

II. By his Providence and Conservation.
Thou, O Man, have no more power to subsist without him being made, than to be
created before thou were made.

Thou were but once made, but oftentimes preserved from Fire, from Water, from
Sickness, from Enemies, etc.


He defends us under the shadow of his wings. Psalm. 944


He gives his Angels charge over us, Psa. 91.^.
as in the example of Elizeus. 2 Reg. 6.


Ps. 103.13
He is as careful over us, as a Father over his Children; Esa. 49.15
a Mother over hers; Jo. 10.11.
a Shepherd over his Flock. Esa. 40,11


Eze. 39. 10.
He governs all things by his Providence.

Ps. 23.1.2.
Not a Sparrow falls on the ground.

Wis 14.3.
He feeds the young Ravens.

Mat. 10.29
He gives us meat in due season.

Ps. 147 9.
Cast your care on him, Ps. 145.15
for he cares for you. 1 Pet. 5 7.


Act. 17.28
In him we live, move, and have our being.

To end this with St. Ambrose.

If thou art sick, he is thy Physician. If thou art weak, he is thy strength.
If thou fear death, he is thy life. If thou desire Heaven, he is the way.
If thou shunnest darkness, he is the light. If thou want food, he is thy
nutriment.

Ps. 144.5.
Blessed are the people, whose God is the Lord.

III. By his Love.
Pro. 8.17.
Delighting in the works of his hands.

Joh. 18.21
Loving them that love him.

1 John 4. 10. 19.
Nay when we loved not him, he first loved us.

Esa. 65.1.
I am found of them which sought me not.

Nay, when we were his enemies. To. 58.10


And that with a perpetual and everlasting love, Jer. 31. 3.
especially manifested in our Redemption.

Which degree of his Love, and the benefit arising by it, no tongue or pen is
able to express.

Saint Bernard says, S. Bern.
If I owe to God all that I am for my Creation, what shall I give further for
my Redemption? In my Creation he gave me to my self; in my Redemption he gave
himself to me, and restored me to my self.

1. And not only in respect of the Act it self.

2. But in regard of the Manner.

1. Man being fallen from blessedness by our first Parents sin, God in mercy
had pity on his estate, and was reconciled to him, was content that he should
be redeemed from the bondage and penalty of sin, from everlasting death of body
and soul, and this was the Act it self.

2. The Manner of it was extraordinary.

Even by his Son, his only Son, God from all eternity, taking ours, and not the
Angels nature upon him.

Suffering death; the worst, the most accursedst, of the Cross, even when we
were his enemies.

Whereby we were not only freed from what we deserved, Punishment, eternal
death of Body and Soul: But made capable of what we could not expect,
everlasting felicity, and life of both.

Is not this love without parallel.

That we that were enemies, children of wrath, Io. 3. 1.
and eternal perdition, should now be called the Sons of GOD.

This is a greater act of love, this manifests Gods love to us more than our
Creation.

For by his word he created us without weariness; But our Redemption cost more,
his only Sons dearest blood.

1 Pet. 3.18
Who suffered for our sins, the just for the unjust.

Isa. 53.12.
And poured out his soul unto death.

Gal. 3. 13.
Was made a curse for us.

Phil. 2.8.
Humbled himself to the death of the Cross.

To redeem us from the death and curse of the Law.

Ps. 111.9.
He sent Redemption unto his people.

He redeemeth Israel from all his sins. 139. 10.


He gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity. Tit. 2.14.


IV. By his Patience toward Men daily provoking him in all ages. 1 Pet. 3.20

In the days of Noah. Ge. 15.16.


The Amorites. Ps. 95.10.


The Israelites forty years. Act. 13.18


The Ninivites and many others. Jonas 3.


He is Long suffering, Exo. 34.6.
He is Slow to anger. Ps. 16.15. 103. 8. Joel 2.13. Jonas 4.2.

V. By his Mildness.
Lenity in Correcting. Neh. 9.17


Not utterly consuming those whom he corrects. Neh. 9.31.


And it is of his mercy that we are not consumed. Lam. 3.22


In his anger remembering mercy. Abac. 32.


Not delighting in punishment. Ezec. 18. 23 32. 33. 11.


Not utterly taking away his mercy, Ps. 89 33. 103. 10.


Not dealing with us after our sins.

VI. By his Mercy and Grace to Sinners.
Be merciful, as your Heavenly Father is merciful. Lu. 6. 36.


The Father of mercy. 2 Cor. 1.3.


He was ever so. Psalm. 22.4.


Ephesians. 24.
He is tender and compassionate, rich, Romans 5. 20
and not sparing in his mercy.

Ps. 130 7.
Bringing many benefits with it.

Luke 1 78.
Begetting us again by it.

Ps. 106.43
Preserving us from dangers and sickness.

Ma. 18.27.
Preserving their souls.

1 Pet. 1.3.
Saving us by it, which is the chief and greatest benefit mankind can desire.
Ps. 97.10.


Phi. 2.27.
And as he is rich in mercy, by pardoning sinners, Ps. 79.10.
so in his favor too, Tit. 3. 5.
promising good to his Servants.

Pro. 8.12. 8. 21.
I will love them that love me,

I will enrich them.

Ps. 97.10.
The Lord will preserve the souls of his Saints.

102. 28.
The Children of his Saints shall continue, and their seed stand fast in his
sight.

Mar. 10. 29, 30.
No man that has forsaken house, etc. for my sake, but he shall receive an
hundred fold.

A hundred fold here, by inward graces, if not by outward dignity.

For deceivable things, they shall receive true.

For doubtful things, they shall receive certain.

For corporal things, they shall receive spiritual.

For transitory things, they shall receive permanent.

Their cares shall be turned into security.

Their tears into joy.

Their trouble into quiet.

Their perturbations into inward peace.

The righteous cry, and the Lord hears them, and delivers them out of all
their troubles. Ps. 34.16.


He that touches them, touches the apple of his eye. Zac. 2. 8


Not a bone of them shall be broken. Ps. 34.19.


For God rewards secundum, though not propter opera.

And reward makes all works seem easy; to the Husbandman in his toil, to the
Merchant in his danger.

The reward of the good shall not fail. Ecclus. 2. 8.


The Lord is good to them that trust in him.

He sends health and wealth to his servants. Lam. 3.25. Pro. 5.8.9.


He never fails them that seek him. Ps. 9. 10.


His reward is plentiful to them that fear him. Ps. 1. 31.


Now let us take a view of all these benefits.

1. Of our Creation, and in that of all things for our use.

2. Of Gods preservation and providence over us.

3. His love to us.

Before we loved him.

Loving him.

While we were his enemies.

With an everlasting love.

In such a large extent, by Our Redemption.

In the act. when we were in bondage of the Devil. Sin.


In the manner, by his only Son, by his death most ignominious and cruel.

To free us from deserved death.

To estate us in undeserved happiness, even life everlasting.

4. His Patience to us daily offending him, and new crucifying his Son again.

5. His Mildness and Lenity in correcting us to Amendment, not to Destruction.

6. His Mercy, in forgiving our offenses, in promising protection and rewards
to his servants.

And tell me, if these be not sufficient motives to persuade us to his service,
if our hearts be not hardened?

And if we ask what it is to be the servants of God?

The Answer is plain and easy; for as it is in the case of a Master Temporal,
so is it in the Spiritual.

To do the Will of our Lord and Master.

This is the will of GOD, even your sanctification. 1 These. 43


To fear and keep his Commandments. Deu. 5.29


This Commandment is double.

1. To keep innocence, and to do that which is right. Ps. 37.38.


2. And to do no evil. Eclus. 7.10.


They are put both in one Verse by God himself.

I have set before thee life and good, death and evil. Deuteronomy. 30. 15.


And by the Prophet David.

Flee evil, and do that which is good. Ps. 37.27.


Now that his Precepts should be kept, there is great reason.

Because they are just and holy. Romans 7. 12


All his Commandments are just. Ps. 119.75


True and righteous are thy Judgments. Apo. 17.7.


Just art thou, O Lord, and righteous are thy Judgments. Psalm. 119.


1. For the first part of his Will. To keep that which he commands. To follow
that which is good. Many motives there are to persuade us to it.

1. For the peace which good men have, 1. With God, They are reconciled to him.

Romans 5.1.
We have peace with him.

2. With Men.

When the ways of man please the Lord, R^o. 16.7.
he will make his enemies also at peace with him.

3. With our Selves.

Having mortified our affections, and placed them on heavenly things, we are
troubled with nothing, but all things are quiet about us.

Psalm. 112. 165.
Great is the peace that they have which keep Gods Law.

Isa. 48. 18. 32. 17.
The work of Justice shall be Peace.

The Kingdom of GOD is righteousness, and peace.

4. To. 14.17.
4. In our Consciences, inward Peace.

2 Cor. 1. 12.
The testimony of a good Conscience was Saint Paul's rejoicing.

Pro. 15. 15 S. Hier.
A good Conscience is a continual feast. It shuns no man's sight.

Tully.
The Heathen had some feeling of this Peace, A life well spent brings such
comfort, that either sickness touches them not, or the grief of it little
troubles them.

Socrates said, Socrates.
That he lived without perturbation, whose conscience reproved him not.

And Byas, Byas.
That he lived without fear, that had a good conscience.

And though such a man have fear, it is not desperate or grievous, but
religious and holy.

Which kind of fear, disquieteth not, but comfort: For the best hope is
joined with such a fear.




2. For the comfort they have in the Holy Ghost.

There is sprung up a light for the righteous, Ps. 97: 11:
and joyful gladness to such as be true hearted.

The voice of joy and health is in the dwellings of the righteous. 118. 15.


They shall be satisfied with the plenteousness of thy house, 36. 8.
and thou shall give them drink of thy pleasures, as out of the River.

All virtues and graces of the Spirit assist them, as the blood of the veins do
the heart.

1. Faith, whereby they discern the good and evil of the life to come; and
adhere to the promises of God made in Christ Jesus. To. 8. 18. 1. 20. 5 10
So that they account not the afflictions of this life worthy of the glory
which shall be revealed to them. Gal. 5. 5. Act. 10.43 Jer. 31.34


2. Hope, whereby they expect their reward joyfully.

Rejoicing in hope.

Romans 12. 12.
Who so trusts in the Lord, mercy embraces him on every side.

Ps. 31.11. 40. 5.
Blessed is the man that has set his hope in the Lord.

Esa. 30.18.
Blessed are all they that wait for him.

Heb. 10. 35.
Cast not away your confidence, which has great reward.

3. Love to God.

Which breeds contempt of the World.

Phil. 3. 8.
Accounting all things dung and loss to win him.

Jos. 23.11.
Take good heed therefore to your selves that you love the Lord your God.

Romans 5.5.
The Love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy, Ghost.

To. 8. 35.
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, etc.

4. Alacrity in Obedience to his Commandments.

The heart of the wise meditateth obedience. Pro. 10. 8.


This is better than sacrifice. 1 Reg. 15 22.


We will do all things which the Lord has commanded us. Exo. 19.8.


I have set God before me, Psalm. 16.


Wherefore my heart was glad. 9, 10.


My heart and flesh rejoice in the living God. 84. 2.


5. Humility in all their actions, which makes them acceptable in the sight of
God.

When we have done all we are able to do, we are to say that we are
unprofitable servants.

He has regarded the lowliness of his Handmaiden. Luc. 1.48.


He has exalted the humble and meek. 52.


Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the Earth. Mat. 5. 5, 6.


Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.

He that humbles himself shall be exalted.

6. Patience in their tribulations, which are accidents common to Gods Children.

For our life is like a troubled Sea. There is nothing so unstable, and no joy
in it is secure; but many dangers and sorrows attend it.

But God (being a skillful Physician, and knowing well the state of our souls)
will minister no more of those bitter potions than we are able to bear, nor
than are needful; nor more than we may with patience endure.

Ps. 80. 5.
Though he feed us with the bread of tears, and gives us tears to drink, yet he
will give it in measure, as a token of his love, in our correction to
amendment, not to confusion.

For tribulation polisheth the soul, it wipes off all the filth, it makes us
fervent in prayer, humble in thoughts, and pure in conscience. Adversity
opens the eyes, which prosperity closes up; but GOD suffers the just, not
to be overwhelmed with grief.

For though many be the tribulations of the righteous, yet the Lord delivers
them out of all.

If their sorrows increase, he lends strength, whereby they not only bear
them patiently, but joyfully: insomuch as they look not on the pain, but the
reward. Not on the affliction, but the Crown. Not on the bitterness of the
Medicine, but the health attained by it. Nor on the smart of correction, but
the Corrector. Who chasteneth whomsoever he loves. Pro. 12,


And they shall be able to say with Job, Shall we receive good at the hands of
God, 2. 10.
and not receive evil? Knowing that the punishment they receive is not
equivalent to that which their sins have deserved; and withal, they consider
the bitterness of Christ's Passion; in comparison whereof, all their
tribulations are nothing, not to be mentioned.

Lastly, They have this assured confidence, That the patient abiding of the
meek shall not perish for ever. Psalm. 9.18.


And that the Lord will save them, that with patience wait on him.

7. In regard that God hears the prayers of the just.

Man by sin is become subject to many Infirmities, Wants, Necessities.


And has no remedy to cure them, nor means to relieve them, but to God by
prayer.

Now this advantage the godly, and servants of GOD have of the wicked, that the
prayers of the ungodly are abomination unto him; but his ears are open to the
prayers of the righteous.

Ps. 34.14.
If ye abide in me, etc. Ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you.

God inviteth them to call upon him.

50. 15.
Call upon me in time of trouble, so will I hear thee.

Mat, 7. 7.
Ask, and ye shall receive.

Esa. 58 9.
Thou shall call, and the Lord shall answer; thou shall cry, and he shall say,
here I am.

65. 24.
Yea, before they call I will answer and while they speak, I will hear.

He will grant them whatsoever they want.

O how plentiful is thy goodness, etc.

Length of days shall be in his right hand, Pro. 3.16.
and in his left hand riches and glory.

Pro. 43.9. 37. 25.
They that fear him lack nothing.

David never saw the righteous forsaken. Deuteronomy. 28.1
And a catalogue of blessings are promised to those which keep his
Commandments.

He will give them in such measure as their necessity requires; if not
largely, yet with the greater quiet and content.

As having nothing, yet possessing all things. 2 Cor. 6. 10.


8. Lastly, In regard of the comfort the servants of God feel at their death.

Who so fears the Lord, it shall go well with him at the last, and he shall
find favor in the day of his death. Eccl. 1.13


The righteous has hope in his death. Pro. 14 32


The righteous find rest in death. Sap. 4.7.


They shall have peace and rest. Esa. 57.2.


Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord. Apoc. 14. 13.


They fear not death, because they learn to dye all their life.

They fear not Judgment, because they have Christ for their Advocate.

They fear not their sins, because they have Christ for their Redeemer.

They tremble not at the horror of the grave, knowing, that though the body be
sown earthly, 1 Cor. 15,^
it shall rise spiritually. And that it is not death, but sleep.

Qui minus deliciarum novit in vita, minus timet mortem.

He that is least acquainted with the pleasures of this life, is ever in least
fear of Death.

But here one rub or difficulty is to be removed: For the nature of Man is
deterred from good, upon any small occasion.

If it be a thing to be done with Ease, we are content to give ear to it.

If with labor and difficulty, we soon give out; we put our hands in our
bosoms with Solomon's sluggard, and say, There is a Lion in the way.

This arises out of the pravity of our heart, drawn from. Original sin, that
is, of flesh conceived in sin.

Gal. 5.17.
The flesh lusts against the spirit, which causes us to loath goodness, as
sick men do potions, for the bitterness, though profitable for health. And
usually men look upon the supposed difficulties, not on the aid which comes
from above.

But if we look into that which God commands, with a spiritual eye, we shall
find it, 1. Profitable. 2. Sweet. 3. Easy.


Ps. 19.10.
1. The Statutes of the Lord are more to be desired than gold, yea than much
fine gold.

King David took as much delight in them, 110. 19.
as in all manner of riches.

A reward shall not fail to them which fear the Lord. Eccl. 2.8.


Who ever abode in his fear, and was forsaken? 10.


He has promised many blessings to those which serve him. Levit. 26.


2. The Statutes of the Lord are sweeter than the honey, or the honeycomb. Ps.
19.10.
They are David's delight.

3. They are not hid from us, 1.9.
nor far off.

It is very near thee, even in thy mouth, and thy heart. Deuteronomy. 30. 11.


His yoke is easy. Mat. 11.30


His commands are not grievous or heavy. 1 John 5.3.


But plain and easy. Sap. 7.22.


Add all these; by Gods special assistance: For God gives strength to him that
faints, and to him that has no strength he increases power. Esa. 40.29.


They that wait upon him, shall run, and not be weary; walk, and not faint. 31.


Which made Saint Augustine cry out, Da Domine quod jubes, and jube quod vis.

So that though his service seem hard and heavy, yet by his grace he adds such
strength to us, that it becomes light and easy.

Ezec. 11. 19.
He will take our stony hearts from us, and give us hearts of flesh.

Deu. 30.6.
He will circumcise our hearts.

And though there will be some relics of reluctance, and tentations left in
them, erunt quasi non sint.

They shall remain but for a trial, not to destruction. To stir us up, not to
ensnare us. To minister occasion for a Crown, not to make us fall. Nor to reign
in and over us.

Now we are to understand, that hard things are made the easier two ways.

1. By a love and desire to attain them. 2. By a hate to that which opposes
them.
1. Saint Augustine says, that labor and pains in which a man takes delight,
is not any way grievous, but delightful; as that of the Hunter, Falconer,
Fisher, and the like: For to compass that we love, either we count it no labor
at all, or else we take delight in the pains: In amore nibil amari.

Which may appear in a Mother, in bearing and educating of her Children.

In a Wife, in pains taking with her sick Husband.

In Jacob's long service for Rachel. Genesis 19.


Which made St. Paul cry out.

Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Romans 8.35
Shall tribulation, anguish, or persecution, etc.

Which caused the Apostles, Act. 5.41.
being beaten, to depart from the Council, Rejoicing that they were counted
worthy to suffer rebuke for his Name.

This labor is also passed the easilier if we consider,

The love of God to us.

The great things he has done for us.

Those greater which he has promised.

The sins wherewith we have offended.

The pains which Christ suffered for us.

Saint Bernard says, The sufferings of this life, are not worthy the
punishment remitted for sins past, the grace and comfort ministered to us for
the present, or the glory to come, which is promised.

2. We are not to set our affections on this World, but to hate it, in respect
of the opposition it is in to our service of God; the love whereof (if we take
not heed of it) infatuateth us, making us to take that for good, which only
seems so.

Now there are diverse reasons, why we should wean our selves from the love of
it.

1. It is Transitory.
No happiness in it of continuance which daily experience proves. In some men
preferred to honor, and others married contentedly, yet dying soon after.

But admit our lives were of a thousand years, what were they, being compared
to eternity.

Eccl. 11.8
Though a man live many years, and in them all rejoice, yet he shall remember
the days of darkness, because they are many. All that comes is vanity.

Baruch 3. 16.
Where are the Princes of the Heathen? etc.

All are but shadows, dreams, smoke.

Take Saint Hieromes Meditation on this point, Nihil puto in seculi hujus
confusione esse perpetuum, sed omnia praeterire and fluere. Quae qui
consideraverit, cadit superfaciem suam, intelligens quam pr^cul sit a Majestate
Dei, and flectet genua ad Patrem in nomine Jesus Christi.

I conceive, that there is nothing perpetual in this confused and disordered
life, but think that all things are transitory, and pass away. And whosoever
duly considers this, falls upon his face, (knowing how far he is distant from
the Majesty of GOD) and will bend his knees to GOD the Father in the name of
Jesus Christ, and crave to be dissolved.

2. It is Miserable.
Besides the brevity, many miseries accompany it.

No year, day, nor hour, but has his misery.

One sues thee for thine estate; another lays wait for thy life; a third
wrongeth thy good name,

Evil Children vex thee, if thou have any.

If thou have none, thou art grieved for the want.

Thy Wife unchaste, and unquiet, disquiets thee.

Thy friends death discomforts thee.

One loses an eye; another an arm.

One is slain by a fall from his horse; Another perishes by water or fire.

So that the miseries overbalance the joys: Then I would know what felicity
is in it;

Saint Augustine describes them at large, Plena sunt omnia laqueis, plena
periculis: incitant cupiditates, insidiantur illecebrae; blandiunt lucra, damna
deterrent; amarae sunt obloquentium linguae, nec semper veraecia sunt ora
laudantium, etc.

All things are full of snares, full of dangers: concupiscence tickleth,
allurements lie in wait, gain flattereth, loss terrifieth; slanderous tongues
of some are bitter, and the praises of others are not always true, or pleasing
to us, etc.

3. It is sinful.
All the actions of it, and of all that live in it being so.

In it you may see the Innocents afflicted, the Guilty acquit; the good
despised, the evil preferred.

Psalm. 14. 3, 4.
The Lord himself looked down from Heaven upon the children of men, and found
them all abominable, none to do good.

Hosea 4. 1, 2.
No truth, mercy, nor knowledge of GOD in the Land; but swearing, lying,
killing, and whoring.

If the Devil be Prince of the world, what goodness can be expected in his
Dominions?

4. Lastly, It is Deceitful.
It seems to be that it is not: promises that it gives not.

Out of the pleasures thereof, arise many sorrows.

Children bestowed, bring cares.

Honor enjoyed, brings emulation.

Wealth increased, brings fear.

Offices possessed, bring envy.

Unlawful pleasures used, bring diseases.

If the World flatter thee, it is but to deceive thee.

If it exalt thee, it is but to cast thee down headlong.

If it make thee merry, it is but in short time after to afflict thee the more.

Extrema gaudia luctus occupaet.

Si spes nobis in vita non esset relicta, S. Bern
quam de vita futura concipimus, non multum hic mundus ab inferno distaret.

If we had not here some hope left to us, which we conceive of the felicity of
the life to come, there were little difference between this World, and Hell it
self.

1 John 2. 15
Therefore (to end this first point) love it not: for he which loves it, has
not the love of God in him.

Colos. 3.2
But settle your affections on high, on God alone, in whose service consists
true happiness.

No Creature can be fully at rest, till it attain to the end for which it was
created, but is restless till then. Now God is the object of Man's happiness,
and the end of his felicity

Nothing can satisfy Man's heart, but God, nor can it be at rest, (though it
possess the whole world) till it return to him. The nearer to him the quieter.

No Man has perfect blessedness in this World.

Eccles. 1. 2.
Vanitas vanitatum and omnia vanitas, said Solomon, who had his hearts desire
as much as any.

Psalm. 4. 1.
Usque quo filii hominum? How long will ye have pleasure in vanity, in the
things of this life, follow lies, in the false appearance of them.

The World is a Hypocrite, covers his defects.

It is a Harlot that bears her Lover out of doors, when their money is spent.

I will conclude with Saint Augustine, Mare, terras, and omnia percurre,
scrutare universa, and ubique misereris, nisi ad Deum refugeris.

Travel over Sea and Land, and search all places, yet shall thou be miserable
and wretched every where, except thou have recourse to God.

And in Gods service all good is to be found.

If thou desire profit:

Eye has not seen, etc. what God has prepared for them that love him. 1 Cor.
2.9


If length of days:

Length of days is in his right hand. Pro. 3, 16.


If pleasures:

Pleasures for evermore.

If honor:

The Just shall be had in everlasting remembrance. Ps. 112 6.


Them that honor me, I will honor.

Blessed therefore are they which are undefiled in the way, and walk in the Law
of God. 119. 1.


Blessed are they which keep his testimonies, and seek after him with their
whole heart. 119. 2.


II. The second part of Gods service in general, is, To avoid that which he
forbids, that is, Sin.

The difinition whereof, and how it comes, you shall have out of St. Gregory.

All sin is committed gradatim, by three degrees.

1. By Suggestion of the Devil. 2. By Delight of the Flesh. 3. By Consent of
the Spirit.
1. For when the malicious Spirit suggesteth sin in the mind of Man, no delight
in it follow, sin is no way acted.

2. But when the flesh begins to delight in it, the sin is begun to be in
the birth.

3. Then; if a Man descend to consent, upon deliberation, then it is plain that
sin is committed.

So that in the suggestion is the seed, in the delight is the nourishment, and
in the consent is the full accomplishment.

Now as virtue and goodness is for diverse respects to be followed: So sin is to
be avoided for many reasons.

Because God hates sin and sinners.

The Psalmist calls sinners Gods enemies. Ps. 37.20.


The ungodly and his ungodliness are both hated alike of God. Sap. 14.9.


Your iniquities have separated you from God. Jer. 5.


His hate may appear by the continuance of it. Esa. 59.2.


He visits the wickedness of the Fathers upon the Children, in the third and
fourth generation. Number. 14. 18.


Seeing thou have forgotten the Law of thy God, I will also forget thy
children. Exodus 24. 7. 20. 5. Hos. 4. 6^


2. By withholding good things from them.

I will hide my face from them. Deuteronomy. 32. 20.


I will take away the hedge of my Vineyard. Esa. 5. 51


I will not feed you. Zac. 11.9.


I will be to Ephraim as a Moth. Hos. 5.12.


3. By the severe punishment of Offenders from time to time.

Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the Robbers? Did not the Lord,
because we have sinned against him. Esa. 42.14.


For sin God drove our first Parents out of Paradise. Genesis 3.


The Angels from Heaven.

Sodom and Gomorrah was consumed by fire. 19.


7.
The whole World by Deluge.

God drowned Pharaoh, and the Egyptians.

Number. 16.
Destroyed Korah, Dathan, and Abiram.

Levit. 10. 1 Samuel 4.
The two Sons of Aaron, and of Heli.

Acts 5.
Ananias and Saphira.

Luc. 23.
Jerusalem his own City; and o^ 600000. which went out of Egypt only two came
into the Land of promise.

prayers of the wicked.

Esa. 1.15.
When they stretch out their hands, he will hide his eyes from them, and though
they make many prayers, he will unhear them.

Job 25. 9.
God will not hear their cry, when trouble comes upon them.

Ps. 66.16.
If I incline my heart unto wickedness the Lord will not hear me.

Job 35.12
They shall cry, but he hears not.

Pro. 28 9.
He that turns his ear from hearing the Law, even his prayer shall be
abominable.

Esa 59.2.
Your sins have hid his face from you that he will not hear.

Lam. 3.44
Thou have covered thy self with a cloud, that our prayers should not pass
through. Eze. 8. 18.


Though they cry in mine ears with a loud voice, yet will I not hear them.

And therefore the hope of the wicked in Gods Mercy is vain, seeing he refuses
to hear them.

Their hope is but like the dust blown away with the wind.

Or a thin froth driven away with a storm.

Or a smoke dispersed with a tempest.

Or a guest that tarrieth but a day.

Because the wicked live in bondage,

For sin is a Tyrant, tyrannizeth over his followers. He that commits sin,
is a servant to sin.

To the Instigators of it.
The World. The Flesh. The Devil.
And the flesh serves the two other by sensuality, Appetitus Sensitivus.

By which the wicked (as the Apostle says) are sold under sin, as slaves in a
Fair. And this made Solomon infatuated with his Concubines.

It infatuates the Adulterer with his Adultery. The Covetous with his Riches.
The Ambitious with his Honor. The Voluptuous with his Pleasures. Sam. 13
It made Amnon commit Incest.

And this comes by privation of Grace, which should bridle their Affections,
and by letting loose their Appetites, which are like Devouring Beasts. like
Blood-Suckers. like The Pit unsatiable.


Because they are in continual trouble, Esa. 57.20
like the raging Sea that cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt.

21.
There is no peace to them.

1. Their passions are concupiscible and Irascible.

If the first cannot obtain what it would, the other is troubled. And by these
two the whole man is disquieted.

Jam. 4 1, 2
From whence are wars and contentions amongst you? are they not hence? even of
your own concupiscences, which fight in your members? for ye lust, and have
not.

2. No peace in their Consciences.

Conscientia Improborum improbis ipsis adversatur; The Conscience of the wicked
is even an adversary to the wicked himself.

An evil Conscience makes men fear shadows where no fear is.

Mala Conscientia terret vel audadissimum; An evil Conscience is terrible even
to the boldest and hardest man.

The witked flee where none pursues. Pro. 28.1.


The sound of fear is in his ears. Job 15.21


Timor Divina dispensatione malos comitatur.

They have five thorns pricking them.

1. The enormity of their sin. 2. The offense done to others, crying like Abels
blood. 3. The infamy which follows sin. 4. The offense to God. 5. The fear of
punishment.
Tell me not, S. Chrysostom.
(says a Father) of a wicked man, which fares deliciously, is apparelled
costly, is wealthy in substance, but discover his Conscience, and there thou
shall find fears, tempests, and troubles, arraigning, and executing himself,
when none but God and his own Conscience know his own deeds.

Who has resisted God, and has peace.

S. Aug.
Thou, O Lord, (says another) have so appointed, that the disordered soul
should be his own tormentor.

S. Ambr.
What greater punishment (says third) than the wound of Conscience which is
more to be shunned that death or banishment.

S. Isid.
A Man may avoid all things (says a fourth) but his own heart; from himself he
cannot slay; wheresoever he goes, the guilt of Conscience follows.

His Conscience is ever in pain.

3. No peace in this world.

In regard of the terror of Conscience, as is said.

Of the infamy they receive by it.

Of the fear of the pains deserved.

Of the loss of temporal blessings.

4. They are without aid or comfort from God.

Afflictions find them unarmed, unprovided to withstand them.

They have no footing to stay them, no hand to help them, nor no Pilot to guide
them: But they are swallowed in the Sea of tribulations.

So that while the good rejoice, they mourn.

While they walk dry, these are drowned.

And while they praise God, these blaspheme.

By the same fire of tribulation, the gold (the just) is tried; and the stubble
(the wicked) is consumed.

The Red Sea drowned the Egyptians, and saved the Israelites.

Lastly, The end of the wicked is miserable.

Their miseries do but begin in this world.

And in their death they are Heirs to Serpents, Eccles. 10. 12.
Beasts, and Worms.

They perish as if they had never been. 44. 9.


Horrible is the end of the wicked. Sip. 3. 16.


Evil in loss of the world their delight.

Worse in the separation of body and soul.

Worst in the Judgment of both.

Evil in the pains of the body; in the fears of the mind; in the afflictions
for loss of temporal things; in the afflictions for want of internal grace; in
the horror of the grave; in the remembrance of sin committed; in the fear to
render an account; in the terror in conscience; in the terror for the sentence;
in the grief for loss of time of repentance; and evil in the grief for
ill-spending it.

When they look back, they consider a short life ill spent.

When forward, a long time to suffer for it.

They grieve for losing the joy of eternity; for mispending that time they had
to get it; for changing such unspeakable joys, for such transitory pleasures.

Their worm never dies, but gnaweth, and vexes for ever.

S. Isid.
Do thou desire then never to be sad? Live well- for a secure Conscience
passes over sorrow lightly, and a good life has joy ever attending it.

To sum up all.
Motives which persuade us to his Service, in doing that which is good.

1. Whereby we have peace with God, our Selves, our Consciences.

2. The Comforts in the Holy Ghost, who assisteth the good with faith, to
adhere to Gods promises.

With Hope, to expect the reward. Love to GOD. Obedience to his precepts.
Humility in their actions. Patience in tribulation.

3. Gods readiness to hear their Prayers.

4. Their comfortable end.

Then the facility, profit, and pleasure to do well.

By a love to goodness, and hate to the world.

Because it is Transitory. Because it is Miserable. Because it is Sinful.
Because it is Deceitful.
Et servite Domino in laetitia. Ps. 100.^


Draw near to him with a pure heart, Heb. 10. 22.
in assurance of Faith, our hearts being pure from an evil Conscience.

And consider the Reasons why we detest sin.

1. For Gods hate to the wicked. 2. For Gods rejecting their Prayers. 3. The
bondage of the ungodly. 4. Their troubles in the passions of the mind, their
consciences in this world without comfort from GOD. 5. Their miserable end.
Et Servite Domino in Timore. Psalm. 2^ 11,


Walk after God, and fear him. Deuteronomy. 13.4.


Heb. 4. 11. 16.
That thou may go boldly to the Throne of Grace: Find mercy, and receive
help in time of need.

A general Exhortation to Prayer.
OF all the parts of Gods service, Prayer justly challenges the first place:
For, in as much as the best of Gods children are subject to many infirmities,
and even the just Man falls seven times a day, and that Man's life (by reason
of sin) is exposed to many dangers, troubles and afflictions, it therefore
behooves us much, and concerns us near, to seek out some remedy, as well to
strengthen our selves from the assaults of our several enemies, that (as much
as flesh and blood will permit) we fall not; as to raise us again when we are
cast down and dejected, either by the sight of our sins, or the crosses and
afflictions of this life. And in this distress, what course shall we think upon
to relieve us, or what means shall we find to aid and succor us.

Certainly none other better than that which GOD himself of his goodness has
prescribed and commended unto us, In regard of Gods Precept.
and by his word has commanded us to have recourse unto, whenever we shall
be thus afflicted, namely, Prayer, Call upon me (says he) in the day of
trouble. Ps. 50.15.

Come unto me (says Christ) all ye that labor, Mat. 12.18
and are heavy laden.
Seek ye the Lord (says the Prophet) and call upon him. Esa. 55.6

Is any afflicted (says he, by the Apostle) let him pray. Jam. 5.13.

Be instant in Prayer. 1 These. 5. 17.

Continue in Prayer. Colos 4.2.



And the better to stir us to this duty, God has added to this Precept a
Promise also; His Promise.
that we shall not lose our labors, or pray to him in vain; for, Mat. 7. 7.
No sooner shall we ask, but he will give: Jo. 16.23.
No sooner call, but he will answer and deliver. Ps. 91.15.
Nay, more, for if God perceive but our inclination to pray to him, he will
prevent us, and before the petition is gone out of our mouths; Esa. 65.24
Before we call, he will answer; and while we are speaking, he will hear. We
may with confidence build upon it, that either he will give what we ask, or
that which shall be more profitable to us.

Example of Christ.
And as we have this Precept and Promise to provoke us to pray to him: So have
we the Example (not only of all the Saints of God, but) of Christ Jesus
himself: Mat. 14. 23. 26. 39.
who (while he was conversant in the flesh upon earth, Jo. 11 47.
though he were wholly without spot or blemish, Mat. 1.35.
wholly innocent, immaculate, and needing nothing, yet) often and earnestly
prayed, for our imitation.

The Necessity.
Among all the Evangelical Precepts or Counsels, there is not any one duty upon
which our Savior more earnestly beats, or to which with more fervency he
inviteth his Apostles or Disciples, than this of Prayer. The necessity whereof
he enforces (among other places of Scriptures) by the Parable of the unjust
Judge, and the poor importunate Widow.

And indeed, Man's nature ever since the fall of Adam, being become earthly,
carnal, and wretched, it cannot keep Gods Law, which is spiritual. Ego carnal
is sum, says the Apostle. Romans 7. 14.


Again, as long as we live in this vale of misery, we being compassed with
cares, tentations, and afflictions, have no other means to free our selves from
them, than to beg at the gates of Gods mercy, ( Ego mendicus sum, and pauper, I
am poor and needy, says the Psalmist) either for grace, favor, and remission
of sins; or the mortification of our affections, spiritual comfort; or lastly,
for supply of temporal blessings.

Neither can any so well conceive the necessity of this duty, as they who (by
the illumination of Gods Spirit) see the miserable condition they are brought
into, by reason of sin. And what would become of miserable Man, if this help
were wanting, but being carnal, be wholly transformed into flesh? The contrary
effect whereto, Prayer works in us; for it elevateth us from earthly to
heavenly thoughts, whereby the heat and affections of the flesh are cooled and
quenched; Prayer being as the refreshing of the lungs to the heat of the heart,
without which Man could not subsist.

The Dignity.
But admit there were no necessity imposed on us to pray, yet the dignity and
honor we receive by Prayer should incite us to it: For Prayer (as a Father
well says ( Is a familiar conference with God. Ephr.
By it we talk with him (as it were) face to face. By other of his Graces (as
in the Word and Sacraments) he vouchsafes to speak to us, by this we have
access and speak to him, for what we stand in need of. And what greater
dignity, what greater privilege can be afforded to poor sinful creature: (
dust and ashes as we are) than familiarly to talk with so great and powerful a
God, and to have daily so free and easy admittance to his presence, to
manifest our necessities to him, and to crave his supply and succor? Nay more,
to become his household servants, (the Church being called his House) a favor,
which King David esteemed the fruition of one day, more than a thousand
elsewhere.

Benefit.
Then, if we consider the profit which arises by the performance of this duty,
we shall be the easilier persuaded to undertake it: For, if nothing else
quicken us, yet matter of benefit does usually work with us, And assuredly, the
benefit which arises by it, is, and ever has been great; for by Prayer we do
not only obtain of God all good things pertaining to the sustentation of this
life, (as the necessaries thereof) and the life to come, (as the gifts and
graces of the holy Spirit) but we also prevent and remove by it all the dangers
and evils of both lives: as the losses and perils incident to this life, and
the punishment due to our sins hereafter. Prayer enlightneth, purges, and
comfort; makes tribulations seem light, breeds servency, begets confidence
in Gods mercy, and overcomes all tentations. Take it away, and take the Sun
out of the world, for without we wander in darkness. With what Medicines did
the Saints heal incurable diseases, cast out Devils, raise the dead to life,
tame wild beasts, quench the force of fire, nay, change the course of the
Elements, and powers of Heaven, but by Prayer? What should I say more? By it we
may do all things, without it nothing.

If you please, you may take a short view of the wonderful effects which have
been wrought, and the benefits which have been obtained, and the punishments
which have been averted in former times, when recourse was had to God by Prayer.

By it
Exodus 17.
The Jews overcame the Amalekites. 1 Samuel 7.
Samuel overcame the Philistines. Judith 13.
Judith overcame Holofernes. 1 Chr. 5. 20.
The Reubenites overcame the Agarens. 2 Chr. 14 20.
Asa overcame the Ethiopians. Iehosaphat overcame the Ammonites. 2 Kings 19. 15.
Ezechias overcame Sennacerib.
2 Chr. 33. 15.
Manasses was restored to His Kingdom.

By it
1 Samuel 1. 9.
Hanna became fruitful. 1 Kin. 18. James 5.
Elias obtaned sire from Heaven, as also rain and fair weather.
By it
The rebellious Jews escaped Punishment. Exodus 32. Numbers 21. 7.
The Ninivites escaped Destruction. Jonas 3.
Ezechias escaped Death, 2 Kin. 20.
The three Children escaped the fiery Furnace. Dan. 3.
Daniel escaped the Lions. Dan. 6.
Jonas escaped the Whale. Jonas 2.
The Disciples escaped Drowning. Mat. 8.25.
Peter escaped Bonds. Acts 12.
Paul and Silas escaped Imprisonment. Acts 16.

By it
David stayed the Pestilence. 2 Samuel 24.
The Lepers were cleansed. Luc. 12.
The Centurions servant was healed. Mat. 8.
The blind received sight. Mat. 9 20.
The Woman's Daughter were delivered from the Devil. Luc. 18.
The Man's Son were delivered from the Devil. Mat. 15. 17.
The sick were made whole. Acts 28.
1 Kin. 18.
The Widow of Sarepthas Son were revived. 2 Kin. 14.
The Shunamites Son were revived. Mar. 9.
The Rulers Daughter were revived. Acts 7.
Dorcas were revived. Luc. 18. 23.
The Publican obtained Remission of sins. The Thief obtained Paradise. Acts 7.
S. Stephen obtained Heaven.
And lastly, That it is the surest remedy to the godly in time of affliction,
appears by our Saviors example, who (when he was in such straits, Mar. 26.
36.
that he said, Undequaque trist is anima mea, Mat. 14. 34.
usque ad mortem, My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death) went aside,
and fell thrice on his face, and prayed, warning his sleepy Disciples to do the
like.

Directions how to pray.
Now, Seeing that for these respects pray we must, in the next place we are to
consider, How Prayer is to be made, that it turn not to sin.

To God only.
1. Prayer must be made to God, and to none other.

1. Because God has so commanded. For Prayer is a part of his Service and
Worship; Deu. 9.13
and his Service and Glory he will impart to none else. Him only shall thou
serve. Mat. 4.10.
And Whatsoever you shall ask of my Father, Joh 19.23 4. 21.
not of Angels, Saints, or the like.

2. In regard of his Glory and Majesty, Psa. 24.8. 96. 6.99.2. 104. 1
wherein he excels all others, and ought therefore above all to be prayed
unto. Luc. 11.13


3. In regard of his singular Knowledge; Esa. 40. 10. 12.
for he knows our necessities better than we our selves. Psalm 66.2.


4. In regard of his Power and Ability to help us. Psalm. 17.6. 18.6 103.


5. In regard of his willingness and readiness to relieve us. Esa. 46.4.


6. In respect of the practice of all the Saints, and of Christ himself.

Of Hanna, of David, of the Saints, 1 Samuel 1. 15.
of Christ.

7. In regard of the absurdity in praying to those which cannot help
themselves, Psalm. 25.1. 73.25.5.1. 77.1.
much less us. Psalm. 22.41
For to which of the Saints or Angels can be properly said, Mar. 14. 23
Our Father which art in Heaven, Esa. 43. 11. 45. 5.
or Hallowed be thy Name, etc. But to GOD alone is this service to be done; for
he only saves us, and besides him is no Savior.

In Christ.
And all this must be done in Christ Jesus, without whom, though Moses and
Samuel should intercede, yet GOD would not pardon, but destroy; for as no work
of devotion can be acceptable to God without Him, so our sins are so odious,
that except our prays be offered by the mediation of Christ Jesus, they will
never be accepted by God.

Heb. 4.14.
We have an High Priest, that is passed into the Heavens, Jesus the Son of God,
etc.

In Faith.
Secondly, Our Prays ought to be made in Faith, for whatsoever is not of Faith;
is sin; and whosoever desires to have good success in his Prayers, ought to
believe, and not to pray waveringly. This Faith makes our Prayers acceptable:
For ( Prayer being the testimony of our Faith) how will our Faith appear, if we
doubt in our Prayers? S. August.
Si Fides deficit, oration perit. Our Savior said to the Petitioner for his
deaf and dumb Son If thou can believe, Mat. 9.23.
all things are possible to him that believes. And to his Disciples, All
things whatsoever you shall ask in Prayers believing you shall receive: Which
lesson St. James also teaches, Jam. 2.5.6
If any man lack wisdom, let him ask of God, etc. But let him ask in Faith.
Saint John says, 1 John 5.14
This is the confidence we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to
his will, he hears us. Saint Paul also bids us, Heb. 4.16.
Come with the same confidence that we may obtain mercy.

Again, As Faith is the foundation of all Virtues required in Prayer, In Hope.
so Hope, certain and assured, is to be fixed and settled in us (when we pray)
that God will perform the promises which he has made, and that he will hear
and grant those things which we shall desire, according to his will; for the
Devil is apt to persuade us, that our Prayers are in vain, either because God
regards them not, or that it is needless to pray to Him, who knows before
what we want; or that (whether we pray or not) all things shall come to pass as
God has decreed; and in these respects, that there is no profit in our
Prayers. All which are but illusions, and clearly against the rule of truth,
and practice of the Saints: In te speraverunt, says David, Psalm. 22.4.
Our Fathers hoped in thee, they trusted in thee, and thou did deliver them.
1 Chronicles. 5. 20.
The Reubenites cried to God in battle, and he was entreated of them, because
they put their trust in him.

Indeed, as Saint Bernard says, a sinners prayers are hindered two ways,
either with too little or too much light. He has no light which neither sees
nor confesses his sins, and he has too much, which seeing them, despaireth of
Gods mercy. Neither of these can be said to pray. How then? The sinner ought so
to temper his light, that he may not only see and confess his sins, but pray
that they may, and hope that they will be forgiven. For it is in Prayer as in
Repentance, Nemo potest agere poenitentiam, qui non speravit indulgentiam: No
man can truly repent, that has no hope of pardon for that he repents of: And
none can be said to pray well, who hops not of Gods favor, in that for which
he petitioneth.

In Charity,
And that our Prayers may the better ascend, they are to put on the wings of
Charity, which is one of the fruits of the Holy Spirit: Gal. 5.22.
For without this quality, our Prayers will prove cold, heavy, and lumpish; and
will return empty unto us. This Charity is twofold; First, toward God;
Secondly, toward our Neighbor.

1. Toward God, in keeping his Commandments; John 14. 21, 23.
for our Savior says, He that keeps my Commandments, is he that loves me:
And the Apostle says, 1 John 5. 22.
We receive of him, because we keep his Commandments; that is, we love him so,
that we are both to offend him.

2. Toward our Neighbor, which Charity is also manifested two ways.

1. In forgiving all injuries received from him, or by his means, after our
Saviors rule, Mat. 11. 25.
When you stand praying, forgive, if you have ought against any; that your
Father also, which is in Heaven, may forgive you our trespasses. And again, 6.
14, 15.
If you forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive
you: But if you forgive not men their trespasses, either will your Father
forgive your trespasses,

2. Secondly, In praying for his wants, and supplying them to o^^ powers,
according to Saint James direction, Tim. 5. 16. 1 Timothy ^. 1.
Pray for one another. And to Saint Paul's, I exhort, that first Prayers, etc.
be made for all men. And to encourage us to relieve them our Savior
pronounces a blessing ^^ all that are charitable in that kind Blessed are the
merciful, Mat. 5. 7.
for they shall obtain mercy.

So that by this we may plainly see that if we be uncharitable, our Prayer will
be barren, and unfruitful.

In Humility.
Fifthly, Humility must accompany these former Virtues. We must acknowledge our
selves unworthy to receive any thing; we are not to arrogate any thing for any
merit of our own, but confess that we are naught but dust, pollution, and a
mass of corrupption; that we brought nothing into this world, nor have
gathered any therein, but uncleanness. We must say with Jacob, Minor sum Domine
omnibus tu is beneficiis, Genesis 32. 10.
I am not worthy of the least of all thy mercies. Luc. 18.
And with the Publican (whom our Savior commended to us for a pattern) deny
our own unworthy (...) deserve any favor. Which Humility of his (as appears
by that Story or Parable) made his prayer more acceptable to God, than the
vaunting and boasting of the proud Pharisee. And with David says, Ps. 51.17.
A broken and contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise. And the Son of
Syrach, Ecclus. 35. 17.
The Prayer of the Humble pierces the Clouds. And lastly, Luc. 1. 52.
the Virgin Mary, He has exalted the Humble and Meek.

This Humility is likewise twofold.

1. Of the Spirit. 2. Of the Body.
1. For by the First, we acknowledge the impurity of our souls, and confess our
selves wicked, miserable, and wretched in our own eyes, and that our strength
is not worth the coasting of; which kind or manner of prayer has ever wrought
effectually with God. The Prophet Esaias witnesses it, Esa. 66.2.
To this man I look, even to him that is of a poor, and of a contrite spirit.
And the Psalmist testifies, how propense and propitious GOD is to such kind of
Petitioners.

The Lord is nigh to them that are of a contrite heart, Ps. 34. 1-^
and will save such as are of an humble spirit.

And the blessed Virgin acknowledges that she found the fruits of her
Humility, Luc. 1.48.
He has regarded the lowsiness of his Hand-maiden.

Secondly, We are to use an outward gesture, answerable to our inward devotion:
We must manifest our Humility by a reverend posture of the body too. God is as
well Creator of the body (which is the souls temple) as of the soul: and
therefore expects to be honored by both. And as it is not to be denied, that
the inward affections are to be regarded in the prime place; yet it will not be
unnecessary to observe with what postures the holy men in sacred Story powered
out their petitions: Genesis 13.2.
Abraham (speaking to God) fell on his face, and bowed to the ground. 1 Ki. 8.22
Solomon, at the Dedication of the Temple, stood before the Lord, and spread
forth his hands to Heaven. Lu. 18. 13.
The Publican stood and smote his breast. Ex. 17.11.
Moses held up his hands to Heaven. Dan. 6.01
Daniel, Stephen, Peter, and Paul kneeled. Act. 7. 60. 9. 40.
David kneeled, and lifted up his eyes. Lastly, Ps. 95. 6.
our Savior Christ (every one of whose actions ought to be a rule to us)
sometimes fell on his face, sometimes kneeled, Mat. 26. 39. Lu. 22.41.
and sometimes lifted up his eyes when he prayed.

Not that Gods worship is absolutely or universally tied to these outward
Ceremonies, Joh. 11.41.
but that they serve to stir up the inward intentions and affections, for while
we kneel, and lift up our eyes and hands to Heaven, we show our humility, and
declare our ardent desire and confidence, that all our aid and help we expect
from God, and none else. Therefore, the acts of humiliation, of casting dust on
their heads, putting on sackcloth, rending of garments, mentioned in holy
Writ, are there set down to no other purpose, but to make their Humility that
used them appear, and to be a pattern for us in after times. Neither is it
without reason, that Man (being a creature consisting of body and soul) should
serve his Creator with both, which makes us a perfect Holocaust or Sacrifice.

And as we have yielded our members servants to uncleaness, To. 6.19^
and to iniquity unto iniquity: so we should yield our members servants to
righteousness, unto holiness.

And to this reverend gesture of the body, must be added the uncovering of the
head. 1 Cor. 11. 4.
Our heads must be bare, and we must not pray so familiarly, as if we were
speaking to our equals: For the higher and more eminent the person is whom we
petition, the more reverend and submiss ought our behavior be to him in our
petitions.

In Perseverance.
In the next place, We must resolve with our selves, not to be impatient of
delays, (as we call them) if God seem not to hear us presently. But we must
pray with Perseverance. Our Savior himself (immediately after he had
prescribed to his Disciples that absolute form of prayer) taught them also (and
us in them) the effects of this virtue, by the Example of the Friend which came
in the night to borrow Loaves. Luc. 11.8. 18. Ps. 40. 1. Mat. 15. 28. Col. 4.
2. 1 These. 4. 17.
And shortly after by that of the Importunate Widow. Which effects also David,
and the Woman of Canaan felt: Wherefore, not without good reason did St. Paul
so often counsel this assiduity and servency in prayer.

And though we make our conclusions by events, (which we usually take notice
only by) that God is not moved by our prayers, nor we bettered by them; we must
resolve, that the fault is ours, and not Gods; For either we ask things not to
be prayed for.

Or coldly, not intending what we desire.

Or not with due reverence and patience.

Or else GOD yields not, either to inflame our zeal.

Or to set an edge on our desires.

Or to humble us.

Or to prove us by adversity, as well as by prosperity.

Or to try whether we serve him for our own ends, or his glory.

Or else the time is not come which he knows meetest to grant what we pray
for.

Elias being persecuted by Iezabel, 1 Ki. 19.4.
prayed, that GOD would take away his life, which GOD granted not presently, 2
Reg. 2. 11.
yet afterward took him into Heaven.

Deus multos non jam exaudiat ad voluntatem, S. Bern.
sed paulo post ad salutem; God hears not many men presently according to their
desire, but after a while he gives ear to them, to their good and salvation.

Therefore we must not give over at the first, second, or third time. For no
doubt, Luc. 11.9.
but he which said, Ask, and ye shall have, will also give what he promised,
when he thinks expedient that we should receive it.

Ps. 27.14.
O tarry thou the Lords leisure, says David. And let not us prescribe to God
either time, place, or manner, but in all modesty, humility, patience, and
perseverance, attend his good pleasure.

Ferventy. Diligence, Attention.
Three other Qualities there are, which seem to depend upon this last Virtue of
Perseverance; for, as the difficulty to pray aright arises of three causes.

1. The Corruption of our Nature depraved by sin. 2. Evil custom or habit, in
suffering our hearts to wander when we are at our Devotions. 3. The malice of
Satan, who (out of his inveterate hate to mankind) intangles our thoughts with
other matters, when we should intend this act.
The Remedies therefore fit to oppose these, are. 1. A fervent desire to the
action; for what we zealously affect, we soonest compass. 2. That we be
diligeut and courageous to overcome all difficulties; for as all Creatures have
a concupiscible nature, to obtain things necessary to preservation, so have
they an irascible, to resist all obstacles which may be to their detriment. It
must not be with us as with the sluggard, Vult and non vult, Prove. ^^
have a desire to it for the excellency, but give it over for the difficulty.
3. That we be attentive to what we are doing, and keep our hearts from vain and
wandering cogitations; Omni custodia serva cor tuum, quia ex ipso vita procedit;
Keep thy heart with all diligence, for there-out comes life; Pro, 4.23.
for as our heart is, so will all the actions be which proceed from it.


For it is not a chill and cold Perseverance, or Expectation, that will serve
our turns to prevail with God, but a fervent spirit to pursue the same. For God
hears not, (at least regards not) as not loud crying, long babbling, or many
tautologies, or repetitions: so neither cold, faint, and drowzy prayers, (not
intending, or minding what we pray for) which proceed only from the lips: but
it is the affection, and zealous desire of the devout, mixed with sighs, tears,
and groans, not to be uttered, Romans 8. 26.
which move, and prevail with him, For God (being a Spirit) looks to be
worshipped in spirit. To which purpose it is that our Savior Christ advises
us, when we pray, to enter into our Closets, and to shut the door: intimating
to us thereby, Mat. 6. 6.
that we (being alone, and private) should cast away all public wandering,
and worldly thoughts, which trouble our devotions, and hinder us from lifting
up our hearts unto God: and wholly, fervently, and considerately, bend our
thoughts and desires unto him. And these retired Soliloquies, and private
Meditations, and Conferences between God and our souls, and between our selves
and our souls, have ever been much approved by the Ancients. Our Prayer (says
an ancient Father) ought to be in such manner as Hanna's was: Ephr. Sir. 1 Samuel
1.
She wept, and prayed, and her lips only were perceived to move. Let every one
hear this, and imitate it; especially they, who with extreme babbling, without
all modesty, yet with loudness of voice, make their prayers. Let us therefore
pray with sighs and groans: But withal taking heed, (as much as we can, with
Gods assistance, and our own endeavors) that in the time of our prayers, no
extravagant thought steal upon us, lest happily we have one thing in our
hearts, and another in our tongues. And to this purpose also speaks S. Basil,
Basil sermon. in Martyr. Iulitiam.
All our prayers ought to be made, not in syllables, but in the hearty
affection of the soul. For how do, or can we think, that God will give us that
for which we pray, when by our behavior and gesture, our faint and weak
solicitation, we seem to him, that either we do not want what we pray for, or,
that he will upon every slight and cold motion, be persuaded to give us what we
desire? Or how can we expect to be heard of God, when we our selves (not being
serious in our devotions, but diverted with other fantasies) hear not, nor
know what we do petition for? The wise man therefore, gives us good and
wholesome counsel in this matter, Ecclus. 18 23.
Before thou prayest, prepare thy self, and be not as one that tempts the
Lord.

Our prayers therefore must not proceed from the lips only; for no man can
assure himself that God hears his prayers, who is so careless, and his
thoughts so wandering, that he knows not himself what he prays for.

Of the Time and Place for PRAYER.
The time.
TAke a little taste of the Time when, and the Place where our Prayers are to be
offered up to GOD.

1 Th. 5.17.
For the Time in general, the Places before-named, Col. 4. 3.
do, and may direct us. Ephesians. 6.18.
Pray without ceasing. Continue in Prayer. Lu. 11.18.
And pray always. More particularly, Nu. 28. 3.
Twice a day (that is, Morning and Evening) the Sacrifices were to be made. Ps.
55, 18.
David prayed thrice, In the Evening, Morning, and at Noonday: 119.164.
And seven times in a day. Daniel prayed thrice. Dan. 6.10
In the morning before day Christ prayed. Mar. 1.35.
David prayed early. Ps. 63. 1. Act. 2. 15.
The Apostles at the third hour of the day. 10. 9. 3. 1.
At the sixth hour. The ninth hour. And David at midnight. Ps. 119.62


For the Place, The place.
In all places says God. Ex. 20.24.
Every where, says S. Paul. 1 Timothy 2.8.
Christ prayed in the Desert. Mar. 1.35.
On a Mountain. Mat. 14. 23.
In the Garden. Isaac in the Field. Peter prayed on the Housetop, or Tarris.
Mat. 26. 36.
In the Congregation, says David. Genesis 24. 63.
To the Temple went S. Peter, S. John, and S. Paul. And Christ bids us when we
would be private in prayer, Act 10.
and not be molested, Ps. 111.1.
to go to our Closets. Acts 3. 1. 22. 17.
So that it appears, Mat. 6. 6.
that there is no Time nor Place unseasonable, to offer up our Prayers unto
God, as occasion shall be offered, though the chief Place for private Prayer is
our Closet, and for public the Temple, where one may stir up another by
example, and where we ought to make public confession of our Faith, and give
public thanks for Gods benefits.

How to pray aright.
To pray aright.
BUt it may come to pass (though we be prepared and fitted with all the former
circumstances) that we may pray, and not be heard, if (in the last place) we do
not carefully consider to pray for those things which are fit and requisite for
God to give, and for us to receive. For as Saint James says, Jam. 4. 3.
Many time: we ask, and receive not, because we ask amiss. For our better
instruction therefore, we are to consider, that there be two sorts of Blessings
to be required of God: First, Spiritual; Secondly, Temporal.

Spiritual Blessings.
1. The first part pertains to Gods own honor, and the good of our own souls;
as Faith, Hope, Charity, Thankful Hearts, Remission of Sins, and other of the
same kind, which are merely spiritual and heavenly. And these Blessings we may
(without doubt) safely and confidently beg at GODS hands, and he will not deny
them.

2. The Second, Temporal.
are temporal and indifferent; as Riches, Honor, Health, Peace, Seasonable
times, Children, and the like. And these are not to be prayed for, but
(according to Christ's pattern of prayer, with thy Will be done; Mat. 6.10.
or, according to Christ's practice) with a Not as I will, 26. 39.
but as thou will: Mat. 8. 2.
Or with the Leaper in the Gospel, Lord if thou will, thou can make me clean.

Saint Bernard disposes these into three heads: S. Bern. In sermon. 5. quadrag.
Two, for blessings of this life, for the body, and soul, and the third, for
the life to come: And in praying for these, he gives three Cautions, with his
Reasons: First, That our prayer for Temporal blessings, which the body wants,
be restrained to things needful; because many times we pray for things
superfluous, to satisfy our pleasures. Secondly, That our petition for the
graces of the soul, be free from impurity, because we oftentimes desire to have
them for Ostentation. Thirdly, That our request for the blessing of Eternal
Life, be in all Humility because many require it at Gods hands, as presuming
upon their own merits.

Our Prayers being thus qualified, being preferred only to God, in Faith, Hope,
Charity, with God, and our Neighbor, Humility of body and soul, Perseverance,
Fervency of Spirit, our souls and bodies attending to what we pray for, and in
due Time and Place, praying aright, both for temporal and spiritual blessings,
we shall (no doubt) by the mercy of God, through the mediation, intercession,
and merits of Jesus Christ, obtain (in his good time) all things which shall be
needful and expedient for us.

Prayer divided into parts.
DEvotions and Prayers, are either public or private.

1. Private prayers are, whereby every particular Man prays to God, for those
things which he wants. In which kind of devotion, we ought at all times to
exercise our selves, because at all times we stand in need of Gods particular
assistance: and therefore, we are tied or limited herein, neither to time nor
place; for whether it be in the night, or morning, midday, or evening, at
home, or abroad, in the City, or Country, in our beds, or at our work, if we
call upon him faithfully, he will hear us.

2. Public Prayers are, whereby the whole Congregation meet in a place,
Dedicated to Gods honor, as well to praise his Name, as to pray for those
things which shall be needful. For although Christians ought to pray privately,
yet ought they not in the mean time to neglect the public worship and service
of God in the Church. For from the beginning it was held and observed as a duty
required; and therefore, before the erection and dedication of Temples and
Churches, the Patriarchs, and holymen, erected Altars in certain places, where
at set times of the day, they might offer Sacrifices, and public Prayer to
God. Ex. 29.39.
In the second of Joel, Joel 2.
you shall find a set and prescribed Form of Prayer for the Minister to use,
together with the place, and the Congregation that were to assist. In the New
Testament also, our Savior Christ himself (to encourage this holy duty of
public Prayer) has promised his presence amongst those that shall be
assembled and gathered together after this manner. Mar. 18 20.
Therefore, whosoever shall neglect these public Assemblies, shows and
discovers thereby, how little he regards Christ's company or presence.

These Prayers are also distinguished into these parts.

1. Invocation. 2. Confession. 3. Thanksgiving.
Invocation consists of 1. Petitions for the good of our own Souls in
Spiritual things. Bodies in Temporal things.
2. Intercessions, either in praying for the good of others, or against the
evil of others. 3. Deprecations against evils, Spiritual. Temporal.



Confession is threesold.
1. Of our Faith. 2. Of the Glory of God. 3. Of our own Sins.
Thanksgiving is either 1. For deliverance from evil. 2. For benefits received.


To these may be added Imprecation, either 1. Against the enemies of God
incorrigible and irreconcilable. 2. Against the enemies of our Souls
incorrigible and irreconcilable.


So that these Rules be observed, 1. That it be not used for private hate, or
revenge. 2. That we rejoice not in any man's Destruction, 3. That we aim at
their Correction.


The use of the Lords Prayer.
BEcause that our Savior Christ has taught us how to pray, and has put the
very words (as it were) into our mouths, which we should use in praying, I
think it necessary to begin with the same, which he has left unto us.

1. In respect of the Excellency of the Author of it, who was no less than God.

2. In respect of the Perfection of the work it self, ( the Prayer) for it
comprehends in it Petitions for all things which we stand in need of.

3. In respect of the Efficacy of this Prayer in working, for it cannot choose
but prevail and work much with God; for none knew the mind and disposition of
God better than he which composed it, which was God.

And let it not lose any part of the due praise which belongs to it, in
regard of the compendiousness, or shortness of it; for it deserves the more
honor, because though it be short, yet it is also copious, and plentiful in
matter, and therefore the more absolute and perfect.

It is not therefore without cause that the Ancients have given so many
excellent Attributes to it.

As the Abridgement of the Gospel, and our Faith.

The Interpretation of our Desires and Hopes.

The very Bond of Charity.

And an inexhaustible Treasury.

Yet let not any Man think, that our Savior prescribed us this Prayer, as that
we should use no other, but be tied to the very words contained in it: but this
we must conceive, that he made it to bridle our desires; that though we make
our Petitions, and frame them according to our several necessities; yet, to
keep us in compass, that we exceed not the limits, nor vary from the extent and
bounds of this Prayer.

The Use of it is twofold.
1. That we might be instructed by it, what is necessary in general to require
of God, and not without need, seeing we (being naturally blind in spiritual
things) know not what is fit to ask; and many times we crave those things (as
Zebedees Children did) which are unworthy both of God, Mat. 20: 21
and our selves, and might prove hurtful also to us, if they should be granted.
And therefore (under certain general heads) he has bounded the desires of the
flesh, and taught us after what manner and rule we should square all our
Petitions. For whatsoever we shall desire against the directions therein
contained, dis-a-greeth from the will of God, and therefore is neither good,
holy, nor profitable. 2. That we may be able thereby to conceive, frame, and
make all our Prayers according to our several necessities, and after that
Petition which sits us, as our occasions shall alter.
The Lords Prayer Analyzed.
A Father, not a Lord. Our Father


One being a name of love.

The other of dignity.

A Father not a Judge.

One being, a name of Goodness, Comfortable

O (...), sub quo nomini desperandum.

The ^^her of Power, Terrible.

Who is able to resist his Power? To. 9. 19.


It is too proud a salutation; Father
For how much are we.

By Nature, Dust and Ashes.

By Sin, Bondslaves to Satan. Ge. 18.27


So much are we below him.

Who then durst be so bold as to call the Father, but that Christ did command
it?

For exceeding great is thy Majesty.

And exceeding great is our Poverty.

Ps. 57.3.
He is exalted above the Heavens, and his glory is above all the Earth.

113. 4.
He humbles himself, when he beholds the things in Heaven.

Job. 13.25
And we are but worms, and leaves, driven to and fro with the wind.

Ps. 78.40.
A wind that passes away, and comes not again.

Yet we are bold to call thee Father; for we come not of our selves, thy Son
Christ has taught us the form. Take notice of the words, they are thy Sons.

Father
1. Father of all Creatures.

In their Creation.

Preservation.

Governing.

Genesis 1.26. 9. 6.
2. Of Mankind, which he formed after his own Image.

Other Creatures are but as a shadow to Man. For he endued him with
understanding.

And the Creatures not so.

To him he gave precepts to order his life.

To the Creatures only by blind instinct.

He was Created in the condition of a Son.

The rest, but as bondslaves. Ephesians. 1.


3. Of Christians, Jam. 1.18. 1 Pet. 3. 23.
more especially by Grace, Regeneration, and Adoption by Jesus Christ, his Son.

A Father, Father
but what Father?

There is no Father like unto thee.

When my Father and Mother forsake me, Ps. 27. 12.
then the Lord takes me up.

Thou art our Father, Esa. 63.16
though Abraham be ignorant of us.

Can a Woman forget the fruit of her womb, etc. Yea, 49. 15.
they may forget, yet will I not forget thee.

A most indulgent Father, Lu. 15.18. Mat. 18. 26.
to whom the Prodigal Son arose and went. Whom the insolvent servant besought.

Though thou be a displeased Father, yet a Father thou art. Though I be a
wastful and disobedient Son, yet a Son I am. Though I have lost the ingenuity
of a Son, yet thou have not lost the compassion and love of a Father

A Father of Mercies. Father


Whom we find so to be.

By his inciting us to good. 2 Cor. 1.3.


Confirming us in it. Pardoning our sins. Delivering us from tentations.
Reclaiming us from sin. Crowning us with blessings.
1. If then thou be our Father, in are thy Sons.

1 John 3.1.
How great, what manner of Lord have thou bestowed upon us, that we should be
called the Sons of God?

2. If thou be our Father, and we the Sons of God, how great is the honor,
that we are as it were Gods?

3. If thou be our Father, then are we Brethren to Angels as also to Men. to
Saints as also to Mean to Christ as also to men. to Himself as also to Poor men
Heb. 2.12.



And how great ought our love to be? Let no man therefore extol himself above
his brethren, nor be ashamed to call any man his Brother, whom God has
vouchsafed to call Son.

4. If thou be our Father, how great is our Hope? what are we to expect from
thee;

Mat 7.11.
Even all things which a Father gives to his Children.

What are we to render unto thee?

Even all duty and obedience belonging to Children: that thou may not repent
thee, nor we be unworthy, either of our Creation, or Adoption.

It is not without some reason from our Savior, Our (...)
that the words Mine, or I, are not to be found in this Prayer.

Our, is a word of charity, and unity. It is not My Father, as if God were any
man's peculiar, but our Father, the Father of all, as he properly is, through,
and in Christ.

Our prayers are most powerful with God, when we express in them a
fellow-feeling of the Necessities of our Neighbors, and Sympathize with them
in their misery. This is Charity.

Let every one of us therefore be as willing and careful to pray for others, as
well, and as heartily as for himself; considering, that in so doing, he prays
for him, whom Charity has made as himself.

Christ bare us, and all our sins in his body. 1 Pet.
Let us do the like to one another in word and deed.

For our Selves, Necessity compels us to pray, My Father. For our Brethren,
Charity inviteth us to pray, Our Father.

In these two words, Our, and Father, the Law and Prophets are comprehended.

In Father, the Love of God.

In Our, the Love of our Neighbor.

And in these two words, the sum of the Gospel is contained.

In Father, our Faith.

In Our, our Charity.

Which are in Heaven
In these words we have a rule and direction to whom to frame our prayers.

Unto thee shall all flesh come.

Ps. 65.2.
Who have I in Heaven but thee? says King David.

He is only able to hear us, and to grant our desires.

It is true, we have Earthly Fathers; but these leave and forsake us; Their
hands are shortened; We call not to them, but to thee, which art in Heaven.

Esa. 66.1.
Heaven is thy Throne.

Mat. 5.34. Ps. 19.1.
The Heavens declare thy Glory.

Not that thou art included in the Heavens only; 1 Reg. 8. 27.
for (as Solomon said) The Heaven of Heavens cannot contain thee; but, as if
that were thy Royal Palace, where the Elect shall enjoy thy blessed presence.

Thou art Every where by thy Presence. Jer. 23.23.
Thou art In Heaven by thy Excellence.
Thou art in Earth also. Esa. 66.1


But they which come to thee, must be lifted up higher.

I have lifted up mine eyes. Ps. 121.1.


Ultra montes expectare.

Sursum Corda.

A word of Hope.

For if thou be our Father and Lord, and King of Heaven, In Heaven
then our Hope is, that our Inheritance is there also; that thou will not deny
us an Inheritance, that have vouchsafed us the Title of Sons.

Let us therefore take the wings of the Eagle, and be lifted up in our
Meditations to Heaven, being made heirs thereof.

Let us look up to Heaven, while we are upon Earth.

Ps. 25. 1. 121. 1. 123. 1. 131. 1.
Unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul.

I will lift up mine eyes to the hills, whence comes my help.

Out of the deep have I called to thee, O Lord.

A word of Power.

In Heaven
For thou art in that place, from whence at all times thou can send us, Help
in danger.
Good things in need.
Plagues for our offenses.


And though thou art a Father by thy Love, yet art thou in Heaven by thy
Majesty and Power.

Let us not therefore presume upon too much familiarity with him, as with a
Father, but let his word [ in Heaven] keep us in a submiss Reverence: For
though Father and Son be of near Relation, yet a Son of the Earth, and a Father
in Heaven, are of great distance.

And let us be respective of his awful Majesty, and make our petitions to him
in fear and trembling; in all Humility and Reverence: And Let us not be rash
with our mouths, Eccl. 5.2.
nor our hearts hasty to utter any thing before him: For GOD is in Heaven, Esa.
66.22
and we ( poor Creatures) upon Earth, which is but his footstool.

This Petition justly challenges the first place. Hallowed be thy Name.


For, being thus entitled and dignified with the honor of Sons, we ought
primarily to consider our duties what we should render back.

And what should a Son desire more than the honor of his Father?

By this word we understand all the Attributes, Name.
by which God has manifested himself, as his Majesty, Justice, Power, Truth,
Mercy, Goodness, etc.

Blessed be thou our Lord, who have given this power to men, To Hallow Thy
Name, To Magnify Thy Name, To Glorify Thy Name,
Which in it self is Holy. Ps. 103.2. 104. 31. 145. 10.


Which all thy works in general do sanctify.

Which all the unreasonable Creatures do hallow and praise in their kinds. Esa.
43. 9. Ps. 97. 5, 6


Which all reasonable Creatures, as Angels and Men do glorify.

Isa. 6.2, 3.
The Angels, and Hosts of Heaven.

Psalm. 103. 20, 21.
Men that are in Heaven already (though Mat. 5. 16.
In Earth) by their works. Ps. 149 1.
In the Congregations. Job. 1, 20.
In Afflictions.


Let us therefore glorify it also; and that not carelessly or slightly, but
zealously and holily, in Thought, Word, and Profession; For the whole scope of
our Actions ought to tend to the Glory of GOD only.

And, Lord, let thy Name be sanctified by others, besides us: Dilate this power
of sanctifying thy Name, communicate it more and more to the Gentiles: Make thy
Gospel to spread to the end of the Earth: Exo. 9.16.
From the rising of the Sun: to the going down of the same, let thy Name be
great among the Gentiles. Thine.


Ps. 115.1
Not unto us, Lord, not unto us, but to thy Name give the glory.

Rev. 4.12.
Thou art worthy, O Lord, (and thou alone) to receive honor, and glory.

And His Name ought to be sanctified by us above all things: for all other
things are for us, and we for His glory only. Not that God shall get any thing
thereby, or that He has need of our sanctifying: but in regard of the benefit
which will accrue to us by it For this honor will be an honor to him that
gives it.

And this praise and glory only, is profitable to the glorifier: It is not so
any where, or in any thing else. He that glorifies God, him will God glorify.

Him that honors me, I will honor, 1 Sa. 2.30.
says God. 2 Th. 1.12.


Let thy Name therefore, O Lord, be Hallowed.

And thine only.

Let it be Hollowed, Inwardly. By Word. By Us. Outwardly. By Profession. By all
Others.


Let us not only salute thee in word, but imitate thee in deed, that we may be
fit to glorify thee, and be worthy to be called thy Sons.

Give us a filial affection.

The Spirit of Adoption. The Grace of Contrition. To. 8. 15.

That we may say from our hearts each one of us, Luc. 15. 18.
Father, I have sinned, I Am no more worthy to be called thy Son. And

This humble Confession is one of the ways to honor God.

Jos. 7.19.
My Son (said Iosuah to Achan) give glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make
confession unto him.

And let us also do it by refraining our tongue from irreverent speeches, and
leading our lives carefully by the rule of Gods Laws.

So shall we truly hallow his Name. So shall we truly glorify him, and say,

Psalm. 8. 9.
O Lord, our God, how excellent is thy Name in all the world.

We praise thee, we bless thee, we worship thee, we glorify thy holy Name.

Rev. 4. 8.
For thou only art holy, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts.

Thy Kingdom come.
Quaerite primum Regnum Coelorum, Seek ye first the Kingdom of Heaven.

GODS Name is more precious and dear to him than his Kingdom. But after his
Name his Kingdom.

In Name, He is alone without us, Sole and Singular.

In his Kingdom, He communicates himself, and what is his, with us.

In his Will, We dedicate our selves wholly to him.

And therefore in respect of Gods bounty to us, this is the chief Petition of
our good and happiness. For,

In it we pray, First, for the coming of Gods Kingdom. That GOD may only rule
over us.

Secondly, For the destruction and eversion of the Kingdom of Satan. That he
may have no more dominion over us.

The Kingdom of GOD is threefold. First, of Glory. Secondly, of Grace. Thirdly,
of Power.

1. Of Glory, (hereafter) which indeed should be the scope of our desires: For
we ought so to live here, that we may desire (without fear) the coming of this
Kingdom.

So to be affected at our death, that we may joyfully, and without fear say,
Lord, Luc. 2.29.
now let thou thy servant depart in peace.

So to be affected in our life, that we may often say, and pray, Phil. 1.23.
When shall I appear before the Lord?

I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ.

Rev. 22. 20.
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

2. Of Grace, in this life in us, That we be not of their minds, who said, Luc.
19. 14.
We will not have this man to reign over us.

But subject us, O Lord, to this Kingdom, that easy yoke of thine, that in all
things we may be obedient to thee.

Govern us, and reign in us, that Satan or Sin reign not in our members. If
thou be pleased so to rule in us here, we shall reign with thee hereafter.

Cast Satan under our feet.

3. Of Power, for there are many Rulers in this world which oppose thy Kingdom.
Arise, O Lord, and take the Rule into thine own hands. Reign thou therefore
only over us. Govern us within and without. For as we are vexed inwardly by our
selves, with civil war: and domestic tyranny, so without also, by others.

Let thy Kingdom. come:
And that it may come in us, let it come into our Rulers. Make them like to thee
in their Government. Let them rule to thee, not to themselves. Let thy Kingdom
come within them; for in thy Kingdom only are proper and fit Laws and
Conditions to rule by.

And because, when this Earthly Government is at the best, it is laborious and
unperfect, hasten thy Kingdom of Glory, we beseech thee, wherein will be no
cause of complaint, but all things will be absolute, and perfect. To. 8. 18.
For which all the Creatures, together with us, earnestly wait, even with
groans.

For all the votes and desires of the Old Testament were pitched upon the first
coming of Christ: Esa. 64 1.
and all of the New upon the second, Lu. 10.34. 2. 19.
looking for that blessed hope, 2 Tit. 13.
and glorious appearing of the great GOD, 2 Timothy 4. 18.
and our Savior Jesus Christ. Re. 22.20.


Let it come to us, but not upon us. Come.


Certainly come it will, will we, nill we.

Let it come to us, not against us.

Let us feel the happiness of it ( O Father) in coming, not the violence of it,
in rushing upon us. In the mean time, let it come to us here, though not in the
full fruition, yet in the certain hope and expectation.

Say unto your souls, I am your salvation. Ps. 35. 3.


It is not, Let us do thy will. Thy will be done.


Nor, Do thou thy will.

But, Thy will be done.

Thy absolute and eternal will which none can oppose.

Which will take effect though all the world resist.

Which will be done, because thou will have it done.

To. 9. 19.
Who has resisted his will?

Acts 9. 5.
It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks.

Thy revealed will; holy and saving, which persuades us to be humble in
Conversation, firm in Faith, just and charitable in Works, true in Words, to
love thee with all our hearts, as a loving Father, to fear thee as a revenging
God: to prefer nothing before Christ, (who preferred us before all things) and
the like.

This we may contradict.

Let that be done as much as may be. Let both be done.

Let us show our obedience to thee here, Ps. 103.20.
as the Angels do in Heaven.

All other Creatures obey thy will. The Sea passes not its bounds. The Earth
alters not its station. And all things else are obedient to thy will, only Man
is disobedient to it.

Thy will, and all thy will, Thy will.
without contradiction.

Thy will, and all thy will, without exception.

Thy will, Act. 21.14.
and not our will. The Lords will be done. Jam. 4.15.
If the Lord will.

Thy will be done in all things, as well pleasing as displeasing to us.

Let not us argue or dispute what is profitable, what is unprofitable; what
pleasant, what hard to flesh and blood: but what thou will, let it be done.

Let our blind and perverse will be led by thy most holy will.

Graft thy will by thy Spirit into ours, as into barren stocks. If our wills be
refractory to thine, root out, dissipate ours, and establish thine; let thy
will over-master ours, conform our wills to thine. Turn our Nill into thy Will.

In Earth as in Heaven, In Earth as in Heaven.

Hallowed be thy Name.
In Earth as in Heaven,
Thy Kingdom come.
In Earth as in Heaven,
Thy Will be done.
Let Heaven be the Pattern and Rule to Earth in all things.

Let us begin to be on Earth, as we would be in Heaven hereafter.

As in Heaven.
1. As by thy blessed Angels.

Oh that we might do thy will, and no less thy will now, than they that hope to
be like them hereafter.

Lu. 20.36.
2. As thy Saints.

Who are Heavenly, even Heaven upon Earth.

3. As the inward Man.

The Spirit which is from Heaven; that professes it self delighted in doing
thy will: that complains that it is hindered from doing it.


Oh that the old Adam made of the Earth had been so ready to do it!

In Earth.
In Earth; in all the Earth: But especially in this part of the Earth where we
live. We are Earth, and of the Earth, let thy will be done in us.

As in Heaven.
As in Heaven; not as much, or as well: Nor with equal proportion, but likeness:
Nor in as great measure, but with like affectinn, willingly, readily,
faithfully.

Let us imitate, though we cannot equal.

We beg thy grace to do thy will, as thy Angels and Saints do it. But because
many things hinder us, we say with Saint Augustine, Give us power and ability
to do thy commands, and then command us what thou please.

And if our condition in this life will not admit so much, yet Lord accept our
desires, which cry to thee, Thy will be done. And if our desires be unperfect
also, yet hear our cry in the Prophets words, Psalm. 119.
Our souls have longed to desire thy Laws, and Commandments always.

Here we may consider, 1. First, Give us this day our daily Bread.
The excellent order and method of this Prayer: For what ought a Son before all
things, and with more fervency desire, than the Honor of his Father, the
Prosperity of his Kingdom, and Obedience to his Will? 2. And in the next place,
what is more proper to Children, than to ask Bread of their Father? or what
more necessary for them?


And in this Petition we are 1. To depend wholly upon his Providence. 2. To
acknowledge him the Giver of it only. 3. Lastly, We are Patiently to expect it
from him.


In it we consider also, 1. What he is to give, Bread. 2. What manner of Bread.

Our Bread.

Daily Bread.

3. To whom he is to give it.

To us.

4. When to give it.

To day.




There is in us a double Nature or Substance, which requires two sorts of Bread.

Esa. 55.2.
1. The Soul has her viands to be provided. Jer. 15.16.
The Bread of Angels. Ps. 65.4.
The Bread of Heaven, the Word, Heb. 5.13. 14.
the Bread of Life, Christ Jesus in the Flesh.

Jo. 6. 33. 35. 48.
Lord give us of this Bread evermore.

Jo. 6. 3,4.
2. The Body also craveth its sustenance, its Bread, that is, all the
necessaries of this life.
Our Belly is a troublesome Clyent, and except it be satisfied likewise, it
draws our minds from thee.

Thou, O Father, have promised to add all things, Mat. 6.33.
if we first seek thy Kingdom. Behold we have sought it, give us therefore
Bread, either fine, middle sort, or course, which of them shall seem good to
thee.

And give us that which may feed, and not choke us, either with the care of
them, or neglect of Thee. Give us frugal, sober Bread, not dainty fare, Bread
necessary, not superfluous: For we are not to take thought for the flesh, To.
13.14.
to fulfill the lusts thereof.

In this word Bread, Bread.
are contained all things necessary, and conducing to the maintenance and
preservation of our lives.

As Breathing it self.

Vescitur aura aetherea.

Sleep, to refresh our weary bodies.

Honest hearts, by which we get our maintenance,

And a competency of estate, are all particulars of that which is contained in
the word Bread.

And with Bread, give us, O Lord, The Staff of Bread. Lu. 26.26
Health of Body. 1 Reg. 19. 8.
Wholesome Air. Psalm. 6.2, 91. 16.
Content of Mind. Convenient Dwelling. Pro. 15.
Peace in our Days, and the like.


Our Bread.
Ours, as proper to Children, by a double right, of Prayer, Labor.

Yet so ours, as first Thine, Thine by gift, because thou will, not because
thou art our Debtor.

Ours for use. For neither Thou, nor thy Angels, need this Bread: But we, being
of corporeal substance, need corporeal sustenance.

We, being Travelers, need our Viands.

Bread.
For our necessity, not for superfluity; which may profit the soul, not hurt the
body; which may nourish the soul, not destroy the body.

Genesis 28. 20.
If the LORD will be with me, and will keep me in the way that I shall go, Ps.
30. 7, 8, 9.
and will give me Bread to eat, and Raiment to put on, so that I return in
peace, then the Lord shall be my God.

Pro. 30. 7, 8, 9.
Two things have I required of thee, deny me not them before I dye; Remove far
from me vanity and lies; Give me neither poverty, nor riches; feed me with food
convenient for me: Lest I be full, and deny thee, and say, who is the Lord? Or
lest I be poor, and steal, and take the Name of my God in vain.

When we say Ours, Our.
we speak not as if it were due to us, but of thy bounty given to us, and
gotten and acquired by our labor, according to thine institution. Ours by
labor.

For if we be droans, if unprofitable burdens to the Earth, it is not ours, it
belongs to others.

If it be gotten by fraud, violence, or constraint, it is not ours.

It is surreptitious. Pro. 20.17
And that Bread is full of gravel.

Let us therefore follow our vocations, and not make thee associate in our sin,
by requiring Bread, being our selves idle and sloathful, or fraudulent and
deceitful.

So ours, Ours.
as if we have more than we need, and any thing remain more than is necessary
for our estate and condition, we impart and communicate it to those which want.

And if we shall withold that which is superfluous from the poor and needy,
we shall be thieves of that which is our own.

It is therefore ours, so, that it may be other men's, by and through our hands.

Give.
Give it thou. Bless thou the labors of our hands: for there are which labor,
and yet want. But when it comes of thy gift, a blessing come with it; and
without thy providence our labors are in vain, the rather, because we are too
prone to sacrifice to our own nets, Hab. 1. 16.
and ascribe the enjoying it to our own labors.

Therefore open thou thy Barnes, open thou thy Treasury: For when thou openest
thy hand, every thing is filled with thy good. Ps. 104.28


Give.
Except thou give it, we shall have no benefit by it; it will nourish no more
than a stone.

Give it thou, for on thee we depend, to day, and to morrow, and all our life.

Give it thou, not retribute, or pay.

It is no Debt.

Bread, and all other thy blessings are Donatives.

Give.
Give it Thou. Break it thou, and give it, let not us take it our selves. For
if thou give it, thou will give it in time, place, and measure: whereas if we
take it, we shall observe none of these rules, but take it to the destruction
of our own souls and bodies.

The Petitions run along still with the rule of Charity. Give us.
For when we say, give us, we speak not thus, To me, and my family. This word [
us] is more general: as well to our Brethren, the Sons of the same Father, who
want Bread, as to me, and my family.

That is, This day of our life, This day.
This time.

Heb. 3.
We are not to petition for an Age, being but of a day, and a particle of a day.

For being uncertain of our days, why should we beg bread for uncertain times?
For we are not assured of life for an age, a year, or a day. Our life is but a
day, and a day is the resemblance of our life: Yet, Providence is not hereby
forbidden, or that none should lay up with Joseph, or the Ant: Genesis 41.
But he that provides not beforehand, Pro. 6. 6.
is more foolish than an Ant, 1 Timothy 5.8.
nay worse than an Infidel.

We must gather up the fragments: Jo. 16.1^.
and the things we gather, provide, and lay up, must be justly gotten. We must
not put our confidence in them, and we must bestow, and use them well.

And forgive us our Trespasses.
Give us, O Lord, Bread convenient and meet, to serve us to day, and to morrow
also.

Esa. 27.9.
This is all the fruit, to take away sin.

This Petition tacitly implies an acknowledgement that we are sinners.

And indeed we are all sinners. 1 Jo. 1.8.
If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves and the truth is not in us.

And therefore it is most expedient to ask forgiveness.

For although God by his Omniscience is not ignorant of our sins, yet it shows
well in us, to ask forgiveness for them.

This benefit accrues by confessing them, that God is prone to absolve us.

1 Jo. 1. 9.
If we confess our sins, God is faithful and just to forgive them.

And this detriment befalls if we continue in them without atonement, that
they make a separation between God and us.

Esa. 39.2.
Our iniquities have separated between us our God: and our sins have hid his
face from us, that he will not hear us.

We have great need to beg forgiveness for them, Jer. 5. 25.
for Our iniquities have withholden good things from us.

And why? Lam. 3.44
God has set our sins as a cloud, that our prayers (for good things) might not
pass through.

And we know (says Saint John) that God hears not sinners, Jo. 9. 31.
that are not reconciled to him by confession.

As long as our sins stand up against us, and are not remitted, we cannot hope
to receive any good at Gods hands.

Therefore, O Lord, not only give, but forgive also, both the guilt and
punishment of them.

And in this thy Mercy is manifested, that thou give to those, who after they
have received, must ask forgiveness.

Give unto us who are thine enemies, and when thou have given, forgive us also.

Forgive us, Forgive.
for we confess we need forgiveness: And we have thy promises, and practice of
remission, to those which confess their sins.

1. He that covers his sins, Ps. 28.13.
shall not prosper: but whosoever confesses, and forsakes them, shall have
mercy.

Lev. 5. 5.
And it shall be, when he shall be guilty in any one of these things, that he
shall confess that he has sinned in that thing, etc. And the Priest shall make
an atonement, etc.

36. 40.
If they shall confess the iniquity of their Fathers, with their trespasses
which they have trespassed against me, 42.
etc. Then will I remember my Covenant, 1 Jo. 1. 9.
etc. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins.

2. Thy practice is seen in diverse examples.

Ps. 32. 5
Of David, by his own confession: I said I will confess my sins unto the Lord,
and so thou forgavest the wickedness of my sin.

By the mouth of Nathan. David said unto Nathan, I have sinned against the
Lord. 2 Samuel 12. 13.
And Nathan said unto David, The Lord also has put away thy sin.

Lu. 15.21.
Of the Prodigal Son.

18. 10.
Of the Publican.

7. 48.
Of Mary Magdalen, and diverse others.

Yet thou have not dealt so with the Angels that fell: Jude 6.
Their sins are not, will not be forgiven: Ours may in thy good pleasure.

We are unworthy.

Let us not be unthankful.

They be Debts which we owe, Our Trespasses, or Debts.
and pay not, but detain against the will of the Owner.

We are Debtors to thy Commandments, being thy Creatures, and created to the
keeping of them.

As often then as we omit, and have undone those things which thou command
us to do, and commit those things which thou forbiddest, we detain a Debt, and
become Debtors or Trespassers.

We see then that all men are sinners and debtors. And forgive.


That there are sins which deprive us not from the Sonship of God.

That there is place and time for remission after Baptism.

Now of our sins, some are committed
Ignorantly, others Of knowledge. Unwillinlgy, others Willingly and greedily.
Before our calling, others Being called. Against God, others Against our
Neighbors and our selves. In heart, others In word and deed. By our selves
alone, others With others either as authors or provokers. Of Commission, others
Of Omission. Secretly, others Of which our heart reproves us
And in all these is the root of bitterness. Deuteronomy. 29. 18.
Forgive them, O Lord, retain not the offense: exact not the puunishment due
for them. Heb. 12. 15.
Be reconciled to us, by laying aside thy just displeasure by receiving us to
thy favor and grace.

Connive at them while they are doing.

Bring them not into question, call them not into examination, nor us to
account for them being done.

And the hand writing that is against us,

Tear it.

Hang it upon thy Sons Cross.

Cast it behind thee.

Drown it in the Sea.

And as the morning Cloud, make it to vanish away, and come to nothing.

Forgive them, because he that taught us thus to pray, (our Surety) has paid,
and discharged these Debts.

Not only my trespasses, Forgive us
but the offenses of my brethren.

There is in this Petition a brotherly Charity also; To. 15.30
and as Christ transferred our sins upon himself, so charity takes our brothers
sins to us, and makes us pray for them.

And it is but Justice also, to pray for the sins of others, in regard many
offenses are committed by them by our persuasion or example.

Not only my trespasses, Forgive us
but the offenses of mine enemies. Act. 7.66.
As thou forgivest us, 2 Timothy 4. 16.
so forgive our enemies also. And this is the highest pitch of charity.

As we forgive, etc.
Forgive, and it shall be forgiven to you, was thy Sons promise. Blessed be thy
name for propounding so easy a condition to us.

To forgive a mite, and be forgiven a talent.

Oh happy exchange, to receive gold for dross! a pearl for stubble!

Oh happy necessity, imposed on us thus to pray! For a malevolent mind can
neither be lifted to God, nor quietly and peaceably conversant with men. And
while he makes us like himself by this condition, that is slow to wrath, and
ready to forgive, he makes us also acceptable to himself, and substitutes us as
it were in his own place, gives us power to forgive offenses.

Blessed therefore be Thou, O Lord, for dealing thus mercifully and wonderfully
with us, in teaching us daily to pray thus, and daily to forgive, and to be
forgiven. And that do bind us by this condition of mutual forgiveness. For he
that forgiveth not, prays against himself, and in effect thus prays, Lord
forgive not me, for I do not forgive.

If we perform not what we say we do, we shall never be forgiven. And it is but
due on our parts to forgive others. For God has already forgiven us for
Christ's sake: we promise then no more than we owe to him already.

Grant us therefore grace, O Lord, to follow thy example, fully and freely to
forgive the offense, and not to retain the punishment, or any malice to those,
whom we seem to forgive.

We petition well and rightly, let us do it effectually henceforth. That thou
may not have cause to say, Ex ore tuo te judico. Thou have not, nor shall be
forgiven.

When we say [ as we] we promise not a pari, As we
but a simili; not so much in quantity, but the like in quality. For we ( God
help us miserable sinners) forgive imperfectly, but God freely and absolutely.

Neither do we say it, O Lord, as challenging, or meriting any forgiveness by
our forgiving, but to show our conformity to Thee in forgiving. We cannot
better discover our selves to be thy Disciples, or Children, than by being
pitiful, and ready to forgive and pass by offenses.

And lead us not into Tentation.
There are two sorts of Tentation, 1. Of Trial. 2. Of Deceit, or Seducing.

1. That of Trial is, when God does any thing to prove the constancy and
affection of his servants, and this is good. Genesis 22.1.
As were the trials of Abraham, Job, Job 1.
and his People. Ex. 15.25.16.4. 10. 20.
2. That of Seducing, is, when we are tempted by the Devil, his Ministers, or
our own Flesh, Deuteronomy. 8.2. 16. 23. 3.
to forsake God, and his Commandments; and this Tentation we pray against. For
what benefit shall we reap by forgiving our old sins, if we contract new?
O Lord, not only be pleased to pardon that which is past, but prevent and keep
us from committing the like. Let us not be encouraged to sin, because of thy
bounty in blotting out our former offenses: but rather to thankfulness, for thy
mercy, and to care, that we offend no more.

Deliver us from that which is past. Subvention. Keep us from that which is to
come. Prevention.
Lest we turn with the Dog to the vomit, or the washed Sow to the mire. 2 Pet.
2.22.


It is enough that we have spent the time past in the works of the flesh. 1
Pet. 4 2.


For the enemy is never readier or nearer to us, Mar. 20. 44.
than when the house is swept clean. Therefore the danger being so near us,
give us grace, O Lord, to be the more wary of him.

Behold, O Lord, the roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. 1 Pet. 5.8
He is at hand to ensnare us, either with his own malice, the delights of the
world, or the pleasures of the flesh. If he cannot prevail by fair means, he
endeavors by force to compel us; If he cannot puff us up with delight, then he
attempts to deject us with sorrow, if thou be from us. Wherefore, O Lord,
forsake us not, and by forsaking us, lead us into tentation. For of our selves,
without Thee, we have no power to resist him, nor has he, without Thee, any
power to tempt us.

Let us not flee to the Enemy, O Lord, being overcome, either by his insulting
over us: nor suffer us to descend to conditions of peace with him, to pacify
him with our yielding, hoping thereby to make him more mild, for that will not
be.

Let us rather look up to Thee, lest we yield to his violence, or give credit
to his craft, presuming either upon our own strength, or destitute of thy help.

Let us perceive his snares by thy light.

Let us resist his assaults by thy strength and power.

Let us neither do evil, or omit that which is good, by being tempted.

Let no Tentation, but such as is common to Man, take hold on us. 1 Cor. 10 33
Let it be as Christ's Vanne, winnowing that which is evil from us, and not the
Devils Sieve, casting through it that which is good.

Let us come out of Tentation, as purified silver, and not be burnt as dross.
Give us a happy issue with our Tentations.

Let it be to the trial of our Faith, and the confusion of Satan. Lead us not
further in, than thou will bring us out again. If in thy Justice thou lead us
in, yet in thy Mercy lead us out. Lead us not to leave us.

Thou, O Lord, temptest no Man; thou leadest none in, Jam 1.13.
but those that first led in themselves, nor hardnest any, but those who first
hardened themselves. Leave not, give us not over to Satan, nor our own wills.

Let us not be rebellious, Ecclus. 3. 26.
and provoke the Tempter; nor love danger, lest we perish therein.

It is a dangerous thing to be tempted, for the uncertainty of the victory.

It is Presumption to desire it, but Humility to decline it.

It is joyfully to be endured, but by no means to be desired.

Lead us not, Lead us not.
or rather bring us not in, do not necessitate us.

There is difference between tempt, and lead into tentation.

The first is Satan's act, the other oft-times is Gods.

GOD led Christ into the Wilderness, but he was tempted by the Devil.

If it be thy pleasure to suffer us to be led in, yet bring us back, as thou
did our Savior.

Into Tentation.
The Tempter often assayles us, O Lord, do not thou deliver us into his power,
to be sifted; but if thou loosest his reins for a time, as thou did sometimes
in Job's case, yet moderate the combat between us, we pray thee, and either
lessen the tentation, as our strength abates; or increase our strength, as the
tentation grows strong, that we may have a joyful issue from it. For if we
neither overcome, nor (being vanquished) become more humble and cautious
thereby, the tentation will be to our destruction, not to our trial.

Let it therefore be to our correction, not to our condemnation, we beseech
thee.

But deliver us from evil.
Not only Lead us not in: that is not sufficient, except thou deliver us also.

If we cannot be free from tentation, yet deliver us from the evil of it. From
tentation that is evil.

All things are Evil which divert us from thee; From evil
but especially that evil enemy of thine, and for thy sake our enemy; for he is
not our enemy, in respect of our selves: we are not of such strength, as that
he should desire to oppose us; but he is our enemy, because we are thy
Children, and belong to thee. Deliver us, O Lord, from the evil of his bondage.

Let GOD arise, and let his Enemies be scattered. Let not the Enemy be able to
do us violence, nor the Son of wickedness hurt us. Ps. 68. 1. 89. 23.


Deliver our Souls, O Lord,
From the neithermost Hell.
From the power of the Dog. 22. 20. 21.

From the Lions mouth, and the horns of the Unicorns.
Out of the mire, that we sink not: 69. 15. 16.
From the deep, and let not the pit shut her mouth upon us.

And deliver us, not only from him, From evil.
but from his malice also. From whatsoever poison he has breathed on the
Creatures. From the enmity of the World.

Take us not from the world, but deliver us from the evil of it. From
whatsoever is evil in our flesh.

Deliver us from our selves, as we are evil.

From evil.
Deliver us also, as from the evil of sin, so from the evil of punishment. From
the evils and miseries of this life.

Especially of the life to come.

Esa. 38.14
O Lord, we are oppressed, undertake for us.

Mat. 8. 25
Lord, carest thou not that we perish.

We are brought into bondage by sin, Captives to Satan, and liable to thy wrath.

We are not able to match with our enemies by our own strength.

Assist us thou, and deliver us.

Deliver us by thy Son, and we shall be free.

He overcame the Devil, and the World.

He overcame them in himself: Let him overcome them also in us.

He overcame the Devil in himself, by breaking his head, dis-arming him, and
diminishing his power.

Let him overcome him in us, by giving us the Armor of the Spirit, and
increasing our strength and grace.

Deliver us from the evil of sin, From evil.
that it have no dominion over us, a part ante.

Deliver us from the evil of sin, when it has prevailed over us, a part post.

And that presently and speedily, if that it seem good to thee: But if not so
soon as we desire, yet let thy deliverance come certainly. Lest the pit shut
her mouth upon us.

Deliver us from evil, From evil.
especially from that evil, that carries with it a show of good. When the Enemy
pretends to condemn that which is evil, and to approve that which is good.

From the Devil at Noonday.

From Satan transforming himself into an Angel of light. 2 Cor. 11. 14.


From pleasing Errors.

From sins declining and bending to the right hand: savouring of politic
wisdom.

Deliver us, from evil.
Deliver us, O Lords

From rebellious hearts.

Hos. 7. 16.
From polluted lips.

Esa. 6. 5.
Throats like open Sepulchers.

Ps. 5. 10. 144. 11.
Tongues talking vanity.

From evil and lustful eyes.

Mat. 7. 22.
From uncircumcised ears.

Ps. 58. 4.
Deaf like the Adder.

Heb. 12. 2.
From hands slow to good.

To. 3. 15.
From feet swift to evil.

Jer. 3. 3
From a forehead of brass; and a neck of Iron.

From these, and all other evils, Deliver us, O Lord.

Ps. 60. 11.
Lord, be thou our help, for vain is the help of man.

Deliver us so, that we may be freed, not only freed, but free.

So free from sin, that we may be servants to righteousness, and so long
servants to righteousness, that at length we may be adopted into Children,
heirs and coheirs with Christ.

Thine is the Kingdom.
Thine is the Kingdom.

The Kingdom is the Lords, says David.

Ps. 22. 18.
Two thing are considerable in this Conclusion. 1 Chronicles. 29. 11.


1. The Confirmation of our Faith, we believe that we are heard of GOD, who is
able and willing to give what we desire. 2. The End whereto we ought to refer
whatsoever we desire in our prayers, The Praise and Glory of GOD.
Thou art a King, Thine is the Kingdom.
and wilt hear thy Subjects. Thou have right and authority to bear rule; and
free command over thy creatures, the works of thy hands.

By thee Kings rule, Ps. 8. 15.
and unto thee must they surrender their Crowns.

All Potentates are but subordinate to thee, thy Vicegerents.

For though God was pleased to style Nebuchadnezzar King of Kings, Eze. 26.7
as having many petty Kings under him, 1 Timothy 6. 15.
yet is he himself, and he only, the King of Kings. Re. 17. 14


For he rules over all, Re. 11. 15.
as well Kings as others.

The Kingdoms of the world are become the Kingdoms of the Lord. Ps. 10.19


Thou art the great King, Mal. 1. 14
as thou speak thy self.

Thou removest, Dan. 2. 21
and sertest up Kings.

And thy Kingdom is not temporary or of short continuance, as other Kingdoms
are: Ps. 145. 11 Dan. 7. 27
but it is an everlasting Kingdom.

Heb. 1.18
Thy Throne endures for ever.

Ps. 10. 16.
The Lord is King for ever and ever.

1 Timothy 1. 17
Thou art the King eternal.

Power.
Thou have power and strength to manage this Kingdom. To. 9. 19.
Thou art mightier than our adversaries.

Who is able to resist thy power?

This power of thine has been felt in all ages.

Mic. 7. 18.
Who can do like thee, or what God is like thee?

Ps 66. 7.
Thou rulest by thy power for ever.

And this power is proper only to thee. Thou have spoken it, and David has
heard it more than once, that power belongs to God. 62. 11.


And that no small power neither.

147. 5.
Great is our Lord, and of great power.

Saint Paul calls it, the exceeding greatness of his power. Ephesians. 1. 19.


His mighty power.

Exo. 15 6.
Moses in his Song calls it, glorious power.

Col. 1. 11 2 Th. 1.9.
So Saint Paul.

Therefore thou, and thou only can give us what we ask.

Great is the glory of the Lord. And Glory.


Glory and honor is in his presence. Ps. 138.5.


He has set his glory above the Earth and Heavens also. 1 Chronicles. 16. 27.


He is rich in glory. Psalm. 8. 1. 113. 4. 148. 13.


He is the only King of glory.

And therefore thou expectest of us, To. 9.23. Ps. 24. 10. Mat. 2. 2
that we should give glory to thee. And, O Lord, our intent is to glorify thee.

We ask these things, as meaning and intending to use them to thy glory, and
say with the Angels, and Quire of Heaven, Luc. 2.14
Glory be to God in the highest. And with all the Creatures in Heaven, and
Earth, and under the Earth, and such as are in the Sea.

Blessing, honor, and glory, and power, be to him that sits on the Throne.
Rev. 5.13


And this Kingdom, Power, For ever and ever.
and Glory, endures not for a season only, but for ever: there shall be no end
of it.

Thy Kingdom is everlasting, Ps. 10. 16.
says David.

Rev. 7.12.
Thy Power everlastiug, say, and pray the Angels.

5. 13.
Thy glory is ever also.

Let us therefore say with those Heavenly people, 19. 1.
Allelujah, Salvation, and Glory, and Honor, and Power, unto the Lord our God.

Amen.
Behold, O Father, we have (according to thy Sons directions and form) presumed
to crave those things which we want.

We have made our necessities known to thee.

We steadfastly believe that thou art able to supply our wants.

We desire of thee, that thou would grant us those things which we have
craved of thee.

We look up to thee, we sigh and groan, and pray thee to confirm our votes and
wishes with thy Seal, Amen, So be it.

Rev. 1. 5.
Grant us our Petitions for his sake, that sent us to thee, and that is a true
and faithful witness, 2 Cor. 1. 20.
and in whom all thy Promises are Yea, and Amen.

Honor him in us, who deserve of our selves (without him) no good, but much
evil at thy hands. And say to our Petitions, Amen, So be it.

O Almighty LORD, Our Father which art in Heaven.
and our Heavenly Father, whose fatherly power and goodness is seen in the
Creation, Preservation, and Governing of all things, and upon whom, as a
Father, we wait and depend for all that is good: who art in all places by thy
presence, but especially in Heaven by thy Excellency; We thy poor Children,
whom thou have preferred before the rest of thy Creatures, Psalm. 8.
do, from the bottom of our hearts, wish and desire, that thy Name may be
Hallowed, glorified, and magnified, Hallowed be thy Name.
from the rising of the Sun, to the going down thereof, even through all parts
of the World: And that it may the better spread from one Nation to another,
Ephesians. 1.4.
give us grace ( who have received the Adoption of Children) so to walk before
thee in holiness and righteousness, that the Heathen, who have not known thy
Name, Mat. 5. 16.
seeing our good works, may glorify thy Name, Thy Kingdom come.
together with us. Thou see, O Lord, that we have many Tyrants amongst us in
this life; as the Devil malicious and cruel; the World vain and curious; the
Flesh frail and deceitful; and our own Will vile and corrupt; all which do
impetuously tyrannize over us, and oppose themselves against thy Kingdom.
Arise, therefore, O Lord, and suppress these Tyrants, and rule over thine and
our Enemies by thy power, and in us by thy grace, that we may hereafter be
Subjects in thy Kingdom of Glory. Thy will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven.
Let thy Kingdom come, and govern us by thy Providence, defend us by thy Might,
lead us by thy Spirit, and teach us by thy Word, Drive far from us the Prince
of this World, and do thou only Rule in us. Give us grace to follow the example
of thy blessed Angels, and all other thy Creatures, who readily and joyfully do
thy will. Let our wills follow thine in all things, and let nothing be
displeasing to us, which thy Will has decreed, either for our prosperity or
adversity. Let us do nothing contrary to thy Will, but let the performance and
execution of thy Will, be the whole scope and aim of our thoughts, words, and
actions. And to this end, give unto us thy holy Spirit, which may direct our
wills, enlighten our understandings, mollify our hearts, and make them
obedient to thy Will. We further cry unto thee, Give us this day our daily
Bread.
O Lord, ( who give food to every living creature, and feedest the young
Ravens that call upon thee) and pray thee, that thou would likewise give unto
us this day our daily Bread. First, and above all, the Bread of Life, which may
nourish us spiritually: and after that, Bread for our bodies, to sustain
Nature. Give us, we beseech thee, all things necessary (not superfluous) for
this life: and grant that we, using thy blessings as becomes us, may be
strengthened and enabled to pass this life quietly and soberly, and at the end
of these our days, by the merits and intercession of our Savior Jesus Christ,
obtain life eternal. And for as much, And forgive us our trespasses, as we
forgive them that trespass against us.
O Lord, as we know thou hear not unrepentant sinners, and that our sins
have (long since) prevented our prayers, and ascended into thy preiuce, to stop
the current of thy mercies, and to call for vengeauce against us: O Lord,
behold, that we earnestly repent us of them, and are heartly sorrowful for
them. Wherefore we humbly pray thee, for thy great mercies to mankind, in thy
Son Christ Jesus, that thou would be pleased to be reconciled unto us, and to
forgive us our Trespasses. Psalm. 130.
Enter not into Judgment with us, for if thou do, no man is able to abide the
mildness of thy Justice, much less the severity of it. Give us also grace to
follow the example of our blessed Savior, who forgave his Enemies, and prayed
for them, that we may forgive them that trespass against us: Lest, when thou
come to Judgment, thou dealest as severely with us, as thou did with him,
Mat. 18.
who had much forgiven, and would not forgive a little. Thou know, And lead
us not into Temptation.
O Father, how unapt we are of our selves to think a good thought, much less to
resist so great Enemies, as are hourly ready to assail us. Suffer us not
therefore to be tempted above our abilities; neither (by forsaking us, or
withdrawing thy hand of protection from us) Lead thou us into Tentation: but,
Lord, so strengthen us, that (although it be not good for us, to be altogether
free from Tentation, yet) by thy aid and grace, we may have a happy issue, and
joyful deliverance from it: And as we have humbly prayed thee, not to lead us
in: So we further desire thee to deliver us out of all evil. But deliver us
from evil.
For as long as we remain in this flesh, we shall have contiuual strivings and
wrestlings with diverse evils, but especially with the evil Spirit, the Enemy of
Mankind, who omitteth no opportunity to bring us into his bondage. But we are
comforted, O Lord, with the assurance of thy mercy, which can effect and work
more to our salvation, than his Malice to our destruction. Grant therefore, O
Lord, that we may be delivered from all evil, and from all our Enemies
spiritual and temporal, that so, Luc. 1.15.
we may serve thee ever hereafter, in holiness, and righteousness, all the
days of our life.

All these Blessings we have been the more confident to beg of thee, For thine
is the Kingdom, the Power.
O Lord, because we know assuredly that thou art King of Kings, none has
absolute power within thy Dominions but thy self, and that thou have power also
without resistance, to maintain thy right, and defend thy Subjects, being able
to give those things which are necessary for those who call upon thee
faithfully.

And we lastly pray thee, And Glory.
that seeing it will be for thy glory, to grant those things which we have
desired that with the bestowing of them, thou will also give us thy grace, that
we may use and employ them to that end for which thou gave them, even thy
Honor and Glory. That so being thy true servants here, For ever and ever.
we may be glorified with thee hereafter, who art Lord of all glory to all
Eternity.

Having thus discovered and laid open our necessities to thee, O Lord in that
form and manner which thy Son directed us, we humbly pray thee, Amen.
to say Amen to all our Petitions. In his Name, and for his merits sake, we
pray thee, to grant them. For though we have no deserts to challenge them, yet
his merits are numberless, by which we plead for them. And with this Sacrifice
and Oblation, we are bold to come unto thee, not only craving pardon for our
sins, but supply of our necessities. We come not to thee of our selves,
presuming of any thing in us; but we are sent by thy Son Jesus Christ, who has
commanded us, with confidence to press unto thy Throne, and in his Name to ask
whatsoever we shall need, either for this life, or the life to come. And as he
has sent us, so has he also put into our mouths, words meet for our request.
O Lord, take notice of the style, it is his own, and for his sake, say to what
we have required, Amen. So be it.

And thou, O blessed Savior, God and Man, intercede (we beseech thee) for us:
for thou only art our Advocate, Mediator, and Intercessor to the Father. Cover
our imperfections and nakedness, with the robes of thy righteousness, and
supply our poverty with the riches of thy merits: and cast nor those from thy
favor and grace, whom by Nature, thou of thy goodness, have vouchsafed to make
thy Brethren. Who live and reignest, with the Father, and Holy Spirit, now,
and for ever, Amen.

Petitions for Spiritual Graces.
OH that my ways were directed to keep thy Statutes, O LORD. Ps. 119 51


Blessed is the man whom thou teach out of thy Law. 94. 12.


119. 18.
Open mine eyes, that I may see the wondrous things of thy Law.

Teach me to do thy will, for thou and my GOD, let thy good Spirit lead me into
the Land of Righteousness.

Give me Grace, O LORD,

Romans 7.18
To know, that in me, (that is, in my flesh) dwells no good thing.

To abstain from fleshly lusts, which fight against the Soul.

To keep in mind always, Thou the World passes away, and the desire thereof;
And that the benefit which a Man gets by the World, is nothing but
Destruction.

Truly to say, Ps. 119.52
I have remembered thy everlasting Judgments, and my Son receives comfort
thereby.

1 Pet. 5.5.
O thou that give Grace to the humble, give me Grace to be humble.

Give me a good heart, Luc. 8.15.
which hearing thy Word, may keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience.

Genesis 6. 8.
O Lord, Let me find Grace in this eyes.

Heb. 12. 17.
Let me find a place and time of Repentance.

2 Cor. 6.1.
Let me not receive thy Grace in vain.

Heb. 12. 15.
Let me not fail, or fall from it.

But let me continue in it. Act. 13.43


And let me grow in it. 2 Pet. 3.18


To the end of my days.

Give me, O Lord, the works of Repentance Carefulness, Give me, O Lord, the
works of Repentance Defense, or clearing my self, Give me, O Lord, the works of
Repentance Indignation, Give me, O Lord, the works of Repentance Fear, Give me,
O Lord, the works of Repentance Vehement Desire, Give me, O Lord, the works of
Repentance Zeal, Give me, O Lord, the works of Repentance Revenge.


Give me Grace to think upon and do Whatsoever things are True, Give me Grace
to think upon and do Venerable, 2 Cor. 7. 11.
Give me Grace to think upon and do Honest, Give me Grace to think upon and do
Just, Give me Grace to think upon and do Pure, Give me Grace to think upon and
do Lovely, Give me Grace to think upon and do Of Good Report.
Give unto me, O LORD, Humility of Heart, Give unto me, O LORD, Charity to my
neighbor Give unto me, O LORD, Patience of Mind, Give unto me, O LORD,
Temperance of Life, Give unto me, O LORD, Chastity of Body, Give unto me, O
LORD, Contentedness of Mind, Give unto me, O LORD, Alacrity of Spirit.
Give unto me, good Lord, Perfect knowledge of my Sins, Give unto me, good
Lord, Hearty sorrow for them, Give unto me, good Lord, Perfect hatred against
them, Give unto me, good Lord, Fervent love to all Goodness, Give unto me, good
Lord, True obedience to thy Will.
2 Pet. 1.5.
Give me Grace, O Lord, to add To Faith, Virtue. Give me Grace, O Lord, to add
To Virtue, Knowledge. Give me Grace, O Lord, to add To Knowledge, Temperance.
Give me Grace, O Lord, to add To Temperance, Patience. Give me Grace, O Lord,
to add To Patience, Godliness. Give me Grace, O Lord, to add To Godliness,
Brotherly Kindness. Give me Grace, O Lord, to add To Brotherly Kindness,
Charity.
The Fruits of the Spirit, Love, Give unto me, O Lord, The Fruits of the
Spirit, Joy, Give unto me, O Lord, The Fruits of the Spirit, Peace, Give unto
me, O Lord, The Fruits of the Spirit, Long Suffering, Give unto me, O Lord, The
Fruits of the Spirit, Gentleness, Give unto me, O Lord, The Fruits of the
Spirit, Goodness, Give unto me, O Lord, The Fruits of the Spirit, Faith, Give
unto me, O Lord, The Fruits of the Spririt, Meckness, Give unto me, O Lord, The
Fruits of the Spirit, Temperance.
Give unto me, good Lord, Contempt of the World. Give unto me, good Lord,
Hatred of Sin. Give unto me, good Lord, Loathing of the flesh. Give unto me,
good Lord, Desire of Heaven.
Give unto me, o Lord, A right Faith to live well. Give unto me, o Lord, A sure
Hope to persevere well. Give unto me, o Lord, A perfect Humility to obey well.
Give unto me, o Lord, A true Charity never to be divided from thee.
Give me grace, O Lord, to be content with that which is necessary.

To despise that which is superflous.

Grant, O Lord,
That I may so live, that I repent not to have lived.

That I may so live, that no man may know I have lived amiss.

That I may so live, that I may always live.

That dying I may live, and living I may dye, Luc. 2.21.
and say with a cheerful Spirit, Lord, now leitest thou thy servant depart in
peace.

Phil. 1.23.
I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ.

Amen.
Prayers for Spiritual Graces.
O Blessed Lord Jesus Christ, who art my only Tutor and Instructor; and from
whom I have learned whatsoever I know; I beseech thee, that thou would
further teach me those things, whereof I am ignorant, and which are necessary
for my Salvation; that thou would keep me in things which I have already
learned, and rectify me in those matters, wherein (as a man) I err:
Strengthen me, and make me firm, wherein soever I waver, and am doubtful; and
keep me from that which is erroneous and hurtful. Above all things, O Savior,
strengthen my Faith, and give me grace daily to prosit in the knowledge and
understanding of thy Holy Word, and so govern all my actions by thy Holy
Spirit, that my life may be answerable to my knowledge; and that I may show the
fruits of whatsoever I have learned, by my good and religious conversation.
Give me a firm and assured hope in thee, and thy gracious promises, that in all
my troubles and necessities, I may be evermore confident in thy mercy. Be unto
me a strong Tower of defense, against mine Enemies; that whether the World
allure me, the Devil assail me, or the Flesh rebel, I may fly unto thee for
refuge. And although thou presently put not forth thy hand to help me, but
defer thy comfort, according to thy good pleasure; yet keep me from doubting or
despairing of thy aid, To. 4.16.
because thy promises are sure. 2 Cor. 1. 10.
Give me a fervent Love, and perfect Charity to my Neighbor; that I may be as
kind to him, and as careful of him, as of one who is a Member with me, of the
same Body, whereof thou ( O sweet Savior) art the Head. Let my love to him be
sincere and unfeigned, which may charitably relieve him in his wants, patiently
bear with his infirmities; and willingly forgive him all his trespasses against
me. Create in me, I beseech thee, a pure, mild, peaceable, and humble heart,
which may think harm to no man, nor recompense evil for evil, but good for
injuries. Cleanse me from all unclean and earthly desires, and lift up my heart
to thee, and Heavenly things: and so write thy Laws in it, that I may wholly
bend my self to keep them, and please thee, persevering in the same to my lives
end. Give me, O Lord, true compunction of heart, and so water it with the dew
of thy Heavenly Grace, that I may, in the bitterness of my Soul, with abundance
of tears, sighs, and groans, bewail and lament all my heinous and grievous
transgressions against thee. Give me grace, O Lord, that I may not boast in any
merits, or works of mine own, or have any confidence in them: but let me glory
in this alone, that I am a Member of that Body of thine which was crucified for
me, and did sufficiently satisfy for all the Sins of the World. If thou, O
Lord, look, or expect any merits from me, behold I tender unto thee thine own
merits, the merits of thy Death and Passion, which thou have vouchsafed to make
me partaker of; by virtue whereof alone, I dare boldly appear before thy
Tribunal. These merits I set between my sins, and thy Justice, and otherwise,
or in any other manner, I dare not, I will not contend with thee. O sweet Jesus,
I desire thee to offer them to the Father, as a propitiatory Sacrifice, for all
my great and grievous Offenses; that when my Soul shall depart from this Body,
it may by the same be freed and delivered from all the judgments and
punishments which are due unto it for sin, and be carried to that blessed
place, where there is no sorrow, but endless felicity, where thou, together
with the Father, and the blessed Spirit, live and reignest for ever.

Before Prayer.
O Almighty and everliving GOD, Heavenly Father, to whom it is manifestly
known, how inconstant, and wandering, the minds of men are, in any good actions,
and how easily we suffer our selves to be carried away, from the contemplation
of thee, by diversity of distractions, and unseasonable thoughts, which take
hold of us, in the time of our Devotions and Prayers unto thee; who also, by
thine only begotten Son Christ Jesus, did prescribe unto his Disciples a Form
of Prayer to be offered up to thee, Mat. 6. 9.
and have derived the same from them to us. Behold me, most wretched sinner,
wholly depraved and corrupt, entreating thee by the same Son, that for his sake
thou would infuse thy Holy Spirit into me, Ephesians. 1. 5.
which may adopt me into the number of thine Elect: that it may teach me how I
ought to pray, according to thy Holy Will; that it may allay all troublesome
and wandering thoughts in me, while I offer up my prayers and praises unto thee:
Suffer me not to serve thee with my lips, and be absent in heart from thee: but
create a right Spirit within me, that I being sensible of all thy graces and
comforts, may with joyful and holy zeal, perform my duty to thee: that so, my
prayers and desires may appear before thee, and in thy Sons Name, I may
effectually be heard, and my petitions may be granted, to the glory and honor
of thy most holy Name, and the endless comfort of mine own Soul, through the
same our only Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Before a Sermon.
O Most loving SAVIOR, I most humbly entreat thee, that thou would be
pleased, at this time, to enlighten my understanding, and to open my inward
ears, with the grace of thy Holy Spirit, that I may hear that sacred Word, with
an humble heart, and rejoice in it, in the obedience of the Spirit: That I may
be fully instructed thereby, how to do good, and avoid evil; and bring forth
the fruit thereof in my life and conversation: That thy Honor and Glory may be
thereby increased, the Devil and all other the Enemies of my Soul, may be
vanquished, my Soul may be saved; and at the last, I may appear with boldness
before thy Tribunal, and receive the reward of a good and faithful servant,
even his Masters joy, Mat. 25.25.
everlasting blessedness; and that, by thy merits only, O blessed Savior.

Petitions for Temporal Blessings, in which we are to desire of God,
THat he would be pleased to continue unto us,

The blessing of a good King, just and religious.

To give unto us,

Magistrates and Justices, upright and careful to see good Laws duly executed.

Teachers, to direct us in the Truth.

That he would bless us with Length and Goodness of Days. Health of Body.
Contentedness of Mind. Competency of Estate. Food and Raiment. Convenience of
Dwelling. Wholesomeness of Air. Fruitfulness of Cartel. Fruitfulness of Soil.


That he would make us happy In Wedlock, In Children, In Faithful Friends, In
Peaceable and loving Neighbors In Honest Servants, In Skilful Physicians.


That he would preserve our Goods, Good Name, Our Senses and Understanding.


That he would protect us, From Trouble, From Enemies, From Dangers, From
Losses, From Sicknesses.


That he would give Peace To all Nations, Peace To our Land, Peace In our
private Dwellings


Rules to be observed in the Morning.
WHen thou awakest in the Morning, shut and close up the entrance to thy heart,
from all unclean, profane, and evil thoughts, and let the consideration of
God, and goodness enter in.

When thou art risen, and art ready, retire thy self to thy Closet, or other
private place, and offer to God the first fruits of the Day; and in praying to
him, and praising him, remember, 1. To give him Thanks, for thy quiet rest
received, for delivering thee from all dangers, ghostly and bodily, and for all
other his benefits to thee. 2. Offer unto him thy self, and all things that
thou do possess; and desire him, to dispose of thee and them according to his
good pleasure. 3. Crave his Grace to guide thee, and to strengthen thee from,
and against all Tentations, that so thou may do nothing the day following
contrary to his will. 4. And Lastly, Beg of him, (according to the Rules before
prescribed) all things needful for the Soul and Body.


To which purpose pray as follows.

Morning Prayer.
I Thank thee, O Heavenly Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, for all thy
Blessings, which I (underservedly) have received from thee; that thou gave a
being from honest Parents, and in that part of the World, where thy Son Christ
Jesus is purely professed; that thou did endue me with Reason and
Understanding, and did also give me perfect Members and Senses: that thou
have preserved me ever since my birth, vouchsafed me health and liberty, and a
competency of means, to maintain me, and those whom thou have placed under me:
That thou have Elected me in thy Love, Redeemed me by thy Son, Sanctified me by
thy Spirit, and kept me this night past from all perils of Body and Soul, and
given me a sweet and comfortable rest. O Lord, I commend into thy hands my Soul
and Body, thoughts, words, and actions, and humbly beseech thee, that thou
would guide and order them all to thy honor and glory, and my endless and
eternal happiness. Enlighten my mind, that (the darkness and cloudy mists of
mine offenses being dispelled) I may walk before thee, in my vocation, Romans 13.
13.
without offense, as in the day, clean, unspotted, and unblameable. Give unto
me thy Holy Spirit, which may bridle my vain cogitations, and headstrong
desires; and order thou (I beseech thee) my words, and rectify all my actions.
O Lord, as thou have of thy bounty raised up my Body from sleep, so stir up my
drowzy Soul from the sleep of sin, and carnal security. Let my Body be ever
assistant to my Soul, in all good actions in this life, that they may both be
partakers of life everlasting. Thou, O Lord, have promised ( to those which
shall faithfully ask) all things necessary for this life: give me, I beseech
thee, (if it seem good unto thee) such a competent estate, as shall be
expedient to support my life, in a civil, modest, and religious manner. Give
unto me that which shall be convenient, but especially, O Lord, a heart and
mind contented, 1 Timothy 6. 8.
with whatsoever thou shall be pleased to allot unto me. Grant, O Lord, that in
thy Name, I may cast forth my Net, into the Sea of this World, and diligently,
carefully, and with an upright Conscience, follow that vocation in which thou
have placed me: that by thine aid and assistance, I may prosper, and have good
success in all my affairs. Bless, O Lord, the Kings Majesty, govern his heart
in thy fear, and guide his understanding, to do those things which shall be
acceptable to thee, and profitable to his Kingdoms. Give him loving and loyal
Subjects, and suppress his open and secret Enemies. And (together with him)
bless his Queen, and Royal Issue, make her as the fruitful Vine on the
Housetop. Ps. 128.3.
Bless all the State Ecclesiastical and Civil, from the highest to the lowest.
Comfort the comfortless and helpless. Bring all Travelers to their own beings
in safety, and direct all upon the Seas to their safe Ports. Show the light of
thy Truth to those which wander out of the right way. Give to all sinnen true
and hearty repentance, strengthen those which have begun well, and give thy
assisting grace, that they may persevere in goodness. To all my Friends,
Kindred, and Enemies, and to those which pray for me, give all thy good
blessings: Keep us all, from all evil, and make us to continue in thy Service
to our lives end; and after the course of this miserable life ended, bring us
to thine everlasting Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Or thus.
ALmighty and everlasting GOD, I praise and bless thee, from the bottom of my
heart, that of thy infinite goodness, thou have preserved me this night past,
and have (with the impregnable defense of thy Providence) defended me from the
power and malice of the Devil, and kept me both in Soul and Body from all his
devices and snares, and raised me from sleep, ( the image of death) and not
left me to be stifled in the darkness of my sins, but have given me a longer
space to repent me of them. I humbly entreat thee, that thou would not
withdraw thy hand of Protection from me, but take me into thy Tuition. Watch
over me with the eyes of thy mercy, Ps. 119 5.
and direct me in the way of thy Commandments. Endue me with those graces of
thy Holy Spirit, whereby I may pass this day, and the rest of my life, to the
praise and glory of thy Name, the benefit of my Neighbor, and the salvation of
my sinful Soul. Keep me, O Lord, from all sin, bridle and mortify my flesh,
that I offend not, nor fall into any transgressions, which may provoke thy
wrath against me. Direct my Soul and Body, my words and actions, according to
the rule of thy Will. Divert my heart from fastening too much upon transitory
pleasures, and convert it to the delight of eternal joys. And because I am not
worthy, O Lord, that thou should hear me, poor wretched sinner, for any worth
in me; behold I set before the merits of thy only Son, 1 John 2.2.
who is the propitiation for our sins: look upon him, and for his
Righteousness, pardon the offenses of me thy servant, and grant to me those
things, by thy mercy, which by the strict Rule of thy justice are not due to
me. Defend me, O Lord, from all mine Enemies. Arm me with thy Spiritual
Weapons, put on me the Clothing of Wisdom and Strength, Ephesians. 6.
the Brestplate of Righteousness, the Helmet of Salvation, the Shield of Faith,
and the Sword of the Spirit, that in this earthly Pilgrimage, I may manfully
oppose the Enemies of my Soul, the Concupiscence of the Flesh, the Tentations
of the World, and Malice of the Devil, that so having finished valiently the
course of this Terrestial Warfare, I may hereafter praise thee in thy Celestial
Kingdom. And thou, O Lord, who give food to every living Creature, and
feedest the young Ravens which call upon thee, Ps. 147.9.
be merciful unto me, in the supply of those necessaries, which I daily want.
Preserve me in health, 1 Timothy 6.8.
give me food and raiment, and sufficient to maintain me in that course of
life, to which it has pleased thee to call me, that having sufficient in all
things, 2 Cor. 9.8
I may abound in good work. And grant that I may lead a quiet life in all godly
conversation; Jam. 3.13.
That having and using thy blessings worthily, I may pass this life with joy
and comfort, till it please thee to call me to a better. Give thy blessings to
the Kings Majesty, the Queen, the Royal Issue, and the whole Estate of this
Kingdom; and grant, that we may all bend our thoughts and studies to please
thee, that at the last, by the merits and intercession of Jesus Christ, we may
be received to thy Heavenly Kingdom, Amen.

Or thus.
O Almighty Lord God, which day after day do minister to sinful man infinite
occasions, whereby we may be stirred up to praise thy holy Name, and art most
plentiful in pity, and favorable to those, which with pure hearts, and
unfeigned faith call upon thee; behold me, thy poor unworthy servant, with the
eyes of compassion, that at this time am bold to offer up unto thee a Morning
Sacrifice of praise and thanks for all thy blessings? and amongst the rest, for
that thou have vouchsafed, after a sufficient and quiet sleep, to raise me safe
from my bed again, which favor thou have not afforded to many others, who in
far greater measure have deserved it, than my self; for which mercy of thine, I
am not able (through my insufficiency and weakness) to give unto thee due
praise and thanksgiving. I pray thee therefore, in thy dear Sons Name, ( in
whom thou art well pleased) Mat. 3.17.
to accept these poor and weak thanks; and for his sake also to be further
aiding and assisting unto me this day following, in whatsoever I shall take in
hand. For thou know, O Lord, how feeble man's nature is, insomuch, that if he
trust to his own strength, of necessity he must fall into many miseries,
errors, and dangers. Have mercy therefore upon mine infirmities, and be
propitions and helping to me, that by thy illumination, I may discern and
perceive good from evil; and by thy leading and direction, may follow the one,
and avoid the other. Lord, so guide me with thy holy Spirit, that I may neither
do, speak, nor think any thing this day contrary to thy holy Will. Behold, O
Lord, I offer my self a living Sacrifice to thee; and humbly pray thee to
accept it. Good God, direct my Soul in the way of thy Commandments; increase
my Faith, Ps. 119.5.
strengthen my Hope, enlarge my Charity, and infuse all the good Graces of thy
Holy Spirit into me. Give me grace, so to remember my sins, as that thou may
forget them; and so to forsake them, as that thou may forgive them. Instruct
me in all goodness, and give me the grace of Perseverance, that I fly not back
from any good courses in this life, but that I may go forward, and continue in
them, to the end of my days. O Lord, who have promised the necessaries of this
life, Mat. 6.36.
to those which shall first seek thy Kingdom; I humbly entreat thee, to give
unto me this day, all things necessary for my sustentation; as Food, Raiment,
Health of Body, Joy of Heart, Peace of Conscience, and a blessing to all my
endeavors; give me a mind contented with that which shall be sufficient, and
not desirous of that which is superfluous; that I may pass the rest of my days
on earth religiously, honestly, and soberly, as becomes thy servant, to thy
honor and my endless comfort. Be gracious to the Kings most Excellent Majesty;
his Royal Queen, the Royal Issue, the whole Estate, Clergy, Nobility, Gentry,
Mastistrates, and Commons; give us all grace in our several places, to do our
Duties, as in thy sight; that at the last (by the merits of Jesus Christ our
Savior) we may receive the reward thereof in thy eternal Kingdom, where thou
reignest, together with the same our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Holy Spirit,
World without End.

Morning Prayer for a Family.
O Almighty Lord God, Heavenly Father, we give thee most humble and hearty
thanks, in that thou have not only of nothing created us after thine own Image,
Genesis 1.26.
but also have from time to time most graciously preserved us; even to this
present Morning, from all dangers and terrors, and have given us this night
past sweet sleep, and comfortable rest; whereby we are refreshed and fitted to
our bodily labor. We thank thee, O Lord, for all thy Spiritual Blessings, for
our Regeneration, Justification, Sanctification in some measure, and our
Redemption by Jesus Christ. We praise thy Name, for thy bountiful supply of all
things necessary for this life, as also for thy patient and long expectance of
us in our Conversion. O Lord, we confess that we have been so far from the
serious consideration of thy favors to us, and from rendering due thanks unto
thee for them, that in stead thereof, we have grievously offended thy Majesty,
with most abominable and vile sins, notwithstanding thou have sought to reduce
us to thy obedience, by the good motions of thy Holy Spirit. As often, O Lord,
as we look about us, either with the eyes of our bodies or minds, so often do
thy fatherly and innumerable benefits appear unto us. For all which, we tender
again and again, from the bottom of our hearts, infinite thanks unto thee; and
humbly desire thee, for thy mercies sake in Christ Jesus, to pardon all our
ingratitude and rebellions. Enlighten us, we pray thee, with thy holy Spirit,
that we may see our imperfections; kindle our zeal toward thee rule and govern
our minds, wills, affections, and actions, that we may not offend thee any
more. And give us Grace. that we may always think, speak, and do, whatsoever
shall be pleasing unto thee, and abstain from all things which shall displease
or ofsend thee. It is more than enough, O Lord, that we have been hitherto so
rebellious against thee: It is too much, that we have been so negligent to
serve thee; and it is worst of all, that we have been so ungrateful to thee for
all thy blessings. Let all evil and wickedness now depart from us, and let new
manners, new affections, and new hearts be renewed in us. We commit our selves,
O Lord, wholly into thy protection, this day, and the rest of our lives; and
most humbly desire thee, of thy infinite goodness, that as now thou have put
good thoughts into us, thou will be pleased to perfect them in us: so that
being led by thy Holy Spirit, we may do that which is acceptable to thee, and
love, serve, honor, and praise thy holy Name all the days of our lives. And
for a much, O Lord, as thou have promised to those that love thee, all things
necessary for this life, we call and cry to thee, O our Father, which art in
Heaven, to Give us this day our daily bread, even whatsoever is needful and
expedient for our sustentation. Give us, O Lord, sufficient for our
maintenance, lest we take evil and indirect courses, or blaspheme, or murmur
against thee: and not too much, lest we forget from whose hands we receive it.
Give not only that which shall be necessary, but contented minds also with it,
Bless, O Lord, the labor and work of our hands, bless us at home and abroad,
and grant that every one of us may truly (as in thy sight) walk in our several
vocations; and diligently and carefully intend the same; making a Conscience of
all our ways, that by thy gracious favor; and our own endeavors, we may have
prosperous success in all things that we shall undertake. Continue, O Lord, thy
Gospel among us. Bless our gracious King, with the Queen, the Royal Issue, the
Lady Elizabeth, with her Princely Offspring; the whole Land, and all sorts and
conditions of people in it. Bless all that travel by Sea or Land, and take into
thy protection all Orphans, Widows, and all that suffer wrong: Give health and
strength to the sick and weak, and joy and comfort to the sorrowful and
afflicted. Bless us, O Lord, with healthful and sound Bodies, keep our good
Names unspotted, and unblemished. Bless the fruits of the Earth, and give us
wholesome, peaceable, and seasonable times. These, and all other thy blessings,
which thou know better to give, than we to ask, vouchsafe (if it seem good
to thy Majesty) to give us, for the worthiness of thy Son Jesus Christ our
Lord, in whose blessed Name, and absolute Prayer, we close up our imperfect
Prayers, and say as he has taught us: Our Father, etc.

Rules for Evening and Night.
AS we usually twice a day at the least, take our bodily sustenance, so should
we be no less careful for the refreshing our Souls; but twice a day likewise
(Morning and Evening, if not oftener) dispose our selves to Devotion and Prayer.
When thou therefore retirest thy self, ( as in the Morning) remember, 1. To
give God thanks that he has delivered thee from the dangers of the day past,
prospered thee in thy affairs, and given thee necessaries for thy sustentation.
2. Examine thy Conscience narrowly, and consider wherein thou have (the day
past) offended God, either in thought, word, or deed: and having set thine
Offenses before thee, confess them to him, ( and in the bitterness of thy Soul)
repent thee, be sorry for them, and crave pardon for them, and desire his grace
that thou offend no more in the like. 3. Pray to God to continue his care ever
thee, the night following, and to defend thee from all perils and dangers.


So that going to thy rest with these good action: and thoughts, thou shall do
like to those, which rake up Fire in the Embers over night, that they may the
more readily find it in the Morning.

In the Night.
When thou awakest in the Night, call upon God likewise, ( for the Night was
not made wholly for sleep) praise him, contemplate, and meditate upon his
works. Sometimes weep for thy sins, according to the practice of DAVID. Ps. 6.
6.
For as the nightly dew refreshes and tempereth the Earth; so do our nightly
tears assuage our Concupiscences. And sometimes rejoice in the Lord, according
to that of the Psalmist, 149. 5.
for the great benefits thou have received from him. By these means, keeping
thy self to one holy Exercise or other, thou shall be sure to avoid the Devils
Tentations, whose chief time of setting upon us, fitteth best with his works,
which are usually styled, Ephesians. 5.11.
The works of darkness.

Evening Prayer. The Lord has granted his loving kindness in the `Day, Ps.
10.4^.
therefore in the Night will I sing of him, and make my Prayer to the God of my
life.
O Lord God, Father everlasting, I yield thee most humble and hearty thanks,
that thou have not only averted thy punishments from me, which my grievous sins
have deserved; but instead thereof, have preserved me from all dangers, and
supplied me with all necessaries of this life. O Lord, I confess, that I have
so highly offended thee this day, that all the punishments which may be
inflicted upon vile and miserable sinners, are due to me. I confess, Repeat the
sins thou can call to mind.
O Lord, that I have offended thy Majesty in -- And not only these do I
acknowledge, but all the rest, which I have committed from my infancy, to this
present hour, wittingly, or ignorantly, in thought, word, or deed, against
Thee, my Neighbor, and my Self. O Lord, I confess my weakness, To. 7. 19.
I do not that which I should, and would do: but that which I should not, and
am unwilling to do, I do: Not regarding or fearing thy incomprehensible Glory;
venerable Presence, terrible Power, exquisite Justice, nor thy Goodness
unspeakable; for which, Ps. 143.2.
if thou should enter into judgment, what would become of me? But, O Lord,
for as much as thou art a Father of mercies, 2 Cor. 1.3.
and do not desire the death of a sinner, Eze. 33. 11.
if he return unto thee by unfeigned repentance: I most humbly (in the Name and
Mediation of our blessed Savior Christ Jesus) crave pardon for them. Lord I
repent, help my impenitency, and hear my request. Be merciful to me a sinner,
and pardon all my offenses, whereof thou, O Lord, know me to be guilty. And
I beseech thee, O Lord, for the time to come, to mollify my heart, water it
with the dew of thy Heavenly Grace, that I may not always bring forth thorns
and weeds fit for nothing but the fire. Cant. 1.4.
Convert me, O Lord, and I shall be converted; open my eyes, direct my heart
and ways: Draw me after thee, and being converted, 2 Pet. 2. 22.
suffer me not to return again with the Dog to his vomit. And forasmuch, O
Lord, as thou have appointed the Night to refresh our bodies, I humbly pray
thee, to defend me (as well sleeping as waking) from the snares of the Devil.
Psalm. 31.5.
O Lord, into thy hands I commend my Spirit, which thou have redeemed (by thy
precious death and passion.) Suffer it not to sleep in sin, and in it lie
languishing unto death, and so be buried in the grave of thy judgments: but
watch over it, I beseech thee, and defend it under the shadow of thy wings.
Psalm. 17.8.
Let me not be oppressed with unnecessary sleep, but raise me in due time to
thy Service and Praise. Thou know, O Lord, that of my self I have no
strength waking, much less when I sleep: I humbly therefore pray thee, to
defend my Soul, Body, Goods, (and all things which thou have bestowed upon me)
this Night, from all evil and damage; and so dispose of me, that I be not
troubled with any terrors, terrified with any vain fantasies, weakened by any
sickness, or impoverished with any casualties or crosses. Keep me, O Lord, from
all evil dreams, and unclean thoughts, and compass me with a wall of thy
mercies, that the Tempter approach not to my Bed: so that being preserved by
thy protection, and refreshed with comfortable rest, I may arise, and offer
unto thee my daily bounden duty and service, even praise and thanks to thy most
holy Name.

Or thus.
O Blessed Lord Jesus Christ, to whose inexhaustible bounty we owe all honor
and praise, I give thee all possible thanks, that thou have vouchsafed to keep
me this day from all evil, so that none of thy fearful judgments (to which I
was justly liable) have fallen upon me; but of thy unspeakable mercy, thou have
preserved me from them, and have also liberally, and with a bountiful hand,
supplied me with the necessaries of this life, notwithstanding my great and
manifold sins committed against thee. O Lord, I confess, that I have wasted the
time (which thou have given me for repentance) altogether idly, vainly, and
unprofitably, not so much as considering, or taking notice, that this day might
have been the last of my life, but have added and heaped up sin upon sin, in
thy All-seeing sight, as if I had stood in no fear of thee at all, daily
renewing (as much as in me lay) thy torments and passions: for which I have
deserved, that the Earth should open unto me, and Hell devour me: which, that
it is not come to pass, I ascribe (with all thankful acknowledgement) to thy
infinite mercy and goodness. O Lord, I acknowledge, that it is of thy goodness
alone, that I am thus preserved from all thy judgments, seeing that many
calamities have befallen diverse others, who have less deserved them than my
self. That some have therefore perished by water, some by fire, some by sword,
others by sudden and violent death, and that I live: That some have been taken
blind, some lame, some distracted in their senses: That others have sustained
much damage in their worldly estate, and I have escaped, and not been punished
in any of these kinds; To what shall I ascribe and attribute the cause? surely
to thy mercy alone, for which I cannot give unto thee sufficient thanks. But, O
sweet Savior, as thy mercy exceeds, so do our necessities increase; thou
can not want matter for thy mercy to work upon, by reason of our inabilities
to help our selves: Wherefore, I further pray thee, that this night following
may be also safe and prosperous unto me, that by a sweet sleep, and comfortable
refreshing, I may be fitted, when I awake, to serve thee with a thankful and
cheerful heart. And because, O Lord, that this life has not one certain hour,
I beseech thee to Enlighten mine eyes, that I sleep not in death, Psalm. 13.4.
and grant, that after I have rested quietly, I may, by thy grace and mercy,
arise to serve thee in singleness of heart. Lighten (O Savior) my darkness,
and mercifully keep me from all dangers of this night. Save me waking, and keep
me sleeping, that I may watch in thee, and rest in peace. There is nothing that
more resembles our Life, than the Day; nor the Grave, than our Beds: O Lord,
therefore, when I am laid down, and by sleep made unable to help my self, being
like unto a dead man, defend me then, by thy power, from the crafts and
assaults of the Enemy, that he do me no harm; so that (though my Body sleep) my
Soul may watch unto thee, and contemplate of the life to come. And grant, that
having passed the night quietly, I may arise as well from the sleep of sin, as
from my natural sleep; and with all alacrity pass the day following in thy
service; and in the end of my pilgrimage (by thy merits) receive the Crown,
which thou have promised to those that love thee, in that day which no night
shall follow, and in that Heavenly Kingdom where thou reignest, together with
the Father, and the blessed Spirit, world without end.

Evening Prayer.
Ps. 141.1.
LEt my prayer, O Lord, be set forth in thy sight, as the Incense, and let the
lifting up of my hands, be an Evening Sacrifice.

55. 10.
In the Evening, Morning, and at Noonday, will I pray, and that instantly, and
thou Lord shall hear my prayer.

(...). 1.
Blessed be thou, O Lord, Who have preserved me from the Arrow that flies by
day, and from the Sickness that destroys in the noonday.

Esa. 38.1.
Who have not cut off my life like a Weaver; nor made an end of me.

O Lord, I confess, that as my days have increased, so has my sin multiplied.

Pro. 24.16.
The just man falls seven times a day: But I miserable sinner, seventy times
seven times.

But I return to thee, O Lord, and repent: Luc. 17.4.
Let not the Sun go down in thy wrath.

O Lord, whatsoever good I have done this day, I acknowledge, that thou have
wrought it in me, and desire thee graciously to accept of me for it, as thy
Instrument only.

O Lord, whatsoever evil I have committed this day, I confess it to be the work
of mine own hands, and heartily pray thee to pardon it.

O Lord, which give the sleep of health to them that love, and causest those
that fear thee, Psalm. 13.4. Psalm. 91.5.
to sleep confidently, Lighten mine eyes, that I sleep not in death. Keep me
from the terrors of the night, and from the works of darkness.

Lord, Cant. 5.
though I sleep, yet let my heart watch to thee; and when I wake, let me be
present before thee, let my thoughts ascend to thee.

Grant, that I may always remember, that the night is no night with thee, Ps.
139.12
and that darkness and light are to thee alike.

Grant, that I may always meditate upon the long and last sleep, the sleep of
Death, the Bed of my Grave, Esa. 14.19.
and the Covering of Worms and Dust.

Let my sleep be a cessation from sin, and let me not in my sleep do, or think
any thing, that may offend thee, or defile my self.

And grant, that after the sleep shall depart from mine eyes, I may remember
thee, search my reins, and try my heart.

O Lord, I commend my self, and all that (of thy bounty) is mine, to thee.
Psalm. 71.1.
In thee I put all my trust and confidence.

Thou see in what dangers we are, what snares the Devil lays for us:

I humbly therefore pray thee, to defend me from him.

And grant me so to order and end my life, that I may sleep in peace, and take
my rest with thee, for the merits of Jesus Christ, etc.

Psalm. 4. 9.
I will lay me down in peace, and take my rest, for it is thou Lord only that
make me dwell in safety.

Evening Prayer for a Family.
O Almighty and everlasting God, who have appointed all times and seasons to
succeed in their due course; and have ordained the day for the works of the
day, and bodily labor; and the night to take our quiet rest and refreshing: by
whose providence and mercy, we have been preserved this day from all dangers,
and have been furnished with all things necessary for this life: we humbly pray
and beseech thee, that now, in this time of night and darkness (wherein we poor
and miserable sinners stand in most need of thy help and aid) thou would be
pleased, to keep us from all dangers; spiritual and temporal. O Lord, we
confess, that we have not deserved the least of thy favors; nay, if thou
should with strict eye examine our actions, how we have spent this day, and
the rest of our days past, we should not be able to stand in thy sight, Psalm.
5.5.
much less beg any further blessings of thee. For (notwithstanding thy manifold
and daily favors) we have in all things been rebellious and repugnant to thy
blessed Will; and obedient and conformable to the command of our Enemies; the
Flesh, the World, and the Devil: Insomuch, as we have lost our liberties, and
are become servants and slaves unto them. For we have wholly given ourselves to
serve the pleasures of the Flesh, in Concupiscences and other carnal Acts: We
have hearkened too much to the delights of the World, in covetous desiring that
which is not our own, in abusing the Creatures thereof, which were created for
our necessary use, and not for our wanton and insatiable desires: And we are
become the servants of Satan, in not opposing and resisting his unclean and
wicked Tentations. Our sins are infinite, and our iniquities are numberless, so
that we cannot, nor are any way able to recount them unto thee. We have fled
from thee, seeking us: neglected thee, loving us: stopped our ears to thee,
speaking to us: turned our backs to thee, reaching thy hand to us: forgotten
thee, doing good to us: and despised thee, correcting us. Yet, O Lord, we
humbly entreat thee, to show thy accustomed mercy to us, poor and miserable
sinners, who in grief and anguish of soul, confess these our offenses, and
earnestly and bitterly bewail them. Look upon us with the eyes of compassion,
not for any thing in us, but for the love and respect which thou bear to thy
Son CHRIST JESUS, in whom we verily believe, that thou art fully reconciled
unto us, Take away our sins, and the punishment due unto us for them. Let thy
wrath be turned from us, and destroy us not together with our manifold
transgressions. Lord, thou see our wickedness, and withal, how, and in whose
name, we crave thy mercy. Turn thee, O Lord, from thine anger, which thou
might justly pour upon us, and be gracious unto us, according to thy wonted
goodness, who abhorrest nothing which thou have made: Create also, we beseech
thee, in us, new hearts, hearts fit to serve thee, and write thy Law in them,
Jer. 31.33.
with the finger of thy Holy Spirit, that all our desires and actions may be
conformable to thy blessed Will. And now again, O Lord, we desire thy Majesty,
to take our Souls and Bodies into thy protection this night following: Suffer
us not to sleep in sin, but watch over us, Psalm. 17.8.
and defend us under the shadow of thy wings: Let not our sleep be excessive
or immoderate, but raise us again in due time, that after a quiet and moderate
sleep, we may arise to serve and praise thee joyfully, begin and perfect our
works justly: labor in our vocations truly; and seek thy Kingdom earnestly:
that at the last, by thee, with thee, and in thee, we may come unto the same
Kingdom, by the merits of our Savior JESUS CHRIST, in whose Name and Prayer we
are bold to call further upon thee, saying, Our Father, etc.

Prayers upon the Life and Death of our Savior Jesus Christ.
O Sweet SAVIOR, Who for the love of Mankind, did vouchsafe to descend from
thy Royal Throne, from the bosom of thy Father, into this vale of misery, and
to take on thee the form of a sinner, even humane flesh, in the sanctified womb
of the most chaste and pure Virgin, and be born without impeachment to her
Virginity;

Be pleased of thy great clemency, to make my heart thy habitation, adorn it to
that end with all Spiritual Graces, and be daily born in me, by renewing in my
Soul a fervent love to thee, and

Be merciful to me.

O Blessed Lord, Who being God Almighty, did not disdain at thy Birth, to be
wrapped in swaddling clouts, and to be laid in a Manger.

Grant, that I may be ever in thy fight a little Infant, in Humility and
Lowliness of Spirit: take from me all ambitious Thoughts, and

Be merciful to me.

O Gracious Lord, Who at thy Birth would be received into this World with the
joyful Hymns of blessed Angels, and be found to the great delight and
admiration of poor Shepherds;

Give thy Grace unto me thy poor unworthy servant, continually to persevere in
thy praises: to seek thee with the Shepherds affection, by seeking, to find
thee; and finding thee, always to retain and enjoy thee, and

Be merciful to me.

O Sweet Jesu, Who were pleased upon the eight day to be circumcised, and in
that most tender age of thine, did begin to shed thy blood, merely for the
love of me and mankind.

Cut off, I entreat thee, all superfluities from my Soul, and take from me all
evil thoughts, words, and works, and

Be merciful to me.

O Blessed Christ, Who (to the unspeakable comfort of me, and all thine Elect)
would be called by the saving Name of Jesus;

Grant, that the memory of this Name may ever cause a reverend respect in me
toward thee, and that by it I may be preserved all my life, and at the hour of
death, and

Be merciful to me.

O Loving Lord God, Who would be found in the Wise men which sought thee,
with Faith and Devotion; and who) having found thee) fell before thee with
Oblations of Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh;

Be pleased, I beseech thee, that I may find thee in Spirit, and worship thee
in Spirit and Truth: Offering unto thee the Gold of bright shining Charity, the
Incense of pure Devotion, and the Myrrh of perfect Mortification, and

Be merciful to me.

O Blessed Savior, Who to leave Mankind an example of Obedience and Humility,
would become subject to the Law, and be brought to the Temple, and there have
offered for thee the Oblations of the Poor, and not the rich;

Give me the Grace of Obedience, to subject my self willingly to my Governors:
Suffer not the least thought of pride to reign in me, but quench in me all
haughtiness of Spirit, with inordinate love, and conceit of my self, and

Be merciful to me.

O Gracious Lord, Who whilst thou were yet young and tender, were contentted to
suffer persecution, and flee with thy blessed Mother into Egypt;

Grant me such ability by thy grace, whereby I may not only suffer persecution
and affliction when it shall please thee, but also persecute and punish all
wickedness within my self before it grow too strong for me, and

Be merciful to me.

O Blessed Jesu, Who being sought for by thy blessed Mother three days,
would be found of her in the Temple;

Suffer me never to be severed from thee, give me such a devotion toward thee,
that I may never be weary in serving thee, nor satisfied with praising thee,
either in Church, or private Closet, and

Be merciful to me.

O Loving Lord, Who would enter the River Jordan, and there be Baptized by
thy Forerunner John the Baptist;

Be pleased, that I may be purified in this life by thy merits, and thereby
washed from all my sins, and

Be merciful to me.

O Gracious Savior, who did continue fasting and praying forty days and
nights together in the Desert, and after diverse Tentations, did overcome
Satan;

Grant, that I may chastise my flesh, and exercise my self in Fasting,
Watching, Prayer, and other Spiritual Excercises, and subdue all evil
Affections, which rebel against the Spirit, and

Be merciful to me.

O Blessed Redeemer, Who for my sake did subject thy self to many Sorrows and
Necessities, to Heat, Cold, Hunger, Thirst, Weariness, Sweat, Iourneys,
Persecutions, and Tribulations;

Strengthen me with the aid of thy Holy Spirit, that I may willingly bear all
Adversities, as coming from thy hand, and

Be merciful to me.

O Blessed Lord, Who, while thou were upon Earth, did vouchsafe to comfort
the Sons of Men, and heal their Infirmities;

Replenish my heart with all pious Affection, that I may account the miseries
of others as mine own, and supply their necessities in whatsoever I may,
according to my ability, and

Be merciful to me.

O Gracious Lord, Who, for thy love to Mankind, did eudure infinite Miseries,
Injuries, Calumnies, Blasphemies, and Revilings, even of those to whom thou
have done much good;

Create in me a heart pure and innocent, which may forgive mine Enemies, and
love them, rendering good for evil, whereby I may show my self a true follower
of thy perfect Charity and Patience, and

Be merciful to me.

O Merciful Savior, Who, to abrogate the Ceremonial Law, did eat the Paschal
Lamb with thy Disciples, and giving them an example of Humility, upon thy knees
did wash their feet;

Grant, that this example may take deep impression in me; give me perfect
Humility, true Obedience, and fervent Love, whereby I may love thee sincerely,
and all others unseignedly, and

Be merciful to me.

O Blessed Lord, Who, of thy great love, did institute the blessed Sacrament
of thy Body and Blood, whereby thou might continue with us to the end of the
World;

Stir up in me an earnest desire and longing after this holy Sacrament, and
grant, that I may ever receive it with a chaste love, deep affection, and a pure
heart, and

Be merciful to me.

O Loving Lord, Who, when thou were to leave this World, did comfort thy
Disciples, and with ardent and affectionate prayer did commend them to the
Father, thereby showing what love thou did bear to them, and all others who
should believe in thee;

Make my heart sensible of this love, and raise in me an earnest affection to
thee, that I may be wholly transformed into the love of thee, and

Be merciful to me.

O Merciful Savior, Who praying in the Garden, did wholly resign thy self to
thy Fathers good pleasure, desiring, that not thy will, but his should be
wholly done;

Give me grace, that in all adversity and tribulation I may flee to thee by
prayer, and ever commit my self to thy providence and good pleasure, and

Be merciful to me.

O Sweet Jesu, Who did suffer thy self to be taken and bound as a Malefactor,
neither did lamont nor murmur whilst thou were shamefully entreated by thy
Enemies,

Give me strength, after thine example, willingly and patiently to endure all
adversity and tribulation, which shall at any time befall me, and

Be merciful unto me.

O Blessed Savior, Who would be forsaken of thine own Disciples in the midst
of thy troubles and afflictions;

Pardon me, thy fugitive servant, and receive me into thy favor: Suffer me not
to wander from thee any more, But give me such constancy and perseverance, that
I may continue in thy service to the end of my days, and

Be merciful to me.

O Merciful Jesu, Who, standing in the presence of the High Priest, did
patiently endure a cruel blow;

Mortify in me all angry affections, that I be not disquieted when I am
injured, nor think of revenge, but for thy sake may bear all things patiently,
rendering good for evil, and

Be merciful to me.

O Gracious Redeemer, Who in the night of thy Passion, would be mocked,
derided, and many ways be despightfully handled;

Help mine infirmities, lend me aid, that I faint not under Tentations or
Tribulations, but give me grace to be thankful to thee for them, and

Be merciful to me.

O Blessed Lord, Who would not reply to the unjust Accusations of thine
Enemies, but mildly with a deaf ear would let them pass;

Grant, that no Slanders may move me to impatience, but that by thine example I
may patiently overcome all that any way defame or injure me, and

Be merciful to me.

O Loving Savior, Who being denied by thy Apostle St. Peter, did look on him
with the eye of compassion, and cause him to bewail his offense with bitter
tears;

Look also on me miserable sinner, with the same gracious and moving aspect,
that I may wash away my sins with the tears of repentance, and never deny thee
my Lord and Savior by word or deed, and

Be merciful to me.

O Sweet Jesu, Who being stripped, would be bound to a Pillar, and scourged,
whereby thy blessed body was torn and wounded;

Heal my wounds by thy stripes, take all evil thoughts from me, and grant me
patience to endure the strokes of thy Fatherly Visitation, and

Be merciful to me.

O Gracious Lord, Who, after so many wounds received, and so much precious
blood shed, were mooked, and crowned with a Crown of thorns;

Grant, that the remembrance, thereof may be imprinted in my heart, and that I
may love thee for thy exceeding Charity, and wholly think of thee, wholly
contemplate on thy bitter pains, and

Be merciful to me.

O Bountiful Jesu, Who were pleased with great pain, labor, and weariness, to
carry thine own Cross to Mount Calvary, and there to comfort the lamenting
Women, exhorting them to weep not for thee, but themselves, and Children;

Give me grace, with a cheerful mind, to bear any cross thou shall lay upon me,
and to bewail with tears my sinful life past, and

Be merciful to me.

O Merciful Redeemer, Who did suffer thy sacred hands and feet to be pierced
with nails, and fastened to the Cross, and there did with great effusion of
blood suffer unexpressable torments;

Grant, that I may always with a saithful and thankful heart; bear in mind thy
exceeding great love, who would endure so great and grievous things for me.
Purge and wash my Soul with those streams of thy most precious blood, from all
uncleanness, and offer them to the Father for a full and plenary satisfaction
of all my transgressions, and

Be merciful to me.

O Blessed Lord, Who, in thy bitter pains, did intercede with the Father for
thine Enemies which crucified thee; saying, Father forgive them, for they know
not what they do;

Give me grace, that, according to thy Precept and Practice, I may love mine
Ememies, pray for them, and do good to those which do evil unto me, and

Be merciful to me.

O Gracious Lord, Who, being crucified between two Thieves, did promise to
the one of them, confessing thee the fruition of Paradise;

Look upon me with the eyes of pity, wherewith thou beheldest that good Thief,
and grant, I may live so, that at the end of my days, I may be found worthy to
hear that joyful speech, This day thou shall be with me in Paradise, and

Be merciful to me.

O Sweet Jesu, Who, for the grievousness of torments, and exceeding loss of
blood, did faint, and cry, I thirst; and were pleased to drink Gall and
Vinegar;

Let the remembrance of this CuP extinguish in me all inordinate riot and
excess. Give me the Virtue of Sobriety, that all inordinate passions being
quenched in me, I may wholly thirst after thee, and

Be merciful to me.

O Loving Lord, Who, when thou were so pleased, did call for death, and
bending thy head, did commend thy Spirit into the hands of thy Father;

Grant, that the uncertainty of my death may be ever in my thoughts, and that I
may be ever willing and ready to leave this transitory life when it shall seem
good to thee, to whose blessed protection I commend my Soul, praying thee to

Be merciful to me.

O Blessed Savior, Who, with great sorrow of thy friends, were taken down from
the Cross, and laid in the Sepulcher,

Bury with thee all my evil desires, that I may seem dead to those things which
displease thee, and be wholly delighted in thee my Redeemer, and

Be merciful to me.

O Glorious Lord, Who, after three days, having overcome and triumphed over
Death and Satan, did rise again out of the Grave, and visit thy Disciples and
Friends;

Revive me from the death of sin, cause me to walk in newness of life, and to
seek after Heavenly things, that when thou come again, I may appear with thee
in Glory, and

Be merciful to me.

O Merciful Savior, Who, forty days after thy Resurrectiou, did gloriously
and triumphantly ascend into Heaven, in the sight of thy Disciples;

Let it please thy goodness, to infuse a longing desire and love of thee into
my Soul, that it may be elevated in affection to thee, and seek those things
which are above, and

Be merciful to me.

O Gracious Lord, Who (according to thy Promise before thy Ascension) did
send thy Spirit upon thy Disciples, and other thy Elect Servants;

Purify (I beseech thee) my heart, that the same Spirit finding my Soul pure
and clean, may make his abode in it, and adorn it with his manifold graces, and

Be merciful to me.

O Blessed Savior, Who, when thou shall at the last day come to judge the
quick and dead, wilt render to every one according to his works, either reward,
or punishment;

Give me grace, so to pass this Earthly Pilgrimage, according to thy Holy Will,
that at that Day I may be (through thy merits) thought worthy to be received
into thy Heavenly Mansion, there to praise and bless thee with the Holy Company
of blessed Saints and Angels for evermore, and

Be merciful to me.

Amen.
Prayers for several Persons.
For a Married Man.
O Gracious Father, Maker and Preserver of Heaven and Earth, who in the
beginning did institute Matrimony, foretelling the mystical union of the
Church, with our Savior Christ: Who also, in the time of his being upon Earth,
John 2.
did honor Marriage with his first Miracle: And have appointed it also for a
means whereby Mankind is propagated, for a remedy to avoid unlawful Lust, Genesis
2.
and for the mutual Comfort and Consolation of thy Children: I humbly entreat
thee, to give me the assistance of thy Divine Grace, that I may live according
to thy Commandments, with my Wife, whom thou have given for my help and
comfort, in this World. Mortify in me all unclean, dishonest, and fleshly
Lusts, let not the heat of unlawful Concupiscence take hold of me, but make me
to be fully pleased, and satisfied with her love, and to love her, as Christ
loved his Church, to cherish and comfort her as mine own body, and to have as
great a care of her health, as of mine own. Grant, that we may live in peace,
without debate; in unity, without discord; like the members of one body,
equally desirous to praise thy holy Name. And as thou have (O Lord) bestowed
many Children upon us, give us discreet hearts, and understanding minds, to
bring them up in thy Faith and Fear, in a religious, honest, and civil manner.
Give them obedient hearts to thee, and to thy Commandments, and to all that
thou requirest of them, to be performed in duty, toward us their Parents: Keep
them from those which are ready to seduce them, and so lead them in thy Faith,
Fear, and Knowledge, that they prove not a curse, but a blessing unto us; and
thereby attain to that blessing which thou have promised to those which honor
and obey their Parents. Grant likewise, O Lord, that I may guide and instruct
the Family which is under me, in thy fear, and in honest and careful manner
provide as well for their bodies, as their souls. And give them the like Grace.
O Lord, to perform their duties, in fear and obedience, not as eye-servers,
Ephesians. 6. 6.
but in simplicity of heart, as in thy sight. Col. 3 21.
And give us (O Lord) a competency of Estate, to maintain our Selves, Children,
and Family, according to that Rank or Calling, wherein thou of thy goodness
have placed us, without excess, riot, or vainglory; and in singleness and
pureness of heart, with all humility, relying upon thy blessed will, who
know better than we our selves what is needful for us. To thee be all Honor
and Glory, now, and for ever.

For a Married Woman.
O Merciful and Loving Lord God, who in the beginning, for the propagation of
Mankind, did take Eve out of the side of Adam, Genesis 2.22.
and gave her to him as an helper. I give thee humble thanks, that thou have
vouchsafed to call me to the honorable estate of Matrimony. Give me grace, O
Lord, that I may lead a life worthy thereof, that I may love my Husband: with a
pure and chaste love, acknowledge him for my Head, and truly reverence and obey
him, in all good things; that thereby I may please him, and live quietly with
him. Grant, that I be not carried away with the vain fashions of this World,
but may put on such habits as shall be agreeable and suitable with the estate
of my Husband, and may become a modest Woman to wear. Help me, O Lord, that I
may, under him, prudently, and discreetly guide, and govern his Household and
Family; and carefully look that nothing be either carelessly lost, or wickedly
committed in my House. Fit me with those good Graces, Pro. 31.
which the Wise Man described in a Good Woman; 1 Pet. 3.
and Saint Peter, in Holy and Sanctified Matrons. Give me such care concerning
the Education of my Children, as belongs to my part, that I may live, to see
them prosper in this life, and afterward we may all be received to thy Eternal
Kingdom, through Jesus Christ, etc.

For a Child.
O Almighty Lord God, to whom the Obedience of Children to their Parents is
most acceptable, and all Disobedience most displeasing; who have promised a
Blessing to the Dutiful, Exodus 20.
and threatened a Curse to the Disobedient Children. I beseech thee, to put away
from me the detestable Sin of Disobedience, and Rebellion against my Parents;
and give me grace to observe them with all kind of Duty: to obey them in all
their just Commands: and to be ayding and helpful to them at all time of their
need. Give me grace; to bear all their reproofs and errors patiently, and not
to grieve them, by stubborn and evil courses. Let me not be so far deprived of
thy Grace, that I scoff or deride them, though by age, or infirmity, they shall
fail in their Judgment or Reason: but cause me to supply their wants, lest
that I having plenty, and (they being in any need or distress) I not supplying
it, or not succouring them, their lives, to whom I owe mine, may be in danger
to be shortened. Lord, forgive all the Offenses which I have heretofore
committed against them. Increase the number of their days: keep them safe in
body and mind: let them see their Childrens Children, Ps. 128.6.
to their Comfort, and thy Glory. Let them govern us, and the rest of their
Family, with wholesome Discipline, and good Example: that at the last, they
may, in their due time, depart this life in peace, and come to thy Kingdom
unspotted, through Jesus Christ.

For a Woman with Child.
O Blessed Lord God, who, for the Offense of the first Woman, Genesis 3.10.
did denounce, and impose an inevitable Curse upon all her posterity; namely,
that they should conceive in sin, and be subject to many grievous pains, and
should bring forth their Children with great danger. Assuage, I beseech thee,
of thy goodness, the sharpness of that Decree, and preserve me, that I may
overcome and escape this great danger, and be delivered of the fruit of my
body, without peril of death; and that it may safely be brought to the Sacred
Font of Baptism, and be regenerated and ingrafted into the mystical Body of
Christ, and made partaker of his Death and Passion. And as thou have of thy
bounty given bodily life to it, and me: so grant us both life spiritual: and so
sanctify our Bodies and Souls here, that hereafter we may live among thy
blessed Saints for ever, in the life to come.

For a Young Man, or Maid.
O Lord, forasmuch as I am (at these years) in the heat of the flesh, and in
the most dangerous time of my life, I beseech thee, take not thy Mercy and
Fatherly Providence from me: but, by how much the greater danger of Tentations
I am in, with so much the more care let thy Grace preserve me, lest happily I
become a Prey to mine Enemies, Ps. 124.6.
who go about to load me with so many sins, that if they prevail, I shall never
of my self get from under the burden of them. But, O merciful Father,
(distrusting in mine own strength) I betake my self wholly to thy protection;
and desire thee, both now and ever, to keep me. Let me not get that habit of
sinning in my younger years, that I be forced in my age (if I be not stifled
before in my Offenses) to bewail the sins of my youth, and to say with David,
Remember not, O Lord, the sins of my youth: Psalm. 25.6
But rather accustom me, from this time forward, to all goodness, that I may
daily more and more profit therein: And that (serving thee with a pure heart
now) I may in mine age say with good King Ezechias, Esa. 38.3.
O Lord, remember, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth, with
a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. Most loving
Father, who take care of all men, I commend unto thee my Soul, as a Child,
that can of himself do nothing: Defend me, I pray thee, from all mine Enemies
spiritual and temporal; keep my Body and Soul pure, chaste, and undefiled; that
I offend not, either in obscene speech, impure thought, or unclean act. My
Chastity is a more precious Jewel than I can keep, without thy help: I
therefore beseech thee, (who have pronounced a blessing to the pure heart) to
keep my heart pure; be thou my guide and preserver, lest in the heat of
Concupiscence, I forget thee. Give me grace, O Lord, to serve and obey my
Parents, and those to whose Government I am committed, and that, in all
humility. And grant, that if thou shall be pleased to call me to the honorable
estate of Wedlock, I may be matched with one, with whom I may serve thee in
peace and holiness all the days of my life, and at the last rest with thee in
thy Heavenly Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

For a Servant.
BLessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who when thou were the Son of God, and
Lord of all the World, did take upon thee the form of a Servant, Philip. 7.
that by thy obedience thou might work the salvation of all people as well
bond as free: I pray thee that, since thou have been pleased to call me to the
state of a Servant, thou would give me an humble and obedient heart, and make
me contented with this condition of life, as allotted to me by thy providence.
Grant, that I may with gentleness of spirit, and singleness of heart; and
willingness of mind, serve those under whom I am placed: and that I may not
either murmr against them, or envy those that are seated in a higher estate:
that I may obey them, in all their honest commands, in all fear and true
respect, not with Eye-service, as Men-pleasers, Col. 3.22.
but with all my heart, and the rather, because thy commandment binds me so
to do. Grant, that serving them diligently, faithfully and carefully, I may
avoid their displeasure, and obtain thy favor and blessing, and at the end of
my days, come to that blessed place, where Thou, with the Father and blessed
Spirit, do reign world without end.

Before a Journey.
Joh. 14.6.
ALmighty and everlasting God who art the Way, the Life, and the Truth, behold,
I beseech thee, to how many dangers of the World, Flesh, and Devil, I am
subject, so that without thy aid, I cannot safely pass through this Vale of
Misery. Lead, guide, and direct me therefore (O Lord) in the high and right
way, whither I would go, Genesis 28. 20.
that I turn neither to the right hand, or the left, nor become a Prey to mine
Enemies. O Lord, thou have a general care over thy Creatures, I therefore (in
this my Journey) commend unto thee my Soul and Body: Defend me from all perils,
I beseech thee. O Lord, which did send thy Angel, as a Companion, or
Fellow-Traveller, with the Son of Tobias, Tob. 5.
and did preserve Abraham, and all other thy Servants, in their travels;
vouchsafe thy blessed Angel, to guide, and conduct me. Be thou my comfort in
the way, and a defense in all dangers. Prosper the business which I go about,
and make this enterprise successful to me. And grant, that my affairs being
dispatched, I may return home safe in body and mind. Preserve (in my absence)
my Family, and all I possess: that I being returned in safety, and they
securely preserved, we may altogether give thanks to thy glorious Name, through
Jesus, etc.

After a Journey.
I Give thee thanks, O gracious Lord, for thy great mercies to me all the days
of my Life. Thou art he, which created me, and thou art also he, that
preservest that which thou have created. How often, O Lord, have thou turned
thine eyes from my sins, and made as though thou did not see them? How often
(and that justly) might thou have withheld thy hand of preservation from me?
And yet thy patience has been so great toward me, that thou have suffered no
harm to befall me. And as I owe thee many thanks for thy former preservations,
so now I am further obliged to thee, in that thou have at this time not only
guided me to the place whither I intended to go, but have also brought me back
in safety, and in my absence have preserved all things unto me. Good Lord, give
me grace, to be always mindful of these, and all other thy benefits to me, and
to be truly thankful to thee for them. And grant, that as by thy mercy I have
well ended my affairs abroad, and am safely returned to this Temporal
Habitation, so my Spirit (after this Pilgrimage) may return to thy Heavenly
Mansion, and there abide with thee for ever: and that, even for the merits of
our only Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

Intercession.
IN which we are to pray,

For all Mankind, For the conversion of Jews, to the Truth. For the conversion
of Turks, to the Truth. For the conversion of Heathen, to the Truth.


For all Christians.

That they may be strengthened, that stand.

That they may be converted, that are in error.

For the Churches throughout the World, that they may be united in Religion.

For our Church, that whatsoever is amiss in it may be amended.

For the Kings Majesty, and his prosperity.

For all Kingdoms Christian.

For Ours, and each part of it, that it may flourish in peace.

For the Clergy: That they may Teach well. That they may Live well.


For Wisdom, in the Council.

Integrity, in the Judges.

Strength, in our Armies.

Discretion, in the Magistrates.

Obedience, in the People.

For the prosperity, and good success,

Of Merchants.

Husbandmen.

Artificers.

Tradesmen

And that they may live carefully and honestly in their vocations.

For the prosperous Education of Youth, either in Universities, Schools, or
Other parts of the Kingdom.


For our Parents, Kindred, Friends, Neighbors, and Benefactors.

For those of whom we have the charge committed to us, either in Church,
Commonwealth, or Families.


For our Enemies, especially those that hate us without cause, that God would
convert them.

For those that commend themselves to our prayers: and those whose affairs and
troubles will not suffer them to pray as they ought.

For those who are in affliction of body or mind.

Who are in danger, or want; in Prison, or condemned to Death.

For those that Excel

In qualities of the mind,

Strength of body,

Abundance of wealth,

That they exalt not themselves above their brethren.

For those who undertake any notable Action, which may redound

To the Glory of God.

The Peace of the Church.

The Honor of the Kingdom.

Deprecation.
O Lord, rebuke me not in thy wrath. Psalm. 38. ^.

Cast me not off for ever. 44. 23.

Cast me not away from thy presence. 51 11.

Hide not thy face from me. 69. 18.

Withold not thy mercy from me. 40. 14.

Forsake me not, O Lord. 38. 21.

Put me not to shame. 119. 31.

Psalm. 39.
Turn away reproach from me.
25. 2.
Let not mine Enemies triumph over me.
27. 12.
Deliver me not over to their will.
64. 1.
Preserve my life from them.
Deliver me, O Lord,
Ephesians. 4.19.
From hardness of heart, to impenitence. Act. 28.27
Grossness of heart. Pro. 7.13.
Impudence of countenance, Esa. 48.4.
Hardness of countenance,

Tit. 1.16.
From a seared conscience.
1 John 5.16
A reprobate mind.
Sin unto death,
Mat. 12. 32.
Viz. Against the Holy Ghost.
From all superfluity of naughtiness.
J^. 1. 21.
The weight of sin.
Heb. 12 1.
The lusts of the flesh, and eyes, and pride of life. 1 John 2.16

All wicked and vain desires.
Hurtful and unclean thoughts.
Mat. 6.2.
Desire of vainglory.
Ecclus. 51
From a deceitful tongue.
5.
Unpure lips.
Hands stretched out to covetousness.
Feet swift to evil.
Eyes open to Toys.
Ears open to Vanity.
From blindness of heart.
Inconstancy of mind.
Scurrility of speech.
Intemperance of the belly.
From desire of riches.
Reproach of my neighbors.
Contempt of the poor.
Oppression of the weak.
Rancor of mind.
Root out of me, O Lord.
Profaneness and Superstition.
Pride and Undecency.
Anger and Contention.
Swearing and Cursing.
Passion and Corruption.
Fraud and Rapine.
Lying and Slander.
Envy and Malice.
Take from me the Sin of Gluttony,
Give to me the Virtue of Abstinence.
Take from me the Spirit of Uncleanness,
Give to me the Love of Chistity.
Take from me the Desire of the World,
Give to me Content of Mind.
Take from me the Heat of Anger,
Give to me the Spirit of Meekness.
Take from me the Care of this Life,
Give to me thy SPIRITUAL Joy.
Take from me Haughtiness of Mind,
Give to me Compunction of Heart.
Deliver me, O Lord,
From all evil and mischief.
All noisome Diseases.
All things hurtful to My Soul. My Health. My Estate. My Quiet.

From all Scandal. From all Grief. From all Infamy.

From all Enemies, Secret, From all Enemies, Open, From all Enemies, Crafty,
From all Enemies, Potent.

From Sudden Death. From Violent Death.

In all my Prayers, and Petitions.
Distresses, and Dangers.
Infirmities, and Need.
Tentations, and Tribulations.
Good Lord, deliver me, and help me.
From the Terrors of Hell.
Eternal Damnation.
The angry Countenance of the Judge. Apo. 6.6.

The fearful Sentence. Mat. 25. 41.

Depart from me into Utter Darkness. 8. 12.

The Chains of Everlasting Darkness. Jude 6.

The Lake of Fire and Brimstone. Apo. 20. 10.

The Smoke of the Torment which ascends for ever. 14. 11.

Good Lord, of thy great mercy, deliver me.
In Affliction.
MOst merciful Redeemer; always loving to us, whether thou sendest us
heaviness, or joy, for thy mercy is great, whilst by outward afflictions (as by
bitter pills) thou curest the inward diseased man, and by temporary troubles,
thou preparest us, and make us fit for joys eternal. Grant, O sweet Savior,
that I may drink of this Cup of adversity, and all others, as reached to me by
thy hand. Thou know, O Lord, that they are bitter to flesh and blood; yet
withal I know, that thou did endure far greater things for me, and that I
have deserved to suffer much more, than thou have laid upon me. O Lord, thou
know also the weakness and frailty of man's nature, and therefore I do
assuredly believe, that thou ( the good Samaritan) wilt not only cleanse the
wounds of my sins, Luc. 10.33
with the sharp wine of thy justice, but wilt also add the oil of thy mercy,
and comfort, whereby I may be strengthened again. If thou think not yet
sufficient, or that enough, which thou have laid upon me, yet add patience, I
beseech thee, to my further grief: and grant, that that these thy punishments
may provoke me to true repentance, whereby I may (by thy merits) obtain
remission of my sins. But (if thy Fatherly Clemency shall be contented with
this gentle and mild chastisement) take off thy corrections, and heavy hand
from me: that so I may for both thy mercies to me, praise thy holy Name: as
well, that thou have so gently dealt with me, in amending me so unprofitable a
Servant, as, that thou have in time taken off the bitterness of affliction, and
not utterly confounded me: in the first, of thy works of mercy, respecting my
necessity; and in the last, not forgetting my infirmity, To thee, O Savior,
with the Father, and Holy Spirit, be all Praise, Laud, and Glory, now, and
evermore; Amen.

In time of Pestilence.
O Lord God, who rejectest none, that, trusting in thy goodness, and believing
in thy promises, come to thee for succor and help. Behold, we beseech thee,
with the eyes of compassion and mercy, thy poor, sinful, and miserable people;
who now are much afflicted and visited with the Plague of Pestilence, with the
scourge of thine angry hand. Our streets are full of grief, and our houses are
filled with heaviness, and all our joy is turned into mourning, by reason of
thy heavy wrath, and hot displeasure, which now is gone out, to destroy and
consume us from the face of the Earth. We confess, O Lord, it is but just, that
all thy Creatures should rebel against Man, and oppose themselves against him,
who has so desperately rebelled against thee, his Creator: For they are all
obedient to thee, only Man, sinful and wretched Man, is continually stubborn
and rebellious, daily abusing thy Blessings, and hourly transgressing thy
Commandments, got leaving his evil ways for fear of thy threats, nor being
allured to goodness with the hope of thy promises. We daily hear by thy
Messengers, and read in thy Sacred Word, what thou have threatened of old to thy
rebellious people, and in them, to us: How, that if they kept not thy
Commandments, Levit. 26. 25.
Thou would send upon them the Sword, to avenge the quarrel of thy Covenant,
and when they should be gathered in their Cities, thou would send the
Pestilence among them, Jer. 4.112.
and they should be delivered into the hands of the Enemy: And yet they have
hitherto been so senseless thereof, that we fear not to add sin to sin, and to
multiply iniquity upon iniquity. And now, O Lord, we reap the just reward of
our impiety, and feel (too soon) that we are justly plagued for our
disobedience. O Lord, we confess, Ps. 19.9.
that thy Judgments are just, and withal humbly acknowledge our misdeeds, and
heartily repent us of them, and earnestly beg and crave, that thou would in
mercy pardon them, and remit the punishment, which in Justice is due unto us
for them. O Lord, In thy just anger remember mercy; incline thine ear, and
hear, open thine eyes, and behold our desolations; and upon our repentance and
humiliation, remove this thy punishment: which in thy displeasure, thou have
begun to inflict upon us. 1 Chr. 21. 15.
Command thy destroying Angel to spare us, and not to strike us to utter
desolation. Ezech. 9.
Be merciful unto us, who are every hour in danger of thy Judgments, Take away
the unwhilesomeness of the air, and purify our dwellings unto health and
safety. Keep those that are well, and release those upon whom thou have laid
the rod of thy afflictions. 2 Chro. 7. 13, 14.
Thou have promised, O Lord, 1 Kings 8.
That, if at any time thou sendest the Pestilence among the People, if that
people do humble themselves, and pray, and seek thy presence, and turn from
their wicked ways; thou will hear in Heaven, and be merciful to their sin, and
heal their Land. We humbly pray thee, O Lord, to make good thy promise, and
ease us of our afflictions. For behold, O Lord, we humble our selves under thy
mighty hand; we bewail, and lament our sinful lives past; and humbly beseech
thee, to give us thy assisting grace, that we may henceforth order our ways to
please thee, Then shall no Contagion hurt us, Dan. 19 8.
but we shall live to praise thy Name; and all the World shall know, that thou
art our God, and that thy Name is called upon by us. Hear us, O Lord, and be
merciful unto us, even for Jesus Christ's sake the Righteous: To whom, with
thee, and the Blessed Spirit, be ascribed all honor and praise, now, and for
ever, Amen.

Confession of Faith.
FAith in general, is a full assent to all things written in the Holy
Scriptures, concerning God, his Will, and Works: not for the evidence of them,
but even for Gods assertion only.

Est sperantium substantia, cognitio little quae non videntur; and tunc est
fides, quando expectatur in spe, quod in re nondum videtur, S. August.
Faith is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not
seen. Heb. 11.1.
And this is Faith indeed, when a man expects that in hope, which in reality is
not seen.

Si vides non est fides.

Faith in special, is a firm assent to the Gospel; the sum whereof is contained
in these three Propositions.

Joh. 3.16
1. That Salvation is to be had by Jesus Christ. Acts 4.12.
2. That there is no other way of Salvation, but by the Name of Jesus Christ. 3.
That there is no Salvation to be had by Jesus Christ, but upon those terms and
conditions which are revealed in the Gospel. Heb. 5.9.

Mar. 1.15.
He is the Author of Salvation to those that obey him.

Rp. Latim, Ser. 4 and 7 coram Rege
This Faith therefore must be ushered by Repentance, and attended by good
works.

Jam. 2.26.
Faith without works is dead,

1 Cor. 13.
It must not be abstracted, but concrete with Hope and Charity.

S. Aug.
Sine Charitate fides potest esse, sed non and prodesse; Faith may be without
Love, but not to do any good. We may well have Faith in us, it is true, but
little good it will do us, except we have Charity also.

For Saint Paul (saying, that a man is justified by Faith without Works) is not
to be understood, that though he live ill, we should call him just, though he
have received the Faith. S. Aug.
Quomodo ergo justificabitur homo per fidem fine operibus, responderet tibi
Apostolus. Propterea hoc tibi dixi o homo, ne quasi de operibus tuis praesumere
videaris, and merito operum tuorum accepisse fidei gratiam. Si fidem quis dicat
se habere, opera tamen non habeat, numquid poterit fides salvare eum? The
Apostle will answer you, how a man may be justified by Faith without Works. And
therefore, O Man, whatsoever I have said, it has been, lest thou should seem
to presume upon thy Works, and by the merit of them, think thou have received
the grace of Faith. But how can that man's Faith save him, which professes that
he has Faith, and yet has no Works?

If I had Faith to remove Mountains, and have no Love, I am nothing. 1 Cor. 13.
2.


1. This Faith is the Foundation of Gods Worship. No worshipping of God, till
we are persuaded that there is one to worship.

Heb. 11.6.
He that comes to God, must believe that he is.

2. It is the first Duty that God requires of us.

1 John 3 33
This is his Commandment, that we should believe.

Act. 16.31
Believe, and thou shall be saved, was the first Rule that Saint Paul gave the
Keeper of the Prison, upon his Conversion.

The people demanding of our Savior, Joh. 6.29.
What they should do to work the works of God? were answered with, That ye
believe: as being the principal or first Degree to Salvation.

S. Greg.
Non virtutibus venitur ad fidem, sed per fidem pertingitur ad virtutes. We
attain not to Faith by Virtue, but Virtue by Faith.

The Particulars of this Faith are contained in the Apostles Creed, so called,
because, 1, It contains the sum of the Apostles Doctrine, which the
Catecumeni were to hold and profess. 2. Or because the Apostles delivered it to
their Disciples.


S. Aug. Ser. 181. de tempore.
Symbolum fidei nostrae tali ratione institutum majores nostri dixerunt.
Tradunt enim, etc. Ne localitur ab invicem discedentes, diversum vel dissonum
praedicarent i is qui ad fidem Christi invitabantur: Omnes igitur in unune
positi and Spiritu Sancto repleti, breve suae praedication is judicium
conferendo in unum, quod sentiebat unusquisque, computabat, atque ha^c^ita
credentibus dandam esse regulam instituerunt.

Our Forefathers tell us, that the Creed was made and composed by the Apostles
at a meeting, before they were to be dispersed. And that, lest when they were
separated, they might preach diverse and several Doctrines of Faith to those
whom they sought to win to the Faith of Christ. And therefore, being all
assembled together, and filled with the Holy Ghost, they made a short and
summary Collection of what they thought fit to preach, and appointed the same
to be delivered to Believers, as a Rule and Foundation of their Faith.

Symbolum breve est verbis, sed magnum est Sacramentis.

And though it be short in words, yet is it great in Sacraments.

It is to be daily repeated and professed.

1. Because it is a mark whereby Christians are distinguished from Infidels.

2. It puts us in mind of our daily trial, whether we continue in the Faith
or not,

3. It incites us to pray, that we continue and increase in it.

4. It puts us in mind of our vow in Baptism, to believe in the Trinity.

Lord, I believe.
Help thou my unbelief.

In God the Father.

Heb. 1. 5.
and gracious affection to us in him.

That in Christ we are all his Sons by grace and adoption.

Joh. 1.12.
As many as received him, to them he gave power to become the Sons of God.

Romans 1.16.
The Spirit bears witness with out spirit, that we are the Sons of God.

Gal. 4. 6.
No more a Servant, but a Son,

Ephe. 1.5.
Having predestined us unto the adoption of Children by Jesus Christ.

Almighty.
Secondly, His Saving Power.

That as he is a Father, willing to do us good, so he is Omnipatent, and able
to do us good.

Even to your old age I am he, Esa. 46.4.
etc. I will bear, I will carry, and deliver you.

I am the Lord, and none else. 45.6.


He is Lord over all. To. 10.12.


Upholding all things. Heb. 1. 3.


Almighty. Genesis 17.1. 43. 34.


Able to subdue all things unto himself. 2 Cor. 6. 18.


Maker of Heaven and Earth. Phil. 3.21.

Thirdly, His Providence in disposing, preserving, and governing all things.

1. By the Word of the Lord were the Heavens made. Genesis 1.2.


He laid the Foundations of the Earth. Psalm. 33.6. 104. 5.


Thou Lord, which have made Heaven, and Earth, the Sea, and all that in them
is. Act. 4. 24.


I form the Light, and create the Darkness. Esa. 45.7.


He lays the beams of his chambers in the waters. Ps. 104.3.


The Spirit of the Lord has made me, Job 33. 4.
and the breath of the Almighty has given me life.

Job. 38. 41.
2. He provideth for the Raven his food, etc.

Psalm. 36.7.
Thou Lord shall save both Man and Beast.

Psalm. 8.
They shall be satisfied with the plenteousness, etc.

Mar. 10. 39.
Over Sparrows.

He cares for us.

1 Pet. 5 7. Act. 17.28.
In him we live, move, and have our being.

3. He orders the world according to equity. Sap. 9. 3.


Psalm. 67.4.
He judges the folk righteously, and governs the Nations upon the earth.

Sap. 4.
Thy providence, O Father, governs all things.

(...) 81.
He orders all things sweetly.

In Jesus. A Savior.
He shall save his people from their sins. Mat. 1.21.


Heb. 7. 25. Joh. 3.18.
He that believes not in him is condemned.

Act. 4.12.
Neither is there Salvation in any other.

Act. 5.19.
By the obedience of one shall many be made righteous.

Christ. Anointed.
With the Oil of gladness above his fellows. Psalm. 45.8. Heb. 1. 9.


The Lord has anointed me. Esa. 61.1.


His only Son.
Of God the Father.

The only begotten of the Father. Joh. 1.14


His only begotten Son. Heb. 1. 2


Our Lord. Joh. 3.16.

In right of 1 Creation. 2 Redemption.


1. By whom he made the World. Heb. 1. 2.
By him were all things created. Col. 1. 17.


2. In whom we have redemption, Ephesians. 1: 7.
Redeemed with his precious Blood. Col. 1.14.
Bought with a price. 1 Pet. 1. 19.


Conceived by the Holy Ghost. 1 Co: 6. 20.

Without the help of Man, 7.23.
to help the uncleanness of our conception.

She was found with Child of the Holy Ghost. Mat. 1.18. 20.


The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, Luc. 1.35.
and the power of the most High shall overshadow thee.

Angelo nunciante, and Spiritu adveniente, S. Greg.
mox verbum in utero, mox intraverbum Caro.

Upon the Annuntiation or message of an Angel, and the Overshadowing of the
Holy Ghost, the word presently entered into the Womb, and with the word the
flesh.

Born of the Virgin Mary.
Made the Son of Man, that we might be the Sons of God.

To purge the uncleanness of our birth.

Esa. 7.14.
He did not abhor the Virgins womb.

Mat. 1.21.
A Virgin shall conceive.

Luc. 1.30.
She shall bring forth a Son.

Luc. 2. 7.
And she brought forth her first born Son, etc.

Joh. 1.14.
The word was made flesh.

Gal. 4. 4.
And when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman,
etc.

S. Bern.
S. Bernard says, That God in the assumption of our nature, made three
mixtures, so wonderful without comparison, that never the like were, or should
be to the end of the world. God and Man; a Mother and a Virgin; Faith and Man's
heart.

Suffered under Pontius Pilate.
Those things which we should have suffered.

That we might not suffer them.

He powered out his soul unto death, etc. Esa. 53. 12


He bare our sins in his own body on the tree. 1 Pet. 2. 24.


He once suffered for sins. 3. 18.


Was Crucified.
To take away the Curse of the Law.

Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, Gal. 3. 13
being made a Curse for us, as it is written.

Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree. Deuteronomy. 21. 23.


He humbled himself, Phil. 28.
and became obedient to death, even the death of the Cross.

Dead.
To take away the sharpness and bondage of death.

To satisfy Gods justice for us.

The wages of sin is death. Romans 6.23


That he by the grace of God should taste death for every one. Heb. 2. 9.


That through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, 14.
that is, the Devil.

And deliver them, who through the fear of death, were all their life time
subject to bondage.

1 Cor. 15. 55.
O Death, where is thy sting?

Buried.
To take away the corruption of the grave, that we might be assured of his
death.

Mat. 27. 60.
All agree that he was buried in a Sepulcher.

Mar. 15. 46.
They took him from a Tree, and laid him in a Sepulcher. Lu. 23.53.


Joh. 19.40.
Descended into Hell.
Act. 13.29.
Whither we ought to have gone, that we might not go thither at all.

Ps. 16.11.
Thou will not leave my Soul in Hell.

S. August.
Non immerito creditur; It is not without cause, Ep. 99.
that we believe, says Saint Augustine, upon this Article. And Christ,
according to his Soul, was in Hell; the Scripture is plain for it, being
foretold by the Prophet David, and evidently expounded by the Apostles
Application of (that Text) Ps. 16.11.
Thou will not leave my Soul in Hell. Acts 2.34.
And he concludes peremptorily with this Question, Quis ergo nisi infidelis
negaverit fuisse apud inferos Christum? Who therefore but an Infidel will deny
that Christ was in Hell?

The third day he rose again from the dead. 1 Cor. 15. 20.

That he might raise with him our nature, Mar. 28.6. Mar. 16.6.
being the first fruits of them which sleep. Luc. 24.4.


He is risen, He is not here. Joh. 20.


Christ being raised from the dead, etc. Romans 6. 3.


And was raised again for our justification. 4. 25.


By the Trinity.
1. By the Father, Acts 2. 24. 3. 15. 4. 10. 5. 30. 10. 40. Ephesians. ^. 20. 1
Pet. 1. 21.

2. By the Son, Joh. 10. 17, 18. Romans 14.

3. By the Spirit, Romans 8. 11. 1 Pet. 3. 18.

He ascended into Heaven.
To prepare us a place, whereto we had no right.

To assure us, that our flesh is gone before.

To send us the Holy Spirit.

He was received up into Heaven. Man. 16. 19.


He was parted from them, and carried up to Heaven. Lu. 24.51.


We have a High Priest, Heb. 4.1
that is Passed into the Heavens.

Ephesians. 4 10.
He that descended is the same which ascended, far above all Heavens.

Joh. 14.2.
I go to prepare a place for you.

Heb. 10. 19.
Having boldness to enter into the Holiest by the blood of Jesus.

Ephesians. 2. 6.
And has raised us up together, and made us sit in Heavenly places together.

Joh. 14.16
I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter.

16. 7.
If I go not away, the Comforter will not come to you; but if I depart, I will
send him to you.

He sits at the right hand of the Father.
Instantly to intercede for us, to show himself head of the Church.

Mar. 16.9.
And sat at the right hand of the Father.

Col. 3.1.
Seek those things which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of
the Father.

To. 8.24.
Who is at the right hand of God.

Heb. 7.25. 9.24.
He ever lives to make intercession for them, to appear in the presence of God
for us.

Joh. 14.3.
Where I am, there you may be also.

Ephesians. 5 23.
CHRIST is Head of the Church.

He set him at his own right hand, Ephesians. 1.20
far above all principalities and powers.

He shall come to judge both the quick and dead.
To receive us with power and glory, Mat. 24. 30.
even to the consummation of all things.

I will come near to you in judgment. Mal. 3. 5.


Behold the Lord comes, etc. Jude 14.


The Father has committed all judgment to the Son. Joh. 5.23.


Ye shall see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of power, Mat. 26. 64.
and coming in the clouds of Heaven.

He has appointed a day in which he will judge the world in righteousness by
that man whom he has ordained. Act. 17.31.


The dead shall arise first, etc. 1 These. 4. 16, 17.


In the Holy Ghost.
An hypostatical power sanctifying from above, Lu. 12.12.
quickening to immortality, Joh. 14.26 16. 13
working powerfully, and invisibly in us. 1 Cor. 6. 11.


By the illumination of knowledge. Esa. 11.2.


Infusion of grace. 1 John 2.27


Regenerating us. Joh. 3. 5. 16. 8.


Reprehending things evil in us. 1 John 2.27


Teaching us the truth, Joh. 14. 26. Joh. 16.13.
1 Cor. 2. 13.

Genesis 20.6
Withholding us from doing evil.

Romans 8. 26
Encouraging us to do good, striving for our good.

Joh. 14. 16
Comforting us in our necessities.

Acts 9. 31.
Adopting us.

Romans 8. 15 26
Helping our infirmities.

2 Cor. 1.22
Sealing to us our inheritance.

Ephesians. 1.13, 14.
Assuring us our inheritance.

The Holy Catholic Church.
Which is the mystical Body of the Head Christ Jesus, composed of all people of
the World, which are called by the Spirit, to the belief of Divine Truth, and
Holiness of Conversation.

Holy.
By imitation of Christ's Righteousness.

Sanctification of the Holy Ghost.

Of all these Members of his Body there is a reciprocal participation to the

Joh. 14.23 6. 55, 56.
Communion of Saints.
1 John 1. 3. 7.
In the union of the Church with Christ.

Ep. 4. 4. 12.
In the participation of his benefits.

Forgiveness of sins. Romans 8

For the present. 1 Cor. 1 30.


To the hope of

The Resurrection of the Body. Job. 19 25

To be united with the Soul. Joh. 5.28 6. 40.


And Life Everlasting.

hereafter. Lu 20.16.


And that after this life there shall be a life wherein the Church shall be
glorified, and God by the members thereof praised for ever. Joh. 16 22 17. 3.
Apo. 21. 4.


Of which I believe my self to be one.

Lord, I believe. Help the defects of my Faith.

1. That I may love thee as a Father.

Reverence thee as Almighty.

Commend my self to thee, as to a Faithful Creator.

2. That I may be mindful to give thanks to Thy only Son.

As to the Purger of our Nature, in his Conception and Birth.

As to our Deliverer, In his Passion, Cross, and Death.

As to the Triumpher over Hell.

In his Descension.

Over Death, In his Resurrection.

As to our Fore-rnner, In his Ascension.

As to our Advocate, In his Session.

As to the Establisher of our Faith, In his Second Coming.

That he may be fashioned in me.

That I may be made conformable to him, In Works.

To his Conception, In Faith.

To his Nativity, In Humility.

That for his Passions,
1. I may sympathize with him, as with one that suffered for me, and be ready
to suffer of him, and for him, when it shall be his good pleasure.

2. I may have an Antipathy with Sin, as being the cause of his Sufferings, and
be Revenged of Sin in my self. Crucify Sin in my self. Morsifie Sin in my
self. Bury Sin in my self.


3. I may conform my self, 1. To his Descension into Hell.

By often descending thither in meditation.

2. To his Resurrection.

By rising to newness of life.

3. To his Ascension.

By savouring and seeking those things which are above, and nearer to my
Salvation.

4. To his Judgment.

By judging my self, lest I be condemned with the world.




That when I am cold in Prayer, and want any Spiritual Grace or Comfort, I may
remember thy Session, and Intercession. And when I am fervent in any evil
Affection or Concupiscence, I may not forget thy fearful and terrible
Iudgement-Seat, and the sound of the last Trump.

That for thy only Son Christ's sake, Uiction, 1 Th. 5. 19
even thy Saving Grace, Ephesians. 4 30
the unspeakable Gift of the Holy Ghost, Act. 7. 51.
and never extinguish, grieve, resist, or reproach it. Mat. 32.5.


That so I may be called into thy Catholic Church, where I may be partaker of
the Persons, Actions, Prayers; and Examples of Saints.

To the assured belief of Remission of Sins.

To the hope of Resurrection, and Translation to Life Everlasting.

Luc. 17.6.
Lord increase my Faith, as a grain of mustard seed. Mat. 17. 20.


Not Dead, Temporary, or Hypocritical.

1 Timothy 1. 5
But pure and unfeigned, most holy, lively, Ephesians. 3. 11.
and working by charity. Jam. 2.26.


Confession of Faith.
O Almighty, and Eternal Lord God, I poor, unworthy, and wretched sinner, am
bold to renew that Covenant of Faith, which in my Baptism, I made unto thee. I
believe and confess, that all those things which thy most beloved Son Christ
Jesus did, suffered, and taught, while he was conversant in the Flesh, here
upon the Earth, are most true, and certain. I profess that I believe all the
Articles of the Apostles Creed, and the Holy Gospel of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, which is preached through all the World. To this Faith I bind my
self, and purpose ( Gods grace assisting me) never to depart from it; and
acknowledge, that without believing thus, I cannot be saved. I am heartily
glad, O Heavenly Father) even in my Soul, and give thee all possible thanks,
that into this Faith I was baptized: and do most humbly pray thee, O Lord,
that this Faith may not fail me, during this life, nor at the hour of death.
And if I shall at any time hereafter, either by the temptation of the Devil,
imperfection of my senses, pain of any disease, weakness, or any other means
speak any thing, in any other manner, than shall be agreeable to this Faith, I
renounce all such words, as none of mine; and desire thee, O Lord, to forgive
them; and pray all those which shall hear them, (if any such shall be) to
account them as none of mine. This I protest, thy Grace aiding me. To thee be
all honor and praise, from this time forth, forevermore, Amen.

Confession of Gods Glory and Praise.
FOR his Great and wonderful works. Genesis 1.


Ecclus 43
Of Creation. Psalm. 145.
Preservation. Romans 1.20
Governance.
Joh. 17. 5.
For his Goodness, Genesis 14.18 21. 33.
The excellency of his Glory.
Luc. 1.37.
His Highness. Genesis 18.4.
His Eternity, Jer. 23.24.
His Omnipotence. Psalm. 13 9.
His Omnipresence. Joh. 21.17
His Omniscience. 2 Ki. 8.29.



To. 11.33.
The height of his Wisdom.
Ps. 117.2.
His Truth. Mat. 24. 35.
His Exquisite Justice. Ps. 111.3.
His Great Mercy. 119. 156.
His Plentiful Mercy. 130. 4.
His Wonderful Mercy. 17. 7.
His Everlasting. Mercy.
13. 6.
For his Promise of the Seed.

Genesis 3. 15
For Performance of that Promise.

For sending his only Son out of his bosom, to work the great work of our
Redemption.

Eus. a. 7.
In being born, in pure and humble manner.

In being conversant on earth, in painful manner.

In suffering Death, Matthew Mark Luke John.
in grievous manner.

For all that he did or suffered For us on Earth.

For all his comfortable Parables of mercy.

Of the Two Debtors. Mat. 18. 23.
Of the Publican and Pharisee. Lu. 18 10
Of the lost Sheep. Luc. 15.4. 8.
Of the lost Groat. Of the Prodigal Son. Lu. 15.21.
Of those that were called at the eleventh hour. Mat. 20 9.

For his comfortable sayings of Mercy.

God sent not his Son into the world to condemn it. Joh. 3.17.


I came not to judge the World, but to save it. 12. 47.


The Son of Man came not to destroy men's lives, but to save them. Luc. 9. 36.


I am not sent to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. Luc. 5. 32.
Mat. 9.13 18. 11.


The Son of Man came to save, and seek that which was lost. Luc. 19.10


Come unto me all ye that labor, etc. Mat. 11.8.


Him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. Joh. 6.37.


Lu. 23. 74
Father, forgive them, etc.

Luc. 43.
This day shall thou be with me in Paradise.

For his Examples of Mercy.
Mat. 15. 28.
The Woman of Canaan. Joh. 4.
The Woman of Samaria. Luc. 8.48.
The Woman with the Bloody Issue. Joh. 8 11.
The Woman taken in Adultery. Luc. 7 48. 19. 5.
Mary Magdalen. 23. 43.
Zacheus. 21. 62.
The Thief. Acts 9.
Peter. Heb. 12 3.
Paul. Luc. 4 29.
Sinners contradicting him. Joh. 8.19.
That would have destroyed him. 10. 31.
That stoned him. Mat. 27. 39.
That reviled and blasphemed him. Lu. 23 34.
That crucified him. Act. 2.23. 3. 15. 19.
This man receives Sinners.
Luc. 15 2.
For the Holy Spirit.
In the Old Testament.
Genesis 1. 21.
By moving on the waters.

By sending it into living creatures.

By inspiring it into man.

By descending on the Prophets.

In the New Testament visibly.
In the shape of a Dove at Christ's Baptism. Mat. 3.16.


By the gift of Christ to the Apostles. Joh. 20 22


In the shape of fiery tongues to them. Acts 2. 3.


Invisibly.
In the Virgins Conception of Christ. Luc. 1. 15.


Upon the Congregation in prayer. Act. 4.31.


Cornelius, and others. Act. 10 44 19. 6.
The twelve Disciples at Ephesus. Joh. 14.26 16. 14.

For his care over us. Lu. 12.12.


For the illumination of our understanding. 1 John 1.27


In our justification. 1 Cor. 6.11


Our Regeneration. Joh. 3 5.
Governing our actions. Gil. 5.22.
Comforting us in Tentations. Ps. 43.10.
Strengthening us in Tentations. Acts 2. 4.
Romans 8. 14

Bearing witness with us, Joh. 14. 16 20.
and assuring us, that we are Gods Children. Ephesians. 3. 13, 14. Romans 5.5. 8. 26


Reproving us in evil actions. Acts. 9.31


Assisting us in good works. Romans 8.1. Joh. 16.8.


Putting good things into our remembrance. Romans 8.26 Joh. 11.26


Interceding for us with groans unutterable. Romans 6.10


Motives to Repentance.
S. August,
NE erubescat poenitentiam agere, qui non erubuit poenitenda committere,
BLush not thou to repent, that were not ashamed to commit things worthy to be
repented of.

For as much as it is beyond the compass, and out of the power of natural man
not to sin at all, but that we add daily sin to sin, as a Fountain casting up
her waters; Ps. 69 27. Jer. 6. 7.
and that it has pleased God (of his mercy to mankind) to promise forgiveness
to those that shall truly and faithfully repent them of the same. Therefore the
duty of Repentance (of all other parts of Devotion) is most necessary for us,
seeing that by it

God in Christ Jesus is reconciled to us.

His anger toward us is appeased.

We are restored to his favor.

Certainly it is a blessed act to confess our own wretchedness, for whosoever
humbles himself, and penitently bewaileth his sins, shall be heard by God, and
by him be delivered from the punishment due for them.

A contrite heart suffers no repulse. Origin.


Repentance is a bewailing for sins S. Greg.
already committed, and avoiding for the future the sins for which we grieve:
for he that mourns for his sins, and leaves them not, incurrs the greater
punishment.

It consists not in the often repetition and confession of them, S. August.
without forsaking them; for that is but a simple profession of them, not a
repenting for them.

But this is true Repentance, when those things seem grievous and bitter to our
souls, which in the act were sweet and delightful: and when that ill which was
formerly pleasing to us, causes a hearty and unfeigned grief in us, and
provokes us to look more carefully to our ways for the future.

Vera peccati confessio est sine intermissione temporis peonitere. S. Hilary.
Peccati vero poenitentia est, ab eo quod poenitendum intellexeris distitisse.

It is a true confession of sin, when we repent without intermission. But that
is a true repentance of sin, when we forsake that, which we conceive we had
cause to repent for.

And again, Nultus id quod confessus est, deinceps debet admittere, quia
confessio peccati, est professio desinendi.

No man ought to commit again the same sin of which he confessed, because there
is no true confession of sin, without a profession to leave the same.

And this is the fruit of Repentance (as St. John the Baptist calls it) to
lament for sins past, and utterly forsake them for the time to come. Therefore
says one well, Agere poenitentiam nihil aliud est, quam profiteri and
affirmare se non ulter us peccaturum.

To repent truly, is nothing elle, but to profess and promise, never to offend
again.

Seeing then what Repentance is, let us take a view how necessary it is, and
for what respects.

1. In regard of Gods hate to sin, and of that God whom we offend, who being
infinite, requires infinite satisfaction.

2. In regard of our Selves: Tertul.
Hominos sumus ad poenitentiam nati: We are Men, and subject to fall, and
therefore (upon the matter) we are born to repent us of our sins, that we may
prevent Gods Judgments in this world, (of all which has formerly been
treated) to escape his Judgment in the world to come, Eternal Death.

For as Men we shall dye, and as Christians we shall give an account.

To say somewhat of this Death, for by it we shall pass to the other, except
Repentance, and Gods mercies prevent it.

1. Death is Certain, it will come.

2. It is Universal or General, none shall escape it.

3. It is Terrible, especially to the wicked.

1. It is appointed for all men to dye.

S. Hierome calls it, Irrecusabilis mort is necessitas.

The necessity of dying is not to be avoided.

S. August. says, That all things in this life are uncertain, but death; and
Natus es? certum est quia morieris.

Art thou born? as certain it is thou shall die.

Anaxag.
It was the saying of the Heathen Philosopher, Sciebam me genuisse mortalem, I
knew I had begotten no other than a mortal man, hearing of his Sons death.

This point, and the certainty of it; is easily proved by experience of Former
ages, Our own time.


The longest liver, Methusalah, died; Ge. 49 29
The Patriarchs, Prophets, etc. died, Jud. 2.10.
and were gathered to their Fathers. Ezr. 3.16.


Where are the Princes of the Heathen become, etc.

They are vanquished, and gone down to the grave.

2. And as it is certain, so it is universal.

Job 30.23
It is the house appointed for all the living.

Ps. 89.47.
What man is he that lives and shall not see death.

Eccles. 2. 16.
As well the Wise man as the Fool.

Ecclus. 40 11.
All things that are of the Earth shall turn to Earth again.

Genesis 3. 19
Thou art dust (says God to Adam, and in him to all Mankind) and to dust shall
return.

It is the Ordinance of the Lord over all flesh. Ecclus. 41. 3.


But though it be certain in it self, yet in respect of the time and manner, it
is uncertain.

For which cause our Savior gave his Disciples counsel to be prepared for it.

Watch, for ye know not the day nor hour. Mat. 24. 13.


Be prepared, Lu. 12.40.
for the Son of Man will come at an hour when ye think not, like a thief in the
night.

The time of our departure is uncertain, whether it shall happen in our
infancy, childhood, youth, or age.

All men live not while they are old, all men dye not while they are young.

And many times Death comes unexpectedly, suddenly, in our greatest security.

Dies aderit cum vives mane, vesperi autem non vives.

There will come a day, when thou shall be alive in the morning, and dead
before night.

God has hid from us the certainty of our end, lest we should promise to our
selves any thing for the future.

And as the time, so the manner is uncertain.

Some dye in their beds,

Others perish by fire, sword, water, etc.

We have but one way to enter into this world, diverse to depart from it.

3. In it self it is also terrible.

Aristotle. Cicero.
Omnium terribilium, terribilissimum Mors.

Of all terrible things, Death is most dreadful.

Mar. 14. 34.
Our Savior Christ began to be heavy, etc.

But to mankind in diverse respects it is terrible.

All occasioned by the Devils malice.

Either he brings the parties dying, 1. Into despair and fear, for Gods
Judgments. 2. Into security, for their own Merits. 3. Into impatience. by
anguish of their sickness. 4. Into infidelity, by causing a mistrust in Gods
mercies. 5. Into worldy cogitations, about leaving and disposing of their
worldly estate. Or, 6. Vain hope, to recover their former health.


Dura mente abesse mors long creditur, etiam dum sentitur.

To a heart that is hardened, Death is thought to be farthest off, even when it
is felt to approach.

The Devil is come down to you, Apo. 12. 12.
which has great wrath, knowing that he has but a short time.

Thus much for the temporal death, the continual remembrance whereof is so
necessary, as nothing more.

Nemo memoriam mortis habens potest peccare.

He that thinks continually that he must dye, does not easily sin.

2. But to speak more properly, Death in it self were not terrible, nor evil,
but a passage from this life to a better, a rest from our labors, were it not
for the Account which is to be given of our life past, and the Judgment which
depends on it, and follows it.

For to fall into the hands of the living God, (in the worst sense, that is, to
hear his heavy sentence pronounced against our sins) is a fearful thing.

The thought of this made the holy man Job himself to cry, O that thou would
hide me in the grave, that thou would keep me secret until thy wrath be
past. Job 14.13


The terror of it is so great, that if we seriously consider it, Our flesh
would scarce cleave to our bones. Ps. 102.7.


S. Hier.
Quoties diem illum confidero, tolo corpore contremisco: sive enim comedo, sive
bibo, sive aliquid aliud facio, semper videtur mihi tuba illa terribilis
insonare in auribus, surgite mortui, venite ad judicium.

As often as I seriously consider of the day of death, I tremble all my body
over: for whether I eat or drink, or whatsoever else I do, methinks that
terrible Trump sounds in mine ears, Arise ye dead, and come to judgment.

Gods judgments are fearful, as they are sometimes executed in this world.

Genesis 3.
Our first Parents (for their sin) were expelled Paradise. Deprived of Original
Righteousness. Made liable to Condemnation, and became Children of wrath.

Subject to diverse miseries, and labors.

He spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to Hell, etc. 2 Pet.
2 42


How did he sweep away (as it were) the Sons of Men from the face of the Earth
by the Deluge? Genesis 7.


How did he destroy Sodom and Gomorrah?

Did not the Egyptians miserably perish in the Red Sea? Exodus 14.


What Vengeance did he take on the Israelites for worshipping the Golden Calf,
Number. 16.
and for murmuring against Moses?

The Scriptures are plentiful in this kind.

But yet these judgments are not to be paralleled with those after Death.

In respect of God, Omnipotent Highly Offended. Justly Punishing. Just Highly
Offended. Justly Punishing. Wise Highly Offended. Justly Punishing. Good Highly
Offended. Justly Punishing.


In respect of Man, Weak Offending his Creator. Suffering just Punishment.
Sinful Offending his Creator. Suffering just Punishment. Wretched Offending his
Creator. Suffering just Punishment.


In respect of the Sentence it self, which inflicts a punishment; sensible for
the pain and misery felt, and prejudicious for the glory lost.

1. He being Omnipotent, will be able to execute his vengeance on his Enemies,
neither shall any deliver them from him.

Job 9. 3.
He is mighty in strength, who has resisted him, and prospered.

36. 22:
He is exalted by his power, no Lawgiver like him.

In making Laws just and holy.

In exacting the due execution of them.

In power to punish the breakers of them.

Jer. 5. 20.
Fear ye not me, will ye not tremble at my presence?

Mat. 10: 28.
Fear him who is able to destroy both body and soul.

Deuteronomy. 32. 41.
If he whet his glittering sword, and his hand take hold on judgment,

Ps. 130.3.
Who is able to abide it?

2 Mac. 6. 26.
Though we be delivered from the judgment of Man, yet we cannot escape the
hand of the Almighty.

His Courts are so high, so transcendent, and his Judgments so definitive,
that no appeal lies from them.

We must rest upon his doom, and go no further.

2. Being Just, he will punish the Breakers of his Commandments: For though he
be merciful, in abundant measure, to pardon the iniquities of penitent
transgressors; yet he is just also to punish the wickedness of obstinate
Malefactors.

Multus ad ignoscendum, S. Bern.
multus ad ulciscendum.

As he is plentiful in pardon, and forgiveness, so is he as plentiful in
revenge.

He hates sinners, and will repay vengeance to the ungodly. Ecclus. 12 6.


He neither perverteth Judgment, Job 8. 3.
nor subverteth Justice.

Nullum bonum irre^^u eratum, nullum malum impunium.

Quanquam Sera, tamen certa Numiuis vindicta.

Lento gradu ad vindictam sui divira proceditira, Val. Mat.
and tarditatem supplicii gravitate compensat.

Nemo impune malus.

There shall no good act go unrewarded, nor any evil unpunished.

For though God be slow, yet he is sure in his revenge.

God ballanceth his slow proceeding in anger, with the grievousness of his
punishment. We know, that a Bow, the farther drawn, shoots farthest. And this
we must hold for a firm Maxim and Conclusion, that Nemo impune malus. There
shall no wicked man escape unpunished.

God will neither be made flexible by favor, nor corrupt by gifts.

Pro. 11.4.
Riches profit not in the day of wrath.

Ecclus. 5. 4.
And therefore say not, I have sinned, what harm has happened to me?

For though God be long suffering, he will in no wise let thee go unpunished.

Concerning propitiation, be not without fear, to add sin to sin.

And say not, His mercy is great, he will be pacified for the multitude of my
sins; for mercy and wrath come from him, and his indignation rests upon
sinners.

We must all appear before his Tribunal, and receive according to the thing
which every one has done.

His Sentence will be so Just, that though in this World we may say, Veniet qui
male judicata rejudicabit dies.

The day will come, when there will be a re-view of things ill carried.

Yet in the case between God and Man then, it will not be not be so.

3. Being Wise, Omniscient.

Nothing is hid from his all-seeing eyes.

He beholds all our actions.

He is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. Heb. 4.12.


All things are naked and open to his eyes. 13.


He knows our thoughts long before, our manifold transgressions, and our
mighty sins.

Therefore no hope of Evasion, by hiding any thing from him.

4. Being Good, He will expect our Thankfulness.

He has ever been gracious to us; heaped many benefits on us: And by how much
the more beneficial he has been to us, the longer expected our conversion, and
the oftener admonished us: by so much the more rigorously will he deal with us
for neglecting these benefits.

Unto whom much is given, Lu. 12.48.
of him much shall be required.

An account will be exacted of our Talents received. Mat. 25.


Every man shall be rewarded according to his works.

He will exact an account from us.

How we have used the Body and Soul given unto us.

How we have employed our Natural Gifts, Temporal Blessings, and the rest, The
signs of his Goodness to us.

Job 9. 3.
And can we answer one for a thousand.

Our Judgment therefore the greater for abusing his Goodness.

Again, If we consider this Judgment in respect of the Parties liable to it,
we shall have greater cause to betake our selves to a more serious
consideration of our estates.

1. In regard of the Nature and condition of Man.

Job. 14 2.
A flower.

Ps. 89 47.
Of short continuance.

13. 25.
A leaf.

Job. 13.25.
Dry stabble.

7. 7.
His substance but dust.

14. 2.
His life but a wind, a shadow of no continuance.

Format us de terra.

Conceptus in culpa.

Natus ad poenam.

Made of earth.

Conceived in sin.

Born to suffer punishment.

In regard that he is sinful and wretched. 2, 3.


Composed of vanity.

Every man living altogether vanity. Ps. 63. 4.


Lighter than vanity.

Shaped in wickedness.

Conceived in sin. Ps. 51. 5.


Born in uncleanness. Job. 14.


A child of wrath. Ephesians. 2. 3.


A vessel of perdition, Esa. 64.6.
dishonor.

Unclean like a silthy clout. Job 15.16. 53.6.


Drinking iniquity like water.

All have erred.

Agunt mala quae non licent, vana quae non expediunt.

Faciles ad seducendum. S. Bern.


Debiles ad operandum.

Fragiles ad resistendum.

They do evil, which is unlawful, and are vain, which is not meet, Easy to
deceive, Weak to work, Frail to resist.


So that our entrance into the world is miserable.

Conversation in it Culpable.

Dissolution from it Damnable.

The Consideration of this unworthiness has terrified all the Saints and
Servants of God, lest they should fall under this judgment.

Job 7. 20.
I have sinned, what shall I do? says Job.

9. 14.
How shall I answer?

Psalm. 6.
O Lord, correct me not in thine indignation, says David.

Jer. 10.24.
Correct me, O Lord, but yet not in thy fury, lest I be brought to nothing,
says Jeremy.

sentence it self, which will be to the good. Venite Benedicti, Come ye
blessed: to the bad, Mat. 25. 34, 41.
Discedite Maledicti, Depart ye cursed, which last sentence is terrible.

1. They are cast into eternal torments, a punishment sensible for the pain and
misery felt.

2. They are deprived of the Beatifical vision of God, a punishment prejudicial
for the Glory lost.

The first is terrible.

1. In regard of the Suddenness and Horror.

At the time of the Judges appearance.

Ps. 50. 3.
A consuming fire shall go before him, and a mighty tempest shall be stirred
up about him.

Their visitation shall be in Thunder, Earthquake and great noise, storm and
Tempests, and the flame of devouring fire. Esa. 29.6.


The day of the Lord is very terrible, who may abide it.

A day of wrath, Joel 2.11.
a day of trouble and distress, etc.

It shall burn as an Oven, Zeph. 1. 15.
and the proud, and all that do wickedly shall be stubble. Mal. 4. 1.


They shall behold

Above them, The Angry Judge disdaining them.

Under them, The Horrible Pit gaping for them.

Within them, The Worm of Conscience gnawing them.

About them, The World burning.

Near to them, The Devils accusing them.

Whither then shall a sinner flee.

It is impossible to be hidden, and insufferable to abide.

If it were terrible for the Israelites to hear Gods voice delivered by an
Angel, who brought no ill news.

Insomuch as they said,

If we hear the voice of the Lord our God any more, Deuteronomy. 5. 25. 27.
we shall die.

And to Moses.

Ex. 20.19.
Talk thou with us, let not God, lest we die.

What will it be for sinners to hear the Judge pronounce this heavy sentence,
Discedite Maledicti.

2. In regard of the Accusers.

Job. 20 67
1. The Heaven, and the Earth.

Mal. 3. 14
2. Christ as Judge.

Jer. 29.23.
Witness.

Ps. 50.21.
I will reprove thee, and set before thee the things that thou have done.

Nah. 3 5.
I will show thy filthiness.

Mat. 25. 42.
I was hungry, and ye gave me no meat, etc.

3. The Angels; Their attendants in this life,

4. The Devils; who attend them for future torments.

Apo. 20.12
5. The Books of their Consciences.

Dan. 7.10.
Thine own wickedness shall correct thee, Jer. 3 19.
and thy turnings back shall reprove thee.

6. The Creatures, whom they have abused.

Ja. 5. 1.
Consider this, lest ye howl and weep in your misery.

Jude 6.
In regard of the intolerable pains which follow the Sentence. Esa. 66.24


Mar. 9.44.
1. Everlasting Chains of Darkness.

Vermis little non morietur. Judith 16 17.


They shall weep for ever.

2. Sharp.

Beyond the Furnace seven times heated. Dan. 3.


3. Various, of diverse sorts.

According to the diversity of sinners offenses.

4. Stinking.

In the Lake which burns with fire and brimstone. Apo. 21.7.


5. Affrighting.

Tormented by Devils.

6. In Bonds, not able to stir.

Bind him hand and foot. Mat. 12. 23.


Held with Cords of his own sin.

Bind the Tares, Pro. 5 22.
etc.

Gathered as Prisoners into a pit. Mat. 13. 30.


Chains of darkness. Esa. 24 25.


7. In horrid darkness. Jude 6.


Prefigured by that of Egypt. Exo 12,


A Land of darkness. Job 10. 22


8. With Company detestable.

In regard that Hell is a Place of no Order. Job. 10, 14 Esa. 5. 14.


Dilatavit Infernus animam suam, and aperuit os suum absque ullo termino.

Hell has enlarged it self, and has opened his mouth without measure.

Of no Rest, or Comfort.

But cries, vexation, weeping, and gnashing of teeth.

Not a drop of cool water to the thirsty.

Continual mourning, sorrow, without intermission.

Hugo
Plexus ardore incomparabili, dolor innumerabili, and poena interminabili.

Full of incomparable heat, innumerable sorrows. and endless punishments.

This for Poena sensus, or the Pain and misery felt.

Poena Damni.

The Loss of Heavens joys.

The deprivation of sinners from Gods sight.

Than which nothing more miserable.

The Excellency of Heaven (the place of Gods rest) may be conjectured at,

By the End for which it was made.

God here, above other places.

Ps. 19. 1.
The Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the firmament his handywork.

2. The Happiness of the Elect.

Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. Lu. 13 28.


Blessed are they which dwell here. Ps. 84. 4.


They shall be satisfied (inebriebuntur) with the plenty of Gods house.

This Happiness we may also value.

By the Price it cost to regain it when it was lost.

The Pains which Martyrs endured to attain it.

The Testimonies of the Prophets, etc.

The Excellency of Heaven may be imagined

By the Description of it.

It needs no Sun or Moon to enlighten it, for the glory of God makes it bright.

The Lamb is the light thereof.

No Night there. Apo. 21. 23.


Here is that Beatifical Vision which the Fathers and Holy men so desired, and
rejoiced in.

Mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation. Luc. 2.29.


I shall be satisfied with thine Image. Ps. 17.15,


Show the light of thy Countenance, and we shall be safe. Ps. 17. 6. 80. 7.


If I have found grace in thy sight (says Moses) show me thy face. Exodus 33:


If thou desire pleasure.

Here is pleasure for evermore.

If honor,

Ps. 16.12. 149. 9.
Such honor have all his Saints.

If good company,

God, and all the Elect.

If music,

A quire of Angels continually praising God with their melodious songs.

To conclude, here is abundance of all things, want of nothing.

S. Aug.
Wherefore, Si credimus futurum Iudicium, been vivamus, ne male moriamur.

Maxima poena, metum perdidisse judicii:

If we believe there will be a Judgment hereafter, let us live well, lest we
dye in an ill case.

It is the sign of a seared Conscience (and that is the greatest punishment can
befall a man) to have lost the fear of the last Judgment.

Lay all these together. That all men are sinners.

God hates sin.

It stands us upon to prevent Gods wrath.

In respect of the Judgment of this World, Temporal, and of the World to come,
Eternal.

That it will be heavy in regard of the Omnipotence of the Judge. Justice of
the Judge. Omniscience of the Judge. Goodness of the Judge.
The Weakness of Man. The Imperfection of Man. The Misery of Man.


The Sentence which makes the wicked liable to the sense of pain, and loss of
good.

And finding that there is an unevitable necessity to repent.

Why defer we to use the means by which we may be made clean, our sins may be
pardoned, and taken off.

A wise Traveller takes the day before him.

And a wise Builder the year before him.

Optime fit quod suo tempore fit.

Stultus semper incipit vivere.

It is best done, that is done timely.

A Fool always begins to live.

For who has promised thee time to repent

How many have been deceived with this vain hope?

The Wise Man gives this Rule.

Eccles. 11. 10.
Whatsoever good thing thy hand finds to do, do it instantly, with thy might,
for there is no work, etc. in the Grave.

Ecclus. 5. 7.
Make no tarrying to turn to the Lord, and put not off from day to day: For
suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord come forth, and in thy security thou shall
be destroyed.

S. August.
Indulgentiam Deus tibi promisit, crastinum diem nemo promisit. Si male
vixisti, been vive, jam hodie.

And, Propter illos qui desperatione periclitantur, proposuit Deus indulgentiae
portum. Propter illos qui spe periclitantur and dilationibus illuduntur fecit
diem mortis incertum. Quando venit ultimus dies nescis. Ingratus es qui
hodiernum habes, in quo corrigaris.

And again, Qui ab iniquitatibus suis recedere negliguut, and sibi de Deo
indulgentiam repromittunt, nonnunquam ita praeveniuntur, Dei furore, ut net
conversionis tempus, nec beneficium remissionis inveniant.

God has promised the pardon, it is true; but no man has promised, or cen,
that thou shall live while tomorrow. If thou have formerly lived ill, live well
to day.

God has been so propitious to Mankind, that for the comfort of them that are
ready to perish in the Sea of desparation, he has a Haven of mercy and pardon.
And for their sakes that are illuded with hope, and delay their repentance, he
has made the day of death uncertain. Seeing thou know not when the last day
will come, thou art an unthankful man, if thou make not good use by
repentance, of this day which God has given thee.

They which are careless to depart from iniquity, and flatter themselves with
the hope of Gods pardon, are many times so prevented by the anger of God, as
they neither find time to convert, nor the benefit of his pardon.

God has reserved to himself the pre-eminence of lengthning and shortning our
days.

The rich man promised himself ease and rest for many years, Luc. 22.
but one night brought a period to his supposed felicity.

Saint Jerome says, That men are worthily taken in the snare of Judgment, as
fish with a hook, or birds in a net; and therefore gives this counsel.

Quia didicisti quod omnia morte finiuntur, and in inferno non sit poenitentia,
nec aliquis ad virtutes recursus: dum in ipso saeculo es festina, contend age
poenitentiam, etc.

Seeing thou have learned that death brings an end to all things, and that
there is no repentance in Hell, nor any recourse to virtue; make have while thou
live, strive and labor, do penance, etc.

But admit that thou had the privilege to know thine own end.

Think thou, that it will be easier to repent hereafter, than presently.

No certainly;

For the longer thou detractest, the harder the task of repentance.

1. In respect of the habit, Custom is another nature.
S. Bern.
Cum aliquid in habitum abierit, difficulter expellitur,


S. August.
Dum servitur libidini, fit consuetudo, and dum consuetudini non resistitur,
fit necessitas.

When a thing has once got a habit, it is hardly expelled.

While we serve and feed our lust, custom steals upon us, and not resisting
custom, we are necessitated to it.

Therefore he gives this admonition.

As no man is to despair of Gods mercy, yet he is not so to presume, but that
without delay he reconcile himself to God, lest he fall into such a custom of
sinning, that when he would, he be not able to get out of the Devils snares.

2. Because the farther we plunge our selves into sin, the farther God is from
us.

Woe unto them that have fled from me. Hos. 7.13.


God will cast them off. 9. 17.


3. For the ground the Devil gets of us.

He is like the strong man which overcomes the weaker. Lu. 11.22


4. For the corruptions of the Soul.

The longer we sin, the obscurer the understanding.

The weaker the Will, the more disordered the desires.

Who then is so void of understanding or reason, that will think he can repent,
after many years, when his sins are multiplied, and grown into a habit, and
that God is farther from us?

When the Devil encroacheth on us, and our faculties are corrupted; And cannot
do it in his better strength.

That sins increasing, the pardon will be easilier obtained for them.

That the infirmity prevailing, the medicine will cure the easilier, knowing
that Languor prolixior gravat medicum, brevem languorem recidit medicus.

A long sickness or languishing disease puts the Physician to his Books, while
a short grief is soon cured by him.

Who can carry a great burden in his age, that groans under a little weight in
his chief strength?

It was a harder and more difficult act in man's consideration, to revive
Lazarus being four days in the grave, Joh. 11.
than the Rulers daughter newly dead. Luke 8.49.


Grant that thou can repent in thine age.

1. Yet consider the time lost, which might have been spent in doing good, and
avoiding evil.

Why spendest thou thy time in sowing that, of which thou shall reap naught but
tears.

The heathen man could say,

He that desires to do good while he is old, Seneca.
makes a plain demonstration, that he has no mind to goodness, till that time
which is unfit for all things.

And it is too late to begin to live, when we are ready to dye.

S. Gregory says, That he is little better than an Infidel, that forbeareth to
repent till he is old. And it is to be feared, that while such a one hops for
mercy, he shall fall into judgment.

Can the infinite Majesty of God offended, be satisfied with a little, a small
repentance?

If thou can not satisfy him for the sins of a day, why heapest thou the
sins of many years, and protractest to give satisfaction till thine age.

If thou have gathered nothing in thy youth, how can thou find any thing in
thine age. Ecclus. 25. 3.


2. Besides Repentance is the gift of God, to whom he pleases, and when.

Every one ought to fear that it will not be given him at the hour of death,
and is therefore to work out his salvation in the time of his life, with fear
and trembling. Phil. 2. 12


Saint Augustine says, That seldom or never a full conversion is seen in the
end of a man's days, and that much doubt may be made of a late penitent.

Of him that repents at the last gasp, and is reconciled ( that is, by the
Minister) to God, I am not certain whether he be secure or not.

Saint Augustine is not confident of his salvation, though he be absolved by
the Priest.

Therefore let every one that would be out of doubt, repent while he is lusty
and strong, and in his perfect health; for he that has lived ill all his life,
and repents not till the last, is certainly in great danger.

Will thou be secure (say two Fathers?) will thou avoid all doubt? S. Ambr.
Repent while thou art well. S. Aug.
And why art thou then secure? Because thou repentest, when thou might have
sinned.

3. There are many impediments in age and sickness.

Men are then troubled with many infirmities.

Cumbred with many affairs.

Grieved with many thoughts, for wife and children, estate and pleasure to be
left.

And what kind of penitence can be expected from man in this estate?

Poenitentia quae fit in extremis, raro vera est, ob magnam difficultaetem in
hoc articulo. It is seldom true, being deferred till our end.

1. For the great perturbations arising by the extremity of sorrow, anguish,
thought of death, all most violent in a dying man.

They suffer him to think of nothing but that with which he is vexed.

2. True repentance ought to be voluntary, not of necessity.

And a dying man is forced.

Like to that of Shimei to David.

Like to that of Mariners in a storm. 2 Samuel 19. 19.


3. If he thinks not of it himself, (as it is very doubtful) his Friends seldom
or never send for those who should put him in mind of it, till it be too late,
till he be past all sense of it,

And this is a just punishment, says S. Gregory, for not thinking on God while
he was in ability to do it, S. Greg.
So that one negligence is punished with another.

Lastly, let not the examples of a sew cause protraction in thee.

For though God forbear his threatened judgments on the Ninivites, it was for
their forty days repentance.

And if thou can repent forty days as they did, thou have the better hope.

And though the Thief ( in articulo mortis, ready to dye) was saved; Yet this
example ought not to give liberty to any, to defer so long.

Besides, his salvation was no less admirable than any other of Christ's
miracles.

And his conversion no less wonderful than his salvation.

For when Christ's own Disciples had denied and forsaken him,

The Thief confessed him.

S. Aug.
Credidit Reus, quod negavit Electus.

But trust to thy timely preparations by the example of the Wise Virgins. Mat.
25.


And consider and think of thine own estate while thou have time.

Eccles. 12.
Make no tarrying to turn to the Lord, and put not off from day to day; for
suddenly shall the wrath of God come forth, and in thy security thou shall be
destroyed.

Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil days come not.

Defer not Repentance unto years unapt, testy, weak, when sin leaves thee, and
not thou it.

Now the time is, when thou may find the Judge propitious.

Seek the Lord while he may be found, Esa. 55.6.
and call upon him while he is near.

Repent, and be converted, Acts 3.19
that your sins may be blotted out.

Now our Repentance prevails chiefly by 1. Prayer. 2. Fasting. 3. Alms. 4.
Tears.


The prayer of humble peirceth he clouds. Ecclus. 5. 17.


It was the practice of David after his fall, as may appear by the 1 Psalm.
Psalm. 51.


It was the counsel of Saint Peter to Simon Magus, Repent of thy wickedness,
and pray to God, if perhaps(...) thought of thine heart may be s(...) thee. Act
3.22.
For God is properly (...) if we neglect not this duty.

Ps. 145.18
The Lord is nigh to all them that call upon him.

Eccles. 2. 10.
He never forsakes them that call upon him.

But of this point more at large elsewhere.

fast be the fast of the soul, in abstaining from sin; yet other fast of the
body is necessary for us, S. Aug.
as a salve for a wound.

It asswageth the intemperance of the body, represseth inordinate affections,
and allayeth the passions of the soul, which arise by fullness.

Luc. 21.34.
Let not your hearts be overcharged, says our Savior.

All the servants of God by this humbled themselves, when they set themselves
to repentance, or to obtain any thing at his hands.

Ps. 35.13. 69. 10.
David humbled, and chastened himself by fasting.

It was an ancient Precept.

Saint Augustine out of Saint Basil says, that it was commanded as a Law by
God to Adam in Paradise, by prohibiting the Tree, And if he had fasted from
that Tree, we had not needed to have fasted; we are sick by sin, let us be
healed by repentance; but repentance without fasting is in vain. So he.

The Flesh had need to be kept under the Soul, like a servant, left it rebel,
and to be held in with this bit; Tob. 12
for let but the reins loose, and the flesh will run headlong to perdition.

Prayer is good with fasting, etc.

And God says, Turn unto me with fasting. Joel 2.12.


The Prayer and Alms of Cornelius ascended to Heaven. Acts 10.^.


Will thou have thy Prayers fly to Heaven, make it two wings, Fasting and Alms.

We are to give alms (says he) in this regard, S. Aug.
that we may be heard when we deprecate Gods anger for our sins past.

By Mercy and Truth iniquity is purged.

Who so stops his ears at the cry of the poor, Pro. 16 6.
he also shall cry himself, Pro. 21.13.
and shall not be heard.

Give alms of such things as you have, Lu. 11.41.
and all things shall be clean to you.

Break off thine iniquities by showing mercy on the poor, Dan 4.27.
says Daniel to Nebuchadnezzer.

Lastly, The most powerful act of Repentance is godly sorrow, 2 Cor. 7.
accompanied with groans, sighs, and tears.

They are the blood of a wounded soul.

They ascend unto the nostrils of God, as the Odor of a sweet smelling
Sacrifice.

God suffers them not to be spent in vain, Psalm. 56.8.
but gathers them.

David every nighe (in thought of his offenses) washed his bed, 6. 6.
and watered his couch with them.

Jer. 31 9.
God promises, that if we come weeping, he will lead us in mercy.

And therefore commands it as a chief demonstration of our hearty Repentance.
Joel 2.12.


Saint Peter, after his denial of Christ, Lu. 22.62.
wept bitterly, but said nothing. We find that he wept, not what he said. He
made choice to repent rather with tears, and no words, than with words, and no
tears.

S. Ambr.
Recte flevit and tacuit, quia quod defleri solet, non solet excusari.

Luc. 7.48.
Mary Magdalen wept, but said nothing, yet Christ said to her, thy sins are
forgiven thee.

Esa. 38.5.
Ezechias wept sore, The Lord said, I have heard thy prayers, and seen thy
tears, and added fifteen years to his life.

Lachrymae tacitae quodammodo preces sunt, S. Aug.
veniam non postulant, and merentur.

Sufficit auribus Domini imber oculorum, fletus citius audit quam voces.

Let the wicked therefore forsake his way, Esa. 57.5.
and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord.

To day if ye will hear his voice, Psalm. 95.8.
harden not your hearts.

If we will not hear this voice of his, Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at
hand. He will stop his ears to us when we cry, Lord, open unto us, Mar. 4.17.
though we cry with tears, as Esau did for his Fathers blessing, who found no
way of changing his [Fathers] mind, though he sought it with tears, carefully,
when it was too late.

For, though tears prevail in their due time, and happy is he that can shed
them; Yet when the door is shut, Heb. 12.
God will say to the impenitent sinner, as he said to the foolish Virgins, I
know ye not.

The Duty of Repentance.
THis duty of Repentance consists of two parts.

1. Mortification of the old Man, which is the first degree of Regeneration. 2.
Quickening of the new, which is the second.
1. Mortification, is an act of the Holy Spirit in us, Romans 6.4, 5, 6.
who does by little and little quench and abate in our souls and bodies, the
natural strength of our corruption, which was crept into us, Colos. 3.
partly Originally, by Adams fall (which is that we mean by the Old man) and
partly that Sin, which we have actually increased by our own frailty.

It consists.

1. In our acknowledgement of Sin. 2. In our Contrition and Sorrow.
Both which are set down in one Verse of the Psalmist. Psa 38.18.


1. Our acknowledgement is either 1. Inward. 2. Outward.


1. Inward acknowledgement is when we feel the burden of our sins pressing us
down, Psalm, 38.5.
our Consciences accusing us, To. 2. 15.
and our thoughts testifying against us. Ps 38. 39.


2. Outward, is when we make Confession of them by speech, or other outward
actions.

And this Confession of sin, is a publication or manifestation of our
unworthiness and guilt, whereby we testify and bewail, that we have sinned
against God, and have (withal) a settled resolution and purpose to offend him
no more.

Confession is either Public. Private.


Public Confession is, when upon the Lords Day, or other days appointed for
Gods Worship, we in the open Congregation, together, or after the Minister, do
confess our sins to God.

Private is, either 1. To God in our Closets, or other private places, as Ps.
32. 5. 38. 9. 18. 41. 4. 51. 2 Samuel 24. 10. Dan. 9.

2. To men. Jam. 5. 16.

2. Contrition is a sorrow and grief of the Conscience, and mourning of the
Soul, because we have offended God, having also joined with it a displeasure
against our selves, and a true humiliation both of souls and bodies, as Iam. 4.
9. Esa. 66. 2. Eze. 36. 1. 41. 10. Ion. 3. 8. 2 Kings 22. 19. Matt. 5. 4. 2
Cor. 7. 9, 10, 11.

Quickening of the new man, is when we, returning to God, live spiritually, and
have a desire (for the time to come) to please Him: this is also called a
Conversion to God.

And this we do, 1. By avoiding evil. 2. Following that which is good.


Both comprehended in Psa. 34.14. Esa. 1. 16, 17.

The Benefits we receive by Repentance, are, Ps. 95.10.
The deferring of Gods punishments due for sin. Psalm 89. 32, 33.
Chron. ^. 8. ^^n. 3.
The mitigation of his displeasure. Ezec. 33.
The averting of his judgments. Joh. 3. 10.
The escaping of eternal death. 1 Ki. 21.29.
The prolonging of our prosperity. Dan. 4.27.
The attaining of eternal life.


Confession of Sins.
Who will give water to my head, or tears to mins eyes, Jer. 5.
that I may day and night bewail my sins and ingratitude against thee, O God,
my Creator? Many things there are which terrify men's Consciences, and bring
them to the true sense of their sins, but nothing is so available thereunto, as
the contemplation of the greatness of thy goodness, and the multitude of thy
benefits. That therefore, O Lord, my poor wretched soul may the better see and
consider in what state it stands, I will recount thy manifold blessings, and
the number of my sins, that thereby also, I may more clearly understand who
thou art, and what I am, how gracious a God thou have been to me, and how
rebellious a sinner I have been to thee.

There was a time, O Lord, (as thy Divine Majesty best knows) when I was not,
and thou tookest me out of the dust of the Earth, and gave me a being; Genesis
2. 7, 1. 26.
creating in me a Soul after thine own similitude, and made it capable of thy
glory. Thou did create my body, with all the members and senses thereof; and
my soul, with all the powers and faculties thereof. And as thou did create
me, so thou did preserve me iu my Mothers womb, Ps. 12.19
that I might come safe into this world, and receive the mark and badge of all
thine, even the Sacrament of Baptism, whereby I was cleansed from the guilt of
Original sin. Amongst a multitude of Infidels, dispersed over the face of the
Earth, thou would have me in the number of the Faithfal, even of those to
whom so happy a lot has fallen to be thine, Tit. 3. 5.
regenerated with the water of Baptism: From which time, I was taken to be
thine, and that admirable and happy Contract was made between us, that thou
should be my Lord, and I thy Servant; thou my Father, and I thy Son: that
thou should perform and show to me the love of a Father, and I to thee the
duty of a Son. Further, O Lord, thou did descend from Heaven to Earth for my
sake, seeking me in all the ways wherein I had lost my self. With thy humanity
thou did ennoble my nature, and by thy bonds did deliver me from bondage.
Thou did challenge me from the power of the Devil, by delivering thy self
into the hands of sinners, and did destroy sin, by taking upon thee the form
of a sinner. Phil. 2.7.
With what reverence shall I speak of that other blessed Sacrament, which Thou
also, O Lord, have instituted and ordained for a remedy of all the miseries
which have befallen me, and the many sins I have committed since my Baptism;
and for a salve and cure for all my spiritual diseases, even the Sacrament of
thy most precious Body and Blood? And as thou have bestowed on me all these
divine and heavenly blessings: so likewise in plentiful manner have thou heaped
on me temporal favors. Thou have from my birth to this hour, preserved,
nourished, clothed, and fed me, in most abundant manner, giving to me the use
of all thy creatures for my sustentation. Nay, what could thou have done
more for me, than thou have done? Or what could thou have given me more,
than thou have bestowed upon me, either of blessings of this world, or of the
world to come?

Now, having received all these mercies and favors from thee, how have I on my
part behaved my self in thankfulness to thee for them? Have I returned due
praise unto thy Majesty for them, or carried my self, and ordered my life, like
to one that might any way deserve them? O Lord, I confess that I have not; for
such has been the malice of my heart, that instead of showing my self
conformable to thy will, I daily add sin to sin, and iniquity to iniquity,
Romans 2.5.
heaping up wrath for my self against the day of wrath. How can I without tears
remember, how often thou might justly have slain me, and yet
(notwithstanding my sins, which call for vengeance) no evil has happened unto
me? How many souls burn in Hell fire, which have sinned far less than I, and
yet I remain alive? What had become of me, if thou had taken me away with
those at the same time? How strict had my Judgment been, if thy Justice had
laid hold on me, laden with so many sins? Who then, O Lord, has bound the
hands of thy Justice, who has deprecated for me, when I lay thus lulled asleep
in the security of my sins? What has pleased thee in me, that thou should
deal more mercifully with me, than with those, who in the midst of their days,
in the heat of their youth, are taken away from amongst us? My sins cried out
against me, and thou stoppedst thine ears, my offenses daily increased against
thee, yet thy mercy daily abounded toward me. I sinned, thou did expect me,
I fled from thee, and thou followedst me: I was weary in offending thee, and
thou not weary in expecting me. And in the midst of all my sins, I ever
received many good inspirations and goodly reproofs from thy holy Spirit, which
checked me in the dissolute course of my life. How often have thou called me
with the voice of Love? How often have thou terrified me with threats and
fears, laying before me the peril of death, and the rigor of thy divine
Justice? How often have thou followed me with thy Word preached. invited me
with thy blessings, chastened me with thy scourges, compassing me about, that I
could by no means slay from thee? And lastly (which is not the least of thy
mercies) with what patience have thou waited for my serious Repentance?

Psol. 106. 13.
What then, O Lord, shall I render back to thee, for all that thou have done
unto me? In that thou have created me, I owe thee all that I am created, in
that thou have preserved me, and thus long expected my return to thee. I owe
thee life, and all that I am. But in that thou have regenerated, sanctified,
and redeemed me, and left those excellent pledges for my salvation; I know not
what to render unto thee. For, if the lives of all men and Angels were in my
power, and that I could offer them unto thee for a sacrifice of praise and
thanks; yet were it nothing, being compared to the least of all thy spiritual
blessings bestowed on me.

Ier. 9. 1.
Who therefore will give a fountain of tears to mine eyes, that I may lament my
great ingratitude, and unjust retribution for all these thy manifold blessings
heaped upon me? Help me thou, O Lord, and give me grace, that I may heartily
confess, and grievously bewail my heinous offenses and transgressions, against
thee; that thou may be reconciled to me, and in thy abundant mercies, show
some pity to me for them. I am thy creature, O Lord, made after thine own
Likeness and Image: acknowledge thy workmanship, for it is thine own. In taking
away the soil and filth, wherewith it is defiled and stained, thou shall soon
perceive it to be thine own handiwork. Art not thou a Father of mercies, which
have neither number, 2 Cor. 1.3.
end, nor measure? Although I have shaken off the duty and obedience of a child
toward thee, yet cast not thou off the love of a Father toward me. I beseech
thee, Although I have done many things, whereby thou might justly condemn
me, yet thou have not lost the means whereby thou may mercifully save me. If
thou forsake me, to whom shall I flee? who is there to help me besides thy
self? Acknowledge, G Lord, a straying sheep: Behold I come to thee all wounded,
thou can heal me. blind, thou can enlighten me: full of leprosy, thou
can cleanse me: and spiritually dead, yet thou can revive me. Thy mercy is
greater than my sin: thy clemency, more than my wickedness: and thou can
remit, more than I can commit. Do not then, O Lord, put me back from thee: look
not so much upon my sins, as upon thy infinite meocies; who live and reignest
God of all mercies, world without end.

Another.
O Almighty Lord God, great in thy power, and terrible in thy judgments, Exodus
34.
who made the Heaven, the Earth, the Sea, and all things in them, by thy
Word, whose Power cannot be resisted, and whose Mercy is over all thy works.
Ps. 145.9.
All things are under thy power and rule, both in Heaven and Earth. Thou
show mercy on whom thou will, art pitiful to whom thou please, and would
not the death of a sinner, Eze. 33. 11.
neither delightest in the destruction of any. O God, rich in mercy, who, Ephesians.
2.4.
out of thy extraordinary love to Mankind, even when we were thine Enemies,
Romans 5.10
did send thine only Son into the world, that every one that believed on him
might not perish, but have life everlasting; Have mercy upon me, have mercy
upon me, according to thy mercy, Psalm. 51.
and according to the multitude of thy mercies, do away my offenses. Lu. 15.18.
Holy Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and before thee, and am no more
worthy to be called thy Son. I have turned from thee, and have broken all thy
Commandments. I have not walked aright, but have gone after mine own lusts,
choosing Esa. 65.2
those ways, which thou have forbidden me to tread in. Neither, O Lord, have I
feared thine anger, but have been in all things disobedient unto thee, and have
hardened my heart against thee. I have hated instruction, Pro. 5.12.
and cast thy sayings behind me. Truth has found no place in me, and my hands
have been the workers of much wickedness. I have spoken vainly, idly, and
wickedly. I have brought forth deceit, and meditated the way of untruth. I have
provoked thy wrath against me, by accustoming my self to do the work of the
flesh, and rejecting the good motions of the Spirit. Woe unto me, rebellious
wretch, Esa. 30.1.
that I have committed these wicked acts, against thee, so loving, so good, so
gracious a God; to the utter destruction of my soul, without thy mercy in
Christ Jesus. In remembrance, and confidence whereof, O Lord, I come to thee,
and humbly entreat thee, that thou would not reject a contrite, humble,
miserable, and repentant sinner, who at this time earnestly invocateth thy
Name. Psalm. 7. 9.
Return a little, O Lord, and be entreated for my manifold sins, do not unto me
according to the multitude of them, neither reward me according to my
transgressions. Let my humble Prayers, sighs, and groans, come into thy
presence, and according to thy promises, receive me again into thy favor. For,
O Father, I am one of those, whom thy only Son redeemed with his most precious
blood. O Lord, my soul does loath my life, by reason of my manifold sins, 1
Pet.5.6.
and I humble my self under thy mighty hand, because I know, that in thine
anger thou show mercy, Aba. 3. 2.
and in time of trouble thou do forgive offenses: And behold, O Lord, that I
confess my sins, beseeching thee, for thy goodness, to do unto me, according to
thy wonted mercy. I am confounded and ashamed to lift up mine eyes unto thee,
because my sins have prevented my prayers, and have ascended up to thee, before
them. Against thee, Psalm. 51.
O Lord, have I sinned and done much evil in thy sight; Yet wherefore should I
dye in my sins, seeing it is not thy pleasure, Exech. 18
that any sinner should dye, but turn unto thee, and live? For thou art good
and gracious, and savest those who are altogether unworthy, out of the
abundance of thy mercy in Christ Jesus the Righteous. For although thine anger
against sinners is unsufferable, and who may abide it? Yet thy mercy toward
offenders is unsearchable, and who can find out the depth thereof, or describe
it? Psalm. 22.
Our Fathers in their troubles cried unto thee, and thou did deliver them,
they put their trust in thee, and were not confounded. And though they, by
their offenses, have justly provoked thine anger, yet (upon their humiliation)
thou did remember thy Covenant, and ease them of their afflictions. O Lord,
be merciful also unto me, for I am miserable and wretched. Heal my soul,
Psalm.41.4. 6. 3. 13.
for I have sinned against thee. My soul is very much disquieted within me: How
long, Lord, will it be, ere thou look upon me, and deliver it? Psalm 13.3.
Lighten mine eyes, for I have (too long) slept in death, and my sins have (too
long) had dominion over me. Return, O Lord, at the last, and be gracious unto
me; O deliver my soul, and have mercy upon me: And all my bones shall say, Lord
who is like unto thee? Ps. 35.10.
To thee be all Honor, Praise, and Glory, World without end.

Another.
O Lord Jesus Christ, the only Physician of sick souls, Gal. 4. 4.
who in the fullness of God came into this World, Mat.9.13.
not to call the just, but sinners to Repentance. Behold me (the most wretched
of all sinners, who (with as much humility as I am able in the confidence of
thy great goodness, cast my self before the footstool of thy Majesty,
confessing my great and grievous offenses. And if the Publican in the Gospel
durst not lift up his eyes to heaven, but stood a far off, Lu.18.13.
and smote his breast, saying, Lord be merciful to me a sinner, what shall I
do, whose sins surpass the greatest sinners offenses? For all my inward and
outward parts, are wholly depraved, and nothing that is good remains in me.
And, when I look into the book of my conscience, I find, that I have abominably
polluted the garment of innocence, which I received at my Baptism. I have put
all my strength to offend thee with all the members I have. For, my feet have
been swift to evil, To.13.15.
and flow to good: Esa. 3.16.
mine eyes open to vanity, and shut to that which is truly amiable. My hands
stretched to covetousness, and closed from the works of mercy: mine ears ready
to hear evil, and stopped to the good motions of the Spirit: and my soul, (the
noblest part in me) which has eyes to contemplate the glory of thy Majesty: I
have turned away from the consideration of thy Excellency, to the vain and
transitory things of this life. I have given liberty to whatsoever mine eyes
have desired, and have not resisted the unclean passions of my heart: so that
the whole course of my life has been a continual warfare against the. How
often have I returned as a dog to the vomit, and as a sow washed, to the mire?
I am that Fool which has said in his heart there is no God. For I have lived
so dissolutely, that I have made plain demonstration by my behavior, That I
believed, thou either were not at all, or else could do nothing at all. Thou,
O Lord, have often called me, and I have neglected thy voice: Thou have
expected me, and I have abused thy patience. Thou have given me the treasure of
a long time to repent, and I have consumed it wastefully. Thou have stricken
me, and I have not been sensible of thy hand. Thou have afflicted me, and I
have made no use of thy correction. Thou did sweat, to make me clean, and I
still remain in my pollution. I am hardened, as well with thy punishments, as
with thy blessings, being rebellious to the one, and unthankful for the other.
And what shall I further say? but that my heart, soul, thoughts, and body, are
all impure and defiled, and that of all sinners I am the chief, 1 Timothy.1.9.
unworthy Earth should any longer sustain me, or that I should expect any thing
from thee, but thy severest Judgment. For if thou sparedst not Lucifer, and
his Angels, for one only sin, Pride, but did cast them from Heaven, Jude 6.
to be reserved for everlasting chains of darkness, unto the Judgment of the
great Day: what can I hope or look for, that have offended thee, not in one
offense alone, but in all kind of transgressions? For my sins are in number,
numberless, insomuch, that I hate my self, for my madness, that from so noble a
liberty, I am fallen into so base a servitude: and find my self overwhelmed
with the horrible dread of thy fearful Judgments, Psalm.55.5.
Yet when I behold and consider that infinite mercy of thine, Ps. 145.9.
which surpasses all the rest of thy works, I am a little refreshed, and my
Soul is a little comforted and revived: For as by the examination of the
hainousness of my sins, and the strictness of thy Justice, Ezech. 11
I did almost despair: Joel 2.
So, considering and weighing the testimonies of thy Servants, left upon
record, for the comfort of poor distressed souls, I am somewhat again cheared
and raised up. For, besides those places of consolation, and many more, I find,
by diverse Parables and Similitudes of thine own, how ready and propense thou
art to receive and pardon the Penitent. As, Luc. 15.
by the lost Penny, the lost Sheep, and by the Prodigal Son, whose Image I find
in my self, and whose life mine does fully parallel. Wherefore, O Lord, I
humbly entreat thee, to restore me (thy lost Son) to thy favor: and withal,
to give me the true sense and knowledge of the innocence I have lost. I do not
desire, that thou should deal so kindly with me, as that Father did with his
Son: but I shall be happy and glad if thou will entertain me, as one of the
meanest of thy hired servants. My hope and confidence is, that thou will pity
me, because thou art the fountain of pity and compassion. Behold me therefore
with the eyes of pity, look on me, and ease me, who come unto thee, laden with
the heavy burden of my sins; Mat. 11. 28.
pardon them, and save me, for thy infinite mercy: and remember not my sins,
but thine own sufferings; think not on me as a proud and rebellious Malefactor,
but as an humble and penitent Convert, Look on me with those eyes of
compassion, wherewith thou did sometime behold Mary Magdalen, Luc. 7 48. 22.
62. 23. 43.
Peter, and the good Thief: Give me true knowledge of my sins, with the first;
true contrition, with the second; and receive me, with the third, into thy
Heavenly Paradise. Let thy obedience satisfy for my rebellions, thy innocence
for my guilt, thy humility for my arrogance, thy fasting for my intemperance,
and thy justice for my iniquity. Lord, if thou will, thou can make me whole,
Mat. 26. 39.
and restore me to thy former grace. Purify, purge, and cleanse me from mine
offenses, and open mine eyes, that I may clearly see mine own pollution: and
make me to grieve that I have not grieved for my sins as I ought to have done.
And as thou have by thy long-suffering hitherto expected my repentance, so, of
thy infinite mercy and goodness, pardon me repenting: and grant me grace, that
I may be afraid to offend thee hereafter. Hear me, O sweet Savior, and make
intercession for me to the Father, with whom, and the Holy Spirit, thou do
live and reign coequal and coeternal Lord God, world without end, Amen.

Confession of Sins.
I confess, O Lord,

Psalm.51.5.
That I was shaped in wickedness, and in sin my Mother conceived me.

Job 14.4.
That I was brought forth in uncleanness.

Deuteronomy. 29. 18. 32. 32.
That I am a root of bitterness.

A wild vine of Sodom.

To.11.14.
A branch of the wild olive.

Ephesians. 2. 3.
The child of wrath.

A vessel of dishonor and perdition.

Ose.7.16.
That my heart is rebellious, like a starting bow.

Psalm.5.10.
That my throat is an open sepulcher, venting all folly.

Esa. 6. 5.
That I am of polluted lips.

Ps.144.11
That my tongue talks nothing but vanity.

Mar.7.22.
That mine eyes are evil prone to lust.

Psalm.58.4.
That mine ears are uncircumcised, and like to the deaf Adder.

Jer. 3. 3.
That I have a forhead of brass, and a neck of iron.

He.12.12.
That my hands are slow to good.

Rom.3.15
That my feet are swift to evil.

I have sinned against thee, O Lord, and in thy sight, not fearing thy Majesty.

My Sins are,

In quantity,

Large, Esa. 57 8
and of a great size. Of long continuance, Ps. 25.11.


From my Mothers breasts.

Deep. Hos. 9 9.
Heavy. Psalm. 38 4.
Like a burden. Like lead. Zach. 5.7.

Stretching to Heaven with their cry.

Many in number, Like the Stars. Jer. 30. 14, 15
More than the hairs of my head. Ps. 40.12.
The sands of the Sea. Oration.
Oftentimes reiterated. Manass.
As a Fountain casting out water. Esa. 57.20
Till they became as a habit. Jer. 6 7.
As red as scarlet and crimson. Esa. 1.18.
I am sold under sin. Romans 7.14.
Till they become natural to me. Like the AEthiopians skin. 1 Kings 21. 25.
The Leopards spots. Jer. 13.23.



In quality,

The worst of sins.

Esa. 5. 18.
Strong, like cords and cart-ropes.

Romans 6 21
Gaining nothing thereby.

Eze. 13.19
For a handful of barley, a little bread.

Ephesians. 4.19.
Committing sin with greediness.

Jer. 3.3.
Sin upon sin.

Eze. 3. 7. 6. 15.
With impudence.

Not being ashamed.

Gal. 2.18.
Knowing it to be sin.

Jam. 4.17.
Giving offense thereby.

Mat. 18.7.
Unthankfully.

Romans 8.21
Like the Dog to the vomit.

2 Per. 2.2.
Like the Sow to the mire.

Psalm. 119. 137.
Therefore, O Lord, because thou art just, and thy judgments true.

I reap the fruit of my foolishness.

Romans 6.21
For what fruit have I in those things whereof I am ashamed?

Ps. 102.3. Job 7. 11.
My days are consumed in vanity, and my years in the bitterness of my soul.

Psalm. 38.3.
And now there is no health in my flesh, because of thy displeasure: neither is
there any rest in my bones, by reason of my sin.

My heart trembles also, with remembrance of thy Judgments.

I feel bitterness above the bitterness of death, in that I have forsaken thee,
O God, and that thou have forsaken me.

Woe unto me, rebellious Wretch, for thus doing.

See, and consider, O Lord, how vile I am become, for my Soul abhors to live.

I have roared for the disquietness of my heart. Psalm. 38.8.


And what shall I now say, or wherein shall I open my mouth? What shall I
answer, seeing I have done these things? Job


Miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me out of this body of death? Romans
7.24


When I have not what I can further say or do, this only remains, this is my
last refuge, that I direct mine eyes to thee. 2 Chronicles. 20. 12.


Out of the deep have I called to thee, O Lord: Lord hear my voice. Psalm. 130.


If thou Lord should be extreme to mark what is done amiss, O Lord, who may
abide it?

Enter not into judgment with thy Servant, O Lord, for in thy sight shall no
man living be justified.

Wherefore, O Lord, I appeal from Thee, to Thee.

From Thee, a just Judge;

To Thee, a merciful Father.

From the Throne of thy Justice,

To the Seat of thy Mercy.

O Lord, be pleased to admit of this appeal.

If thou do not, I perish.

Mat. 8.25.
And, O Lord, carest thou not that I perish?

1 Timothy 2.4 2 Pet. 3.9.
Who would have all to be saved, none so perish.

I am thine, O save me.

Ps. 119.94. 138. 8.
Despise not the work of thy hands.

Wis. 11.24
Who hate nothing which thou have made.

Ps. 116.15
I am thy Servant, and Son of thy Handmaid.

Dan. 9 19
Thy Name is called on by us.

Heb. 1. 16
Thou art not ashamed to be called our Lord.

I am the price of thy Sons blood. O spare thy Workmanship.

Thy Child.

Thy Name.

The price of thy Sons blood,

But I am a sinner, and God hears not sinners. Joh. 9.30.


Yet I pray thee remember of what I am made; Ps. 78.40.
That I am but flesh, and a wind that passes away, and comes not again.

Take notice of the matter of which I am made.

Remember that I am but dust. 103.14.


Frail flesh. Light wind. Loose dust.
And will thou, O Lord, break a leaf driven with the wind too and fro? and will thou pursue dry stubble? Job. 13.25


Behold, O Lord, though I have 1 Pet. 5.6.
yet I humble my self under thy mighty hand.

Spare the humble and contrite.

David spared Shimei that railed on him. 2 Samuel 19. 19.
And David was a man according to thine own heart. 1 Samuel 13. 14.


Therefore do thou spare me.

Ahab, King of Israel, forgave the King of Syria his offense, 1 Kings 20. 31,
upon his humiliation.

Was there ever King of Israel more merciful than thou?

Thou forgavest the same Ahab ( who had sold himself to sin) when he humbled
himself. 1 Kings 11. 29.


Spare me also, I beseech thee.

Ps. 80. 4.
O Lord, how long will thou be angry with thy Servant which prays.

Job 31. 3.
Surely, Lord, I hide not my sins, like Adam, but confess them.

1 Col. 11. 31.
Behold, I judge my self.

2 Cor. 7. 11.
Accept, O Lord, the Sacrifice of a troubled Spirit, A contrite heart, A grieved
Soul, A wounded Conscience.


Though I have sinned against thee.

Practice to be merciful.

Ps. 22. 4.
Our Fathers trusted in thee, they trusted, and were not confounded.

25. 6.
Thy mercies have been ever of old.

89. 49.
Lord, where are thy former loving kindnesses.

Sir. 2.10.
Look at the Generations of old, and see, did ever any trust in the Lord, and
was confounded? Or whom did he ever despise, that called upon him.

Promise.

Ps. 119 49.
Remember thy word unto thy servant; upon which thou have caused me to hope.

Let thy mercy come unto me, O Lord, even thy salvation, according to thy word.

God has promised, which cannot lie. Tit. 1 2.


He is a God of truth. Psalm 36 6.


And confirmed it with an Oath. Heb. 6.17.


Which promise the unbelief of men cannot make void. Romans 3.2.


If we believe not, yet he abides faithful, he cannot deny himself. 2 Timothy 2.
13.


There will arise no benefit by my destruction.

For what profit is there in my blood, if I go down into the pit? Psalm. 30.9.


For in death is no remembrance of thee, and in the grave who shall give thee
thanks? 6. 5.


Will thou show wonders to the dead? Or shall the dead arise and praise thee?
88. 10.


Shall thy loving kindness be declared in the grave? Or thy faithfulness in
destruction? Ps. 88.11.


The grave cannot praise thee, death cannot celebrate thee: the living, the
living, he shall praise thee. Esa. 38.18.


I will not dye, but live, and declare the works of the Lord. Ps. 118 17 Psalm
34.8.


O taste and see how gracious the Lord is, blessed is the man that trusts in
him. 1 Pet. 1. 3.


Ps. 109.2. 97. 17.
Thy mercies, O Lord, are Sweet.

63. 4.
Comfortable.

5. 7.
Better than life.

51. 1.
Many. A multitude of them.

130. 6.
Plentiful,

Luc. 1 78.
Tender.

Romans ^.20.
Superabundant.

1 Timothy 1. 14.
Wonderful.

Psalm. 17.7.
Infinite.

71. 13.
Great.

86 1.
Broad. From the East to the West.

119. 156.
Long.

103. 12.
Deep.

Ephesians. 3. 18, 19.
High. To the Heavens.

Psalm. 26 5 108. 4.
High. Above the Heavens.

Psalm. 25.5. 103. 17.
Past knowledge.

136.
Eternal of old.

19. 2.
For ever.

79. 9.
Preventing.

23. 6.
Following.

32. 11.
Compassing.

103. 13.
Pardoning.

4.
Crowning.

145. 9.
Over all thy works.

Our sins. Romans 5.20


Thy justice. Jam. 2.13.


Thou art the Father of mercies. 2 Cor. 1.3.


Thou art patient, and slow to

Thou winkest at the sins of men, because they should repent. Wis. 11.23


Sparing thy people forty years. Ps. 95.10. 78. 39.


Many times thou did turn thy wrath away, and would not suffer thy whole
displeasure to arise.

It is of thy mercy that we are not consumed. Lam. 3.21


Gentle in correcting, insomuch as justice is not without mercy.

I will visit their offenses with the rod, and their sin with scourges:
Nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him. Ps. 89.21.
33.


He has not dealt with us after our sins. 103. 10.


How shall I smile thee, O Ephraim? Hos. 11.8.


Placable, and easy to be pacified.

He will not always be chiding: neither keeps he his anger for ever. 103. 9.


His wrath endures but the twinkling of an eye. Psalm. 30.5.


Esa. 54.7.
For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather
thee.

Abac. 312.
In anger he remembers mercy.

2 Samuel 12. 13.
David said, I have sinned against the Lord. And Nathan said to David, The Lord
has also put away thy sin, thou shall not dye.

Esa. 30.18
The Lord waits to be gracious unto us.



Luc. 1.71.
Thy Compassions are called bowels of mercy.

Ps. 106.43
When thou did see the misery of thy people, thou had compassion on them.

Mt. 15. 32. 18. 27.
Then the Lord of the servant, moved with compassion, loosed him, and forgave
him the debt.



Ps. 130.7.
With thee is plentious redemption.

Lu. 15.22
The Father of the Prodigal, not only pardoned him, but put on him the best
Robe, and a Ring, and killed the fat Calf for him.

He will have joy in Heaven, for a sinner repenting.

Thy pardon extends, not only small, but great sins, and sinners.

Such as Pet. who forsware thee, Lu. 26.74.


Paul, who blasphemed thee. 1 Timothy 1. 13.


The Thief on the Cross. Lu. 23.43.


The Adulteress. John 8.


Mary Magdalen. Luc. 7.38.


They say, If a man put away his Wife, and she go from him, and become another
man's, shall he return unto her again? shall not the Land be greatly polluted?
But thou have played the Harlot with many Lovers, yet return again to me, says
the Lord. Jer. 3. 1.


He is kind to the unthankful and evil. Luc. 6.35.


But all these are recapitulated and Christ Jesus.

In whom he has given us great and precious promises. 1 Pet. 1.4.


And in whom all the promises of God are Yea, and Amen. 2 Cor. 1. 19.


In naming of whom it will be sufficient. Joh. 16.23


Jesus, thou Son of David, have mercy on me. Mat. 15. 22.


Which Name Jesus, was given unto him, because he saves us from our sins. Mat.
1.21.


S. August.
Lord, Do not so earnestly mark our sins, as that thereby thou forget thine own
Name.

2 Samuel 19
Thou Son of David ( who forgave Shimei his sworn Enemy, reviling him)

Forgive me.

O Christ hear me.

Intercede for me.

Make thy Father propitious to me.

Psalm. 35.3.
Say unto my Soul, I am thy Salvation.

1 Timothy 2. 15.
Let not thy Apostle comfort me in vain, when he says, This is a faithful
saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the world to
save sinners.

Romans 5.20
Where sin has abounded, there grace has super-abounded.

11. 32.
God has concluded all under sin, that he might have mercy upon all.

5. 10.
When we were Gods Enemies, we were reconciled to him by the death of his Son.

Let not another of thy Apostles say in vain.

1 Pet. 3 18
Christ once suffered for sin, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us
to God.

Let not the third.

Mercy rejoices above judgment. Jam. 2.13.


Let not the fourth.

If any man sin, 1 John 2.1.
we have an Advocate with the Father, Christ Jesus the righteous. And he is the
propitiation

Let not thine own words be spoken in vain.

Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest. Mat. 11. 28.


I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. Luc. 5. 32.


I came not to judge the world, but to save it. John 12. 47.


These things are not cannot be spoken in vain.

Wherefore, in the multitude of the sorrows that are in my Heart, thy
comforts, O Lord, have refreshed my Soul. Ps. 94.19.


Let us therefore come boldly to the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain mercy,
and find grace to help in time of need. Heb: 4 16.


Which be pleased to grant,

For thy great and many Mercies.

Thy Names sake.

The Glory of thy Name.

Thy Promise sake.

Thy Practice sake.

My Misery.

My Infirmity.

Even for thy Son Jesus Christ's sake.

The Seven Penitential Psalms Paraphrased.
Psalm 6.
O Lord my God, rebuke me not, I beseech thee, in thy fierce indignation
against my sins, either in this life, or at the day of judgment, neither
chasten or correct me in thy hot displeasure, by condemning me to eternal death.

2 Have mercy and compassion upon me, according to thy accustomed goodness, O
Lord, for I am weak, and frail by nature, strengthen me therefore by thy grace,
O Lord, and heal me, by curing the infirmities of my Soul, for they are
multiplied so greatly upon me, that my bones, and all my inward parts are vexed
and disquieted with the remembrance of them.

3 My sinful Soul, considering my manifold offenses, and trembling at the
thought of thy just anger against them, is also (like as is my flesh) sore
troubled, and almost at the point of desparation: but thou, O Lord, that
desire not the death of a sinner, how long will it be ere thou look upon me,
and bring me out of this misery?

4 Return from the rigor of thy justice, O Lord, to the sweetness of thy
mercy, and deliver my Soul from the bondage of sin: O Lord, save me from the
assaults of the Devil, not for any merits of mine, but for thy mercies sake, in
Christ Jesus my Savior.

5 For in death there is no remembrance of thee, to praise and glorify thy
Name: and who, surely none there is that shall give thee thanks, or celebrate
thy goodness in the grave of Hell, where nothing is to be heard but weeping,
gnashing of teeth, and blasphemies.

6 I am weary and faint, with my groaning and sighing for my transgressions,
every night, when I should take my rest, I wash my bed, weeping for them, and I
water my couch, the place of my rest, with my tears of unfeigned repentance.

7 Mine eye of reason and understanding is consumed, and grows weak, because
of the grief I take, fearing thy judgments: yea, it waxes old, and I continue
in sin, because of the united Forces of all mine Enemies, the World, the Flesh,
and the Devil.

8 Depart therefore far form me al ye mine Enemies, which are, and have been
the workers and causers of mine iniquity, by your tentations, and evil
examples; for henceforth I will have no more to do with you; for my Conscience
assures me, that the Lord, of his infinite goodness, has heard and pitied the
voice of my weeping: and therefore I should be unthankful to him, to return to
those sins, which he, in his mercy, has forgiven.

9 The Lord, I cannot repeat it too often, has graciously heard my earnest
supplication for the pardon of my sins, and he, the Lord, plentiful in pity,
has not only now, but will also hereafter receive my prayer, whenever I call
faithfully upon him.

10 Let all mine Enemies therefore: who have sought my destruction, be ashamed
at my Conversion, and before vexed and troubled at the consideration os Gods
judgments. Let them no longer delay, but repent and return to the Lord, and be
ashamed, that they have so long deferred their conversion, and suddenly,
without any longer delay, make their peace with him, by unfeigned repentance.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

Psalm 32.
BLessed is he in this life, in assured hope, and thrice blessed, in full and
perfect fruition, in the life to come, whose transgression, by Gods mercy, is
forgiven, in respect of the offense: and whose sin, by the imputation of
Christ's righteousness, is so covered in this world, that it be not laid open at
the day of judgment, in respect of the punishment.

2 Blessed and happy is the man, unto whom, in regard either of offense, or
punishment, the Lord, accepting the merits of Christ, imputes no sin, but
gives so ample a remission of them, that he takes no notice of any sin in
him: and in whose Spirit, as well as in outward show, is no guile, but
penitently, without hypocrisy, bewaileth his offenses.

3 When I my self (I speak by experience) kept silence, dissembling and
covering my sins, wherewith my Conscience was oppressed, my bones, and inward
parts, waxed old and feeble, through my roaring, which God regarded not, though
I cried all the day long, and that, because I confessed not my sins aright unto
him.

4 For day and night, continually, thy hard hand of affliction was heavy upon
me, to punish my obstinacy, and to reduce me to repentance; and by reason
thereof, my moisture and vigor which I formerly had, is turned like to the
drought of Summer, and is almost withered and dried up.

5 My sin therefore, at the last (I being thus handled by thee) did I resolve
to acknowledge unto thee in contrition of soul, and mine iniquity, which I
formerly concealed, I have but any longer hid, but humbly confessed unto thee.

6 I further said within my self, when thy grace began to work in me, that I
will no longer continue in my rebellion, but penitently confess all my
transgressions, and iniquity unto the Lord, gracious and merciful: and I had no
sooner done it, but thou (of thy wonted compassion) forgavest the iniquity, and
punishment of my sin, committed against thee.

7 For this remission of sin, as it was necessary for me to pray for it, so
shall every one, of what condition soever, that is godly, (for the just also
fall) pray unto thee, O Lord, in a time when thou may be found, in a fit
season. But in the greatest danger of floods, and swelling of the great waters
of afflictions, God will so preserve serve the just man, that they shall not
have power to come nigh unto him; to oppose or overwhelm him.

8 Thou, O God, art my hiding place, and refuge in all tribulations; thou (for
in none other will I trust) shall preserve me, by thy power, from trouble and
adversity. Thou shall compass me about with thy mercy, and I will sing unto
thee songs of praise, for my deliverance.

9 I will instruct thee (says God) O Man, if thou will be ruled by me, and
teach thee in the way of righteousness, which thou shall wall in without erring.
I will guide thee in the right way with mine eye of providence, that no evil
shall happen unto thee.

10 Be ye not therefore, O foolish men (since I am so careful over you) without
reason, as the unruly Horse, and dull Mule, which have no understanding, to
bridle their headstrong desires: whose hard mouth must be held in with strong
hand, and with bit and bridle, and you with tribulations and afflictions: if
you be rebellious, then (as they must be held in lest they come near thee, and
fall upon their Rider, or kick at them, so) shall you be forced by adversity to
know your selves, for opposing God your Creator.

11 Many sorrows, either in this world, or torments, in the world to come,
shall be to the obstinate and unrepentant wicked: but he that with his whole
heart depends on, and trusts in the Lord his God, the Mercy of the same God
shall compass and defend him on every side, from all dangers.

12 Be glad then, O ye Servants of the most High, in the salvation of the Lord,
and not in your own strength, and rejoice in fervency of spirit, ye that are
just and righteous: shout for joy, in the comfort of a good Conscience, all ye
that are upright in heart. Because the Lord is gracious to those that love him,
and has delight in the prosperity of his Servants.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
Psalm 38.
O Lord, I do not altogether decline and refuse thy corrections, only this I
require of thee, that thou rebuke me not in thy fierce wrath, by condemning me
with the reprobate: neither chasten me, poor sinner, too severely, by the
extraordinary afflictions of this life, or in thy hot displeasure.

2 For it is not without cause, that I should thus deprecate thine anger, for
thine arrows of grief and anguish stick fast in me, and are sore upon me
already, and thy hand of present affliction presses and troubles me sore.

3 There is no soundness nor health in my flesh, because of the vehemence of
thine anger against me: Neither is there any rest or quiet in my bones, and
inward parts, when I consider, that thy displeasure arises toward me, because
of the grievousness of my sin.

4. For (having recollected my thoughts) I find that mine iniquities (which
hitherto I regarded not) are so many, that they are gone over my head, they are
past my understanding, for quantity and quality, and as a heavy burden, for
the weight of them, they are become to heavy for me to bear any longer: they
press me down so much, that I cannot look up to Heaven, or heavenly things.

5 My wounds, which sin has made in my Conscience, stink in thy nostrils, O
God, and they are so abominable, that now they corrupt, and putrify in mine
own sight: and all this is come upon me, because of my foolishness, that have
let them go so long unsearched, (un-repented of) that they are almost past
cure, or remedy.

6 I am troubled therefore, that I have so long put off my conversion, I am
bowed and pressed down, with the weight of my transgressions, and an humbled in
soul for them greatly, and crave pardon for them. I go mourning and grieving
all the day long, be wailing the former time of my life mis-spend.

7 For my loins are filled, and infected with a loathsome disease, or carnal
concupiscence: and there is no soundness nor goodness at all in my flesh, for
that it rebelleth against the Spirit.

8 I am feeble in body, and sore broken in mind, in so much, that considering
with my self, how grievously I have offended thee, I have roared and cried
bitterly, by reason of the disquietness of my sinful heart: O Lord, therefore
forgive my offenses.

9 Lord, who know all things, and do search into the hearts of all men,
all my desire, to be reconciled to thee, and to lead a new life, is before
thee, thou know it, and my groaning, and earnest prayer, mingled with sighs
and tears, is not hid from thee, but (I hope) is ascended into thy presence.

10 My heart, which has lost the peace of Conscience, pants for fear of thy
Judgments, my [wonted strength fails me, and I am grown weak: as for the
light of mine inward eyes, wherewith I was wont to discern good from evil, it
is also dim, and gone from me, and I am become like to them that walk in
darkness.

11 My lovers, and those which I took for friends, because they see me go about
to forsake my evil courses, stand aloof off from my sore, and instead of giving
me comfort, become mine adversaries: and my kinsmen, who in my prosperity
fawned on me, now stand afar off, and leave me comfortless.

12 They also of mine Enemies, that seek after the ruin of my life, and
eternal happiness, lay snares and tentations for me: and they that seek my
hurt, in bereaving me of my good name, speak mischievous and false things to my
reproach, and imagine deceit, how to divert me from the right way, all the day
long.

13 But I, being resolved to persist in the way of repentance, and to trust
wholly in the mercy of God, behaved my self to them as a deaf man, giving no
ear to their allurements, and made as though I heard them not: and I was in my
behavior to them, as a dumb man, that knew not how to speak; or, that opened
not his mouth.

14 Thus careful was I, lest mine Enemies should entrap me, and I continued
still, as a man that hears not, nor is moved with their tentations, and in
whose mouth (notwithstanding their evil deeds to me) are no reproofs.

15 For in thee, O Lord, (let them do what they can) do I hope, and put my
confidence, that thou will keep thy promise, and hear me, when I call upon
thee, O Lord, my God, and Savior.

16 For I said in my prayer to thee, hear me, O Lord, lest, if thou forsake me,
they should rejoice and triumph over me, for when, and as soon as my foot of
Faith slippeth, never so little by infirmity, they presently imagine, that thou
have forsaken me, and magnify themselves, as though they had obtained victory,
against me.

17 For I cannot marvel, that they should so do, considering, that when I feel
the weight of my sins, I my self am ready to halt and despair: and the reason
of my sorrow is, because thy judgments are before me, and in my thoughts.

18 For remedy whereof, I will declare, and confess to thee, O Lord, in the
biterness of my Soul, my iniquity, and take revenge of my self for it: yea, I
will be (as long as I live) heartily sorry, and much grieved for my sin past,
though it be forgiven.

19 But mine Enemies think not of forsaking their ways, they are lively, and
merry, and cry peace, peace, to their Souls, and they are strong to do evil:
and they also that hate me (because they see my Conversion) wrongfully, and
without cause, are multiplied, and exceedingly increased.

20 They also that unthankfully render evil to me, for the good which I have
done unto them, are also become mine Adversaries, and do unto me all the
mischief they can, and why? because they perceive my conversion, and that I
follow and love the thing that good is, which they hate.

21 Forsake me not, either in tentation, or tribulation, O Lord, the Author of
my salvation: O my God, whom I desire to serve, be not far from me, by
withdrawing thy grace from me.

22 Make haste (lest I faint under the burden of my sins) to help me, against
my Enemies, O Lord, who art my only stay in this life, and my salvation in the
life to come.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
Psalm 51.
HAve mercy upon me, miserable sinner, O God, full of mercy and compassion,
according to thy loving and infinite kindness to the Sons of men; and, as my
sins are infinite, so, according to the multitude of thy tender mercies, which
thou have ever showed to penitent sinners, blot out of the book of thy
remembrance my innumerable transgressions.

2 Wash me thoroughly, with the blood of thy dear Son, from mine iniquity,
whereby I have so often offended thy Majesty; and cleanse me, in the fountain
of thy mercies, from my sin, whereby I have also offended my Neighbor.

3 For, behold, O Lord, I hide not, nor excuse, but in the bitter tears of
repentance acknowledge and confess my horrible transgressions against thee, and
my grievous sin, in which I did for a time take delight, is grown odious to me,
and is ever before me in remorse of Conscience.

4. Against thee, most merciful Father, only, have I sinned, and though I were
ashamed to commit sin in the sight of men, yet I have done this great evil in
thy all-seeing sight: yet, O Lord, be merciful to me, and pardon it, that thou
might be justified, and found true and faithful, when thou speak (as
thou have often done) of mercy and forgiveness to the penitent, and be clear
from the imputation of injustice, when thou art arrogantly and falsely judged
for severity, thy punishments being just, though the eyes of our understanding
be not so clear, as to perceive the justice of them.

5 Behold, O Lord, that I, as all mankind, was shapen in the iniquity of
original sin, from which fountain springs my misery: and in sin, and
concupiscence did my mother conceive me, from whence grows the infirmity of
my flesh.

6 Behold also, O Lord, I know that thou desire Truth, Faith and integrity,
in the inward parts of my conscience: and in the hidden parts of me (my soul)
Thou shall make me, by the illumination of thy Holy Spirit, to know wisdom, to
eternal life.

7. Purge me, leprous sinner, with spiritual Hisope, the blood of thy Son,
instead of the Hysope, which was wont to cleanse the leprous, in the law; and by
that blood, I shall be clean, and purified from the leprosy of sin: Wash me,
in the fountain of Grace, and then, by tears of repentance, and the merits of
my Savior, I shall be whiter in thy sight, than Snow.

8. Make me poor wretch to hear, and sensibly feel the joy and comfort, of
remission of my sins: and let me find gladness in the promise of life eternal,
that the spiritual bones of my soul, which thou have broken with tentations;
and afflictions, may rejoice, and give thee thanks and praise.

9 Hide and turn away thy face, and wrathful countenance, from my sins, lay
them not to my charge: and blot out of thy Register all mine iniquities, that
they never appear to condemn me.

10 Create in me (polluted) a clean and pure heart, O God, the Creator of all
things, and renew by thy Grace, a right and sanctified Spirit in me.

11 Cast me not away, into the pit of desperation, by debarring me from thy
presence, where (only) is fullness of joy, and take not for ever, thy Holy
Spirit of comfort from me.

12 Restore unto me rather the unspeakable joy of thy Salvation in Christ
Jesus, which they feel in their consciences, whose sins thou remittest: and
when I am reinstated in thy favor, uphold and keep me, from falling again,
with thy free, powerful, and saving Spirit.

13 Then, even when I shall be restored, I will, by word of exhortation, and
example of conversation, teach transgressors how they shall keep thy ways and
Commandments: and by that means (thy Grace assisting) they, which now are
sinners, shall forsake their wickedness, and shall be truly converted unto thee.

14 Deliver me, and quit me, from my former bloody offenses, and keep me
henceforth, from blood-guiltiness, and carnal corruptions, O God, my Protector:
Thou God, which art my Redeemer, and the Author of my Salvation: and, all the
days of my life, my tongue, for joy thereof, shall sing unto thee, and that
aloud, and cheerfully: and praise thy Name, by extolling of thy righteousness,
who do justify sinners, and art merciful to the penitent.

15 O Lord, that give wisdom to the simple, open thou my lips, which are
closed by sin, from doing any service unto thee: and then, with boldness, my
mouth shall utter, and show forth thy praise: For to thee alone belongs all
Honor and Glory.

16 For thou, O God, desire not, that I should offer the Sacrifice of Goats
and Calves, to expiate my offenses, else would I willingly give it, and lay it
on thy Altar: but thou (having, by sending thy Son Christ Jesus, abrogated the
Ceremonies of the Law) delightest not any longer in burnt Offerings, but in
obedience to thy Commandments.

17 The Sacrifices accepted of God, and whereby we are in Christ reconciled to
him, are a broken and humble Spirit, dejected with the sight of sin: a broken
and contrite heart, truly mortified and repentant, O God, thou have promised,
that thou will not despise, but lovingly accept.

18 Do good, O God, in thy good pleasure, and be favorable and gracious unto
Sion, thy Catholic Church: Build thou, upon a sure Foundation of Religion, and
establish the hearts of thy Saints and Servants, the walls of thy Church,
Jerusalem.

19 Then shall thou, in Christ Jesus, be pleased with us, and with the
Sacrifice of Righteousness, in thy Congregation. And with burnt Offerings and
Oblations of our hearts. Then shall they, thy Servants thus established, offer
Bullocks: the Sacrifice of praise, upon thine Altar, in thy presence, to the
honor of thy most holy Name.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
Psalm 102.
HEar my Prayer, which, in the bitterness of my Soul, I make to thee, O Lord,
whose mercy is the Sanctuary of distressed sinners: and let nothing stand
between that mercy and me, which may hinder my cry to come to thee.

2 Hide not thy face, turn not away thy countenance from me, as if thou were
offended at me, but rather, in the day of adversity, when I am in trouble and
sorrow, incline thine ear of pity unto me, and that right soon and speedily.

3 For my days, which I have misspent, are consumed away like smoke, which for
want of substance, dissolveth to nothing, and my bones, which by my broken
spirit, are dried up, are burnt up as a firebrand.

4 My heart is dejected, and smitten with the thought of thy Justice, and it is
withered, with remembrance of thy Judgments, like grass, without juice or sap:
so that in this anguish of Soul, I forget, and loath to eat my bread.

5 By reason of the grievous voice of my groaning, sighs, and tears, I am so
consumed away, that my bones, for want of flesh, cleave to my skin, and I am
nothing but skin and bone.

6 I am (for shame that I have offended thee) become in condition like a
Pelican, that lives solitarily in the Wilderness: and I am like an Owl, not
daring to be seen, but that avoideth the light, and is continually in the
Desert, shunning the company of other Birds.

7 I watch, and sleep not, for the thought of my sins, and am as a Sparrow,
that caring for no company, sits alone, making grievous lamentation in a
mournful note, upon the housetop.

8 Mine Enemies, seeing me thus penitent, reproach me, with opprobrious
speeches, all the day, continually deriding me: and they that (while I was
their companion in sin) applauded me, are, upon my conversion, mad against me,
and do combine, and are sworn to do me mischief, and to that end set themselves
against me.

9 For this cause, taking no pleasure in this world, I have eaten ashes, and
fed upon course meat, like as it were fine bread, and dainty fare, and I have
mingled my drink with tears, weeping, and lamenting for my sins.

10 Because of thine indignation against me for them, and thy wrath for my bad
life past, all this evil and more has befallen me, for thou have lifted me up
very high, and from thence have cast me down, that my fall might be the greater.

11 My days, few and evil, are passed like a shadow upon a Sun-Dyal, that
declineth toward the Evening: and I that lately seemed to flourish, am
withered, and dried up, like grass, without sap, for want of thy comfort.

12 But thou, O Lord, which were and art, shall continue immutable, and shall
endure for ever, while all transitory things pass, and come to nothing: and thy
glorious works, shall be had in remembrance unto all generations, even unto the
end of the world.

13 Thou, O Lord, who seem to men to sleep, shall arise in thy strength, and
have mercy and compassion upon Sion, thy Church militant, now oppressed with
the tyranny of Antichrist: for the time to look upon her, and favor her, is at
hand, yea the set time, which thou have decreed for her deliverance, is, or
will not be long ere it come.

14 For they which be thy true and faithful Servants take pleasure and delight
in her stones (their fellow Servants) and are glad when they see them prosper:
and favor, and pity the very dust and ruins thereof, when they see them under
persecution.

15 So, that when they shall be delivered from their misery, the very heathen
shall fear and tremble at the Name of the Lord, and be converted to him: and
all the Kings and Potentates on earth, which now oppose the truth, shall
acknowledge thee, O Lord, to be the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and be
afraid at the greatness of thy glory and Majesty.

16 When the Lord, by his almighty power, shall build up Sion, and repair the
ruins of his Church, he shall then, to the confusion of his enemies, appear in
his glory, which they shall not be able to endure.

17 He will then in mercy regard, and hearken to the prayer of his poor
servants, and the destitute of his help: and not any longer seem to turn away
his face from them, nor despise their prayer, and earnest supplications.

18 This mercy of his, shall then be recorded and written as a remembrance for
the generations to come, even to the end of the world, which shall attempt the
like against his Church: and the people, yet unborn, that shall succeed and be
created, in ages to come, shall praise and magnify the Lord, which only does
mavelous things.

19 For he has in mercy, by sending his Son Christ Jesus, looked down from the
height of his Sanctuary, his holy place: even from Heaven, his Fathers bosom,
did the Lord Jesus behold the Earth, and had compassion upon all the Sons of
men.

20 To hear and pity the groaning of the Prisoners, such as did groan under the
burden of the Law, and to loose, and set at liberty, by his passion and
intercession, those of the posterity of Adam, that are appointed to suffer
death, for not fullfiling the same.

21 To the end, that they being so delivered, may declare, and show the power,
and the Name of the Lord, which is Jesus the Savior, in Sion, his Church: and
magnify and extol his praise in Jerusalem, his holy habitation.

22 When the faithful people, which are yet dispersed over the face of the
Earth, are gathered together, and made one Congregation, and the Kingdoms of
the Earth, which are yet in darkness, are instructed to serve thee, the only
Lord of Heaven and Earth.

23 He, even the Lord, in the time of this expectation, has weakened and abated
my strength, so that I can do no good of my self, in the way of this my earthly
pilgrimage: he has shortened and cut off my days, by afflicting me for my sin.

24 I said, yet in this weakness, and anguish of my Soul, O my God, withdraw
not now thy mercy from me, and take me not away out of this world in the midst
of my days, the chief time of my strength; as for thy years, as they are from
all eternity, so shall they endure, throughout all generations, even for ever.

25 Of old, at the beginning of time, have thou, of thine own power, laid and
created the Foundations of the Earth, the visible World, and all things in it:
and the Heavens, and Firmament thereof, are the only work of thy Almighty hands
and power.

26 They, even Heaven and Earth; and all things in them, shall pass away and
perish, from the form they now have: but thou, O Lord, the Creator of them,
shall endure immutable. Yea, without all doubt, all of them, as thou have
decreed, shall wax old, and consume with age, like a garment long worn, and as
a vesture, or garment, shall thou, by the sound of the last Trump, change and
dissolve them, and they shall yield to thy power, and be changed.

27 But thou, O Lord, art the same, always unchangeable: and thy years, being
from all Eternity, shall have no end, but continue for ever.

28 The Children, and posterity of thy faithful Servants, begotten by the
seeds-men of thy Word, shall continue in grace in this life: and their
righteous seed shall stand fast, and be established for ever, together with
them in glory hereafter, and enjoy everlasting happiness before thee, in thy
blessed presence.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
Psalm 130.
OUt of the depth of tentations, dangers, and sorrow for my sins, wherein my
Spirit is almost overwhelmed, have I, by fervent prayer, cried and called unto
thee, O Lord, who only art able to give me relief.

2 Lord, of thy mercy haste thee, and hear my voice and petition, and deliver
me from my misery, O my God, let thine ears of pity and compassion be attentive
to consider and well weigh the lamentable voice of my humble supplications, and
let not my prayer return unpitied or unheard of thee.

3 If thou, Lord, contrary to thy disposition, should be so exact and
extreme, as in the rigor of thy justice, to mark the iniquities, which we by
our natural corruption daily fall into, and punish us accordingly: O good Lord,
who? none, not the most upright, shall be able to answer one for a thousand, or
stand before thee, Job 3. 3.
(without much horror) at the Judgment Seat.

4 But, for the comfort of poor wretched sinners, and to keep us from utter
desperation, we find it recorded by the holy Spirit, that there is forgiveness
of sins, and mercy toward sinners repenting, with thee, by Jesus Christ, who
came to save them: and yet, this mercy of thine is tied with such conditions,
that thou, who also art just, may be also feared, lest thy lenity be abused.

5 I, for my part, wait, and confidently expect, for the Lord, to receive mercy
from him: My sinful, but repentant Soul, waits to receive consolation: and in
his Word (whereby he promises mercy to repentant sinners) do I hope, and place
my whole confidence, Heb. 10. 23.
because I know, that he which has promised is just.

6 My sinful Soul, in this expectation, waits for the Lord, and tarryeth his
good pleasure to comfort it, more earnestly than they that, in a disconsolate
long night, watch for the morning: Yea, (I say it again) more zealously than
they that are weary of the night, and watch for the light of the morning.

7 Let Israel, and all Gods faithful people, hope still, and put their trust in
the goodness of the Lord: and not without cause: for with the Lord, though he
justly take vengeance on us for our sins, yet there is, ever was, and will be
found, mercy toward penitent sinners: and with him, by Jesus Christ, is not
only forgiveness for a few sins, but plenteous redemption from the captivity of
the Devil and Sin.

8 And he, even Jesus Christ, by his merits and intercession, shall redeem and
save Israel, and each of his faithful servants, from all his iniquities, and
the punishment due for them.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
Psalm 143.
HEar my earnest and humble prayer, O Lord, which in my misery I make unto
thee, Give ear, and be not deaf to my supplicatious, in the time of my
distress: but in thy faithfulness and truth, which endures for ever, answer
me, and grant my petition, which I make, not trusting in any merits of mine
own, but in thy righteousness.

2 And my further petition to thee is, that thou enter not into the Throne of
thy Judgment, by strictly examining my mis-deeds, and dealing rigorously with
me thy poor servant, who has misspent his talent: for in thy all-seeing
sight, shall no man living in this vale of misery, be justified, or found
innocent.

3 For, the Old Enemy of mankind, the Devil, has by his malice persecuted, and
sought to entrap my Soul, to separate it from the love of thee: he has
smitten, and cast my life and Soul down to the ground, and filled me full of
earthly desires, he has made, and caused me to dwell, and take pleasure in the
darkness of of my sins, as those that are without sense, and have been long
dead.

4 Therefore, O Lord, considering my desperate estate, is my spirit overwhelmed
with grief within me, and my heart is disquieted within me, and is also
desolate, and sore troubled.

5 I yet, in the midst of the sorrows that are in my heart, do remember what I
have read and heard, what thou have done in the days of old, how that thou
have been gracious to the penitent, and severe against the unrepentant sinner.
I meditate also on all thy works, but especially on that of thy mercy, and I
muse, and exercise my self in contemplating on the works of thy hands, admiring
thy Power, and Wisdom, in the Creation of all things.

6 I stretch forth, and lift up my hands in my prayers unto thee, O Lord: my
Soul (which is dry for want of the dew of thy grace) thirsts after thee, for
the water of life, as a thirsty land, in a time of drought.

7 Hear me, and answer me speedily, delay not, O Lord, for my spirit waxes
faint, and fails me in my devotion: Oh hide not thy face and loving
countenance from me miserable sinner, lest it come to pass, that I be like in
condition unto them that go down headlong after their own inventions, into the
pit of destruction and perdition.

8 Cause me by thy Spirit, to hear and feel thy loving kindness and mercy in
the morning speedily, lest I perish: for in thee only, and not in the help of
Men or Angels, do I place my whole trust and confidence: Cause me, by thy
grace, to know and learn the way of thy testimonies, wherein I should, and
ought to walk, without declining to the right hand or the left: For I lift up
my soul, by prayer and repentance, unto thee, who only can direct me aright.

9 Desiver me, O Lord, by thy power, from all mine Enemies, visible and
invisible, for I flee, and make haste for succor unto thee, as to my
Protector, to hide and defend me from their violence.

10 Teach and instruct me (that am ignorant) to do thy Will, and those things
which thou command, for thou art thy God and Director: Thy Spirit is good,
and all-sufficient for me: Lead me therefore by it, into the right way, which
brings into the Land of Righteousness and Truth.

11 Quicken me again, O Lord, and revive me from the death of sin, for thy
Names sake, which is Jesus, and for thy Righteousness sake, and love to
goodness, bring my Soul by thy grace, out of the trouble and anguish whereinto
my sins have brought me.

12 And of thy tender mercy and compassion cut off, and kill in me mine
Enemies, the concupiscences of the flesh, and destroy and confound all them,
that with injuries and tentations afflict and disquiet my Soul, which is wholly
devoted to thee: for I am thy servant, and Son of thy Handmaid, and desire to
serve thee in holiness and righteousness all the days of my life.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
Directions before Receiving the Holy Communion.
AS many as desire to be partakers of the holy Sacrament of the Body and Blood
of Christ (as of necessity every one must be, that intends to receive benefit
by him) ought, before the taking of it, to prepare his Soul, and fit it, for
the due receiving of it, and not come to it carelessly, without due examination
of himself, and respective consideration of the excellency and worth thereof.
And therefore, before the time of communicating, we ought to spend some hours
or days (the more the better) in meditating upon the great and unspeakable
love and mercy of God toward us miserable sinners, in ordaining so powerful a
means to purge and cleanse us, and bring us to him: in believing all his
promises made to us in Christ Jesus, in applying them to our selves; in
performing the works of charity; in examining in what estate our Souls do
stand; in calling to mind our sins, and confessing them to God; in grieving and
repenting for them, and that in all humility and godly sorrow; in returning
with the Prodigal; Lu. 15.20
smiteing our breasts with the Publican; Lu. 18.13
weeping with Mary Magdalen; Luc. 7.58.
begging mercy with the Thief on the Cross; and lastly, in promising to God, to
lead a better life for the time to come.

Thus if we do, no doubt, but we shall be welcome Guests to this Feast, as
being of that number for whom it was prepared. For by how much the more we come
prepared to take this Sacrament, so much the greater shall be the grace which
we shall receive by it.

There are four Duties required in every Communicant. First, Faith, to believe,
that Jesus Christ did, and suffered all things, which are written of him in the
Holy Scriptures, for the Redemption of Mankind. Secondly, Repentance, by which
a man (confessing his sins to God, with a purpose to lead a new life) is
reconciled to him. Thirdly, Reverend Behavior, that in all humility, we make
our selves fit Guests for such a Feast. Fourthly, Meditation and Attention,
that we, during tht time of the administration of the Sacrament, attend no
earthly thoughts, but wholly fix our Souls upon our Savior Christ, and
meditate on nothing but this great and high benefit, and thereby be enflamed
with a hearty love, and thankful mind to God, not only for his infinite love,
in suffering so great things for us, but also for instituting this blessed
Sacrament, to remain to the end of the World, as a sure pledge of his
continuance among us, and perpetual care over us.

After we have communicated, and are refreshed we ought also to be thankful to
God, for so great a benefit; ( Thankfulness being not the least Duty of this
Service; The Sacrament it self being called Eucharistia, which is Thanksgiving)
and to strive to imitate him as well in life as death: to live purely, and not
to defile our Souls again, being purged and cleansed by the powerful operation
of this blessed Sacrament: that so by Examination, Meditation, Thanksgiving,
and constant Resolution of Amendment, We may worthily receive Christ into our
Souls and be made members of his mystical body.

Meditations and Prayers before the Communion.
What am I, O Lord, that I should be so bold as to come near to thee? what am
I? that I should attempt to receive this so great and high mystery? what is man
by nature, but a vessel of corruption, unapt to any good, propense and most
ready to any evil? What is man, but a creature, of all others most wretched?
blind in judgment, inconstant in his actions, unclean in his desires, and
(though small in desert, yet) proud and great in his own conceit? Thou see, O
Lord, what I am. But thou, O Lord, art great, good, wise, and eternal:
omnipotent in strength, wonderful in wisdom, deep in thy counsels, terrible
in thy judgments, and absolutely perfect, in all thy works. How then dare I,
that am so base and unclean a creature, Job. 15.15
approach to the Feast of so great a God, and a Lord of so great a Majesty?
Behold the Heavens are not clean in thy sight, and the Pillars of Heaven shake
and tremble at thy word. Saint John the Baptist (who was sanctified in his
Mothers Womb) professed himself not worthy to unloose the latchet of thy
shoes. Job. 1.27.
Saint Peter cried out to thee, to depart from him a sinful man, How then, can
I, the chief of all sinners, but tremble at thy presence? O Lord, I fear that
(being thus wretched and unfit) I shall not be admitted to this Feast, Mat. 22.
2^.
but rather be repelled, for want of a wedding garment, even the garment of a
sanctified Soul. For my whole life has been so wretchedly and lewdly spent,
and my days have been so wickedly wasted, that I hourly seem to renew thy
passion. Many a time I have (with Judas) sold thee, for a small sum of pleasure
or profit, Mat. 26. 22.
and now in coming to receive thee unworthily, Mat. 24. 26.
what do I else, but with him, betray thee with a kiss? How then shall I dare
to receive thee, in so desperate and wicked estate? How can thou abide or
dwell in so loathsome a Dungeon, wherein, there is no part, room, or corner
clean? O Lord, I acknowledge mine unworthiness, and yet withal thy mercies are
not hid from me: and by them, I am encouraged to come, with confidence unto
thee, for by how much the unworthier I come unto thee, by so much the more will
thy mercy be glorified, if thou do not reject me. Lord, thou art not wont to
put sinners back, but to call, and set them forward to repentance. Wherefore, O
Lord, animated by thy calling, and invitation I come unto thee, overburthened
with the weight of my sins, hoping to find ease and relief of thee. Thy custom
(while thou were upon earth) was to receive sinners, and to eat with them: and
thy delight was to be with the Sons of men, Luc, 15.2^
If thou, O Lord, be still pleased with such guests, behold one here at this
time, of that kind, a notorious sinner. I verily believe thou tookest more
pleasure in the tears of the sinful Woman, than in the great feast of the
proud Pharisee, Luc. 7.38, 47,
and for a few tears of hers, did forgive many sins unto her. Behold, O Lord,
new matter offered for thy great mercy to work upon. Here lies a sinner who
has many more sins than she, but fewer tears by many: who though he has more
grievously offended, yet does more carelessly bewail his offenses than she did.
She was neither the first, nor the last, whom thou in thy mercy did receive
to favor. O Lord let me also be one of the subjects of this thy mercy, and
although I have not tears sufficient to wash thy feet, yet thou had shed
drops of blood, more than sufficient, to cleanse my sins. I read, O Lord, in
the Gospel, Luc 16, 17, 18,
that all that were diseased flocked to thee; and (by that virtue which came
out of thee) were healed: and I verily persuade my self, that thy Nature is not
changed: for in thee is, and will be to the end of the world, health and remedy
for all griefs: and thou art readier to make us whole, than we are to ask
health of thee. I know O Lord, that this Sacrament (which I so earnestly long
after) is not only meat for those that are in health, but Physic also for the
sick: and does not only refresh the righteous, but cleanses those that are
sinners also. If I be weak, by it I shall be strengthened, If in health, in
health by it I shall be preserved, and if dead in sin, by it I shall be
revived. I humbly therefore entreat thee, O Father, that (as as David did
admit. 2 Samuel 9.
Mephibosheth to his Table for his Fathers sake: so) thou would suffer me to
be partaker of thy heavenly Table, for thy Sons sake, who with so great labor
and sorrow, did regenerate us, by his death on the Cross, and lives and
reigns with thee, and the Holy Spirit, for ever.

Prayers before the Communion.
O Almighty Lord God, Father of all mercy, and consolation, I humbly beseech
thee to behold with the eye of pity, my poor and wretched soul, which though
thou did create after thine own Image, and washedst with the blood of thy
dear Son, yet I have so abominably defiled and defaced with the stain of sin,
that it can hardly be known, O Father, I was thy son, whom thou did to
lovingly embrace and load with blessings, and who was in thy house in great
honor and dignity: In the Sacrament of Baptism thou did adopt me, and
gave me the inheritance of a son and heir, but I unthankfully and
prodigally, by my evil life, have wasted my Patrimony: I have wickedly abused
the flower and prime of my youth, and the good parts and faculties of my soul
and body, with the pleasures of the flesh, pride, surfeiting, envy, lust,
covetousness, ideness, rebellion, and disobedience: and now, at the last, I
find that all the temporal delights of the flesh, and the World, are altogether
vain, and vanish like smoke. For all flesh is grass, and all the Glory of man,
is but like the flower of the field, Esa. 40.6. 1 Pet. 1.14.
and is suddenly gone. He that is rich to day, to morrow becomes poor and
miserable; he that walks in health, and strength of body to day, to morrow is
(by sickness) made feeble and weak; he that lives to day, the next day dies;
and he, which to day glories in the greatest pomp, to morrow is laid in his
Coffin, and carried to his Grave. Therefore, O Lord, consider the weakness and
frailty of man, and turn away, I pray pray thee, thy face from my sins, and
remember not them so, in thine anger, that thou forget either thine own mercy,
or my weakness. By mine own fault, I confess, O Lord, and by my evil
conversation, I have made my self unworthy of thy favor, and by my evil
concupiscences, I have grievously wounded my conscience, I have often grieved
thy holy Spirit, by not harkening to the good motions thereof, but yiedling to
my sensual lust, and beastly appetite. Yet, O merciful Father, cast me not
utterly from thy sight: for from the beginning of the world, it was not heard,
that thou did reject any sinner, that with a contrite heart came unto thee.
Behold I come unto thee in great necessity, and cast my self at thy feet,
confessing the greatness, and multitude of my sins. They have brought me into
that evil state and condition, that I am not worthy to be called thy Son, yet I
pray thee receive me into the number of thy hired Servants. Luc. 15. 2^.
Give me grace, heartily to repent me of my sins, feed and cherish me with the
bread and drink of the Body and Blood of thy Son Christ Jesus, that by thy
mercy, I may be received to grace, and restored to the former dignity, from
which I am worthily cast, and to the inheritance of thy everlasting Kingdom,
through the same our Savior Jesus Christ.

Another.
O Blessed Savior, I poor unworthy sinner, have a great desire, and earnest
longing to come to thy Table, but considering my many and grievous sins,
tremble, and fear to approach unto it. For when I consider thy words to thy
Disciples, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his blood, you
have no life in you: Joh. 6.59.
And on the other side, I Cor. 11. 27.
the words of the Apostle, whosoever shall eat this Bread, and drink this Cup
of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, I am
in such a straight, that I know not what to do: For gladly would I receive this
Sacrament, being desirous to live: but fearful I am to take it unworthily,
trembling at thy Comination. I come therefore to thee, the Fountain of Mercy,
hoping that thou will wash me. I come to thee, the good Samaritan, Lu. 10.34
hoping that thou will cleanse my wounds. I open my grief, and discover my
iniquities to thee; I look upon my sins, great and grievous, and thereupon
tremble: yet beholding thy mercies, great and plentiful, I am therewith again
refreshed. Remember, O Lord, how many drops of Sweat and Blood thou did shed,
how many Pains and Sorrows thou did sustain, to expiate my sins. I entreat
thee therefore by them, to purge and purify me, that I may worthily be
incorporated into thy body, which is thy Church, and may worthily also receive
this blessed Sacrament: that so, together with thy whole Church, I may give
thee praise everlastingly.

Or thus.
O Merciful Lord Jesus, I confess my self to be a most grievous and wretched
sinner, not worthy to approach into thy presence, altogether unfit and unmeet
to receive thee under the roof of my Soul, Luc. 7.6,
in respect of the stains and pollutions thereof, and that it is not decked and
fitted with such good graces as thy Majesty and Presence requires, and
therefore am afraid to come near unto thee. Yet O Lord, considering thy
comfortable saying, Eze. 33. 11.
that Thou do not desire the death of a sinner, but that he should turn unto
thee, and live: and thy blessed invitation, how lovingly, with the arms of thy
mercy stretched out, thou have called all, that are heavily oppressed with the
burden of their sins, Mat. 11. 28.
to come to thee for comfort and ease. And lastly, thy usual practice, in
pitying and relieving those which were cast down with the thought of their
misdeeds; as the Thief on the Cross, Luc. 23. 7.
Mary Magdalen, John 8.
the Woman taken in Adultery, the Publican, Luc. 18.
Peter, Luc. 26.
and Paul, (all of them grievous sinners) I am comforted, and emboldned to come
unto thee, assuredly trusting, that thou will (of thy goodness) supply my
defects, and make me a worthy receiver of the high mystery and benefit of thy
blessed Sacrament, whereof of my self I am altogether unworthy. Stretch out thy
right hand, O sweet Jesus, to me thy poor servant, and give out of thy rich
storehouse of mercy, what I want: that thereby I may be made a living Temple
to thee, and an acceptable habitation for thine honor to abide in. And grant,
that being cleansed by thy mercy and goodness, I may by thy grace and power,
persevere in all godliness and holiness of conversation, to the end of my days,
and attain to that blessed place, where thou reignest, with the Father, and
Holy Spirit, world without end, Amen.

Meditations and Prayers after th Sacrament Received.
IF all the Creatures in the world should offer themselves together with me, to
praise thee, O Lord, yet is it certain, that we could not give thee sufficient
thanks for the least of thy mercies: and if together we cannot sufficiently
praise thee for the least, how much less can I alone perform so great a duty,
for such inestimable blessings, as I have at this time received? for
vouchsafing to visit me, comfort me, and honor me with acceptance and
admittance to thy blessed Table. If Elizabeth the Mother of John Baptist, (upon
the Virgin Mary's entrance to her house) said, Luc. 1.43.
Whence is it, that the Mother of my Lord should come to me? What shall I say,
whom the Lord himself has visited and united to him, by his blessed Sacrament,
being a vessel and receptacle of all impurity, who has so often offended,
despited, and neglected him? Psalm. 8.4.
King David wondered why God should so esteem of, or visit man; but I wonder
much more, why he should be made man for man, abide with him, suffer death for
him, and give himself to him for spiritual food. Solomon, after he had built a
Temple to God, reasoned thus, 1 Ki. 8.17.
But will God dwell indeed on the Earth? Behold, the Heaven of Heavens cannot
contain thee, how much loss this House that I have builded? May not I much more
marvel, that God will not disdain to come and abide in this my poor and
wretched Soul? What greater benefit of grace, what greater argument of his love
is there, can there be showed to me? Oh my Soul, if thou would but thoroughly
conceive the happiness that comes to thee by this holy Sacrament, then
consider, and well weigh, what benefits it brings with it. By it the Sons of
Men are made the Sons of God, and all that is earthly or carnal in us, is
mortified, that the Deity may live and abide with us. What therefore, O my
Lord, shall I do? What thanks shall I render to thee? With what fervency shall
I love thee? For, if thou, so mighty a Lord, have vouchsafed to love me, poor
wretched creature, how should it be, but that I should return love again to
thee? And how shall I express my love better, than in forbearing those things
which thou do abhor, and following those things which thou do command?
Give, O Lord, to this end, thy concomitant grace to me, whereby I may return a
reciprocal love to thee, and love those things which are acceptable, and avoid
those things which are to thee unpleasing. Give me a heart which may love thee,
with so true, faithful, and constant affection, as that nothing under the Sun
may separate me from the love of thee. Romans ^.39
Let me not follow the love of the World, or delight in the vanities of it any
longer: but give me power to kill and quench all other love and desires, and to
love thee only, desire thee only, and only think of thee, and thy
Commandments: that all my affections and thoughts may be fixed on thee, that
in all tentations and adversities, I may have recourse to thee only, and
receive all comfort from thee alone, who live and reignest, one God, world
without end, Amen.

Another.
I Humbly thank thee, O sweet Savior Jesus Christ, that thou have so
plentifully refreshed my dry and fainting Soul, with the holy Sacrament of thy
precious Body and Blood. I earnestly entreat thee further, that whatsoever is
in me vicious, or contrary to thy blessed will, may by virtue of this blessed
Sacrament, be rooted out of me, that my Soul may become a fit habitation for
thy holy Spirit. Let it be to me the absolution of my sins, the confirmation of
my faith, and increase of all thy graces in me, the viands of this my
peregrination and pilgrimage, the only delight of my soul; peace and joy in
tribulation; health and strength in affliction and tentation. Let it be a light
and guide to my actions, and my only comfort in the day of my dissolution. Let
the Palate of my Soul be so changed thereby, that it may relish nothing besides
thee. Grant also, that I may hunger and thirst after this bread of life, and
cup of salvation, and that I may with a pure mind, and chaste affection, receive
it often, that thereby my soul and body may be preserved to life everlasting;
to thee be all praise, power, and dominion ascribed now and for ever.

Or thus.
I Yield thee all possible thanks, O merciful Lord, that of thy own mere
goodness, and without any merit of mine, thou have so plentifully at this time
satisfied me, with the extraordinary food of my Soul, thy blessed Body and
Blood. O Lord, I heartily repent me of my sins past, and am heartily sorry,
when I consider how unprofitably and wickedly I have spent my life hitherto: I
desire, O Lord, to amend what is amiss in me: be thou ayding (I beseech thee)
to me, that I may not only duly bewail and lament for that which is past, but
take heed to my ways for the time to come. And to this end, O Lord, do thou
strengthen me with thy spiritual aid, for without thy help, and the direction
of the Holy Spirit, I shall not be able to do any good thing, or perform that
which is pleasing to thee. Grant, O Lord, that I may hereafter faithfully
follow and serve thee, who have at this time so lovingly vouchsafed to come to
me. And because (through my infirmity) I cannot follow thee as I would, be
pleased to assist me with thy power, and draw me after thee: Let my Soul be so
strengthened by virtue of this Sacrament, that it may esteem nothing pleasing or
delightful in comparison of thee: that it may lust after no transitory thing,
nor be disquieted with any worldly cross; but, by thy assisting grace, I may
overcome all the difficulties of this life, and bless thee in the life to come.

Or thus.
O Blessed Lord Jesus, who, of thy unspeakable Love, have condescended to my
infirmity, and vouchsafed in these mysteries to come unto me, and have made me
partaker of thy blessed Body and Blood. I humbly entreat thee, of thy infinite
goodness, not to look back upon my sinful life past, and to give me grace to
obey thy Commandments, hereafter, and not to return to those former sins, 2
Pet. 2. 22.
as a Dog to his vomit. Grant, that this most holy Sacrament may be to me life
and salvation, and not turn to my greater punishment and condemnation. Grant,
that it may cleanse my Soul from sin past, and strengthen me against all
tentations to come. Grant, that it may be so wholesome and nourishing to me,
that I may walk in the strength thereof all the days of my life: and at last
be brought by thy merits, to that place of Glory, where thou do reign,
together with the Father, and the Blessed Spirit, forever.

Psalm. 103.
Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me, praise his Holy Name.

Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all his benefits.

Which forgiveth all thy sin, and heals all thine infirmities.

Which saves thy life from destruction, and crowns he with mercy and living
kindness.

Which satisfies thy mouth with good things, etc.

Motives to Thanksgiving.
IT is not the least part of the Duty of a Christian, in the sight of God, to
be thankful to him for the benefits he daily bestows upon us. For as God is
kind, merciful, and loving to us: so he expects that we should render back
thanks to him for those blessings which we receive from him. For we have
nothing else to retribute to him, but a thankful memorial of his blessings. And
this King David well understood, when he said, Psalm. 116. 12, 7.
What shall I render to the Lord for all the benefits he has done unto me? I
will offer to thee the Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, etc. As therefore we ought to
be diligent in Prayer, for those things we want: so ought we also to be
perpetually thankful for them, when we have obtained what we desire. And when
we have done all that we can, we cannot give him due praise and thanks for the
least part of that which we daily receive. For if we respect that which is
past, present, or to come, we shall still meet with matter enough, which
expresses his goodness and love to us, and exacteth this Duty from us. If we
consider that which is past, then we shall soon perceive, that but for him, we
had not been at all, nor been preserved hitherto, amongst so many dangers,
without his protection: If that which is present, we cannot but acknowledge,
that by his alone goodness we live and enjoy those blessings wherewith we are
loaded, beyond desert: If that which is to come, he is our hope, of all good
things which we desire or expect, either for this life, or for the life to
come. And as God accounts Thanksgiving a Duty, Ps. 50.23. 15.
so he takes it for an Honor done unto him, if we perform it. He has so much
esteemed of it always, even from the beginning, that he reputed and accounted
it above the rest of the Sacrifices offered unto him. Besides we may consider,
that in the Law, Ose. 14.2.
God himself instituted a peculiar and special Sacrifice of oblation of thanks.
Mal. 1.11.
For the Feast of the Paschal Lamb, Exodus 12.
was no other thing but an Eucharistical, or thankful service, in remembrance
of the wonderful deliverance of the Jews from their servitude. Our Savior
also instituted the Sacrament of the Eucharist, Luc. 22.
for a perpetual remembrance, and memorial of all his benefits to Mankind,
especially of our Redemption by his death. Hest. 9.
Hester established a Feast to preserve a thankful memory of the Jews
deliverance from the plots of Haman. And in brief, Exo. 15.
it was generally evermore the practice of Gods Saints, to express this Duty,
Deuteronomy. 32.
as may be seen by many Songs, Judges 5.
Hymns, 1 Samuel 2.
Psalms, Ps. 34.96. 103. 107. 111. 113. etc.
and Prayers of Thanksgiving, which are left unto us in the Scriptures, as
patterns for us to imitate. Of Moses and Miriam. Of Moses alone. Esa. 38.10
Of Deborah. John 23.
Of Hanna. Abac. 3.2.
Of David, Dan. 3.
in diverse places of the Psalms. Luc. 2. 19.
Of good King Ezechias. 1. 68.
Of Jonas. 1. 46.
Of the Prophet Habakkuk. Of the three Chirldren. Of the Angels. Of Zachary.
Acts 4.24.
Of the Blessed Virgin Mary. Rev. 5.12.
Of the Church. And of the Elders. And after those examples, of necessity we
must frame our selves: for be sure of this, That whenever praise and thanks
shall sail, and be wantiug on our parts toward God, then presently God will
withdraw his hand of mercy and bounty from us.

Thanksgiving.
I Thank thee, O merciful Father Lord of Heaven and Earth, for all thy mercies
and favors continually heaped upon me: for that thou have not only created me
after thine own Image and likeness, Genesis 9.6.
and given to me a body with all the parts and members thereof, and a soul with
all the powers and faculties thereof, that with them, and by them, I might
know, love, and serve thee: but that thou have so graciously preserved both
body and soul, from time to time, from all dangers. Thou have always been my
refuge in tribulations, and my defense and succor in adversities: When I went
astray, thou did reduce me into the right away; when I offended thee, thou
did gently correct me; when I was sad, thou did comfort me; and when (for
the grievousness of my sins) I was ready to despair, thou of thy mercy and
compassion did strengthen me, and keep me from utter ruin. I acknowledge, O
Lord, thy more than fatherly indulgence toward me, from my birth to this
present time: for unless thou of thy goodness had upheld me, I had long ere
this time been drowned and overwhelmed in the bottomless gulf of my sins. But
thou have delivered me from the jaws of the roaring Lion, who has daily
sought to devour me, and have defended me from all his snares and assaults. 1
Pet. 5.8.
And as thou have of thy mercy preserved my soul from destruction, so thou have
oftentimes delivered my body from the gates of death, when many sicknesses and
infirmities took hold of me. I thank thee also, O Lord, for all other thy
temporal blessings, which thou in plentiful manner have heaped on me, as Food,
Raiment, Wealth, Possessions, and Children: For my health and liberty, for the
prerogative which thou have given me over all thy creatures, in their
subjection to my service and use. I thank thee also, O sweet Savior, for the
infinite work of my Redemption, and for thy exceeding great love, in
accomplishing that great work: that thou would suffer so many torments,
sorrows, labors, and griefs; yea so bitter and disgraceful a death, even the
death of Malefactors, to redeem me from a most desperate and certain state of
damnation, (which I most justly have fallen into) to a state of glory, and
immortality, which I by no means could have deserved. I thank thee also, O
Lord, most holy, for all other thy spiritual graces and blessings, as my
Regeneration, Vocation, Sanctification, for thy blessed Sacraments, for my
Preservation, and hope of Glorification. O Lord, I am not sufficient to render
unto thee condign thanks and praises for all these thy mercies: yet accept, I
humbly pray thee, these poor and weak thanks, which I offer unto thee,
according to my bounden duty and service, For as there is no hour of my life,
wherein I do not enjoy thy favors, and taste of thy goodness: so (if my
frailty would permit) I should spend no time of my life, without remembering
them, and praising and blessing thee for the same; Glory be therefore to thee,
O Lord my Creator; Glory be to thee, O Jesus my Redeemer; Glory be to thee, O
Holy Ghost my Sanctifier; Glory to the high and undivided Trinity, whose works
are inseparable, and whose dominion endures world without end.

Another.
ALmighty and everliving God, I humbly thank thy Heavenly Majesty, for all thy
blessings which thou have vouchsafed to me, poor and sinful creature; that thou
have created me, and given to me a body, the workmanship and excellency
whereof, when I behold, and well consider, I find so many several benefits
received, as I have members, veins, joints, sinews, and nerves, all which
discover and manifest the wisdom and power of the Maker of them: The benefit of
which several parts, none can so well know, as they which want any of them, or
are grieved with the infirmity or weakness of them. I therefore bless thee,
that thou have not created me blind, lame, deaf, or dumb, evil-shaped, or weak
in my senses; but have given me a sound and right mind, in a healthful body. I
further praise thy Name, O Lord, for that thou have infused a soul into this my
body: a work so glorious and transcendent, that if I were not altogether
stupid, and void of all judgment, I would not by my actions account so basely
of it as I seem to do, nor defile it with such impure, contemptible, and
unclean works, as I daily commit. I thank thee, O Lord, that I was not born
amongst Infidels, and amongst those who do not truly call upon thy Name; but in
that part of the world, where thy Gospel is truly preached, and thy Sacraments
duly administered. I thank thee also, for thy gracious preservation of me, from
my birth to this present hour: I confess, O Lord, that it is of thy mercy and
goodness, that I am thus preserved: for if thou should but withdraw thine
hand of preservation from me, it could not be, but that in the twinkling of an
eye, I should miserably perish, and return to nothing. I thank thee, that thou
have of thy providence appointed all thy Creatures for my sustenance and
service: some for health, and some for delight: Grant, O Lord, that I may use
them to those ends for which thou have created them; and that by them I may be
moved truly to meditate on thy goodness, and seriously praise thee for them. I
further thank thee, O Father, that when, as by our first Parents fall, all
mankind was in the state of damnation, it pleased thee (not to deal with us, as
thou did with Lucifer, whom thou utterly expelledst thy presence, but) to
send thy only Son from thy bosom into this world, that by his bitter death we
might be restored to our former estate. I acknowledge, O Lord, that I owe much
unto thee for my Creation, but much more for my Redemption; For what would it
have profited me; nay, what misery should I not have suffered, to have been
born, and afterward to be condemned for ever? I thank thee, O Lord, that thou
have also vouchsafed to call me out of the depth of darkness, and shadow of
death (wherein I lay) by the admirable light of thy justifying grace, to the
true knowledge and love of thee. It is not the least of thy benefits, O Lord,
it shows not the least part of thy power, that thou have called me from so
vile an estate, whereinto I had cast my self after Baptism (and in the same had
continued many years rebelliously) to the estate of Salvation. For it must
needs be acknowledged that thy mercy is great in pardoning sinners their
offenses: but withal, it cannot be denied, but that thy power is greater, in
making sinners; righteous and just. Great was the benefit of my Creation, but
by that act, I was not only made the Son of man: but greater is the benefit of
Justification, for thereby (in Christ) I am made the Son of God. Great is the
benefit of Redemption (and indeed the greatest of all others) but without
Vocation and Justification, it had availed me nothing. Great is the benefit
which arises by the expectation of Glory: and no less is this of
Justification; for it is a work of no less power to make a just man of a
sinner, than to make a just man happy and blessed: for as much as the
difference between sin and grace, is more than between Grace and Glory. I
acknowledge therefore, O Lord, that the benefits which arise by these heavenly
gifts and graces are so great, that my tongue fails, and my heart wants
ability, wherewith sufficiently to praise thee for them. I praise thee also, O
Lord, for thy blessed Sacraments; for that of Baptism, whereby I was cleansed
from the guilt of original sins, and regenerated and adopted into the number of
thy Children: and for the other,, of the blessed body and blood of our Savior
Jesus Christ: the Sacrament of Grace, Unity, Charity, and Remission of sins,
the food of our Souls in this Pilgrimage, and the Conduit through which all
graces are conveyed to our fainting Souls. Lastly, I thank thee, for thy
preservation of me in thy Grace, by which I am restrained from returning to the
mire with the washed Sow, and to the vomit with the Dog: 2. Pet. 2.
and by which I am strengthened to do something acceptable and pleasing unto
thee. I confess, O Lord, that whatsoever good I have done, is wrought in me by
thee: and whatsoever tentation or evil I escape, is merely by thy providence. O
Lord, continue, and keep me still in this grace, that I may so use all thy
blessings, and so keep them in mind, that they may stir up in me, a more ardent
desire to magnify thy blessed Name, and a greater care of ordering my ways
hereafter: that I may no more grieve thy troubled Spirit, Ephesians. 4. 30.
who with thee, and thy blessed Son, our only Savior lives and reigns one
God, world without end.

Another.
ALL praise, honor, and glory be given to thee, O Lord God, Father Almighty,
for all thy inestimable benefits bestowed upon me, and all mankind, whether
private or public, general or particular, spiritual or temporal. Who is able
to reckon up or declare the several kinds or parts of them? for creating the
world, beautifying, enriching, and making it fruitful for the use of man: for
giving unto us souls and bodies, and adorning them, with infinite faculties and
gifts: and (which exceeds the rest of thy blessings) for delivering us from the
power and servitude of sin and the Devil, for forbearing and expecting our
repentance so loug, preserving us from all dangers, and furnishing us with all
things necessary for this life.

What praise shall we render to thee, O sweet Jesus, for all that thou have
done, and suffered for us: We praise and bless thee, for thy Incarnation and
Birth, for all the labors, pains, sorrows, wounds and disgraces, together with
the vile and ignominious death which thou did suffer, to reconcile us to thy
Fathers favor, from which, our sins had justly excluded us: for which thy
great love to the Sons of men, blessed be thy holy Name.

O holy and blessed Spirit, who in the beginning of time, did move upon the
face of the waters at our Saviors Baptism, Gen 1. 2.
in the shape of a Dove: Mat. 3. 16.
and on the Apostles in the shape of fiery tongues, Act. 2. 3.
we praise and worship thee, for enlightening our understandings: for fitting
and making us apt to conceive the mysteries of life eternal; for converting us
from evil conversation, to newness of life, and for sanctifying us to life
everlasting: for directing us in the works of truth, and governing us in our
temporal affairs.

O glorious and sacred Trinity, infuse into us we beseech thee, such measure of
thy grace, that we may be daily mindful of all these thy blessings. Pardon all
our former ingratitude and negligence, in that we have been no more zealous to
love thee, nor more careful to serve thee, and so forgetful to thank thee,
for all thy benefits and mercies. Illuminate our hearts, that we may firmly
believe in thee, devoutly call upon thee, and obediently execute thy holy Will,
that at the last we may by the merits and passion of thee, O Savior, attain to
that heavenly Mansion, where thou, O blessed Trinity in Unity, and Unity in
Trinity abidest world without end.

I thank thee, O Lord, For my Creation. my being. my well being.


That I am endued with Reason.

That I am A civil man.

A Christian. Freeborn. Ingenious. Of honest Parents.
That I am sound in mind, Senses. Body.


That I am well brought up. taught.

I thank thee, For thy gifts of Nature. Grace. Estate.


For delivering me from Danger. Infamy. Trouble.


For the health of my body. A Competency of Estates. Friends. Children. Kindred.


I thank thee, O Lord, For thy Redemption. Regeneration. Instruction. Vocation.
Consolation. Illumination. Justification. Hope of glorification.


For thy patience toward me.

For thy Grace preventing me.

For Governing me.

For thy Continual care over me.

For Strengthening me in tentation.

For Reproving me in evil.

For Assisting me in good.

For the Conjunction of my heart.

For the hopes of pardon for my sins.

For the benefits I have received.

For any good done by me.

For all those that have done me good, by their Writings. Sermons. Conferences.
Prayers. Examples. Reproofs. Injuries.


For all, and every of these, and for all other known, or unknown, remembered,
or forgotten.

I confess, and will confess thee.

I bless, and will bless thee.

I thank, and will thank thee, as the Author and Giver of them all.

Seven Psalms of Thanksgiving Paraphrased.
Psalm. 8.
O Lord our God, Creator and Preserver of all things, how excellent, glorious,
and reverend is thy great and holy Name, not in one particular Nation only, but
in all the Kingdoms of the Earth, who, as thou have magnified thy Name in the
Earth so have thou set and extolled thy glory above the Heavens also.

2 Out of the mouths and tongues of babes and sucklings, even very Infants,
have thou, because men of riper years and understanding neglect thy glory,
ordained strength, and given little Children ability to praise thee, because of
the malice of thine Enemies, the principalities of this world: that thou
might, by this thy great wisdom, and power, still the tongues, and suppress
the blasphemous speeches, of the Enemy and Avenger: when he shall see, that by
such weak means, thou can effect so great matters.

3 When I consider, and duly weigh, thy Heavens, and the glorious frame
thereof, the work of thy fingers, made and created only by thee: together with
the Moon, and the Stars, and other beautiful Lights of Heaven, which thou at
the beginning of time, have ordained of nothing, I cannot but in the depth of
admiration say.

4 What is man, for whose use and service thou have made them, and all things
in this world, and him to serve thee? That thou, so great and glorious a God,
art mindful of him, in so large a manner: and what is the Son of man, the
posterity of sinful Adam, that thou, in such measure of mercy, visitest and
regardest him?

5 For, if I look unto his Creation, and consider whose Image he bears, I
find, that thou have made him in all respects, very little lower in degree,
than the pure Angels, who are honored with thy presence: and have, of thy
bounty, and especial favor, crowned him with glory and honor, in making him
so glorious a Creature.

6 Thou made, and have appointed him also, thy Vicegerent on Earth, to have
dominion and command over thy Creatures, the works of thy hands, and Creation:
thou have subjected, and put all things which thou have made, under his feet,
to obey and serve him.

7 All Sheep and Oxen, Beasts, for his food and sustentation, yea, and not
those only, but the untamed beasts of the field also, have thou made pliable
and serviceable to him.

8 The Fowl of the Air, some for food, and some for pleasure and delight; and
the Fish of the vast Sea, which is stored with variety; and whatsoever else
passes, swimmeth, or lives through the unknown paths of the Sea, are also
created by thee, to serve him.

9 O Lord, our Lord, when I seriously consider thy power and wisdom, in thy
work of Creation, and the especial honor and favor thou show to Mankind,
in giving him this large Commission over the rest of thy Creatures, I cannot
but admire, and say, how excellent and great is thy Name, and Power, in all the
Kingdoms of the World! There is none, O Lord, worthy to be compared to thee.

Glory be to the Father, to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, etc.
Psalm 30.
I Will extol thee, and praise thy Name, O Lord, as long as I live, and not
without great cause, for thou, in thy mercy, have lifted me up, and endowed me
with thy blessings: and have not made, no, nor suffered my Foes to work their
will against me, who intended, if thou had forsaken me, to rejoice and
triumph over me.

2 O Lord, my God, and Savior, I cried, and made my humble supplication unto
thee, in my trouble and adversity, and thou, of thy accustomed goodness, did
graciously hear me, and have healed me, of all mine infirmities.

3 O Lord, thou, by the power of thy grace, have brought up, and restored to
life my sinful soul from the grave of perdition, whereinto my sins had well
nigh cast me: Thou have in thy love to me, kept me alive, and preserved me from
many dangerous sicknesses, that I should not yet go down into the pit of death,
but live, and praise thy holy Name.

4 Sing, and rejoice unto the Lord, our God, ( O ye Saints, and faithful people
of his, who have, with me, felt and tasted of his mercy) and give thanks
together with me, at the remembrance and consideration of his holiness.

5 For his anger and displeasure endures toward sinners but a moment, and
short space, if they truly turn unto to him: and if we seriously consider his
mercies, we shall find, that in his favor is life to those that lie
desparately sick in their sins, if he but touch them with his finger of grace:
as for weeping, heaviness, and affliction, it may, and of necessity must,
sometime befall his servants, but yet it shall endure, and afflict them for a
night, a little while only: but joy and comfort comes again to refresh them
in the morning, by sending the light of his countenance upon them.

6 And, before I fully understood, how God uses to deal with his Servants, I
was so confident of my self, that in my prosperity, when I felt the grace of
God abundantly in me, I said, and presumed, that I was so fully settled in Gods
favor, that I shall never fall, or be removed from it.

7 Lord, by thy favor and goodness, thou had fixed and made my mountain of
grace to stand so strong, that I conceived my self so secure, that I could not
slide back, or fall away: Yet after a while; I found by experience, that I was
in an error, for thou did but hide thy face, and a little while obscured thy
grace from me, and, being left to my self, I found such an alteration, and
defect in me, to do good, that I was therewith sore troubled, and disquieted.

8 I thereupon presently recalled my self, and cried earnestly by prayer to
thee, O Lord; and betook my self unto the Lord, who never utterly forsakes his
Servants; and to him I made my earnest supplication, never ceasing, till I
obtained his return, and thus I said in my prayer.

9 What profit, O Lord, is there, can there be, in my blood, or death, when I
go down into the pit, or if I dye in my sins? surely none to thee, for thou
delighten not in blood, or in the death of a sinner. Shall the dust, or they
which are dissolved thereinto, before repentance, praise thee? or shall it
declare thy truth, and show thy glory? Nay, verily, they shall rather, in the
horror of punishment, blaspheme thy Name. Suffer me not therefore, O Lord, to
be of that reprobate number, of which I must needs be one, if thou absent thy
self, or withdraw thy grace any longer from me.

10 Hear me therefore, O Lord, and that right soon, for my spirit waxes faint,
for want of thy gracious assistance: and have mercy upon me, in this distress.
O Lord, I renounce all further confidence in mine own strength: be thou my only
stay and helper. Upon this petition, the Lord heard my request, and thereupon I
turned my prayer into a song of praise and said.

11 Thou, O Lord, art worthy of all honor and praise, for thou have turned for
me, and for my good, my mourning for thy absence, into dancing and joy for thy
gracious presence: thou have made me to put off my sad habit of sackcloath and
sorrow, and instead thereof, have girded and apparelled me with a vesture of
gladness, even the peace of conscience. And all these things have thou done for
me.

12 To the end, that all my sorrow being removed, and I being delivered from
all fear, my glory, tongue, and heart, together, may sing praise and thanks to
thee, who have done so great things for me: and that I should not be silent, in
extolling thy mercy. And therefore, O Lord, my God, as thy goodness deserves,
and my duty requires, I will, with all the affections and faculties of soul
and body, give thanks unto thee, and praise thy Majesty for ever, as the only
Author and finisher of my salvation.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
Psalm 34.
I Will bless and praise the Lord, for all that he has done unto me, at all
times; as well in adversity as prosperity, and his praise, as it shall ever be
in my mind and heart, so shall it be continually without intermission, in my
mouth, by declaring it to others.

2 My Soul especially, shall make her boast, and glory in the Lord, and not in
any thing that is in me: so the humble, and they which are any way dejected,
when they shall hear thereof, how gracious God has been to me, shall in hope
of the like mercy to them, rejoice, and be glad also.

3 O ye, whosoever has felt Gods favor, as I have, magnify, and extol the
mercies of the Lord with me, for his goodness: and let us joyfully with one
accord, exalt, and praise his Name together.

4 I my self, when I was in trouble, sought the Lord by prayer, and
humiliation, and he rejected not my petition, but graciously heard me, and
granted it; and he not only delivered me from the danger I was in, but from all
my fears also, which I conceived at it.

5 They also, that lived in former ages, (our Forefathers) whenever they
were distressed, looked up, and cried unto him: and were relieved by his mercy,
and lightened by his grace: their faces were not any whit ashamed, because they
did put their trust in him.

6 This poor man (even my self) cried (by their example) in my distress: and
the Lord, plentiful in compassion, graciously heard him, and saved and
delivered him immediately out of all his troubles and calamity.

7 The good Angel of the Lord, deputed by him for each man's protection,
encampeth, and fortifieth round about them, that with an unfeigned heart fear
and serve him: which Angel preserves them in all their ways, and delivers
them from all the machinations of the Devil, and his Angels.

8 O taste ye therefore, and see, make experience, and you shall soon find,
that the Lord is good and loving to those that faithfully call upon him, and
you will also confess with me, and say, Blessed and happy is the man that
lays aside all confidence in himself, and that in all his necessities
trusts in him, and his protection.

9 O fear, reverence, and love the Lord, all ye, that by truly believing in
him, become his Saints, and observe his Commandments: for, take this as an
infallible truth, that there is no want to them they shall lack nothing that is
needful for them, that with an upright heart fear and serve him.

10 The young Lions, mighty and worldly minded men, although they think
themselve (...) do they lack true peace of Conscience, and suffer hunger, and
want that which is truly good; but they, which with a pure heart, and humble
spirit, seek the Lord, and desire to please him, shall not want any good thing,
when the Lord in his wisdom shall think it needful for them.

11 Come therefore, O ye Children, that desire to be informed, and with
attentive minds hearken, and give good ear unto me, that am experienced in the
mercies of the Lord, and I will teach and instruct you in the fear of the Lord,
which is the beginning of wisdom.

12 What man is he, among the Sons of men, that desires to live a good life,
and loves to spend many day so in this life, that he may see and enjoy good
and happy days hereafter.

13 Keep, first of all, thy tongue from speaking evil, let that member do no
man wrong, and preserve thy lips from speaking guile, or that which is false,
though to be to thine own prejudice: for the Lord abhoreth lying lips.

14 Depart from evil, avoid all things which thou know displeasing to God,
and yet think not that sufficient, except thou also apply thy self to do that
which is good and acceptable to him: Seek peace, between God, and thy self; thy
self, and thy Conscience; thy self, and thy Neighbor; and if thou shall find
that peace in any of these particulars shall fly from thee, pursue it with all
thy might, that thou may recover it.

15 The provident eyes of the Lord, (for thy comfort in taking this course) are
ever fixed upon the righteous, to preserve them from all evil, and to confirm
them in all good: and his ears of compassion are always open unto their cry,
to deliver them from all distress.

16 The face of displeasure, and the angry countenance of the Lord, on the
contrary, is set and bent against them that forsake good, and do evil, without
remorse of Conscience, to cut off, and root out, not only such wicked persons
themselves, but the very remembrance of them from the face of the Earth, that
there shall remain no memorial of them.

17 The righteous in their affliction cry, and flee unto God for succor and
the Lord in mercy hears their prayer; yea, and, in his good time, delivers
them out of all their troubles, either by aiding them with spiritual comfort,
that they faint not under them, or by removing their afflictions from them, or
them from their afflictions, by taking them into heavenly joys.

18 The Lord (who has a continual care over his Elect) is ever nigh unto them
in comfort, that are of a broken and humble heart: and always saves such (and
no other) as are of a contrite and bruised spirit, that they fall not into
desparation.

19 Many in number, and great in weight, are the afflictions and troubles of
the righteous, for they that will live godly in Christ, must suffer
persecution; but the Lord, of his infinite goodness, forsakes him not, but
delivers him in due time out of them all, that they shall not be able to do
him harm.

20 He, even the Lord, keeps and preserves all his bones, which though the
wicked go about to break, yet notwithstanding all their attempts, not so much
as one of them is or shall be broken by them: and not only so, but the hairs of
his head are numbered also.

21 Evil, on the other side, shall slay the wicked, and turn them to
destruction, and they, whosoever they be, that hate the righteous, whom the
Lord loves, shall be desolate, and deprived of the comfort of Gods holy Spirit.

22 The Lord by his power and goodness redeemeth and saves the soul of every
one of his servants from all evil, and none of them that put their trust and
confidence in him, and his mercy, shall be left desolate, or without
consolation.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, etc.
Psalm 103.
BLess and magnify the Lord, thy Creator, O my Soul, for all his mercies and
favors extended to thee, and all that is within me, holy and pure, give praise
unto, and bless his holy and great Name.

2 Bless the Lord, O my Soul, I say again, as well for thy Creation, as for all
other his great and glorious works, and, at any hand take heed, thou be not
ungrateful to him, and forget not, nor let slip out of thy remembrance, all, or
any of his benefits, as well in forming thee after his own Image, as in his
continual care, and preserving thee from many dangers.

3 Who, only by his power can, and of his mere mercy and goodness forgiveth all
thine iniquities, pardons all thy sins, as well actual as original, how great
soever, how many soever, as often, as with a pure heart, and humble spirit,
thou repentest thee of them. Who, like a good Physician, heals all thy
diseases, and thy infirmities, by the regeneration, and renewing of his holy
Spirit in thee.

4 Who only redeemeth and saves thy life from destruction, and utter ruin,
and who, instead of taking of just and severe revenge of thee for thy sins,
crowns and compasses thee with loving kindness, many blessings, and
comfort thee with his tender mercies, which are above the rest of his works.

5 Who, in his providence, satisfies, and fills thy mouth, and desire, with
all good things necessary for thy sustentation: so that thy youth, by his
power, is renewed like the Eagles, by curing thy weakness and infirmity, and
making thee lasty and strong.

6 The Lord relieveth them that suffer wrong, and executes righteousness and
judgment, without respect of persons, and stands for all that are unjustly
oppressed, against those that are too mighty for them.

7 He, in former times, at the publishing of the Law, made known his ways, and
taught his Commandments unto Moses, by whom he gave directions to succeeding
ages, what they were to follow, and what to avoid: and his mighty acts were
well known unto the Children of Israel, by their many and great Deliverances.

8 The Lord, our God, is merciful in forgiving offenses, and gracious, in not
imputing our sins unto us: he is slow to anger, expecting the conversion of
sinners: and plenteous in mercy, exceeding in his love, and liberal in his
benefits to those that fear him.

9 He will not always chide, nor be ever displeased with his Children: neither
will he remember our sins, and keep his anger against us for them for ever, but
in his wrath he will ever be mindful of his mercy.

10 He has not dealt with us, nor punished us rebellious wretches, after the
quality of our sins, wherewith we have daily offended his patience, nor has he
rewarded nor retributed to us, according to the hainousness of our iniquities:
for he knows, that if he should strictly enter into judgment with us, no
flesh could be saved.

11 For like as the Heaven is high, as we see, and far above the Earth: so
great is his mercy above his justice, toward them that fear him, and in remorse
for their offenses, truly turn unto him.

12 As far also in distance as the East part of the World is situate from the
West, which by reason of their separation, can never come near to each other:
so far at the least has he removed, and put away our transgressions and sins
from us, that they never shall come near unto us, to do us any harm.

13 Like as a tender and compassionate Father pityeth his disobedient Children,
and upon submission receives them again to grace: so the Lord, who is the
Father of mercies, pityeth and grieveth to see the afflictions of them, that in
fear and trembling for their sins, return unto him.

14 For he, the Lord, which knows all things, knows also our frame, that we
consist of flesh and blood, subject to corruption and frailty, and he withal
remembers, and considers that we are but even dust, fashioned out of the
Earth, and therefore must needs partake and savor of earthly substance.

15 As for wretched and frail Man therefore, his days are but as grass, which
is green in the morning, and before night is cut down and withered: and as a
fading flower of the field: which for a while only, in the Spring time, is
beautiful, and afterward in cropped or decays: even so, and in no more
assurance is he that in the greatest prosperity flourishes. For after a while,
in a short time, he is no more seen, nor his remembrance shall be no where
found.

16 For as the wind and storms passes over it, and every flower, and presently
it is gone, and withered, and the place thereof, where it grew, shall not know
it, not bear it any more: So Man, after he has a while felt the troubles and
storms of this World, shall soon dye, and be forgotten, and the place of his
being will be no more known.

17 But yet the mercy, and loving kindness of the Lord, to the Sons of Men, is,
and was from everlasting, and shall continue to everlasting, to the end of the
World: and shall ever be upon them, especially, that with unfeigned hearts,
serve, love, and fear him: and his righteousness in all his promises, shall be
accomplished to his servants, and unto their Childrens Children, their
posterity, through many generations.

18 To such especially, as forget not his Commandments, faithfully keep, and
observe his Covenant; and to those that remember, and be mindful of his
Commandments, and frame themselves to do them.

19 The Lord, who commands the observance of his Laws, is most worthy of all
honor, and not to be neglected; for he has (before the Foundations of the
World) prepared his Throne, and Seat of Majesty in the Heavens, where he is
attended on by the glorious Company of Angels, and his Kingdom is not straightened
or limited to one peculiar Place or Country, but he rules and commands over
all People and Nations.

20 Bless therefore the Lord, that is so mighty, ye that be his holy Angels,
magnify, and laud his holy Name; ye, that excel in strength, and that gladly
do and execute his Commandments, and that, by harkening unto, and obeying the
voice of his Word, willingly execute his will and pleasure.

21 Bless ye, and praise, I say, the Lord, your, and our God, all ye his
Heavenly Hosts, ye blessed Angels: ye that are Ministers and Servants of his,
that willingly and gladly execute and do his pleasure.

22 Bless, and praise together, with one accord, the Lord, our God, all his
works, which he has created, for the celebration of his glory, wheresover ye
remain, in all places of his Dominion, even every where: And lastly, as I began
with thee, O my Soul, to stir thee up to his praise, so I end with the same
excitation, Bless, Praise, Laud, and Magnify the Lord, thy God, O my Soul, to
whom he has ever been so gracious and merciful.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
Psalm 111.
I Will praise the Lord, and give thanks unto his holy Name, with my whole
heart, and that not only in my private Devotions, but in the public Assembly
and Meeting of the Upright in heart: and in the Congregation of the Faithful,
the Church also.

2 The wondrous works of the Lord, our God, even from the beginning, through all
ages, even to this time, are so great and glorious, that worthily he alone
deserves to be magnified for them; they are sought out, and searched into, of
all them that have pleasure, and delight in meditating and contemplating
therein.

3 His work, in the Creation and Fabrique of the Universe, is honorable and
glorious, of all his Creatures worthily to be admired: and his Righteousness
and Equity, his Care and Providence, in the preservation and government of it,
is likewise to be magnified, because it is permanent, and endures for ever.

4 He has made and perfected his wonderful works with such wisdom and power,
that they ought to be remembered, and his Name to be celebrated for them: And as
he is omnipotent, so the Lord is also gracious, and loving to his Servants, and
full of compassion, plenteous in mercy to every repentant sinner.

5 He has, of his providence and bounty, ever given meat, and all other
necessaries, to them that fear and serve him: yea, and he, as he has formerly,
so will he ever, to the end of the World be mindful of his Covenant of Grace,
to his Servants.

6 He has showed and manifested to his people, his elect, the power, and
efficacy of his great works, not only in the creation, but in the Redemption of
mankind: that he may give unto them that are in Chirst, the heritage of the
heathen, according to the promise made to our forefathers.

7 The works of his hands, all his actions are done in verity, and Judgment,
and all his Commandments are sure, just, holy, and worthy to be observed.

8 They stand fast, and are settled firm, for ever and ever, to the end of the
world: and they are done, and commanded, upon good grounds, in truth and
uprightness, as being enjoined by the Author of Truth and Equity.

9 He in the fullness of time, sons Redemption and Salvation unto his Elect
People, by Jesus Christ, he has commanded his Covenant, of the New Testament
for ever to be observed by them: and it concerns them carefully to keep it,
because he which commanded it, is a jealous God, and severe to transgressors
and Holy reverend is his Name.

10 The filial fear of the same holy and reverend Lord, is the beginning and
basis of all true wisdom; which whosoever has not attained to, is not really
wise, howsoever he may be esteemed by the world: but a good and perfect
understanding have they, and they are truly wise indeed, that do his
Commandments, and keep his Precepts: his praise and remembrance endures
for-ever, and continues throughout all generations.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
Psalm 138.
I Will praise and bless thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, with all my
strength: yea, before the Gods, in the presence of thy holy Angels, will I sing
praise, and laud unto thee.

2 I will worship in fear and reverence toward thy holy Temple, dedicated to
thy honor and service, and I will praise thy holy and great Name, for two of
thy blessings especially, namely, for thy loving kindness, in comforting
distressed sinners, and for thy Truth, in performing thy promises: for thou thy
self have preferred and magnified thy Word of Truth, above all the Attributes
of thy Name, else, whatsoever.

3 In the day and time of my affliction, when I cried unto thee, by earnest
prayer, thou did not stop thine ears, but graciously answeredst me: yea and
strengthened me with thy Grace, and strength in my Soul.

4 All the Kings and mighty men of the earth, be they never so high in
condition, shall, and may worthily praise thee, without disparagement to
themselves: when they, by the preaching of the Gospel, hear the words of thy
mouth, which are nothing but Truth.

5 Yea, they shall sing and rejoice, in excercising themselves in the ways and
Commandments of the Lord: for great and unutterable is the glory and Majesty
of the Lord of Hosts.

6 Though the Lord our God be high, and his Majesty be above all things, yet in
his abundant mercy, has he respect unto the lowly in their own eyes; and the
more humble they are, the more he regards them: but as for the proud, and
those which exalt themselves, he despises them, and knows them, as it were a
far off.

8 Though I walk and live in the midst of trouble and sorrow, and in the shadow
of death: yet, whenever I call upon thee faithfully, thou will (I know)
revive and raise me up: thou shall also stretch forth and reach unto me thy
hand of power, against the wrath and malice of mine Enemies, and bridle their
fury: and thy right hand of omnipotence shall save me from all their
enterprises.

8. The Lord of his goodness, will perfect and finish that which concerns me,
and my salvation: thy mercy and loving kindness, O Lord, never fails, but
endures from generation to generation, even for ever; Withdraw not therefore,
that mercy of thine from me, O Lord, and forsake not thou the work of thine
own hands; not made by any strange God, but by thee, the only and true God.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
Psalm 145.
I Will extol and praise thee, my God, and Creator, O King or Majesty and
Glory: and I will bless and magnify thy Name, O preserver of mankind, for
ever and ever, even all the days of my life.

2 Every day, not a day shall pass over my head, but I will bless thee, and
be speaking of thy mercies: and I will praise and give thanks unto thee, and to
thy Name, for ever and ever, as long as I live.

3 Great and glorious is the Lord, far exceeding all the false Gods of the
heathen, and greatly is he to be praised for all his works: and his greatness
has neither end nor beginning, but is unsearchable, and past man's finding out.

4 One generation and age shall praise and leave the memory of thy goodness,
and thy works of power, wisdom, and mercy to another succeeding generation, and
shall declare to posterity, the remembrance of thy mighty acts.

5 I my self, as well as I am able; will; as I have good cause, speak of, and
extol, the glorious honor, and the exceeding greatness of thy Majesty: and
tell unto the people the excellency of thy wondrous works.

6 And not only I, but all other Men, shall be forced to confess, and speak of
the exceeding might, and the wonderful effects of thy terrible acts, against
thine enemies: and I, according to my poor ability, will declare unto posterity
thy greatness and Majesty.

7 They, even all people, which are governed by thy power, and satisfied with
thy goodness, shall abundantly utter, and continually with praise acknowledge,
and keep the memory of thy great and super-abundant goodness and mercy: and
shall, in all Assemblies and Congregations, sing, and rejoice, because of thy
Righteousness, wherewith thou rulest and disposest all things.

8 The Lord, our God, notwithstanding our grievous sins, is gracious, and
loving, yea, and full of compassion by nature, evermore slow and unwilling to
wreak his anger upon us, it being an act contrary to his disposition, and
instead of punishing, he is of great mercy, and ready to pardon the repentant.

9 The Lord is also good and gracious, not to any particular persons or people
only, but to all that turn unto him, and if we shall consider his tender
mercies to the Sons of Men, they are over his justice, and all his other works.

10 All thy works and creatures shall therefore praise and magnify thee, O
Lord, in general: and, above the rest, thy Saints, and Servants, to whom, in
particular thou extendest thy mercy, shall bless, and continually praise thee,
for the same.

11 They especially shall not be silent, but speak of, and declare unto those
that have not known thy Name, the Glory and Majesty of thy Kingdom, which is
above all the Kingdoms of the Earth, and shall, wheresoever they come, talk of,
and set forth thy mighty power, which no Potentate is able to resist.

12 To make known, and to make manifest thereby, to the Sons of Men, even all
the generations to come, his mighty and wonderful acts, which he has done in
our time, and in the ages foregoing: and also the glorious Majesty, and
Super-excellency of his Kingdom, and Power.

13 Thy Kingdom, O Lord, is not temporary, or of short continuance, but it is
an everlasting Kingdom, was without beginning, and never shall have end: and
this thy Dominion and Rule endures firm and stable throughout all generations,
to the end of the World.

14 The Lord in his mercy upholdeth, and lifts up all those that fall by
frailty and weakness: and raises up, by the grace of his holy Spirit, all
those that be dejected, bowed, and cast down with the thought of their sins.

15 The eyes of all Creatures wait, and are fixed upon thee, as upon their
careful Father, for sustenance and help: and they no sooner call unto thee, but
thou, of thy providence, supplyest their wants, and give them their meat, and
all things necessary for them, not only in due proportion, but in due season,
and time also.

16 Thou openest thy hand of bounty, and satisfiest the insatiable desire of
men, which nothing but thy self can satisfy, and of every other living thing
besides.

17 The Lord is only righteous, just, and unreprovable in all his ways, and
actions: and it is he only that is holy, and pure in all his works.

18 The Lord is nigh, and ready at hand, unto all them; that in distress, call
upon him, and seek unto him for help, Yea, to all, without respect of persons
that call upon him in truth, faith, and uprightness of heart.

19 He is so gracious, that he will not only hear them, but grant their
petitions, and fulfill and satisfy the desire and request of them that fear
and serve him: he also will hear their cry, in time of affliction, and will
save and deliver them out of all their trouble.

20 The Lord, by his omnipotent power, preserves and keeps all them that
love him sincerely, and obey his Commandments, but as for all the wicked, and
unrepentant obstinate sinners, those will he destroy from the face of the Earth.

21 My mouth shall, as long as I have any being, speak of, and declare the
Praise and Majesty of the Lord, most mighty, and as I do, so let all Flesh,
People, Nations, and Kindreds, from the rising of the Sun, to the going down
thereof, bless, laud, and magnify, together with me, his holy and great Name,
even for ever and ever, from this time forth for evermore.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, etc.
Imprecation.
THis part of Devotion, (or of Zeal, as I may call it) although it seem harsh,
and not well to stand with the Charity of a Christian, yet in some caeses it
has been, and may be lawfully used.

1. When the Church of God, in any part of the World, lies (as it were) at the
Stake, and groaneth under the burden of Persecution, and the Enemies thereof
are incorrigible, and not to be reconciled. In this case, not only a private
man in his Devotions, but the Church also in generel may use these
Imprecations, to the end that the Church may by these kind of Prayers, and Gods
assistance, recover its former Peace and Quiet.

2. When a Christian shall perceive that his Enemies aim altogether (against
the Rules of Charity) at the utter subversion both of his Body and Soul; In
this Case also a man may (without breach of Charity) use these Imprecations.

In either of which Cases, if the children of Gods or our own enemies shall
join, assist, or persist maliciously in the steps of their Parents, they are in
our estimation to be accounted of no better, nay, not so well as the very
Heathen who have not known the Name of God at all.

And to this end, I have given you a taste only of some of the zealous wishes,
and earnest desires or Imprecations of some holy men, Prophets and Apostles,
which are set down in sacred Scripture, left (no doubt) for our imitation in
the several cases before mentioned.

Imprecations against the Enemies of God and, his Church.
Number. 16 15.
OF Moses in the rebellion of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, Respect not thou their
Offering.

2 Reg 19. 15.
Of Ezechiah against Sonacherib, the blasphemous King of Assyria.

2 Chr. 14. 11.
Of Asa against Zerah, the King of AEthiopia.

20. 6.
Of Iehosaphat against the Moabites and Ammonites.

Of Nehemiah against Sanballat and Tobiah.

Neh. 4.4.
Turn their reproach upon their own head, and give them for a prey in the land
of captivity.

And cover not their iniquity, and let not their sin be blotted out before
thee.

Of David against Gods enemies in many places.

Psalm. 5.10.
Destroy thou them, O God, let them fall by their own Counsels: cast them out
in the multitude of their transgressions, for they have rebelled against thee.

10. 15.
Break the arm of the wicked.

Break their teeth, O God. Psalm. 58.6 68. 1.


Let God arise, and let his enemies be scattered, let them also that hate him,
flee before him.

Lift up thy feet, 74. 4.
that thou may utterly destroy every enemy which has done evil in thy
Sanctuary.

Power out thine indignation upon the Heathen that have not known thee. 79. 6.


O my God, make them like a wheel, and as the stubble before the wind. 83. 13.


Persecute them with thy tempest.

Make their faces ashamed.

Let them be confounded and vexed evermore: let them be put to shame and
perish.

Let them be as grass upon the house top, which withers before it grows up.
129. 6.


Let not the ungodly have his desire, O Lord, let not his mischievous
imagination prosper, lest they be too proud. 140. 8.


Let the mischief of their own lips fall upon them.

Let hot burning coals fall upon them: let them be cast into the fire, and into
the pit, that they never rise up again.

Of the Apostles against the High Priests. Act. 4. 24


Of Saint Paul.

1 Cor. 16. 22.
If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha.

Gal. 1. 9.
If any man preach any other Gospel, etc. let him be accursed.

5. 12.
I would they were even cut off that trouble you.

Against the Enemies of our Souls.
Psalm. 35.5.
LEt them be confounded, and put to shame, that seek after my Soul.

Let them be as chaff before the

Let the Angel of the Lord chase them.

Let their way be dark and slippery.

Let the Angel of the Lord persecute them.

Let destruction come upon them.

Let them be confounded and ashamed.

40. 14.
Let them be driven backward,

Let them be desolate.

Let Death seize upon them.

Let them go down quickly to Hell. 55. 15.


Let them be covered with reproach and dishonor. 71. 13.


Set a wicked man over him. 109. 6.


Let Satan stand at his right hand.

Let his prayer become sin.

Let his days be few.

Let his Children be Fatherless, and his Wife a Widow.

Let his Children be Vagabonds and Beggars.

Let the Extortioner catch all he has.

Let there be none to extend mercy to him, or his Children.

Let his posterity be cut off.

Let the iniquity of his Fathers be remembered.

Cast forth lightening, and scalter them: shoot out thine arrows, and destroy
them. 144. 6.


And it is not to be conceived, that these Imprecations arise from a weak
affection, as though the godly were glad, or rejoiced at the destruction of the
wicked, nor to persecute them out of the malice of humane nature.

1. But, for as much as the love of God ought to be preferred before the love
of our Neighbors, and that then our Neighbor is truly loved, when that love
respects the glory of God; we worthily prefer his glory before the love of
his Enemies, who by their wickedness would endeavor to obscure it.

2. They used these Imprecations against those Enemies, when they were out of
hope (as is before said) of their amendment.

3. And Lastly, It was done, not so much to destroy the persons, as to
frustrate their Counsels and Imaginations.

The Ten Commandments Paraphrased.
Deu. 4. 13. 10. 3.
THe Law of the Two Tables was written by the Finger of God, promulgated by the
Ministry of Moses, Ex. 19.24.
and Angels, Act 7 53. Gal. 3.19. Heb. 2.2.
and contained summarily what God commanded the people to observe, and what to
avoid.

It is divided into two Parts.

Our duty toward God. Our duty toward our Neighbor.
The four first Commandments enjoin the first duty.

The six last, the last.

And thus follow.

God spoke all these words, saying, I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee
out of the Land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

In the Preface, by mentioning of Gods Name, God spoke, etc.
Jehovah. His Majesty. Spoke. By his Word.


The hearers were prepared to attention.

The Brevity and Order of the Commandments make them easy to be learned.

This Preface belongs to all the Decaloque, and contains a description of
the Person who gave the Law.

Who being God, the Creator and Disposer of all things, is to be obeyed:
Neither are we to make any scruple or doubt, but that all things which he
commands us in his Law, are just and holy.

I am the Lord.
Who only is Omnipotent, and was from all Eternity, from whom all things that
are had their beginning, and who has absolute and sole power to command and
prescribe Laws unto us.

Thy God. Ps. 144.15.
Happy is the people who have the Lord for their God.

By these words ( thy God) every one of us may receive particular comfort, that
as he is able, so he is willing and ready (by making this Covenant to be ours)
in his particular providence and care, to do good to every one of us in our
need, if we keep his Commandments.

God.
A God, to relieve and aid us, not a severe Judge, to condemn us,

Let us therefore,

With all reverence, serve him as a Lord.

With earnest desire, repair to him in our need, as to a merciful God.

With hearty zeal, love him for his goodness.

With trembling, fear to offend him for his justice.

And let us be holy, as he is holy. Lev. 20.7.


In this delivery of the Jews from their servitude, Which brought thee, etc.
is his infinite Power described: whereby he is declared to be as well able to
save his Servants, as to confound his Enemies.

And this deliverance is foretold and paralleled by the Prophet, Esa. 52
as a Type of our deliverance from the servitude of sin.

The First Commandment. Thou shall have no other Gods before me.
HAving (as it were) settled in our hearts his Authority and Power, Thou shall
have no other Gods.
to prescribe and make Laws unto us, his just precept is, that We have no other
Gods before him.

1. Neither by abating any reverence due to him.

But to worship him with all our heart.

By acknowledging him to be the only true God.

By honoring, serving, and praising him above all things.

By trusting and relying wholly upon him.

By expecting all good from him.

By humbling our selves before him, and patiently bearing whatsoever he shall
please to lay upon us, and subjecting our wills wholly to his.

2 Not by attributing any honor to other Gods or Idols, or putting any
confidence in Saints or Angels, Earthly Pleasures, Riches, Honor, or the like,
lest we offend thereby.

Genesis 30.1
As Rachel did, by asking Children of Jacob.

2 Kin. 5.6.
As the King of Syria, by desiring Ioram to heal Naamans leprosy.

2 Chr. 16. 12.
As Asa, by too much trusting to his Physicians.

Lu. 12.16.
As the Fool in the Gospel, trusting to his riches.

Before me.
Neither secretly in thy heart.

Nor in the view of God and the World openly.

Not, but that God is every where, and sees into the secret corners of our
hearts, and is Omniscient; but to set a note or brand of impudence upon us, for
our indignity to him, if we shall make open profession of our Idolatry to any
false God or Idol, in worshipping it; or of our excessive love, or doting upon
any Creature, by putting confidence in it, and neglecting our dependence on
God, who is only able, by his Omnipotency, to relieve us.

This Commandment enjoyneth the inward worship of God.

The Second Commandment. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image.
AS in the first Commandment, God requires, that we worship him only
inwardly: so in this, he forbids all undue and indirect outward worshipping
of him; and enjoyneth us, not to make any resemblance, to worship him by;
because he is a Spirit, and is only to be worshipped in Spirit and Truth.

It consists of two parts.

1. A prohibition of making any Image representing the Divine Godhead.

2. Of exhibiting any worship to any Image.

And that, 1. Because he is incomprehensible, cannot be represented in any form
visible. 2. Because he is able to punish the contemners of his Name.


And to bless his true Worshippers.

Thou shall not, etc.
1. Therefore we are not to grave, or make any Image, or resemblance of him.

Deu. 4.15
For when he gave the Law, (says Moses) he appeared in no manner of similitude.

Esa. 40.18
To whom then will ye liken God? or to what likeness will ye compare him?

2. Neither are we to make the likeness of any thing, to worship it.

For as we ought not to make any resemblance of him: so neither when we make
the similitude of any thing else, (the true use of making Pictures, and the
like, being lawful) not to worship, or attribute any honor to it.

Not that all Images are hereby forbidden.

1. For some in the Old Testament were Typical.

The Brazen Serpent being the Type of Christ.

The two Cherubins on the Ark represented the Majesty of God attended by his
Angels, etc.

2. Some are for Ornament; many in the fabrique of the Temple, and in the holy
Vessels of it.

3. Some Historical, of stories either out of the Scriptures, or of other
Writers.

4. Some for instruction in the nature of Beasts, Cities, and Countries.

Saint Paul says, Romans 1.23
that the Gentiles changed the glory of the incorruptible God, into an Image
like to corruptible man, and to birds, and four-footed beasts, and creeping
things; wherefore God gave them up to uncleanness, etc.

1. Either by bowing the body, Thou shall not bow down, etc.
uncovering the head, or bending the knee to them.

2. Or by setting the same in any eminent place to worship them, bestowing
extraordinary cost on them, making Pilgrimages to them, or dedicating Altars,
Lamps, or the like to them.

For I the Lord, etc.
By this Commination, he shows his power to punish Offenders, and that he is
able and all-sufficient to supply our wants likewise.

Am a jealous God.
Like the jealous Husband, who will have no partner in his love.

And suffers no Corrival, Competitor, or Sharer in his Service.

My Son give me thy heart, thy whole heart.

And visit the sins etc.
Punishing them that run after false Gods, in many descents, even as long as
they shall continue in their idolatrous courses.

Though the Son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father, yet this is so
odious to him, that he will take vengeance of the Idolatrous Generation.

As of the Jews in general. Solomon, and others.
1. To show how odious Idolatry is to him. 2. To force men (who naturally have
a love and care to their posterity) by this Commination, to abstain from it,
left their issue be plagued.
Confounded be all they that worship carved Images, Psalm. 97.7.
and that delight in vain Gods.

The mercy of the LORD, And showing mercy, etc.
is over all his Works. 145. 9.
is over his Justice. Jam. 2.13.



For whereas he punishes Idolaters in his Justice, but to three or four
generations: He is merciful to thousands of those that worship him aright,
throughout all generations.

His reward is always greater than his punishment. Luc. 1.50.


Of his own nature more bent to show mercy, than to execute severity.

It is his proper work, Ps, 28.21.
and suitable to his nature, to have mercy: but he is hardly drawn to punish,
as being a work altogether unsuitable to his disposition.

To them that love me.
With their whole heart, without hypocrisy, and do not impart that worship to
others, which is due to him.

And keep my Commandments.
In obedience, walking in his ways.

All his Commandments, but chiefly this concerning his worship.

The Third Commandment. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in
vain, for the Lord will not hold him guiltless, that takes his Name in vain.
The scope of which is, to show what reverence is due to God in our
Conversation, especially in the use or abuse of an Oath.

Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord in vain.
THe Name of the Lord, which in it self is Holy, True, and Just.

And therefore we ought not to profane it, or take it in our mouths lightly,
or upon every small occasion.

Herein we offend,

When we blaspheme God, either openly, or in our hearts.

When we use his holy Word to any profane, scurrilous, or impure end.

When we commit Perjury.

When we murmr against him.

When we leave his Providence, and consult with Witches, or the like.

When we swear upon trivial and light causes.

When we curse, or use unlawful Imprecations.

When we perform not that which we faithfully promise.

When we (in any action of our own) detract from Gods glory, and attribute and
arrogate too much to our selves.

An Oath is to be ministered when the glory of God is questioned, for some
weighty matter urges it, upon the Magistrates command. And to be taken by
those who are of years of discretion, and in their right senses.

For the Lord will not, etc.
The Lord, and Judge of Heaven and Earth, who sees, and observes all our
actions, is so far from conniving at this sin, that without repentance, he will
condemn every one that offends therein.

1 Samuel 14. 24.
Saul, for unadvised cursing, and adjuration, lost a Victory against the
Philistines.

31. 4.
For consulting with a Witch, was (with his Sons) brought to untimely end.

2 Kings 19. 10.
Sennacherib, for blaspheming God, was slain by his own Sons.

Acts 5. 5.
Ananias, for lying to the Holy Ghost, dyed suddenly.

The Fourth Commandment. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day, etc.
IN this Commandment are two things contained.

1. A Precept or Declaration of the will of God.

To set apart some day.
1. To the public worship of God. 2. In ceasing from our labors.
2. A Reason of the Commandment.

1. Because God after the Creation rested on the seventh day. 2. Because he
also blessed and sanctified it.
Let not worldly cares put it out of thy mind, Remember
but observe it with all Care and Religion.

And not without great cause was this Precept so strictly urged.

1. Because by the neglect of it, arises the neglect of all spiritual duty.

2. Because in it was contained a Type or Shadow of the great and everlasting
Sabbath, which is our Sanctification.

3. Because we have thereby some time to show mercy to our Servants and Beasts,
wearied with labor.

In frequenting the Church, That thou keep holy etc.
and there to exercise thy self.

In Prayer.

Hearing the Word.

Receiving the Sacrament.

In pious and religious Works, as Visiting the Sick. Relieving the Poor.
Meditating on Gods Works. Praising him for them. In refraining from Sin. In
resting from servile Labor.


And although that part of the Jews Sabbath be abrogated which respected the
Seventh day Sacrifices, and other exterior acts of Gods worship, commanded and
enjoined to the Jews: yet the Church has appointed instead thereof the Lords
day, or Sunday, (called the first day of the week) wherein all Christians are
bound to retain and observe all the duties of the first Sabbath, Rev. 1.10.
Acts 20.7 1 Cor. 16. 1.
avoiding the Jewish strict and superstitious Ceremonies,

Six days, etc.
In following the Vocation appointed thee by God, wherein thou art to omit
nothing necessary for the sustentation of thy Family.

And not to spend those six days wholly in idleness, pleasure, or excess.

Nor in the public duties of the Sabbath, and thereby nelecting the Care over
thy Family.

In that day, But the seventh day,
neither thou, nor any of thy Family, or Cattle, shall do any servile labor,
(except in case of necessity, and preservation of Gods Creatures from damage or
loss) but ye shall spend it in those religious duties formerly set down.

In case of necessity (The Sabbath being made for Man, and not Man for the
Sabbath) we are to conceive, that it was ordained not to destroy, but to
preserve him; and therefore all works are not forbidden that day.

1. As dressing of meat. By the example of the Priests, Number. 28. 1.
who on the Sabbath killed the Beasts for Sacrifice, and dressed the rest. Mat.
12. 1
And of Christ's Disciples, plucking ears of Corn. And Tertullian says, De
Coron. militis. c. 3
That the Ancient and Primitive Church never fasted on the Sabbath day.

2. Ministering Physic to the Sick. Luc. 6.7.
By the example of our Savior, John 5.
healing on that day.

3. Saving Corn, Hay-Houses, and the like, Mat. 12. 11.
from perishing. By our Saviors question to the Pharisees.

2. The Reason why God commanded the observation of the first Sabbath was, 1.
Because, after God by his Word had created the Universe of nothing, Genesis 2.2.
he rested himself from all the work that he had made. 2. Because this day was
by him blessed and sanctified.


And the reason why the Seventh day was changed by the Apostles, and continued
by Christian Emperors, into the first day of the week, upon which the
Christians Sabbath is observed, was in remembrance of our Saviors
Resurrection, Ioh. 22.19
(which happned on this day) as may be gathered by Christ's selecting that day
to appear twice to his Apostles after his Resurrection.

The Second Table. The Fifth Commandment. Honor thy Father and thy Mother,
that thy days may be long on the Land, which the Lord thy God gives thee.
AS the first Table teaches the honor and love of God, so does the second,
the duty we owe to our Neighbor. And the first Commandment of this Table
enjoyneth us to honor and reverence our Parents, as being the thing which God
esteems next in degree to his Honor.

And it contains,
First, A Precept. Secondly, A Promise.
1. The Precept is General and Particular-

1. The General comprehends our Duty to all our Elders and Superiors, whom
God has set over us, for our government and preservation; which duty is of
necessity to be performed, in respect of the upholding of Politic Government,

2. The Particular Precept contains our Duty to our natural Parents, Father
and Mother, of what degree, estate, or condition soever they be.

Whether Poor, or Rich; Good, or Bad, this Commandment lays hold on us.

Honor thy Father and Mother.
That which we are enjoined to do by these words, is to Reverence them: as from
whom we received our being. Love them: for their care, sorrow, and pains, in
our education, Obey them: in all lawful things, at being appointed by God to
command over us. Be thankful to them: in requiting their charge and love; in
ministering to their necessities. Be patient with them: in their corrections,
and bearing with all their infirmities.


That which we are forbidden to do against them, is, Not to speak evil of them,
or to curse them. Ex. 21.17.
Not to see them want, Lev. 20 9.
Not to be ashamed of them, Mat. 15. Mat.7.11.
for poverty, or other cause whatsoever.


2. The Promise is made to all such as shall keep this Precept, That thy days
may etc.
which is Long days, of life here, and happy too, else they would be no better
than a curse.

Long days hereafter, for ever in bliss, which is the highest blessing that
can befall to any.

It was Saint Paul's observation, Ephesians. 6.2.
that this was the first Commandment that had a Promise annexed to it.

This Promise God made, 1. To allure us to the Duty of reverencing and obeying
our Parents and Superiors. 2. To show how highly he esteems of it. 3. It
suits with the Commandments, if we honor our Parents, who gave us life, we
shall be rewarded with long life.


The Sixth Commandment. Thou shall not Kill.
THis Commandment follows properly, and in order in the next place: For man's
life being the most precious thing in this World, and upon which all other
things depend, God seems to take care by this Commandment for peace and
quietness, whereby man's life may be preserved.

The life of man ought to be preserved for three respects.

1. Because God is the Judge of man only,

2. Nature desires nothing more than the preservation of life.

3. Murder destroys all society.

Thou shall not Kill.
Neither thy self, nor others.

Neither shall thou have any desire to do any such act.

Under this Commandment are diverse other particulars forbidden: For as God
forbids the act, so does he command that all occasions or means to execute
that act be forborne and taken away.

If God commands us not to kill, then he prohibits the affections to Slaughter.
Anger. Unjust War. Quarrelling. Chiding. Hatred.


And all other things of this nature, Mat. 5.2^.
which may be as provocations to slaughter.

And on the contrary he enjoyneth us,

To love our Neighbors as our selves.

To live peaceably and quietly with them.

To do good for evil.

And all this because,

Man is the Image of God.

Flesh of our Flesh.

The thing that Christ paid so dear for.

The Seventh Commandment. Thou shall not commit Adultery.
Thou shall not commit Adultery.
THe chief aim and scope of this Commandment is to preserve the marriage bed
inviolate. And with great reason it is placed next to the prohibiting of
homicide, because that next and dearest to a man, after his own life, is the
preservation and honor of his Wife; Genesis 2.24.
for they two are but one flesh.

And by this Commandment is also implicitly, and secretly forbidden, To. 1.26.
Whoredom. Mar. 5.28.
Incest. Sodomy. Sins against Nature. Unlawful Desires and Affections.
Uncleanness. Evil Talk. Obscene Songs. And Impudent Behavior. Uncivil Sight.
Lascivious Pictures. Intemperance of Diet. Delicacy and Excess in Apparel.
And the like.

Being provocations to the Sin here forbidden.

And as we are prohibited these things, so are we commanded hereby, To live
Chastely. Temperately. Modestly. And purely in Heart.


For by these Virtues (as our Savior tells us) we shall come to the
Beatifical Vision of God, Mat. 5. 8.
and enjoy that Blessedness which he has promised to those that in pureness of
heart love and serve him.

The Eighth Commandment. Thou shall not Steal.
THat is, thou shall not take from another any thing which is not thine own.
Thou shall not Steal.
And against this Commandment we may offend diverse ways.

By committing Sacrilege, taking any thing from the Church.

By withholding that which is due to King or Prince.

By robbing on the high way, or out of houses.

By deceiving any man.

In bargaining. In false weights and measures. In being bankrupt without cause.
By oppressing the Poor, or keeping his pledge.

By encroaching upon the possessions of any other, either by violence openly,
or by fraud, in removing Landmarks, etc.

By keeping that which is found from the true Owner.

By denying or concealing a trust.

By detaining the Laborers hire.

By living idly, and eating out of another man's labor.

By neglecting a Masters service, and mis-spending his goods.

The Ninth Commandment. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy
Neighbor.
THou shall not give false evidence before a Judge, Thou shall not bear false
witness.
against any man. Whosoever does so, is not only guilty of the breach of this
Commandment, but of the Third also, in committing Perjury.

Neither is false Testimony with an Oath forbidden only, but also without an
Oath.

1. Thou shall not accuse thy Brother unjustly.

Slander him. Revile him. Backbite him. Abuse him by uncivil jests.
2. Thou shall not lie or equivocate.

Either for sport. Or to avoid danger or loss.
For though some seem to approve,

Genesis 27. 19.
Of Jacob, in lying to his Father, that he was Esau.

Ex. 1. 19.
The Midwives, to save the Children.

Josh 2.4.5
Rahab the Harlot, to save the Spies.

1 Samuel 19. 14.
Michol, to save David her Husband.

Jud. 11. 5.
Judith, to deceive Holofernes.

Yet it is safer (with Saint Augustine) to hold, S. August.
that all lies, being directly opposite to truth, must needs be sin.

The Tenth Commandment. Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors House.
Thou shall not, etc.
THis Commandment is directly against Coveteousness, or evil Concupiscence, the
issue of Original Sin, which was derived to all Mankind, after the fall of Adam.

Not covet.
No man ought to covet or desire (no, not so much as in his heart) any thing,
which belongs to another man, and whereby he may receive any damage or
detriment.

Neither his House, which is his inheritance, and his defense against the heat
of the Sun, and the sharpness of the cold.

Nor his Wife, which is bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh; His Partner
as well in sorrow as pleasure.

Nor his Servants, without whose help and labor he cannot dispatch his affairs.

Nor his Cattle, which do his work.

In conclusion, nothing, which may any way prejudice him.

Now, Jam. 2.10.
seeing that He which is guilty in breaking one part of the Law, offends in
all: And that to the keeping of it, the whole inward and outward man is
required: And that the Flesh (while we are in this world) is wholly opposite to
the Spirit: It is impossible for us to fulfill the same by our own endeavors.
For it is with us, as it was with Saint Paul, In our flesh dwells no good
thing; Romans 7.18.
and the good that we would, we do not, but the evil which we would not, that
we do. And seeing also, To. 3.20.
That by the deeds of the Law no man can be justified; Not that the Law is in
fault, (being good of it self) but our own Flesh; 8. 7, 8.
The carnal mind being enmity with God: And they which are in the flesh, not
being able to please him. For the comfort therefore of all, when as neither the
works of the Law could justify us, nor we were able to fulfill the same, God,
of his infinite mercy, sent his Son Christ Jesus into the World, Gal. 3. 13. 14.
That he suffering death for us, might redeem us from the curse of the Law,
that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through Faith.

For in him all the Promises, Ceremonies, and the Law it self, were fulfilled
and ended.

1. The Promises.

As, The Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head.

22. 18.
In thee shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed.

2. The Ceremonies.

Ps. 110.4.
The Priesthood, by his Eternal Priesthood.

The Sacrifices, Heb. 7 27.
by his own Oblation.

Circumcision, Luc. 2.21. 3. 21.
by his Circumcisiou and Baptism.

Passover, by the Eucharist. Mar. 14. 22.


2. The Law.

By his Satisfaction, and absolute fulfilling of it, in whom was no sin nor
spot, Cant.
but an absolute and perfect Righteousness; which Righteousness he has of his
free will and mercy imputed to us, and made ours, if with a lively Faith we
apprehend him, and believe on him.

And in this respect, it may be said, that he observes and fulfilleth the Law
of God, who (not trusting to himself, or his own works) commends himself
wholly to the Grace of God, To. 8. 3. 4.
and seeks all his Righteousness by Faith in Christ Jesus. 2 Cor. 5.2.


So that we are to rely on those words which Saint Paul spoke in his Sermon at
Antioch, Be it known unto you therefore, Act. 13 38
Men and Brethren, that through this man (Christ Jesus) is preached unto you,
the forgiveness of sins: And by him, all that believe, are justified from all
things, from which you could not be justified by the Law of Moses.

But yet, we must take this along with us. That this Faith, whereby we believe
that Christ satisfied the Law, and is become our Righteousness and Perfection,
is merely by Gods grace and favor infused into our hearts by the Holy Spirit:
which stirs up in us a love and desire to keep the Law of God: which though
the same desire never attaineth to perfection, while we live in these Earthly
Tabernacles, for the frailty and indisposition of the Flesh, yet God in his
mercy accepts the same for Christ's sake.

For the better conceiving of the drift and scope of these Commandments, we
are to take notice of two things.

1. Whereas, In every Commandment, the grossest sin, tending to the breach of
that Commandment, is only forbidden by name; yet we are to conceive, that all
sins of that nature, though lesser in degree, and not named, together with the
provocations thereunto, are likewise inclusively contained in that prohibition.

2. And where any Virtue is commanded to be observed, there all the Vices and
Sins contrary to that Virtue are forbidden. And where any Vice is prohibited,
there all opposite Virtues to it are enjoined.

Meditations of Death.
THat all men must dye, being long since Enacted by Statute in the Parliament
of Heaven, unrepealed: and the knowledge of the day of death being by God kept
from us, Aug. in Ps. 34. Conc. 1.
lest we should promise to our selves any thing for future time: I shall not
need to spend many words, to prove either the absolute necessity of the one, or
the uncertainty of the other. Only give me leave to conclude this work with a
few Meditations and Prayers, which may serve as well for those, who feel the
hand of God by sickness: as for those which are in perfect health, to meditate
and think upon, that they be not taken unprovided. And it is exercise of
Meditation of Death, and resolution to dye, ought not to seem strange or hard
to Christians. For the Philosopher, Plato.
in his time, accounted all days spent, without serious consideration of our
end, to be but fondly consumed; and affirmed, That the whole life of a Wise
man, was nothing but a Meditation of Death. And therefore it has been
observed, Genesis 23.3. 19.
that Abraham, when he was in the Land of Canaan, purchased no more Land, than
would serve to bury his Dead. To teach us, that we should not fix, or fasten
our minds upon the transitory things of this World, but have our affections
bent upon another, and meditate upon the day of our Death; which brings two
benefits with it. First, It delivers us out of many cares and troubles. And
Secondly, It leads us to joys unspeakable. The First of these benefits the
Heathen man could see, Artabanus to Xerxes, Herod. 17.
by the light of Nature, when he said, That, No man lived in so flourishing
estate, who, if not often, yet once in his life, did not desire rather to dye,
than to live. For the unavoidable calamity, and grievous diseases, incident to
this life, do so often disquiet and vex a man, that, notwithstanding our life
is naturally short, yet, sometime it seems overlong unto him. And therefore,
( says he) Death is the most acceptable and wished-for sanctuary, and place of
refuge, for a life full of misery and grief. And for the Second, take (amongst
many) that of Saint Cyprian, Cypr.
We pass by Death to immortality, neither can we come or attain to eternal
life, but by leaving this life. Nor is our corporal death to be accounted an
end or period of life, but a passage to a better; for by this temporal journey
we pass to Eternity. For this separation of the Soul and Body, ( commonly
called Death) if we consider the true scope and aim of God in it, is not
inflicted by him, as a severe Judge, to punish the Elect: but as a most
merciful Father, who only calls his Children, from a Dungeon of Misery, to a
Place of all Felicity and Happiness. And this is that which has always made
the Godly to leave this life with such willingness and joy, and to endure with
so great courage and constancy, all their greatest agonies.

Meditations for the Sick. Esa. 38. 1.
Set thy House in order, for thou shall Dye.
Job. 19 25
I Know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon
the Earth.

And that I shall be again clothed with this skin, and in my flesh I shall see
God, whom I my self shall see, and

This hope is laid up in my breast.

Ps. 39.5.
Lord, let me know mine end, and the number of my days; that I may be
certified how long I have to live.

Behold, Thou have made my days as it were a span long, and mine age is as
nothing in respect of thee, and verily every man living is altogether vanity.

For man walks in a vain shadow, and disquieteth himself in vain, he heapeth
up riches, and cannot tell who shall gather them.

And now Lord, what is my hope?

Deliver me from all mine offenses,

Take away thy stroke from me, for

When thou with rebukes do chasten

Hear my Prayer, O Lord, and with

For I am a stranger with thee: and

O spare me a little, that I may recover

Answer me, Job. 13: 2.
O Lord, How many are mine iniquities and sins? Make me to know my
transgressions, and my sins.

Wherefore hidest thou thy face from me, and hold me for thine Enemy.

Will thou break a leaf driven too and fro? and will thou pursue the dry
stubble?

Psalm. 71.1
O cast me not away in my weakness, forsake me not when my strength fails me.

Though I be afflicted, yet let me not be distressed: Though in want of some of
thy comforts, yet not of all: Though chastned, yet not forsaken.

94. 12.
Blessed is the man whom thou chastnest, O Lord, and teach him in thy Law;
that thou may give him rest in the days of evil.

119. 67.
Before I was troubled, I went astray, but now I shall learn thy Word.

25:7.
O Lord, Remember not the sins and offenses of my youth: Nor judge me according
to my works: For I have done nothing worthy of thy sight, but of eternal death.

51. 1, 2.
Wherefore, I pray thee, Blot out all my offenses, and wash me thoroughly from my
wickedness, and cleanse me from my sin.

Job. 7. 10.
I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men? Why have
thou set me as a mark against thee, so that I am a burden unto my self.

And why do thou not pardon my transgressions, and take away mine iniquity?
For now I shall sleep in the dust, and thou shall seek me in the morning, but I
shall not be.

Are not my days few? Cease then, and let me alone, that I may take comfort a
little. 10. 20.


Before I go whence I shall not return, even to the land of darkness, and
shadow of death.

A land of darkness, as darkness it self, and of the shadow of death, without
any order, and where the light is as darkness.

What man is he that lives, and shall not see death, shall he deliver his Soul
from the hand of the grave? Ps. 89.27.


The fear of death overwhelmeth me, and my heart is disquieted within me; 55. 4.
For that I have daily sinned, and not repented, considering, that, from the
Infernal pit there is no redemption.

Be thou merciful to me, O Lord, and save me for thy Names sake, and in thy
strength deliver and comfort me.

Ps. 119 75
I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are just, and that thou of very
faithfulness have caused me to be troubled.

2 Cor. 4.17.
Oh let this light affliction, (which will quickly be gone) cause unto me
afterward a more excellent and eternal weight of glory.

Ps. 94.19.
In the midst of the sorrows that are in my heart, let thy comforts, O Lord,
refresh my soul.

Job. 10. 8.
Thy hands have made me, and fashioned me round about, yet thou do destroy
me.

Remember, I beseech thee, that thou have made me as the clay, and will thou
bring me into the dust again?

Have thou not powered me out like milk, and curdled me like a cheese.

Thou have clothed me with skin and flesh, and fenced me with bones and
sinews.

Thou have granted me life and favor, and thy visitation has preserved my
spirit.

14. 16.
O Lord, thou numberest my steps, and do set a watch over my sin.

My breath is corrupt, my days are extinct, the grave is ready for me. 17. 1.


I have said to Corruption, Thou art my Father, and to the Worm, Thou art my
Mother and Sister.

Is there not an appointed time to man upon Earth, and are not his days as the
days of an hireling. 7. 1.


My days are swifter than a Post, they flee away, and see no good. 9. 25.


I know thou will bring me to death, and to the house appointed for all the
living. 30. 33.


Woe is me therefore, O Lord, that I have sinned. What shall I do? Whither
shall I flee? but to thee, O Lord, my God. Be merciful to me in the last day.
My Soul is very much disquieted within me, But Lord, I require thy aid and
comfort.

Be mindful, O Lord, of thy Word, wherein thou have caused me to put my trust,
and let thy mercy come unto me, according to thy Promise. Ps. 119.49
For thou art my Maker, and I am the work of thy hands.

Deliver me, O Lord, from eternal death, in that day, wherein Heaven and Earth
shall be dissolved, when thou come to judge the Earth.

I am affrighted, when I consider that day, the day of thy wrath, the day of
misery, that great and exceeding bitter day.

O Lord, in that day where shall I hide my self from the face of thine anger?

O Lord, when thou come to Judgment, condemn me not, I beseech thee, but
deliver from the Gates of Hell my poor Soul, which I commend unto thee.
Acknowledge then, O Lord, thy Creature, not made by any strange Gods, but by
thee, the true and living God. Make my Soul joyful with thy presence, and
remember not my sins, but according to thy great mercy think upon me in that
day, for the merits of my blessed Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

A Prayer for the Sick.
ALmighty and most merciful Lord God, who, by the infirmities of this life,
do put us in mind of our mortality, and by these outward afflictions, do
call us to inward Repentance: I cry unto thee with my whole heart, Psalm. 6,1^.
Rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy displeasure. Have
mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak: O Lord, heal me, for my bones are vexed.
Thou art He, O Lord, Job. 5 18. 1 Samuel 2.6.
That woundest, and healest again: that killest, and revivest: that leadest to
the Gates of Hell, and bring back again. If this my sickness, O Lord, be not
unto death, help me on this my bed of infirmity, and strengthen me. If thou
think expedient, rather that I should dye than live, do with me according to
thy good pleasure, and receive my spirit to thy peace, which I commend into thy
hands, who live and reignest God of all mercy, world without end.

AMEN.
Or thus.
O Merciful Lord God, who, of thy great mercy, do forgive the offenses of
those who truly repent, mercifully look upon me thy poor servant, and hearken
unto me, who humbly crave of thee remission of my sins. Renew, O Lord, in me
whatsoever is corrupt and decayed, by the Devils malice, or mine own frailty.
Pity my sighs, pity my tears, pity my groans; vouchsafe to be reconciled to me,
that have confidence in nothing, but thy mere mercy. O Lord, it grieveth me,
that I have offended thy Majesty, and it grieveth me much, that I can grieve no
more than I do. And I humbly pray thee, by the Death, Passion, and Intercession
of thy Son Christ Jesus, to pardon my offenses: promising, that if I recover my
former health, thy grace assisting me, to abstain from displeasing thy Majesty
hereafter. I willingly, O Lord, and freely from my heart, for thy sake, forgive
all offenders and offenses against me, and I heartily desire all those, whom I
have any way offended, to forgive me. O Lord, though my natural man trembles
at the thought of death, yet I profess that I am willing to dye, if it be thy
good pleasure. I. have received life, and all the blessings of this life from
thee; What shall I render back to thee for them? I will willingly receive this
Cup of Death, Psalm. 31.6
and praise thy Name. I commend into thy hands my Spirit: And whether thou
disposest of me to live or dye, I resign it to thy good will and disposition;
and humbly pray thee, that if thou see it good for me, to prolong my days on
Earth, that thou would renew my conversation, by the direction of thy Holy
Spirit, that I may pass those days in thy fear: If thou be otherwise pleased
to dispose of me, take me, I beseech thee, into the arms of thy mercy: for
Jesus Christ's sake, my only Savior and Redeemer.

Or Thus.
O God of all Consolation, who have promised to hear all those that faithfully
call upon thee, and not to reject any, that with a contrite heart, and penitent
soul, shall humble himself before thee. I humbly entreat thee, in the Name and
Mediation of thy Son Jesus Christ, that thou would be pleased to be merciful
to me, thy poor servant, at this time afflicted with sickness. O Lord, pardon,
forget, and blot out of thy remembrance, whatsoever I have committed against
thee, in the whole course of my life. Seal and confirm unto me (by thy Spirit)
a pardon unto me for all my offenses, that I may thereby receive such comfort
in my soul, that I may with all joy and willingness depart out of this life
unto thee. Let me be certified, Romans 8.1.
That there is no condemnation to those which are united and ingrafted into
Jesus Christ, by Faith: That I may be confident, Romans 32.
That neither my Sins, Death, the Devil, nor ought else, can draw me away, or
separate me from thee. And that I may be assured, that thy Throne will not be
to me a Bar of Severity, but a Haven of Safety, and a sure Sanctuary and
Refuge for me to flee unto. Strengthen this Faith in me, which may serve as a
Buckler to defend me from all tentations: and that forsaking the confidence or
strength of all other things, I may flee wholly to thy mercy in Christ Jesus,
whereby I may be protected from the terrors of thy Judgment. Grant unto me
distressed sinner, these graces, even for the same Jesus Christ his sake, who
with thee, and the Holy Spirit, lives and reigns, for ever.

Or thus.
ALmighty and everlasting God, whose years fail not, and who have determined
the days of man, which he cannot pass, yet thy self endurest for ever, and thy
Throne from generation to generation: Remember that I am but dust, like grass,
and my days as the flower of the field, which flourishes in the morning, and
in the evening is dried up and withered. O let me know my end, Psalm. 39.5.
make me mindful of my mortality: 14.
I am a stranger with thee, and a sojourner, as all my Fathers were, and cannot
promise my self one hour, much less any days or years in this my Pilgrimage. I
am like a tottering wall, 6. 2, 3:
and a broken fence, give me grace therefore, that I trust not in the
uncertainty of this life, like the rich Fool in the Gospel, Luc. 12.
but I may every hour prepare my self in thy fear, to pass out of this frail
mansion and to expect thee with a solid Faith, and firm Hope, waiting
cheerfully for the day and time of my dissolution: And looking for that blessed
hope, Tit. 2. 13.
and glorious appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ. Make me (like the faithful
and wise servant) ever ready and prepared for the coming of my Lord, Lu. 12, 43
lest being suddenly prevented, I be taken like a Bird in the snare of the
Fowler. O Lord, Pro. 7.23.
thou have by this gentle correction, put me in mind of my mortality, give me
also grace, that I may make good use of it, that I may cast off all the cares
of this world, and wholly betake my self to make my peace with thee. And I
humbly pray thee, that thou would not forget me in my pains and miseries, in
all my infirmities: be not far from me, when by reason of the terrors of Death,
and assaults of the Enemy, I have most need of thy help, but strengthen my soul
with thy holy grace, against all sensations; that my faith fail me not, but
that thy holy Spirit assisting me, I may overcome my spiritual Enemies; and at
the hour of death, Lord, (I beseech thee) let thy servant depart in peace,
according to thy word. Luc. 2.29.


Or thus.
BLessed Lord Jesus Christ, the only comfort of the living, and the eternal
life of those which dye in thee; I wholly submit to thy blessed Will, whether
it please thee to suffer my Soul any longer to live in this Earthly Tabernacle
to serve thee, or to have it depart out of this transitory world, being
certainly assured, that it cannot perish, if committed to thy keeping. O Lord,
I put off this frail Flesh with a willing mind, in hope of the Resurrection of
it at the last day, together with my Soul, when it will become much more
glorious and happy than now it is. I beseech thee, O Lord Jesus, strengthen me
with thy grace against all temptations, and defend me with the shield of thy
mercy against all the assaults of the Devil. I know that of my self I have no
strength: wherefore my whole confidence is in thee. I have no merits of mine
own to allege, for I see many, yea too many, of my sins, to stand up against
me; but by thy mercy, I trust that thou will repute me amongst the just. Thou
were born for me, did hunger, thirst, fast, and pray for me; thou did many
good works, and sufferedst many bitter things for my sake. Let thy Blood wash
away the spots of my Offenses, let thy Justice cover my Unrighteousness, and
thy Merits plead for me before the great and severe Judge. And as many sickness
increases, let thy grace increase, that my faith fail not, my hope waver not,
nor my love to thee wax cold. Let me not be cast down, or dejected with the
terror of death; but when death shall seize on the eyes of my body, let the
eyes of my soul look to thee; and when the use of my tongue shall fail me,
Psalm. 31.9^
let my heart cry unto thee, I commend my spirit into thy hands, O Lord, who
live and reignest, etc.

Although thou kill me, Psalm. 23.4
yet will I trust in thee, and though I walk in the midst of the shadow of
death, yet will I not fear, because thou Lord art with me.

FINIS.
A short Table of the chief Heads contained in this Book.
A General Exhortation to Gods Service. Page 1 To Prayer. 50 In regard of Gods
Precept. 51 Promise. Ibid. Christ's Example. 52 The Necessity. ib. The Dignity.
54 The Benefit. ib.
Directions how to Pray.
1. To God only. 58 In Christ. 60 2. Faith. ib. 3. In Hope. 61 4. In Charity.
62 5. In Humility. 64 Of Spirit. 65 Of Body. ib. 6. In Perseverance. 68
With Fervency, Diligence, and Attention. 70 The Time for Prayer. 74 The Place
for Prayer. 75 How to Pray Ariight. 76 Prayer divided into Parts. 78 The Use of
the Lords Prayer. 82 The Lords Prayer Analyzed. 85 Prayers for Spiritual
Graces. 142 A Prayer before Prayer. 145 Before a Sermon. 147 Petitions for
Temporal Blessings. 148 Rules for the Morning. 150 Morning Prayer private. 151
For a Family. 160 Rules for the Evening, and Night. 165 Evening Prayers
private. 167 For a Family. 176 Prayers upon the Life and Death of Jesus Christ.
180
Prayers for several Persons.
For a Married Man. 196 For a Married Woman. 198 For a Child. 200 For a Woman
with Child: 201 For a Young Man, or Maid. 202 For a Servant. 205 Before a
Journey. 206 After a Journey. 207 Intercession. 209 Deprecation. 211 In
Affliction. 216 In Time of Pestilence. 218 The Creed Analyzed. 221 Confession
of Gods Glory. 242 Motives to Repentance. 246 The Duty of Repentance. 284
Confession of Sins. 287 Seven Penitential Psalms Paraphrased. 318 Direction
before the Sacrament. 362 Meditations and Prayers Before the Sacrament. 365
Meditations and Prayers After the Sacrament. 376 Motives to Thanksgiving. 383
Thanksgivings. 386 Seven Psalms of Thanksgiving Paraphrased. 399 Imprecation.
432 The Ten Commandementts Paraphrased. 438 Meditations of Death. 469
Meditations for the Sick. 472 Prayers for the Sick. 479
FINIS.

