AN ACCOUNT OF THE Late horrid Conspiracy TO DEPOSE Their Present MAJESTY'S K.
WILLIAM and Q. MARY, To bring in the FRENCH and the Late King JAMES, and ruin
the City of London.

WITH A Relation of the miraculous Discovery thereof.

ALSO Some brief Reflections on the Trials of the Lord Preston, Major Ashton,
and Mr. Elliot, who were chiefly concerned therein, and found Guilty.

By a Gentleman who was present at their Trials.

LONDON, Printed for J. Humph^ys, 1691.

THE PREFACE, TO All that love the Protestant Religion, King William and Queen
Mary, and Old England.
I Need not tell you, Gentlemen, how many and how restless Endeavors have been
used by the Enemies of our dear Country and dearer Religion, to destroy both
ever since the Reformation. You cannot but remember with due regret and
concern, what deep Designs have been frequently laid for this Purpose, within
the reach of your own Observations, (not to look back to King James the First,
or Queen Elizabeth, of blessed and eternal memory.) Nor are you, I am
confident, of so easy and implicit a Faith, as to be persuaded by all the
popular Harangues in the World to contradict your own senses: And indeed, they
only may inform us how much we have hitherto been the Care of Heaven, and what
need there was of our being so, since we have taken so little of our selves,
but with a sort of Stupidity, which looks like Incantation, for the most part
sat tame and quiet, Expectants when the hanging Sword would drop on our Heads,
which so slender a Thread as to outward view only supported; though we ought to
believe there was an Arm within the Clouds, which would not suffer it to wound
any further than its Commission: For indeed, what else has hitherto preserved
us under the two last and the present Reign? For whether the Throne has been
filled by an open Papist, or a pretended Protestant, or one who is really such:
One thing is certain, that Popery, with its infeparable Companion, has been all
along struggling to get uppermost, and like a true Politician, was indeed
nearest the obtaining its desire, when it appeared farthest from it. The Popish
Plot in King Charles 's Reign, although it obtain not its immediate Design, yet
in the Effects thereof, went a great length toward our ruin, like Gunpowder
in a Vault, doing incomparably the more mischief by being stifled. All know
what an odd Branch was grafted upon it, and how unnatural a Fruit it bore; the
Jugglers, who managed that Show, pretending to change Papist into Presbyterian:
Just as effectual a Miracle as their turning Bread into Flesh, while it is Bread
still. However, this is more certain, That they went on so fairly, as to Juggle
one King ('it is more than probable) out of his Life, and the other out of his
Throne; for indeed he was little better than spirited away by the Kidnapping
Priests and Jesuits, the Merchandise of Rome being sometimes the Bodies, as
well as the Souls of Men. And one would have thought a fair riddance there had
been now made for good and all, the vacant Throne being filled by the Consent
and Applauses of all goodmen, with two Protestant Princes, whose actions as
well as words have declared them as true Defenders of the Faith, as of the
undoubted Rights and Liberties of their Kingdoms. But neither must these expect
to sit in quiet, like the ancient Heroes, they seem born for Troubles, and made
on purpose to wade through Danger and Honor. And were their Enemies and the
Protestant Religion's (whose Life and very Being seems very much bound up in
Theirs) but all before 'em; Were there no danger but from the Sword of France,
or the late King's Valor, there would not be so much reason for our
apprehension and concern. But when those inestimable Lives, as well as all our
own, all that we have hazarded, whatever i^ dear to us, have paid for, continue
to Pray, and are ready to fight for; when all this, and the Interest of all
Europe, shall be still in as much danger as ever, from a sort of People, that
Mercy is thrown away, and Pardon lost upon 'em; I cannot doubt, but we shall
all be inspired with a just Iudignation against them: That the Law will be, now
in earnest let loose upon them; and that we shall no longer by a foolish pity
toward them, endanger our own utter Ruin.

Now as to what their Designs are, and have been for some time past, these
Papers may give some satisfaction, till a larger account shall be thought fit
to be made public.

An ACCOUNT, etc.
NO one can imagine that a Plot of so dangerous a nature, and large an extent
as this appears to be, which is now brought on the Stage by so wonderful a turn
of Providence, could be of yesterdays growth, but as Trees which shoot their
Roots deep into the Earth, and spread wide in the Air, may be easily guest to
be of no very late planting; so, for a Reason not unlike, we may believe the
original of this Design is to be fetched much higher than its Discovery, and the
event would be apt to make one think there was really more in the Memorial, we
have been told was last Summer presented to the French King, than some persons
would have us imagine. And indeed it may be worth another Enquiry what became of
that Plot, for which, after so many Proclamations plainly declaring, that there
were ill Designs then on foot against the Government, after so many persons
actually seized and committed for the same; there was never any suffered
besides one Blockhead that was not worth a saving* Whether the reason of this,
and of their acquitting all those committed upon that account without any
Trial, at which time my Lord C --, and Presto^ among the rest, were dismissed of
their Confinements* Whether the reason of it were, That the Government was
resolved to try whether an Excess of Merc^ and Mildness would work any thing on
those concerned, or intended to let them run to the end of their Line, and more
clearly discover themselves to all the World, is not our present business to
enquire. What Is perhaps more sure, is that as deep as these ^oles lay, they did
not work in the dark, but their Design were known some time since, to some
Ministers of State, (at least one) and that few steps they took or Feet they
advanced, were Secrets to them against whom they were levelled; which shows us,
that the present Government wants not those who can manage things of this
nature, perhaps not much less dexterously than a Cecil or a Walsingham, and has
further had a large and a happy Influence in opening some persons Eyes, which
Prejudice had so long either blinded or changed their color in relation to the
Honor and Integrity of a certain Noble Person, who after all the hot and hasty
Censures past upon him, has been the chief or sole manager of this Detection
and Discovery.

Whoever were behind the Scenes in this Plot, we are certain enough who were
publicly engaged in it, and the main Go-betweens and Agitat^rs for the Cause,
which were so lately tried for their Lives, and so justly found guilty, were my
L. Preston, one commonly called Major Ashton, and Mr. Elliot.

Ashton had been employed formerly by Major General W --, before the late
King's abdication, and had married one Mr. Rigby's Daughter, but whether or no
embarked in the same design, time may discover.

For my Lord Preston, he has been sufficiently known e're this, and perhaps it
would not be either beyond Truth or Modesty to affirm, He had been better have
suffered the former Errors of his Management to have been forgotten, than by
thus meddling in things of such a dangerous nature, given liberty and occasion
to look backward, and thereby draw on his own Head nothing but Infamy, and
ruin. It will be readily granted, that the Family of the Grahams have been not
a little obliged to the late King James, and that Gratitude, where it leads us
no farther than Justice, is a very Noble and B^^utiful Virtue; but then a
Mistaken Gratitude and Honor ought not sure to carry us into such Actions as
are pernicious to the Society, under which we enjoy protection, and to our
Country toward which we have far deeper and stronger Obligations than we can
possibly have to any particular Person. For I Would fain know, whether it would be
any excuse for a Man who should set Fire to his own Father's house, or the
public Magazine of his City, that he had formerly been obliged by the Robbers
of the one, or declared Enemies of the other. Now how fit a person my Lord
Preston was for an Employment of this kind, and as it should seem the general
Agitator of the whole Affair, will easily appear, if we consider his Character.
He is undoubtedly, to do an Enemy Justice, a person of the highest Form for
most Accomplishments becoming a Gentleman. -- His Wit is much above the
ordinary Standard, he is extremely well verst in business, and as indefatigable
in the prosecution of what he undertakes. He has been generally thought a Man
of Courage, and if he appeared to some more dejected than was usual at the time
of his Trial, 'twas no great wonder when he found all his fine work unravel'd,
the Cause ruined beyond a possibility of recovery, and his own Life at the
mercy of offended Law, and injured Justice. After all, it must be owned he is a
great Master of address, and his words are so charming, his motions so
graceful, that a fitter person could hardly be found out, or even made on
purpose to bewitch Men from their duty and Alegience, and for my part I rather
wonder such a man as he, has not made more Proselites to his Masters Interest,
than that he has made so many. And if at his Trial he showed not so great a
Strength of mind as may have appeared in other parts of his Life, I believe we
may blame his Ingenuity for it, it being probable that one who knew himself so
deeply and palpably guilty could hardly have Face enough to insist much upon
his Innocence. Add to this, that he is a reputed Protestant, and had been
formerly Ambassador in France, from the King of England. The other two, being
but Under Wheels, to this great Mover, will not deserve so much time, or
notice, in this short Paper, nor are so laden with Commendations as we find he
is in almost all the Letters, made public at the Trial from the Heads of the
Party, nor are they of so fair a Character as his Lordship has had given him.
For these yet behind the Curtain, time may draw it aside and discover 'em, nor
can any one think, that a design of this Nature and Extent, had only three or
four Persons imbarkt therein. Thus much therefore must for the present satisfy
for the Characters of the chief Managers of this Conspiracy.

As for the Subject and Method thereof, it can appear from nothing better, or
clearer than the Original Papers and Letters of the very Conspirators and
Managers under their own Handwriting. And indeed there need no Colors to
heighten or advance it. -- The Devil is ugly enough of himself, could the
Painter describe him like what he really is, nor needs the addition of Tail and
Horns to make him more terrible. The Truth is, 'twas a Home-stroak, and there
wanted no good will, either in the design or management. 'Twas neither less nor
more, than the overthrowing the Government, Deposing, if not Murdering Their
Majesty's, Whom God long preserve, to the Confusion of their Enemies, bringing
in an Army of French and Strangers, and joining them on their Invasion, after
having betrayed the Strength and Condition of the Nation to them, and given an
exact Account of our Fleet and Forts, laying Designs for the Destruction of
both, and taking a particular and remarkable care to plague London. -- Which
Favor the Honest Citizens cannot be forgetful of, and some here at home of
another Character, one would almost think had been aiming at, a little before
the Plot was ripened.

This in general -- More particularly the Scene was laid as deep and as subtily
as Hell it self could contrive it (though the Traitors concerned, will be apt
to say here, as well as in the Gunpowder Treason, 'Twas the Devil who
discovered it) to destroy in a few Weeks, or Months, all that which has been so
long and so firmly building, by the wonderful Providence of God, and the united
Wisdom, and Valor of the Nation at the expense of so much Blood and Treasure,
as it has already cost us. Here at home it appears to have been carried on ever
since, and before the Bravado of the French on our Coasts the last Summer; for
some of the Letters taken, mightily lament the disappointment they met with at
that time, and assure the Enemies of our Country, that 'twas for want of no
good will, but only a handsome opportunity* that they lent not their utmost
assistance to destroy it -- But you would not have Men Rebel when they cannot
do it, and join the French at Portsmouth or Devonshire, when fast in the Tower
of London. However they saved their Stakes, and by this time it seems were got
^e^dy for another Game, their only trouble being (as they express it) that
their Confinements had retarded the Affair, but promising with double vigor to
prosecute it as soon as discharged of their Imprisonment, and recover the
ground which they had thereby lost.

But one grand Obstacle, it seems, the Plotters met with in the prosecution of
their Designs. They knew very well the Mortal and Unchangeable Aversion rooted
in the very Souls of the generality of the English against Popery, ever since
the Reformation, and which they liked, at least, never the better for what
knowledge they had thereof, during the short visit it lately made us:
Accordingly they could not but imagine this would be a terrible Obstacle to
their design of reinstating the late King James in his Throne, whom the English
can hardly think much better or truer for having been so long under the French
King's Pupillage, nor could believe it so much as possible, that he should
return without the destruction of the Protestant Religion, not only in England,
but very probably throughout all Europe. This Objection, which lay so full
against the very center of their design, they found it necessary to obviate
e're they could proceed one step further; and though all the World else thinks
it impossible that King James should should ever now return without Popery at
his Heels, the Agitatars of this design undertake to prove it possible -- which
was all it seems they would so much as pretend to; tho with what Reason, or to
what end, I cannot imagine, only the cause would bear no more, scarcely that it
self; for tho we believe it is possible, and barely so, for a Man to leap over
the Bridge and not be drowned, or Tumble from a precipiece and not be Crushed to
Pieces, (of both which we have Instances) yet none but a Madman would offer to
repeat the Experiment, in hopes of the same Event. But that the Villainy might
proceed Methodically, they had a formal Consult, and Conference between diverse
Lords and Gentlemen: Tories as well as Whiggs (those are the words of the Paper
which gives an Account thereof; Seized among others in Ashtons Bosom) wherein
it was Actually proved; possible that he might return without any Injury to the
Protestant Religion. -- And wherein were several fine Chimeras proposed, which
had King James Conquered the Country, and Recovered His Throne by the French
Arms, would have signified just as much as his Promise at his first coming to
the Crown, and his Oath at the Coronation, to protect the Government as then
Established, in Church and State. -- But now, they tell ye, he had bit upon the
Bridle, and known the smart on it, and if he ever came back again, he had learnt
more wit, then to take such evil Courses as had formerly Broke and Ruined him,
Yes undoubtedly, as much as any Highway-Man or Murderer Pardoned, during his
happy Reign, would leave the Road, or Cutting-Throats, for having been once in
sight of the Gallows. One would think the former Jaunt of almost Twenty Years
long, had been enough to have taught some Persons Wit and Honesty; if ever they
would have been capable of either: Or at least, that the sound Ruffle they met
with from the People of England before they came to the Throne, should have
taught 'em, when fixed in it, how to behave themselves there, and what Measures
to use with a Nation; who, tho it is not an easy matter to anger 'em, when once
they are so, never Bite but their Teeth meet; and tho you cut their Heads off,
will not let go their hold. There Is a Proverb of a certain King, a little wiser
then him we are discoursing of, which may be with Truth and Manners enough
applied -- at least to some of his Old Courtiers, and those inseparable
Friends, who will to he sure always have his Ears and Heart -- Bray a Fool in
a Mortar, yet he will not depart from his Folly: Which was one unlucky Objection,
which I doubt, those Men of Projects, and Reason, forgot to answer at this
Conference; tho it seems, several there present, who pretended great Zeal for
the Protestant Religion, (and without doubt, much according to knowledge) went
away as entirely satisfied in the point in Controversy, as one who has never
made any experiment of Matter of Fact, is with some fine Hypothesis of mounting
to the World in the Moon, in a Chariot of Ganza's. In the mean while they must
give other Men leave to doubt of what they were pleased to be satisfied with,
so long at least till they can produce one Instance of a Bigoted Popish
Prince, who kept his word with his Protestant Subjects, longer then his
Interest persuaded him to observe it; or he wanted Power to break it. However,
so much we may learn by the Title of the Conferrence before mentioned: that it
is not being of one Party, or the other, makes a Man Honest: That Loyalty is not
Tied up to one side or Interest. That there are Traitors of both sides; and
that all those who love the Government, ought heartily to agree in their
Defense of it, tho they differ in their Sentiments, as to other things, unless
they would have both that and their selves Ruined by the Common Enemy.

After this Consult, we may believe they pushed on more vigorously than
formerly, and have brought things to bear so well, that in their several
Letters of Treasonable Correspondence, they rest almost secured of Success;
provided, they might be but powerfully assisted by the French, in that manner
and time they proposed, and had drawn up in a Scheme of the whole. And if they
did their part, and a certain Person easy enough to be guest at, did but
appear in Westminster Hall, (as they express it in one of their Cants) they
doubted not but before next Easter Term, the Causes would come to a Final
Hearing. That is before that time, we had been all involved in Blood and
Confusion, and as miserable as these Plotters and their Masters could make us.

To that end, Exact Lists were sent of all our Naval preparations, what Ships
in Repair, and what not, from the First, to Sixth Rates, not omitting so much
as the very Yatchts and Tenders. So that an Account also added of such
Commanders as were most likely to be drawn to the French Interest -- So that we
need now no longer puzzle our selves to guess which way so many French-Pistols
creep in among us; (Twenty Four of which, have within this few days been
Received in no larger a Sum then Forty Pound.) And yet more Villainous;
Directions were prepared for the French Fleet, how, and where to Fight, and
destroy Oars, their Numbers proportioned, and the Time of their setting out,
and appearing upon our Coast at furthest in March, or the beginning of April,
to hinder the Dutch Fleet and Ours from Joining. They were to look to Spithead
in their way, Burn the Shipping there, and take the Town. To which end, a most
Exact Account was drawn up for them of all the Force in Portsmouth. The State
of the different Forts, as South Sea, Trevanion, etc. As the Number of Men in
Garrison, and the Facility of putting a design of that Nature in Execution.
London, to be sure, among the rest, is never to be forgotten Nothing is to be
done till those proud Citizens be humbled -- Carthago est delenda -- Destroy
that, or that will Destroy Rome or at least till things are Ripe enough, and
the Rebellion strong enough, let French Ships always lie ready on purpose to
Plague it, as if their Fire had not been enough before.

But they knew what would be most acceptable to the Person who employed them,
who whilst he remained at Helm, was so true a Pater Patriae, who always so
dearly loved the City, and between which and him there was so little Love ever
lost. Further if it should come to a Battle, the very place was agreed on where
they should fight the English, not so high as last Summer, near the Beachy, but
rather in the Chaps of the Channel. And all this with the landing of the
French, and the public defection of his Traitors at home, who were immediately
to come in to their assistance, to be put in Execution as soon as possible
after the departure of the King for Holland, a Proclamation being prepared
(perhaps with as much as Coleman's Declaration for dissolving the Parliament)
to the same effect with what was discoursed in the Consult before mentioned,
setting all the Varnish possible on the Cause; the Protestant Religion to be as
surely established and defended as it was before, they only to have the
Government, and all the poor harmless Catholics to be left to nothing but
their Devotions. The Dispensing Power and Prerogative to be left where it was
before that Controversy begun; all Persons being also required to come under
the French Standard, and turn Traitors by such a day, on pain of being used as
if they were so. In order to effect which Designs, and carry on a
Correspondence with the Enemies of the Nation, several particular Cants being
invented, under which to cover their Treasonable Practices. Some of the Letters
were writ on pretense of Trade; advising their Correspondents by all means to
choose such Factors as were bold and Industrious, to fix probable ends, and
choose fit means to bring them to an issue, which they added, was the life of
Trade as well as Government. Above all, to be quick and expeditious as possible
in their Resolutions and Actions, the Sea being now open, whereas a few Months
hence 'twould be very dangerous sailing. Others were disguised in a Story of
Tenants or Landlords, acquainting the Person to whom it is writ, that many of
the Freeholders were dissatifyed with their usage, etc.

Others related to a Lawsuit, as has been already mentioned; some were Letters
of Civility and Compliment, as from one acquaintance to another, assuing them
that their Elder Brother and most of their Family were their true Friends, and
would continue so; enquiring for their little Daughter, whom though they had not
yet seen, they had heard described very pretty and Witty. All this under
seigned Names. To Mr. Reading and Mrs. Reading, Mr. Charleton and others.

Besides these they had several Characte^s and Keys affixed to them, the more
covertly to carry on the main business; one wherein all the Letters of the
Alphabet were made use of to signify Persons and things, one Letter standing
for the K of France, another for K. James, a 3d. for the K. of England, the
Duke of Luxemburgh, the Marquess with them, Duke Powis and his Duchess,
England, Scotland, Ireland, Holland, Dunkirk, etc. the Marquis of Carmarthen,
the Lord Devonshire, the Lord Clarendon, Lord Preston, and several other great
Persons, both their Friends and Enemies. But this was observable in most of
their Letters, that although they began with some of those sorts of Cants
already mentioned, and carried on the Humor pretty well, yet before the
Conclusion, they used generally such high and profound expressions of respect
and veneration as could agree to none with any common propriety of Speech, but
those of the first Quality, and such as they thought their Sovereigns. One good
Man being so zealous in the Cause, as to protest he could venture his hopes of
Heaven upon it, or an expression little below it, if not the very same. But
after all that could be written, said or done, London still sticks in their
Stomachs, whose Citizens or Clergy they could by no means be pleased with, the
Clergy being as the significant memorandums express it, almost all stark
naught, and the very worst of the whole Nation. I wonder wherein have the
Clergy of London obliged the Lord Preston so highly, that he is pleased to do
them the honor of so ill a Character? Not that it is a new thing for
Malefactors to give thofe who detect and prosecute 'em, ill Names, while they
style none Honest Fellows but such as are as great Villains as themselves. In
the mean time it seems all the Luidores yet received are not sufficient: Money
is the Life of the Cause all the World over, which the Jacobites want as well
as we, and those Horse-leeches still cry, Give, Give, without being ever
satisfied. Poor King James, must he pay Pensions still when he himself is but a
Pensioner? The mischief is, his Brass Money will not go in England, nay would be
out of fashon in Ireland, had the Teagues any other among them -- So thick are
the Complaints, and so bold the Beggars, that one may easily conclude their
King cannot live without them, nor they without him. My Lord will acquaint you
with my occasions -- I have told my Lord my occasions. The B^arer knows how I
have been pressed, How well I have deserved -- and much more to the same purpose,
which the World will shortly see in the printed Trials.

After all this, people may choose whether theyl'l believe any such thing as a
Plot, they may say and swear (and yet not be perjured) that this is as great a
Sham as the Popish Plot in 78, and all those who dye for it as ^^rand Martyrs
as Coleman, and as innocent as the Jesuits; nay, had not all this been so
strangely discovered, things had run on in the same current, and the great
Agitators but got safely off with their Papers, or but got them disposed of
safely into the bottom of the Sea; had all this happened, and the French Fleet
according to appointmnet appeared on our Coast as they did the last Summer, who
dared have dreamt of a Plot in it, any more than the last time, or that they
came for any thing else but to fish for a few Herrings on our Coast, or make
fine Lines across the Channel in a Sunshiny day?

And here I should have closed the account of this cursed Design, had not a new
and strange accident given us new confirmations thereof. No longer since than
the last Week, were taken two Gentlemen coming ashore from France in a small
Sloop near Lewis in Sussex -- Sir. R. P. who by the greatness of his Genius,
and mere strength of his own natnral Reason (both of 'em as weighty Motives as
the Jesuits Arguments) left the Protestant Religion for the Roman, in the Reign
of the late King James, and would fain have had his Children Educated the same
way, had not their virtuous and prudent Mother placed them out of his reach.
The other Colonel M. and old experienced Officer: Both going to a great
Papists House in those parts, One of these a Man of Interest and Money, might
have done excellently well, lying there Perdue till the Plot had ripened; then
to have raised Forces for advancing the design; and the other of more Brains
and Experience, when raised to have commanded them. With these were found
several Letters of dangerous consequence, which it is said, confirm exactly what
has been formerly discovered. And here we are like to meet with something of
Ingenuity, though not much Wit, and the having been with King James at the Boyne,
(or rather running away with him there,) actually and publicly acknowledged.

It may be worth also to remark the subtle ways the Conspirators took to
prevent Discovery. They indeed did almost as much as Men could do, who had no
mind to be hanged, to keep themselves safe, and had provided against every
thing but Providence. Here at Land they made use of Iron-heels, opening and
shutting with a sort of a Spring, to be covered with Leather, and worn in a
Shoe, wherein to conceal their Treasonable Letters and Papers. But these too,
were discovered as well as the Person who made 'em, who lately was seized, and
in custody for the same. What they did at Sea to the same end and purpose, was
very strangely rendered ineffectual, and proved only a strong presumption
against 'em.

And from hence 'twill be an easy Transition to the wonderful Discovery of this
so deep and well-laid Design. In which, perhaps there may be some passages not
yet ripe for public notice. What has yet appeared on the open Stage in
relation to this great Affair, is to this purpose.

After the Scene had been laid, and the Scheme of their Designed fixed as
abovementioned, and the Assurances and Protestations of the most confiderable
Persons therein engaged, given under their own hands to be witnesses against
'em; My Lord Preston and his two other Accomplices, Major Ashton and Mr.
Elliott, etc. prepared for France, with an account of the whole Negotiation. In
order whereunto, a Vessel was to be hired to convey them to France, and one
being found sit for the purpose, the Master was to be bargained with for the
price; who at the first meeting, wherein he engaged safely to transport em
thither, demanded 200 l. for his reward: At the second Meeting, he fell to 100
l. Ashton and Elliott, agreeing with him for the same; the Money to be deposited
in Mrs. Burdet's hand till the Service should be performed; accordingly 93
Guinea's and a 6 d. were paid in, the odd six pence being broke, and one piece
left with Mrs. Burdet, the other Mr. Ashton had with him, which he was to
deliver to the Master of the Ship as soon as ever he had landed his Passengers
at any Port in France, and on his return and bringing that piece to Mr. Burdet,
on the application and agreement thereof with the other piece in her custody,
he was immediately to receive the Hundred pounds. According to this Agreement,
the Master prepared his Smack for the Voyage, and all things being ready, they
came to Surry-stairs late in the Evening, to avoid suspicion, calling a
Sculler, with whom these 3, the Skipper and my Lords Man rowed Through-Bridge
to the Tower, and over against it near Pickle-herring-Stairs, went aboard the
Smack there provided. But the weather being cold, the Water-man, as is usual,
lent them his Coats to keep them warm, which it being late, and he in haste to
return, as well as they to get rid of him, were there forgotten; and on his
recollecting himself, and returning, denied, on which he was forced to go home
without them.

In the mean time the Vessel went down the River, as fast as Wind and Tide
could carry it, and soon came to Long-Reach, where then lay the George-Frigat
at Anchor, of whom my Lord Preston had some apprehensions, and therefore
desired the Master to hide them till they past that danger, which he did under
the Quarterhatches on the Ballast, whence they returned above-Deck, when out of
sight of the Frigate. But at the Block-houses at Graves-End, my Lord was again
for hiding, and accordingly retired to his old hole; a Pinnace being just
coming aboard them, which the Master thought was only come to Press, as Captain
Billop who was in her, pretended all his business there was, who coming aboard
with a Press-Warrant, humoured the business exactly, and asked the Master if he
had any Men aboard? He replied, he had a Protection, which he produced: The
Captain tells him he was sorry for it, but must look further; and going into
the Hold, found my Lord Preston and the other two a top of the Ballast, whom he
immediately searched for Papers, whilst one of the Seamen who came with him
discovered Mr. Ashton thrusting somewhat into his Bosom, of which he
immediately informed the Captain, who questioning him concerning Ashton with
Presence of Mind enough replied, 'twas only his Handkerchief, which he
immediately pulled out of his Bosom; but the Captain not thinking fit to trust
him, clapped his Hand after, and found something much more valuable, to wit, that
famous Packet of Letters which did all their businesses, with a small leaden
Plummet fixed with a Packthred, sufficient to have sunk it deep enough for ever
telling Tales again; which way they would soon have sent it, had not their Fear
confined 'em to a place where it was impossible for them to put a thing of that
Nature in execution. But there were yet found further Evidences against them;
for exactly in the same place whence these Papers were taken up by Ashton, the
same Seaman who discovered him doing it, observed something else lying on the
Ballast, which proved a couple of Seals, both my Lord Preston's; one the Seal
of his Office, as Secretary of State to King James, the other his own Coat of
Arms; both which he delivered to his Captain; observing at the same time my
Lord Preston in great Confusion, pale and trembling, and scarce able to speak a
Word. However my Lord and the others treated the Captain with a great deal of
Complaisance and Respect, desiring him to go ashore with them for some
Refreshment, who not judging that so convenient, yet civilly proffered to
accompany them for that end aboard the George Frigate, which lay in their way to
London (and of which they had now no reason any longer to be afraid.) But
finding all those Subterfuges rendered ineffectual by the prudence of the
Captain, they resolve to attack him on the two other sides, on one of which
most of Mankind lies open, with Arguments of Profit and Honor, offering him
some Hundreds of Guinea's only to Dispose of those Papers he had taken, which
he might easily do, without giving any suspicion to those about him, my Lord
having another Parcel of Letters of less concern, to which they might fix the
Plummet that was on the others, and easily make 'em pass for those he had first
taken: Adding further, That 'twould be a gen^r^us thing for the Captain to go
along with them. But none of all this prevailed, he still continued faithful to
his Trust, and altogether unmovable; and the Pinnace brushed away roundly
toward London, which Elliot observing, swore they rowed as if they were
carrying them all to Prison. And when they came under the Bridge, wished
heartily 'twould fall down and crush 'em all to the bottom -- But 'twas the
same thing, the Bridge was as stubborn as the Captain was before, and stood
still in the same place where it has been this two or three hundred year, while
the Pinnaces were tugged lustily, and soon brought their Fare to Whitehall;
where, just as they were stepping out of the Boat, my Lord Preston clapped some
Money into the Hands of two of the Smack's Men, who were brought up with them,
bidding 'em when examined, say, That the Ship was bound for Flanders, not for
France.

No sooner were they landed here, but Captain Billop waited on my Lord
Nottingham with the Packet, which he had seized, which he having opened and
looked over, delivered all of 'em to the Captain again, who carried them to the
Lord President the Marquess of Caermarthen, who also opening and marking 'em,
carried 'em to the King, after which my Lord Sidney had them in his Custody,
wherein appearing Treason enough to have hanged all the Plotters in England, my
Lord Preston was sent back to the place from whence he came so lately before,
the Tower of London, and the other two likewise committed.

'Twas not long after this, before they were acquainted their Trial was coming
on, and time given 'em accordingly to prepare for the same. The Bill was found
against 'em with little hesitation on Thursday, January 15th, and the next day
they were arraigned at the Old Bailey, my Lord's Petition to have the Trial put
off till Monday not being granted him. For indeed 'twas already more than time
to let the Enemies of the Government know, that it could be angry, and dared
both bring 'em to Justice for their Treasons, and punish 'em for the same.
Besides, Delays in this case might on many accounts be dangerous, and would
serve only to encourage the Accomplices of these Traitors, and dishearten the
true Friends of the King and Kingdom. On his Arraignment, my Lord Preston
insisted on his fruitless Peerage, (he being only a Knight in England, though a
Viscount in Scotland) which had been prejudged in an higher place, the House of
Lords having before thrown it out, and which there was no great likelihood
should ever be allowed him, since his Patent was dated at St. Germains, after
King James his Abdication; and had it been allowed for good here, it is certain,
those who had done it could not have cleared themselves from such consequences
as would have been most pernicious and invideous to themselves and the Nation.
-- However this took up some time, and about an hour or two's Argument was
employed therein, but after all, it was overruled by the Bench, as any one
would easily guess it could be no otherwise. He moved also for a Copy of his
Indictment, and brought Presidents, but those were answered, and his Request
not granted, but a Copy of the Panel he had according to custom. The next day
being the 17th of January Ann. Dom. 1691. he came to his Trial, at which was a
vast Concourse of all degrees present, particularly, besides the Lords Chief
Justices, and their Brethren, several Noble Lords of the Garter, several Lords
of their Majesty's most honorable Privy Council and others, my Lord President,
Lord Sidny, etc.

And here I would not be mistaken in what short Reflections I intend to make on
the Trials of the petsons then accused and now convicted of this Conspiracy, as
if my Intent were to forestal the public Accounts which will shortly be given
of the same. Were this an Age like such as we have seen which would not bear
Truth, and the Trials such as would force any one who saw or read 'em to wonder
how so many Madmen broke out of Bedlam, and got possession of the Bench; and
accordingly had we no expectation of a true Account of matter of Fact, then
indeed something of that Nature though from a private hand might be both
necessary and grateful. But now all things have been managed as becomes a Court
of Justice, not as formerly with the Decency of a Bear-garden, no doubt but the
public will be soon gratified with a true and exact History of the Trial of
the persons lately convicted, which make so much noise in the World. All I
pretend to here is from my own personal observation and knowledge to compare a
little these Trials with those of the former Reigns, and to show the vast
difference in the management of the whole in respect both of Court, Bar and
Evidence.

In the opening the Evidence, here was no affected Exaggeration of Matters, nor
Ostentation of a putid Eloquence one after another, as in former Trials, like
so many Geese cackling in a row; here was nothing besides fair matter of Fact
or natural and just Reflections from thence arising. What few Witnesses the
Prisoners had were not affronted or cross-bitten in their legal Evidence. The
Prisoners themselves were treated with that Humanity ever due to those who are
unfortunate, though the most criminal persons in the World. There was so much
Reason upon the Bench, that they had no need of Railing, and those at the Bar
had such usage as if they came thither to be tried for their Lives, not baited
to death. As for the Evidence, it was the clearest and highest the Nature of the
thing could possibly bear -- Plain Proof, undeniable matter of Fact, a
desperate Plot at home, Correspondence with Enemies abroad, inviting them
hither, showing 'em where to fall upon us, betraying the Strength of the Nation
to 'em our Ships and Forts, corrupting and seducing those at home, and taking
whatever measures could possibly be thought on for our common Ruin. And this
seized in the very Bosoms of the grand Conspirators in their own undeniable
Handwriting, nay their Seals, even their double Seals together with it. These
Men had fairer play than Noble Sidny, etc. who were hanged by help of a
Marginal Note, for controversial Papers of twenty years standing, to which they
made both Keys and Characters, abused the Court as much as Dryden's Poem, and
by a rare new Law-figure (for 'twou'd puzzle one to find it in all Vossius his
Rhetoric) called Innuendo, extremely obliged the late King Charles, by turning
him into a Tarquin. No Art nor Trick was there used to make them plead guilty,
as with -- n, nor one Murder committed to facilitate another as with the great
and unfortunate Earl of Essex, whose Blood even yet in vain cries for Vengeance.
Every thing here was in its due place and order; the Patriots on the Bench, and
the Malefactors at the Bar; not quite contrary, as we have seen formerly, when
the Persons Arraigned have as far and as visibly out-weighed the Judges in
Sense, as in Probity and Honor. The Juries here were neither frighted nor
surprised, nor such as would be so; the Defense made by the Prisoners for the
most part so weak and enervate, and so much below themselves, that it plainly
appeared the fruitless Effort of a Guilty Mind, and 'twas easy enough to read
their Sentence in their Foreheads, pronounced by a Judge within, greater than
those who filled the visible Tribunal.

On the whole, my Lord Preston, was, after a fair Hearing, on a long and full
Evidence, found Guilty, about Seven in the Evening of the same day he was
Tried. Major Ashton, after a Defense which took up more time, on the Monday
after, being Jan. 19. And on the same day Elliot's Trial was put off until
another time; but whether any of them will obtain or deservk their Lives by an
ingenuous Discovery of all the Particulars of a Plot, so wide and deep as this
will appear to whoever hears or reads the Letters which give an Account of it,
a little longer time will very probably decide: Till when, here has been
sufficient already brought to light, as to the reality of the Plot it self, the
horrid and desperate Designs thereby to be perpetrated, the manner of its
management, and strange Discovery; enough, I should think, to satisfy all
persons, who in this point really want satisfaction, and are not themselves
either Well-willers to the Design, or actually concerned therein.

FINIS.

