APOSPASATIA SACRA: OR A Collection of posthumous and orphan LECTURES:

Delivered at St. PAUL'S and St. GILES his Church, BY The Right Honorable AND
Reverend Father in God LANCELOT ANDREWS, Lord Bishop of Winchester.

Never before extant.

(...). Heb. 11.4. Printed by R. Hodgkinsonne, for H. Moseley, A. Crook, D.
Pakeman, L. Fawn, R. Royston, and N. Ekins. 1657.

The Preface.
AS there is nothing that a Christian can more desire than a personal union
with his mystical Head; so there is nothing that a Christian ought more to
value than the precious means of its achievement: For, as the highest degree
of perfect Happiness, is to be actually present with Christ in Heaven; so the
highest degree of imperfect happiness (such of which we are capable in this
valley of Tears) is our assurance of (...), Heb. 6. 11.
hope that we shall be happy in perfection. Now amongst the several Requisites
and means of Bliss, our invoking of God Almighty is not the least: for
whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be Romans 10. 13
saved; But as we cannot call upon him in whom we have not believed, nor
believe on him of whom we have not yet heard; so neither can we hear without
verse 14.
a Preacher. Upon which it follows; That because Faith verse 17.
comes by Hearing, and Invocation by Faith, therefore (in order of Nature,
though not of Dignity) Invocation is the third step; Faith the second; and
lawful verse 15.
Preaching the very first.

But here it ought to be considered, That Preaching is not only That, which in
these innovating times has swallowed up the word Preaching. Nor are Sermons
only those which spend themselves and expire with the fugitive breath of him
that speaks them; and being publicly uttered no more then once, do either
vanish, as mere words, into the soft Air; or else are, as water commonly
split upon the Ground. We know that Preaching is a general word, which
properly signifies to divulge or Luke 8. 39.
publish; And though we usually restrain it to the manifestation of God's own
word, yet That may also be Preached more ways than one. The Catechizing of
Neophytes in the purest Ages of the Church, may be worthily called one kind
of Preaching, although they were not admitted to any higher degree of Teaching
than to the very first Rudiments and Grounds of Faith. It was said by Justin
Martyr, in his Paraenesis to the Graecians, that even in some of their own
writings the very Judgment to come was Preached to them; and particularly in
Plato's, the (...) Just. Mart. (...) p. 10. 21. 22 etc. Plato in Rep. l. 10.
Resurrection of the Body. The same Father tells us that Orpheus (...). Justin.
Mart. ibid. p. 13.
preached to his son Musaeus, concerning the unity of the only true God. The
public Homilies of the Church are an exact kind of Preaching, and that in
the judgment of Master Hooker, as well as of King James, and the Council of
Hooker Eccl. Polit. l. 5. 9.
Vaux. The holy-Ghost's Amanuenses did even Preach to the Eyes and
Understandings of all the World, by transmitting what they had written from
hand to hand, as well as when they conveyed it by word of mouth. The Word of
God does Preach it self to every man living who will but read it. The
public Reading of the Scriptures is the best kind of Preaching to all that
hear it; And so the Council of Toledo was pleased to call it. The Reading of
the Law was laid by Moses as the foundation, whereon to build in men's spirits
the Deuteronomy 31. 11.12.13.
fear of God: Upon the bare Reading of which Law King Josiah was so moved, and
wrought upon, that he 2 Chronicles. 34 18.19.27.31.
humbled himself, and wept, and rent his clothes, and made a Covenant before
the Lord, to keep his Commandments and his Statutes, and perform the words of
the Covenant which were written in that book; Nor is it unworthy to be
ruminated upon; That though Moses was Theopneust, the Friend and Favorite of
God (as well as Abraham) and sure as able to speak, without book, the mind
and Tenor of the Law, as any man that ever lived before or after, yet he
thought it as effectual to the saving of Souls, to take the book of the
Covenant, which he had first transcribed from God's own Preaching upon the
Mountain, and publicly to Exodus 24. 1.2.4.7.
read it in the audience of the People.

Now the Reason of this is very evident, and deserves to be considered by that
sort of Hearers, who are wont to prefer the words of men, when gracefully
spoken out of the Pulpit, before the plain word of God, when merely read out
of the Pew, not at all considering, That the Mal. 4. 2.
Sun of Righteousness in the Scripture, like the Sun of Nature in the
Firmament, shines much the brighter for being Naked. It is not the Language,
Fancy, Wit and Learning (which are eminently seen in one sort of Preachers)
much less the Memory, the Lungs and the Gesticulations (which are daily
observable in another sort of Preachers) I say it is not any of these things,
nor all together, that is effectually powerful to the conversion of Souls;
Nay it is not the Spirits going along with the Preacher, that does alone do
the work (for the Spirit of God did go along with the Apostles when they were
cast out of the Cities, and along with our Savior, in the fullness of his
Godhead, when yet he could (...) etc. Mar. 6. 5. Ad divina enim opera
requiritur accipientis Fides: Ergo hine sequitur, homines in credulos and
ingratos quaesi Deo manus vincire, ne ipsis opem ferat. Theod. Beza in locum.
not do many Miracles in his own Country merely because of their unbelief)
but it is his working a docility in the heads and hearts of such as hear, that
they receive with meekness the ingrafted Jam. 1. 21.
word, which is alone able to save their Souls.

This does open to us a reason why the very same Sermon has such variety of
effects in them that hear it, and why a Jonah may preach to the melting of
some, whilst a Jeremy may do it to the hardening of others. If woegoe to
Christ's Schole as Mar. 10. 15.
little-Children (that is) with humble, attentive, and teachable Dispositions,
we shall be great proficients and wise enough unto salvation, by hearing those
Sermons distinctly read, which our 1 Cor. 7. 23
only Master and his Messengers are incessantly preaching throughout the
Scriptures; whereas without that temper and preparedness of mind, we shall
(in utramque aurem dormire) only sleep with our Eyes open; and where Gods own
word, through our wretchlesnesse, is not sufficient to awake us from that
Lethargy of sin wherein our Souls lie steept, and swallowed up, Certainly
nothing that is humane will raise us out of our senselessness and carnal
security; All the vehemence and Invention, all the noyses and Declamations, all
the Grimaces and gestures of all the Lectures in the world will but amuse our
Ears, and lull our Fancies, and benum our Apprehensions, and (like so much
Ladanum) make us snore in our sins so much the louder. It Was by the 1 Cor. 1. 25
and 21. which compare with verse. 18.
foolishness of God (to use the Apostles Catachresis) and by the foolishness
of preaching (as the worldly-wise then thought it) by which it pleased God to
save them that believe, that is to say, by the plainness and simplicity of the
Gospel, without the artifice and colors of skillful men, the world was turned
upside down, as the envious Act. 17. 5 6
Jews were pleased to phrase it. By that word, and that spirit which the
learned Greeks so much despised, Saint Peter preached to the conversion of Act.
2. 41
three thousand Souls at one short Sermon, and of Act. 4. 4
five thousand at another.

Far be this which I have spoken from being spoken to the disparagement of
those judicious and pious Sermons, which have been usefully preached by able
men. Had I not been a true lover of all good preaching, and even of all such
Lectures, as were regularly founded and authorized, not to factious but pious
ends, I should not now have gratified the importunity of friends (however many
and urgent on this occasion) by helping to usher into the world, (and by
commending to the perusal of every Reader, who can be glad to grow wiser then
now he is) The very learned, wise and sacred Relics of this Great Author who
lies before us. I am not now to be taught, That though the best way to
knowledge, is to Job. 5. 39.
search the Scriptures, as those that testify of him who has the words of Job
6. 68.
eternal life, and that as faith comes by hearing, so hearing comes by the
word of Romans 10. 17
God (not by the glosies, or conjectures, or dexterities of men) yet there are
many (...) precious and hidden treasures of knowledge which God was pleased to
lock up in Tropes and Figures, of which the unstable 2 Pet. 3. 16
and the unlearned are not entrusted with the Luke 11. 52
Key. The Priests Mal. 2. 7
lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his mouth, as
being the (...), apud LXX.
Angel or Messenger of the Lord of Hosts, and the Steward of those Mysteries
which God has committed to his keeping. The famous Eunuch of Acts 8. 27. 28.
29. 30. 31
Ethiopia was able to read the Prophet Esaias, and had so good an understanding
as to discern how little he understood it; and therefore St Philip was joined
to him for his Guide. There were some 2 Pet. 3. 16
hard things in St Paul's Epistles, which many did wrest to their own
destruction, of which St Peter does give us no other reason, then their want of
learning, as well as of stability. Those waters Isa. 55. 1.
of life are not every where fordable, no not to this tall Elephant who waded
in them so very deeply, much less to the low-statur'd silly Lambs, who are
apt, in shallow places, to sink or swim. And therefore, though it is evident,
that our very best drinking is immediately out of the crystal Spring, whilst
the 1 Pet. 2. 2.
milk of the word is yet 1 Pet. 2. 2.
sincere, not mixed and troubled with the skillful deceipts of knavish Ephesians. 4.
14. Phil. 1. 15. 16
Teachers, or with the zealous ignorance of honest Romans 10 2. Heb. 5 12.
fools; yet in the Body of the Church, we know that every Member is not an 1
Cor. 12. 14. 17. 19. 27. 28.
Eye, and every one that has Eyes is not a Isa. 30. 10. Mich. 3. 7.
Seer, and yet there must be Seers, that there may be Vision; for where there
is no Prove. 29. 18.
Vision, the People perish. The Church of God, which is the 1 Timothy 3. 15.
Pillar and ground of the Truth, is universally acknowledged. The common Mother
of us all. And though some of her Children can feed themselves by her
direction, and are able to digest the strongest Heb. 5. 14.
Meat, and can carve besides to their weaker Brethren, yet such as are Infants
in understanding, or new born Babes 1 Pet. 2. 2.
in Christianity, must suck the 1 Cor. 3. 2. Heb. 5. 12. 13.
milk of the word from their Mother's Breast, or else receive it from their Mal.
2. 7.
lips, whom she has appointed to give them food in due season. For want of
able Pilots to steer their course, by the knowledge which they have to use
their Card and their Compass in Application to their polar Hebr. 12. 2. Number.
24. 17
Star, how many 2 Pet. 3. 16.
little ones have been 2 Pet. 3. 16.
drowned in the Rev. 22. 1.
River of life, and as it were swallowed up by that sincere 1 Pet. 2. 2.
milk of the word, which able Pastors would have taught them to swallow down?

But as on the one side it must be granted, that where the Scriptures are dark
there must be Guides to the blind; and where the places are steep or slippery,
there must be Leaders of the Infirm: so again on the other side it is too plain
to be denied, that there are many Mat. 23. 16
blind Guides and feeble Leaders of the blind, who carry those that follow
them into the same Mat. 15. 14.
Ditch of error, wherein themselves are delighted to lie and welter. There are
not wanting in our Israel some blear-eyed Seers, who love Job. 3. 19.
darkness rather than light. Their inward eyes are so fore, and so far from
being patient of seeing the Sun in his Meridian, that nothing seems to hurt
and offend them more than the brightness and glory of any opposite Truth, when
it endeavors to break in, and dispel the darkness of their Designs; which is
in effect the very reason that St. John has rendered why men love darkness and
hate the light, because (says he) Their Ibid.
deeds are evil. There is another kind of Seers, who are not blear-eyed, but
rather purblind; they are extremely short-sighted, and cannot see a far 2 Pet.
1. 9.
off. They look no farther than the outside and face of things: And not
discerning the very marrow and kernel of what is written, they conclude that
there is nothing beyond the bone and the shell. So when Hercules had traveled
as far as the Streights of Gibralter, he presently set up his Pillars, and
wrote upon them his (Ne plus ultra,) supposing he had gone unto the end of all
the Earth, because he was able to go no farther: Whereas Americus Vesputius
and Christopher Columbus had their eyes of understanding far better sighted,
and were able to find out another World. There is a third sort of Seers, who
are not purblind, but double sighted and squint-eyed, at least appearing to
look two Ecclus. 2. 12 Jam. 1. 8.
ways at once, having one aspect upon God and another upon Mammon; obliquely
glancing with the left eye upon Godliness, and attentively gazing with the
right eye upon Gain; as if they endeavored by their practice to confute the
Aphorism of Christ, That No man (at once) can serve two Luk 16. 13
Masters.

It is now too late to be dissembled, That since so many have preached without
a Mission, and since so many have made Preachers without a Commission, since
the Sanctuary of God, which was appointed by Him to be a House of Mat. 21. 13.
Prayer, has been turned by Those in Hooker's Eccles. Polit. l. 5. 32.
some into a House ofmeer Preaching, the very plenty and redundance of such as
preach before they are Jer. 23. 21.
sent, and of such as preach against those that sent them, may be said, in some
sense, to have bred a Famine of the Word. This puts me in mind of what was
said by the Florus.
Historian (in ipso Samnio Samnium requiratur.) In such a case as this is, we
are hardly able to see wood for Trees. There are so many vast numbers of either
untaught or illtaught Teachers, that amongst them all nothing of good is to be
learned. Nor was there ever more need to press that Caveat upon the People
which our Savior gave to his Disciples (though (...) by Him in a different
sense) (...), Take heed Mar. 4 24.
what ye hear, and (...), Take heed Luk 8. 18.
how ye hear, and (...), Take heed Mat. 24 4.
whom ye hear. For where there is one good Joh. 10. 11.
Shepherd who enters by the door verse 1.
into the Fold, there is a verse. 1. and 10.
Thief and a verse. 12.
Hireling, a verse.12. Mat. 7. 15.
Wolf, and a Mat. 24. 5.
Deceiver, who do all climb up some Job. 10. 1.
other way. For one good Shepherd, who will lay down his verse. 11.
life (if need require) in defense of his Sheep against the Wolf, how many
Hirelings are there who leave verse. 12.
the Sheep and flee away, as soon as they see the Wolf coming? How many
Thieves are there, who verse. 10.
come not into the Fold, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy? How
many Wolfe-like Shepherds do walk about in Mat. 7. 15
Sheeps clothing, but carry nothing into the Fold by which they are qualified
for Shepherds, besides an iron Hook and a pair of Sheers?

We know the Word in it self has not only a heating Jer. 23. 29.
, but withal a Joh. 15. 3.
cleansing Faculty. But as the God of all Grace, and Grace it self, so the
means of Grace (next to God and his Grace, are most of all capable of being
injured. And because the abuse of the best things does ever prove the greatest
and worst abuse; therefore the liberty of the Pulpit has been of much sadder
consequence than that of the Stage. Infidelity comes by hearing as well as
Faith; and that by hearing the word of God too; I mean, by hearing it
perverted, not rightly opened, nor well applied. And I wish it were not easy
to prove so lamentable a Truth by much deplorable experience, as well in former
as later Times. Since the Jesuits Apes have taught the People to rely upon the
opus operatum of hearing Sermons (as if Religion consisted in the outward
Sacrifice of the Ear) it is well known that in France, as well as in many
other places, the greatest pretenders to Reformation have by their preaching
and practice (their practice suitable to their preaching) helped to make
Reformation an odious word. Whilst they whose Office should have obliged them
to have been Messengers of Peace (shedding abroad among the People words of
Reconciliation, Humility, and strict obedience) have been the Boutefeux and
Bellows of nothing but wars and tumults and irreconcilable Dissensions. The
chiefest Protestants in France (such as the Dukes of Roan and Boullion, the
famous Mornay du Plessis, and learned Cameron) could not hold from complaining
against their own Preachers: It seeming horrible to Them, that the first
Banners should be displayed by such as professed to be Ministers of the Gospel
of Peace. But so it is (and can never enough be insisted on, until a perfect
Amendment and Renovation.) That since the Mat. 24. 15.
(...), I mean, the Doctrins of Buchanan and Junius, Brutus, Boucherius,
Hottoman and Paraeus, have been made to stand in the holy Mat. 24. 15.
Places, Christian Magistrates have trembled at the very opening of Church
doors, as at the opening the doors of Janus: and the first day of the week has
rather been a day of Sabbath, for the mustering up of Hosts and Armies, than a
Christian Sabbath or Day of Rest. Pulpits have been the places where men have
beaten up their Drums and lifted up their voices like so many Trumpets, not
(as the Isa. 58. 1.
Prophet) to show the People their Transgressions, but to exhort and incite
them to their Commissions. They who compelled so many thousands to perish at
Rochell for want of victuals, rather than suffer them to partake of the Royal
clemency that was offered they who made a conflagration of the whole Province
of Languedoc and parts adjoining; they who eminently murderd the learned
Cameron, for refusing to run into the same excess of Riot, were none others
then the pretended and professed Ministers of the Gospel. And if the Name of
the Gospel was thus abused even in France (where the Beast was more subject to
bit and Bridle,) How much more was it in Scotland, where it was frequent for
the Beast to hold fast the bit betwixt his Teeth, or to spit it out of its
mouth, or to shift the Rains from off its Neck, and thereupon either to cast or
run away with its Rider. The pretended Heralds of Peace and Charity, national
Unity and Concord, have been the Tragical Boanerges, whose Thunders have been
seconded with Thunderbolts. They have turned their Flocks and Congregations
into Bands and Regiments, and have made their Churches their several places of
Rendez-vous. When any Malcontents, whether Lay or Clergy, have meditated
Disturbance to Church and State, the common custom has been to dispatch their
Emissaries and Tickets to all the Praecones of the Pulpit, to make them pray up
and preach up the thing Designed: whose tongues have been touched with such
Coals of fury (rather than zeal) as have kindled a fire throughout the Body of
the Church; such a flagrant and spreading, devouring fire as has not been able
to be quenched with less effusions than of many whole Rivers of Christian-
blood. King James complained at A.D. 1620
Newmarket; (upon occasion of Mr. Haddock, who was wont to preach in his sleep,
as he pretended, that he might vent his own Inventions as the Oracles of God)
of his Troubles which in his Kingdom of Scotland he had received from that
Sect; professing his inability to suppress those Ministers from open
slandering in their Sermons: In so much that many times he was constrained to
interrupt them in the midst of their Declamations, whereby they did not only
presume to rail by name at his Servants, but against his own Royal person
before his face, and all this out of the Pulpit, and in perfect digression from
their Text. For twelve entire years together, during his Residence in Scotland
(for his Reign we can hardly call it) he prayed to God upon his knees before
every Sermon he was to hear, that he might hear nothing from the Preacher
which might afterward grieve him; but after his coming into England (he said)
his case was so well altered, that his Prayer was to (...) by what he heard.
Indeed whoever has but dip't into the Scottish Story, and remembers what he
has read concerning Mr. (...) Hist. (...)(...). p. 367. 368.
James Gibson, or David Idem ibid. p. 419. 420. 421 as far as p. 426.
Black, Mr. Robert Ibid. p. 416. 417. 451.
Bruce, Mr. Walter Ibid. p. 427.
Balcanquall, Mr. Andrew Ibid. p. 419. 455.
Melvill, Mr. John Ibid. p. 430.
Welsh, Mr. Robert Ibid. p 446. 447.
Wallis, and Mr. Ibid. p 446. 447.
Dalgleish, Mr. John Ibid. p. 450. 451.
Davidson, and Mr. John Ibid. p. 456.
Dikes, besides the (...) and Knoxes, and many others of the same P^st, (some
declaring Loc. citat.
out of the Pulpit, "That all King's were the Devils Barns; That the Devil was
in the Court, and in the guiders of it; That King James in particular, was
possesst with seven Devils; That his Queen was only to be prayed for for
fashions sake; That Queen Elizabeth was an Atheist; That the King (then over
them) had discovered the treachery of his heart; That the Subjects might
lawfully rise and take the sword out of his hands; That the Judges, Nobility,
and Lords of the Council were Miscreants and Bribers, godless Dissemblers,
enemies to the Church, holy Glasses, Cormorants, and of no Religion:)"I say,
whoever has read such things as these, will not wonder at that hatred which
the learned and orthodox King James conceived of them; nor at that advice which
he gave his son, "To take heed of such (...). lib. 2. p. 41. 42.
Puritans, very Pests in the Church and Commonweal (they are the Kings own
words) whom no deserts can oblige, nor oaths or promises bind; breathing
nothing but Sedition and calumnies, aspiring without meusure, railing without
reason, and making their own imaginations the square of their Conscience."Nor
will any man wonder, that so much K. J. his letter from Windsor, to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, Aug. 4. A.D. 1622.
care was taken by him for the giving of Laws to the Pulpit, and more
especially for the regulating of Lectures, that there might not be "broached
(by the reading of late Writers and ungrounded Divines) any unsound, (...) and
dangerous Doctrins, to the scandal of the Church, the disquieting of the State
and present Government."I will conclude what I have spoken of the corruptions
of the Pulpit with the complaint and Prophecy of our incomparable Bpp. Andrews
Opusc. p. 31. 32. 33.
Author, which he delivered to all the Bishops of a Provincial Synod. First of
all he complained, Ex quo nuper hic apud Nos vapularunt Canes muti, animos sibi
sumpsit indoctissimus quisque, involavit in locum hunc, hic ad clepsydram
(...), cohaerentia non cohaerentia, scabra, putida, insulsa, nec co^a nec
condita praecipitavit usque, and boc salicet Concionari dicitur. Ex quo
p^iginoso cuique aditus patesactios hlc quicquid libet effutiendi, Ecclesiam
Tonstrinam versa est, non plus ibi ineptiarum quam hic. Theologia in (...)
Canes non la trantes mulati in Catulos oblatrantes. Siquis quid enucleatae aut
reconditae eruditionis prose^, Statim Corruprorem clamant, and quasi
adulterantem verbum Dei: ita reun peragunt ipsi omnium corruptores and caupones
nequissimi, qui non eruditionem immiscent, sed pro ed nugas and naenias, and
cerebig cruditates, quibus non sallua, non albumen ovi magis aut ^ejunum aut
^sulsum est.
"That since the dumb Dogs were lately beaten, every Dunce took upon him to
usurp the Pulpit, where talking by the hour glass, and throwing forth headlong
their incoherent, misshapen, and stinking crudities, to the very glut and
surfeit of all wise hearers, they have the luck forsooth to have it called by
the name of Preaching. He further added, That since unlearned and itching
tongues had invaded the liberty of speaking their pleasures from the Pulpit,
the very Church was infested with as many fooleries of aiscourse as are
commonly vented in the places where men sheare sheep. By which means (says our
Author) Theology was turned into mere Battologic, and the dumb Dogs into
barking Whelps; crying out against them who improve their Sermons with any
unvulgar and choice parts of learning, as those that corrupt and adulterate the
word of God."Whilst they themselves (who thus rail against the things they
understand not) "are the most dishonest Hucksters and corrupters of it; the
crude and raw trifles of their own sick brains are as unsavory as spittle, as
tastlesse and insipid as the white of an Egg."This is the upshot of this
greatmans complaint: And his Prophecy upon it was briefly this, That unless
the Synod then assembled would take heed unto themselves, and to all the Flock,
to the Church of God, to the Doctrine of the Church, and to the Dispensers of
the Doctrine, "There would Nisi Doctrinae Voci, idque mature attendatis, brevi
aulla futiarae est omnino, cui (si maxim velitis) possitis attendere. In Conc.
ad C^vum in Synod. provinc. Cantuar. prove. 1593.
shortly come a time when nothing of these should be left to be taken heed of;
And a p. 40.
Babel should be erected instead of Sion."Now that this most learned and pious
Prelate was most impartially severe in every part of that Sermon, and sincerely
aimed (in his severity) at the peace and welfare of Church and State, (to which
he was carried by Scias me (...) pacis semper studiosum fuisse. Idem in Kesp.
ad Epist. 1. Petr. Molinae^ p. 172.
nature as well as by design) and that he meant the same Faction or Sect of
Preachers to whom his beloved King James was so deservedly severe (as being
always infested by them) will undeniably appear to every intelligent and
honest Reader, who will Conser. opusc. p. 39. 40. ut and p. 31. 33. cum p. 165.
166. and seq.
compare that Latin Sermon with his three Epistles to learned Moulin.

What the admired Bishop Andrews, and the judicious Mr. Hooker, and many other
wise men of the age last past, did only fear and foresee, we, the first of
their Posterity, have lived to feel: I mean the lamentable effects which are
wont to follow (I say not the liberty, but) the licentiousness of the Pulpit.
What comes too late to be prevented, may yet, in time, be capable of some
redress. Be our condition never so ill, we cannot hope to make it better by
merely despairing of our Amendment. What I have hitherto premised concerning
the nature of our Disease, is not intended to deject or afflict any Reader, but
only to make him the more attentive to what is offered in this Volume (at
least) as one means of Cure and Restoration. Where there are too many Sermons,
I apprehend there are too few. And the more numerous they are who preach up
Heresy and Schism and Disobedience, the greater number is needful to preach
them down. The more unruly and vain T^t 1. 10.
Talkers, especially they of the Circumcision (the (...) do Verse. 11.
subvert whole Houses, and teach things which they ought not for filthy lucres
fake; the more need have we of such as hold Verse. 9. and 11.
fast the faithful word; and are able by sound Doctrine, both to exhort, and to
convince, and to stop the mouths of Gainsayers. The greater plenty there is of
them 1 Timothy 4. 1.2.
who depart from the Faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and Doctrins of
Devils, speaking lies in Hypocrisy, and having their Conscience seared with an
hot iron; The more must They be needs wanted who are Verse 6.7.13.15.16.
good Ministers of Christ, nourished up in the words of Faith and good Doctrine;
refusing profane and old Wives Fables, giving attendance unto Reading and
Meditation, and continuing in both, that they may save themselves and them that
hear them. By how much the more we do abound with such as 2 Timothy 3. 6 7.8.
creep into Houses, leading captive silly Women, ever learning, but never
learned, such as like Jannes and Jambres resist the Truth; The greater
abundance there ought to be of such as Verse. 14. and 17.
continue in the things which they have learned and been assured of, knowing of
whom they have learned them, and are thoroughly furnished unto all good works.
The more there are of those 2 Timothy 4. 3.4.
itching and prurient Ears who cannot endure sound Doctrine, but heap to
themselves Teachers who have as prurient and itching Tongues, and turn away
their attentions from aged Truth unto newly devised Fables and Conceits after
the Mode; By so much the greater is the necessity of such as are knowing and
stable men, holding 2 Timothy 1. 13
fast the form of sound words, and preaching according to the Romans 12 6.
Analogy of Faith, teaching the People to walk in the Jer. 6. 16.
old and the good way, that walking therein they may find rest unto their
Souls. In a word, The more Interpreters there are who have Luke 11. 52
taken away the Key of knowledge, neither entering in themselves, nor suffering
others to enter in; by so much the more we stand in need of all those faithful
1 Cor. 4. 1.2.
and able 1 Cor. 4. 1.2.
Stewards, who may Prove. 2. 12.
deliver us from the way of the evil Man, from the man that speaks froward
things.

Now if ever any Bishop, since the Apostles own Times, was both a faithful and
able Steward, rightly using the Key of knowledge, religiously opening the
Mysteries of God, bringing Mat. 13. 52
forth out of his Treasures things new and old; If ever any Pastor took Act.
20. 28 1 Timothy 4. 16.
careful heed unto himself, and to his Flock, over which the Holy Ghost had
made him Overseer, 2 Timothy 4. 5.
watching in all things, enduring afflictions, doing the work of an Evangelist,
and making full proof of his Ministry; If ever any 2 Timothy 2. 15
Workman needed not to be ashamed, as rightly dividing the word of Truth, and
venting nothing out of the Pulpit but what is (...) (1 Timothy 5. 17.) est, Ser
monem elaborare. Authore nostro Judice, in Conc. ad Cl. p. 32
elaborate and exact; If ever any Preacher had both Urim and Thummim, the
former in his words, and the later in his example, Tit. 2. 8.
unreprovable in his Doctrine, and 1 Timothy 3. 2. Tit. 1. 7.
unblamable in his life; The most admired Bishop Andrews may pass for one of
those Tit. 2. 7.
Patterns, in whom these Lines of perfection were all concentered.

And this I say so much the rather, because I find him to have the honor of
being hated and Correp. Corr. p. 190. and 206. 208.
snarl'd at by a late profane and saucy Scribler; who, as if he were willing to
kill the dead, and pluck a glorified Saint out of the Land of the Psalm. 27. 13
Living, has not only attempted to sullie the Name and the Writings of this
Great Author, but has publicly malign'd his very imparadised Soul too. He
has not only defamed his Doctrine, as Atheological, irrational, and worse than
that of Arminius (which, in the judgment of the Accuser, is no small crime)
nor has he only reproach't him by a most odious comparison with one
exceedingly below him (whom yet he presumes to prefer as far before him, for
sooth, in sanctity) but by an unchristian insinuation would make his Reader to
believe, That Bishop Andrews was the worse for being Bishop Andrews, that Dr.
Andrews was more a Saint than the Lord Bishop of Winchester, and by
consequence, that his last days were very unhappily his worst too, But since
the Author of such profaneness is very sufficiently stigmatized by avowing
himself, in print, the Author of it, I shall not in a preface say more than
this, That the great 1 Pet. 2. 25
Bishop of our Souls was far worse dealt with; and, in the later part of his
life, was called a Wine-bibber, a Glutton, a Mat. 26. 65 Mar. 2. 7.
Blasphemer, a Demoniack.

How consummate a Divine, how exact a Preacher, how acute a Disputant, how
judicious a Moderator, and how eminent a Christian our Author was, there is
nothing more easy than to conclude, both from the admiration of the best men,
from the malignity of the worst, and from so many of his Writings as have been
heretofore published: And ( after all, I may add) from these imperfect, but
precious Relics, which are here presented to the learned and to the unlearned
Reader. They being so pithie, and yet so plain; so very short and concise, but
yet so full and perspicuous; so close and home to the Text, but yet so useful
in Applications; that it is hard to say, for which sort of Readers they are most
proper; whether for the learned, by being so wise; or for the unlearned, by
being so easy. They who are the most ignorant, may here get knowledge; and
they who have the most knowledge, may here get more. They that are Leaders of
the People, may learn what things they ought to preach; and they that are
followers of the Pulpit, may learn what Preachers they ought to hear.

It Is true, it cannot be denied, and it ought in justice to be proclaimed, that
this Volumne of Notes was only taken by the Ear from the voluble Tongue of the
Dictator, as he delivered them out of the Pulpit; and so are infinitely short
of their original perfection. We must not judge by these Lectures, what kind
of Preacher their Author was; but we must guess by the Author, how exactly
accomplished these Lectures were. There have been many great Monarchs, who
having began to erect their stately Fabrics, have left them imperfect upon
Design, that late Posterity might wonder at the excessive greatness of their
Intentions. And it is thus far applicable to the case in hand, That every
Reader may imagine by the beauty of these Ruins, what kind of Buildings he
should have seen if he had seen them standing in their integrity. But having
said thus much in veneration of the Author, to whom the Printer has offered
this well-meant injury, I have something to allege by way of Apology for the
Printer, by whose devotion of care and cost, these sacred Fragments were thus
collected. He knew the same of the Author was so transcendently high, and
placed so far out of the reach of spite or envy, defamation or disgrace, that
he supposed it a lesser Crime thus to communicate these Lessons as now they
are, than to deprive Posterity of their Advantage. He look'e not so steadily
upon the Name and Credit of the Author, as upon the interest and good of Souls.
He thought the Reader would esteem it, not only as an excusable, but as a
commendable trangression, which being no way injurious to more than One, will
redound to the benefit of many thousands.

Besides, it may be pleaded in his excuse (by such as are willing to make the
best of a bold adventure, not because it is bold, but because it is past, and
now too late to be prevented) That next to the Authors and Composers of learned
Works, their Conservators and Guardians deserve most thanks and commendations.
We think we owe a great deal to such as Photius, and Stobaeus, (and the
publickminded Sirmondus of these last times) through the industry of whom we
do enjoy many things, which but for them, we might have lost. How comes it to
pass, that we have nothing (unless mere figments or arrant scraps) of such as
Berosus, Ctesias, and Megasthenes, Theopompus, Euphorus, Callisthenes, and
Timaeus? Or that we want so many books of Diodorus Siculus, Polybius, Ingens
Livius, and Dion Cassius? Or that we have lost so many Volumes of learned
Writers in the Church, such as Melito, Theophilus, Tatianus, Irenaeus, Clemens
Alexandrinus, Hippolytus, Origin, and the like, but because there were not in
all times, men of faithful, industrious, and public Souls? Yet we reckon our
selves obliged to such as will lend us the very Ruins of Methodius of Tire,
and Dionysius of Alexandria. Nor was the publisher able to guess at any
reason, why the Remains of Bishop Andrews should not be every whit as welcome
(if not to this which is so near him, yet at least) to after Ages; when men
will value the very Gleanings after so excellent a Labourer in the Mat. 9 38.
Harvest of the Gospel, above the many whole Crops of such as are unskilful or
idle workmen.

But now for mine own part, I must ingenuously confess, that though I find my
self more usefully and deliciously entertained with the very least fragments of
Bishop Andrews, than with the fullest spread Tables of those new Men, who
uninvite the People to be his Guests, and train them up to another Diet; yet in
reverence to the Fame of so inestimable a Writer, and in a fear of being
offensive to many persons yet living, with whom his memory is highly precious,
and in an humble submission to the most wise determinations of those two
Reverend and learned Prelates, who were alone entrusted with the disposal of
his Works, I should never have consented to the divulging of these Notes, had I
been timely consulted with before they were finished at the Press. Not only
for those reasons which I find to have been given by the Bishops of London and
of Ely, both in their English and Latin Prefaces, before his English and
Latin Works, but for diverse other reasons which are too obvious to need a
prompter. I know that the enemies of this Great Author (that is to say, of the
Church of England) do love to take their measures of him, not from his latest,
and most mature, but from his youngest and crudest Writings. I know the
injuries he has suffered by the unwarranted publications of some few things
which are found to vary from that which is known to be his last and ripest
judgment. I know what calumnies are heaped upon his equally beloved and
friendly Grotius through the licentious publication of his posthumous Works. I
know his infinite Improvements from after that time when he was Vicar of St.
Giles; and his dislikes of all preaching, which, by being too frequent, is
withal too loose. Thence was his Censure upon himself (recorded by Bishop
Buckridge in his p. 21.
funeral Sermon) That when he preached twice a day at St. Giles, he prated
once: Not but that his very Table-talk, and what, in the depth of his Humility,
he called his prating, was more useful and more learned than the very best
preaching of them that are Enemies to his Glory as well as Doctrine, but because
he thought the Word of God was never well enough handled, and that the Work of
God was never well enough done, until it had received his utmost care and
circumspection. So meek and modest was his opinion of his own performances,
(however admired by other men) that he seldom (if ever) could give them his
final Approbation, until they had passed, the third time, betwixt the Hammer
and the Anvill.

All which when I consider, I think it my duty to make it known, That I never
heard of this Volume until I saw it entirely printed, and only have taken this
opportunity to preserve the Reader from being deceived, and the incomparable
Author from being wronged. My excusing of the publishers (I mean, my endeavors
to excuse them) is not meant to imply that they are innocent, but is the
mercifullest way to conclude them guilty; Who commonly live and subsist, not by
being over-tender of the Names and Reputations, but by publishing the Writings
of those especially, whom they think the most vendible and famous Authors.

Were those Stenographers now living, by whose Legerdemain these Notes were
stolen, (and yet it were well if that dexterity had never been used to viler
ends) they would not scruple to tell the Reader, what (...), etc. Arrian. Epict
in Praesat.
Arrian said to Lucius Gellius in the very same case. "(We have transcribed
these Lectures of Bishop Andrews neither precisely so as he delivered them, nor
perhaps so exactly as they might have been taken by other men, nor yet with any
design to put them forth into the light: But we caught them out of his mouth by sleight of hand, in such a manner as we were able, that recollecting in our
memories the excellent Lessons which we had heard, we might be able the more
effectually to lay them up in our Hearts. Nor can we choose but admire, how
these imperfect and impolish't Lectures should thus have flown into the Common,
out of our Enclosure, not without our knowledge only, but against our wills
too. Yet are we by so much the less solicitous, by how much the more we are
assured, That he, whose Auditors we were, affected no man's applause; but was
wholly intent upon this very thing, That he might benefit his Hearers by all he
spoke. He was so powerful and mighty in what he taught us out of the Pulpit,
as to carry our affections which way he pleased. And if he proves less
powerful in these Instructions of his which are delivered from the Press, we
alone are to be blamed, by whom alone they have received their Imperfections.)"

But because those ready writers are not in being to speak themselves, I will
conjure the Reader, in their behalf, so to profit himself by this Volume of
Instructions, as not to prejudice his Teacher in any kind; but evermore to
reflect upon the greatness of his Piety, the transcendency of his Judgment,
the excessivenesse of his Learning, and the exactness of his Life; his
painfullnesse and diligence in his Pastoral charge at S. Giles, and afterward
in his Episcopal; the great and manifold services he did the Protestant Church,
not by preaching only and living in a most exemplary manner, but by defending
her Discipline as well as Doctrine, against the strongest Opponents of each
extreme, (I mean Those of the Consistory, and Those of the Conclave,) and by
all other performances so every way worthy of his Great Calling, that the
learned Isaac Casaubon (as himself has told us in one of his published
Epistles) looked upon Him and Bishop Overall, with other Fathers of our Church,
as equal to Hosius and other holy Assessors in the general Council of Nice. To
which he added this declaration; That he never expected to see a Church so
nearly approaching unto the Primitive in point of purity and Order, as the
Church which he found at that Time here in England.

Now that the God of Purity and of Order will, in his own best time, restore
and raise up such able Pastors to go in and out before his People, and to keep
his Remnant from being carried from Jerusalem to Bethel, from Bethel to Babel,
and from Babel to Babylon; That he will bind up the Breaches, and wipe off the
Stains, repair the Glory and Reputation, of his afflicted, defiled, disgraced
Spouse, causing Righteousness and Peace to take up their dwelling within her
Gates, Plenteousnesse and Truth within her Palaces, is sincerely and daily the
prayer of

The very meanest of her Admirers in the days of her Mourning and Captivity,
T. P.

Elenchus Latino-Anglus omnium Concionum totius Libri; Numerus paginam indicat.
A Latin and English Table of the Sermons of the whole book, with the number
of the page in which the Sermon does begin.
Index Concionum in Caput primum Geneseos.
The Contents of the Sermons preached upon the first chapter of Genesis.
VAE vobis Legis interpretibus, quoniam sustulistis clavem cognitionis: ipsi
non introistis, and eos qui introibant prohibuistis. Luc. 11. 52.


Woe unto you Lawyers, for ye have taken away the key of knowledge: ye entered
not in your selves, and them that were entering in, ye hindered. page 657

In principio Dius creavit Coelum and Terram, etc. Genesis 1. 1.


In the beginning God created the Heaven and the Earth. p. 1

Creavit Coelum and Terram, and omnia in illis.

He created the Heaven and the Earth, and all things therein. p. 5

Terra autem erat res informis and inanis, tenebraeque erant in superficie
abyssi. verse. 2.


And the earth was without form and void, and darkness was upon the face of
the deep. p. 10

Et spiritus Dei incubabat superficiei aquarum.

And the spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters. p. 13

Tum dixit Deus, esto lux; and fuit lux. 3.


And God said, Let there be light; and there was light. p. 14

Viditque Deus Lucem illam bonam esse. 4.


And God saw the light that it was good. p. 19

Et distinctionem fecit Deus inter hanc lucem and tenebras.

And God divided the light from the darkness. p. 25

Lucemque Deus vocavit diem, tenebras vero vocavit noctem. 5.


And God called the light, Day, and the darkness he called, Night. p. 32

Sic fuit vespera and suit mane diei primi.

And the evening and the morning were the first day. p. 660

Deinde dixit Deus, Esto expansum inter aquas; ut sit distinguens inter aquas
unas and alteras. 6.


And God said, Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters: and let it
divide the waters from the waters. p. 36

Fecit ergo Deus hoc expansum, quod distinguit inter has aquas, quae sunt ab
infera expansi istius, and aquas illas quae sunt a regione supera expansi: and
fuit ita. 7.


And God made the firmament, and divided the waters which were under the
firmament, from the waters which were above the firmament: and it was so. p. 44

Expansum autem hoc Deus vocavit Coelum. 8.


And God called the firmament, Heaven. p 52

Sic fuit vespera, and fuit mane diei secundi.

And the evening and the morning were the second day. p 664

Postea dixit Deus, Confluant aquoe istae quae sub hoc Coelo sunt in locum
unum, and conspicua sit arida: and fuit ita. Aridam autem vocavit Deus terram,
singula vero aquarum conceptacula vocavit maria: and vidit Deus id esse bonum.
9.10.


And God said, Let the waters under the Heaven be gathered together unto one
place, and let the dry land appear: and it was so. And God called the dry land,
Earth, and the gathering together of the waters called he, Seas: and God saw
that it was good p 56

Iterum dixit Deus, Her bascat terra herbulas, herbas sementantes semen,
arbores fructiferas edentes fructum in species suas, in quibus suum sit semen
super terram. 11.


And God said, Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed, and
the fruit-tree yielding fruit after his kind, whose seed is in it self, upon
the earth. p. 65

Et fuit ita. Nam produxit terra herbulas, herbas sementantes semen in species
suas, and arbores edentes fructum in quibus semen suum est in species suas: and
vidit Deus id esse bonum. Sic fuit vespera, and fuit mane diei tertii. 12.13.


And it was so. And the earth brought forth grass, and herb yielding seed
after his kind, and the tree yielding fruit, whose seed was in it self, after
his kind: and God saw that it was good. And the evening and the morning were
the third day. p. 666

Post dixit Deus, Sunto luminaria in expanso. Coeli, ad distinctionem faciendum
inter diem and noctem: ut sint in signa cumtempestatibus, tum diebus and annis.
Sintque in luminaria in expanso Coeli, ad afferendum lucem super terram: 14.15.


And God said, Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven, to divide
the day from the night: and let them be for signs, and for seasons, and for
days and years. And let them be for lights in the firmament of the heaven, to
give light upon the earth: p. 72

Et fuit ita. Fecit enim Deus duo illa luminaria magna: luminare majus ad
praefecturam diei, and luminare minus (...) noctis, atque stellas, Et
collocavit ea Deus in expanso Coeli, ad afferendum lucem super terram, Et ad
praesidendumdiei ac nocti, and ad distinctionem faciendum inter lucem hanc and
tenebras: viditque Deus id esse bonum. Sic fuit vespera, and fuit mane diei
quarti. 16.17.18.19.


And it was so. And God made two great lights: the greater light to rule the
day, and the lesser light to rule the night: he made the stars also. And God
set them in the firmament of the heaven, to give light upon the earth: And to
rule over the day, and over the night, and to divide the light from the
darkness: and God saw that it was good. And the evening and the morning were
the fourth day. p. 78

Postea Dixit Deus, Abunae progignunto aquae reptilia animantia; and volucres
volanto supra terram, supersiciem versus expansi coelorum. 20.


And God said, Let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving Creature that
has life, and Fowl that may flic above the earth in the open firmament of
Heaven. p. 667

Et creavit Deus coetos maximos: and animantia omnia repentia, quae abunde
progenuerunt aquae in species ipsorum, omnesque volucres alatas in species
suas: 21.


And God created great whales, and every living Creature that moves, which the
waters brought forth abundantly after their kind, and every winged fowl after
his kind: p. 84

Viditque Deus idesse bonum.

And God saw that it was good. p. 88

Et benedixit eis Deus, (...): Foetificate, ac augescite, et implete aquas per
maria, et volucres augescunto in terra. 22.


And God blessed them, saying, Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the waters
in the Seas, and let fowl multiply in the earth. p 89

Deinde dixit Deus, Producat terra animantia in species ipsorum, Pecudes et
(...); bestiasque terrenas in species suas: et fuit ita 24.


And God said, Let the earth bring forth the living creature after his kind,
cattle, and creeping thing, and beast of the earth after his kind: and it was
so. p. 669

Fecit enim Deus bestias terrenas in species suas, et pecudes in species suas,
omniaque reptilia terrae in specres (...): et vidit Deus id esse bonum. 25.


And God made the beast of the earth after his kind, and cattle after their
kind, and every thing that creeps upon the earth after his kind: and God
saw that it was good. p. 670

Postea dixit Deas, Faciamus hominem ad imaginem (...), secundum (...) nostram:
qui dominetur in pisces maris, et on volucres coels, et in pecades, et in (...)
terram, at que in omnia (...) repeantia super terram. 26.


And God said, Let us make man in our Image, after our likeness: and let them
have dominion over the fish of the Sea, and over the sowl of the air, and over
the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creeps
upon the earth. p. 93

Iraque creavit Deus hominem ad imaginem suam, ad imaginem, inquam, Dei creavit
eum: marem et foeminam creavit eos. 27.


So God created man in his own Image, in the Image of God created he him; male
and female created he them. p. 97

Deinde benedixit eis Deus, et dixit eis Deas, Foetificate, ac (...), et
implete terram, eamque (...); et (...) in pisces maris, es in volucres coeli,
et in omnes (...) super terram. 28.


And God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful and multiply, and
replenish the earth, and subdue it; and have dominion over the fish of the Sea,
and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moves upon the
earth. p. 100

(...) dixit (...), dedi vobis (...) semen quae sunt in superficie totius
(...); (...) in quibus est fructus arboreus, sementantes (...) ad comedendum
erunt. Omnibus (...) terrae, (...) volucribus coeli, omnibusque (...) super
(...), in quibus est animae vivens, dedi omnes (...) virides ad connedendam et
suit ita. Tum (...) Deus quit quid (...), ecce autem bonum erat valde: sic
(...), et suit mane diei sexit. 29.30.31.


And God said, behold, I have given you every herb beating seed, which is upon
the face of all the earth, and every tree in the which is the fruit of a tree
(...) to you it shall be for meat: And to every beast of the earth, and to
every fowl of the air, and to every thing that (...) upon the earth, wherein
there is life, I have given every green herb for meat: and it was (...). And
God saw every thing that he had made; and behold, it was very good. And the
evening and the morning were the sixth day. p. 105


Index Concionum in Caput secundum Geneseos.
The Contents of the Sermons preached upon the second chapter of Genesis.
ITaque perfecti sunt coeliet terra, omnisque exercitus illorum. Genesis 2. 1.


Thus the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the host of them p. 115

Quum autem perfecisset Deus die septimo opus suum quod fecerat, quie vit ipso
die septimo ab omni opere suo quod fecerat. verse. 2.


And on the seventh day God ended his work which he had made; and he rested on
the seventh day from all his work which he had made. p. 122

Et benedixit Deus diei septimo, et sanctifica vit ipsum: quum in eo quie
visset ab omni opere suo, quod crea venat Deus, faciendo. 3.


And God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it, because that in it he had
rested from all his work which God created and made. p. 128

Istae sunt generationes coeliet terrae, quando creata sunt (...) ate Jehova
Deus fecit terram et coelum: Et omnem stirpem agri, qui nondum fuisset futurus
in terra, omnemque herbam agri, quae nondum fuisset oritura (...) quum non
demisisset Jehova Deus pluviam super terram, et nullus homo futsset ad colendum
terram. 4.5.


These are the generations of the heavens and of the earth, when they were
created: in the day that the Lord God made the earth and the heavens, And every
plant of the field, before it was in the earth, and every he (...) of the
field, before it grew: For the Lord God had not (...) it to rain upon the
earth, and there was not a man to till the ground. p. 142

Aut vapor ascendens e terra, quiirrigaret (...) superficiem (...). Finxit vero
Jehova Deus bominem de pull vere terrae, sufflavitque in nares ipsius (...) sic
factus est homo anima vivens. 6.7.


But there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole face of the
ground. And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed
into his nostrils the breath of life: and man became a living soul. p. 147

Ornaverat autem plantis Jehova Deus hortum in Hedene ab Orient: ubi
collocavit hominem illum quem finxerat. 8.


And the Lord God planted a garden eastward in Eden: and there he put the man
whom he had formed. p. 155

Feceratque Jehova Deus ut germinaret (...) quaevis arbor desiderabilis ad
adspectum, et bona ad cibum: arbor quoque vit ae in hortoillo, it arbor
scientiae boni et mali. 9.


And out of the ground made the Lord God to grow every tree that is pleasant to
the fight, and good for food: the tree of life also in the midst of the garden,
and the tree of knowledge of good and evil. p. 162

Fluvius autem procedit ex Hedene ad irrigandum hunc bortum: and inde sese
dividit, ferturque in quatuor capita. Primi nomen est Pischon: hic est qui
alluir rostam Regionem Chavilae, ubi est aurum. Et aurum illius (...): ibidem
est Bdellium, and lapis Sardonyx. 10.11.12.


And a river went out of Eden to water the garden, and from thence it was
parted, and became into four heads. The name of the first is Pison, that is it
which compasses the whole land of Havilah, where there is Gold. And the Gold
of that land is good: there is Bdellium, and the Onyx stone. p. 167

Nomen vero (...) secundi est Gichon: hic est qui alluit (...) Regionem Cuschi.
Et nomen tertu (...): hic est qui labitur ad Orientem Assyriam versus: (...)
autem quartus est Euphrates. 13.14.


And the name of the second river is Gihon: the same is it that compasses the
whole land of Ethiopia. And the name of the third river is Hiddekel: that is it
which goes toward the east of Assyria: and the (...) river is Euphrates. p. 172

Accipiens itaque Jehova Deus homimem; collocavit ipsum in horto Hedenis, ad
colendum (...) et ad (...) cum. 15.


And the Lord God took the man, and put him into the garden of Eden, to dress
it, and to keep it. p. 177

Interdixitque Jehovah Deus homini, dicendo, De fructu quidem omnis arboris
hujus horti libere comedes. 16.


And the Lord God commanded the man, saying, Of every tree of the garden thou
may est freely eat. p 182

De fructu ver o arboris scigntiae boni et mali, de isto ne comedas. 17.


But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat of it.
p. 187

Nam quo die comederis de eo, utique moriturus es.

For in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely dye. p. 192

Dixerat autem Jehovah Deus, non est bonum esse hominem solum: faciam ei
auxilium commodum ipsi. 18.


And the Lord God said, It is not good that the man should be alone: I will
make him an help meet for him. p. 197

Nam quism formavisset Jehova Deus e terra omnes bestias agri, omnesque
volucres coeli, et adduxisset ad Adamum ut (...) qui vocaret singulas (etenim
quocunque nomine vocavit illas Adam, animantem quamque; id nomen ejus est.) 19.


And out of the ground the Lord God formed every beast of the field, and every
fowl of the air, and brought them unto Adam, to see what he would call them:
and whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that was the name thereof. p.
204

Vocavissetque Adam nomininibus pecudem quamlibet, et volucrem Coeli, omnemque
bestiam agri: non aderat Adamo auxilium commodum. 20.


And Adam gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl of the air, and to every
beast of the field: but for Adam there was not found an help meet for him. p.
211

Quapropter injecit Jehova Deus soporem altum in Adamum quo obdormivit: et
desunepta una de costis ejus, inclusit carnem pro illa. 21.


And the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he slept: and he
took one of his ribbs, and closed up the flesh in stead thereof. p. 216

Extruxitque Jehovah Deus ex costa illa, quam sumpserat de Adamo, mulierem:
camque adduxit ad Adamum. 22.


And the rib which the Lord God had taken from man, made he a woman, and
brought her unto the man p. 219

Tum dixit Adam, Hac demum vice adest os ex ossibus meis, and caro ex carnemea:
haec vocabitur vira, eo quod haec ex viro desumpta est. 23.


And Adam said, This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh: she shall
be called woman, because she was taken out of man. p. 222

Idcirco relicturus est vir patrem suum and matrem suam: and adhaerebit uxori
suae, eruntque in carnem unam. 24.


Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto
his wife: and they shall be one flesh. p. 225

De septem versiculis, a versu 18 usque ad finem 24. qui de Matrimonio, Viro
and Foemina agunt. 18.19.20.21.22.23.24.


Of the seven verses, from the eighteenth verse to the end of the twenty
fourth, concerning Matrimony. p. 228

Erant autem illi ambo nudi, Adam and uxor eius: ac non erubescebant 25.


And they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed. p. 237


Index Concionum in Caput tertium Geneseos.
The contents of the Sermons preached upon the third chapter of Genesis.
SErpens autem erat astutus, astutior quavis bestia agri, quam fecerat Jehova
Deus: Genesis 3. 1.


Now the Serpent was more subtle than any beast of the field which the Lord
God had made: p. 249. 252

Ille dixit mulieri, Etiamne edixisse Deum, ne comedatis ex omni (...) arborum
hujus (...)

And he said unto the woman, Yea, has God said, Ye shall not eat of every tree
of the Garden? p. 254

Tum dixit mulier Serpenti illi, andC. verse. 2.


And the woman said unto the Serpent, etc. p. 257

De fructu quidem arborum hujus horti comedemus: At de fructu arboris istius
quae est in horto hoc dixit Deus, Ne comedatis ex isto, neque attingatis eum:
ne moriamini. 2.3.


We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the Garden: But of the fruit of the
tree which is in the midst of the Garden, God has said, Ye shall not at of it,
neither shall ye touch it lest ye dye. p. 260

Dixit vero Serpens ille mulieri, Non utique moriemini: Novit enim Deus, quo
die comederitis ex eo, aperturos se oculos vestros: and vos fore sicut Deos,
scientes boni and mali. 4.5.


And the Serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not surely dye: For God does
know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened. and ye
shall be as Gods knowing good and evil. p. 263

Quum ergo videretur muliert bonum esse fructum arboris illius in cibum, and
gratissimam esse illam oculis, ac desiderabilem esse arboris fructum ad
habendum intelligentiam, accepit de fructu ejus and comedit. 6.


And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was
pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of
the fruit thereof, and did eat. p. 266. and 272

Etiamque dedit comedendum viro suo secum, qui comedit.

And gave also to her husband with her, and he did eat. p. 281

Tunc aperuerunt sese oculi amborum, noveruntque se nudos esse: and consutis
foliis ficulneis fecerunt sibi subligacula. 7.


And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they were naked: and
they sewed fig leaves together, and made themselves aprons. p. 289

Deinde dudiverunt vocem fehovae Dei itantem per hortum ipsum ad ventum illius
diei: quare abscondit se Adam and uxor ejus a facie fehovae Dei, inter orbores
illius horti. 8.


And they heard the voice of the Lord God, walking in the garden in the cool of
the day: and Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the Lord
God, amongst the trees of the garden. p. 292

Inclamavit autem Jehova Deus Adamum, and dixit et, (...)? 9.


And the Lord God called unto Adam, and said unto him, Where art thou? p. 296

Qui dixit, Vocem tuam audiebam in hoc horto: extimui autem, eo quo nudus sim,
and abscondi me. 10.


And he said, I heard thy voice in the garden: and I was afraid, because I was
naked; and I hid my self p. 300

Dixit vero Deus, Quis indicavit tibi nudum esse te? An de fructu illius
arboris, de quo interdixeram tibi ne comedas ex eo, comederis? 11.


And he said, Who told thee that thou wast naked? Have thou eaten of the tree,
whereof I commanded thee, that thou should not eat? p. 303

Cui dixit Adam: Mulier ista quam posuisti mecum, ipsa dedit mihi de fructu
illius arboris, and comedi. 12.


And the man said: The woman whom thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the
tree, and I did eat. p. 306

Tum dixit Jehova Deus mulieri, Quid hoc est quod fecisti? Dixit autem mulier,
Serpens iste seduxit me, and comedi. 13.


And the Lord God said unto the woman, What is this that thou have done? And
the woman said, The Serpent beguiled me, and I did eat. p. 309

Quapropter dixit Jehova Deus Serpenti illi; Cum feceris istud, maledictus esto
prae omni jumento, and prae omni bestia agri. 14.


And the Lord God said unto the Serpent, Because thou have done this, cursed
art thou above all cattle, and above every beast of the field: p. 305

Super ventrem tuum ito, and pulverem comedito omnibus diebus vitae tuae.

Upon thy belly shall thou go, and dust shall thou eat all the days of thy
life. p. 672

Praeterea, inimicitiam pono inter te and mulierem hanc, similiter que inter
semen tuum and semen hujus. 15.


And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her
seed. p. 678

Hoc conteret tibi caput, tu autem conteres huic calcaneum.

It shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel. p. 686

Mulieri dixit, Admo dum multiplico dolorem tuum, etiam (...), in dolor paries
liberos: quin erga virum tuum appatitus tuus esto, and ipse praeesto (...) 16.


Unto the woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow, and thy
conception. In sorrow thou shall bring forth children: and thy desire shall be
to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee. p. 313

Adamo vero dixit, Quia (...) voci uxoris tuae; and comodtsti de (...) arboris
illius quo interdixeram tibi, dicendo, Ne comedas ex isto: maledicta esto terra
propter te; camdolore comedito proventum (...) omnibus diebus vitaetuae: Eaque
spinam and carduum proferto tibi, tu vero (...) herbam agri. 17.18.


And unto Adam he said, Because thou have he arkened unto the voice of thy
wife, and have eaten of the tree, of which I commanded thee, saying, Thou shall
not eat of it; cursed is the ground for thy sake, in sorrow shall thou eat of
it all the days of thy life. Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to
thee: and thou shall eat the herb of the field. p (...)

In sudore vultus tui vescitor cibo, donec revertaris in humun, cumex ea
desumptus fueris: nam (...) es, et in pulverem reverteris. 19.


In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread till thou return unto the
ground: for out of it wast thou taken; for dust thou art, and unto dust shall
thou return. p. 321

Vocavit autem Adam nomen uxoris suae Chavvam: eo quod ipsa matter sit omnium
hominum viventium. 20.


And Adam called his wifes name Eve, because she was the mother of all living.
p. 327

Fecitque Jehova Deus Adamo et uxori ejus tunicas pelliceas, quibus vestivit
eos. 21.


Unto Adam also, and to his wife, did the Lord God make coats of skin, and
clothed them. p. 330

Et dixit Jehova Deus, Ecce, homo estne sicut unus ex nobis, cognoscendo bonum
et malum? nunc igitur videndum ne extendens manum suam accipiat etiam de fructu
arboris vitae, ut camedat victurus in seculum. 22.


And the Lord God said, Behold the man (...) become as one of us, to know good
and evil. And now left be put forth his hand, and take also of the (...) of
life, and live for ever. p. (...)

Emisit itaque eum Jehova Deus ex horta Hedenis, ad colmdum terram illam ex qua
desumptus fuerat. 23.


Therefore the Lord God sent him forth from the garden of Eden, to till the
ground from whence he was taken. p. 329

Quumque expulisses hominem; instituit a part anteriore horti Hedenis
Cherubos, ftammam quae gladii (...) ad custodiendum viam quae ferebat ad
arborom vitae. 24.


So he drove out the man: and he placed at the east of the garden of Eden,
Cherubims and a flaming sword, which turned every way to keep the way of the
tree of life.


Index Concionum in Caput quartum Geneseos.
The Contents of the Sermons preached upon the fourth chapter of Genesis.
DEinde Adam cognovit Chavvam uxorem suam: quae ubi concepit et peperit
Kajinum, dixit, Acquisivi virum a Jehava. (...) pergens (...) fratrem ipsius,
Hebelum. Genesis 4. 1.2.


And Adam knew Eve his wife, and she conceived, and (...) Cain, and said, I
have gotten a man from the Lord. And she again bare his brother Abel. p. 363

Fuit que Hebel pastor gregis, et Kajin fuit agricola.

And Abell was a keeper of sheep, but Cain was a (...) of the ground. p. 369

Fuit autem post dies (...), quum obtulit. (...) de (...) terrae munus Jehovae.
Et ipse (...) Aebel (...) de primogenit is gregis sut, et de adipe eorum. verse.
3.4.


And in process of time it came to pass, that Cain brought of the fruit of the
ground an offering to the Lord. And Abel he also brought of the firstlings of
his flock, and of the (...) thereof: p. 374

Respexitque Jehova ad Hebelum et ad munus ejus. Ad Kajinum (...) et (...)
minus ejus non respexit: 4.5.


And the Lord had respect unto Abel, and to his offering: But unto Cain, and to
his offering, he had not respect: p. 381

Quapropter accensa est ira Kajini valde, et cecidit vultus ejus.

And Cain was very wrath, and his countenance fell. p. 388

Tum dixit jehova Kajino, Quare accensa est ir a tua? et quare cecidit vultus
tuus? Nonne si been egeris, remessio; sivero non been egeris, prae foribus est
peccatum excubans? 6.7.


And the Lord said unto Cain, Why art thou wrath? and why is thy countenance
fallen? If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? and if thou do not
well, sin lies at the door: p. 393

At ergate est appetitus illius, et tu praees illi.

And unto thee shall be his desire, and thou shall rule over him. p. 398

Post colloquebatur Kajin cum Hebelo fratre suo: evenit autem quum essent in
agro, ut in surgens Kajin in Hebelum fratrem suum interficeret eum. 8.


And Cain talked with Abel his brother: and it came to pass when they were in
the field, that Cain rose up against Abel his brother, and slew him. p. 407

Quamobrem dixit Jehova Kajino, Vbi est Hebel frater tuus? qui dixit, Non novi:
An custos ego sum fratris mei? 9.


And the Lord said unto Cain, Where is Abel thy brother? And he said, I know
not: am I my brothers keeper? p. 415

Dixit vero Deus, quid fecisti? eoce vocem sanguinum fratris tui, me ab (...)
humo inclamantium. 10.


And he said, What have thou done? the voice of thy brothers blood cries unto
me from the ground. p. 422

Nunc it aque tu maledictus esto: exsul ab ista terra, quae aperuit os suum ad
excipiendum sanguinem fratris tui e manu tua. Quum humum ipsam colueris, ne
pergito edere vim suam tibi: vagus et infestus agitationibus esto in terra.
11.12.


And now art thou cursed from the earth, which has opened her mouth to receive
thy brothers blood from thy hand. When thou tillest the ground, it shall not
henceforth yield unto thee her strength: a fugitive and a vagabond shall thou
be in the earth. p. 428

Tum Kajin dixit Jehovae, Major est poena mea quam ut sustinere possim. 13.


And Cain said unto the Lord, My punishment is greater than I can bear p 435

En expellis me hodie a superficie istius terrae, ut a facis tua abscondam me:
cumque vagus sim et infestus agitationibus interra, si (...) fuerit qui me
invensat, interficiet me. 14.


Behold, thou have driven me out this day from the face of the earth; and from
thy face shall I be hid, and I shall be a fugitive and a vagabond in the earth:
and it shall come to pass, that every one that finds me, shall slay me. p.
443

Dixit vero Jehova illi, Propterea quisquis interfecerit Kujinum, septuplo
vindicator: and imposuit Jehova Kajino signum, ne cum caederet ullus qui foret
inventurus cum. 15.


And the Lord said unto him, Therefore whosoever slays Cain, vengeance shall
be taken on him seven fold. And the Lord set a mark upon Cain, lest any finding
him should kill him. p. 450

Egressus itaque est Kajin a facie Jehovae: and consedit in terra Nodi, ad
Orientem Hedenem versus: 16.


And Cain went out from the prefence of the Lord, and dwelt in the land of Nod,
on the East of Eden. p. 456

Et cognavit Kajin uxarem suam, quae concepit and peperit Chanocum: quamobrem
studebat aedificare cavitatem, and vocavit nomen civitatis illius de nomine
filii sui Chanoc. 17.


And Cain knew his wife, and she conceived and bare Enoch and he builded a
City, and called the name of the City, after the name of his son, Enoch. p.
462

Deinde Chanco natus est Hirad, and Hirad (...); Mechuajel vero Methuschaelem,
and Methuschael (...). Assumpsit autem sibi Lemec (...) duas: 18.19.


And unto Enoch was born Irad; and Irad begat Mehujael, and Mehujael (...)
Mathusael, and Mathusael begat Lamech. And Lamech took unto him two wives. p.
468

Assumpsit autem sibi Lemec uxores duas: prior is nomen suit. Hada, and nomen
secundae Tkilla. Peperitque Hada Jabalum: (...) aut or habit antium in tentori
is and pecuariae. Nomenque fratris ejus fuit Jubal: hic fuit author omnium
tractantium citharam and organon. Tzilla vero ipsa quoque peperit
Thubal-Kajinum, qui erudivit omnem fabrum aerarium and ferrarium: sororemque
Thubal-Kajini, Nahamam. 19.20.21.22.


And Lamech took unto him two wives: the name of the one was Adah, and the name
of the other Zillah. And Adah bare Jabal: he was the father of such as dwell in
tents, and of such as have cattle. And his brothers name was Jubal: he was the
father of all such as handle the harp and organ. And Zillah she also bare
Tubal-Cain, an instructor of every artificer in brass and iron: and the sister
of Tubal-Cain was Naamah p. 474

Tum dixit Lemec suis uxoribus, O Hada and Tzilla audite vocem meam, uxores
Lemect auribus percipite sermonem meum: nam virum interfecero ad vuinus meum,
etiam adole scentem ad tumioem meum. Cum septuplo sit vindicandus Kajin, utique
Lemec septuagtes septies tanto. 23.24.


And Lamech said unto his wives, Adah and Zilla, Hear my voice ye wives of
Lamech, hearken to my speech. for I have slain a man to my wounding, and a
young man to my hurt. If Cain be avenged seven fold, truly Lamech seventy and
seven fold. p. 480

Cognovit autem denuo Adam uxorem suam, quae peperit filtum, and voca vit nomen
ejus Schethum: nam reposuit mihi Deus, inquit, semen alterum pro Hebelo, quem
ipsum intersecit (...). 25.


And Adam knew Eve his wife again, and she bare a son, and called his name
Seth: for God, said she, has appointed me another seed in stead of Abel, whom
Cain slew. p. 486

Sed and ipsi Schetho genitus est filius, cujus nomen vocavit (...): tunc (...)
est in (...) nomen Jehovae. 26.


And to Seth, to him also there was born a son, and he called his name Enos:
then began men to call upon the Name of the Lord. p. 492


Index Concionum diversarum, ex veteri and novo Testamento.
The Contents of the Sermons, preached upon several choice Texts, both out of
the Old and New Testament.
SED advolavit ad me unus ex istis Seraphim habens in manu sua prunam quam
forcipibus sumpserat ab altari. Admovitque ori meo dicens, Ecce, attingit hoc
labia tua: jam amovetur iniquitas tua, and peccatum tuum expiatur. Isai. 6. 6.7.


Then flew one of the Seraphims unto me, having a live coal in his hand, which
he had taken with the tongs from off the altar. And he laid it upon my mouth,
and said, Lo, this bath touched thy lips, and thine iniquity is taken away, and
thy sin purged. p. 515

Atendite ne justitiam vestram exerceatis coram hominibus, ut fpectemini ab
eis: aliquin mercedem non habebitis apud Patrem vestrum qui est in coelis.
Matt. 6. 1.


Take heed that ye do not your alms before men, to be seen of them: otherwise
ye have no reward of your Father which is in heaven. p. 522

Operemini non cibo qui perit, sed cibo illi qui permanet in vitam aeternam,
quem Filius hominis dabit vobis: hunc enim Pater obsignavit, id est, Deus. Joh.
6. 27.


Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for that meat which endures unto
everlasting life, which the Son of man shall give unto you: for him (...) God
the Father sealed. p. (...)

Dixit igitur cis, Videte, and cavete ab avaritia: nec enim cujusquam vita ex
iis quae ipsi suppetunt, in eo sita est ut redundet. Luc. 12. 15.


And he said unto them, Take heed and beware of Covetousness: for a man's life
consists not in the abundance of the things which he possesses. p. 538

Nam cui baec non adsunt, is (...) est, nihil procul cernens, oblitus sese a
veteribus peccatis suis fuisse purificatum 2 Pet. 1. 9.


But he that lacks these things is blind and cannot see far off, and has
forgotten that he was purged from his old sins. p. 544

Abrahamus pater ille vester gestivit videre diem istum meum, and vidit, and
gavisus est. Joh. 8. 56.


Your Father Abraham rejoiced to see my day: and he saw it, and was glad. p. 550

Principes populorum congregantur, populus Dei Abrahamt; quid Dei sunt
protectiones terrae, valde excelsus est. Psalm. 47. 10.


The Princes of the people are gathered together, even the people of the God of
Abraham for the sheilds of the earth belong unto God: he is greatly exalted. p.
555

Et inutilem servum ejicite in tenebras illas extimas: illic erit fletus and
stridor dentium. Matt. 25. 30.


And cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness, there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth. p. 561

Pro puero isto supplicabam, praestititque mihi Jehova petitionem meam, quam
petebam ab eo. Quamobrem ego quoque precario datum sisto eum Jehovae omnibus
diebus quibus fuerit, (...) rogatus precario est Jehovae. Incurvavitque se
Schemuel ibi Jehovae honorem exhibens. 1 Samuel 1. 27,28.


For this child I prayed, and the Lord has given me my petition which I asked
of him. Therefore also I have lent him unto the Lord as long as he lives, he
shall be lent unto the Lord. And he worshipped the Lord there. p. 565

Victori dabo edere ex arbore illa vitae quae est in medio Paradisi Dei. Apoc.
2. 7.


To him that overcomes, will I give to eat of the tree of life which is in the
midst of the Paradise of God. p. 572

Cupimus autem ut unusquisque vestrum idem studium ad (...) usque ostendat, ad
certam spei persuasionem. Heb. 6. 11.


And we desire that every one of you do show the same diligence, to the full
assurance of hope unto the end. p. 578

Et factum est praelium in Coelo: Michael and angeli ejus praeliati sunt cum
Dracone, and Draco pugnabat and Angeli ejus: Sed hi non praevaluerunt, neque
locus eorum (...) inventus est in Coelo. Apoc. 12. 7,8.


And there was war in heaven, Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon,
and the Dragon fought and his Angels, And prevailed not, neither was their
place found any more in heaven. p. 586

Quicquid dat mihi Pater, ad me veniet: and eum qui venit ad me, nequaquam
ejecerim for as. Joh. 6. 37.


All that the Father gives me shall come to me: and him that comes to me, I
will in no wise cast out. p. 594

Qui vero haec audierunt compuncti sunt cord, and dixerunt ad Petrum ac
reliquos Apostolos, Quid faciemus viri fratres? Petrus autem ait ad eos,
Resipiscite. Act. 2. 37.


Now when they heard this, they were pricked in their heart, and said unto
Peter, and to the rest of the Apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do?
Then Peter said unto them, Repent. p. 601

Tum alter ad alterum dixerunt, Nonne cor nostrum ardebat in nobis, dum
loqueretur nobis in via, and dum adaperiret nobis Scripturas. Luc. 24. 32.


And they said one to another, Did not our heart burn within us, while he
talked with us by the way, and while he opened to us the Scriptures. p. 607

Etenim per unum Spiritum nos omnes in unum corpus baptizati sumus, and Judaei,
and Graeci, and servi, and liberi: and omnes potati sumus in unum Spiritum. 1
Cor. 12. 13.


For by one Spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or
Gentiles, whether we be bond or free: and have been all made to drink into one
Spirit. p. 614

Ex eo quod maxima illa nobis ac pretiosa promissa donavit, ut per haec
esficeremini divinae consortes naturae, elapsi ex corruptione quae est in mundo
per cupiditatem. 2 Pet. 1. 4.


Whereby are given to us exceeding great and precious promises, that by these
you might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the corruption that
is in the world through lust. p. 620

Ad hoc ipsum vero vos, omni praeterea collato studio, adjicite fidei vestrae
virtutem. 2 Pet. 1. 5.


And besides this, giving all diligence, add to your faith virtue. p. 624

Adjicite fidei vestrae virtutem; virtuti vero notitiam.

Add to your faith, virtue; and to virtue, knowledge. p. 628

(...) vero continentiam, contincntiae vero tolerantiam. 2 Pet. 1. 6.


And to knowledge, temperance; and to temperance, patience. p. 631

Tolerantiae pietatem, pietati vero fraternum amorem, fraterno vero amori
charitatem. 2 Pet. 1. 7.


And to patience, godliness; and to godliness, brotherly kindness; and to
brotherly kindness, charity. p. 635

(...) vos, O viatores omnes? intuemini and videte an sit dolor par dolori meo,
qui factus est (...): quam afficit Jehova moerore die aestus irae suae. Lam. 1.
12.


Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by? behold and see, if there be any
sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me, where with the Lord has
afflicted me, in the day of his fierce anger. p. 639

Nam eratis velut oves errantes: Sed (...) con vertistis (...) ad Pastorem and
Curatorem animarum vestrarum. 1 Pet. 2. 25.


For ye were as sheep going astray, but are now returned unto the Shepherd
and Bishop of your souls. p. 644

Paulisper, and non conspicietis me, and rursum paulisper, and videbit is me,
quia ego vado ad Patrem. John 16 16


A little while, and ye shall not see me: and again a little while, and ye
shall see me; because I go to the Father. p. 648

Adeo provocantes Deum ad indignationem fact is suis, ut irrumperet in eos
plaga; donec consistente Pinchaso and judicium exercente, coercita esset plaga
illa. Psalm. 106. 29,30.


Thus they provoked him to anger with their inventions: and the plague brake in
upon them. Then stood up Phinehas, and executed judgment: and so the Plague was
stayed. p. 652


LECTURES PREACHED UPON the first Chapter OF GENESIS.
LECTURES, Preached at Saint PAUL'S LONDON.
In Principio Deus creavit Coelum and Terram, etc. Genesis 1. 1.

WE have heard of the undoubted credit and unquestionable Authority of Moses
the writer: Now touching his handwriting, he has left five Books, as five
fingers of his hand, to point at the knowledge of God and heavenly things, that
so he might show them unto us.

In all which Books, we may observe two principal parts of his intent and
purpose: The one was to deliver to Gods Church the Law and Word of God: The
other is to write the History of Gods Works.

First he sets down the Creation of the Would, and all flesh; that after he
might show the Law which was given to all flesh in the World.

This History of the worlds Creation aptly divides it self into two parts;
The first concerns the old World (2 Pet. 2.5.) which was in Paradise. The
other, that World which has been since, and shall be to the end thereof.

Touching the old World, he considers it in its perfection, integrity, and
happiness, in these first two Chapters; and in its defection, decay, and
misery, in the third Chapter: For the perfection of it, we are led to consider
the Creation of the World, in the beginning of this Chapter, and the Creation
or making of Man, and investing him in Paradise, to be the Lord and Governor
of all the World and the things therein.

The sum of these verses, is the narration of the manner of the rearing up of
the frame of all things we see in heaven and earth; which is a matter of so
high, huge, and infinite consideration, that we should quickly confound and
lose our selves in it, if God had not given us this thread of direction in our
hands, to bring us out of this intricate maze, which else would astonish us.

This Creation is divided into six days works, in which is showed the six
joints, as it were, of the frame of the whole World: In which six days the
proceeding of God in this work, consists in these three points. First, the
creating of all Creatures, of and after an indigest, rude and imperfect matter,
and manner: For, the first day was made a rude mass or heap, which after was
the Earth. Secondly, a bottomless huge gulf, which was the Waters. Thirdly,
over both was a foggie obscure mist of darkness which was the Firmament.

After that, in the second place, is set down the distinction, which is in
three sorts. First, Of Light from darkness. Secondly, Of the nether Waters
from the upper Waters, (viz.) of the Seas and Clouds. Thirdly, Of the Waters
from the Earth.

After the distinction and dividing of this, ensues in the third place, Gods
work in beautifying and adorning them after this order which we now see.

First, the Heaven with Stars. Secondly, the Air with Fowls. Thirdly, the
Earth with Beasts, Herbs and Plants of all sorts. Fourthly, the Sea and Waters
with Fishes.

And having thus finished this great frame of all the World, and beautified the
same as we see; Then he framed and made Man, the little world, after his
Image, and placed him therein, as his Palace to enjoy and possess.

Touching the first part of the Creation, it is set down in the first verse;
in which are four works of great weight and importance.

1.
The first, In principio; Second, Deus; Third, creavit; Fourth, Coelum and
Terram: For these two, being coupled, do fall under in one part of the
division. In which are offered unto us four principal matters of great regard.

1.
First, That this World and the things we see, were not so ever, but had a
beginning at a certain time.

2.
Secondly, At the beginning, these things had not their being of themselves,
but of another.

3.
Thirdly, That the Creation and working of them was only of God, and of that
God which is in unity of essence and trinity of persons.

4.
Fourthly, That Heaven and Earth are God's, and that they were made and
preserved by him.

Touching the first ( in principio) has admitted a three fold sense, according
to the diverse conceits of diverse men; all which have been received, and may
be, without error or danger: First, Origin and Ambrose do take and interpret
it as the Cause, which was the beginning of all, and that is Gods Wisdom;
which (as the Cause) began all. And they may seem to be led to understand it
thus, by these two places, the one in the 4 Prove. 7. Wisdom is the beginning,
etc. the other 104 Psalm. 24. In Wisdom have thou made them all; Therefore
they thought, that in the beginning is meant, In Wisdom God created, etc.

Secondly, it is taken for the order of time, as who should say; First of all,
and before any thing else was done, God made Heaven and Earth, in the very
first beginning of time; that is, in a moment, or as it were in the twinkling
of an eye 1; Cor. 15. 52. So had all things their beginning and motion, in the
beginning of time; as they shall leave and lose it at the end and last period
of time, which is the Worlds end: It is no danger of error thus to understand (
In principio.

Thirdly, It is said (11 Heb. 3.) that it is a Mystery and matter of Faith, to
believe this, of the Creation, in the beginning, and so it is; yet God has not
made our reason so repugnant from Faith, even in natural men; but that even by
the sense and sight of things, man's reason cannot deny, but must needs gather
and confess this to be true, That all things were made, and had a beginning;
And this all Heathenith Philosphers (as may appear by all books of the
Gentiles, in all ages, since the study of learning, and learned men has been)
do plainly show, that they had in remembrance themselves, and did commend to
others by their writings, the knowledge and acknowledgment of this universal
Creation.

This he proves by those Philosophers which were as ancient as the Prophet
Esdras, until late times, and that they had a remembrance of Noah, naming him
Janus, and painting him with two faces, one looking into the old world before
the Flood, and the other beholding the world after: Besides such writers, of
natural men, very reason does consent hereunto, That the world was made by
some wonderful Power, and so had a beginning; for Reason is ever naturally led
to look and consider the beginning and cause of any thing it sees; as when it
sees a great Tree, though it see not the root, yet it conceives, for
certain, that it has a root which conveyeth sapp to the Tree, by which it
grows and increases: So when it sees a great River, it by and by
concludes, there is a great Fountain and head where it has his original and
beginning. Again, Reason cannot abide infinite Causes, as 1 Cor. 11. 3. to say,
the woman came of man, the man of Christ, and Christ of God; Because diverse
Causes have diverse times and motions; but Reason will bring things to their
particular head and chief causes, which by one motion and at one time did it.

Also in that we say things are done successively, by order of times nearer and
farther off, it argues necessarily a beginning, and therefore faith David Psalm.
119 91. All things continue alike, from the beginning, through thy Ordinance.
All things since in the world have been yb Gods appointment and Decree. Psalm.
65.9. Paul tells this to the wise and learned of Athens, as a thing which
they knew and taught in their Schools to be true 17 Acts 24. And Plato faith
it was a saying of great antiquity and credit in his time, and long before;
That God made all things, and man, at a certain time, which was their beginning.

Plutarch shows that some deemed the world to be conceived and brought
forth, and to grow to perfection as a man; and others, that it was the stamp
which God set on it, and so all learned men in all ages, and all men endowed
with natural sense and right reason have been resolved in this, That the world
was the workmanship of God, and had his beginning.

The party adverse to this truth, was the first of the sect of the
Peripateticks, which (contrary to his master Plato, and all that were hefore
him, and contrary to his Scholar Theophrastus, and the most that followed him
after) held that Mundus erat aeternus, and so had no beginning nor maker at
all; yet (notwithstanding this new conceit and opinion) he confesses this
twice or thrice, that he gives credit to those ancient men which were before
him, which by long grounded experience, and by evident demonstration, and
credible testimonies held and taught otherwise then he thought, and in his
book de Coelo, he says that there was a Chaos, a darkness and light which
had a beginning, therefore as he seems to differ, and leave his ancients, of
singularity only, on a conceit and devise of his own, so his Scholars and
followers after him, forsook him in that opinion, and therefore this point
stands undoubted; as ratified both by evidence of reason, and by the
judgment of the learned in all ages. The second Point is the Creation, in
which we are to note first, that the things which we see were not of
themselves, when they had their being and beginning, because they are an effect
and work of some efficient cause; for it is very absurd in reason, that one
and the same thing should be both a Cause and an Effect of it self, for so it
must be granted that a thing both was and was not at one time; for as it is
the Cause, it must needs be before it was, and as it is an Effect, it could
not be at the first; so it should be and yet not be at one time: Therefore
David teaches us to say, It is he that made us, and not we our selves, we
are the Sheep of his pasture, for preservation, and the works of his hands,
for Creation; so that Job faith, we must resolve That it was another that made
all things, and that one is God.

These two points, that not the World, but another, made the World and all in
it, does overthrow two errors of the Philosophers, Opinio Stoicorum,
the one was of the Stoics, which taught quod omnia fiunt fato, as if by the
revolution of things and times, at such an instant the world must needs be, by
fatal destiny and necessity, and might not be otherwise.

Epicuremum.
The other were the Epicures, which taught; The world was a thing made at a
venture, by casual chance, and happy hazard, by a divine essence; the one
taught that God could do no otherwise then but make it; the other thought that
God did he could not tell what.

But Psalm. 115. 3. Deus fecit quecunque voluit in Coelo and Terra. And Revel.
4. 11. All things were made for him and by his will. And Esai 45. 18. God made
not Heaven and Earth in vain, to no end, but the word fignifieth that he made
it with Wisdom and Counsel. Esai 43. 13. God was before any day was, and he
asks, Who could constrain him by necessity to make it or not to make it. Heb.
3. 4. If a man, being in a strange Country, shall see a house, he will
certainly affirm that there has a man builded it, that it is a man's work; so
says he, when we see all Creatures, Heaven and Earth, we know that God made
them all.

A reason against that opinion of Fortune is this, That things done by Chance
are without cunning: But God with infinite wisdom devised all things; the Eye
to see, Colors to be seen, and the Light, as the means by which we see; also
all things are in such wonderful order, succeeding one another in their
course, as the seasons of things, which show them not to be by Chance,
therefore the Philosophers were glad when they found out that (...),
intelligentia, that was the cause of all; so that they confess all things to
be made by a wonderful wise Counsel, and discourse of an understanding
mind; So that it was made by another, not by Necessity nor Chance.

Creavit Coelum and Terram, and omnia in illis. Genesis 1. verse 1.

NOw are we come to the fourth and last point which we are to consider, in
this verse, and that is, That the things which were Created by God, are both
Heaven and Earth, which here is said to be his workmanship; Which though it be
here set down in two general things, yet are his works manifold, yea infinite
and cannot be numbered; All which Creatures and things Created, cannot be
better expressed then in these two, which contain all the rest, for he so
faith Exodus 20. 11. In six days he made Heaven and Earth, the Sea and all
that is therein; So does David expound his meaning, Psalm. 146.6. and Revel. 10.
6. therefore Job says, 38. 6, 7. That God made not only the Stars with the
Heavens, but also the Angels, or Children of God which are in them, and Psalm.
24. 1. God when he is said to make the round World, he means also, all that
dwell therein, that is, Man also; yea he is also the Lord and Creator of the
Souls and Spirits of all Flesh, as well as their bodies. Numb. 27. 16. So
that, to conclude with Saint Paul, by these two is understood and comprehended
all the Creatures, visible and invisible, which God made. Coll. 1. 16. For the
Heavens are the bound upward, and the Earth is the bound below, which conclude
all between them: Let us therefore first consider these two jointly; then in
the order wherein they stand, and in the last place severally. Touching the
first, David says, Psalm. 102. 25. Thou Lord in the beginning have laid the
foundations of the Earth, and the Heavens are the work of thy hands. Esaias 40.
12. It is God that made Heaven and Earth. Job 37. 17. 18. Job. 38. 5, 6. The
Heavens do show this, in that they resemble their Creator, because they are
moveable, and yet subject to alteration, and the Earth unmovable, and not
subject to motion.

2. Point.
Moses meaning is, That not the Earth alone was made by God, but also the
Heavens, that is, both of them, and all in both, were his work, not the Earth
only but also the Heavens; against the Philosophers, which think therefore that
the Heavens were not made, because none can assign the point where the Heavens
began, nor in what part God began to make them, nor where the Heavens first
began to move; by which reason they might hold that the heart of man was not
made, because none can tell how it began its motion to pant and beat, whether
by sustole or diastole, but as the heart was made, though unknown where the
first motion of it is, so were the Heavens.

That he made not the Heavens only, but also the Earth below, against the
errors of the Manichees, which hold that there were two causes of Heaven and
Earth; That the good and white God made the Heaven, and Man from the middle
upward; And the black and evil god was the efficient cause of the Earth, and
of Man from the middle downward; but as Gods power and wisdom is showed and
seen as well in an Ant as in an Elephant, as one says; as well in the creeping
Worms, and basest Creatures, as in the Angels and most excellent Creatures: So
does his Majesty and Might appear in the Earth as well as in Heaven.

3 Point.
Now in regard of the order here set down, we have a consideration first of
the Heavens; for if there were any Order observed in Gods Creation, surely the
Heavens were made in the first place, which shows the glory of the Creator;
for who ever, in building his house, would or could begin it at the Roof
first, and then afterward lay the Foundation of the Earth: but his omnipotency
is such, that he begins to make his house from the Roof downward, as we
see in the second and third verses; And this is strange, says Job 26. 7. That
he has made the Heavens turn round like a wheel without an axeltree, and
that he has caused the Earth to hang and stand without any prop to uphold it:
When we therefore consider the Heavens and Earth, the work of thy hands, we
must needs know that the corners of the Earth are upholden by his hand.

4 Point.
Let us consider them severally and apart, in which we must regard them after
three sorts; 1.
First in respect of God, as they are compared with him; 2.
Secondly, as they are compared to themselves; 3.
Thirdly, comparing them to us.

1.
Esaias 66. 1. Comparing them with God; Heaven was made to be his Seat, and
Earth to be his Footstool.

2.
In respect of themselves; Heaven was made as the male part of the World, by
whose influence, motion and dewes, the Earth, as the female part should, as it
were out of her womb, bring forth all living and necessary things. Hermes the
Egyptian, the Persian wife men, and Orpheus the Grecian, appoint these two as
the matter of all things that are.

3.
In regard of us our selves, Heaven and Earth are the means of our moving and
rest, for the motion of the Heavens is the beginning of our bodily motion, and
the unmovable Earth is the cause of rest: Wherefore says Job 38. 33. That the
Course and Order of Gods Creatures must make us orderly in all our doings. In
respect of God and us, God has made the Earth to be our (...), our work house
to do his will in; (...).
and he made heaven to be his (...), his Country, or pay house, where he will
reward our good works.

Thus we have seen Gods ordinance in these words, 1. That Heaven and Earth are
Gods handywork: 2. That the Heavens by order are first, and first of us to be
cared for: 3. The use of it which we must make, both in respect of God, of
themselves, and our selves. Now out of this doctrine we frame the first article
of our belief thus, God in the goodness of his fatherly love made Heaven, and
Earth, and all in them: And that he might have a Creature above all others, to
whom he might impart and bestow them, he made Man after his own likeness; so he
made all things, non suo commodo, Job. 35. 6, 7. for we can do him no good;
neither did he give them us, nostro merito, Esaias 40. 5, 6. For how could we
deserve any thing, when he gave all things to us before we were, and when we
were made we were but vanity; therefore it was his mere and gracious goodness
that brought forth Heaven and Earth for us at the beginning. Psalm. 115. 15. We
are the blessed of the Lord, which made Heaven and Earth: So in that Psalm is
distinguished the true God from all Idols; for they cannot move, nor speak,
nor do any thing; but God did all with his word. So St. Paul, by the same
reason, exhorts the Lycaonians to turn from Idols to the true God, Acts 14.
15. But most plainly Jeremiah 10. 11. teaches this use to be made of the
knowledge of Gods Creation. In Captivity, says he, you shall be tempted to
serve their Idols; but he tells them what answer they must make, which is
written in the Caldee tongue, all the rest of the book being in Hebrew, which
answer is this: Our God made Heaven and Earth, and all in them is; but your
Gods can do nothing, but their names shall vanish away, and not be heard upon
the Earth. By which we see, that this makes a plain difference between the
true God of Heaven, and Idols, their names shall perish before the earth; but
as our God was before the Earth was made, so the Earth and Heavens shall pass
away before him, which endures for ever. The Gentiles made their gods the
offspring of Heaven and Earth; but we know that Heaven and Earth are the
offspring of our God, which made all; and this is the difference to discern the
true God from the false; thus we have seen what we are to learn out of this,
for the grounding of our judgment and sound knowledge, and perfecting our
understanding in the Creation.

Usus.
Now it remains to show, out of this four points, what is to be learned for
the breeding and nourishing of good motions and affections in our hearts.

For the first, If there was a beginning of all things, then undoubtedly there
will be an end.

If there be a head, though the Image be never so great and tall, yet we shall
come to his feet at the last, Dan. 2. 41, 42, 43. as the world had its seed
time, that is, its beginning, and its Winter time, when it was overwhelmed with
water, and its hot Summer, when God rained in it fire, so shall it have its
harvest time at the last, faith Christ: Math. 13.30. when the good shall be
carried into Gods barn, and the evil into Hell fire: therefore some have well
observed, that the Hebrew words which signify heaven and earth, have the first
letter of them Alcph, and the last letter of them Tau, to show that they shall
have an end, as they had a beginning, both in heaven and earth, so faith St.
Paul, 1 Cor. 10.11. and Dan. 12.12. but as in the beginning the morning had his
evening, and the evening his morning: so shall it not be at the end; for then
says Saint Jude, in his Epistle, there shall be to the godly a morning of
eternal life, without any dark or dim evening any more, verse. 21. and to the
wicked an evening of utter darkness, without any morning or lightness, verse. 6.
that is, as the Angel swear Rev. 10.6. that as God made the beginning of time,
so there should be no more time, nor course, nor order of days, but eternity
of all; Wherefore says St. Peter, what manner of men ought we to be in all
godlyness of life, seeing God made the world in love for us, and seeing there
will be an end of the world, and a judgment for us. The Apostle, Heb. 1. 11,
12. cites David's saying, that the Heavens shall wax old, and be folded up as a
garment, when the full number of Gods Elect are accomplished, for whom this
garment and covering of heaven was made, and who do bear up the pillars of the
earth; for if it were not for the Godly and Elect in the world, neither of them
could continue, Esaias 51.6. The earth also shall be wrapped up at the time: in a
word, this word ( Create) signifies to begin with wisdom and judgment, and
to end with justice and judgment; so, Elohim, the Creator, signifies a Judge;
and we in our name Creatures carry about us this sentence, that we are one day
to be judged.

2. Point.
The second point is, That the Creation was of nothing: then good motions and
affections, which that knowledge must breed, nourish, and bring forth in us, is
to make us learn to know and acknowledge our nihil, that each of us in
particular are nothing, though we in pride so advance our selves here on earth,
as though it seemed to us, that we were something; yea, that we were made of
some more excellent things than others; as if we were not as the Publican: but
says St. Paul, If any think themselves to be ought, or if we be any thing now,
let him know that this is so by God, not of himself, 2 Cor. 11.5. tametsi nibil
sumus, in illo tamen sumus, therefore if we be nothing, that shall condemn us;
if we be any thing, it is not that which can deserve to save us; for we are
that we are, by his grace, 1 Cor. 15.10. And if we can acknowledge this with
humility, then we shall know this also, to our comfort, that he which made us
of nothing, can, and will, bring us to be somethings in goodness, if we serve
him with humble minds, Esaias 38.3 And this is the use and fruit of that.

3. Point.
The third point is, That God is our Creator whose name, Elohim, is fetched and
derived from this Hebrew preposition el, and from the Greek preposition (...),
by both which God is called, which prepositions both do signify per and
propter; to teach us, that he is our per quem, and must be our propter quem, in
all our actions: therefore as it is he per quem sumus, so we must make here,
his glory and praise, the end of all our thoughts, words, actions, or devises,
whatsoever. Psalm. 96. 5. Elohim is said to make all, and therefore we must with
praise tell it out among the Heathen: So there we are taught to remember him in
our youth, as our Creator; to knit our selves and our wills to him, as our
Governor; and in trembling, to fear him as our Judge, for he comes to judge
the world in truth, Psalm. 96. 13. for if we shall amend our lives, we shall
rejoice and wish for his coming, as we rejoice and praise him for our making;
and this is the perfection of a Christian man, contremiscere, when we think how
wonderfully God has made us, and with joy and gladness say with David, Psalm.
119. 52. I remembered thy judgments of old, and received comfort: and as we
know that in him, and by him, we live, move, and have our being, Acts 17. 28.
so we must live, move and breath only for him, that is, so far forth as may
make for his glory, that at last we may with joy commend our souls to him, as
to a faithful Creator, 1 Pet. 4. verse. 19.

4 Point.
The fourth point was, the things made, namely, Heaven and Earth, which
comprehended all in them; that one being the upper bound above, and the other
below, between both which are all: The use is, that if we look upward we see
Heaven; if we cast our eyes down, the earth will be seen; for our eyes and
light are given to see both, which two, if we ask them, they will tell us, Job.
12. 7. If we will not ask them, yet they will preach and declare Gods glory,
Psalm. 19. 1. that not once a week, but night and day; not for an hour in the
night or day, but continually; though their preaching do not trouble our ears,
being dumb, yet they cry aloud; and though they speak not English, yet their
voice is intelligible to all Nations and Languages in the world: wherefore
seeing they still cry aloud, and tell us of the Creator, that he made all these
for us; it is required of us, that we be ready with our tribute and homage,
which is to yield due and continual praise and thanksgiving to God for them;
for heaven and Earth have a fellow feeling of the good and evil which either
we do, or God does for us, Esaias 39. 1. and they rejoice with us, when we do,
or have any good done to us. And so when we offend God in paying our duty, Jer.
2. 12. then it is enough to make heaven and earth stand still and be amazed and
astonished at it, because we forget God and our duty. Thus does our sin and
ungratefullness overthrow and prevent, and stain the whole course and order of
Nature, Jer. 12. 4. so there is a concurrent of them with us in honoring,
serving, and praising the Creator, both of them and us. Therefore it is our
duty and part, to give heedfull care to those preachers, which preach God
without the Church, always in silence; and so give our duty and tribute to
serve and praise God with them amongst his Saints here, that we may be
glorified with them in Heaven; that we may praise and magnify him with his
Creatures in earth, that we may be glorified with his Saints in Heaven, quod
faciat Deus per Christam.

Terra autem erat res informis and inanis, tenebraeque erant in superficie
abyssi. Genesis 1. 2. verse

THE former verse was delivered to us an abstract of the whole work of Gods
Creation: now lest we should think that when he mentioned Heaven and Earth
before, he should mean that all things in Heaven and Earth were made in the
very moment of the beginning, even as we see them now; therefore Moses (...)
haste to tell us, that though at the beginning and first moment God made
quecunque nunc sunt, yet he made them not qualia nunc sunt, but did that in six
distinctions of several times. It had been as easy to him, to have created
all things, even in the perfection and order they are, in a moment and instant,
and in that beautiful form, in which they present themselves now to our eyes:
But it pleased God, though in power he could doc it, yet in wisdom to proceed
after these three degrees mentioned before. First, to create the beginning,
both of all times and of all things, as the matter and beginning of all
superior bodies, and the beginning of all inferior bodies, of nothing. After
the work of creation, follows the work of distinction, from this 2. verse to
the 11. And lastly ensues the work of persection, with beauty to adorn all his
works, and to finish them, which is from the 11 verse to the 16.

It pleased God thus to proceed in this work; as well that he might show
himself to be the God of order; as also to discover to us the mystery of the
Trinity, in the three properties of the three persons, which appear in the
Creation; For all was made by his Power, which is the property of God the
Father; By his Wisdom, which is the property of God the Son, by which all
things were orderly disposed and distinguished; And by the riches of his
Goodness, which is the property of the holy Ghost, by which all things were
adorned and made perfect: these three properties are remembered in the Revel. 5.
12. and Acts 17. 28.

We live by his power; we, and all things, move in this order by his wisdom;
and we have this our being by his grace and goodness: by his power we are
taught to acknowledge him to be our beginning and original, ex quo sumus: by
his wisdom we acknowledge him to be the upholder, per quem sumus: by his
goodness we confess him to be the Chief, propter quod sumus. For, considering
his goodness, we, and all Creatures, must endeavor to do all that we can for
him, and his praise and honor. All which three are plainly and orderly set in
the 11. Romans 36.

God also took this orderly proceeding, partly that we entering into the
meditation of Gods works, might by this means have, as it were, a thread to
direct us orderly therein: for, by this means, we come to know this difference
between Creatum ordinatum, and ornatum esse, as the Hebrews say, by this means
we shall know, not only the beginning and being of all things, but also how
orderly and excellently all things were made in this Creation: And thus much of
the reasons of this course of Gods proceeding in this work.

Moses having therefore in the first verse set down the materials of the World
and all in them; now to the 11. verse he shows the work of distinction: And
after, the work of adorning and perfecting all.

But first of all he handles two things in this verse, The rude rudiments of
the World.
First what the things were he made in the beginning, before they were
distinguished by God; for they were void and vain confused things, without
order or form, all covered with obscure darkness.

Secondly, He shows how God did first order and dispose these rude things,
that they might be fit for distinction and perfection. Of the first whereof at
this time.

In the first verse we consider God as Deum Theologicum; for it is a matter and
a mystery of Faith, that God gave all things their being of nothing: But now
hereafter we shall consider him tanquam Deum Philosophicum; for there is no
Philosopher, if you allow him his (...) this matter of the World, but will
confess, that it was God as they call (...), an understanding Spirit, which is
his power and wisdom, framed all things in this order and form, even common
natural reason allows and admits this rule, because our Consciences do
see it, That in every excellent work, the action must by certain degrees and
spaces come to perfection; for before fire can burn any other things, it must
first warm, then by little and little make black, and parch and scorch the
combustible thing, and after that, it inflameth it, and at last makes it
perfectly of its fiery nature, able to do that to another thing which the fire
did to it at the first; so every cause, by an orderly course of proceeding,
does bring his effect to perfection

Moses shows therefore, that God took that course which is very agreeable to
natural reason; and therefore first sets down the imperfection of all things
at their first beginning, and then the degrees by which they come to their
perfection: For at the first there was a foggie gross darkness; after, he made
the dawning or morning, which is a mixture of some light and some darkness; And
after, he made the perfect light. So at the first he shows touching the
waters, that they were a bottomless gulf; afterward, he made them quiet
waters; and at last, made them salt Seas and fresh Waters, Fountains and
Springs, in most necessary and orderly sort. And for the Earth, first the
beginning of them (which were the matter of all earthly things) it was a
desolate and disordered, rude and deformed mass, covered with water; After, God
set it above the Waters, and made it dry ground, as the word signifies; And at
the last he brought it to its perfection, making it fruitful and sanctifying
it in all necessary things: In the handling of which, we will first generally
behold them together, and then severally and apart.

Touching the first, It is even as if he had said, all things in Heaven and
Earth were not, at the beginning, in that comely and perfect order and manner,
in which you behold them now: for now they present themselves to our eyes well
fashioned, adorned and replenished; but then they were without form, unshapely,
and void. So the waters now we see, serve for Navigation above, and within them
they are most profitable and fruitful in bringing innumerable store of fith;
but at the beginning it was made void, rude, and raging: Now we see the Heavens
beautified and adorned with stars and lights; but at the beginning it was but a
gross mist and confused darkness, without any light: Wherefore one calls them
the swaddling Clouts of the Worlds infancy, Psalm. 104.6. for the Waters
overspread and covered all the Earth, and the mist of darkness, Job says, was
the swaddling band of the World, 38.9. So the Clouds were the swaddling Clouts
of the World, in which it was wrapped up; and the Seas were his Swathes, to bind
and swadle it up in its best infancy.

As the Worlds Creation was of nothing, in the work of distinction all things
were next kin to nothing; for that without was rude and confused, and within is
void and emptic of any good, is as a thing of nothing, and such were all things
says Moses. The Earth being distinguished from the Waters was something indeed,
but yet so dry and unprofitable, that it was to no purpose nor use for any
thing to dwell and remain on it.

Now we see the earth is set first, if Moses had observed a curious order, he
should have placed heaven before earth, as in the 1. and 6. but the manner of
the holy Ghost in the scripture, is always to begin to speak of that which is
freshest in memory, and that is commonly, that which one speaks of last.

The earth is called Toba, Tobohu, which has this signification that it was a
thing without show, in sight misshapen and deformed to outward view, and within
to have no inward virtue of good substance, to make amends; for Tohu,
signifies a thing misshapen without, and Tobohu signifies a thing wanting all
goodness, and substance within, to make amends for that; and so it signifies
a thing of no commendation or value. There are many things which are Tohu, that
is, deformed without, as Elisha 2 Reg. 2. 23. who was mocked and derided of the
boys in the street, but yet within he had inward virtues, which made amends
for his outward want.

And there are some things which are Tobohu, that is, void and wanting all
inward substance, and good stuffing within, without are very goodly and fair in
show to look too, as Absolon which without, was a man without blemish, but
within he had no good stufting answerable to that without, but rather fraught
with pride, murder, and disobedience.

But the earth was both Tohu and Tobohu, without deformed, and within void and
empty, not that it had no form, for that were against reason, but it was such a
form as was altogether deformed; for there is, forma (...), and forma
perfectionis, and this deformed form it had which made it loathed, having
nothing to commend it; it had as the prophet Esaias 34. 11. speaks, line of
deformity, and the stones of emptiness, threatening to make wicked Cities such
deformed things, that is, he will make them like the world at this state, a
confused head, and the stones of the heap shall not be sound stones, but
unprofitable rubbish fit for no use. Thus we see what the earth was at the
beginning.

Now God in proceeding did replenish and fill that void emptynesse which it
had, with all good things which it wanted, and beautified the deformity of it
in this most glorious form, as now we see, and better shall perceive hereafter:
so that it is evident, that both the fullness of things, with which now it is
replenished, and this beauty which it has, it then wanted.

Et Spiritus Dei incubabat superficiei aquarum.
2.
SEcondly, we are to consider of the deep which is called Abyssum, which in the
Scriptures is properly applied unto the waters, as in the 7. Genesis 11. and Esaias
51. 10. and Luke 8. 22, 23.

These waters were the matter of which the heavens were made, for God spread
them abroad as molten glass, Job 37. 18. and they shall dissolve and melt
again in the last day 2 Pet. 3. 10, 11, 12. so that in this depth of water, is
contained the matter whereof the high heavens were made. St. Austine calls it
inordinatum mensitatem aquarum, that is, a disordered; for they had no limit or
bound, nor any order or course in them; they were without any shore Psalm. 104.
6, 9. for they were above the mountains and prevailed over all, until God did
limit them, and set them their bounds, Pro. 8. 27. which they should not pass
to cover the earth, yea and also God limited the upper waters, and bounded
them in Clouds, Job 26. 8. so that the Clouds break not, he also made doors and
bars for the Sea below, Job 38. 10, 11. and said thus far you shall come,
and no further. Touching their first disorderly motion, it is set down Psalm:
93. 3, 4. the flood did rage horribly and they did lift up their waves, but now
God has set them a most orderly and profitable and necessary course eundo and
redeundo, Psalm. 104. 10. of ebbing and flowing by course and recourse of times
and tides: These deeps had a face, nay as the word signifies, it had two
faces, in which the Philosophers do easily consent and agree with him; for all
know that this globe has a double hemisphere, yea one half sphere is the upper
face of the earth, and the other is the nether face of the earth; now he
tells us that then the darkness was over both faces of the earth and waters,
and not as it is now; for when it is dark night with us, it is bright day with
the Antipodes, which are as the nether face of the earth, but then it convered
all with obscure darkness.

3.
Thirdly, As for darkness we are not to conceive any otherwise of it, then to
be only a privation, defect and absence of light, which then wanted; for as one
faith tenebrae erant, id (...) non erat lux: So that by the negative, he
shows that there was a privation of light, not that this privation followed
the habit, as if there had been light, but that the darkness was first over
all, before there was any light made, 45 Esaias 7. it was said, that God created
darkness but that was by denying unto things light; for herein appeared Gods
power, in that as he made something of nothing, so God brought (...) out of
darkness, 1 Cor. 4, 5. Psalm. 18. 11. God came down and darkness was under his
feet, he made it his pavillion round about him, to cover the brightness of his
person, Psalm. 36. 6. God and his works are as tenebrae and Abyssus, like the
great gulf; therefore we must not curiously prye and question about him, and
his matters.

As God made the darkness for some use and purpose for himself, to be his
pavillion, Psalm. 18. 11. so, in respect of us, he made them to special use,
Psalm. 104. 23. he made darkness that it may be night, which is a time for all
things to take their rest in: so that as the day was made for labor, so this
for rest, because quod caret alterna requiae durabile non est.

And God has made it for a third use, to the rebellious Spirits, and Devils,
and to wicked men, namely, to reserve them in utter darkness unto the great
day, Jude 4, 5, 6. So God made it to be a pavillion for himself, a couch for
us, and a torment to the wicked.

Tum dixit Deus, esto lux. Genesis 1. 3 verse

MOses, having before described the primative State of the world, how God made
it of nothing, and then endowed it with an aptness to receive a better form,
he does in this verse unto the 11. proceed to a three fold work of distinction,
separating and sequestring orderly one part from the other, to avoid confusion.
The first was of the light from darkness, which was the first days work: The
second of the celestial and superior parts of the heavens from the inferior
bodies below: Thirdly, the earth and dry land from the waters, and having
performed this inward perfection, as it is called Chap. 2 verse 1. he
proceeds afterward to the outward adorning of them three, and so finisheth
the work.

This verse has in it the first work of distinction, for, whereas before it
was a blind lump, wrapped up in Clouds of waters, as in his Clouds, and
swadled with darkness as with a (...) as Job faith, now God took off from it
his swaddling (...), and clothed it with his own garments, Psalm. 104. 2. that
is, endowed it with light. Fiat lux and er at lux.
In showing thereof we are to consider two things: First, the precept and
mandate of God, Fiat lux. Secondly, the execution thereof for the performance,
Et er at lux.

In the first, two things are to be observed. First, the authority from whence
the mandate came, Dixit Deus. Secondly, the tenor and contents of the precept,
Fiat lux.

First, touching the authority of the precept, we see it was God that said it,
dicere autem, faith (...), eft verbum proferre, whereout we gather two
observations. 1. The mouth of the Lord, from whence this spirit before, and
this word came. 2. Of this word, from whence this work came.

Touching the first, it were absurd to say, that God should speak after the
manner of men, with an audible sound of words, for it were in vain and to no
end, to speak when there were none to hear: therefore this is that which we
must conceive of it, that when God speaks to us in his word, he does it, as
it were, in our dialect, that is, so as we may understand what he means, for
if he should speak properly of himself, we are not able to comprehend the
manner of his works, therefore as the Holy Ghost takes a name, and title from
a Dove, so does God (...) borrow his manner of doing from a Prince, which is
the greatest thing we can conceive, for what is in our conceit (more forceable
to the speedy execution and through dispatch of a thing) then a Princes
straight commandment, and mandate, which on a sudden can cause whole Armies of
men to be ready at his pleasure.

Men do unfold and manifest their walls and counsels in all matters, by word
of their mouths: Sicut voluntas sermo ejus, it a natura opus ejus, faith one,
his word is his will, and all the frame of nature is his work, proceeding
therefrom. Wherefore, in that it is said God spoke, it is meant, that he
plainly revealed and meant to declare his will.

This uttering and revealing the will is after two sorts, which the two Hebrew
words do signify. First when a man, by a secret discourse does reason or
speak in his heart, which does reason off the audible sound of words, Preach.
2. 3. I in my heart purposed with my self; so the fool spoke in his heart, that
he durst not utter by sound of voice, Psalm. 14. 1. So there is a double word
speaking, the one is verbum vocis, the other cordu But to speak truly and
properly, there is but one word, which is in our hearts; as our word is first
clothed with air, and so becomes audible to men's ears; so faith one,
Christ, the word of his Father, being clothed with (...), was visible and
manifest to all men: So to conclude, the word is that he conceived first in the
Closer, as I may say, of his (...), and then does make it plain here by
Creation, and after by redemption.

And here we may learn the difference between us and God: In us there is one
thing by which we are, and another thing by which we understand and conceive
things; but in God both his being and understanding are of one and the same
substance: And this substantial Word of God, is that where with St. John
begins his Gospel. God created that which was not, but the word was in the
beginning. Therefore it is verbum increatum: it made all things at the
beginning, Coll. 1. 15. 16. Therefore it was before the beginning, John 17. 5.
Thus we see, as Christ says, how Moses scripsit de me, John 5. 46. this word
of God is proceeding from God, John 8. 42. as the holy Ghost does also, John
15. 26.

The proceeding of the Son is four fold.
But Christ's manner of proceeding is determined after four sorts. First, as a
son proceeding from a Father. Secondly, as an Image from a Picture. Thirdly,
as the light from the Sun. Fourthly, as a word from the speaker, as a Son
from the Father, Psalm. 2. 7. this day I begot thee; this day, that is, from all
eternity; for to God all times is as one day: also he begot him in respect of
the connaturality and identity of nature and substance that he has with God
the Father.

As an Image from a pattern, that is, in likeness and resemblance to the
Father, Coll. 1. 15. for he is like God in property and similitude of quality,
and therefore is called, the lively and express character and graven Image,
form, and stamp of his Father, Heb. 1. 3. Thirdly, in respect of Coeternity;
For, as the light proceeded from the Sun, so soon as ever the Sun was, so
did Christ, the word, from eternity, Heb. 1. 3. and therefore he is called, the
brightness of his Fathers glory: So at what time God was, at that time the
brightness of his Son appeared and shone from him. Last of all, in regard of
the immateriality, 1. John 1. For, as a word conceived in us, is no matter or
substance, so this was Coemateriall, but an incorporeall generation: Thus we
see that his proceeding is four fold.

Christ distinct in person, one in substance.
Now this word is distinct from the Father in person, and one with him in
substance: That he is distinct from him, it appears Genesis 19. 24. Psalm. 110.
1. the Lord said to my Lord, 30. Prove. 4. what is his name, and what is his
sons names, Esaias 36. 9. the father brought forth a son; ergo, diverse from
himself. Touching the Godhead of Christ, Job says, surely my Redeemer lives,
and I shall see God with these eyes, Job. 19. 25, 26. Psalm. 45. 7. God, even
thy God, shall annoint thee: There is God annoynting God; for he is called thy
God also, whom we must worship, Esaias 9. 6. Jer. 63. 6. his name is the
righteous God. In the new Testament, Romans 9. 5. even as he was verbum
incarnatum, (...) Tim. 3. 16. and John 17. 2. this is eternal life, to know
God, and him whom he sent, Jesus Christ. I have made it plain before, that the
Heathen had notice of his second person: As the Persian called him the second
Understanding; The Caldeans called him the Fathers Understanding or Wisdom;
Macrobius, a Counsel or Wisdom proceeding from him: so may we say likewise of
this word (...) which is attributed to Christ; for they seem not to be ignorant
of that name. Some called him (...) which is verbum: Hermes calls him the
Natural Word of God: Orpheus, the Word of the Father; And Plato most plainly
in his Epistle to Hormias: But most strange is that which (...) writes inlib.
de preparatione Evangelii, scited out of AEmilius and Heraclitus, and let this
suffice for the distinction of the duty and notice of Christ, which is Verbum
Dei.

Now this word has a relation to him that speaks it, and also to the things
Created: therefore it is called verbum expressivum in respect of God, and
verbum factivum in regard of his works: for his Precept did, in respect of
himself, express his Will; but, in respect of us, it had a power to Create, and
make things that were not. Therefore, 1. John 3. he is called (...), and in the
15. verse he is (...): so that both in regard of his Father and us, he is a
word. Little divinity, and much danger, is in those late Divines, which say,
that this was but a temperarie word, which God used in Creating all things; for
we see this is verhum increatum, and the very root; of which, all that is said
after, are but as branches derived therefrom:

And thus much for the authority of this Word.

Fiat lux.
Now to the Creation of light. Moses makes plain mention, That the first
several thing which God perfectly made was Light: Wherefore we will first speak
of the Order, then of the Nature. God is Pater Luminum, Jam. 1. 17. Therefore
first he brought forth light, as his sun: But some, having little Philosophy
in them, do reason against this work of God very impiously, as if it were not
to be said, that light was made three days before the Sun, which is the
cause thereof. But if we respect God, the Father of lights, or the Sun, which
is the light of the World, or the necessity of light, for Lux est vox verum,
because that which things cannot express by voice and words, they do plainly
show by the coming of light, which manifests all things. Again, God being
about the work of distinguishing, it was necessary, first to make the great
distiuguisher of all things, which is light; for in nocte est color omnibus
idem, and tenebrae rerum discrimina tollunt, but the light distinguishes one
thing from another. Again, of the three beginnings, we show that the first
beginning was of time, but we could not have a morning to make a first day,
without light of it was first made; for the natural common Clock of the world,
to distinguish times, is the course of light and darkness, which is the essence
of day and night. Furthermore, we have seen that the Heavens were the first and
most excellent: therefore the light, being the first quality and affection of
the the Heavens, the first body made, must by right order be made first. Last
of all, we begin naturally, a communionibus, but there is nothing with which
all things do more commonly communicate, than the light of the Son: ergo, it
is first, for it is the communication of Heaven, because all the Stars do
borrow their light of it, and we see by it on earth; it is oculus noster, by
which we see, and it is their Cresset to light all them.

There are some which will have a reason of Gods works, and would know how it
could be that light should be first made, and four days after the Sun to be
made, which was the cause of it: But to these, I answer, that their absurd
doubt, does argue small skill in Philosophy: for they speak, as if the light
were an affection and quality only of the Sun; for we see that the fire on
earth, the meteors and lightnings in heaven, the scales of Fishes, and a dark
wood, have also light in them: And what does give light to these? I answer, not
the Sun; But admit the same were the cause of light, yet we see that many
things have their proceeding in nature before things on which they have, after,
their dependence: As all agree that the livor in a man, has the precedence in
nature, and yet after it has his dependence on the heart as his chief; for
though the light has now his dependence on the Sun, yet then it had his
precedence. And as Christ was long before he took the body of Flesh: so was the
light a certain time before it took, and was joined, to the body of the Sun.
Again we may say, that though the Sun was not created now, yet the substance
of the Sun was now made, and so we may understand lux for corpus lucidum,
which after was perfected.

Last of all, this of St. Basil will overthrow their doubt: For if a man will
grant to God, that he made all things, without matter, of nothing: then we must
also grant that he can make light without the Sun; for God does not depend
upon ordinary means; he is not bound and tied to the Sun, that by the means
thereof, light should show; for he can give light without it three days, by
miracle, at the beginning, and will for ever give light without the Sun,
after the end of the world. The Hebrews spoke of three Creations. 1. De nihilo:
2. In nihilo: 3. Super nihilum: All things were of nothing, the light was in
nothing, the earth hanged upon nothing, Job. 26. 7. Tell me, says Job, on what
the earth depends; and I will tell thee on what the light then did depend,
for it was miraculously, giving light without Sun.

A word of the second point, Job tells, that it is a problem, and a hard
question, to know from whence the light is, Job 38. 19. and in the 24. verse,
That it is more than man's wisdom to answer it, for the very light is
darkness, and ignorance to us, for all that reason can conceive of it, is
this, that either it must needs be a substance, or else (...) substantiae; that
is, flowing, or proceeding from a substance, as a quality or affection of it:
if it be a substance, it must be a spiritual or a corporal substance: a
spiritual substance it cannot be; for it affects a bodily substance, bodily
it cannot be, for the motion of it is a moment, for with a flash it lighteneth
all, and also if it were then, it must be granted, that two bodies are in one
place, as the air and the light at one instant, but indeed as they say of the
Element, that they are next kin and affinity to accidents; so we may say of
light, Preach. 11. 5. there is a light of knowledge and a light of comfort.

The execution of the Precept.
The execution of the Precept was of the nature of the Preceptor and Commander.
2 Cor. 4. 6. For as by his word, he made the Whale bring Jonas safe to land; so
here he caused light to come out of darkness; Romans 4. 17. calling things that
were not, as if they were; as the motion of the lightning is, that is, in an
instant with celerity coming from the East to the West, Luke 17. 24. so was
the Creation of it for the facility of making it: we know that no work is
impossible to God, Luke 1. 37. For as casie as it is for man to speak any
thing, so casie it is for God to do any thing: Gods dictum and factum is all
one and alike to him. Wherefore we may conclude with David, that Gods word
runs swiftly to the performance and execution of his Will: It is easily and
speedily done. There is matter to be learned, to lead us to good motions: But
of this hereafter.

Viditque Deus Lucem illam bonam esse. Genesis 1. 4 verse.

THE meaning of this is, That as we have seen Gods wisdom and power in the
execution of his Will, so now we may see the goodness and mercy of God in the
confirmation and approbation of the light which he (...) allowing it as good
for our use, Job. 28. 3. (...) God gave not the light to the Moon, but to us,
that the light might arise to us. The reference that this verse has with that
which goes before, is this: God made things before; and here Moses shows the
quality of it, that it was even in Gods judgment very good and perfect, that
is, as the Philosophers say, God in all his works limiteth together bonum and
ens; for all that he makes is passing well made, The difference between Gods
works and ours
which shows the difference between Gods works and ours: For it is our manner,
so we do a thing that God wills, or that we purpose, it is no matter, we
care not how it be done: But here God teaches us by his example, that we
should in attempting any thing, have a special care that it be good, and
welldone: Also it is usual with us, that the thing we make in haste is, as we
say, canis festinans, that is, it is rudely and blindely done; and therefore
that which a man will do well, he takes great pains and leisure about it,
because it is a hard and difficult matter to do a thing well; but God does,
and can do things well, and perfectly well, with ease, with quick dispatch,
even in a moment, with great facility and celerity, and yet we see, he
confirms it to be very good in these words: Two parts: the View, and
Confirmation to be good.
Therefore there are two parts; First, the view which God takes, in beholding
the light: Secondly, his testimony, affirming and confirming it to be good.

The View.
Touching the first, As before we haveheard of Gods speaking, so here now we are
to consider of Gods seeing. Touching both which, Moses, by Gods spirit, is
taught to speak after the manner of men, in our phrase and dialect, that it
might be to our capacity; for he cannot speak to us as to spiritual, but as to
carnal men, for our fleshly understanding, 1 Cor. 3. 1. It is said, that God
spoke familiarly to Moses, Exodus 33. 11. that is plainly, both touching the
matter, and also for the phrase and manner of his speech: My meaning is, that
Moses seems to tell us, that God did, as men use to do; which, when they
have done any work, they will after return to it and take a view thereof, and
look on it, that if any thing be amiss, he may mend it, and to the end he may
allow and approve of it, if it be well and according to his mind. So God,
after the same manner, is said to do here: having made the light, he
considered of it; and seeing it according to his mind and liking, he
expresses his love, liking and allowing of it. Wherefore it is as much to say,
as placuit Deo: for as his word fiat lux expressed his Counsel and secret
purpose, which it pleased and liked him to determine to bring to pass; so now
this approbation expresses his good pleasure, that it should continue and
abide to our good use and benefit: So that God is not like the potter, which
sometime having made a pot, does not like it, but breaks it again; but God
will have his work continue, and therefore does authorize it to be good, Genesis
1. 4. We set our eyes upon things that are good and beautiful; so when God is
said to like any thing, it is said that he looked and beheld it, yea, and that
he smells also to it, as a pleasant thing, Genesis 8. 21.

The use, fruit, and profit of (...) Doctrine is of two sorts.

The first is in respect of our minds and affections. The second in respect of
our actions and practice. For our judgment, it teaches us to know that Deus
vidit, that is, we are the work of his hands, and he does behold and consider
us and our doings, whether they be good Genesis 16. 14. God is there called Deus
vivens and videns, and Job. 7. 18. nos indies visitar, that is, he does see us
often every morning, he does visit us, for that is a frequentative of seeing;
so that he by his providence and care does behold and visit us and our doings
continually, not only when it is morning, and in the light, but also in secret
and in the dark and hidden places, Psalm. 139. 12. for the darkness is no
darkness to him, the night and day light to him are both alike; yea, the 16.
verse of that Psalm, God saw David when he was secretly in his mothers womb; if
we could dig down into hell he sees us there, Amos 9. 2. if we fly to the
uttermost parts and corners of the earth, there he is and sees us, Psalm. 139.
8.9.10. sive lucerna ardet, videt te; sive extincta est, videt te, says one;
there is nothing so hid but that he knows it, and he will reward it openly,
be it good, Matthew. 6. 4. 6. 18, or bad, 2 Samuel 12. 12. Then this that God
watches and sees has relation to these two ends; He looks on it, that if
it be good it may please and delight him, and so he may be moved therewith to
save and preserve and commend us and our actions; but if he sees it evil, it
is his intent to condemn, dislike, and destroy it and us. Thus we see Gods view
is profitable for our thoughts and judgment to know his approbation or
reprobation.

The second sort, is for our practice: for God is said in the Scriptures, to
do many things, that we may do like and resemble our Father: If God look on
his, and our works, much more it is our duty and behooves us to do the like:
If he be grieved, and sorrowful, and repent, when he sees our works evil;
how much more does it concern us to do the like.

Examen in mente est quod visas in oculo. Therefore we must consider often of
our doings, to see whether they be good or bad, which thing is contrary and
against a humor of ours; for when we have done any thing, we never consider
whether it be good or bad, we have no regard of it afterward.

Therefore, the Prophets oftentimes beat upon this exhortation, Vadite in cor
vestrum. Consider your own doing in your hearts, Esaias 46.8. Preach. 2.12. The
wise man, often says, that he returned to consider the fruit and labor of his
hands, to see the vanity or good of them: And if we thus consider our ways and
works, whether they be good or evil, and repent, or rejoice, approve or
disprove them, then we do, like Children, imitate our Father: If God return to
behold his light, how much more should we return to see and consider of our
works of darkness, and to acknowledge with repentance, how evil they are; It
is our custom and fashion, if we do any thing for our inferiors (as God does
here) not to regard it; wherefore seeing he does carefully consider and regard
the things he makes for us, being so base as worms, how much more does it
concern us, doing things for him that is our Creator, to do the like? For if
we do any thing for a Prince or a Noble man, what great care and pains, and
consideration do we take in doing and viewing, that it may be well? wherefore
much more must we do in our works, for him who is King of Kings.

Last of all, touching the use: If God were so careful to look to this work,
which could bring no gain or profit to him at all, then how much more does it
concern us, to look to our works, which we do to him, seeing to them is great
reward promised? Psalm. 19.14. he did his gratis, without any hope of reward,
but we have promise and hope of reward for our well doing; and therefore it
behooves us to behold and see that our works be good; which we shall the rather
do, if we consider the seldomnesse of our attempting any good, and the
sillyness of our well doings, when they are at the best; for God every day
does many good things perfectly for us, but we scarce do any good once in a
week, yea, not one good thing, though never so unperfect, to a thousand sins,
which therefore must humble us, and make us look to our works.

Lux er at bona.
Now we are to consider the goodness of this creature Light. Touching which,
this is the general regard and rule of Divinity. Nemo bonus est nisi Deus,
Mark 10.18. therefore if any man, or any thing created, be good, or have any
goodness ascribed to it, we must know that it was derived from God, which is
the fountain of all goodness, Psalm. 104. 2. for goodness is his garment, and
we are naked and destitute of it, until he does cast the lap of his own garment
over us. Light is good, because God made it, and partaketh the quality from
God. For it is impious to think that any thing in the World should be evil,
defective or imperfect, (and therefore not commendable) and the cause and fault
of it not to be in the matter of which it was made, but of the efficient which
made it; But if any thing be good, perfect and commendable, the cause of it is
the goodness of the maker, not of the matter: for the matter of all things is
nothing, or a thing rude and unperfect, and therefore of it can proceed nothing
of worth. In men's works, if the matter whereof we make things, were as
permanent and durable as the form, which the workman sets to it, our works
would be long and very lasting; for we see, that if the matter of a house or
garment would continue, and were perfect, the form and fashion of it would
continue, and not decay; but because the matter is ruinous and subject, the one
to be rotten, and the other to be threadbare. Therefore our works cannot last,
so all the defects and imperfections, both of Body and Soul, do come from the
defects of the matter, of which we were made, not of the form in which God made
us: from thence therefore had Adam and his posterity, an ability and
possibility, to be subject to return to emptiness, to darkness, and to
deformity, to be without goodness and full of evil, because he was made of
the rude matter, which was so: But if any good thing remain in us, it is
because of the relics of that form in which God made us. Thus much of
goodness in general: now for a more particular consideration of the goodness
of light: We see that God first praises that, which indeed causes all other
things to be praised, and therefore it must needs be good and most commendable.

Secondly, God is the testis and witness, which affirms it to be so: Who
dare deny it?

Thirdly, yea who can deny it, for our own eyes being judge and witness, we
must needs also, with God say, it is good, for it has aspectabilem in se
bonitatem; yea it is a means by which we see how good God is, Psalm. 34. 8.
Behold and see how good God is. Goodness has two respects, the one is in
regard of it self, the second in respect of others; when it is good to other
things, and in as much as it does good, and delights others besides it self,
by communication of his quality to others; And hereunto arises the threefold
distinction of bonum, which all Philosophers gaze at, and speak of so much. The
first, is, bonum honestum. Second, bonum jucundum. Third, bonum utile, all
which do much differ. Psalm. 133. 1. unity and amity of brethren, is bonum
atque jucundum. Titus 3. 8. many things may be bonum, utile and jucundum, but
this light is good in all respects, (...) 47 3. verse. For the first, That is
good, which is desired in, and for it self, as Eve therefore desired the Apple,
Genesis 3. 6. but we desire to see the light only for it self, propter videre
lumen; and therefore having no pleasant object at all: Yet we still love to
have our eyes open, because it is good to see and behold the light of the
Sun. Also all good things and virtues are in a league of great affinity,
friendship, and amity with the light, which argues that it is somewhat like it
in goodness, Ezekiel. 13. 9. 17. 22. veritas non quaerit angulos, for truth
fears and hates nothing more then to be kept and imprisoned in darkness; and
all evil things cannot abide the light, but hate it as deadly, because light
is contrary to their evil nature; but honest and good things delight in the
light.

Secondly, It is delightful for others to behold, as the apple, Genesis 3. 6. as
well as Bonum in se; for we count it a miserable thing to eat our meat in
darkness though our meat be good, Preach. 11. 7. and 5. 6. It is a pleasant
thing to see the Sun, Preach. 11. 7. Blindness is an uncomfortable thing, as
Tobie confesses, yea such things as have not sufficient light, are less
comfortable and delightful; for the house which has little store of light, we
find fault withal as melancholy and uncomfortable: Therefore it has a nature
to be comely also and amiable or beautiful, Psalm. 147. 1. Lux habet
venustatem, it is sightly for the pleasure of the eye, and therefore is called
matter pulchritudinis, the colors that have most brightness and light in them,
are best liked, and so are the silks which have the greatest and fairest gloss.
But without light there is no beauty, the eye is without pleasure or delight in
any object; for in the dark a russet coat and a scarler robe is all one; no
difference between a ruinous Dungeon and a princely Palace: Therefore in this
degree of good, light is very good.

Thirdly, touching the profit of it, Which utile also caused the desire of the
Apple, Genesis 6. 3. light is very profitable and commodious, both in matters of
expediencie, and also in things of necessity; for all our knowledge comes of
light, and is compared to light, Ephesians. 5. 8.9. In Job. 37. 22. it is compared
to gold, both propter venustatum, utilitatem, and necessitatum; and if you will
know thoroughly the price, value, and estimation of it, then see the value and
estimate of the eye; for one would rather lose all his gold and treasure for a
ransom, than depart from one eye, for that did grieve Israel most, 1 Samuel 11.
2. and why should one make any reckoning of his eyes, if it were not for the
light? for without it, our eye and our nose can see both alike: yea, we have no
use, but trouble of it, without light; we may know and consider the price of
light by this, that in the night, which is a natural absence of light, rather
than we will sit in the dark and want the benefit of light, we will redeem and
buy it with money, and some know what cost some are at in buying of light. Out
of this consideration arises matter of meditation, both for our profit and
amendment of life. And first it shows the condemnation and rebuke of three
faults, in three sorts of men: For we say that the action which crosses Gods
action, is very ill; but the judgment and opinion which crosses,
contradicts, and denies Gods judgment and approbation of a thing, is far
worse:

God, when he saw the light, said it is good: How dare any person be so ill, as
when he sees the light, to say it is evil? Yet there are three sorts of men
which do thus. It is a usual thing, in the sale of such Wares and Merchandise
which are adulterate, evil, and corrupt, men will say this light is evil, it
is not good for us what soever God says; and therefore they do frame and make
false and deceiveable lights. But seeing the light, the brighter it is, the
beter it is, they which will sell good and lawful Merchandise, must not make
to themselves dim and deceiveable lights; for seeing this visible light is
good, we must not call light darkness, nor good evil, Esaias 5. 16.

Secondly, In regard of the light of grace we see, as Job says that there are
some which are Lucifugae, which fly and hate the light, such Creatures are
unclean, Levit. 11. 19. 30. as Batts and Owls among birds, Moules and Rats
among Beasts, they are odious to all men; so among places, Dungeons and
darksome Rooms are odious also. And as this is so, in things natural; so, in
things spiritual, lucifugae actiones, are of the like evil nature and odious
to God and good men; because both such men, and their doings, have an
opposition to light, and the author of light. They come from darkness of the
mind, that is, ignorance and unbelief, and they are begotten by the Prince of
darkness the Devil, Ephesians. 6. 12. and in the end they go to utter darkness,
and therefore they are called the works of darkness, Romans 13. 12. And so no
marveil though they love darkness and hate light, if any cannot abide the light
of Gods word to be reproved by it, as Herctiques and Hypocrites, such dig deep
pits to hide their Counsels, Esaias 29, 15. because they see the light is to
them evil, and as the shadow of death, Job. 24. 17. The emptiness of good
things, and the bottomlesnesse of ill things, and the deformity of both,
proceeds and comes from darkness, and was enclosed in it, as we have seen
in it: And so spiritually is all found in the ignorance of the truth, Ephesians. 4.
18, 19. either the blindness of men's minds, which is natural, or else that
which is wilful, when men do wittingly wink and will not see the light.
Wherefore we see God made light first, before any other good: And so our selves
must receive spiritual light of knowledge before he will give us any better
grace.

The third sort of men are catchers and fault finders with Gods Creatures; such
which think to know how Gods works, which now are good, might have been far
better, as if God might have done well to have craved their counsel and help;
but Gods works both in particular and general, are so good and perfect, that
they could not be mended. Wherefore, if the light seem ill for us, we must
confess and acknowledge, that the fault is not in Gods work, but in the
illness and infirmity of our eyes and understanding: If the Word seem evil to
us, know that it seems so to us, because we and our works are evil, and
therefore cannot abide the light, John 3. 20.

Wherefore to conclude, that which God has called and sealed up to be good,
let no man presume to call and count to be evil, Act. 10. 15. For a work
belongs to such, which call that is good evil, and evil things good, and
darkness light, Esaias 5. 20. But if we love the light of nature, and praise God
for it, Psalm. 148. 5, 6. And if we love the spiritual light of grace in his
word, and glorify and praise God for it, 1 Pet. 2. 9. that has called us out
of darkness into his marveilous light, then God will at last reward us with
his light of glory, and bring us to that inaccessible light, wherein he
dwells, which is the father of lights, unto which no man can attain unless
Christ, the light of the World, bring him, and therefore let us pray, that the
father for his sons sake, will make a way for us by his spirit of light, to
which three persons in unity, be all praise and glory for ever.

Amen.
Et distinctionem fecit Deus inter hanc lucem and tenebras. Gen 1. 4. verse.

THere was in the first verse nothing before God made something of nothing,
after which, at the first we saw it to be a (...) dark heap, without any good
form or ability to receive any better: But after followed the impregnation and
indowment which God gave, by which the things first created had a faculty and
power given, to receive this form which now they have. Fourthly, ensued the
essence and being of all creatures, they were prepared by the Spirit, and
perfected by the word of God: where we considered, first, the essence and being
of light, and then the nature of it: And lastly, of all the goodness of the
light, both in regard of the presence of God, who in his counsel thought it to
be good, and also after the creation by his approbation, allowed the use and
continuance of it unto us.

Now follows, the distinction and dividing, which gives yet a degree of
perfection to the former light, more than it had before; for at the first, he
gave light such a being, which should prodire in actum, and not every being,
but a special good being, which is a degree further, of order and distinction,
against disorder and confusion, to be in all respects laudible, and that not
every good being, but that which is more, an ordered, and distinguished, and
comely good being, which work of all other is the perfection of Creation, as we
shall see in the rest: for things though they be never so good in them selves,
as St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 14. 7. of another thing in the like case, yet they
cannot be discerned of men to be so, neither are they meet for any good use of
men, unless they have a certain distinction and order.

Order.
Therefore order is, as some say, very goodness of goodness it self, for there
are many good things, which do cease from being good to us, yea become
hurtful being without the rank, order and degree, either of their set and
distinct place or time: As fire though it be good in the Chimney, yet it is not
good, nay it is very evil in the top of the house. Fire is very good in the
Winter to warm us, but in the Summer it is not so good, but shunned of men: So
the light not being tempered and proportioned orderly, but being any degree
too-bright, it hurts and blinds our eyes, that we cannot see, Act. 22.6,
11. Excellens objectum corrumpit sensum: So the fire being in any degree too
fierce, and too hot in the Chimney (and Winter) that is, not moderated, and
ordered in a good degree, it does us no good. Wherefore we see, that a set and
a distinct order must be observed in good things, both touching the place,
time, and degree; And that the contrary, inordination, deordination, or want
of order in these things, which is called Babell hereafter, that is a
confusion, makes things to cease from being good to us, which in their own
nature are very good. It was necessary therefore, that God should proceed to
this work of distinction, as he in wisdom does: This then is as if Moses had
said, the light was good; for else extingueret, non distingueret Deus si non
esset bonum, he would not else have distinguished it, but dashed it in pieces
and destroyed it again.

Therefore because it was good he separated it and set it apart from darkness,
by it self: Lonum and malum in Creatura arguit quid Creator and materia little
erat.
Which thing does teach us, that all things created, be they never so good, they
carry in them, as well a mark and sign of the matter whereof they were made,
as of the Creator who made them, that is, as by some goodness in them they
show the excellency of their maker, in some part, so by some ill and vicious
quality in them, they bewray the imperfection and rudeness of the matter of
which they came. As for example, Corn has his chaff with it, Light has
adjoined his contrary, darkness, Honey brings his unsavory wax, Metals have
their dross, and Liquors and Wines their lees and dreggs, the one shows the
goodness of the maker, the other the rudeness, deformity, and emptiness of
the matter. Now then we see, that until there be a distinction and separation
between the lees, grounds or dross of the Wine or Beer, and until a trial be
made to refine and put apart and try the dross from the pure Metal, and sift
the chaff and sever it from the Wheat and Corn, we can have no good and sit
use profitable for us and convenient. Even so we say of the Light; for
according to the course of this mixed world, light was brought forth in his
mixture, that is, in darkness, John 1.5. Therefore as God does here try and
discover, and separate light from darkness, so in Math. 3.12. he is a Fanner
and Winnower of the chaff from the Wheat, and by separation cleanses his
floare, leaving there only the Children of light.

Ob.
But touching this action let us consider this first, Wherefore he left any
darkness at all; and why he did not clean cut off all darkness, considering
that it is opposite to the light, which is good? Whether darkness be evil?
Where first arises this question to be discussed, Whether Darkness be evil,
seeing it is opposite to light, which is good.

Touching which I have told you before, That darkness is but a defect, absence,
and want of the light, and mere privation, and no substantial thing of it self:
And therefore it is said, when God created darkness, we must understand it to
be spoken in this sense and phrase of speech, That when God created no light at
the beginning, therefore he is said to create darkness; for God caused it by
withholding light. Wherefore, as emptiness is nothing but a want and defect of
stuffing and fulness; and as nakedness is nothing but a want of clothes and
covering; and as silence is nothing but a withholding of words and speech:
T^nebrae Naturalis. Moralis.

So darkness, being no substance, and nothing but a mere and bare privation,
and that not privatio moralis, but naturalis, not a want or defect of virtue,
which indeed is vicious, but of light, which has a use commodious: Therefore,
in that regard, it cannot be said to be evil; but in regard of the morality,
as we say, i. as it has a resemblance, similitude and proportion to that which
is moral, as knowledge and ignorance, in that respect it is blanched among
evil and vicious things.

Ob.
But it may be objected, That if natural darkness be not evil, why then did
not God say before also, that it was good?

I answer, That light is an essence, and has an essential goodness in it; but
darkness being nothing, no essence of it self, therefore it could have no
essential goodness to commend it self; but it (...), as we say in the Schools
an ordinate goodness (...), for this rule we hold in divinity, that Deus bons
and (...) facit and (...). So that things have either Bonum essentiale, as the
light, or Bonum ordinatum, as the darkness. And God (...) many things which
have no essential goodness in them, because by his ordination disposing them,
he can and does bring them to our great good use and commodity, As silence has
a great good use even in (...) and sometime holding a part gives a great grace
to the At. Ignorance has this use, that it is a spur to prick men forward
to the knowledge of liberal Sciences. So darkness, in the Art of Painting,
has a great necessary use for shadows and the darkness of parts, give it
greater grace and beauty: Afflictions have a good use by Gods ordination; So
has adversity, for it is made good for our instruction and amendment: So this
darkness and absence of the light, has bonum ordinatum given it, for God in
wisdom and mercy disposes and orders it to be a Cabin and Chamber in which
men can best sleep and take their rest, Psalm. 104. 20. and in Justice he
ordeineth it to a good use and end, namely, to be the (...) and place of
torment and punishment to the wicked, in the world to come. You see then why he
made not such a light which should compass (...) overspread all the world with
his bright beams, without admitting any shadow at all, Job. 38. 27. And you see
the reason why God suffered not the light to be mingled confusedly with
darkness, but distinguished the one from the other without taking other clean
away.

2d part.
Now in the second place we will consider first the things divided and
distinguished here, and then the division and separation it (...) Distinction.
Touching the first, we must as, St. (...) says, Phil. 1. 10. (...) between
things different and opposed, which we call, membra dividentia, and we must not
conjoyn and confound them together, for God does confound such, which make a
separation and breach in Gods things, which should not be divided, Math. 23.
37. as the Chickens which separated themselves from the Hens call, and also he
consoundeth those, which agree and join together in evil things, from which
they should be separated and divided, Genesis 11. 8. they have a woe which
confounds these membra dividentia: calling good evil, and light darkness, for
God will and does divide things that are noble, from things unnoble, and good
things from that which is bad, and he will have no agreement between them, but
the Divils art of dividing is contrary, for it is his study to glue and mash
together ill things with good, Nahum 1. 10. and to divide and separate good
things one from another, and therefore never leaves until he makes Gods
Church regnum divisum, Mat. 12. 26. So the Devil shuffleth good things to bad,
that there may be an equality between them, which should have no coherence,
which is matter confusionis, as he is author and pater confusionis. Wherefore
this must teach us to divide, as God does things of different and contrary
nature.

As for the division it self, the manner of it is after four sorts: 1.
For, first, he divided them in cause, for the bright and fair, clean, bodies,
as fire have their fulgorem, Ezech. 1. 4. and is the cause of it, the firmament
has his splendorem, and is the cause of it. So he divided them, that so he
might appoint these to be the causes of light to the World. So e contra he did
it, that these corpora opaca, these thick and compact bodies should give a
shadow, and so be the cause of darkness: so God divided them first that they
might be diverse causes of these.

2.
Secondly, he has divided them in places; when the light is in the upper
Hemisphere with us, the darkness is by division cast into the lower Hemisphere
with the Antipodes: And so God has set his horizon Circle, as a girdle about
the midst of the Earth, Job 28. 20. which is a lymit and bound of this
division, to leave darkness, that it come no nearer the light, then that.

3.
Thirdly, in time; For as this very, part of time with us is light, so to some
in the afternoon at this very hour, it will be darkness and night; for as now
by Gods separation, light does drive out darkness, so then the light shall
give place to the dark; and so shall the course of times continue.

4.
Fourthly, in regard of the use, of which we spoke before, Psalm. 104. 23. For he
divided them thus, in the one we might have time to labor and work, and in the
other to rest and sleep: and therefore the light is called the window, by which
we see what to do, and night the curtain to draw over it, when we are weary
and would take rest; and as this is the temporal use, of this alteration of
light and darkness, which God has made: so there is an eternal use for which
he did it, and that is, he separated the one from the other, that the light
might be the inheritance of his Saints in light, in regard of which God (...)
darkness in the Stars, that now give us light, Job 25 5. But that light which
God dwells in, and we shall, is such which has no darkness at all, John 1.
5. And this is our reward, which are the Children that walk in light; but for
the wicked, he has reserved another eternal use of darkness, even Caliginem
tenebrarum, which gross part of darkness, is in this distinction cast down
into the bottomless deep of Hell, for the punishment of the wicked, as that is
(...) to the good, so is this (...) to the wicked. And indeed, God being
willing to send back none of his creatures which he had made to nothing again,
therefore the worst thing in this work of distinction, he sends to the place
which is next nothing, that is, to the lowest and basest place of the depth.
Hell.
Therefore Hell is said to be in that place of emptiness or below, Rev. 9. 1.
And Tohu is the bottomlesfe place. Esaias 30. 10. So that place of Hell is Tohu,
Tobehu, emptiness of all good, bottomless and infinite in all ill, disordered
with all confusion, utter darkness without light: So it is a place of all
horror and desolation for ever, which place of darkness is evil indeed to the
sufferer, but to the good for the justice of the righteous, and just God which
is blessed and glorified by his judgment therein.

Now that we may make better use of the knowledge of this, than the Heathen do
of their Philosophy, for the framing in us of good and honest motions, this may
we learn for our uses.

1.
First, that God is the author of all order, place, time, and all things else,
which do observe a comely course and order of times and seasons: He ordained
first night, then day by course of place, he orderly distinguished sursum and
deorsum, and so of other things as we shall see hearafter: wherefore he is not
the author of disorder and confusion, as it is plainly said, 1 Cor. 14. 33.
which also is taught of shadow and figure, Deuteronomy. 22. (...) he will not have us
make a mixture, and confusion of things divided; as not to mingle seeds of
diverse natures, not to make Cloth of Wool and Flax, not to plow with an Ox
and an Ass, for such things are abomination in Gods eyes: which type does lead
us, to see the deformity of spiritual confusion and disorder, which is set
down in the 2 Cor. 6. 14. 15. Our faith must not be coupled with infidelity,
for what agreement can there be by yoking these opposite and unequal things
together: so that God did not only make order, but also made it to this end,
that it should continue, and be kept of every man, yet there is and ever will
be, confusion and disorder both in particular men, and in Commonwealths
contrary to Gods ordination, but the end of it is the confusion, and overthrow
both of Commonwealths and us, if we continue so: in private men there is no
danger or great hurt to be feared, by such in whom there is mere ignorance of
simplicity; but when there is a mixture of knowledge with it, as when men know
their ignorance and yet will be wilful, when we think that we know something,
and yet know nothing, as we should, and when we seeing, will be wilfully blind,
this is very dangerous: therefore God cannot abide the mixture of outward
holiness with inward corruptnesse, Hypocrisy.
that is, to seem to be that we are not, which practice is Hypocrisy, which the
prophet compares to a Cake baked on the outside, and dow raw in the inside,
as it is in action so for affection, God cannot abide such as mix and join
together, cold and hot, and so become luke warm in affection Rev. 3. 16. for
such God will spue out of his mouth.

The proper and natural term of confusion, is taken from the custom of
Apothecaries to mingle Oil and Wine, which are of diverse natures, which should
be kept in several vessels apart: So if men knowing God and yet will power
evil actions, and sins on their own consciences, which are against it, this
is the holding of the knowledge of God in unrighteousness, Romans 1. 18. which
God cannot abice; as we must not join good things to evil things, to culler
and cover them, for this is Hypocrasie as the former was impiety: this God
calls Mat. 23. 27. the putting of a fair marble tomb over the foul rotten
carcass which we have: and having bad interprises and attempts, to put on a
well varnished visard to hide the baldness of it, 2 Cor. 4 2. and cast over it
the cloak of Godliness, and so by joining good and evil, making evil to be
in the company of good, that it may not be suspected or the better entertained
with men. Such are now a days: For the Divill seeking to disturb and destroy
the Church, by some he laboreth to do it, by joining the Queens injunctions
and proceedings to it, under which pretense, they satisfy their covetousness
with the hurt of the Church.

Others under the pretense of a good thing, namely of reformation, on the other
side do seck much hurt to Gods Church, so some on the one side put light to
darkness, and on the other side join darkness to light, which should be
separated and not come together. Non est aliud Abyssus, aliud facies Abyssi,
they are not two things severed, and therefore if it be dark or light in the
deep, it will appear so in the face of the deep: So we must appear and show
plainly and outwardly by our face and deeds, what we are within the bottom and
depth of our hearts, and indeed as the showing his darkness over the face of
all, was a preparation to have light sent to all: so when we profess and
manifest outwardly, how evil we are by repentance, it is the very note of
reformation, and (...) we begin to be good.

Thus we see God is our pattern for imitation, to teach us to separate and
distinguish good and evil. Touching our selves first, which thing Gods word
also resembling, God himself does teach us, Heb. 5. 10. For it discerns and
separateth the will in the hearts and thoughts of men, as well as in actions,
and sets his mark on them, saying to us, this is evil, avoid it, this is
good, receive it.

Two things in light.
There are two things in light, which are the marks and notes of his goodness
by which it is known, that is, brightness and comfortablenesse. So Gods Spirit
is called the light and oil of knowledge, for knowledge, instruction, and
direction, and in the 45. Psalm. 7. He is called the oil of gladness and
comfort and consolation, so Gods word is a lantern, and also a joy and
comfort, Psalm. 119. 105. but e contra ignorance and darkness is melancholy and
uncomfortable. So we may make our mark of distinction on things; for if we see
them uncomfortable to the soul and conscience, set a mark on it, that knowing
them, we may eschew such things, and ensue such things as are good and
comfortable. And thus much for our selves.

Now touching others, we learn also that in Commonwealths the Magistrate must
have his stone of Tynne, Zach. 4. 10. that is, his marking stone, for that is
the word also here, to set his mark of difference on the evil, to discover
them from the good. The Minister has belonging to him only vision to discern
them, Jer. 15. 19. but the Magistrate has division to do it; so that he may
by deed approve and commend the good, and reprove and condemn the bad; and if
all did keep this difference, the world would be a light world; but because the
good and the evil, without any distinction or regard, are shuffled together, 1 Samuel 8. 1. this confusion in Commonwealths is the cause, by Gods just
judgment, of the confusion and renting a sunder of Commonwealths and
Churches, Dan. 5.18. This just division then looked to in the Governor, would
avoid confusion in the popular sort, as God does here begin to distinguish
light from darkness, so does he the same continually by his word, Heb. 4. 12.
separating and marking the works of darkness from the armor of light; for it
shows to us, daily, which are ignorant and negligent, these things are evil,
and not to be done; that is good, and must be done; these things the ignorant
Gentills and Infidells did; therefore thou must not do the like, which have
knowledge: these things do they which are desparate and without hope of
comfort; therefore thou, which have peace and joy with God must not do so.

Thus we must be careful in separating evil from good, until the great day
of separation, when God shall sever all evil from good for ever; for here God
is a Fisher, and Commonwealths and Churches are as a Net, which has in them
good and bad together, children of light and darkness, but then at the last
day of separation, when a full, final, and perfect distinction shall be made,
all shall not be taken into Gods Boat, Math. 25. 32. but the good fish only
shall be taken into Gods Boat, and the evil shall be cast away. Then God will
be a Sheepherde, Math. 25. 32. and divide the Sheep from the Goats for ever,
setting this eternal mark venite Benedicti, ite Maleaicti. Until the last
day of perfect separation, there will be still confusion and disorder, both in
private men and public Weals, but they which cease not to confound
themselves in themselves, Justice with unrighteousness, qui confundunt,
confundentur, Thus we have seen the order of separation in God; also the manner
of it in us, both privately and publicly; And what confusion will be unto the
last day. And thus much of the natural separation, and the spiritual use
thereof.

Now as here we see divisio rerum, so in the next place is set down divisio
nominum and denominationum, which ever ensues the other, for it is the sin
of the world not to divide things in their denominations and names which are
perfectly and plainly distinguished in their natures; for they call repentance
and remorse sullenness and melancholy, and David's spiritual joy foolishness,
covetousness they call honest thrift, profuseness providence, and riot
liberality, patience they call cowardlinesse, and quarrelling manhood, light
darkness and darkness light: So they confound the names, when they cannot the
natures: But such shall give account for it, to the great distinguisher in the
great last day of division.

We have in this distinction many things to consider, as, The names given, The
Athcists objection, And sundry other matters, of which the next time.

Lucemque Deus vocavit diem, tenebras vero vocavit noctem. Gen 1. 5. verse.

AFTER God had distinguished and divided light from darkness, as being things
in nature opposite, and in degree unequal, which contrariety and inequality,
not being separated, are the authors of all confusion. Now he proceeds to
divide them in name; for as the natural division serves for all things, so
this distinction of denominations and names, in respect of us men, serves for
our knowledge to distinguish them, which inducement moves us to think that God
had respect to mankind even from the beginning in all things that he created,
as if he purposed to make them for men; for though light and darkness
affects all Creatures, even beasts, yet the name and title given to them
concerns only man, who understands and discerns things by their names;
and therefore as soon as he made man, he gave him a gift to know by what names
to call and distinguish one thing from another, Genesis 2. 19. for God has in the
Creation ordained things that they should be known, and that they might be
known, he gives names of distinction, which are symbola rerum, as it were,
notes to know them by; and because we cannot in this life know all that God
made, we look for a clearer light after this life, by which our knowledge shall
be perfect, 1 Cor. 13. 12.

Touching this division of names, we have four things to consider, First, the
manner of denominations: Secondly, the cause: Thirdly, the end: Fourthly, the
dependence of the day on the light, and not on the Sun, as some say.

Touching the first, that is, Whether God called them by their names and
imposed titles to them after a sensible manner, with a distinct audible voice,
I find a double contrariety in Writers; But, to resolve upon it, To whom
should he speak audibly, seeing there was none to hear and understand? And
therefore to no end and purpose should we think, he should speak so, but as the
Hebrew say appellavit, id est fecit appellari, the same phrase, as we say
Princes do build houses, that is, do cause them to be builded: wherefore the
manner of giving names is this, that as God gave before the natural use of
things, so now he took order that we might have a use of them by names, to know
and talk of them so.

2.
God is the cause and author of the names of things, by which we know and call
them; for though we say, that when God created man, he made him capable of
speech and of language, in which language we see God had speech and conference
with him, being made, Genesis 2.16, 17,18. Yet Adam imposed not the names to the
Creatures, Genesis 2. 19. but according to that gift of knowledge and utterance,
he calls things by such names and titles as he had received from God; for as
God did largiri linguam, so he did nominibus praeire linguae; for here we see
before ever man was made, in all the six days works, God gave names to the
things as he made them, and to Adam himself, and in these seven things named,
are contained all other particular things made in, and with them.

3.
The end, to which God gave and imposed sundry names was, that we should do as
he has done, that is, when things have a true being, then to give names to
them accordingly, and not to our fancies, and things which indeed are not at
all, as the custom of the World is for things that have no esse, as the Hebr.
said, must have no name: For God gave names to things that were created, and
had a being:
We must not then do as the Apothecaries, that is, set on their Boxes a name
and title of a precious thing, when within it there is no such matter; we must
not affect the name of Learning, Godliness and Light, nor give it to others,
when we know our selves and they to be darkened and evil. Secondly, when things
have a true being, we have a care to give names and titles, agreeable to the
nature and quality of them, that the act and nature of the thing, may be made
manifest in the name of it, as written in the forehead: for as a man draws
good Liquor out of the Cask, so out of the meaning and signification of the
Word, and denominations given by God, we may draw out the hidden nature and
knowledge of the thing, for nomen est symbolum rei, and this is seen even in
these names of day and night, given to light and darkness; for concerning the
name of the day Jom, it is very significant and pregnantand discloseth the
nature of the day, and the Hebrew word, which signifies night, is the
negative, The day what it signifies.
to the meaning of the day, the day imports as much as Ens, being, showing us
that our being and life, must be employed altogether in the day time, in some
honest exercise and work of our calling, of God or the Country, and that we are
not any longer to reckon or account our selves, to live or have any being, then
when we walk, as in the day, in the course and actions of our life, and work
of our calling; for being idle, ill employed, or sleeping, sloathfully spending
and consuming our time in vanity, we are dead and have not the being of men;
also there is a good signification given of those, which take the name of Jom
from striving and moving, teaching that the day is a time of walking, stirring,
speaking and laboring, and the night e contra, a time of silence, rest, and
ease, and sleep, or rather a time, thereby to restore and recover the strength
of body, which in the day was spent by careful and painful travel, in which
sense I showed the day to be the workhouse, and the night to be our Cabin or
Couch of rest, Psalm. 104. 23.

4.
Lastly, touching this division, we see that the reason of man, is offended with
God in this place for naming a day, saying there was a day, so long before
there was any Sun, which seems absurd to them, because they think the day
depends on the Sun, as on his cause, therein most fasly and grossly,
drawing their reason from that which is now, to that which was then at the
beginning, in which they argue their ignorance and error, even in learning and
Philosophy. Note the Sun.
Wherefore touching this question, whether be the cause of the day, we say and
prove according to this, that before there was any Sun, there was a day, two
or three, for the course and order of things are otherwise in the proceeding of
nature, then of the first beginning, as we have showed: Again, touching this
particular, we say, that the day is broken and draws long before we see the
Sun, only because of the approaching of the light; also when the Sun is in
his Eclipse, and when it is all day long hid and covered with the Clouds, yet
we say, and call it, the day time; so the contrary, we see and say, that the
day depends on the light, not on the Sun, and his participation of
communication. Again, the Sun is not light, but vehiculum hujus lucis ex qua
fit dies; and therefore is called the Lamp which contains light, and tanquam
lycbnus, as Basil well faith, which is not light and shining of it self,
until the accessory light be put to it, aliunde, as this light, by which the
day was, afterward was put to the Sun, and so now since it causes our day:
Again, there are many things, which can and do conceive and bring forth light,
besides the Sun, as a Flint, Gunpowder, Fire, by which we may perceive a
great difference between this light, and the Sun after, that whether we take
the light to be defluum or a stream of brightness issuing from God for Nebora
in Hebrew signifies as well a stream of water, as a beam of light, Job. 3. 4.
we shall see that light does not stream from the body of the Sun only, but
from many other things, created as we see, as the fire, De fluvium ignis
fulgor, Ezech. 1. 4. Also there is De fluvium firmamenti splendour, Dan. 12. 3.
The streams of Brightness.
righteousness shining from the Firmament, Meteors.
as streaming and issuing from the impressions and meteors of the Air; or
whether we say, that it streamed from the Heavens, and from Gods glorious
Majesty, as light did to the Israelites out of the Pillar, any of these, or
altogether, will give them their answer, and repel the frivolous and unlearned
objections of the Atheists: or else if we consider as Nazianzen does very
wisely think and gather, that is, all things in gross were created at the
beginning, in the two generals, Heaven and Earth, though the perfecting and
polishing of the Creatures in particular, were by degrees brought to perfection
in the six several days, so he conjectureth that the Sun was made when the
Heavens were made, at the first, but after the fourth day it was perfected, and
had the light annexed to it, this gives them an answer.

The use.
Now touching the spiritual use of this knowledge, in which we will keep the
course of these three things before noted. First, that a distinction of names
of us must be truly kept. Secondly, that they might be agreeable to the nature
of the things. Thirdly, that we must express the nature of things showed by
their names, by our right and well usage and practice of them.

1.
I began to teach the last day, that it does not avail us, that things be
distinct in nature, if there be a confusion of names; therefore God in wisdom
brought in the right division of both orderly; for though names in affirmation
and negation cannot change the true nature of things, Non amittunt quod sunt
cum amissione nominis, as in Judaes name, and though we call Gold Copper, and
Lead Silver, yet the false name affirmed or denied hurts not the nature; yet
notwithstanding, in respect of us, except there be a distinction of certain
appellations, names and titles, we shall grow erroneous and ignorant of the
right natures of things; therefore one sets down this rule, that fides
nominum est salus proprietatum, the right keeping of the names truly discerned,
is the preserver of the true properties of things: Therefore the Devil, not
being able to alter the nature of things made, and distinguished by God, he
labors in the other to shuffle and confound the names of things, which ought
to be distinguished, to deceive men: To such God faith, Job. 38. 2. Who is that
which darkneth the Counsel by words without knowledge? for giving of ill and
wrong names, confusedly obscureth the right knowledge of the natures of things
to us, and Paul complains of it, 1 Timothy 6. 20. he complains I say of things
in his time falsely so called. So may we now complain of (...), that is, of the
false faith, zeal, sincerity, preaching, and reformation of many, which indeed
is but falsely so called; for their unfruitful faith is no faith, their blind
zeal is no zeal, their reformation is deformation, and their preaching is but a
(...) or prattling, though it be falsely otherwise called. Wherefore they are in
great fault, which give one and the same name both rei, and privationirei, to
the substance and the shadows of things. This then is the first use, which, by
Gods example, we are to learn, namely to term things by their right names, by
which God has distinguished them.

2.
Secondly, As the names must not be in confusion, so there must be a fitness
and stablenesse agreeable and correspondent to the natures of the things; for
commonly the names and titles of the world are either too big or too little
in proportion for the nature of things. It men be great in authority and
wealth, we are no niggards in our words, but give great and swelling titles to
them, though they be of small or no deferts, as Esaias 32. 5. they will not stick
to call Naball by the name of Nalath, that is, a foolish clownish Chrule, a
right worshipful man, to flatter him withal; but God will be angry if we give
titles after such a manner, Job. 32. 22. As we are Parasites to others for
favor or gain, so we love to be flattered of others, and to have a great and
glorious name for small and simple gifts; though our deeds be very small and
few, yet we must bumbast our words as great as may be, but God observes
agreeableness.

3.
Lastly, We learn that if the name be agreeable to the nature, then in our life
and action we must also express the nature of the things by well using, as the
word teaches us, that is, that seeing the day is our being, and shows that
our life and being is laboring and well being in our Calling, therefore we must
reckon or account our selves no longer to live and have the being of a man,
then we are in the day employed in such honest and good actions of life, and
esteem our selves in that respect as dead men, or as beasts, when we are idle,
slothful, and given to sleep, Prove. 24. 33, 34. we must be far therefore
from the speech and saying of the sluggard, that is, yet a little more sleep
and slumber, that is delight in idleness. And so must we be far from it in
doings, behavior and custom, Prove. 26. 14. which is thus described, even as a
door moves on hinges, so does he in idleness, one calls such fungos and
truncos, showing that we differ not from blocks, being idle and sleeping, nor
from mushromes, eating and drinking, nor from whelps, sporting and playing, but
then we are men, when we do the actions of men, that is, to study for
knowledge, and work and travail for thy living, so that the night is our time
of non esse, so long as we will ociosum esse. Wherefore seeing Christians are
not of the night but of the day, 1 These. 5. 5. we must do the actions of good
works, which belong to the day, and for which the day was made; for idleness,
theft, adultererie, murder, etc. hate the light, because they are works of
darkness, 1 Cor. 4. 5. so are there three pair of them set down, Romans 13. 13.
So the qualities of our actions must be framed to the meaning of the word and
nature of the things, which God has made for us. And this may suffice for the
second distribution of the names.

Et dixit Deus sit firmamentum, etc. Genesis 1. 6. verse.

IN the second verse these two were coupled together darkness and the deep;
and how blessed an exchange of light we had been made partakers of, we have
already heard.

Now it follows to hear the wonderful works of God in the deep, and that not
in the face of the deep, but in the bowels and middle part thereof; God has
before removed the swaddling band of darkness, and now he comes to take order
in the deep, and hereafter he will come to the earth to order it, which as yet
lies desolate, overwhelmed and buried in the midest of the waters and deep.

Though the deep had but a poor being as yet, yet it had cause to praise God
for it, as simple as it was, Psalm. 148. 7. But God, that it might praise him
more, being moved with pity, to see this poor rude being, in great goodness,
swallowed up Abyssum in Abysso, to teach us, that as there is nothing so dark
and hidden, though it be in darkness it self, but his eye of providence can
see it, so that there is nothing so deeply covered in secret, but that he by
the same can reach to it.

In this second work the Prophet begins at the third point; for the first
two, which are the materials and womb and the impregnating, making fit or
enabling it to receive a better form, were things belonging particularly to the
first days work, which, in respect of the prerogations it had, was called the
one day and the day alone: For in the first day there was spiritus (...)
creatio sed varia procreatio; for all things being made in gross at the first,
and impregnated and conceived in this womb of the waters, had afterward in the
six several days and times their procreation, and were brought forth, and
therefore the gulf being enabled before, is not distinguished and separated
into that place, which is the upmost Heavens of all above us, and the purest
and cleerest and best part of the waters; The other part which is more unpure
is set in that place below, under us, which reaches unto the bottom of the
deep of the earth: Saint Austine says, that this separation was therefore
made, because God would not trouble the living Creatures of the earth,
afterward with many waters, which were not a meet Element for them to live in,
but only they should have the impressions of the Air, to water the earth, as
rain, snow, hail and dews.

Coelum aereum
Touching Heaven which is one part of the division, there is varia acceptio
verbi, it is diversely understood: for first, it is taken for coelum aereum,
which we call the sky as in the 20. verse of this Chap. volucres coeli, when
Heaven is taken for the Air or Sky, Jer. 8 7. Milvus in coelo, etc. that is,
in the Air, so Gen, 9. 14. nubes coeli, that is, the Clouds which hang and
fly in the Air: And Christ says, that they are skillful to discern the
times, by view of the face of Heaven, to know what the day will be by the
redness or lowering of the Air or Sky, Luke 4. 25. he says, the Heavens were
shut or locked up three years, that is, the Air where the Clouds are. So do
Heathen writers take the word coelum non animum mutant qui trans mare currunt,
that is, they change the Air not their minds, etc. where coelum is taken for
that distance of place, which is between us and the Moon. After we have spoken
of this coelum aereum, we will come to the other coelum coelorum: but first let
us consider the Air in the general, and then the true Chambers of the Air,
as David calls them, Psalm. 104.2.3. that is, of the three Regions of the
Air. In which treatise we will consider, Distributio.
first, the matter or argument of these verses. Secondly, the name of the thing
it self in the 8 verse.

In the first three things are to be noted: First, Gods Edict: Secondly, the
execution of it, in the former part of the 7. verse; And the third is the
return of the Edict or Writ. And it was so. Of the first, in which we consider
the word, the manner, and the parts, to whom the Edict is given; and then what,
wherein, and to what end it was; namely to distinguish the one waters from the
other.

It pleased God in every days work, to have several speech and mention made
of his Word and Spirit, the one to exclude necessity, the other to exclude
chance or casualty; the word is ever named to conclude and shut out that
objection, quis erat ei consiliarius, Esaias 40. 13, 14. that he had no need of
counsel or advise, the other to exclude quis dedit illi prior, for as he did
all things without the advice and help of any, by himself, so he did it of his
mere goodness and grace, without any motive or persuasion of our deserts.

Touching the word, which I told you was verbum unum increatum and aeternum: We
must consider it abiding in God, as skill, art, and cunning does abide in a
perfect workman; and his proceedings and manifestation in the Creatures as the
skill of an artificer, proceeds from him into his work, and there is to be
seen: so the second person, the word of God abides for ever wholly in God, and
dwells and rests in his bosom, Pro. 2. And this, by this means passes
from God the Father, into his workmanship and Creatures, and is to be seen
manifestly how wonderful and glorious Gods word and wisdom and art is, by
which he made all: And so may we say of his spirit which is inseparable and
coequall with it: for as with our words our breath also proceeds out of our
mouths, in one action, and at one time: so ever the word and the spirit of God
proceeds from him together, to the perfecting of any work. So we see they are
indivisible, Heb. 1. 2. 3. Christ by whom God made the World, is there called a
stamp, or graven form of his Father and the brightness of his glory; so that
now here is showed the second stamp, and impression graven and formed in these
works, in which the brightness of his Image may be seen, namely his power and
wisdom, etc. For by the word of God also were the Heavens made Psalm. 33. 6.
says David, out of which sentence we may learn two special points.

1.
First, that the word of God is the general mediator, not only between God and
man in the work of redemption, but also between God and his works in this
Creation: for after that the word of God was, he by whom all things had their
being, and were that they are, and were set joint and in order by him, then by
the same verbum increatum proceeding from God, together with that powerful
working of the sanctifying Spirit, were all things new created, and set in
right order and joint again, being by Adams sin clean out of frame.

2.
The other point is, that whereas it had been all one for Moses to say, Deus
dixit aut Deus facit, he rather causes this phrase, Dixit Deus, quia fecit
dicendo: in men indeed sermo and apus are two things of diverse natures, often
separated; for commonly the greatest sayers are least doers well, the talkative
are seldom active; but in God they are all one, his dictum and factum have no
difference; for as (...) says, with God initium sermonis est perfectio operis,
and this is the prerogative of the supernatural Agent.

Touching the style or phrase of the Edict or Mandate, it is imperative: the
Kings of the Earth are glad oftentimes by fair means to entreat that their
inferiors and subjects may do their will, as the (...) men counseled Roboam,
1 Reg. 12. 6, 7. And the Apostles (...) always use their authority in
commanding, 2 Cor. 8. 8. (...) continually goes by way of commanding, because
none are able to resist his will; he fears none that shall withstand him. In
this style and phrase he is, in resembling, compared to a Prince or King, who
uses but his commandment and word to have his will in any thing executed; if
he will have an Host of men in Armor, he needs but send out his commandment,
and it is speedily done, while he sits still: So does God here. Wherefore,
if we fear and obey Princes Precepts, and if the dumb Creatures execute his
commandment, How much more ought we which are men, to obey and do that he
commands us?

3.
The third point unto whom this Edict is directed, is non enti, Romans 4. 17. he
speaks to things that are not, as if they were, so did he in the first days
work, but now he commands the deeps of the waters, 2 Cor. 4. 6. touching
which God challenges the greatest Princes in the world, Job. 38. 8.11. Can
(...) command the deeps? The proud King of this Island, as we read in
Chronicles, took upon him this authority to command the waters, but he was
checked by their disobedience; but when God commands the deeps they obey,
contrary to their nature, Esaias 44. 17. Conclusio.
Thus we see what is taught by the Edict: And then, to whom it was given.

As the work to make light of darkness is past all our capacity, so this is as
wonderful a miracle, and as great contrariety, as the former, to make
altissimum excelsum coeli, ex profundis (...), which, as the other, shows the
wonderful power of the Creator that made them. Again, God in all this work, is
contrary to the manner of men in their Architecture; for men use in making any
thing, to make their frame in that place where the (...) matter may be had
near hand for their work: But as this matter is contrary in our reason, so he
thinks it all one to fetch the matter, of which he will make Heaven, out of
the deepest and remotest place of all; whereas we, building Ships, do choose
that place where the wood is new, and to build houses we seek a place where
stones are (...) at hand to be had; but it is all one with God, his arms is
long, and his power and word able in a moment to fetch and do it.

2.
Secondly, It is Gods challenge, Job. 38 8. that (...) can make a thing orderly
out of a disordered matter, but God, of the most confused, rude, raging, and
disordered (...) in the world, made the Heavens, who are most beautiful, and
whose course is most orderly and certain.

3.
Thirdly, He is admirable in this, that he can make (...) ex infirmissimo, of
the infirmity of the deeps; for what more weak than water? Ye of it he made the
Heaven, which is the most firm and stable thing, and therefore called the
firmament.

4.
Last of all, Men use to begin the frame of their building at the foundation and
pavement, but God begins his house at Heaven, which is the roof and cealing,
Psalm. 104.2. and then after makes the Earth, which is the foundation and
pavement, as it is Psalm. 24. 1, 2. which consideration makes David use this
exclamation by way of admiration, Psalm. 118. 23. The right hand of the (...)
the pre-eminence, it does bring mighty things to pass.

2d part.
The second part consists in three points, de quo, in quo, ad quid: De quo.
We will begin with the Firmament, which is called Rachia, that is expansio, a
stretching forth abroad; the property of which word includes the signification
of the nature of such actions, whereby metals are driven thin and beaten abroad
into plates, as Smiths with their hammers use to do; in which sense it is
taken, Numb. 16. 38. and Jer. 10. 9. so the expansion or driving out of metals,
is the original from whence this word is borrowed, and being so borrowed, it is
applied to the spreading or drawing out of any thing what soever, as of a
curtain, Psalm. 104. 2. The Firmament of Heaven compared.
which kind of phrase by comparison, is there given to the making of the
firmament, as if he had, as it were, spread the Heavens abroad as a curtain;
also to the overspreading of a vault, to which also the firmament is compared;
also to the pulling out abroad and expansion of a roll of paper or parchment,
to which also it is likened, Esaias 34. 4. likewise to the blowing up of glass
out of a lump into a hollow compass, to which Job resembles the making of
Heaven 37. 18. which comparisons do yield unto us the hidden consideration of
this work of God: for such a like work was performed here this second day in
making Heaven, as these handy-Crafts men do show. Simple comparisons these are
to show such a matter, yet sufficient, sithence we can conceive no better.

In quo.
The two actions of Gods Spirit mentioned before, sustole and diastole, which I
said are seen in all works created, are no where better expressed than in this
work, for the dilatation and contraction of the spirit moving in this work, was
the expansion and stretching out of the Heavens; and the compression and
drawing in of his force and virtue is and shall be the dissolution of the
firmament, for then they will run and roll together as a roll, and as molten
glass, etc.

The resemblance and shadow of this work of God we may set before you in a
matter of common experience; for it is usual to see a pot of water, by the
force of the fire, to evaporate, and so stretches forth out of a little pot,
as to fill the whole room with his moisture extenuated; and again, being so
dilated into a thin vapor, we see it drawn in and compressed into little drops
of water again, which also some explane by the manner of distillation, which
first rises as a vapor, filling all, and then resolves into drops again, and
is made the same quantity of water and moisture which it was before. So God in
this work, as a Stiller, first, by a vapor rising up by the Sun, he
stretches abroad the waters above us, and then the cold congealeth and
compresseth that vapor into clouds, and after, by heat, again resolves and
melts the clouds into drops of rain, which return to the Sea; So that in
creating Coelum aerum, the rarefying and extenuating the waters into vapors,
and so dilating it by expansion, was the first beginning of them. Gods
distinction is taken after the manner of a thin stone, or marking stone, with
which, faith Solomon, Prove. 8. 27. circuit Coelum quasi circino suo, as if he
had a compass to make a circle for their separation, Esaias 40. 12. faith, that
in this separation with one hand God did hold up the upper waters, and with the
other he depressed the waters below: we know it to be a matter of such
difficulty, to stop the course of waters, that it busieth the best and wisest
heads to stop up the breaches, once being made. Yet God, by his power, does
separate the waters, and keep part above, and his intergerium, his partition
wall and bank which he uses to divide and keep out one from the other, is the
weakest Element, that is, namely the Air, which is most strange, that that
should be terminus, a bank and bound to the mighty waters which had most need
of a terminus to limit it self; yet God has made of it such a limit which is
called firmamentum, that is, a most strong, sure, and firm bond, which shall
not fail; yea, it is more firm and permanent, than if it had been made of a
rock of Adamant, for that the waters would have eaten and perished, but this is
most durable, by Gods appointment.

Ad quid.
The last thing is ad quid, namely, that there may be a division. Where
generally is employed a double division, the one is before, of things in nature
opposite and contrary, as light and darkness; the other is here of things
which have an inequality, as the purest waters from the unclean and impure; for
God will have not only evil distinguished from good, but also the things that
in degree and quality are better and more excellent, are to be separated from
that which is more base and vile; for the not distinguishing these, is the
mother of confusion: We must not only mark and beware of the Devil the
adversary which is (...), but also of things which are apparently evil, or are
not altogether good: therefore God divided the clearest waters in the best and
high place above, and the groslest he set below in the depth. So we have a
difference between (...) pendiculam, and aquam fluidam, the one is Mare
superum, the other is Mare inferum. This is the division of the Waters.

Now in the upper waters of Coelum aereum, there are two parts, aqua (...), and
aura flabilis, which are (...) together. Now between these two waters thus
divided, because they are not contrary in nature, but only different in degree,
the inferior and baser waters do first, as it were, reverently acknowledge
their humility, by sending up vapors to them in the Clouds; and they, as
grateful, do send down drops and showers more liberally, even pouring them
down again: So there is a mutual reciprocation and circulating in nature
between them, as ebbing and flowing is below; so is there breathing up and
dropping down between them both.

But to what end are these waters above and below, and wherefore is there a
division of them? Because God had before taken order for light, that there
might be time, it was next of all convenient and meet that he should take order
for place, wherein his Creatures might inhabit; for in that place where the
thick and compact body of the waters is, the Creature could have but a slow
motion; and therefore it is no fit Element for us: Wherefore God having an eye
to man, respecting him in all his works, provided in this, that he might have a
fit Element of Air, in which he might live, move, and have his being.

The end of the other division and separation was this, that the waters being
thus set apart, might be as a bridge for us, not only from one Country to
another, by ship here on the nether waters, but also that there might be a
communication and passage from Earth to Heaven, by the means of the Air; for
the Air is, as it were, the bridge and path and casement, by which the light
of Heaven comes to us; it is the pipe, through which sounds and voices come
to our cares, smells to our nostrils, colors to our eyes; it is the strainer or
five, through which, as Job faith, the rain is sifted in little drops, but
especially as you know in the first day God made light, which has a proportion
and resemblance to this word John 8. 12. yea, it is vox Creatorum also; for the
dumb and senseless things do, as it were, speak and tell us what they are by
the light; So, if you mark, the Air, which is made the second day, has a
resemblance to Gods Spirit; for as the Air is the act of breathing, which we
easily fashion and receive into our bodies; so our spiritual life is by the
holy Ghost, of whom we have the like apprehension, and as light comes to our
eyes by the Air, and words to our ears, so that by it we apprehend light and
speech and communication; so is the Spirit of God the very means whereby our
souls do apprehend the spiritual light, and by which the word of God is
conveyed to the ears of our hearts; So spiritually the Holy Ghost is vehiculum
lucis, and vocis Dei, etc. and this we learn by way of resemblance.

The last point is concerning this, to know to what end are these upper waters
of the Air. We are to know, that God made them to be his magnus Thesaurus, his
great treasure house for store, Deuteronomy. 28. 3. for there he says he will at his
pleasure open this great store house, and out of it give the first and latter
rain and snow, to molifie and make fruitful the Earth, which is so great a
blessing that we are bound to praise God continually for his gracious work.

The manner.
The manner of which work is set down in Genesis 28. 6. God, out of the lower
waters raises a sum or vapor or mist, which he condensateth in the middle
region of the Air and (...) together, or (...) into waters again and binds
them (...) in the clouds, Job 26. 8. which by his word, as by his Hosts, he
brings, as in (...), from the remotest parts of the Earth to us, or to
others, as he pleases to make the Earth fruitful, Psalm. 135. 6, 7. Of these
waters in the clouds God makes diverse impressions, Job. 38 25. as great (...)
and streams, little small rain and showers, and streams and snow, and hail,
Job. 38. 37 the clouds are his bottles for small rain and dews, and 25. verse,
so they are his spouts (...) pour out great rain, Job. 37. 6. which are called
storms. Also out of these upper waters he ordained to have snow scattered as
ashes and wool, Psalm. (...). 16. and touching these things he asks, Job 38.
22. if any man had been in this store house to see these treasures.

Aura flabilis.
As for the drier part of the Air, the end of them is to be Aura flabilis, and
by the force of their wind to fetch carry and recarry the Clouds which are his
vessels of his rain; also he has made them to sweep and cleanse, both the Air
it self from corruption, and the nether waters from (...). Thus we see the end
why God in coelo (...), has made both undam (...) and auram flabilem, as St.
Austine says, for by them he fills the (...) of Corn with goodness, and
dropeth fatness on the earth, Psalm. 65. 11. And therefore we must pray, not
only for the blessing of the earth, but also of the heaven, as Jacob Genesis 49.
25. Deuteronomy. 33. 13. Not only for the blessing of the womb of the earth, which
being a fruitful soll quickly conceives and brings forth fruit, but also
the blessing of the breasts of the Clouds, without which the fruit will very
soon perish and wither, Job 38. 8. For it is Gods blessing, both to make a land
a fruitful and fertile soil apt to conceive, and also to send seasonable rains
to it, that it may grow and be ripe and good for man's use. These all do
likewise serve for the execution as well of Gods justice to correct us, as of
his mercy to do us good: For when we displease him with our sins; he makes
these things his rods, by causing the Heavens and Clouds to be as Brass, and
the Earth as Iron thereby; and on the contrary side, when he in justice will
set wide open the windows and fludgates of heaven, to drown the earth with
floods and inundations, as he did the old World.

Usus.
And this is that use and instruction, which we are to learn out of this
division, to pray, if it please God for his blessings, and not to sin, for
fear we be scorched with droughts, and over whelmed and drowned with floods.

Fecit ergo Deus hoc expansum, quod distinguit inter has aquas, etc. Genesis 1 7.
verse.

THe treaty concerning the second days work, is divided according to the work
it self, and the name given to it, the work is set down in the sixth and
seventh, to the manner of it in the eighth verse. In the work we observed three
points, according to the three several verbs Dixit, fecit and sit: The first
contains the precept or warrant for the making of the work. The second the
workmanship and going about to do or make it. The third, the return and
certificate to signify that it was fully executed, which three are in Dixit,
fecit and factum est.

With man it often times falls out that dixit, is without fecit, that is, it
is too usual, that men promise and say much, but do it not, and many times we
see his fecit, to be without perfecit, that one may say, factum est, it is
fully and perfectly done: the first we see Mat. 21. 30. he said, but he did it
not, the other custom of men is exemplified, Luc. 14. 30. for as he did it
not, so on the other side, This man began to build a house but did not finish
it: So none can say, that his fecit, was factum est 3 the first also we see, 1 Samuel 18. 17. Saul said he would give Michol to David, but did it not, but it
was not so with God: for he is not yea in saying, and nay in doing and
performing, but as certain as he says a thing, so surely it is done, for his
word is truth, and that his deed declares; and on the other side it is far
otherwise with God, than it is with man; for if God begin a good work, he will
surely finish it thoroughly, Phil. 1. 6. perfecit quod facit, if he be the
beginner and author of any thing, he will also perfect it and finish it, Heb.
12 2. so that we shall confess, as here, that quod fecit factum est. So that
that is the first consideration in God, that these three several things,
saying, doing, and perfecting, are inseparable in him, joined and linked
together as a chain, that one ensuing the other and all following the first.

The first of these has been showed before; the two last, the Work and the
Certificate are now to be handled in order. The Work, in this seventh verse,
touching which, we see that it does stand on two points and parts. First, He
made it. Secondly, He separated it.

Concerning the making, the word gnasha signifies to make, which has an
opposite and diverse sense, from two words which may seem to be the same too,
meaning Esaias 45. 7. there is these three words formavi, creavi, feci, of these
three several words the first is common to the other two; for all that is made
of somewhat or nothing has a form; and therefore is formed: Distinctio.
but facere and creare are distinguished thus. To make presupposes a matter
subject; but to create, is to make of nothing, in the first day God created of
nothing; but now in this work he is a maker, for Coelum aereum was made of
something, the Heavens were planted, Esaias 51. 16. and therefore there was
something which was as it were, the seed, kernel, or science, or (...) of
which it was planted: It is true, that in respect of us it is more admirable to
see a thing made of nothing, because we cannot conceive it, then to see or
hear of a great thing made of a small matter because it is familiar
experience, with which we are acquainted, to see a little child prove a great
man, and a seed (...) kernel proves mighty tree: but in respect of God both
works are like, strange, and also in the respects of the works themselves to
make a tree of a kernel, and to make (...) tree of nothing is alike, though
the one we approve, because of common experience, as a matter usual and
nothing strange; for Gods power, is miraculous in both, though in the one now
it be made natural and usual, it was strange to sea it to turn water into
wine, and to feed five thousand with five (...) and two fishes; yet the strange
miracle is wrought by (...) year, as we see, but we consider it not; for God
sends the watery moisture of the Earth to be conveyed into the Vine tree,
which sap God turns into Wine, though it seem natural; and with as few Corns
of grain as will make five loaves, being sowed in the Earth will multiply and
increase to as much as will seed five thousand with bread; and two fishes will
bring so many fishes as may suffice so many fer meat; so that we have these
wonderful miracles amongst us every day.

Now touching the Heavens, the science, kernel, or plant of which they were
planted and made, was the waters, (...) (...) 3.5. The other words to which
this word in nature is opposite and (...) sense, is oper are, which signifies
with ones hand to work with tools and instruments, with laborious pains: But
God does not so make the Heavens, but he does it with as much ease as it is for
a man to breath, Psalm. 104. 30. emitte spiritum and creabunter (...) besides
the facility, with such speed and celerity that in the space of time that one
can say fiat, with the festination he does his works: which is diverse from the
custom of men in making or doing any thing; for they commonly take great
pains, and spend much time in work to no purpose, and can do nothing; as
Peter, Luke 5. 5. he labored all night and caught nothing, but it is otherwise
with God, whose word without instrument or pains, or without any delay (...)
thoroughly effect his work which he will have done: And thus we see the
reference this word has of these two words, and what we learn by it.

The third thing is a matter of inquiry, because in the former work only these
two fiat and factum est, and nothing between saying, and it was done; but here
is put in fecit, as by way of Parenthesis between them in this work, which
surely we must know is not idly set down, but to great purpose; and therefore
not curiously of us to be inquired of, why it is so placed: to answer which, we
must know that it was for our sake, simul fieri (...), it was all one to God
saying and finishing at one time, but it was meet for us to have his action and
work expressed herein. Therefore Moses, dealing here as a Prophet, does foresee
some danger and error which might arise by leaving of this clause and fecit
Deus, therefore he betimes does labor to prevent it by setting it down, for he
knew that God would not have his truth sown among thorns of Errors, Jer. 4. 4.
therefore Moses here before hand endeavors to stubbe them up Error Timaei
and Platonis.
For Time us the Pythagorean, and Plato, that great Philosopher, holding the
truth of the Creation, do notwithstanding advise this rooted thorn, that they
suppose God only but to give out the Edict and direction how and what should be
done, and to make certain Demones and Intelligentiae to be the workers, doers,
and bringers to pass of the work; and so, in that respect, ascribing worship
and honor to them, as the Instruments and Agents in this action. But God is
here set down, not only as the Master Builder, to oversee and give direction;
but also he was the only Agent and Workman which did make it himself, he both
gave out the Edict with his word, and with the same did fulfill and bring it to
pass: So that there was but one Commander, who, the self same, was the Maker
also, Esaias 40. 13, 14. Dixit, and non fuit ei consiliarius, fecit, and non fuit
ei auxiliarius: So that this excludes any Copartner with God in this
business; for then he was alone, and alone of himself did make it, not caused
it to be made; Angels Created
for the Angels and celestial Spirits were created when God said fiat lux, for
then not only all light things in mundo sensibili were made, as stars, etc.
but also all things in mundo intelligibili, as 2 Cor. 11. 14. which also may
appear by the order and placing them, first in Psalm. 148. 2. so that they could
not be created before, for then they should be eternal, nor after, for then
there is nothing to insinuate it; and indeed there is no danger thus to
understand it, but there is great danger of error to hold the contrary, that
they were created before, for then they may think, that as Hiram sent the
matter of the Temple and Solomon gave the form, so God gave the matter of the
world and the Angels the form and fashioning of it: But God in this work is
alone, for his work stands not as ours does, that is, that the matter and the
form of the work should come from diverse Authors, as before we can come to Iron
plate, we must fetch the matter from the Ironmonger and the form from the
Smith; before we can have a Garment, we must have the matter from the Draper
and the form from the Tailor: But with God it is not so, for from him
proceeds both the matter and form of all Creatures, creat, facit, format.

This is the first resolution of this question, to which there is a second
answer, which is good for instruction, Gnasha.
taken out of the nature of the word gnasha; for the Hebrews use it in their
phrase, not only to make a thing, but also to trim up and to give a better form
to any thing; in which sense it is said, 2 Samuel 19. 24. that Mephiboseth had
not made his beard nor his feet, by which is meant, had not trimmed his beard
nor washed his feet, which he had made to him before: So God in this place is
said, by this gnasha, to give the outward form to these Heavens, and so to trim
and perfect them up as they should be; for they being made before in gross, now
he stretched them out after a circular form, Job 9. 8. as having made a
Curtain, should spread it abroad, and set it up, whereas before it lay wrapped up
rudely together, Job. 22. 14. tendit Coelum, that is, now he did bend and bow
the Heavens compassed as a bow, which was made before, but not half round, but
circular round, and sphericall; and not only did he set this form to them, but
also gave them a circular and sphericall motion to turn round in their course
about the Earth, Psalm. 19. 6. it does go in his compass, in gyra sue, Preach.
1. 5, 6. the Sun and Winds do go a circuit, in circuttione, vel circuitu
suo. Thirdly, He in this kind of making them did now add to them a virtue,
force, and heavenly influence, Job 38. 31. which heavenly and comfortable
influence is called the sweetness of the Heavens, Deuteronomy. 33. 13. Therefore we
are willed to praise God in firmamento virtutis suae, Psalm. 150. 2. by which
virtue the Heavens have a comfortable and reviving force, an action, influence,
and dominion, as the word sign fieth, in these Creatures below.

And thus much of fecit. Now of the things which he made. First, We see that
whereas the Heavens before were compact and entire. Now by Gods workmanship
they are scattered and spread round about and divided; for being made, it was
Gods purpose, that it should be to this use, to be parted asunder into two
parts.

The Heavens by some is called tenue expansum, that is, a thing thinly spread
abroad. In the making of it we consider the Maker and the manner of it, which
is both simply and plainly, and also comparatively by way of resemblance set
down in the Scriptures; The Spirit of God.
for the power and force by which it was made, was the Spirit of God, The Word
of God,
the Execution^r and Minister of that thing was Gods Word, the second person who
willed and commanded it to be done, Psalm. 104. 30. He sends forth his Spirit
and they were created, Job 34. 14, 15. If he draw or gather in his Spirit, they
perish again: So that all that is made, is ascribed to the expansion and motion
of the Spirit going out; and the undoing or marring any thing is attributed to
the drawing in of it again.

The breath of Man has a diverse force and nature as it is drawn in or out;
Warm and hot.
for as it ^s with open mouth brea^hed out (which is halitus) it is warm, and
being drawn in, it is cold again; if it (...) mildly and naturally expired and
breathed out, as then it is warm and hot so being violently and forcibly with a
blast puffed our, it is dry and cold; of which two sorts of motions of Gods
Spirit is the Air made, the moist moderate showers and rain by the one, Psalm.
147. 18. and winds and frost by the other, Job 37. 10. So it is (...), vis
caloris, which warmeth, rarefieth, and makes thin everything living: so that
power moving on the waters, made them grow into a thin body, where of the Air
was made.

Now for the comparison, this work of the Spirit is compared to an Eagle, or
any other bird, in sitting on the eggs to hatch their young: For so God having
made a nest and laid or brought forth his young, as it were, unperfected, does
now by his spirit incubare, that is sit and spread his wings over them, and so
giving vital life and power, break the shell, and sic pullulavit mundum. Thus
we see the power of Gods Spirit in the nature of the Word, and the resemblance
of the comparison here used.

The matter.
For the matter, we see that the waters are the seed of the Heavens, which,
receiving a power by the operation of Gods Spirit, proceed into a thin vapor,
which is partly Air partly water, and not perfectly either, which mist or
vapor God lifts up and sublimateth, Jer. 10. 13. and by that means made it
Coelum aereum.

There are four comparisons in Scripture to set out this work, To a Still,
the first, Job 36. 27. being lift up in vapor, he does in the middle Region by
cold cruddle and condensate it, as in a still, Psalm. 18. 12. to a Glassman,
The second to a Glassman, Job 37. 18. for so he seems to blow up the Heavens
round. to a Goldsmith,
The third to a Goldsmith, which is in the word Raha, Exodus 39. 3. for so he
beat it out abroad. to an Upholster.
The fourth to an Upholster, Psalm. 104. 2. for so as a Curtain he unrowleth it
and extends the Heavens abroad, Esaias 40. 22. thus you see the workmanship of
the Heavens in the Agent, in the Matter, and the Manner of the Work.

The end why God made the Heavens.
Now the end why he made them was, That it might be a Pavilion or Tent, Esaias 40.
22. or a Curtain, Psalm. 104. 2. over our heads, where the word used is the same
which is set down in the making of the Tabernacle, which signifies either
pellis or cortina, a covering or curtain of skinns.

The Heavens were made thin, to the end there might be a space for motion and
operation; therefore it is driven thin above, and divided from the nether
waters, Dan. 12. 3. and therefore it is thin here below, that both the lights
of Heaven might have passage to us through the Air, being corpus transparens
and translucidum, Dan. 4. and also that the comfortable influence, virtue, and
force of the Heavens might have free and easy passage to us, by and through
the thin Air.

It is not a disordered confusion.
Now for the dividing, The word here used is not Babell, which, Genesis 11. 9.
signifies division, for that word notes such a division which is a disordered
confusion of things, as it were renting or tearing or breaking a thing in
diverse pieces without order or regard, but Gods division is not such; for as he
made all things well, so he divides all things well, Jer. 10. 12. Pro. 8. 27.
for this word signifies that it was an apt and fit division, so artificially
and orderly done, as if it were divided by line and rule.

Secondly, Gods division is not a scatterring of things being divided, as it
was in Babell, but such a division which has a conjunction and unity, and
agreement of parts which are divided, which is best expressed in the division
of ears, eyes, and nostrills, which being separated, do notwithstanding meet
in one nerve as one and the same; so it is in all things that God divides, as
the fingers and toes, etc. they meet in unity at some one point: So where the
waters are divided, it is with agreement, quasi rota in rotam, Ezekiel. 10. 10.
having a mutual unity, intercourse, and reciprocation one to the other; for
the Air is the means whereby the upper waters are knit and united to the
nether, Genesis 7. 11. The Airie Airie is, as it were, the windows of Heaven, and
doors through which is passage for light and rain, Gen 8 3. so this division
(...) to this end, (...) the thing divided, The upper Waters.
we are to consider now but of the upper waters above, the lower waters we shall
speak of hereafter.

We see here God divides the Clouds from the Channels, which upper Waters he
divides into several chambers or stories called contignationes, Psalm. 104. 3.
which we call the three Regions of the Air, in the uppermost of which is snow
and hail, in the middle one rain, in the lower dews.

Another division is this, God made not the upper waters entirely on compact
substance, but bound them up in diverse bonds of clouds, that through them,
being divided, the light and influence of Heaven might pass down to the earth
through them, which else could not. There are three things of which we read in
the Scripture, which are raised out of the Earth, and do concur and meet in
the Air, of which, two have names, and by them we may give a name to the
third; the first is the Clouds, which are called his Chariots, and the second
are the Winds, or horses that draw them, Psalm. 104. 2. therefore the third,
which is the Waters, must needs be the Carriage which is in the Chariots.

The Winds four.
The winds he draws out of the deep, Psalm. 135. 6, 7. and so are the Clouds
taken out of the deep, Psalm. 33. 7. for a vapor being drawn up, the watrynesse
of it being dried up, it becomes of a windy nature: Touching the division of
the Winds, that principally they be four, Zach. 6. 5. The use of Winds.
which have their use in the four quarters and parts of the firmament, which use
is, Job 37. 21. vis purificandi, to cleanse the Air and Waters, which else
would corrupt and (...). Also the Winds have a necessary use in respect of
the Waters; for the South and West Winds bring rain, moist, and warm weather,
and the East and North Winds serve to bring cold and dry weather and frosts,
Luke 12. 54.

The Clouds, the matter, the use of them.
In the second place, for the Clouds, they rise also out of the waters and
deeps, Psalm. 33. 7. and as it is plain, 1 Reg. 18. 44. for the Clouds rose out
of the Sea, of which Clouds came the rain. They serve in regard of the
firmament for a shadow to cool us and keep us from parching in the time of
Summer and Harvest, Esaias 18. 4. And in regard of the waters, they serve as
vessels and bottels to hold and contain them, and that to the end that they may
not be poured down all at once, but, as Job says 26. 8. they do quasi
cribrare, as it were sift them in small drops down on the Earth.

The Waters.
The Waters are divided into aquas fluidas, and congelatas, for the flowing
waters God descends to the lowest and basest use, even he made them to soften
and molifie the clodds of Earth in the Country to the Husbandman, Job. 5. 10.
and to wash and cleanse our streets in the City.

The Dew, and Rain.
For the Dew, which is a liquid and slim'd moisture, and the rain also: The use
is 1 Reg. 17. 1. they serve for drink to men, and the Dews serve for herbs and
grass, whose roots being near to the uppermost face of the ground, would be
dry and wither without such Dews to moist it, Pro. 3. 20. and because there are
plants and trees which have their roots deep in the Earth, so that Dews cannot
pearce to them, therefore God has provided a greater store of water, the
showers and Rain, Joel. 2. 23. which may reach to the deep roots.

Now for the congealed waters by the cold: God gives the snow like wool, to
keep out the cold blasts of the North wind, that the seed may be warm and
nourished in the ground, Psalm. 147. 16. and he scatters the frest to serve
for ashes, to keep in the seed which is in the Earth, that it spire not, nor
spread out too soon, before it be well seasoned and rooted in the Earth, lest
after it should for want of root and deepnesse of Earth dry and wither away
when the Sun comes, Luke 8. 6. Thus we see the waters elevated and drawn up
laden in clouds and thrown down to our great use and benefit. But there is
another use which God has ordained, to put all these his Waters to, and that
is as well to be rodds, to correct and punish us for (...), for his Justice, as
well as the former use was for our good, of his Mercy, Job. 37. 13.

First, for the Winds, When in Mercy he will do us good, he makes them auram
temperatam; but when he in Justice will make them his rodds of correction, he
makes the Winds spiritum procellae, by which confringit naves in mare, Psalm.
48. 7. and concutit and praecipitas domus, Job 1. 19. and overturneth trees by
the roots.

When God will have the Clouds instruments of his Mercy, he makes them
pregnant and with Child with waters, for the first and later rain do make the
land fruitful, Job 37. 11. When in Justice he will have them rodds to correct
us, he makes nubes steriles, as Solomon says, 25. 14. and, as Jude says,
Clouds without water, we shall see them, but have no good of them, for our
sin; also, for our sins, instcad of dews, he sends mildews, Hag. 2. 18. the
rain of Gods mercy is a blessing to us, Psalm. 68. 9. it is a gracious rain.
When God in Justice will have the rain to be his rod, he sends and makes
raging rains and storms and tempests to destroy our fruit and food, Pro. 28. 3
For the frost and hail, God makes them his rods to kill and destroy their
Vines and Mulberrie trees, Psalm. 78. 47. And thus much of the uses of the
waters.

Now of both these together was the Firmament made: For this Air, Coelum
aereum, is more necessary for men then the light which was made the first day;
for we may have a use of darkness, and sleep without light, but we cannot
live, sleeping nor waking, without Air to breath in, sive firmamento
destruitur firmamentum panis, Psalm. 105. 16. the distemperature of it causes a
famine, Ose 2. 21, 21. in Israel famine, and men call and seek to the Earth for
food, the Earth has no power, it cannot give any, but is dry and barren
without the Heavens, and therefore it calls and waits on the Heavens for
his dews and influence, and the Heavens cannot give such gracious rain, and
therefore calls to God to give them a warrant and commandment and power to
do it: So God hears the Heavens, the Heavens hears the Earth, and the
Earth hears the Corn, Wine and Oil, and then they hear and sustain Isreal's
want.

Fuit sic.
The last point is fuit sic, which is the return and accomplishment of that
mandate, for at his word all things were created, yet not in actibus suis sed
in (...) suis, as we say in the Schools; for it did not then in the second day
presently rain, snow, hayle and freeze, but God made them meet and able and fit
for that purpose for ever after, as God did all his work sine adjumento
consilii, sic fecit sine adjumento auxilii alicujus, as he gave order with his
word how things should be done, even so they come to pass, Esaias 40. 13, 14.

Here are two things in this to be considered, first virtus verbi: Secondly,
obedientia Creaturae. The power of Gods word is seen in that it is able to
bring to pass any thing sine mora, sine labor: Solomon would build a Temple
very beautiful, 1 Reg. 6. 38. but he could not do it in less time then seven
years; and after, when it was made the second time, forty and six years they
say the Temple was making, and can Christ rear it up presently in three days?
this they thought impossible, but behold here is a greater Temple then Salomons
was, yet he made the whole frame of it in no longer space and time then one may
say fiat Coelum, for presently fuit sic, says Moses, Psalm. 148. 5. he only
spoke the word and they were made; for the other he did it without trouble or
pains, 1 Reg. 5. 15. Solomon, to have his Temple made (though it must be seven
years a doing) yet he must have threescore and ten thousand Artificers, and
fourscore thousand Laborers, even 150000 men might be troubled to labor about
the world, and spend infinite cost about Instruments and Engines to do it; But
here with God is no such matter, no help of men, no need of Instruments, nor
any fear of let or impediment to hinder his work and will, but his word and
power to bring all to pass.

Obedientia Creaturae.
Touching the obedience of the Firmament created, we have three things to
consider: First, with what celerity, conformity, and constancy all things were
done as God would have them. For the speed and celerity: We see that the
Waters, as if they had ears to hear what the word commanded, and wings to fly
about the execution of it so soon, yea more speedily they did it. We read in
the Scriptures that God preached to none but only to man; for it is enough for
him only to say the word to all Creatures of the Earth else, and it is done;
but he must stand and take pains to preach an hour every day to persuade us
that are men, which are far more beholden unto God than any Creature else,
and yet it will not avail to make us obedient to his word.

As for conformity to his word, it was sic, even after the manner and form in
all respects as he would have it: But if we do a thing it is lame and
unperfect in some respect, and not conformable to his will.

Last of all constancy and perpetuity, Psalm. 119. 91. they continue still
according to their ordinance; for all things serve thee: He has set thee a Law
which shall not be broken, Psalm. 148. 6. For it is a wonder that such Seas of
waters which hang and fly over our heads daily, do not fall on us, and with
their weight destroy us; for we see what a bucker of water is for heaviness in
his fall, yet the pillars of God uphold them that they fall not, which pillars
one would think should be aere, that is, made of brass, but they are aereae,
airie pillars, and yet last longer and are more durable then the greatest
brazen pillars that we can imagine, for in time they would corrupt and be eaten
up of the waters; but yet the power of God has so strengthened the Air, that
being the weakest thing that is, as our Proverb says, As weak as Water, not
being able to sustain it self, no not to be a pillar to hold up a feather from
the ground, yet it is made a Firmament, that is, a most firm, sure, and durable
pillar to uphold all these Clouds and bottels of water above; they move motu
immobili and varietate invariabili, and so they continue after Gods ordinance,
even unto this day, as the Psalmist says.

Expansum autem hoc Deus Vocavit Coelum: sic fuit vespera, and fuit mane diei
secundi. Genesis 1. 8.

WHich words contain in them the second principal part of the second days
work, which is the word of denomination and entitling the Firmament thus with a
new name. When God made Abraham, the Father of the faithful, he exchanged and
gave him a new name, Genesis 17. 5. When Jacob was exalted to the like dignity,
his name was also changed and he called Israel, Genesis 32. 28. So here having
made ex abysso Coelum, that is, as some say, Coelum a coeno, of the dreggs of
that gulf, then he vouchsafes, according to the dignity of (...), to give it
a name agreeable thereunto.

Touching the denomination in general, I showed four things before, which I
will not repeat now, but only, call to your remembrance. The first was, The
name of things are of freehold, and therefore must move us to attention,
because, though these works are beneficial to all Creatures, yet the
apprehension of their names belong only to man, at whom God did aim and level
in this work.

The second, That the things which are diverse in nature, must be distinguished
in name.

The third, The manner of giving names must be in proportion agreeable to the
nature of them.

And lastly, What the significations of the names are. Not repeating this
generality, we will now descend to the particularity of this name, and see by
the notations of the word what is signified thereby.

The old English called the Heavens aloft, as though it were lifted up, as it
was out of the deep. The Latins call it Caelum quasi caelatum, that is,
embroidered and garnished, as it is. The Grecians call it (...), quasi terminus
mundi, as it were the border and bound of the World. The Hebrews call it
Shameshe: Concerning which word there is three several opinions, all which may
be well and to good purpose received: There are of the Hebrews which deduce the
word from the verb Shama, which is to wonder, because of the admiration which
all men have of this glorious World, especially if we consider with David, Psalm
8. 4, 5. that God having such excellent and glorious Creatures in Heaven should
so, notwithstanding, regard man, which is but a clod of earth, as to endue him
with these divine graces, and with a reasonable soul: The admirablenesse of
this work consists first, In that they being made of the dreggs of the deep,
are notwithstanding the most splendent and glorious Creatures of God. Also in
that they moving continually are immobilia, and varying and changing in their
courles always, are notwithstanding invariabilia, for they move motu immobili
and varietate invariabili. Also in that they consisting of water, which is most
weak and infirm, are nothwithstanding most sure and firm of all other things.
The other opinion takes it from the verb Magam and the adverb Iham, as if God
had appointed with his finger to the Heavens and said, Here are all things, if
you want light, waters, either for soul or body, here they are to be found,
and here you may have it, as indeed all good graces come from above, from our
Father in Heaven, Jam. 1. 17.

The second note touching the word is, in that it is of the duall number, which
implies that the Heavens are double and two fold, which is apparent in the 17.
verse, where it is said, that the Stars are in Heaven, and in the 26. verse
it is said, that the Fowls also fly in Heaven. Now this is plain and sensible
in every man's eyes, that the stars are not where the Birds do fly, neither
do the Fowls fly where the Stars are. Out of Psalm. 68. 33. the ancient
Hebrews do note to us, that there was a former and later Heaven, a higher and
a lower Heaven made by God, the lower Heavens in the Scriptures are usually
termed and called Coeli, Psalm. 148. 4. and the upper Heavens, which is the Seat
of God, is called Coeli Coelorum, 1 Reg. 8. 27. and in other places, for as
there was in the Temple of Salemon Sanctum and Sanctum Sanctorum, so in the the
great Temple of the world there is Coelum and Coelum Coelorum, to answer to it
in the upper and higher Heavens, as was shadowed in the Temple, is the mercy
Seat, the Altar, and the Propiciatory; but in the nether is atrium, I.
Benjamin, etc, that is, a division of several Courts for Stars, Clouds,
Fowls, Men, etc. Between the higher and the nether Heavens, as it was in the
Temple, there is a Vail or Curtain spread, Heb. 6. 19. which does part the one
from the other. Besides these two Heavens we read of a third Heaven, 2 Cor. 12.
2. which is the highest number we read of in Gods word, so that besides the
Merchant man's Heavens, which is prosperous wind, and besides the Husbandmans
Heaven, from whence comes seasonable weather in Summer and Winter; there is a
third Heaven which we must seek for, which is Regnum Coelorum, for the Fowls
do fly per medium Coelorum, 17. and 26. verses, as the Angel did, Rev. 8.
13. therefore there is a Heaven on both sides of this middle Heaven. The
impressions of the Air are the Host and Army of the nether Heavens, and the
Stars are the Hosts of God, which inhabit and are in Garrison in the second
Heavens, and the Hosts of Heavenly Soldiers, Saints, and Angels, are the
Armies of the third Heavens, Luke 2. 13. which Heaven is called solum gloriae,
for Heaven is his throne, it is called the habitation of Gods holiness, Esaias
63. 15. And God is described by this place, Matthew. 5. 34. Deus qui sedet in
Coelum, Psalm. 121. 2. so his place is in the third and highest Heavens, and
from thence comes the true wind and spirit, John 3. 8. and the true rain and
dew and water of Grace and life, John 4 14. and from thence descended the true
bread of life, John 6. 32. and the oil of joy and all good things spiritual
whatsoever; and from thence we are to look for them; Thus we may consider of
Heaven, though we might here rather know and learn the way thither, then
curiously to search what it is, which we cannot find nor comprehend, 1 Cor. 2.
7.

I come to the two other Heavens, because this place teaches and warranteth us
only but of these two. Touching the second Heaven, this we find, that it is a
glorious body, Exodus 24. 10. though it consists of and by the waters, as St.
Peter says 2 Pet. 3. 5. as in the water we see no diversity or variety; yet in
the body of the Heavens there is great variety; for it is as it is in natural
things. In a kernel we can perceive no variety, but yet it brings a tree
forth, which has great variety, as a body of wood, bark, leaves, blossoms, and
fruit, and by this incarnation we have participation of those graces, Heb. 10.
20. and he calls all to him to buy these waters, John 7. 38. 39. and by his
spirit he will power them into our souls, Romans 5. 5. Water of Meditation.
and of these waters the Patriarchs and we tasted, 1 Cor. 10. 3. and by these
waters of Grace we have passage and navigation from Earth to Heaven, Act. 2.
17. 18. by our waters we can pass from one Country to another.

Waters of Grace.
These waters of Grace are contained in the clouds of the Law, the preaching
thereof does drop gracious words, as the dew, Deuteronomy. 32. 2. and therefore the
wiseman says, that the lips of instruction are a wellspring of life; so the
preaching and ministry of Gods word is the clouds and bottels which hold this
water. Therefore Acts 14. 3. and Acts 20. 32. Gods word is called verbum
gratiae, which does contain heavenly grace as the clouds do water, which by
the inluence of Gods spirit is made aqua vitae and vivificans, John 6. 35. for
the word is as seed, but the spirit gives life, and so that is made effectual
in us, and we made fruitful unto God, and as a sweet ground whom God has
blessed, Genesis 26. 12.

Now as God, in the name of Heaven, holds up the finger, as it were, and
says here is waters to be had and looked for, so the same word of God which
made the Heavens, must give these waters from thence; and therefore they which
want wisdom, and knowledge, let them ask and seek them of God, Jam. 1. 5. 17.
The bucket by which we must draw this water is a true faith, Esaias 12. 2, 3.
Prove. 12 17. 19. and then our souls became like a well watered garden, Jer. 31.
12. This water it yields for meditation.

There is also profitable matter to learn for (...), For as we see God does
here, we must express the like in our actions, that we may be like unto God:
First, When we have received our light of knowledge, we are taught by the order
of Creation, that the next course in regeneration is to extenuate our earthly
affections, and to sublime and elevate and to lift up our minds to Heaven,
Phil. 3. 20. So St. Paul wills us, Col. 3. 2. this is the laying up of
treasures in Heaven, Matthew. 6. 20. we must think on Jerusalem which is above,
if we will be free Citizens in it, Gal, 4. 26. Secondly, for the division, As
there is a Heaven and Earth, the two parts of the world, so is there in man two
parts correspondent, the earthly Adam made of the dust, and the spirit and soul
which God gave, (...). 12. 7. which is called the Heavenly Adam, 1 Cor. 15. 47.
48. God will first say, let be a separation, our souls must be separated from,
earth, earthly and carnal things, as we said before, and ascend; And as all
earthly things which make for the flesh, are brought into a narrow compass of
the Earth, which is but a prick in a circle, whereas God has reserved the
large spacious room of the Heavens for our souls, so must we bring our carking
cares of this life into a narrow room of our hearts, and let the whole compass
of our souls and thoughts be filled with the study and care of the Kingdom of
God. Thirdly, As the part of waters which ascended, became a Firmament, and are
most sure and immutable unto the end of the World; so must our souls, having
begun in the spirit, ascend to Heaven, be constant, firm and immutable to the
end of our lives, and never end in the flesh, Gal. 3. 3. nor fall to the Earth
as those stars did, Rev. 6. 13. for it it is the part of a foolish and wicked
man that is mutable and wavering, Prove. we must not be Rubenites, Genesis 49. weak
and inconstant as water; for a just man's heart is firm and shall not shrink nor
be moved, but (...) his (...) in God, Psalm. And this is the part of Martyrs,
for though they are by nature weak and fearful and as waters, yet by Gods
grace are made, as the Firmament, more sure against all Gods enemies than a
wall of brass.

Matter of thankfulness.
The last use is for matter of thankfulness and gratefullnesse, with which we
will close up all. For we see that when the Earth sends up but a thin and a
small mist, the Clouds requite it by pouring down showers; So Cursus Dei
gratiae dependet in recursu nostrarum gratiarum actionis; for as the Clouds
will send no more rain, if the Earth will send up no vapors, nor breathe up
any mists; so only Gods Graces will descend into our Souls, when our
gratefullnesse does from thence ascend up to God; for then they cease
distilling down on us, when we leave off to be thankful. Wherefore let us be
thankful for Coelo aereo, for without the benefit and pureness of it, we
cannot breathe and live, Psalm. 65. and let us be thankful pro Coelo aethereo,
for the comfortable and sweet influence of the stars, because the Earth has
no power to bring fruit, without the virtue of the Heavens.

And lastly, Let us (...) thankful pro Coelo Coelorum, or Coelo Coelesti, that
is, for the third Heavens; for as we must praise God for these sensible and
visible Heavens, so must we for these invisible and incomprehensible Heavens,
which we enjoy only by hope and faith; for seeing we know that he created them
to be a dwelling place for his Saints, John 14. 2. we must not only praise God
with thankful hearts for it, but also prepare our souls that we may be meet to
be received into them, with the wise Virgins evermore praising him, for that
although he has not made us Haeredes regalis mansionis here on Earth, yet he
has called us to have mansionem in regno Coelorum which he send us, which has
purchased it for us cui honos and gloria in seculum.

Postea dixit Deus, confluant aquae istae, quae sub hoc Coelo sunt in locum
unum, and conspicua sit arida: and fuit ita. Genesis 1. 9.

THE action of the second day was suspended, as I told you the last time, and
in some sort left undone and unperfect, by reason that the Prophet delayed and
deferred the approbation of the Heavens, until he should show us what should
become of the nether waters then separated; wherefore having declared how the
upper waters, being lift up, were stretched and spread abroad, and made a
Firmament; now he shows how the nether waters below were gathered together to
make the Seas, and withal he shows us the Earth (which, as St. Ambrose
says, lay as a wrack in the midst and bottom of the waters) was by Gods word
drawn up and brought to light, and made profitable for man and beast. For after
the swaddling bands of darkness were removed and the disordered course of
waters, well ordered and disposed, then the eye of Gods providence, from which
nothing is hid, beholds the Earth which was covered and swallowed up in the
deep, Psalm. 104. 6. and so he delivers it of his goodness both from the
outward impediments of the waters, which kept it from the sight of the light,
and also from the inward and natural inconvenience of emptiness, by which it
was unmect for any living thing to dwell on it; which mercy of God, because it
shows it self to Earth, and we are earth, dust and ashes, therefore it does
so much the more nearly teach and concern us, though light was made, and the
firmament framed, yet both these parts of the world, and the world it self was
unperfect, until the Earth was discovered. Therefore Moses tells us, that
God did, as it were, make haste and speedily pass over the first and second
day, that he might the sooner come to the Earth, which in the next place he
frames, partly to show that he is not bound to any course or frame in building
his house, as to descend orderly from the cealing of Heaven down to the
foundation of the Earth, and partly to manifest his spiritual care and
providence that he has for the Earth and earthly things, indeed, as the
Prophet tells us, Esaias 45. 18. God made not the Earth in vain, but to this
end, that it might be habitable, but it passes our capacities to think that
God would put it to so honorable a use, as to be the place on which he would
set his chief delight; But whereas we would think that God, being in Heaven,
would not abase himself to vouchsafe to look down on the Earth in this
miserable and desolate case; yet now this third day being come, in which the
Earth should be made and perfected, we see God adorneth this work with a double
Precept, with two actions, and a double approbation, to show his special care
and delight he had in this work, for here is twice dixit Deus, and twice fecit,
and twice dixit Deus bonum esse, which repetition of redoubling we only see
when there is another revolution and another third day, in which God made man
of the Earth, to be the perfection of the Earth, as it was the perfection of
the world. Therefore we see, that though the Heavens were his own habitation,
and the Earth he meant to give and bestow on men, (...). 115. 16. yet he
seems to have less care and regard of Heaven than of Earth, and to bestow,
as it were, double pains and cost on our habitation, over he did upon his own,
which is our great comfort, that God rewards and esteems or respects so
much this Earth.

4 Parts.
In this days work we are to consider four parts, each doubled, First, two
Decrees; then two Actions performed: Thirdly, by two accomplishments: Fourthly,
by two approbations.

On the Earth we see two actions necessarily performed, First, the emptying and
removing of that it should not have, which was the outward impediment of a huge
number of waters, which hindered the sight of it and ability to be inhabited.

The second the delivering and removing from it his nether and inward
inconvenience of emptiness, being void of all things meet for habitation, and
replenishing it with store and variety of Plants and Herbs, etc. And so having
removed the outward and inward impediment, Tohu, Tobohu, which it had within
and without, he finished the work of God, gets out a several warrant to
remove both inconveniences, to this end, that it be habitable and stored with
necessaries for them that dwell therein.

The parts are the Decree and the Action; the giving out of the Decree is to be
considered in this word Dixit, the tenor of the Decree is durable: First, for
the removing of the waters: Secondly, for the appearing of the Earth: The third
and last place sets down the accomplishment of it. Touching the giving out
of the Decree, to omit the things before rehearsed, I will deliver these three
points, First, the giving out of it in regard of God: Secondly, touching the
word: Thirdly, of the number.

1.
For the first, Seeing Abraham makes it a great matter, Genesis 18. 27. that Earth
should seem to speak to God, we may think it a wonder and a strange thing that
God should so abase himself, as it were, to behold, much more to vouchsafe to
speak to this rude and poor Creature, which lay in worse and baser case than
any other; for whereas other Creatures in their imperfection had but one
inconvenience, we see this had two, without and within: Wherefore, if we make
this a matter of inquiry, the Scriptures show us this reason, that it is Gods
usual custom and nature and delight, to show his goodness, especially in
exalting things humble and most base, and to lift the poor out of the mire, Job
5. 11. It is a known thing, that God Humilibus dat gratiam, Pro. 3. 34. which
all the Apostles also teach; wherefore the Earth, being the lowest and basest,
and most poor and humble, does God of his grace and goodness choose to give it
this grace, and to exalt it thus.

The Prophet tells us, that God had made choice to dwell in two places,
Habitat aut in aeternitate, or else habitat in humilitate, that is, he will no
where dwell, but either in the high Heavens, or else in the low and humble
Earth. Therefore of his goodness he vouchsafed to seek a treasure house in the
Earth wherein to keep his chosen, and so has made the Earth, as it were, the
ornament of the Heavens.

Thus we see the Decree in respect of God.

2.
Secondly for the Word. As we saw the word of God to be the pillar of the
Heavens, so here we see it serves to build and uphold the Earth, and as the
Spirit then moving, by dilatation made and spead abroad the Heavens, so here
the work and power of the Spirit is seen in contraction, for so the Earth was
made, and the Seas, gathering in the waters; and as the Heavens were by
division, so now the Earth and Waters are made by union, being joined together.
So that as a man's hand is called instrumentum instrumentorum; So Gods word is
Gods hand, by which the Heavens and Earth were made, Psalm. 33. 6. By the word
of the Lord the Heavens were made, that is, Psalm. 102. 25. they are the work of
his hands, the Word and Spirit, and as there he speaks of them as of a body,
so here he calls it Synagoga aquarum, a concourse or gathering of waters,
thereby comparing the Sea to a great Cathedral Church, and the Arms, Streams,
and Rivers to be as it were Parish Churches to that Sea or Diocese; so that as
all inferior Parishes are ordered and depend on their Mother Church, so does
this teach us to think of the Seas and gathering of waters.

Touching the name and title given to them, there are diverse judgments and
opinions, but they may be reduced to these four: 1.
The first has a denotation and pointing at the properties and qualities of the
water and Seas: 1.
And first from the plenty and abundance of them, in which sense we call any
great quantity a Sea, as a Sea of People, of troubles, etc.

2.
Secondly, For the instability, in which respect, the wicked are compared to the
Sea, as tossed in trouble and wavering in inconstancle, Esaias 57. 20.

3.
Thirdly, In respect of the raging and unrulinesse of the Seas, Psalm. 65. 7. 2.
therefore, for these ill qualities of the waters, they think that God gave the
Sea this name: Other think that God gave not that name to signify any evil,
but rather the good properties and nature of it, and therefore they say that it
has its name because the Seas were, as it were, the mother, out of whose womb
the earth was taken, as Eve out of Adams side, and it was not only taken e
visceribus aquarum, as having a womb, as Job says 38. 8. but also the Earth
takes his nourishment ex visceribus aquarum, for of it self it is dry and
witherly withal, Prove. 30. 16. and is as a Child thirsting, gaping, and
opening his mouth for the moisture of the waters to drink and be satisfied with
it, Psalm. 143. 6. so they think that it has his name hereof, and from and out
of it issues the Earth, and is nourished also thereby.

3.
The third sort think that it is nominated from the situation and place which
it has, for if we look in a Map of the World and set our face to the East, we
shall see that the Seas are placed on the right hand and the Earth situated on
the left, as giving it the right hand of fellowship.

4.
The fourth and last sort are the best, who considering the two words which
signify the Earth and the Sea, Majim and Jamin, for the first letter put to
the latter end of the other word makes them all one, and the last letter of
the second word put before the first, makes the two words to be all one
without difference, which is done only by a transposition of letters, which
show that Waters naturally are above the Earth, and yet by Gods transposition
the Earth is set above the Waters, and so they are without difference joined as
in one Globe.

This transposition of the things they gather out of the transposition of
words; for at the first naturally the Seas eat up and devour the Earth, but
now being transposed and set aloft, it feeds and nourishes it; at the first
it was the grave of the Earth, but now it is as a garment to it, Psalm. 104. 6.
and so by Gods spirit it is transposed, and God did as it were change and
transpose his Decree to have it so, Job 38. 10.

The third point is, That it is set down in the plural number; for though we
call all the gathering together of the waters but one body, singular, yet it
has two shores, which are the Seas lips through which he thrusts forth, as
it were, his tongue by rivers into the land, so in his parts it is plural, as
in arms and fingers, but all this plurality joyneth together in one salt Sea,
Genesis 14. 3. and we do call that the main Ocean Sea, which is the greatest
place whereto is the gathering together of all waters, Joshuah 15.7. and 47.
Job calls the Seas, the bottom of waters 38. 16. and the other Rivers and
streams to be, as it were, salt tears dropping and distilling from the eyes of
the deep Seas, which running through the veins of the Earth is cleansed and
purified from his brackish and barren nature, and so it is made profitable and
pleasant and good.

Now to the second part of this work, which is Gods approbation, touching
which, first of Gods view, and then of the goodness of them.

This speech is taken from Artificers; for as they having made a thing, will
return to behold and view it, either to amend it if it be amiss, or to commend
it if be well. So it is said, That God, having perfected all waters above and
below and the Earth, he took a view and consideration of them, not to amend or
correct them, for he needed not, because he is so perfect a workman that all
his works are most perfect and cannot be amended or made better; for though
foolish men think this or that evil, or imagine how it may be better, yet God
knows all to be most absolutely and perfectly good; and therefore it is said
that his looking on it was only to approve and allow it as good in it self for
us, and herein God differs from men; for men are careless in their work, so
they do it, they care not how it be done; but God will not do a thing, but he
will see it well done, and confirm and avouch it to be perfectly good.

Duplex usus.
This example teaches us to have a double use of Gods Creatures: The one a
natural use of them, as the Earth to tread on, the light to see by: The other
is a spiritual use, which is usus reflexus, which is the consideration of Gods
mercy and goodness in making these things, and our grateful acknowledgement
thereof, for as God would not make them materially, but regard and consider
them in their qualities spiritually; so we in using them naturally, must make
this spiritual use of them admirari Artem, adorare Artificem.

We will first speak of the Waters, and then of the goodness of them: Of the
nether Waters.
We have before spoken of the upper waters; now this is to be understood of
these below, which are gathered together in the Seas; for these also God says
are good, in speaking of which, we must divide the waters, as the old Hebrews,
for all waters are good, both those which they call the waters of Bethlem, that
is, good and sweet waters, for which David longed, 1 Reg. 23. 15. and also the
waters of Jericho, 2 Reg. 2. 19. which were salt and unfruitful.

Waters of Bethlem, and Jericho.
Touching the waters of Bethlem, 1.
First, they were good; for they have a double use, profit, and goodness which
we find; the one is by reason of a filthiness and foul soil and corruption
which the Earth and Earthly things bring to us, and which our own sweat and
excrements will cause about us, and it is a necessary virtue to wash, cleanse,
and purify or scourc those things about us which are foul and unclean, as by
pouring water into our hands to wash them, 2 Reg. 5. 10. 14. or to wash our
clothes and apparel, 2 Samuel 19. 24. if we should want and lack water but for
these uses, it would be ill with us, so good and necessary they are for our
life. This good and necessary use of water is spiritually signified in the
Lavor of the Temple in the old Law, and in the Sacrament of Baptism in the new
Testament.

2.
The second goodness and benefit in it, is in regard of drought and heat; for
when we or the Earth is dry and thirsty, the water is drink with his moisture
to satisfy it, and when we are hot, the water, naturally cold, has a cooling
face to refresh us, as the heart being in a chafe and set in a heat by chafing
is faint, and longs and brayeth for the waters, Psalm. 42. 1. so does man's
heart thirst and cannot endure the drought and heat within, except it be cooled
with the drink of the waters; and therefore it is said, Psalm. 104. 10.
propinquavit Deus, that is (as the word imports) when God made the waters, he
began, and did, as it were, drink to all the Creatures, showing them that there
was the place where they should fetch drink, and so to pledge him for ever
thereat: And in respect of this goodness which we find in the nature of the
waters, we see that those things which are very good, and so necessary that we
cannot be without them, they are compared and said to be as cold as water to a
faint and thirsty soul, Prove. 25. 25. Besides this, it has a good use to
dress our meats as well as to be drink.

Salt Waters.
Now for the waters of Jericho. Those are bitter and brackish waters of the
Seas, they were made also very good, and to a most commodious use, for they are
made promptuarius, a store house or treasury from whence comes all waters in
the world, both above in the Clouds and below in the Earth: Clouds, Waters from
the Sea.
For the Clouds, it is said; that God calls and raises waters out of the Sea,
and causes it to ascend into the Clouds, and so by drops to descend down into
the Earth; Amos 5. 8. So the Cloud waters are from the Seas.

So fresh Waters.
So are all the fresh waters in the fountains and springs, for as Job says 38.
8. they are tanquam lachrymae trickling and distilling from the eyes and head
of the Seas; for they make the world as a body like a man, as they compare man
to the World; for the head and higher parts is the waters, the bones of the
body is the Quarries and Rocks, the Muscles and Flesh is the earthly part of
hills, etc. the Conduit pipes and Fountains of Water streaming and running in
the Earth, are called the veins of the Earth; that the Springs and Fountains
issuing and springing out; are as the blood letting and opening of a vein; and
as in a man's body when the veins are (...) in diverse places, the whole body
must needs he overwhelmed and all imbrued in his own blood, and perish; so it
is said of the World, Genesis 7. 11. in the great deluge, in which the World
perished by water, rupti sunt fontes Abyssi, which breaking up of the fountains
was the cause that the waters played above the Earth, so that all the blood and
veins come and go to one head and original of the liver; so the Rivers have
their waters from the Sea, and do return them thither again, Preach. 1. 7.

And this is the third miracle which we see in this work of the Waters: First,
We saw them at Gods word ascending up into the Clouds, and descending.
Secondly, The lower waters standing up on a heap and continuing so. Thirdly,
That the Rivers ever running into the Sea, and yet are never empty and dry: and
again the Sea ever receiving all waters that come, and thereby being ever full,
is not satisfied as never full, and yet never overmatcheth the bancks, which
wonderful miracle in this work of God we see every day, and yet regard it not.

2.
The second goodness and benefit of these waters is in Psalm. 104. 26. that men
may say, there go the Ships, that is, God made it a fit and good place for
Navigation, non ad habitandum sed ad navigandum and natandum, by which passage
of Merchandise and Seafaring men, we disburden our selves of those superfluous
commodities which our Land affords, and get thereby, by exchange, the
commodities of other Countries, which we want: So that as God has Wagons and
Chariots in the Clouds, and we Wagons and Chariots on the Earth and Land, so
God has by this taught us to make Ships as our Wagons by Sea to transport and
carry and have passage from one Nation to another. But though we can have our
horses and Wagons on the Land when we list, yet cannot Mariners and Merchants
have their Sea Wagoners to drive their Wagons there, at their pleasures, but
must wait and tarry Gods leisure for prosperous gales; and merry winds are
sent them at the good pleasure and commandment of God, and by reason of this
goodness and benefit of waters God has caused it, that the Harvest of the
Seas, and the Treasure of the Sands shall be as great and greater then the
Harvest of the Land, and that the wealth of Merchants shall go beyond the
wealth and treasure of the Husbandmen, Esaias 23. 3. yea we see that Salomons
wordly wealth and abundance of all things, both for necessary service, as
timber, gold, etc. and for pleasure and variety as Apes and Peacocks, etc. 1
Reg. 10. 22. all that came by means of Merchandise and dealing by Ships, and
having traffic to Ophir, which made him so rich, that gold was as stones in
the streets; and this goodness of the Seas especially concerns us which are
Islanders, we best know it and feel here this singular and special goodness
of the waters, and say as God does, that we see that they are good; for were it
not for this, we should be imprisoned in this little Island, and be without the
knowledge of other Countries, also we should be cloyed with our commodities and
be destitute of many other which we want; An excellent benefit of the Sea.
but that which is most, we should have been ever without the knowledge of Gods
holy Word; For how could that have come hither, Or how could we have gone
beyond the Seas for it, had it not been for the Sea, wherein go the Ships?
Paul's Shipwreck was most blessed and happy to that Island, Act. 27. 41. for by
that means the Gospel of Christ came to them, the greatest commodity that
could be; But unworthy are we of this Pearl which Merchants have sound and
brought from beyond the Sea, seeing we so lightly regard, that we will scarce
step out of doors for to hear it, this is the good that we by it have
Merchants, Nahum. 3. 16. Another benefit of good we receive by them, Nahum. 3.
14. in that they are made to us as a Ditch, Fortress, Wall, or Bulwark of
strength and defense to the Land. For in Islands we are entrenched, as it were,
round about, with Sands, with Rocks, with Ships, and Seas. These things more
properly pertain to us Islanders; for Islands are called the branches of the
Sea.

For main Lands have other carriage and defense, though with more trouble and
cost. Lastly, It is good for Peter with his Nets and Gins to take Fish.

The discourse of the Earth.
Now for the Earth, God also saw and said that it was good likewise, which is so
well known, that I need not tell you that the use of it a top is not only good
to go and run upon, and inhabit, but also to bear Corn, Wine, Oil, Herbs,
and Roots, and other Fruit, for Man and Beast, that dwell thereon Job. 28. 5.
And under the good mould for fruit, we see it good and profitable, in that it
has mines of Coal, and under it veins of Gold, and other most profitable
metals, and under it precious stones, and every where within Quarries and Rocks
of stone, and without Trees of timber to build us houses withal. This were
sufficient to make us see and confess, to Gods glory, how good it is to us.

But let us come to the very substance of the Earth, in respect of the whole,
and (not to search his riches and parts and fruits) we see that it is the
matter of which we are made, and to which we must return, Job 10. 9.10. which
there is set down after two manners, both as we respect Adam in creation, or
our selves in generation, being poured out as milk, etc. For touching creation,
we are of the Earth, and therefore called houses of Clay, as Jeremy speaks to
his King, O Earth, O Earth, etc. 22. 29. Wherefore, if we think our selves
good, we cannot deny, but the matter of which we were made is also good.

2.
Secondly, It is a good and a convenient place super quem, as the Air is a fit
Element in quo; for God has made it good to go upon, and therefore he has
made it locum lucidum, solidam, siccum fixum, and firmum, that being light and
steady, it might have all the commendations and goodness of a place to dwell
in; and as it is a place to move in, so it is to take rest and ease; as it is
(...), a Workhouse and Shop, in which we must employ our travail and labor, so
is it our Refection.
refectorium, to refresh and ease our selves, and to recover our strength.

The Earth is the Lords and all in it, Psalm. 24. 1. but he has given the Earth
to the sons of men, Psalm. 115. 16. but only to this end, that they should
serve him in the works of their Callings, in the service of God and the
Country, that they might keep his Statutes and observe his Laws, Psalm. 105. 45.

3.
The third goodness is the benefit of our grave, for this is our Mothers lap
and arms into which we yield our bodies, being dead, it is our Coemeterium,
our sleeping place in the night time of our death, Job 17. 13. as it was our
(...) in the day time of our life.

Now as we have considered the goodness of it wholly; so now let us see the
parts by themselves, the hills, mountains, and rocks are good for shaddows in
time of heat, and for shelter in time of Winter against cold and tempests, Esaias
32. 2. the stoney rocks also serve for Conies, Psalm. 104. 18. the valleys and
dales are good and commodious for Corn, Psalm. 104. 10. Esaias 30. 23. and also
for pasture, Psalm. 65. 13. so it is good for to give all things to feed man and
beast.

The other dryer part of the Earth, which is sand and gravel, is good for
treasure, Deuteronomy. 33. 19. and the wet or moister part of it which is clay and
marle, is good to dung and mend the land, also to make vessels of earth, Jer.
18. 3, 4. and to make brick and houses, and mortar, Ezech. 13. 10. So that the
high and low parts, the dry and moist parts of the Earth, are very good.

The Waters and Land jointly considered, four things noted therein.
Yet let us further consider these things, that is, the Waters and Land joint
together, as they are framed in one globe, touching which we have four things
to note.

1.
The first, is in regard of Heaven and Celestial bodies, where we shall observe
a threefold good; for a thing that is good only in it self, and does not impart
it to other, is good in vain, and to no end; and that which is good to it self,
and has a nature to be good to other, but has noe good means to conceive it,
is to no purpose: Wherefore, as the Heavens have virtue and goodness, as
light, heat, dews, etc. So the Air is the good means by which it is sent and
conveyed, and the Earth is that receptacle which receives all those good things
imparted to it: So all the good of Heaven is conveyed to the Earth by the Air,
and so it is made known and proved to be good. The Earth is the pond of all
waters, and the lap and open hand, yea, and the wide open mouth which God has
ordained to receive all the blessings of Heaven, until Heaven have received us.

2.
Secondly, The Waters and Earth are good in regard of one another, the waters
are good to the land, and the land to the waters; the Earth would be without
water to glue it together, even as dust, which would fly in our eyes to hinder
our sight and choke us, and hinder our breathing in the Air, Job 38. 38. and
being all dry clods it would be unprofitable for tillage; therefore God gives
the waters to mollify and soften it, Psalm. So the Earth is good to the Sea
waters; for it is a clenser and strainer, through which the saltness and
unfruitfulnesse of the Waters are amended, and made profitable, Exodus 15. 25.
Also as it makes them serviceable, so does the Earth make them medicinable, by
his veins, giving a virtue to make hot bathes, Genesis 36 24. so by it the waters
are made profitable, serviceable, and medicinable.

3.
Thirdly, In regard of our selves which enjoy both; for both are our matter and
substance of which we are made: For the Earth is the Meal and the Waters the
Liquor, of both which the whole lump of Mankind was made, and by both we are
preserved alive, as the means appointed by God.

4.
Lastly, in regard of God. For the Earth is Gods good Footstool, the Seas and
Waters his Gallory or path to walk in, Job 9. 8. and the Heavens to be his
Seat, on which, if he but stamp with his feet, as angry, both the Eart and
Waters are troubled and do quake; but if he tread gently, as pleased, they are
quiet, and do, as it were, leap, play, and dance for joy; but at his frowning
and check the hills tremble, and the Seas are troubled and make a noise, Psalm.
48. In the 114. 5. we may see a Dialogue between the Sea and the Land touching
this; For the Earth asks the Waters, What ayleth thee that thou art troubled,
etc. The Waters reply and say, We fly at the presence and voice of God; at
which he says, Tremble thou O Earth; for if his feet make the Seas go out of
course, then it is able to overturn the Earth, being his Foo stool.

Usus.
The use of this is matter of meditation, both of Gods Mercy and Justice: If we
anger God with sin, the Earth is made to stagger and reele, the Seas to roar
and swell, and the Fire to rage and burn on every side, and threaten our
destruction: If we please him, they are made good means for our preservation:
Where of this is the effect and application of this his goodness and
approbation, to pray to God, which is the hope of all which dwell on the Earth,
and which remain on the broad Sea, Psalm. 65. 5. that he will use the Sea to
drown all our sins in it, Micha. 7. 9. and one day to make us to see all his
goodness in the land of the living, Psalm. 27. 13. for then we shall indeed see
that all that God made for us is most absolute and good.

Iterum dixit Deus, Herbascat terra herbulas, herbas sementantes semen, etc.
Genesis 1. verse. 11.12.

IT was a benefit for the Earth to be disburdened from the great weight of huge
waters, wherewith it was surcharged, even that breathing and ease from that
burden was a great blessing; but it contenteth not God (so gracious is he)
only to make it spectabilem, but also he will make it speciosum; he will have
it both conspirable, that it may be seen, and also conspicuall that it may be
worthy the sight, that is, comely, sightly, and good and pleasant to behold.
For, as Esaias says, 40. 15. it was made and appeared at the first, it was but a
dust heap, and as he calls it, a measure of dust ashes, but now it is made
habitable and a seat for men; then it was in its nature but as a Desert place,
destitute of all necessaries to sustain them which are and remain dwelling in
it; but now, being delivered from the natural inconveniences Tohu, Tohohu, it
is become a storehouse, replenished with all things for man and beast, mundus
erat antea domus, as I have showed you; for it had Heaven the sealing, the
Waters as walls, the Earth as pavement, sed non erat in domo hac panis; it was
as a Shepherds Cottage and wilderness in which we might stay, but we must
needs starve, if it had continued so: Wherefore as good no place as such a
place, until God had added this blessing to furnish it, as here we shall see.

Therefore, that it might be penu, as the waters made it promptuarium, God here
makes it a storehouse and place of receipt, taking order by his word that it
might be locus conveniens ad vitam, ad victum, ad vestitum, and to that end
does he here open his mouth again, says Moses.

Touching which, 1. The second opening of Gods mouth.
we will first consider of his second opening of his mouth. 2. Of the Argument.
Secondly, of the Argument and Contents of his Edict. 3 Of his words, and works,
which do express it.
Thirdly, of his Words and Works, which do express it.

The iterating and doubling of his word, is a sign of his double care and love
he bare to the Earth, which we must answer again by doubling our love and care
to please him with all our heart and soul Matthew. 22. 10. If we look on all
their works and compare this with the two before; and after we shall see
heuseth but one speech to his place of Heaven, but he speaks once or twice to
this, and the reason is because the Earth was cumbred with a double and indeed
with a tripple inconvenience; for it was within empty, without a bare and a
deformed dust heap, and all overwrapped with waters to cover it: Therefore God
having removed the waters with one word, now here he removes the other
inconveniences, giving her facultatem foecunditat is instead of emptiness, and
amictum venustat is for the other without; So this is the beautiful apparel
of the Earth which the Poets say Vesta gave her, rather do we account this as
a work of adorning, than a removing from it these native inconveniences which
before it had; for these we call ornaments that may be removed or taken away,
as we are whole though jewels and bracelets and chains be taken away, such are
the living Creatures, as beasts and birds, etc. which may be removed. But those
things here named, grow fast unto the Earth and cannot be put away, but are as
supplies to the indigence of nature. God cannot abide esse inners, that is, an
idle being; and therefore, as he gave the light a power to send out beams, and
the Heavens to send down influence and dewes, and to Rivers a motive power to
run into the veins of the Earth, and so spring up: So here to keep the Earth
from idleness, he in this work of distinction gives it a power to shoot out
Plants, which are as the beams and influences of the Earth, that it corrupt not
in idleness. And thus much of the order and dependence of these words.

The Argument.
Now, for the form and argument of it, We shall see that the pupose of God
herein, is partly to deck and trim up his work, and partly that it might be
enriched with store for profit and (...); for nothing is good in respect of
God, which is only speciosum videnti, nisi sit commodum utenti; therefore God
would make it as well profitable as pleasant, both for man and beast, Psalm.
104. 14. and prepare and make all things ready and fit for life, before he made
living things. Which course we see usual and agreeable to nature; for God
provideth still breasts full of milk before the Child be born: And it is the
manner and course of men in the world, before they will come to dwell in and
possess a house, they will first lay in their provision and necessaries for
household.

A good Pater Familias.
So does God deal in this place; He first takes order for our diet and fare,
the Flower of Meal for Bread, and the Grape for the Winepresse, out of the
Herb and the Plant, Ose 9. 2. which Moses calls, Deuteronomy. 32. 14. the fat of
the Wheat, and the blood of the Grape, thus he provideth for men in the Herbs
and the Plants, and for beasts he took order in that he left for Hay and for
Pasture and Grass of the fields, Psalm. 104. 14. and clean and good Provender
for them, Esaias 30. 24. All which he did that we might be kindled with the love
of God, which has been so careful and provident for us.

The Decree.
Touching the Decree, it contains three parts, First, the Decree it self.
Secondly, the Complement of it, and it was so. Thirdly, the Censure of God in
his liking and approbation, that it is good. Of the first of these at this time.

Wherein first of his speaking again, When we shall consider the virtue and
force of Gods dixit, whereby he made and furnished all things, It must teach
us, not despicere terras, not to look downward and depend on the Earth for
food, nor yet suspicere stellas, that is, not gaze on the stars to trust in
them for fruitful increase; but it teaches us to pass beyond all these, and
know that all these blessings of the Earth come from God and his word, which
says Let the Earth bear forth, and it was so, non produxit terra antequam
dixit Deus producat terra; for the nature of the Earth was at first empty, in
the second degree dry and cold, which are mortiferae qualitates, and will
rather kill than quicken and keep any seed, herb, or plant: But notwithstanding
all this, if God call for a plenty, and say, Let the Earth bear, though there
be no man to till the ground, no seed in the ground, no stars to give
influence, no means now ordained to cause it, yet it will bring forth fruit in
abundance: For at this time Adhuc Adam fuit Adama, that is, Agricola fuit
adhuc ager, man was earth, and yet in the dust heap; therefore man was not the
cause that the Earth did bear fruit, neither were the Heavens and Stars any
cause, for they were not as yet made; for the Sun, Moon, and all the Stars,
are Juniors to the Herbs and Plants, and the very Grass and Flower of the
field Ancients to them all, quid ergo aspiras astra, says one to starre-gazers.

These plants and herbs are the influence, and stars and beams shooting out
of the earth, as the Heavens hereafter have stars in them.

It is strange that Theophrastus, which never knew Moses writing, does yet
acknowledge this, That the earth brought forth all fruits meet for man and
beast, before any living Creatures were on the earth. If then the fruits of the
earth are not from any earthly cause, not from the earth it self, nor from man,
nor from the stars we must needs conclude that they come from this dixit
Deus, by the blessing of his word willing it to be done; the truth of which God
has sealed and signed up to us, by two reasons, the first St. Paul pleads, 1
Cor. 15. 36.

The second part is the Censure of approbation, saying, that it was good. In
the Preach. 5. 8. the wise man being a King does confess that the
fruitfullness of the earth is so necessarily good that no man, no not the King
himself, can live or continue, but must miserably pine and perish without his
fruit; and therefore St. James 5. 7. the Apostle calls them, the precious
fruits of the Earth, for which we wait as the hope of our life. There are three
goods, as I told you before, honestum, utile, jucundum, each of which contain
in them a double goodness: All which three pair of several goodnesses we shall
see in the earth Bonum honestum, as a virtue moral which respects true
justice, equity, and faithfulness; and on the other side, benignity,
goodness, mercy, and liberality, which we shall see in the earth. Bonum
jucundum.
In that good which is called jucundum, there is one special prerogative to
delight and please the senses, as to be fair and sightly to the eye, sweet to
the smell, pleasant to the taste, delightful to the ear: So there is
multiplicity of delight.

Bonum utile.
For Bonum utile, there is utile ferrum, which we cannot be without, which is
durum telum, and will break through walls.

Bonum honestum.
The other, that is Bonum honestum, is such a profit which we may be without,
but yet not conveniently.

For the first moral goodness, though properly it pertains to men, yet here
it may be applied to the earth, and a pattern of it may be seen there. For
touching truth and fidelity, Commit any seed into the earth, it is more sure
and trusty to keep it than man; therefore the Husbandman, having sowed his
seed, sleeps securely without doubt or distrust, Mark 4. 26. knowing that he
deals with a most true, just, and faithful Creature, which will safely
depositum servare, and in due time repay and deliver his charge, and that not
barely in the same measure that it received it; but that which is the second
point, it will repay, besides the principal, great increase very bountifully
with great liberallity, Psalm. 72. 16. A handful of Corn shall be sown on the
hills, and it shall bring forth a croppe, Esaias: Every Corn, says Christ,
Matthew. 13. 8. comes up and brings his advantage, some thirty, some sixty,
some an hundred fold, every one will be manifold, Genesis 26. 12. So had Abraham
and Jacob an hundred fold increase, and this increase and gain it speedily
returns; for it is not dealt withal as Usurers custom is, that is, we take
in bonds and obligations; but without constraint or exaction, of its own
goodness and liberality, it gives more, though it be fructum indebitum, that
is, more than it owes us to repay any: but Userers will not stand to men's
grateful return of recompense, but will bind men before they lend, that they
may be sure of their harvest before hand: but we need not deal so cruelly with
the Earth, for it will liberally give us, if we shall thankfully praise God the
maker of it and us. So there is a justice in paying that which is committed
with faithfulness without breaking or deceiving; and there is liberality and
goodness, to repay with thankfulness more then is received. And this dealing
if God see in us, which are of the earth, he will say it is good; Bonum utile.
for bonum utile has two respects both for man and beasts; for that which is
absolutely needful Pabulum and latibulum, Esaias 5. 6. for us food and raiment
is ferreum utile, and we must be content with it, 1 Timothy 6. 8. As for our food
we have it of the Earth, it yields us for nourishment within and without; for
our covering, if we respect our houses, for shadow and shelter in Summer and
Winter, we have all the matter from the Earth of which it is made; and for our
nearest covering, which is next our skin, that we have of the Earth as well as
our remotest shelter; therefore if these things be good for us, we see that the
Earth and his fruit is well approved and censured by God, and we are to
acknowledge it with thankfulness to God, Numb. 11. 5. they confessed that
their good estate they had in Egypt came from the Earth, It was well with us
when we had our bellies full of fleshpots, Garlike, etc. For medicine also to
recover health, being lost, and to preserve it, being had, all come from the
Earth, Psalm. 47. 12. it (...) drinks, which are refrigerium animae, and bread,
which is fulcrum cordis, Psalm. 104. 15. to preserve health and strength, and
creavit Deus medicinum, (...), says the Wiseman, Wisd. 38. 4. It brings a
cluster of figgs for meat, and to be also a medicine to make a plaster for
(...) Carbuncle, Esaias 38. 21. If the Art of the Apothecary and Physician be
good; if it be goodness to have health and strength, and to be preserved in it
by meat and medicine, then the Earth is good, because the goodness of them
come from thence: And this goodness of the Earth is not good and profitable
only filiis hominum, but even servis hominum, to our beasts, fowls, and cartel;
it brings herbs for the use of men, and for the service of men also, that is
for beasts food, and fodder, and provender, which does servous Psalm. 104. 14.
we have olera for the pot, as I have showed you, 2 Reg. 4. 39. and grass and
hay for beasts; out of the herbs of the Earth we have for (...) use bread, and
drink, and corn; and for their service which serve us, it brings pulse for
provinder, yet in our grain God has made in wheat meal flower for us, and the
straw, chaffo, and bran for beasts. We must praise God for this goodness of
the Earth, Psalm. 147. 8, 9.

For the other part, if we come to shelter or covering, Our outward
farthestcovering is the house, and our nearest covering (...), all which come
from the earth, Exodus 9. 31. the great and main timber and beams for buildings
and strength, and the fine grained timber for beauty and ornament, to ceale our
houses, come from the earth, Jer. 22. 13. 14. for wainscot timber, Hagg. 1. 4.
As we know both Salomons Temple and houses came out of the fruits of the earth,
Jonas gourd for shadow and meat grows out of the earth; also for instruments
both of Music for pleasure, or of occupations for service, came from the
earth: So that pabulum and latibulum is thence.

Jucundum Bonum.
I come to jucundum for pleasure of the eyes: It is our delight to behold hills
and valleys set orderly, with woods, springs and rivers, Number. 24. 6, 7. and the
Lillies for beauty exceed Solomon in his royalty, Matthew. 6. 29. as our eye
does more willingly gaze at nothing more then this; so among our chief
delights, we seek a pleasant situation where we may have goodly prospects,
orchards and gardens, Preach. 2. 5. all the pleasure and comfort we have in
sweet smells and odors come from the earth, Psalm. 45. 8. as myrrh, alloes and
cassia, camphire and spikenard, Cant. 4. 13. for all come out of flowers and
trees, etc. For the last, it brings milk and honey, Exodus 3. 8. wine and
oil, Psalm. 104. 15. the fat of the Earth, and the blood of the grape, milk and
flesh, immediately do come from the earth, as fruits for us.

Besides these things for necessity, the earth brings forth manifold
varieties of fruits for dainties and pleasure, in so much as one says, we fit
longer and with more delight secundis mensis quam primis, that is, at our
banquet and junkets, than at our first part of our dinner for diet, need and
hunger, but all is from the earth. In one word, to conclude, go to the
goodness in Winter, and our fire and fuel is from thence, Esaias 44. 16. the
good of the Spring, which is herbs and flowers; the good of Summer, which is
shadows; the good of Harvest, all fruits; the good of Autumn, the seed which is
sown: all come from the earth, which shows that it is good. As we consider
the parts of the year, so if you mark the parts of every thing, you shall see
them to be good: A goodness comes from the Roses; Herbs and all Plants are
goodness from the stalk, another from the leaf, flower, seed, and fruit, both
for distillation and other uses; even the gummes which sweat and drop from
them, are good and profitable, and nothing ill that God made, whether we
respect the goodness severally of every thing in his kind, or of the
goodness of every part of them being divided.

Object.
Only one thing comes cross against this generality; For, seeing many things
are unprofitable, many evil and hurtful, how can all be counted good, annon
Deus spinas pungentes, neccon succos occidentes creavit? for Thorns and Briers
are an evil curse, and Colloquintida and many things growing out of the Earth
are evil, poysonfull, and deadly.

Answ.
The ancient Fathers, entering into this discourse say, That the Sun it self is
not good to every one, for it hurreth ill eyes.

There are many things which are good only in their times and places, Preach.
3. 11. and in this respect there is nothing in their particular place and time,
but has a good use, though generally at all times, and to all persons it be
not good the barrennesle and bareness of the earth God has made to be good to
us, and to a good end, namely, to be a whetst one to move us to industry and
diligence, and to keep us from idleness; though thorns and briars be ill
inter fruges, yet they be good circa fruges, these spinoe are profitable and
good in soepe for defense, though in sulco they be evil, and do hinder the
Corn. Succus venenosus, and occidens are by the Art of the Physician and
Apothecary made Theriaca mundi, the Treacle and purgation to expel and draw
out all venom and poison. That Colloquintida which they said was death and
deadly poison, 2 Reg. 1. 39,40. is medicinable with us and commonly used in
purgations, so is Vipers flesh, etc.

But we stand not on this; but though they were not good for to show Gods mercy
and love to the Godly, yet they are good to show his justice and wrath to the
wicked, Esaias 10. 5. there are none but will say that rods are good and
necessary in a school; so are these things good to punish the wicked in the
world, Joel. 2. 25. So that if there were nothing but this which David
confesses, Psalm. 119. 67. Before I was troubled I went wrong, but now I keep
thy Law; therefore it was good for me that I have been introuble, etc. It were
enough to prove them to be good, because these Armies and Hosts of Gods
displeasure do bring us to goodness, Joel 2. 25.

But now for germinabit tibi spinas, Genesis 3. 18. that is, for thy finne and
because of thy disobedience, the earth shall bring forth to thee thousinner: so
that before we did sin there was none of these things that could hurt us, but
were for our good; for, as God made us mortal and subject to corruption, yet
it was Gods preservative grace, which keeping him from dying and mortallity,
that his dust returned not to dust; so the same preservative grace should have
kept all Adams posterity from any hurt of these things, if they had continued
in integrity: Wherefore to conclude this, whether thorns and venomous herbs
were created in principiis suis or in semine, for we hold both Creations, it is
certain that they had been good, and could not have been hurtful to them, if
they had not sinned, which we see by warrant; for those men which were renewed
to the Image of God, and were in Gods favor, all things did serve to their
good, and no ill thing could hurt them, Jam. 5. 17. Elias could command Heaven
to rain and not to rain, Jam. 5. 18. Joshuah might by Gods permission command
the Sun and Moon, Joshuah 10. 12. The three Children could not be hurt in the
fire, raging and flaming, Dan. 3 27. Neither could the Lions be evil to hurt
him, Dan. 6. 22. The Viper could not hurt Paul, Act. 28. 3. If the faithful
drink deadly poison, it shall not hurt them, Mark 16. 18. and many such
examples are, Heb. 11 33. which show that God gives his preservative grace to
the Godly, by which they have such a prerogative as Adam had in his innocence,
when his corruptible dust was kept from corruption, that it turned not to dust
again. They which have Gods eyes and Image shall see this to be true, that the
thing which is deadly to some, shall not hurt them; So that as all things are
clean to the Clean, so all is good to the Good and Godly.

Usus Spiritualis.
Now for the spiritual use: And first we are put in mind of our homage to God,
in serving and praising him for these earthly and temporal blessings, which we
receive from him the only author and owner thereof; for many not knowing that
their Wine, Oil, and Corn, and other riches come from God, Ose 2. 8. did give
the glory and praise of them to Idols, ascribing the gift to others: If by
these things we receive strength and continue in health, we must remember our
duty to be thankful, Ezech. 11. 16. to 21. for seeing God has opened his
mouth for our good, saying, Let the Earth be fruitful, and if now he still
opens his hands and fill us with his blessing, it is our duty of
gratefullnesse to lift up our hands and open our mouths to bless and praise
his holy name; so these earthly benefits must be keys to unlock and open our
mouths to sing some praise to him, Jer. 2. 31. God has not been a Lord of
darkness nor a wilderness to us, therefore we must not be as barren and
unfruitful ground to him, but yield some fruit of our lives by obedience, and
some fruit of our lips by thankfulness. Usus duplex.
The use and profit of this, is first in regard of Gods word to the Earth, and
then in regard of Gods word in respect of himself: For the first, we see that
God speaks but once to the Earth, and it is sufficient to move it to perfect
obedience: But in the 22. Jer. 29. God is fain to speak thrice, terra, terra,
terra, before we can be brought to hear and understand, for our ears are more
deaf than the senseless earth.

Post dixit Deus, Sunto luminaria in Expanso Coeli, ad distinctionem faciendum
inter diem and noctem: ut sint in signa cum tempestatibus, tum diebus and
annis. Sintque in luminaria in Expanso Coeli, ad afferendum lucem super terram:
Genesis 1. verse. 14.15.

IN this Chapter God created the World; and being created, he perfected it; and
being perfected, he furnished it; Thus the Heavens and the Earth were finished
and all the hosts of them, the first verse of the next chapter. Austin says
well, Creata ordinavit, ordinata ornavit, creata ordinata and ornata septimo
die perfecit, after the beginning was the perfecting, after the perfecting was
the adorning, tenebras fugavit, abyssum exaltavit, terram discooperuit: In
these three following days is the beautifying of the Heavens, the Waters, and
the Earth. God first began to create the Heavens; then he made the Waters, and
lastly the Earth: So he first beautifieth the Heavens, then the Waters, and
lastly the Earth; that is first beautified which was first created.

Argument.
Touching the Argument of this days work: The Heaven is as a Garden, the
Fathers call the stars coelestes Rosas, heavenly Roses: The Sun is as the
general of the host of Heaven, the Moon is as the Suns Lieutenant. The Sun is
as the Father, the Moon as the Mother, and the Stars are as the Children. When
Joseph dreamed, that the Sun and the Moon, and the eleven Stars did do him
reverence, and he told it his father, Jacob was angry saying, What! shall I and
thy mother and thy brethren fall on the ground before thee? chap. 37. 9. The
Sun seems as gold, the Moon as silver, and the Stars as many pearls. God
counts the stars, and calls them all by their names, Psalm. 147. 4. and in
Psalm. 19. 4. he has set in the Heavens a Tabernacle for the Sun, which
comes forth as a Bridegroom out of his Chamber, and rejoices like a mighty
man to run his race: His going out is from the end of the Heaven, his compass
is unto the ends of the same, and none is hid from the heat thereof. The Sun,
says Austin, is a Bridegroom: all the stars with one consent do sing
praises unto God, Job 38. 7. This is the sum of the Argument.

As for the words, in Dixit Deus is the Decree; then is the return; then the
execution; then lastly, the approbation.

Of Dixit generally. Quest.
Some make this question, Why the lights were not brought forth before the
fourth day, the three first days were without Sun? God commands the Sun
and it rises not, he closes up the stars, as under a signet, Job 9. 7. Resp.
The question is thus answered. First he brings forth the things themselves,
then the ordinary means; the Plant is first, then the seed, the means of the
Plant; the Earth is first, then is it furnished with herbs; the Heavens must be
before the Stars; there was light the first day, but the Sun was not before
the fourth day. The Heathen says, that Sol est cor mundi; and the Physicians
say, the heart is not first framed in the body, but the liver, and after the
heart. God, without any means, brought forth the second cause, and by his power
he brought forth the effects of the second cause. Ambrose says, Sol est matter,
non author lucis. The Heathen says, that deus est Plantarum, the Sun is the
god of Plants, but Rubus est senior Sole, the Sun is not the god of the silly
Bramble. The Persians, seeing nothing more glorious, did worship the visible
Sun. The Egyptians under Orus, the Romans under Bacchus, did worship the
Sun. The very Jews did erect Temples, and do sacrifice to the Sun and Moon
and the whole host of Heaven; neglecting the service and worship due to God,
who is the cause of the Sun and of the light. They be not only his
everlasting lamps; but, even as the Heathen say, they are his hammers to
rarifie the Heavens: their influence is for the generation of Plants and
Mankind, they join Homo and Sol, Sol and Planta: The Sun concurreth to
generation, this Philosophy teaches and Divinity confesses. Before God said,
Let there be, and Let there appear to be: He causes being; He causes the
morning to keep his place, Job 38. 13. The Sun makes not only things to
appear, but even, as it were, to be. Spiritus incubans, the spirit hatched the
waters; and dixit Deus, the word of God, brings forth the light: The Sun of
righteousness does arise, and health shall be under his wings, Malachi 4. 2.
He causes the visible Sun to shine upon the earth: Christ is the spiritual
light, whereby the Heavens and all therein have their light. Christ is the
Bridegroom in his marriage chamber, Matthew. 9. 15. by whose permission the Sun
comes forth as a Bridegroom also out of his chamber, Psalm. 19. 4. These
lights; though they have no tongue to speak unto us, yet by their beauty they
point to our eyes, by their light they sing the glory and praise of God in our
ears.

Now of the tenor: Wherein we will consider three points, First, the things
themselves: Secondly, the place: Thirdly, the uses of them.

1. The Lights.
For the first. There was light before; these are not lumina, but luminaria,
they are not lights but lightners. Basil, upon the 1 Ezech. 4. says, That the
fire which was wrapped in the cloud, and the brightness that was about it, was
the light of the Sun: And Miscen, upon the 14. Exodus 20. That the pillar of
the cloud, which gave light by night, was as the Moon. Light distinguished from
Sun and Moon.
I wish, as Chrysostom, that you would rather use things manifest, than to be
curious in things secret; although the schoolmen do say, that the generation
of these Creatures is a corruption of the former Creation, which cannot be; for
corruption is a defect; and this is no corruption, but rather a perfection of
the former Creation; and these latter lights are derived from the former. Light
and day is not all one thing, and the Sun is distinct from them both, the
difference of them all Paul shows in one verse, At midday he saw a light,
passing the brightness of the Sun, shining round about him, Acts 26. 13.
This light was lux vitae, there is lux diei, and splendour solis. The day and
the Sun are not one, so says Christ, the day is the durance of the light:
luminare a lumine is there distinguished, for the Sun is but the carriage of
the light. the light and the Moon are distinct: the Moon every month leaves
her old light, and puteth on a new, after the conjunction. Neither the Sun
nor the Moon are light of themselves, but the Sun is the Chariot of light:
Paul, in the 2. Philippians 15. wishes them to be pure and blameless, that
among the wicked Nation they would shine as lights of the World. John says, He
was not that light, but he came to bear witness of the light, John 1. 8. It
behooves that in them which witness this light, there should be light, though
they are not the light it self; for otherwise they be the blind leaders of the
blind, Matthew. 15. 14. The Fathers do call the Apostles Apostoli lucis. Or is
one thing in Hebrew, Maor is another; lumen is one thing, and luminare is
another; light is one thing, and that which gives light is another. Things not
durable shall be corrupt, and shall be brought forth: But when he purposes a
father matter, and a continuance as long as the world shall continue; as when
he made the Heaven and the Earth, the Sun and Stars, God says sit, let
therebe: he says in the singular sit, luminaria in the plural, let there be
lights. The Moon and the Stars are but as glasses, having no light in
themselves, but borrowing it from the Sun.

2 The placing of the Sun and the Stars.
The second point of consideration, is the place which is most convenient, in
three regards, The first is in regard of God and his Wisdom, who is the cause
of them, and is above: Where is the way wherein light dwells? Job 38. 19. It
is sursum, it is above.

2.
Secondly, Their place is most convenient, in regard of their ministering of
light to so large and spacious an house, as to the whole world: they do hang
in the Heavens as on a beam.

3.
Thirdly, By this means they are in safety, from the tyranny and malice of man,
for if they were in men's reach, they would pull the stars from their place,
and God from his throne. Adam did eato the fruit, though he were forbidden:
Gilead is a City of them that work iniquity, and is polluted with blood:
Priests are murderers in the highway by consent: there is villainy in the
house of Israel: there is whoredom of Ephraim, Osee 6. 8. But man cannot
practice any of his envy against the stars which are placed on high in the
Heavens. So that the placing of them above in the Heavens, does signify unto
us, that the cause of them is above the Heavens, and the effect of their
ministrating, and the providence God had of their safety.

3 Their use.
The third point to be considered is their use, which is manifold: The first is
to separate the day and the night, which is orderly to divide the course of
time; for there is no beauty without order. The day and the night were before
divided, what needs God now to make a second division here? You must
understand that there are two dividings, the one is a division in duo, into day
and night; the other is inter duo; the day is assigned to the Sun, the night
to the Moon: When the whole is parted, it is divided. The man in the 12. Luke
13. said to Christ, Bid my brother divide the inheritance with me: So that a
thing is divided, tum separatur, and cum separatum diversis assignatur. The
Sun is, as it were, the surveyor of men's work, the Moon and Stars are our
watchmen when we do take our rest. The Lord gives the Sun for a light for
the day, and the courses of the Moon and Stars for a light to the night, Jer.
31. 35. By the ascending and descending of the Sun, we have our hours, our
days, our seasons: hereby we have days shorter and longer: and for that the
Sun had so many good qualities, and was so worthy a Creature, men of other
Nations, and in times past, gave glory and worship to the Sun, to it they did
erect Altars, build Temples, and offered sacrifice.

But non dominium sed ministerium dedit Deus Soli. The second use is for
signs: Homer did say so much, that they were as signs to admonish us: It is
good for Star-gazers, and out of this place they do gather, that by the
Stars they may foretell things to come. Ambrose imputes no fatal destiny,
that cannot be shunned, to these signs, but rather that they are signs for
direction. The Chaldees and the Persians, did foretell by the conjunction of
Stars, that there should be inundations, and that such things are inevitable;
but for the most part, even then when they said should be wet there was the
greatest drought: Hereby they cast figures, and show men's Nativities; but the
Lord says, Jeremy 10. 2. Learn not the way of the Heathen, be not afraid for
the signs of Heaven, though the Heathen be afraid of such. Most excellently
says the Lord, in the 44. Esaias 25. I destroy the tokens of the Soothsayers,
and make them, that conjecture, fools, and I make their knowledge foolishness:
Their knowledge is foolish vanity, it is inutiles querenti, and impossibilis
profitenti. No inevitable destiny is to be ascribed to the Stars; for all
that is, is in the hands of God. They are signs to the Husbandman, by them God
gives him discretion to sow and to reap in season, Esaias 28. 26. They are
signs to the Mariners, to them which sailed with Paul toward Rome, nor Sun
nor Moon appeared for many days, Acts 27. 20. They are signs to the Physician
for his criticali days: The Sun is a sign and as trumpet to the Beasts,
which when it rises, they do retire to their dens; and then goes man forth
unto his work, Psalm. 104. 22. They are also spiritual signs and holy signs;
they that dwell in the uttermost parts of the Earth shall be afraid of thy
signs, Psalm. 65. 8. The Son of man at the latter day shall be as the light
of the Heaven, Luke 17. 24. God will then show wonders in Heaven, and tokens in
the Earth, blood and fire and vapors of smoke, Acts 2. 19. So that these
lumina, when we behold them, and think of the later day, are signa
poenitentiae, they are buccina poenitentiae; from whence are certain
influences, the Moon to the waters, the Sun to the Earth. If God be pleased,
sweet is the increase of the Sun, and sweet is the increase of the Moon,
Deuteronomy 33. 14. But if God be angry, then is it otherwise.

And they are for seasons, they are signs for place, Deuteronomy. 4. 47. Moses bids
the Israelites to remember the signs and Acts that God did in Egypt, Deuteronomy.
11. 3. They are for times, to every purpose there is a time, Preach. 8. 6. for
opportunity is the very bud of time: They were for seasons inrebus sacris, in
Gods feasts and holy days: God has appointed the Moon for certain seasons,
the Sun knows his going down, Psalm. 104. 19. By the Sun the days are
hotter and colder: The Moon is made to appear according to her season, the
feasts are appointed by the Moon, the month is called after the name thereof,
Ecclesiasticus 43. The Moon is a direction of the Passover, every seventh day
is the Sabbath, state tempora sunt a Sole in things civil: Faires, meeting and
ordaining Magistrates is by ordinata tempora. The Moon has a short motion: the
Sun has a great wheel for his whole course in a year, for his compass by
days: There is the morning Star shining from the end of the night to the
beginning of the day; the evening star, the end of the day to the beginning
of the night: The Sun in the day, the Moon in the night, are for their
seasons: the revolution of the Sun is in a year, of the Moon in a month. The
Sun did rise to Jacob, after he had wrastled with the Angel, chap. 32. 31.
The Passover was to be offered at Even, at the going down of the Sun in the
months of Abib, Deuteronomy. 16. begin. So that the Sun and the Moon are for
seasons, as it is in the 104. Psalm. God, says Job in his 26. chapter 13. Has
furnished the Heavens and framed the crooked serpent, which is taken for the
Zodiac. God says to Job, Can thou bring forth Mazaroth in their time, Can
thou guide Arcturus with his sons? Job. 38. 32. The Sun runs about in a
day; and in a year it goes to each Tropic: In accessu begins the Spring; in
decessu the Winter.

For themselves
They are for illumination, to be a light, that is to give light; to be a light
even at midnight. The Sun is a light perpetually: when it is absent from us,
it gives light elsewhere; to us it gives light while we do need it: It is
for us, so that we may say to the lights sit vos non vobis, they are for the
Earth and for the Heavens: they are for lights in the Firmament, and to give
light upon the Earth. Sol est propter terram, this is an honor to us, and
humility in them. The Sun comes forth as a Bridegroom out of his chamber,
and rejoices like almighty man to run his race, Psalm. 19. 5. So that it is
for the Earth; it was made to serve and lighten the earth: take thou therefore
heed, lest thou lift up thy eyes unto Heaven, and when thou see the Sun and
the Moon, and the Stars, with all the host of Heaven, thou should be
driven to worship and to serve them, Deuteronomy. 4. 19. It cutteth off their
adoration; for creavit eos in ministerium cunctis Gentibus. Sol o Deus est
famulus. Luna est ancilla tua, ambo sunt in ministerium homini: Non sunt
conservi, sed servi hominum: Non sunt cum terra, sed propter terram. Great then
is their humility to us, which are subject to corruption, whose brothers and
sisters are the very worms. So that the Sun, in his very name in Hebrew, does
import that it is not Deus, but servus hominum: At Joshua's commandment the
Sun stayed in Gibeon, and the Moon in the valley of Aielon, Joshua 10. 12.
Isaiah showed this sign that Hezechiah should restore his health, he brought
the Sun back again ten degrees; God then shows great favor unto man, that
can make the Sun to stand still and retire back again, 2 Kings 20. 9. These
Lights then were assigned to divide the day from the night; their Function is
for the inferior Earth, and the superior Heaven: they were ordained for the
decking of the Celestial part, and for the use of man, and lastly, for the
glory of God. They do serve for the Earth, and they do show forth Gods
praise, yea, the stars of the morning praise God together, Job. 38. 7. The
Sun, and the Moon, and all the bright Stars shall praise him, Psalm. 148. 3.

Et fuit ita. Fecit enim Deus duo illa luminaria magna: luminare majus ad
praefecturam diei, and luminare minus ad praefecturam noctis, atque stellas, Et
collocavit ea Deus in expanso coeli, ad afferendum lucem super terram, Et ad
praesidendum diei ac nocti, and ad distinctionem faciendum, and inter lucem
hanc tenebras: viditque Deus id esse bonum. Sic fuit vespera, and fuit mane
diei quarti. Genesis 1. 15,16,17,18,19,

BEFORE we have spoken of the Decree; now of the execution and of the return;
of the censure or approbation, and so we will end the fourth day. Of them in
order, and it was so; some say fecit, others posuit; all the six days work
stand upon these three joints, creavit, fecit, and sint.

It was so.
It was so: This is the return and execution of Gods Decree; it is the usual
echo of Gods word, it is the Amen of that which proceeds from his mouth:
herein is the verifying of his edict, the power of his word, and the expedition
of that he commands: Herein is the conformity of the return, and the
commandment, and the continnance of that is commanded. Let this suffice for
and it was so. For the continuance, God promises to David, I will stablish thy
seed for ever, and thy throne from generation to generation, Psalm. 89. 4. These
lights are placed in the Heavens where is no error, by his power they were
made, he brings forth the innumerable host of stars by his word, the Lord
bids Abraham to look up unto Heaven, he bids him tell the stars if he
be able to number them, and he said unto him, So shall thy seed be, chap. 15.
5. For the expedition, The Sun rejoices like a mighty man to run his race,
Psalm. 19. 5. He runs a long race in a short space: For the conformity in the
Heavens, we do daily pray sicut in Coelo, in Terra, that Gods will may be done
in Earth as it is in Heaven. As for the constancy of the Heavens, it is
circular, regular, and certain. God did swear by his holiness, that he would
not fail David, saying, His seed shall endure for ever, and his throne shall be
as the Sun before me, Psalm. 89. 36. Thus says the Lord Jer. 33. 20. If you
can break my covenant of the day and of the night, that there should not be day
nor night in their seasons, then may my covenant be broken with David my
servant, that he should not have a son to sit upon his throne: But as the
army of Heaven cannot be numbered, neither the sand of the Sea be measured, so
will I multiply the seed of David. And it was so. Eclipses and Conjunctions are
by their certainty: oh wonderful is their immutability in their continual
mutability: by them is the differences of all times, of all seasons. It was so
even by the hand of God, by his hand they were made, they were placed. Every
good and perfect gift is from above, and comes from the father of lights,
with whom is no variableness, James 1. 17. The Earth is immovable, yet subject
to alteration: the Stars are in their motion immutable: they were made to
lighten the Earth, to rule the day and the night; they were not made to be
adored. Austin makes this dialogue between these lights and man, Creator est
supra me and te, qui fecit me and te, me prote, and te pro se: this is spoken
by the Sun: God made these lights for man, he made man for himself: David, in
the 8. Psalm 3. says, When I behold thine Heavens and the works of thy
fingers, the Moon and the Stars which thou have ordained; What is man, say I
then, that thou art mindful of him? or the son of man, that thou regardest
him? Thou have made him little lower than God, and have crowned him with glory
and worship: thou have given him dominion over the works of thine hands: yet is
he, by Abraham's confession, but dust; The worms are his kinsfolk, says Job;
The words of his mouth are iniquity and deceit, says David, Psalm. 36. 3.
Creata sunt omnia per Deum Patrem, ordinata sunt per Verbum, ornata per
Spiritum. His spirit has garnished the Heavens, Job 26. 13. Let all the Kings
of the Earth sing the praises due unto the Lord, Psalm. 138. 5. Austin says
well, What greater obedience can there be, dixit, and facta sunt? What greater
love can there be then quod pro nobis facta sunt: Oh therefore let all the
Nations of the Earth be thankful to the Lord, who has made us and them, and
them for us. Of what are they made? surely of something: sit lux, that was of
nothing; fecit stellas, that was of something: He created the form and formed
the matter; fecit and fuit is not all one: the matter is the light, the Heavens
is the form: God has stretched out the Heavens, which are strong, as a moulten
glass, Job 37. 18. They are made, by the best opinion, of water and light.

The Sun and the Moon.
Now what is made. Two great lights the Sun and the Moon, which are as a great
fire, and the Stars are as little sparkles: as two great torches, and as many
little wax candles: The Moon is lesser than many stars, according to
Astrology, which Moses does not impugn: though it be a lesser body, yet is a
greater light in respect of the stars, and a lesser in regard of the Sun,
and so says Moses. Moses was very great in the land of Egypt, not great of
personage, but great in favor, Exodus 11. 3. The greatest Apostle is not taken
in the quantity, but in the quality: the great men, are said men of dignity, of
account, that are in much favor. Paul counts himself the least of the
Apostles, not as one of lowest stature, but of least desert: David was great
with God, not in that he had a large and spacious body, but for that God did
love and favor him. So there is alia gloria Solis, alia Lunae, alia Stellarum;
for one star differs from another in glory, 1 Cor. 15. 41. Here he
speaks of the lights, not of the celestial bodies, wherein he shows
himself skillful in the Mathematics: He was learned in all the wisdom of the
Egyptians, Acts 7. 22. so that he could have discoursed among the Astrologers
of the quantities of the celestial bodies, but here by naming the greater and
lesser light, he does instruct the very simple. The light must be great, for
the house wherein it must hang, is the whole world. There must be two, because
they must serve for two seasions: they are lumine impares, because they are usu
impares: There is luminare majus and luminare minus: The Sun.
The greater is the Sun, which is the President of the day: the Persians say
that it is the lightner of all other lights, luminare omnium luminum, and that
it is the Prince and Governor of light. The stars do get up to the top of
the Epicycle, in his absence they do mourn, and meet him again with joy in
their Epicycle, for they do owe allegiance to the Sun. It has two
qualities, light to direct, and heat to cherish. He is like a Bridegroom and
like a Giant, says David: Pulchritudinem sponsi videmus per lucem, vim
gigantis per calorem, says Austin upon the 19. Psalm 5.

The Moon.
The lesser is to rule the night, At the rule of the Moon the Sun does not
murmur, but it does give place unto the Moon, being inferior. Here is greater
obedience and humili y used then men do use in this age; there is no obedience
in the inferior to the superior, but murmurring and desire of equality: The
Sun has the rule of the day, the Moon the dominion of the night, both are
content: In Lordship there is no fellowship: The three first nights without
light.
Before this fourth night the three nights had no light, but were merely dark:
The Moon now shines in the night, it is the Suns deputy; In the night it is
comfortable in the Sea by navigation, on the land by journey. The Moon by some
is called nocturnus Sol; It is cold and moist, My head, O my sister, is full of
dew, and my locks with the drops of the night, Cant. 5. 12. In the time of her
rule is the time of ease and of silence. She has a mild light; she shines
lumine repercusso, with a borrowed light. The day by the Sun is hot, the
night by the Moon is moist. The Sun is in the world as the heart in the body,
and the Moon as the liver: The Sun draws up, and the Moon dissolves.

The Stars.
Now of the Stars which God made. He makes the Pleides and Orion, Amos 5. 8.
they are the attendants of the Moon. Praise ye, says David, the Lord which
made great lights, as the Sun to rule the day, the Moon and the Stars to
govern the night, Psalm. 336. In the Heavens has he put a Tabernacle for the
Sun, Psalm. 19. 4. The stars fixed have their tabernacles: God that made the
world, and all things that therein is; He is the Lord of Heaven and of Earth,
he dwells not in Temples made with hands Acts 17. 24. The Israelites took up
the Tabernacle of Moloch and the Star of their God Remphan, figures which
they made to worship, Acts 7. 43. There are stellae erraticae, the Planets, and
stellae fixae, the other six Planets have their light from the Sun: Six
branches came out of the golden candlestick in the temple, Exodus 25. 32. They
had not only many Idols, but they had stars of their Gods, Amos 5. 26.
Siccuth and Chiun, their images in that chapter and 26. verse, are Mars and
Saturn. They called Barnabas Jupiter and Paul Mercury Acts 14. 12. They have
for saken the Lord, and forgotten his holy mountain, Esaias 65. 11. Yea Lucifer
has said in his heart, I will ascend into Heaven: Oh Lucifer how art thou
fallen, which art the Sun of the morning? Esaias 14. 12. Venus is the morning
Star; the evening star is the Mace-bearer to the Moon, and the morning
star to the Sun. As touching the fixed stars, God says to Job in his 38.
chapter 32. Can thou bring forth Mazaroth in their time? This Mazaroth is
taken for the Zodiac: Can thou guide Arcturus with his Sons? The star
Arcturus is the Northern Pole, in the tail of Ursamajor; in the Zodiac are
the twelve signs, whereof one contains many stars: from thence there is a
correspondencie in Aarons garment and in the Temple. It is the hand of God that
has framed serpentem incurvum, the crooked Zodiac; Job 26. 13. Galaxia or Via
lactea, is held by some to be the passage of the Sun; by others, the meeting
of the radiations of many stars, from thence is moisture. There is mention of
Orion and the Pleiades, Job 38 31. Orion, when it appears, brings in
Winter: sweet are the influence of the Pleiades, delitiae sunt Pleiadum: When
those seven stars appear, the same being in Taurus, they bring in the spring
and pleasant flowers. It is even God, says Job the 9. chap. 11. verse, that
makes the stars, Arcturus, Orion, and Pleiades: And Amos 5 8. In the dog
days the stars of the nature of a dog, do rule. Arcturus, as I said
before, is the Northern Pole, this star especially has a principal use for
direction to Mariners where ever they go; for Arcturus and his sons is their
chief mark, the load stone will ever look toward that. They have an use in
their influence, which is especially in the night. By Gods mercy the Mariner,
by means of the loadstone, shall know which way to sail, which star
Arcturus, with his sons, the Lord does guide, Job 38. 32. As for the
influence, Sweet is the increase of the Sun, and of the Moon, Deuteronomy. 33. 14.
Regard ye me not because I am black, the Sun has looked upon me, Cant. 1.
5. Solardet, The Sun burned up Jonahs gourd, Jonas 4. 8. So the Sun is for
Gods justice as well as for his mercy; there is a pleasant dew, and a
mildewalso. Be thou faithful, then shall not the Sun smite thee by day, nor
the Moon by night, the Lord shall preservethee from all evil, Psalm. 121. 6.
And as the influences of the stars are sweet in his mercy, so they are also
the ministers of his Justice: The stars in their courses did fight against
Sisera, Judges 5. 20.

17 Verse. posuit stellas.
Now of the posuit stellas, and as some say dedit stellas. God, say some, did
give the stars in way of dowry or a jointure: But the better sort doc say
posuit stellas, that is, he set them in order. He has nor set them tanquam in
centro, but tanquam in circulo, in excellent order. The Astronomers do say,
that the standing of the Sun and the course of all the stars is in
uneffable wisdom: The Sun rises and goes down and draws to his place
where it rises; the wind goes toward the South, and compasses toward the
North; the wind goes round about, Preach. 1. 5, 6. The Stars nor Planets
could not be placed neither higher nor lower.

By the removing of the Sun the corn, when it is sowed, receives moisture;
at the spring it makes the Corn to appear; it, by its heat, ripeneth the same.
God, by making them, set them in order; he made them after the Heavens: He made
the Earth first, Herbs after; and the Sea before the Fishes; the leaves are
after the Tree: All the Host of Heaven, says the Lord, shall fall, as the leaf
falls from the Vine, Esaias 34. 4. They lighten the Earth, they are called
oculi mundi: we do see good and evil, and yet we do doubt, but the light
gives discretion to discern; but the light of mine eyes is not mine own, Psalm.
38. 10. By their light we number, we measure, and order the Earth: It receives
no light by man's industry: this light is lucerna pedibus, by them God does
impregnate, and extracteth the fruits: they rule the day and the night, and
they serve for the use of man. Abimelech lay in ambush in the dark night, but
he rose as soon as the Sun was up, to fight with Gaal, Judge 9. 33. So they
have imperium and ministerium, the evening and morning is ruled by the Stars,
the night by the Moon, and the day by the Sun, yet they do serve the use of
man: by the devotion of the Sun the days are longer and shorter; by them the
light is separated from the darkness; by the course of Heaven we have hot and
cold days; the year, the month, the day, are reckoned and distinguished by
the Host of Heaven, Ezechiel 31. 1. The Moon in the full is the Summer of the
Month, the conjunction is, as it were, the Winter.

They are to divide light and darkness; this is for man's sake in respect of
the Creatures: The Sun is the protector of man; and when he rules, it is the
time of labor: but when the Moon rules, the night comes and restores
strength: Who may abide the coming of the day of the Lord? Malach. 3. 2.
darkness is, as it were, the dross of light, the purest metals have their
dross.

Now of the Approbation, and God saw that it was good. No evil is to be
ascribed to the constellation of any star; for all the stars that God made
are good: The good of the light is visible, there is in it a moral goodness;
for malus odit lucem, and quaerit tenebras: The Adulterer, the Thief, the
Murderer, are the Children of darkness; so that in light there is a moral
goodness. Therein also there is a pleasant good, The light is a pleasant
thing, it is a good thing to the eyes to see the Sun, Preach. 11. 7. Herein
bonum and jucundum do meet together. Falsehood and wickedness dwells in dark
places, but veritas non quaerit angulos. Fear was upon the Mariners when
neither Sun nor Stars in many days appeared, Acts 27 20. But Sol and
solace dwell together: they have bonum utile. Their use and profit is to light;
the Sun is clavus vitae, by them we have direction to judge and discern.
Hereby is the managing of days and of nights, alternatio temporum, and
vicissitudo rerum: Hereby is a time to sow and a time to reap; Hereby is
confusion of times avoided. So God saw it was good in all goodness. God makes
his Sun to arise upon the evil and the good, and sends rain on the just
and the unjust, Math. 5. 45. So that the light is an argument of Gods goodness.

The spiritual use: For Admonition.
Now we will give you some small spiritual use. Out of them we may learn
admonition of our end by their end; for the Heavens shall be dissolved, and
folden like a book, all their hosts shall fall as the leaf falls from the
Vine, Esaias 34. 4. so that out of the book of the Heavens we may learn
admonition, Admonition.
Let us not be a disobedient and gainsaying people, Romans 10. 21. but let us do
good under the Sun sub bono simus boni. For the proceeding, The course of the
Sun and the Moon is good, and still in motion; Let not us then be idle, non
vivamus ignavos annos and vanos dies, lest that come on us which came upon the
Egyptians, Psalm. 78. from Heaven God rained down Heavenly Manna, the wheat of
Heaven, the bread of Angels, as it is in the same Plalme: wherefore cast off
lying, and speak every man truth unto his neighbor, Ephesians. 4. 25. Austin says
well, Cum occidit visibilis Sol, occidat iracundia tua, ne occidat tibi
Christus Sol invisibilis. The Sun and Stars are wonderful works of God.
Ambrose says, Sapientes admirantur magna, stulti admirantur nova, ut cometas:
the Stars, the Sun and Moon, are the vessels of his goodness. David says,
When I behold the Heavens, the works of Gods fingers, the Moon and the Stars
which thou have ordained, What is man said I, that thou should remember him?
or the son of man that thou should regard him? Psalm. 8. 3. And as the
visible Sun does daily arise, so says Malachie, Unto them that fear Gods
name shall the Sun of righteousness arise, Malach. 4. 2. Christ is this
Sun of righteousness: And the Church is fair as the Moon, pure as the Sun,
Cant. 6. 9. The Church is full of spots, but cleared by the Sun of
righteousness; the Church waxes and waineth, and still is renewed as the
Moon: the words of the Prophet is as a light that shines in a dark place,
until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts, 2 Pet. 1. 19. In
the time of the Prophets was darkness, but at Christ's coming there was a
perfect light: The knowledge of faith is as the morning light, which grows
lighter; the knowledge of reason is as the evening which grows darker and
darker.

Imitation.
Out of the Heavens we have an use for imitation. The Sun rises visibly and
continues his course: We must continue in the good we have begun, we must
learn courage of the Sun, which rejoices like a mighty man to run his
race, that we may shine among the crooked Nations as lights in the World,
Philip. 2. 15. that we should not only have light in our selves, but learn by
the Moon, the Sun, and Stars, to give also light unto others.

Men light not a candle and put it under a bushel, but on a candlestick to
lighten those in the house: Let your light so shine before men that they may
see your good works, and glorify your father which is in Heaven, Matthew. 5. 16.
Let the streams of our light succor the poor; be you liberal lights to the
glory and praise of Gods name: so shall we come from the light of the Sun to
continue in the everlasting light of righteousness; Then shall the light of
the Moon be as the light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun shall be
seven fold, Esaias 30. 26. This place has no need of the Sun nor the Moon to
shine in it, for the glory of God does light it, and the Lamb is the light of
it; the people which are saved shall walk in the light of it; there shall be no
night at all, Rev. 21. 23. Then shall the just men shine as the Sun in the
Kingdom of their Father, Matthew. 13. 43. and sic finiamus de luce, of the
light, which light God of his mercy grant us all.

Amen.
Et creavit Deus Coetos maximos: and animantia omnia repentia, quae abunde
progenuerunt aquae in species ipsorum, omnesque volucres alatas in species
suas: viditque Deus id esse bonum. Genesis 1. 21.

Preached January 16. 1590.
HEREIN is the second part of the work of the fifth day; Here is the return of
the Precept. Creation of Fishes.
This is Gods water-work, first the creating of the great Whale, then of the
shoale of small fishes: It is said creavit, and not fecit: you shall find this
word creavit in three several verses only, of this chapter, in the first, in
this, and in the 27. verse. Creavit.
Creavit is applied in the first to being; in this verse to living; in the 27.
verse to understanding. In the holy tongue aget, in the first verse, is to be;
Cara is to have life; and Sagar, in the 27. is to have understanding: So that
creavit goes by degrees, from being to living, from living to understanding,
which is the perfection of creation; the first of the Heavens, lacking sense;
the other of Fishes and Fowls, having life; the other of Man, having
understanding. Barha, in Hebrew, in the first verse, is not only creare ex
nihilo aliquid, but ex nihilo magnum quod est miraculum. The Masterpeece.
Artificers among their works have one especial, which they call their
Masterpiece: God in his creation has in the Heaven one especial Masterpiece,
namely, the shining Sun, having his being from the Creator; he has in the
Water the great Whale, who has life from above; He has in the Earth Man his
Masterpiece, who from God has his understanding.

Whales.
These Whales are the great monsters of the Sea: In creating them, says
Ambrose, Creavit vastitates and stupores: even at the sight of him shall one
perish, Job 40. 28. the Tunny is a great fish, the Whale is a great tyrant, The
great Leviathan God has made even to play in the Sea, Psalm. 104. 26. He has
made him, says a Father, to be vectem maris, a bar of the Sea, so great is a
Whale: Satan the tyrant of the world, is compared to Leviathan the tyrant in
the Sea, Esaias 27. 1. AEqualia habent montibus corpora, says Ambrose. The
nature of the Sea is to be abyssus, these great Whales are immensae moles in
hoc abysso: though he be huge, yet the Sea is deep; though he be strong, yet
the Sea keeps him in ward: Job, in his 7. chap. and 12. verse. Am I a Sea or
a Whale fish, that thou keep me in ward: the greatness and strength of a
Whale is declared in the 40. of Job, the 20. verse, to the 41. chapter: He
cannot be drawn with an hook; neither can his jaws be pierced with an Angle:
thou can not fill a basket with his skin, nor the fish-panner with his
head: And in the 4. chapter God says None is so fierce that dares stir him
up: In the fourth verse of that chapter it is said, A double bridle cannot hold
him: Who shall open the doors of his face; his teeth are fearful round about:
In the 6. verse, The Majesty of his scales is like the strong sheilds: In the
9. verse, His neesings make the light to shine; and his eyes are like the
eyelids of the morning: out of his mouth go lamps and sparks of fire. In the
11. Smoke commethout of his nostrils, as out of a boiling pot; in his neck
remains strength. In the 15. verse, His heart is strong as a stone, and hard
as the nether millstone. In the 18. He esteems iron as straw, and brass as
rotten wood; When the Sword does touch him he will not rise up: He laugheth at
the shaking of the spear; the Archer cannot make him fly: the stones of the
sling he accounts as stubble. In the 22. verse, He makes the depth to boil
like a pot, and makes the Sea like a pot of (...): when he foameth the depth
seems to have an hoare and white head: He is made without fear; he is a king
over all the children of pride. This Leviathan is left here by Job for an
Epilogue of Gods great works: He, like the Serpent in the 12. of the Revelation
the 15. casts out of his mouth waters as a flood. This his greatness is an
especial and infallible example of Gods strength, who created him and his
hugeness.

Creation af all other Fishes.
Furthermore he created all living and moving things in the Waters in great
abundance. The small fishes are not the superfluity of nature says Ambrose:
He showed as much power in creating the small fishes as the great Whales,
totidem syllabae ad creandum pisciculos, ut ad creandum coetos: nec labor at
Deus in maximis, nec fastidit in minimis: both are miraculous; there are
miracula magna and parva, and sape parva sunt magnis majora, says Austin:
There is as much admiration in the small shrimp as in the great Leviathan.

Living Souls
Every soul is the matter of this creation, but not the body: At the
resurrection he will do a strange miracle, but this is a greater, for plus est
ut educat Deus animam viventem, quam ut reducat Deus animam viventem: this is
the miracle in this creation, that God gave sense, life, moving to the fishes:
Soul.
The soul is distinct from the body; there is a soul and flesh, Esaias 10. 18. the
soul is distinct from life: My soul is cut off though I live, Job 10. 1. the
soul is distinguished from the breath, Genesis 8.

Moving of Fishes.
Further, every thing moving, that moved of it self: not one way, as heavy
things do downward, and light things upward: not by any circular motion as do
the Heavens: but that moved all ways, every way; and that moved as the shell
fishes do by expansion. The moving in this place signifies a gliding, applied
to fishes in waters, and worms on the Earth: there are other motions, as the
flying of birds, the pacing foot by foot of beasts, and of men. The sense of
fishes is dull, yet their motion is perfect and swift. If they had sense only
to feel their hurts, and not motion to avoid the same, God might have seemed
cruel: It follows,

Which the waters brought forth in abundance.
Which the waters brought forth in abundance. Whole shoales of fishes do
appear by their motion, at the times of the year, upon the coasts; the spawns
are infinite: the singleness of one word has made such infinite numbers of
fishes, that their names may make a Dictionary, and yet shall we not know all
their names. When Jacob blessed Joseph and his two sons, he prayed that they
might grow, as fish, into a multitude in the the midst of the Earth, Genesis
48. 16.

In their kinds. It is to be wished that it were remembered, that Solomon did
show his wisdom in speaking of trees, of beasts, of fowls, and of fishes, 1
King 4. 33. Diverse kinds of Fishes.
there is diversity of kinds of fishes in Deuteronomy. 14. 9. there are clean and
unclean, the fishes that had finnes and scales they might, but fishes without
finnes and scales they might not eat: There are fishes of the Sea and of the
Rivers, Levit. 11. 10. There are shel-fishes, and fishes covered with a skin,
as a Lampree.

God made no such great fowls in the aile, as is the Whale, a fish, in the Sea,
lest we should be in danger, and they fall upon our heads; Flying Birds.
and therefore even to the birds God gave wings, according to their kind:
flying is the perfection of the birds motion, the wings are the Instruments.
Volucres are the birds flying with feathered wings; and insecta having wings,
not any feathers, as the Be and the Bat: There are wild fowl and tame fowl,
land fowl and water fowl.

Diverse kinds of Birds.
They do differ in the talent and in the beak, having crooked beaks and sharp
talents, being sharp sighted, seeing their pray afar off; some water fowl
having feet broad like an oar, and others talents sharp like a needle; some
living in the water by the fishes, others living in the air, having fishes for
their meat, so living in the air and by the water As Heaven and the Air are
joined, the Comers in the one like the Stars of the other: Lakes are in the
Land, and the Land in the Sea: Birds that fly in the Air and feed in the Sea.
So in diverse respects there are diverse kinds, both of fowls and of fishes.

The Approbation.
Now of the approbation, that God saw it was good. Gods eyes were not dim, for
he said they were good, who knew they were good; There is, as we have told you
often heretofore, triplex bonum in God, there is bonum utile: God has said
these things are good, take then heed to the word of the Lord, Jer. 2. 31. In
God is also bonum jucundum: whereupon David in the 34. Psalm. 8. says, Taste
you and see how gracious the Lord is: And in the 16. Psalm. 11. In his presence
is the fulness of joy, and at his right hand there are pleasures for
evermore. In him there is also bonum honestum, for Mercy and Justice are
throughout the Scriptures ascribed unto him.

The goodness of Fishes.
This goodness may be ascribed to the Sea in regard of it self, for Navigation;
or in regard of the fishes: Bonum utile.
When Moses blessed the Tribe of Zabulon, he said, they should suck the
abundance of the Sea, and of the treasures hid in the sands, Deuteronomy. 33. 19. the
people remembered the fish which they did eat in Egypt, Numb. 11. 5. When the
people lusted for flesh, being six hundred thousand footmen, Moses asked
whether all the sheep and beeves should be slain? Or whether all the fish of
the Sea should be gathered together? the 22. verse of the said chapter. Christ,
for the most part fed upon fish, unless it were at the Passover. Fish is good
for all Nations, but especially for Islanders, who by nature should be
Icthyophagi, for flesh came, and was transported unto Islands. Among the
calamities denounced upon Egypt one was this, That the Fishers should mourn,
and all they that cast Angleinte the River should lament, and that all they
that spread their nets upon the waters shall be weakened, Esaias 19. 8. So that
fish is good in regard of profit for meat; and the bones and oil of those
which serve not for meat, are for other purposes very profitable. Further, by
fishing and using themselves to storms, men are enabled to do service for
their Country. When Jacob blessed his son Zebulon, Cen. 49. 13. he faith,
Zebulon shall dwell by the Sea side, he shall be an haven for ships. They used
fishing, and by abiding the storms on the Sea they got this profit, to be able
men: so that the people of Zebulon did jeopard their lives (...) the death in
the field against Sisera, when Ruben did abide among the sheepfolds, Gilead
stayed beyond Jordan, Dan remained in ships, and Aship sat on the Sea bank and
stayed in his decayed (...), Judges 5. 18. Zebulon is a tribe of account as
well as Benjamin, Judah, and Neptali, Psalm. 68 27.

Bonum jucundum.
Next for bonum jucundum, in them there is a pleasant good: Fishing is
delightful to most that use it; and the taste of many fishes is most pleasant:
the basest fish, a shell fish, called Purpura, gives our purples, the most
sumptuous and pleasant color, that which adorneth Princes does come from a
fish: whereupon it is said, aquarum est quod in regibus adoratur. Margaretae,
the precious pearls that beautify Princes robes come from the Sea. So they are
pleasant for meat to the mouth, and for color to the eye.

Bonum honestum.
In them also there is bonum honestum: They are for examples to imitate: they
are symbola viltutum ut insitensur, and specula (...) ut fugiamus. Though they
are dumb, yet will they teach us; yea the fishes of the Sea will declare unto
us the power of God, Job 12. 8. we learn by them, not to have their dull sense:
the greater fishes cate the lesser, God makes man as the fishes of the Sea,
Abacuke 1. 14. this ravening, and still savoring of the salt water must be
avoided. We are to follow the fishes in this, that they go in shoals as in an
army; they go, as Salemon says the Grasshoppers go, in bands, Prove. 30. 27.
Hereby we do learn unity, which above all things we ought to follow.
The Kingdom of Heaven is like a draw-net cast into the Sea, that gathers of
all kind of things Matthew. 13. 27. The world is as the Sea; his word is the
net; his Church is the ship; the Apostles are the Fishermen, Matthew. 4. 19.
Mankind are the fish; the Heaven is the shore; Christ is the Pilor. Cast
symbolum Resurrectionis.
Lastly, the Whale is symbolum resurrectionis, a resemblance of the
Resurrection; for as Jonas was three days and three nights in the whales
belly, Jonas 1. 17. So shall the Son of Man be three days and three nights
in the heart of the Earth, Matthew. 12. 40. Thus far concerning his Mercy, the
other part is Gods Justice, wherein also they are good: As the Serpents and
water Snakes are for rods to punish the wicked: At the sight of the whale we
even perish, the end of the 40. chapter of Job. We will conclude then with
Ambrose, that (...), and malorum acerbitas nos trahit ad (...)

Viditque Deus id esse bonum.
January 28. 1590.
IN the approbation further, The Fowls are good.
God saw that the fowls were good. If you consider profit, they are for meat:
When the People murmurred for meat, Moses asks Whether he should kill all the
beeves and sheep, or gather together all the fish of the Sea, Numb. 11. 22. He
forgot the fowls of the Air but God sent them Quales in such abundance that
they were more then two cubits above the Earth, the 31. of that chapter, Bonum
utile.
They are not only for food in their flesh, but in their eggs also: And as
their flesh is for our eating in the day, so is their feathers for our resting
in the night. Birds are prositable in war and in peace: In sagittis belli,
and in calamis pacis; their feathers are for arrows in time of war for
fighting, and their quills in peace for writing. Ambrose and Basil say they are
profitable in destroying (...) and noisome things, as Owls. Insecta, as the
flies are (...) baits: Cantharides are good in medicine.

Bonum jucundum.
Secondly, They are good if you consider pleasure: Correct thy son, says
Solomon, and he will give thee pleasures to thy soul, Prove. 25. 17. There is a
pleasure in the taking of them by fowling to the meaner persons; and by hawking
to Princes and the better sort. The springing of the Partridge has been an old
pleasure, 1 Samuel 26. 20. There is a pleasure in them to the eye: The wings
of the Peacocks are pleasant; so are the wings and feathers of the Ostrich, Job
39. 16. There is a pleasure to the ear: the harmony of Instruments is but
devised by art; the chirping and singing of birds est nature alis music a mundi:
The fowls of Heaven do sing upon the branches, Psalm. 104. 12. as do the
Nightingale and the Lark, with other birds. The Navy of Tarshish brought
among his other wealth unto Solomon, for pleasure, Apes and Peacocks, 1 Kings
10. 22. And when his Navy brought him his gold of Ophir, there came also
Popengayes and Parrots, birds only for pleasure, in the same.

Bonum honestum.
As for honestum bonum, remember the little Be. In birds we have matter of
instruction for manners: Whereby we may learn matter to be avoided, and to
follow. There are unclean fowls as well as clean: The unclean are described in
the 11. of Leviticus 13. as the Eagle, the Vulture, the Kite, the Hawke, etc.
The ravening of these fowls we may learn to avoid. In the little Be we may
learn labor and good order, good government: The Bees have the most ancient
Commonwealth, banishing from their Hive the idle Drone; all good policy is
also to be gathered from them. Of the Eagle we do learn true nobility, by his
soaring and mounting up on high, as Ambrosae says on the 39. of Job 30.
habemus animum sursum sapientem: as by therenewing of the Eagles beak and
strength, we learn to renew our ways: look in the 1. of Micah 16. where the
Prophet says, Make thee bald, and shave thee for thy delicate children,
enlarge thy baldness as the Eagle: Thence may you gather the pattern of true
Nobility; for the natural history does report, that the Eagle causes the
baldness of his breast, the better to keep warm his young: all the evening, to
keep himself the warmer, he gets some bird, and sleeps upon it all night;
in the morning he does not prey upon it, but suffers it to fly away: and
because the Eagle will be sure not to meet that bird again, when he sees which
way it flies, the Eagle takes some other way. God shows his providence in
the old Testament to the Ravens, in the Gospel to the Sparrows; though the one
be ravenous and the other base, two dozen three half pence: See the 147. Psalm
5. much more then will he regard man: Sweet is the song of the Turtle, Cant. 2.
12. We have an example in the Stork for kindness to his Damme. We learn
sincerity and innocence from the Dove, Matthew. 10. 16. And Solomon compares,
in the 1. Canticles 15. the Churches beauty to the eyes of a Dove. By the
returning of the Swallow and Crane in their season, as in the spring, we ought
to remember to return from a sinful life: The Stork in the Air knows her
appointed times: the Turtle, the Crane, and the Swallow observe their coming,
Jeremy 8. 7. David, the better to express his mourning and solitariness, in
Psalm. 102. says, I am like a Pelican of the wilderness, like an Owl of the
Desert, as a sparrow alone upon the house top. In the Phoenix lastly may be
resembled the resurrection: Our good is in their good.

Fowls also of some sort are good for his Justice, some do foretell calamity,
and are the ministers of destruction, Ezcchiel 39. 17. When Esaias foretold his
desolation to the City, It shall be a Court for Ostriches, the shrich-Owle
shall rest there, the Owl shall make her nest there, the Vultures also shall
be gathered together, Esaias 34. 14. God punished the Egyptians with swarms of
flies, Exodus 8. 24. And the Canaanites with swarms of Hornets, Deuteronomy. 7. 20. By
these little things God shows his power: Then let us confess all riches,
honor, and all we have is from God, 1 Chronicles. 29. 12. Let us therefore meditate
continually of all the works of God, with David, and say, Meditabor omnia opera
Dei.

Et benedixit eis Deus, dicendo: Foetificate, ac augeseite, and implete aquas
per maria, and volucres augescunto in terra. Genesis 1. 22.

IN this day are two Precepts: the first in the 20. verse is the Institution,
and here the second is the propagation. He does not only command a being, but a
continuing. This is a second blessing not of nature, but it is Gods blessing
simile generare simile: It is Gods blessing to open the wombs of some, as it is
his curse to close the womb of others.

The propagation and conservation of nature.
This Act in this verse, is an Act of generation, nay of conservation and
preserving: the Fathers say this is a creating of Nature, and the inacting the
continuance thereof: this is magna Charta Dei, if I may so term it. The wheel
of Generation began this day, which still turns, and shall till God stay it.
By his extraordinary power, of nothing, he created something: By nature, of
something, something comes, for ex aliquo aliquid fit, says natural wisdom.

3 Points.
In this verse are three points, First, the Term or Phrase; Secondly, the Tenor;
Thirdly, a Proviso.

1. The Phrase.
For the first, God blessed.
God blessed them. Benedixit has an affinity with creavit: In the Hebrew
Barath is for being, and Barak for blessing: being and ingendring, crevit and
creavit, have an affinity; Benedixit Deus is as much to say, God gave good
words; Dixit fiat, and est factum; been dixit, and been est factum: Gods
blessings are better than ours. God blesses and man blesleth: Man's blessing is
verbal.
Man's blessing is to wish well, as to say, The blessing of the Lord be upon you,
or we bless you in the name of the Lord, Psalm. 129. 8. Man blesses God with
praises, reverence, and with obedience. Our blessing is but fair words blown
out of golden bellows, it is but verbal: Gods blessing is real.
God blesses us otherwise, for his blessing is real; for when God blesses, he
leaves a blessing behind him, Joel 2. 14. destroy not the vine, for a
blessing is in it, Esaias 65. 8. our blessing is but of windy words. When Christ
blesses, a power went from him, he felt it go from him in Matthews Gospel.
David terms it the dew of his blessing, for that it soaketh to the root, and
his curse is like oil. The echo of Gods benedixit is benefecit: been precari
and nihil praestare, is man's blessing: been precari and praestare, is Gods
blessing. His blessings are infinite; The water droppeth out of his bucket, and
his seed shall be in many waters, Numb. 24. 7. God is blessedness it self,
Christ is called the Son of the blessed. But among all his blessings here is
meant that which is spoken of Genesis 49. 25. namely the blessing of the breasts
and of the womb, which is the power of fruitfulness and of fertility. When
Isaac blessed Jacob, the smell, says he, of my son, is as the smell of the
field which the Lord has blessed, Genesis 27. 27. Fertility, Gods blessing.
fertility is the blessing of God; maledictio Dei, Gods curse of the Earth is
barrenness, chap. 3. 17. For the sins of the People maledictio depascet
terram, the curse shall devour the Earth, Esaias 24. 6. The restraint of Gods
blessing causes barrenness. The words of God (saying) before caused but
effects: Here he ordains his Creatures not only his works, but to be causes
and fellow workers with him: his blessings of this place are bestowed upon all
sorts, Gods righteousness is like mighty mountains, Psalm. 36. 6. This word
Barak is applied to the knee, and signifies, as it were mothers tenderness to
the Babe sitting upon her knee: Rachel says to Jacob, chap. 30. 3. Go in to
her, and she shall bare upon my knees, where barake is used. When the Babes are
upon their Mothers knee, they kiss them, they wish well, they cherish them: So
does God setting us on his knee, so that blanda est in Deo matrum affectio. Let
then every tongue speak his praises, let every knee bend, when God is named.

Saying.
Saying: As it is referred unto God, the very beasts do understand Gods
dialect and obey, The Lord spoke unto the fish, and it cast out Jonas upon the
dryland, Jonah 2. 10. God commanded the Ravens to feed Eliah, and they brought
him bread and flesh to eat, 1 Kings 17. 4. If the Lord do but hiss, the
flies from Egypt, and the Bees from Ashur, though they be dumb, shall come, and
shall light in the desolate valleys, Esaias 7. 18.

2. The Tenor of the 22. verse.
The Tenor is tripartite. Crescite multiplicamini, and replete aquas.
Crescite multiplicamini, and replete aquas. Growing is referred to quantity,
multiplying to numbers: Nec esse potest luxuries verborum: things grow bigger
multiplying by conjunction of male and female, filling the waters: For the
place, all waters, the two first are for propagation, and to replanish the
whole Sea, the pond of the World, auxesis erat. The Husbandman sows the seed,
but God gives a body at his pleasure, even to every seed his own body, 1 Cor.
15. 38. Yet at length such is the increase, that the Corn serves not only
their Country, but for Merchandise they carry Wheat for other Countries also,
Ezechiel 27. 17. whether thou sleep or wake thy Corn grows: the growth of
living things also is from God; for who by taking care can add one cubite unto
his stature? Matthew. 6. 27. Learn there how the Lilies grow, incrementum a Deo
est. Plants do grow, crescunt viventia: But propagation is appropriate unto
viventia, which is a ripeness of generation, and an ingendring of the like. He
that finds seed for the sower will minister bread for food, and will multiply
your seed, 2 Cor. 9. 10. there is for that cause distinction of sexes: God has
given seed to one in his loins ad gignendum, to other a womb ad pariendum. It
was God did withold from Rachel the fruit of the womb, chap. 30. 2. If God be
so pleased, there is no strength to bring forth, Esaias 37. 3. So it is a
blessing to bring forth and to bring up; it is benedictio uberam to make the
barren fruitful. Filling the waters is a preservation of things multiplied.

Four parts of this Conservation.
Edictum est hoc conservationis, it has four parts. 1. Natural love.
First, natural love of the engenderer to the thing engendered. As an Eagle
stirs up her nest, fluttereth over her byrds, stretches out her wings,
takes them and bears them upon her wings, Deuteronomy. 32. 11. yea even the Dragons
draw out the breast and give suck to their young, but the Daughters of my
People is become cruel like the Ostriches in the wilderness, says Jeremy,
Lament. 4. 3. The Pelican pierces her own breast to feed her young; it is a
great blessing that the young ones shall know their Damms, however they be
hatched, as the Partridge gathers the young which she has not brought
fourth, Jer. 17. 11. 2. The natural knowledge of their meat.
The second point of their preservation is the natural and ordinary knowledge of
their meat; As the Be flies to the flower, the land fowl to the seed, the
water fowl to the root; the Crab watches the Oysters gaping, he knows
pabulum and latibulum, thev know their place, the Sparrow finds her an house,
and the swallow a nest where she may lay her young, Psalm. 84. 2. and therefore
they make their nest hard without and soft within, The Dove makes her nest in
rocks to be in safety, Jer. 48. 24. 3 Knowledge of their enemies.
The third part of preservation is, that they know their enemies: the Dove
fears the Kite, not the Swan; the Partridge the Hawke, not the Goose; and the
fishes fly the Pike. The Be has knowledge of her sting, therefore in her
anger she stingeth: the birds trust some in their beaks, some in their talents,
and the weak and simple Dove trusts in her wings. They have knowledge of time
and place; the Stork knows her season; the Swallow never is seen but in the
Summer; the Cock croweth certainly at his hours: Ex Avihus est praesagium
Coeli; when the Crane takes up a stone, and flies with it in his foot, it is a
sign of a storm. 4. Knowledge of their Medicines.
The fourth part of preservation is, that they do know their medicines. The
Eagle builds his nest on high, as in a tower: the Hawke to get her feathers
flies with a south wind, she stretches out her wings to the South, Job 39.
29. Plumescit vento Australi; the Swallow cures her eye sight by the
Celandine; the Ibis teaches us to take a glister; the Sea horse learned us the
blood-letting, for when he feels himself full of corrupt blood, he pricketh
himself upon a sharp reed.

3. The Proviso
Now of the Proviso. The Fowls only multiply.
He says only, The fowls should multiply upon the Earth, fishes, by shoals, did
fill the waters, and the spawn of fishes covered the waters. It were dangerous
and troublesome if the fowls had so many eggs as the fishes have spawns, non
est tanta volucrum luxuries quanta est piscium. God still regarded man, he
would not have the Air pestered, therefore he restrained them only for to
multiply. Sol and homo generant hominem, says Philosophic: but Divinity says
benedictio Dei and homo generant hominem, illa and pisces generant pisces, illa
and aves generant aves. Gods blessing.
It is his blessing that gives food to the hungry, clothes to the naked,
riches to any man, It is not labor that makes rich, nor strength that gets
victory, Proverbs 10. 22. It is in vain for man to rise early, to lie down
late, and to eat the bread of sorrow, for man's state is in Gods providence,
Psalm. 127. Children are the inheritance of the Lord, the fruit of the womb is
his reward, in the same Psalm. By study and Gods blessing comes learning.
Whether then you eat or drink, or beget, or whatever you do, you do it by
Gods blessing. That this blessing of God toward us may continue, let us bless
and praise his name for ever. If our blessing of thanksgiving and praise do
ascend, his blessings will descend, sic crit recursus and decursus perpetuus.

Postea dixit Deus, Faciamus Hominem ad imaginem nostram, secundum
similitudinem nostram: qui dominetur in Pisces Maris, and in Volucres Coeli,
and in Pecudes, and in universam Terram, atque in omnia Reptilia Reptantia
super Terram. Genesis 1. 26.

Februar. 4. 1590.
IT is St. Ambrose question Quamdiu discimus alias Creaturas, ignoramus autem
nos? Before you see that things created before, were for us: The Creation of
Man.
And now he creates us. The knowledge of names, the plenty of all things,
Ecclesiasticus 17. 2. the tale of days numbering the first, second, and third,
etc. are for reasons capacity. This numbering of days is the Ephemerides and
Chronicle to the Worlds end. God has concealed his strength from the horse,
yet has showed it unto man: After God has compassed about the Heavens; after
he had ordered the land and the Sea, he then created man, and then he sounds
the retreat, Quod est action ultimum, fuit intention primum; for God had
still a regard of him: God said thrice in the creation of Man, which has a
resemblance of the Trinity: There is conveyance of Gods grace to man, here is
Gods Counsel for man's care.

4. Things.
In this verse we will consider four things under four causes: First, Man's
efficient: Secondly, the matter: Thirdly, the form: Lastly, the end in the
similitude of God, and in dominion over the fowls, fishes, and beasts God has
made him a Ruler. Of them in order.

1. Man's efficient.
First, There is a partition wall, there is a difference, between this work of
man and all the former. Faciamus:
The style now is changed, fiat and sit into faciamus: God before was a
Commander, now he is a Counselor: Quis est (says a Father) qui formabitur, ut
tanta sit opus prospectione: Before with saying sit and fiat, facta sunt: but
here in faciamus is deliberation, for that he now makes him, for whom all the
former Creatures were made. The beasts were made this day with Man; but here is
the difference, creata sunt ambo eodem die, non eadem fide; eodem loco, non
eodem modo. God said producat terra, germinet herba; sed dixit faciamus
hominem. Austin says well, Fecit (...) ut procul stans, at hominem ut prope
accedens, porrigens manum: God framed man out of the Earth, as does the Potter
his pot out of the clay, As the clay is in the potters hand, so is the house of
Israel in Gods hand, Jer. 18. 6. We are not only the sheep of his pasture, but
the sheep also of his hands, He made us and not we our selves. Let us mark, to
whom is this Precept directed? not the Angels and Elements. The Arrians and
Jews do say, that in the creating of man God consulted with Angels, and had
the help of Elements; which opinion is without all discretion: For who has
instructed the spirit of the Lord? or was his Counselor? Esaias 40. 13. Nec
consilisrium neque auxiliarium habet Deus. Men are not the pattern of the
Angels, but the image of God. Some Jews say here God speaks like a Prince in
the plural number, denying the Trinity; but Philo Judeus, the best of the Jews,
disclaimeth that opinion. We say therein is expressed the Trinity. Princes in
giving their Law use most magnificence. God at the giving of his Law says I am
the Lord thy God, thou shall have no other Gods but one, in the singular
number. The unity of Godhead, and the Trinity of Persons.
In dixit Deus is the unity of substance, in faciam us is the trinity of
persons: In the treble creavit in this chapter; in the treble dixit in this
sixth day, is signified the Trinity of persons. In the image and similitude is
the unity: In nostra is the trinity; dicit ad similitudinem, non similitudines:
This is plain both in the creation and in the regeneration by Christ, God in
unity, man in the trinity. In creating man is great deliberation, it is a joint
work of the Trinity. Thus far of the cause efficient.

2. The matter of Man.
Secondly, Of the Matter. God created Man, or Adam, which is nomen collectivum,
and signifies Earth, the Matter of our creation. God in creating the Heavens
de profundis abyssi exaltavit altitudinem Coeli: And here man, a clod of earth,
before perchance trodden sub pedibus bestiarum, collocavit super capita
Angelorum ut in Christo. David seeing man's baseness Psalm. 144. 3. says, Lord,
what is man that thou regardest him? or the Son of man, that thou think
upon him? and likewise in the 8. Psalm, all before tend to honor and
excellency; this work of ours shows our own baseness, that we are but fimus
and limus: the creeping worm called in Hebrew Adama has alliance with Adam,
which man, who is but a worm, as says Job, he confesses himself to be vile,
Job 39. 37. In the 22. Jeremy, 29. the prophet exclameth saying, O Terra,
Terra, Terra. Adam or Man is not every kind of Earth, he is not sandy, but of
a serviceable and profitable gleeb; for he is for Gods especial use, and made
to his own likeness. In Gods temple there was no timber but of fruitful
trees, aliquid Deus creavit exnihilo, and hic ex infimo maximum, at homo malus
and otiosus ex aliquo facit nihil. Though David were an holy man, yet did he
see corruption, Acts 13. 36. For man is of the Earth earthly, and born mortal,
subject to corruption. Galen the Heathen says, that the Anatomy of a man is
Hymnus Dei: He says to the Epicure, take an hundred year to work but one part
of a man, and thou can not mend it; for in man God has been so absolutely a
workman, that nothing in him may be mended. Miranda fecit pro homine, sedmagis
miranda in homine. I will praise thee, O Lord, says David, Psalm. 139. 14. for
I am wondrously made.

3. The form of Man.
Thirdly, The form of man in our Image, juxta similitudinem nostram; though man
be de terra, and in terra, yet he is not propter terram. God created his former
Creatures secundum speciem suam, according to their kind: God creates man
secundum similitudinem suam. Man is Microcosmos, so say the Heathen: but
divinity says he is Imago Dei: in omnibus Creaturis vestigia sunt Dei, sed in
homine non solum sua vestigia sed imago sua. Est enim non solum opus sed imago
Dei. Miscen. upon this place, says upon Imago Dei, that in una hac voce
innumer as habemus voces: Who fo sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be
shed; the reason is this, for in the image of God has he made man, Genesis 9. 6.
So there is no exchange of men's souls; in imagine sua, we are created without
blemish. Now when Adam was an hundred and thirty years old, he begat a child
in his own likeness, after his image, chap. 5. 3. that was blemished by his
sin. Our perfection in the image of God is esse constmiles filio Dei, for we
are predestinate to he made like the image of his Son, that he might be the
first born of many Brethren, Romans 8. 29. We are changed into the same Image
from glory to glory, 2 Cor. 3. 18. Perfect felicity is the Image of God, virtue
is the way to this felicity, sin deformeth this Image in us.

Here is Imago and similitudo: Similitudo.
Similitudo is the genus and comprehends both: similitudo is as a union in
quality, here it is added as a perfection to the Image: the lineaments hereof
by the Fathers are said to be first, The essence of the soul is in the body, in
omni and unaquaque part, as God is in the world.
Secondly, the soul is immortal: God is so. Thirdly, there is a triple power of
the soul, Understanding, Memory, and Free Will. Understanding is every where,
in Heaven, in Earth, in the deep, on this side and beyond the Seas; there is an
ubiquitie of the soul, as of Gods presence, every where. Memory, the
infiniteness thereof is as that of God, who is without limitation; quae est
haec immensa hominum capacitas? says a Father; the will and conscience cannot
be bound, but it is free to think: so God what him pleases, that can he do.
God, by his power, creates man, and make h a natural World: And Man, likewise,
makes artificialem mundum, as ships for carriage, temples for service; lights
and candles as artificial stars: creavit etiam homo alteram quasi naturam.
Imago Dei nata and creata.
There is a primitive Image, which is Imago nata, that is, of Christ the Son
of God: Imago autem creata Dei is of man: Christ is the Image of the invisible
God, the first born of every Creature, Coloss. 1. 15. Zeleb in the original
tongue is nata Imago quae est Christi: Tohar, creata Imago quae est Adami. In
the Redemption Christ made himself as our Image, Man planted may fall, so did
Adam; but being replanted by Christ, he cannot fall: The first man Adam was
made a living soul, the last man Adam was made a quickening spirit, 2 Cor. 15.
45. ad similitudinem nostram; Imago Dei est omnium hominum, similitudo autem
est paucorum: the one is the bare face, the other is the robe royal: the one we
have by essence, the other by virtue: the one by nature, the other by grace. We
ought to put off the old man with his works, and put on the new man which his
renewed in knowledge, after the Image of him that created him, Colloss. 3. 10.
and love is the bond of perfectness: so that knowledge is recommended in the
Image, and love in the likeness: which two are as the Urim and Thummim of the
Law: Our soul is as a glass to behold his virtues, and humble precepts, Luke
6. 27. In his similitude to be as he is, as far as we may. Hence have we a
thankful remembrance, that he will crown us with glory everlasting, if we
finne not against nature, and draw on, instead of his similitude, larvam
Demonis, the visor of the Devil; but put on the new man, which, after God, is
created unto righteousness and (...), and give not place unto the Devil,
Ephesians. 4. 24. We have in us Earth, in regard of the body, and Heaven in regard
of the soul: in the one is time, in the other eternity. Christ calls the
Gospel, The Gospel of every Creature, Mark 16. 15. Ambrose says, posuit Deus
in homine Terram and Coelum, non ut Terra mergat Coelum, sed ut Coelum elevet
Terram: totum hoc est (...) se assimulare Deo: Let thy inward thoughts and
outward conversation be good and agreeable, for this is the end of all, Fear
God and keep his commandments, this is the whole duty of a man; for God will
bring every work, with every secret thing, unto Judgment, whether it be good or
evil, Ecclesiastes 12. 13.

4. The end of man's creation, to rule other creatures.
After God has crowned man with knowledge and love, in the latter part of this
verse, he gives him a Scepter, and makes him Vicegerent over the Sea, the
Air, the Earth; over all the fishes, fowls, beasts, and creeping things
therein, bidding him to rule over them: He brought before man the beasts and
fowls he had created, to whom Adam gave their names, Genesis 2. 19. The Image is
of perfection: the Similitude is in wisdom; in knowledge, in the Son; in
love, in the Holy Ghost; in power, of the Father. Miscen says, Fecit Deus
hominem nudum, to show that he needed the help of other Creatures for clothing
and for meat: Man's soveraingtie is to have at his command, and to serve him,
the whole earth and the furniture thereof. If God bid him to rule over the
fowls, fishes, and the beasts, over the better sort, then surely over the
worser: Yea, God has made the Sun, the Moon, and Stars, with all the host
of Heaven, to serve man, and has distributed them to all People, Deuteronomy. 4. 19.
He has given him dominion over the beasts, that is, the privilege of hunting
into what parts he please; and dominion over the Earth, which is the privilege
of Husbandry. Oh let us live after the similitude of him whose Image we are;
and let us not be like, nay worse than beasts, pejus est comparari bestiae,
quam nasci bestiam. For man, though he be in honor, he understands not, but
is like to beasts that perish, Psalm. 49. 20. We are here to note the obedience
of the Creatures while man was obedient: and that the mutiny and discention
between them, and their disobedience to man, did arise by man's rebellion to God
his Maker. Adams disobedience caused their disobedience.
When Adam stood, then the cattle, the fowl, and the beasts of the field came
and did homage unto man, and were content to be named by him, chap. 2. 20. But
after his fall fugiunt and fugant; they some of them, fly from him, and other
some make him to fly. Now we serve the cattle before they can serve us. This
comes to pass by disobedience, by blotting (as much as in us lies) the
Image of God: Let then our own wickedness correct us, and our turnings back
reprove us; for know and behold that it is an evil thing and bitter, that thou
have for saken the Lord thy God, Jer. 2. 19. It is Gods bounty to be created in
the Image of God, according to his likeness: Let therefore our care be, that
these his great benefits be not bestowed in vain by our own sensuality, lest,
by that means, we be cast from his likeness; for at the first God created man
without corruption, and made him after the Image of his own likeness, Wisd. 2.
24.

Itaque creavit Deus Hominem ad Imaginem suam, ad Imaginem, inquam, Dei creavit
eum: Marem and Foeminam creavit eos. Genesis 1. 27.

Februar, 6. 1590.
GODS deliberation was in the former verse: Here he enters into consultation:
in this image his person is represented; this verse is the accomplishment of
the former. Fuit sic was the return of the other days; Three creavit's in this
verse.
but he uses another course here, the three creavit's, iterated thrice, is a
specifying of great joy of God in this his work, it is, says a Father,
triumphus Creatoris. It expresses the tender affection and dear love God has
to man: in a speech of affection Solomon says, Prove. 31. 2. What, my son!
and what, the son of my womb! and what, oh son of my desires! Paul likewise
ravished and carried away with this fervent affection, uses this treble
iteration in the 2 Cor. 12. 2. I knew a man in Christ above fourteen years
ago; whether he were in the body I cannot tell, or out of the body, I cannot
tell; I knew such a man, whether in the body or out of the body, I cannot tell,
which was taken up into thethird Heaven. Others do conceive, that God by this
treble iteration, blew a trumpet to the Waters, Earth, and Heaven, that is, to
all the World, that they should all know that man was their Governor. Thus much
for creavit in general, and the treble iteration thereof: Now we will consider
the especials.

Faciamus was a word suspicious, so that some thought God had the help of
Angels; but here by creavit the doubt is answered, that is was one by the
Deity.
Imago nostra, was suspicious, here ad imaginem Dei, ad imaginem suam takes
away the doubt. Creavit thrice iterated in this chapter, the first is creating
essence, the other life, the other understanding. Creavit is here thrice
mentioned, for that all these three, essence, life, and understanding are in
this one Creature Adam: He has being, sense, and reason, est autem ratio anima
animae and pupilla animae: all which three are expressed in chap. 2. 7. God
made man of the dust of the ground, that is his essence, and breathed in his
face the breath of life, and the man was a living soul, there is the person of
God the Father in the creation: All things were made by the word, and without
it was made nothing, John 1. 3. So by this conceit Gods purpose is understood.
Here the Fathers in treble iteration find trinity of Person, in creavit unity
of Godhead: The Image is for knowledge, the similitude for love, and power is
given him for execution. The mind or heart receives, Deuteronomy. 6. 6. the will
affects, the power or dominion executes. There is contemplation, affection,
and action brought forth by this triplicitie. Now of the considerations apart.

Three parts of this verse.
This verse has three parts, Two of the soul one of the body
the two first concern the soul, the last the body, as is apparent: By the two
branches of the soul, is signified a double care of the soul, and a single care
of the body. Our soul is coelum, our body coenum, the one heavenly, the other
earthly. The opinion of the better sort of Interpreters is, That God uses this
often repetition for the better credence, saying, ad imaginem suam, ad imagine
ejus, cujus? respondet, ad imaginem Dei. Man carries the image of God, not of
Caesar, not of the World; Date ergo Deo quae sunt Dei. The best sort say it is
for the emphasis, for our learning and for our memory, alleging the 22. of
Proverbs 20. Have I not written unto thee three times in counsels and
knowledge: It is ad perpetuam rei memoriam. Jeremy says thrice, Oh Earth,
Earth, Earth, in regard of our humiliation. Similitude and Imago.
Here Moses shows, that though in regard of our bodies we are Earth, yet in
regard of our souls we are Heavenly. To the peace of God we are called in one
body, Colloss. 3. 15. Christ took upon him our vile Image to redeem us. The
woman is of the man, the man is by the woman, but all things are of God, 1 Cor.
11. 12. By sin we have lost this Image, but fear to sin renews this
Image, which who has not, he is no man. But what is become of Gods likeness,
the Image is twice mentioned; but sometime the Image is taken for the
likeness, as in the 3. James 9. Men are made after the similitude of God. The
Fathers take the similitude for a perfection, not a generality. St. Ambrose
says, Est Imago quam babemus, est similitudo quam querimus, The Butter-flie
can be glorious, the Ant provident, the Wasp can revenge, but to think of God
belongs to man alone, whose Image he is. Bernard says, Imago quam omnis
vivens habet, nullius est momenti, condemnatio est mundi, and per peccatum
sumus deformes ad imaginem pecudum: the beautifying (...) in the similitude.
Man is not Imago Dei, sed ad Imaginem Dei. Basil says, the image is by nature,
the similitude by grace, for the similitude is the perfection of the image. The
image of God is knowledge: The new man is renewed in knowledge, after the image
of him that created him, Coloss. 3. 10. In the likeness is love, which is the
bond of perfectness, the 14. verse of that chapter. This is to be created in
the new man, in his likeness of righteousness and holiness, these are the
colors of this likeness: and the oil of these colors is truth, the which he
pours into us, Luke 10. 34. and so having this similitude, man is perfect:
But the Devil, envying this beauty, gave man a pensill of his own will, and had
his colors of malice, vain device, and lust, and these drown men in perdition
and destruction, 1 Timothy 6. 8. But Miscen says, While the Devil poysoneth men's
affections, let not reason assist Satan, and his temptations are but bubbles.
But if the conscience and judgment of man be corrupted, thence comes all the
transgressions of Mankind, then is their agricultura peccati.

Of the body, Male and Female.
Now of the body, Male and Female created he them. The image of God is common to
all, the similitude to a few; this diversity of sexes is in regard of the
flesh, for there is neither Jew nor Grecian, neither bond nor free, neither
male nor female, but ye are all one in Christ Jesus, Galath. 3. 28. Male and
female created he them, and called their name Adam in the day they were
created, chap. 5. 2. There is in Adam the similitude and the sex, he
understands things spiritual and things earthly, therefore he has soul and
body: He is as a Theater to behold God, and as a glass to view Gods likeness:
He was created without corruption, Wisd. 2. 23. Only this have I found, says
Solomon, that God has made man righteous, Preach. 7. 29. Man is made straight
in respect of this body, wherein is resembled the inward righteousness of his
soul, Ne habeamus ergo curvam animam in recto corpore, let us strive to be
inwardly as God has made us outwardly, that is, to have upright thoughts, and
a straight conscience toward God and toward man. Man's study is not the care to
preserve Gods image: So that we carry about us Gods image to be the
condemnation of the World. We should show in our body the image of God renewed
in us. There be those that say, that God made the upper part of man and the
Devil made the lower part; but God made man from the crown of the head to the
sole of the foot. Male and Female.
Moses therefore says, Male and female created he them, both were made the
sixth day. The manner of making the Female is the 21. verse of the next
chapter, of the rib of Adam was Eve made; both Male and Female God made,
showing, in them, his mercy unto thousands. The like did God promising in the
seed of Abraham all Nations should be blessed, Psalm. 105. Before in dominentur,
they were both foreseen. There is a difference of sex in others, as in Birds
and Beasts, but the same is expressed only in the principal Creature. Adam was
not ex semine mulieris, says Ambrose: He created Adam, and out of Adam he took
Eve. He created but one: and wherefore one? because he sought sanctum semen, an
holy seed, Malach. 2. 15. He created not Marem and Foeminas, nor Mares and
Foeminam, but Marem and Foeminam: So this is no refuge for Adultery, but it is
the institution of the holy estate of Matrimony: so that from thence issues
the holy seed. The Adulterers, like pampered horses, do neigh after their
neighbors wives, Jer. 5. 8. committing abomination with others wives, forcing
their own sisters, and their fathers Daughters, (...) 22. 11. but lawful
marriage begets children to God, not to the World. Before God created other
his Creatures after their kind severally: but here God takes the Female out
of the Male, being both bone of the same, and flesh of one flesh, that so love
might perfectly be grounded between them; but as the woman is of the man, so is
the man also by the woman, 1 Cor. 11. 12. Mulier est exviro, vir per mulierem.
Man enclosed Woman in the Creation, but woman incloased man in the Redemption.
Jeremy in his 31. chapter 22. says, The Lord has created a new thing in the
Earth, a Woman shall compass a Man. Eve came out of Adam, Christ out of the
Virgin Mary, without any knowledge or copulation of the flesh. These are high
mysteries, and works wonderful; The man was not created for the woman but the
woman for the man's sake, 1 Cor. 11. 9.

Hence is observed the state Ecclesiastical, Political, and Occonomicall.
Out of this verse the observation of the primitive Church has been, First, in
the Image of God is resembled the estate of the Church, the Ecclesiastical
estate. In dominentur, let them rule over the Earth, and Sea, the Fowls and
Fishes, is the ground of a Commonwealth. Though Christ were abased, yet all
the Nations shall worship him: The Kingdom is the Lords, and he rules among
the Nations, Psalm. 22. 17. 18. The perfect are to rule the unperfect: the Man
has dominion over the Beasts and all the Earth; this is the resemblance of the
Political estate. In creating them Male and Female, is the perfect resemblance
of the Oeconomicall estate of every House and of every Family.

Deinde benedixit eis Deus; and dixit eis Deus, Foetificate, ac augescite, and
implete Terram, eamque subjicite: and dominamini in pisces Maris, and in
volucres Coeli, and in omnes bestias reptantes super Terram. Genesis 1. 28.

Februar. 9. 1590.
THE second speech God here uses concerning man, The creating of Mankind.
is whereby he creates Mankind, as before he created Man: Propagation.
For though creation be a great benefit, yet this is a further benefit of
propagation or continuance. God, by Nathan, promises to David, that his
Kindome shouldbe stablished for ever, though David said, Who am I oh Lord, and
what is my house? 2 Samuel 7. 18. Though David's people were small, yet did God
multiply them, and gave continuance to his seed.

Two parts of propagation.
There are two parts of propagation, A Heir: an Heritage.
The one is to have an Heir, the other to have an Heritage, both are here given
unto Man. Of them in order.

Adams Heirs are Mankind.
God restrains not his bounty unto these two Adam and Eve. Esaias, in his 49.
chapter 6. prophesying of Christ, says, It is a small thing to raise up the
Tribes of Israel; I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles: God gives
not the Earth to two only, for the Earth is too big for two; there must be many
to inhabit it; there be those that dwell in the uttermost place of the Earth,
Psalm. 65. 9. They only are not the two vessels of his mercy; there are more
vessels then they, and that he might declare the riches of his glory upon the
vessels of mercy which he has prepared unto glory, he has called both Jew and
Gentil, Romans 9. 23. By the multitude much glory is given to God: In the 26.
verse, was the planting of this principal work; this is the watering thereof
by his blessing. Creation and procreation are both blessings, yet several
blessings; all have the one, yet not all the other. Though the Eunuchs be as
dry trees, yet God has for them a blessing, Esaias 56. 3. Diverse have their
wombs closed: this is a restraint of Gods blessing. When the Prophet did even
consult what curse God should give Judah for their Idolatry, he says, Give
them a barren womb and dry breasts, Osee 9. 14. When Jacob blessed his
children, he said to Joseph, He shall be a fruitful bough, that is, in the
Hebrew, a son of increase, chap. 49. 23. As Gods curse is a restraint of
increase, so his blessing is the fountain of procreation, been voluit is the
fountain also of Gods benedixit; For God has created all things, and for his
wills sake they are, Rev. 4. 11. Gods blessing is not res voti, as man's is,
only to wish well, but it is as dew and oil that soaketh to the bone.

Benedixit iis De^.
Increase is an actual blessing, An handful of Corn is sown, and the fruit
thereof shall shake like the trees of Lebanon; the Children shall (...) like
the grass of the Earth, Psalm. 72. 16. So that Children are Gods blessing. God
could at once, at the first, have filled the Earth with men, but God made one
for that he would have an holy seed, for woman was out of the rib of man, chap.
2. 22. God blessed them, therefore the estate of Marriage is blessed; therefore
God made woman an help for man, chap. 2. 18. The Schoolmen say, Est enim haec
benedictio remedii, a blessing of remedy: this is a remedy for filthy lust and
concupiscence: And therefore says Paul, to avoid fornication, Let every man
have his wife, and every woman have her own husband, 1 Cor. 7. 2. Humiliata est
benedictio. This binds not every one to marry; (...) est dans facultatem,
non addens necessitatem: this is no precept, but a power and faculty to
increase and multiply. When God said, chap. 2. 16. Thou shall eat freely of
every tree of the Garden, he bound him not as of necessity to eat of all, but
gave him liberty to eat of any. Matrimony, some say, is a carnal filthiness,
and full of sin; therefore they disalow Marriage. There are some other say,
that Marriage is a matter of necessity, saying that all must needs marry; but
both of these opinions are most wicked. God said before to the fishes, crescite
and multiplicamini and replete aquas maris: and to the Birds maltiplicentur
super terram.

Replete terram
Here replete terram especially concerns man. With the blessings wherewith he
blessed Plants and Beasts, he blesses Man, and with more, saying, Crescite,
multiplicamini, and replete terram: By the first is given us stature; by the
second, power of issue; by the last, a power of plenty: He would not have man
small in stature, nor solitary in number; but he made him to fill the Earth. He
proceeds in a good course, first there is maturity; for before maturity there
is no seed: after maturity and ability, he gives him a will to multiply;
wherein is a pleasure: Sara laughed saying, After I am waxed old, and my Lord
also, shall I have lust? chap. 18. 12. She seeing her self barren, gave her
maid Agar to Abraham for wife, chap. 16. 3. God gives a power unto man of the
rains, God opens the womb and moistneth the breasts for propagation. When God
had opened Rachels womb, the son which she had conceived and born she called
Joseph, saying the Lord will give me yet another son, chap. 30. 24. So that
Joseph's name is not restrained to one or two, but she hoped to have further
increase.

Every bird and fish had these words, dixit Deus iis: Though the words spoken
here to man are the same, yet the accent in the holy tongue makes the
difference: But the expressing of the difference is in dominamini, after these
three, which shows the dignity of this Creature. Before it was said to the
other Creatures, subjicimini, be ye subject; Subjicite terram.
but here it is said to Man subjicite terram, which being added to the three
former, makes a great difference, which shows man to be of a noble
condition, being ad imaginem Dei, among whom God has his Elect: Who shall not
only replere terram morientium, but even replere cerlum, id est, terram
viventiam. I should have fainted, says David, except I had believed to see the
goodness of God in the Land of the living, Psalm. 27. 13. Even for man's sake
was the world created, and the consummatum of the world depends upon them.
Basil and Ambrose do say, these words do concern Adams mind, that he grew in
the gyfts of the mind. There is a growing up in Christ, by faith and
knowledge, to a perfect man, unto the measure of the age of the fulness of
Christ, Ephesians. 4. 13. this is to grow in favor and in wisdom; applying the
filling of the Earth to replete terram viventium, nempe, coelos: And unto them
that grew in these gifts, and do persevere to fullness, and overcommeth, God
promises dominion, that he shall be a pillar in the Temple of God, he shall
have written on his head the name of God, the name of the new Jerusalem, Rev.
3. 12.

The value of the benefit.
Now concerning the value of the benefit: it is a benefit to have issue, to have
Heirs. When Adam saw the World, he named it a Globe. An Heir.
When Adam had a son by Eve, he was called Cain, that is a possession, chap.
4. 1. Abraham esteemed it a great benefit to have an heir of his own loins;
therefore, in chap. 15. 2, 3, 4. To have Children.
He says to God, what will thou give me, seeing I go childlesse, and again
lo behold, unto me thou have given no seed; the Steward of my house is this
Eliezer of Damascus; wherefore lo a servant of my house shall be mine heir?
But God does comfort him saying, This man shall not be thy heir, thy seed shall
be innumerable. When Jacobs sons told him that Joseph was living, and
governor of the land of Egypt, and showed him the chariots which he had sent
for him, Israel said, I have enough, Joseph my son is yet alive, chap. 45.
28. So then children are a comfort to their Parents and a staff to their age:
they are a beauty to the Commonwealth; The sons growing up in their youth as
plants, and the daughters as the corner stones graven after the similitude of a
Palace, Psalm. 144. 12. They are also a strength unto the Commonwealth, As the
arrows in the hand of the strong man, so are the children of youth, Psalm. 127.
4. The Prophet, in repeating the blessed estate of Jerusalem, after the return
from her captivity says, in the 8. Zecharie 5. That the streets of the City
should be full of children playing in the streets thereof.

The other is an Heritage.
The other benefit in this place is the Heritage, the latter part of this verse.
This is an approving of his former counsel; it is a Deed of gift of Gods
Creatures of the Earth it self, and an intayling of it unto man and his
posterity. Subjicite terram.
The first is a tenure of the Earth, saying subjicite eam, and giving to man an
interest in the furniture of the Sea, Air, and Land. God is the chief Lord of
all.
God he is the chief and absolute Lord of all things, and over all things: The
Heavens are his, the Earth also is his, he has laid the foundation of the
World, and of all that therein is, Psalm. 89. 12. The furniture also is his: All
the Beasts of the forest are his, and the Beasts on a thousand mountains, Psalm.
50. 10. The glory of Lebanon, the beauty of Carmel is the Lords Esaias. 35. 2.
The riches of the Earth, the gold is his, and the silver is his, Aggey 2. 9.
God in his own person, in 41. Job. 2. says, that all under Heaven is his.

Mankind has the Earth, Sea, and the Air in Fee-farm.
But God here delivers unto man possession of the Earth and his Creatures,
bidding him to rule over them. God reserveth the Heavens to himself, even the
Heavens are the Lords: terram autem dedit filiis hominum, Psalm. 115. 16. He
gives the Earth as it were in Fee-farm to the sons of men. God, the cheef
Lord of all things, makes man ruler over the Earth, makes the Earth (as the
Germans do say) a County Palatine. So that men are no usurpers, but lawful
rulers: All titles in the Law, in Manors, Lands, and Dominions are from hence.

In subjicite terram are employed these three, seizing, keeping, and employing
of the Earth: Jus primae possessionis.
Jus est primae possessionis, first, possession was a right in the beginning:
wherefore it is said in the 11. Deuteronomy. 24. All the places whereon the soles of
your feet shall tread, shall be yours. If two came together to one place, they
divided the possession by consent, as did Abraham and Lot, chap. 13. 11. Or
else they divided the same by lots, as in the 15. of Joshuah 1^ A comparison.
The Earth was at first, as a dish of meat at a Table, where every man might cut
where him pleased; but when one had cut forth his piece and laid it on his
(...), it became private, and it were injury to take from him, that is now his
own by possession. God promised to the seed of Jacob, the Land of Canaan, the
lot of their inheritance, Psalm. 105. 11. For the Israelites, by their just
carriage and honest conversation obtained the promise, and having injury
offered them by the Canaanites, took revenge under Joshuah, Possession Jure
Belli.
and possessed the Land jure belli. Jacob gave unto Joseph, at his death, one
portion above his brethren, which he got out of the hands of the (...) by the
sword and by the bow, chap. 48. 22. The right he had, was by the sword and by
the bow, and this was his own. That the former world had by just war and
subduing of Tyrants, was a right. If we win a Country where no habitation
has been, or which has not been habitable for wild beasts, by chasing from
thence the beasts, and by subduing that Country, it becomes our own by
subjicite terram. When the most high God divided to the Nations their
Inheritance. When he separated the sons of Adam, he appointed the borders of
the people, according to the number of the children of Israel, Deuteronomy. 32. 8.
Every one had a mark-stone, to know their own several, Deuteronomy. 27. 17. Thereupon
says the wise man, in the 22. Proverbs 28. Thou shall not remove the ancient
bounds which thy fathers have made. David smote the (...) and the Moabites, he
subdued them and made them tributaries, 2 Samuel 8. 2. God has assigned (...)
Mankind the bounds of their habitation, Acts 17. 26. Isreal's possession three
hundred years was a good right, Judges 11. 26. Thus much of Heirs and Heritage,
concerning the (...) upon others lands, and keeping their own.

The last point of subjicite terram, is the employing, that is, to labor,
turmoil, to break it up, to harrow and plough it; this is for Husbandry, to
dung it and manure it for pastures, to make houses and buildings for Architect,
to make gardens and enclosures for solace. The mold also is to be employed, as
the sand, the chalk, the clay for the brick and tyle, is to be employed.
Solomon, when he builded the Temple, had great occasion to search quarries of
stone, there were great and costly stones sent from Hyram for the foundation
and beautifying thereof, 1 Kings 5. 17. God gave to man industry whereby to
find the metals, also the riches of the Earth in the bowels of the same. God
gave the Earth to man, God subdued it not for, but he bad man subdue it:
Subjicite eam, non dedit subjectam, sed subjiciendam. God made man, not of
loose sand, but of a molde, of gleeb to labor, not to be idle; and therefore
Adam, in the state of his innocence, was put into the garden of Eden that he
might dress it and keep it, chap. 2. 15. Man labored then not with sweat, for
his labor was not laborious; for by man's transgression Gods curse came, that
in the sweat of his face he should eat his bread, chap. 3. 19.

Dominamini.
Now of Dominamini. Plenitudo terrae est jam hominis. In dominio sunt haec
quatuor, usus, fructus, consumptio, and alienatio. In use,
First for Use, we have power to tame some, as the Horse, for all his strength;
yea even the Lion, for all his courage; and the Elephant for all his hugeness:
Those which will not be tamed, we rule over them by imprisoning them. Fruit,
In regard of fruit, We have the wool of Sheep, the teeth of Elephants, and the
horn of Unicorns. Consumption,
For consumption, or spending, They are some unto us for meat, and others for
medicine. Alienation.
In respect of alienation, we buy and sell them daily.

Over Fish, Birds, and Beasts.
Further, Over what shall you rule? Even as it is in the text, Over the fishes
of the Sea, by the Angle. Christ bids Peter cast in his angle and take the
fish, Matthew. 17. 27. Or by the net: Christ also bid Peter let down his net to
make a draught, Luke 5. 4. Angling and fishing are to man both for profit and
for pleasure.

And over the fowl of Heaven. By Fowling, by Hawking, by power or by policy,
either killing them with arrows, or taking them in pits, or by snares, as in
Prove. 7. 23. the 20. Joshua 13. God for the Ravens and for the young birds
prepares their meat Job 39. 3. So that the fowls and birds are to man for
service, for solace, and their notes of music.

And over every beast. This is indeed a large Charta de foresta: We are
permitted and authorized hereby to hunt the wild beasts of the forest, and
being hunted, to eat the flesh thereof, Levit. 17. 13. Thou may eat flesh,
even what soever thy heart desires: Even as the Roe buck and the Heart is
eaten, so shall thou eat it, Deuteronomy. 12. 22, 23. There they were permitted the
eating of all kind of flesh; they might before eat the flesh of that they had
hunted, as of the Roe-buck and of the Heart. It was caro justitiae which they
got by hunting; it was dainty meat unto the Hunter; for unto the hungry soul
every thing is sweet, Prove. 27. 7. The Hunter had his snares, Psalm. 91. 3. The
Hound hunteth the Deer: both are serviceable unto man; there is pleasure in the
hunting and chasing: the game is for meat when it is pulled down. We have rule
over Horses and Dogs, who serve us, though not to feed us. The Dog defends
our flocks from the Wolf, our houses from thieves, our bodies from injury:
the swiftness of the Horse helps our slownesse: the Elephant in battle
helps our weakness: the Sheep help our nakedness, clothing us with their
wool: the Ox plougheth the ground, to give us bread, and eats grass to be
our food, he gives his hide to shoe us; and every thing that moves in the
Earth is for man. We find great goodness many ways in the Be, and in the
Silkworm; God saw, man feels the goodness of those things God has created.
So that subjicite terram is the tenor of all Law, a giving possession of
inheritance: and dominamini is a rule and dominion given to man over the
utensils, the riches of the Sea, Land, and Air.

A spiritual Analogy.
There is here also observed by the Fathers, a spiritual Analogy in dominamini.
In man there is a spirit and a soul; in him there is also Earth: the cares of
the body ought to be less than those of the soul, est enim anima in homine
coelum, corpus autem coenum, says Basil, non sit coenum coelo superius, sed
sit coelum coeno superius, Let the soul have dominion over the body and the
concupiscence thereof; the body is earthly given to lust, anger, envy, pride.
Here they admonish us to subdue these beastly affections, and to tame the
savagenesse of our corrupt nature. The whole nature of beasts, and of birds,
and of creeping things, and things of the Sea, is tamed, and has been tamed of
the nature of man; but the tongue can no man tame, it is an unruly evil, full
of deadly poison: this place do they allege out of the 3. James 8. And as
James says, that the tongue should be tamed from evil speaking, malicious
slandering, back-byilng, lying, and dissembling: so say they (and that very
well) that all the brutish affections ought to be tamed and subdued; that so
the soul might reign in the body, and the body be subject to the soul.

Praeterea dixit Deus, Ecce dedi vobis omnes Herbas sementantes semen quae sunt
in superficie totius Terrae; omnesque Arbores in quibus est Fructus arboreus,
sementantes semen: vestrae ad comedendum erunt. etc. Genesis 1. 29,30,31.

Februar. 11. 1590.
THIS is Gods third speech, of this sixth day, concerning man. The first in the
26. verse is of his power in creating him: The second dixit, in the 28. verse,
is of his providence in preserving mankind: This third speech is Gods further
care for the nourishment of them whom he has created and by propagation
preserved. In the 30. verse God shows his love to man, having before given
unto man the beasts of the field, yet he gives to his beasts their meat. The
last verse is the closing up of the sixth day.

Man's meat.
The Argument of the 29 verse is for provision for man's meat. An Objection.
Here arises a question made by some: Man in the estate of his innocence was
immortal, what need had man then of any meat?

The Answer.
True it is, that Adam was created immortal, yet having a possibility to be
immortal: Thereupon the Schoolmen say there is a double immortality, posse non
mori fuit Adami, mori non posse est Dei; for Christ only, who is King of Kings
and Lord of Lords has this immortality, 1 Timothy 6. 16. which is bestowed upon
us by way of reward through Christ our Savior, whereby our nature is ingrasted
in the divine nature of the second immortality; for the first man Adam was made
a living soul, and the last Adam was made a quickening spirit, that is, bringing
us from Heaven the spirit of life; the first was of the Earth earthly, the
second of the Heaven heavenly, 1 Cor. 15. 45. Adam was created with a
possibility of immortality; the part immortal of man's creation was from God;
but through man's disobedience and ambition, when he did eat of the forbidden
fruit of good and evil, God shut him out of the garden of Eden, lest he should
take also of the tree of life and eat and live for ever, chap. 3. 22. whereby
Adam was deprived of life; for it was said in the 2. chap. 17. When in that day
he did eat of the forbidden fruit, he should dye the death. So that by man's
disobedience man became mortal, who before, in the state of his innocence, had
a possibility of immortality, for then he had the Image of God perfectly, but
by sin came death, per peccatum mors: and so by man's transgression Gods Image
was defaced; for by one man sin entered into the World, and death by sin,
and so death went over all men by this Adams sin, even Babes were subject to
death, though they had no actual sin, Romans 3. 12. And life came to Mankind
through one that is Christ Jesus: As by the offense of one the fault came on
all men to condemnation; so by the justifying of one, the grace abounded to all
men, to the justification of life, the 18. of the foresaid chapter: For, by
him, this mortal must put on immortality, this corruptible incorruption, for
Christ swallowed up death in victory, saying Death, where is thy sting? Hell,
where is thy victory? 1 Cor. 15. 45. Man was not immortal by himself, but the
life he had God gave him: In the state of his innocence he had heat and
moisture, which God breathed into him when he breathed life, chap. 2. 7. and
therefore man needed even then food to preserve heat and moisture. Man before
was immortal and his meat uncorrupted, but by man's fall, man became mortal,
subject to death, so that both man and man's meat were corrupted; and Adam was a
debtor to the flesh to satisfy his hunger. Before God said Dominamini all
beasts and fowls were peculium Dei, Gods proper store: The trees and fruits
were before, but this is man's warrant, To touch any thing, any tree, any herb,
for their meat. Herein then more particularly we will consider two things, what
God gave unto man, and to what end.

Ecce.
Ecce. Behold is a word of wonder, expressing a matter of wonder and Gods great
love to Mankind. Ecce (says a Father on this place) patentem and amentem
Creatorem: He is not only a Creator full of power, but even a faithful
Creator, 1 Pet. 4. 19. for behold he is both man's Creator and man's Cator. He
visits the Earth and waters it, be makes it very rich, and for men he
prepares corn, Psalm. 65. 9 And he says unto man Deuteronomy. 28. 4. and 5. That if
he obey God, blessed shall be the fruit of his body, the fruit of his ground,
the fruit of his cattle; and blessed shall be thy basket and thy dow. So that
God provideth us corn for bread, and bread to eat. It is even God that gives
us life and meat, he makes us and serves us: quis autem est major? but who is
greater, he that sits at the Table, or he that serves? is not he that
sits at the Table? And I am among you (says Christ) as he that serves,
Luke 22. 27. God the great Jehovah ministers unto man all that he needs.
David assures himself that God will help and defend him, Psalm. 38. 22. from
the hand of his enemies. God made for man coats of skin, and clothed them,
chap. 2. 21. God gives to men beds whereupon to take their rest: God will
strengthen him upon the bed of sorrow, and turn all his bed in his sickness
then will God send him comfort, Psalm. 41. 3. Thus much of Ecce, behold.

Ecce dedi.
He says not Ecce dixi but Ecce dedi: He opens his hand, not his mouth; he
shows his liberality which is wonderful; it is a beholding of works, not of
words: Manifold are the works of God, the Earth is full of his riches, Psalm.
104. 24. There is also a further thing; for he says not Ecce do, but Ecce
dedi, as much as to say, Oh man before you were born I provided for you all
herbs and all trees, I respected you before you were, I had you in mind in all
the days of the Creation; Fecit, quae fecit omnia pro homine Deus before he
said faciamus hominem; he made all things for man before that he made man,
which shows Gods care and fatherly love he bare to men even before man was.
What shall I say hereof more but this, Amor Dei erga hominem est antiquior
homine.

Every Herb having seed, every Tree having fruit.
He gives unto man every herb having seed every tree having fruit, bearing
seed; whereby he gives us all grain, seed, corn, pulfe, spice the grape, and
other fruitful trees. Adams diet objected to be raw
It may be objected, That to eat of nothing but of herbs, and of trees, and of
such fruit as the Earth brought forth, were but a raw diet. Well fare Noah's
Table, for he had flesh in great plenty for his meat, Genesis 9. 3. for as the
green herb, so gave God unto him all things for meat: If God be our Cator, as
he is liberal, so he will be frugall. Eliah was fed by the Angel with a cake
baked on the coals, and a pot of water, 1 Kings 19. 6. yet in the strength of
that meat walked he forty days and forty nights. Answer.
And surely unto Adam the trees of Paradise were better and more pleasant than
all the dainties of Noah's Table; for the trees that were there were pleasant to
the sight and good for meat, chap. 2. 9. These innocent meats were fit for the
state of innocence, even unto this day the service of delight is the herbs and
fruits of the Earth; even then when flesh was for meat, it was to be eaten
without the blood, the Hunter might eat that he had hunted. Virgo terrae fuit
herba, blood corrupted the Earth, all meats are but obsonia, but sauce, in
respect of bread, which is the comfort of the heart if we be thankful; for
otherwise, though God give us our desire, yet will he send leanness into our
soul, Psalm. 106. 15. By simples at this day the Physicians use to restore
health. If God conveyed every herb, then every herb was meat for man: yea then
so was the Coloquintida, which is called now fell terrae, and a vehement poison,
yet Elisha caused the people to eat thereof, and they had no hurt, yet they
said that in it was death, 2 Kings 4. 40. and that death was in the pot: mors
in olla came by sin, it was not so from the beginning. Furthermore here is no
necessity imposed upon man to eat of all the trees, but a liberty is given him
to eat of any. Some also make another objection: If he might eat of all trees,
then of the forbidden tree. But the Fathers answer, That saying that gave to
Adam every tree bearing ordinary fruit: such were not the trees of knowledge
and of life.

To what end Herbs and Trees are given Man.
The last point is, To what end God gave man herbs and trees. Fuit ut sint
alimentum, that they might be for meat, to have herbs and trees given, and that
for meat are diverse things: For fruition.
There is a man, to whom God has given riches and treasures, and he wants
nothing that he can desire; but God gives him not power to eat, thereof, but a
strange man shall eat it up, Preach. 6. 2. Elisha told the King, That he should
see with his eyes the great plenty that should be in Samaria, but he should not
eat thereof, 2 Kings 7. 19. Though a man have abundance, yet his life stands
not in his riches, Luke 12. 15. and therefore in that chapter, what availed it
the rich man to have much fruit, many barns, and much goods laid up for many
years, when that even in the same night they should fetch away his soul? Then
whose were those things which he had provided? Dedi vobis ut sint in escam,
There is the fruition.

In esca, tria.
In esca tria sunt. 1.
The first is a content of the appetite, which avoideth famine; for when God
shall break the staff of bread, men shall eat and not be satisfied, Levit.
26. 26. 2.
Sometimes also the men of this world have their portion in this life, they have
their bellies filled with Gods hidden treasure, Psalm. 17. 14. It is Gods curse
to have sown much and bring in little, to eat and not to have enough, to drink
and not to be filled, to be clothed and not to be warm, Aggey 1. 6. 3.
The third benefit in meat is, that it nourishes, While the flesh was yet
between their teeth, before it was chewed, the wrath of God was kindled against
the people who lusted, and God smote them with an exceeding great plague, Numb.
11. 33. The meat of the wicked in his bowels was turned, he has devoured
substance, and shall vomit it, for God shall draw it out of his belly, Job 20.
14. So that to eat, to be satisfied, and to be nourished, are three several
benefits; as to have and not to eat, to have and eat and not to be satisfied,
to have eat and be satisfied, and not to be nourished, are three several curses
and plagues. Some there are, who though they eat never so much or never so good
meat, are ever lean; whereas others are fat, though their diet be small and of
the basest sort: For though that Daniel and his fellows did eat pulse and drink
water for ten days, yet at the end of the ten days they were fairer and in
better liking than they which did eat of the portion of the Kings allowance,
Daniel 1. 15. God has created meats to be received with giving of thanks,
neither is any to be refused, being sanctified by the word of God and prayer, 1 Timothy 4. 5. So that in a word, as Gods benefits descend upon us, so our prayer
and praises must ascend up to God for the same.

Omnibus autem Bestiis Terrae, and omnibus Volucribus Coeli, omnibusque
Reptantibus super Terram, in quibus est anima vivens, dedi omnes Herbas virides
ad comedendum: and fuit ita. Verse. 30.

The meat of Beasts.
HEnce you gather that God provideth for men and for beasts; for our Tables, and
beasts Mangers; which providence stretches to all that has life in itself.
The beasts being ours, we should have provided them meat; but God herein
shows his love unto man: Nunquid de bobus, and de passeribus cura est Deo?
God provideth fodder for the Cattle, and meat for the Sparrows, he causes
grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for the use of man, Psalm. 104. 14. He
gives to Beasts their food, and to the young Ravens that cry, Psalm. 147. 9.

It may seem at the first sight, that God allows men and beasts the same
diet. Things planted and sowed by Husbandry are for Men: but that which the
Earth gives of her own nature, without tillage, as quae sunt spontanea, are
for Beasts: The seed in Corn, the fruit in Trees is allowed unto Man, the
stalks to Beasts: So that there is not the same allowance unto both, although
both had their allowance.

Et fuit sic; And it was so. Some do ask whether the Beasts, as Lions; the
Birds, as Hawks, lived upon their prey in the state of innocence? Surely no;
for they had herbs allowed them; the Lion did eat grass as the Ox: for if
they had preyed so, then even in Noah's time he must have laid up meat in store
for the wild beasts in the Arc: The wild beasts were fed before with grass:
The ravning and preying of savage beasts came by man's trangression. It is
Austins opinion, That the Lion did eat grass before the fall: Esaias prophecieth
saying, That at the coming of the Redeemer Christ Jesu, the Lion shall eat
straw with the Bullock, Esaias 11. 7.

Tum inspexit Deus quicquid fecerat, ecce autem bonum erat valde: sic fuit
vespera and fuit mane diei sexti. Verse. 31.

A general survey of all God had made. All were very good.
HEre is a general Survey of Gods works, and a general approbation also.
Before, when he did behold them severally, he beheld them to be good; in this
general survey, behold they are very good, which is another degree of goodness.
God, then when he had surveyed all his former works, and likewise Man, the
accomplishment of the rest, he (...) in them an excellent harmony. Hitherto
there was a state of imperfection, but here God saw that everything was very
good: God here makes a general muster of all, and of Man the Captain Creature,
cui cunt caetera ut insignia, for man is the abridgment and accomplishment of
all the other Creatures: Good things joined together must needs be very good,
when that even ill things joined together may be good: A thief is ill, an
halter is ill, join both together they are good, that is, bonum justitiae. Good
things joined together, having their Captain, are very good: Love is applied to
the heart, meat is for the belly: the head is the perfection of the body, and
Man is the perfection of the Creation. God saw each day bonum; but when he saw
man with the rest, he saw that they were valde bona: at sum bonus est solus
Deus: Man is the chief Creature: caetera omnia sunt propter vos, 2 Cor. 4. 15.
all other things are for man's sake. The Lord all things has made (says
Solomon) for his own sake; yea even the wicked for the day of evil, Prove. 16.
4. so that God has made caetera propter vos, the other Creatures for you; and
you and them propter se. Then give praises unto his name, give him thanks for
his loving kindness; give glory due to God unto him, that so by him we may
have full assurance of future immortality.

Three things hence to benoted.
Hence we are to learn three things. 1.
That men would survey their works as God does here, how great and how excellent
they are; this is perfect wisdom and virtue, though commonly men set forth
their rude works for perfect, without any survey: For Solomon, though he were
the wisest man of his age, yet could he say, that when he looked upon all the
works that his hand had wrought, and in the travail he had labored to do, and
behold all was but vanity and vexation of spirit, Preach. 2. 11. When God sees
man's wicked ways, he will reprove him, and set them in order; to them that
dispose their way aright God will show his salvation, Psalm. 50. 21. This is a
rumination and a consideration of our works, which are unperfect, to reform
them, and of Gods works, which being good, were, being accomplished, very good.
Oh men glorify God and follow him, he is the pattern of goodness it self.
Therefore let men see and know, let them consider and understand together, that
the hand of the Lord has done this, and the holy one of Israel has created
it, Esaias 41. 20.

2.
Secondly, Hence we learn to rectify our judgments, and to see as God did see.
Diverse men have an itch in the tongue, who will find fault in this or that
which God has made; this comes to pass when men will seem to see more than
God himself did see. When that God did try every work of his here seven times
in this chapter; as for the words of the Lord, they are pure as silver, tried
in a furnace of earth, fined seven fold, Psalm. 12. 6. So are his works also;
and this is a bridle to our licentiousness, to suspend our judgment, and not to
find fault with Gods works. God has said they were very good, habent ergo
bonitatem etsi nobis ignotam. Diverse things are good in their place, diverse in
their time: Fire in the cold of Winter is good, in the heat of Summer it is not
so good: Water in the Summer is good. It is Gods curse and a great grief to eat
in darkness, Preach. 5. 17. In time things be good, all things have their
time, Preach. 3. In a word let every one say thus with himself, God has seen
this or that good, I silly man cannot see it otherwise. Omnia sunt munda
mundis, and sicomnia bona bonis, all things are clean to the clean, and all
things good to the good. God creates good things, he orders evil things: the
thing is not ill, but the ill applying is evil, not the power. There is potest
as ad infestandum. if it be applied to the Malefactor, it is even bonum
justitiae. Sic non est dedecus culpae sine dedecore vindictae. God says, It
shall be well with the just, for they shall eat the fruit of their works; but
woe be to the wicked, for it shall be evil with them, Esaias 3. The punishing
the wicked and rewarding the just is good; for we know that all things work to
the best unto them that love God, Romans 8. 28. If any thing be amiss, the evil
is in man, not in God: God has made us good, but by Adams transgression, and
our daily sin, we are evil: It is our iniquities that has separated between
us and our God; it is our sins that have hid his face from us, Esaias 59. 2.
and Jer. 5. 25. Say not then this is ill or that is ill, but say I am ill and I
am wicked. God, who made all things, could best see that every thing was very
good: but either by ignorance or by ill desert we are dymme sighted.

3.
Lastly, For imitation we must see as God did, that we may see our works good:
Bonitas bonitatum, and omnia bonitas was the state of the first creation: By
sin it was that Solomon says, the beginning of the Preacher, that vanitas
vanitatum, and omnia vanitas; and therefore let us be wary. Gods deeds were
visible, they were not good words only, but good gifts: let not us say only
ecce dixi, but let our acts be good to the needy with ecce dedi: let us imitate
God in that his goodness. There are two good things come from man, the one in
2 Pet. 1. 9. Knowledge, temperance, love, etc. The other in the 4. to the
Philippians 14. to communicate to the afflicted: benefacite and communicate is
the sum of all.

So the evening and the morning were the sixth day. In the former days there
was creation of nothing, a disposition and ordering of things created, and an
adorning of things ordered: Here is an accomplishment of all his works. God,
before man was, observed the days and the number, but here he delivers unto
man the Calendar of times, which we have received and shall be received to the
worlds end. The evening goes before the morning: rest is in the evening, labor
in the morning, to the which man is ordained: After this his last work comes
the seventh day, the day of rest. God he rests not in the waters, nor in the
Earth; he rests not in the Heavens: but to conclude with the excellent saying
of St. Austin: Requiescit Deus in homine, ut homo in Deo requiescat, God took
his rest in man, that man might take his rest for ever with God: Which God of
his mercy grant us all; to whom be all honor, glory, and praise, world without
end.

Amen.
AMEN.
LECTURES PREACHED UPON the second Chapter OF GENESIS.
LECTURES Preached in Saint PAUL'S Church LONDON.
Itaque perfecti sunt Coeli and Terra, omnisque exercitus illorum. Genesis 2. 1.

April 22. 1591.
IN the course of the former Chapter, ever we have seen the closing up of every
days work to have this usual and ordinary return, and dixit Deus. Now the
seventh day being come, we are not to look for the old usual dixit, but for a
new course of speaking and manner of dealing; for as God finished and perfected
his Law in ten words, when he spoke in Sinay: So here in ten words he perfectly
finished the whole work of Creation; and therefore now need no more to command
any thing else to be made, because Heaven and Earth and all the fulness of
them, are thus perfectly done and finished.

If there be any thing in all the world, either they are here spoken of, or
else are ( in lumbis terrae and Creatoris, in the loins of the efficient, or in
the womb of the World,) For within the six days all things were made; so that
we may say with the wise man, Preach. 1. 9. What is now or shall be hereafter,
but that which has been made or done before hand, therefore there is now no
new thing under the Sun.

As that first Chapter was for the world; so this Chapter some call Man's
Chapter, for it is but the remainder of the former Chapter, and is accounted as
only a gloss, or Commentary of the Creation of man, set down in the 27. verse
of the first Chapter.

The former Chapter does describe the great world in general, but this speaks
especially of the lesser World, viz. Man.

This Chapter does consist of three parts.

1.
The first is the Complement of the Creation, with the description of the
Sabbath, or rest, or seventh day, in the first three verses.

2.
The second contains a brief sum and abridgement of the Creation of the
great World, from the 4. to the 7. verse.

3.
The third part is a repetition of the Creation of the little World, or the
continuation of the history of man, from the 7. to the end.

Touching the first, as it is contained in three verses, so in it there are
three parts, or members to be marked.

1.
In the first, The Holy Ghost stands upon the perfection of Gods works.

2.
In the second he shows, That having perfectly finished all, he gave himself
to rest.

3.
In the third, That he instituted that day, and sanctified it, to be a sabbath
for ever to be used, observed, and kept.

Which three parts do depend one upon another; for God having perfected all,
he rested, and in that rest he blessed the seventh day, and instituteth the
Sabbath: these are the three branches of the first part: The first whereof I
will handle at this time.

1. He perfected all when man was created.
Moses, by way of sequel, tells us, by joining the perfection of things to
man's Creation: That is a singular and an honorable prerogative in that behalf
unto man: For recounting the perfection of all Creatures presently after man's
making, he infers that they were not perfect, but defective before; for
until man was made, that (...), that wheel of generation and course of nature
whereof St. James spoke 3. 6. which never stood still. God took no rest before,
nor made holy day, because there was no end nor perfection of his work until
man was made; Insomuch as God may seem to have made such a vow as David did
Psalm. 132. 4, 5. That he would not suffer himself to take any rest, until he
had found that earth of which he would make man, and had placed him in the
World; which argues that there was a defect and imperfection, and as yet
something to be supplied, for the Earth lacked, and therefore looked for her
possessor, which was man, who carried therefore the Earth in his name, that he
might show that the earth depended on him; The Host of Creatures.
for the perfection of Heaven and Earth is in him, who as he was Princeps
Terrae, A Captain.
so was he Infans Coeli, one born to inherit Heaven also; for seeing Heaven is a
body and capable of a body, it must needs be that it was not made only for
spirits, but for a body which was to be made: Therefore in that he says, Thus
were the Heavens and the Earth perfected, he shows that their perfection was
suspended, and they held as unperfect and not complete, until man was made.

Though the Heavens were made, 1. 19. yet until now they were not perfected:
There was Urim, as the Hebrews say, but there was not Thummim: i. there was
light, but there was not the perfection of light. Thus then were the Heavens
and the Earth perfected; for though there was a power in God to make more
Creatures, and create more things besides these; yet note, he makes his full
point, and says, all is perfected, which is that ( consummatum est) of the
Creation.

Thus much generally for the copulation and sic. Now to descend to the
particulars, we see thy are distributed into two joints.

1.
First, Heaven and Earth, which are the Continents.

2.
Secondly, The host of them, which are Contents and fullness thereof.

That a thing be made perfect, there are required two degrees of perfection,
which are opposite to the double imperfection, spoken of in the former Chapter,
Barrenness, Emptiness.
called Tohu, Tobohu, the one being an outward perfection opposite to
barrenness and emptiness without: the other is inward, opposite to rudeness
and deformity within.

The one is called perfectio (...) which is integritas partium, when all the
parts are orderly in a comely proportion framed and well set together.

The other outward perfection is (...), that is, a due supply of decent
furniture, and the accessory of needful ornaments which being added it is also
outwardly perfect; both which you may see in a body: for when a man's body is
rightly knit together in every joint with good color and countenance, he has
his first inward perfection of nature; but so long as there is nakedness,
there is yet a defect and want outwardly: But being adorned with jewels and
apparel, it has then the outward perfection also.

(...).
We see them also in a house; for when it is framed and the frame set together
orderly, and the rooms of the building well contrived and conveyed, then it
has the first perfection, Integritas partium.
i. integritatem partium: but when it has the hangings, furniture, and
implements, which is called suppellex, then it has also the other, (...), for
by that means every room is furnished and adorned.

The like order we may observe in Heaven and Earth; First they were imperfect,
nothing done nor disposed; then they were facta, that is, perfectly made and
disposed, as great, spacious, and stately rooms as yet empty and void; but now
being filled with the hosts of of them, then they are perfectly furnished
indeed.

The Septuagint do translate that which is here called the host (...), i. the
beauty of Heaven and Earth: but the propriety of the word in the original
tongue imports Armies, or Hosts, or Bands; Quest.
Whereupon the question is, Why Moses does express the fulness of Heaven and
Earth, and the furniture and implements thereof, by this comparative name of
Armies?

Resp.
For answer some say, That it may be that the Israelites were then in Camp and
Garrison, when Moses wrote this, which estate of theirs being military, he
uses a military word. Indeed if we consider the form of Heaven, the Prophet
says, It is as a Tent spread abroad, Esaias 40. 22. In regard of which, the
furniture which is under it is fitly compared to Armies and Bands, or Troops,
to inhabit it.

But many other good and forcible reasons there are, why Heaven is called a
Tent or Pavilion, and the furniture in it compared to Squadrons of Soldiers in
a Camp.

1.
As first in regard of the huge multitude of things in them; for one cannot say
the furniture or implements of a house is comparable to them; therefore the
furniture of an Host does best express it.

Every Creature therefore in Heaven or Earth is Gods Soldier, in pay with him,
and has received some weapons to punish Gods Enemies, and the several kinds
are, as it were, the Ensigns of his Army, and the company of all are the Host
and Army Royal.

2.
The second reason is in respect of order, because no Camp can be more orderly
trained than the course of Nature in the order of Gods Creatures. The days in
Winter cast themselves, as it were, in a ring, in the Summer abroad and so come
long. The Stars keep duly their assigned place, time and course, without
disorder or disturbance to the rest. So the Herbs do in their order, and
seasons one follow another. And so do the Fish gather together in skuts and
squadrons, and march about the Sea coasts in their kinds.

3.
Thirdly, There is a respect beyond these, which is in regard of their head and
Captain; for in an Host there must needs be imagined a Leader or head Governor
of all, which we cannot say of household stuff or apparel, for it implies not
a head necessarily: Man, therefore, is made the Captain and guide or head of
this Host, In which regard they are thus called.

4.
Fourthly, There is a higher regard, which is of God the chief and supreme head
or Emperor, in which respect God is called, The Lord of Hosts, Exodus 15. 3.
Therefore, as man on Earth is Lieutenant to lead you; so in Heaven and Earth
God is Chieftain and highest Commander of them; For if God send out his swift
watchword, all Creatures do carefully obey and muster themselves to do his
will, Psalm. 147. 15. If he do but hiss or whistle, they come out and set
forward, Esaias 7. 18. And for retreat, Mark 4. 39. if he say Peace, and be
still, the winds cease, are still, and go no further.

5.
Last of all, because if they had been expressed by the term of apparel or
furniture, it might have been thought that all things had been made for
pleasure: but by the comparison of Soldiers, they are made known to be made for
service also, as Soldiers are.

All other kinds of service are but for one use, as a Servants service is only
obedience either to do or not to do, but there is a double use and service of
a Soldier: Miles pro and contra.
The one is to apply himself to the good of his Captain and Country:The other to
be ad oppositum against his enemies, to defend his Captain, and to offend his
Adversary. So man's life is called a Warfare, and Christians are Soldiers, in
both virtues endeavoring to do good and to resist evil, and to throw down all
that does oppose it self against God.

Also wheresoever mention is made of an Army, there is employed an Enemy, which
therefore gives some occasion out of this, to gather the fall of Angels, which
Heavenly Creatures are made not only to serve ad muniendum, sed ad puniendum,
for the benefit of the good, but for the punishment of disobedient and disloyal
servants; for against such, all things in Heaven and in Earth, do arm
themselves for revenge, and oppose them selves against them.

We may if you please muster these Armies in their several ranks and orders.

Armies in Heaven, celeftiall Spirits, as the Angels.
And first concerning the Armies in Heaven, they are of two sorts. The first are
in the uppermost Heavens, in which are the Angels, which being spirits are
called, by implication, Heavenly Soldiers or Gods host, as Jacob in the old
Testament called them, Genesis 32. 2. and St. Luke in the new Testament 2. 13.
These are the first order, which have the name of an Host; concerning which
celestial Creatures we read that they are (...) Psalm. 104. 4. Called Soldiers
in respect of their ministry.
and fitly compared to Soldiers, in respect of their service and ministry, Heb.
1. 14. Multitude.
and also in respect of their multitude, Psalm. 68 17. and Dan. 7. 10. And in the
New Testament, Matthew. 26. 53. Christ speaks of twelve Legions which
surpasses the greatest Host that ever was. Power.
Also in respect of their power, they deserve the same name, 2 These. 1. 7. Also
in respect of their wisdom for policy, 2 Samuel 14. 20. these are continually
present and affistant with God, Job 1. 6. 1 King. 22. 19. And God does send and
employ them to our service, Genesis 28. 12. and are often messengers between God
and man; Their care and charge.
and their care and charge is not only to look to whole Countries and Nations,
Joshua 5. 14. as of Israel, and Dan. 10. 13. of Persia and Grecia, but also of
singular persons, as St. Peter had his Angel, Act. 12. 15. So had Agar, Genesis
16. 7, 8. And little Children had their Angels, Matthew. 18. 10. Abraham's servant
an Angel, Genesis 24. 7. and Tobias an Angel.

Having their charge generally of Countries, and especially of several men,
They are present with us,
it follows consequently, that they are present with us and about us, Preach.
5. 5. In which regard we must take heed to our behavior propter Angelos, 1
Cor. 11. 10.

To guide and direct us.
They are not only present, but also do go before us, as guides for directions
in good matters, as Abraham's servant, Genesis 24. 40.

To hinder some in bad matters.
And as they serve to further us in good things, so do they hinder some men in
bad courses and enterprises, Numb. 22. 31. as they did Balaam: And they do
rejoice if we prevail in that which is good, Luke 15. 10. And the last service
they perform, is to carry and convey us into Abraham's bosom, Luke 16. 22.

The Military service of Angels.
Now touching their military service, they do pitch their Camp about the Godly
ad muniendum for defense, Psalm. 34. 7. and ad puniendum they do pursue and
scatter the wicked. They are in Cherubins spreading their wings over the good,
Exed. 25. 22. and (...) out a fiery sword against the evil, Genesis 3. 24. There
is friendship and fidelity to the one, and opposition and open hostility with
the other.

So they served for Elishaes protection and defense, 2 Kings 6. 17. and for
opposition and defiance to the Enemies of God, Esaias 37. 36.

We see both together, Genesis 19. 15. they defend Lot and (...) Sodom: And Acts
12. 7, 8, 9. the same Angel which delivered (...) out of (...) smote Herod
with the disease of the worms, that he died.

In the Firmament the Stars.
Touching the nether Heavens, The Host of the firm ament is the celestial
bodies, Deuteronomy. 17. 3. for so are the Stars and the Planets called, Act. 7. 43,
44. And their Military service is, Judge. 5. 20. to fight in their courses
against Gods enemies.

Armies in the Air.
For the lowest Heavens, which is the Air, There God has his Host, viz. the
Wind; for the Wind (though it be but a puff of Air) yet when God does
stir it, it has such a military and violent force, both on the Seas, Psalm.
48. 7. and also on the Land, 1 Kings 19. 11. Job 1. 19.

Leave the body of the Air, and go to the furniture of it, There shall you
see that God has his storehouse of Snow and Hail, Job 38. 22. both for reward
of the good, and revenge of the wicked, for from thence came fire and brimstone
on Sodom, Genesis 19. 24. and from thence came the storm of Hail upon the
Egyptians, Exodus 9. 22. etc.

If you come to the fowls of the Air, they are Gods Army, for our good to
feed us, 1 King 17. 6. or else for our punishment, to feed upon us, Ezech. 39.
4.

And Gods power does not show it self in the great Fowls, as Ostriches and
Eagles, but in his Army of little poor Flies which are in the Air, Exodus 8.
24. and his swarms of Hornets, Deuteronomy. 7. 20. for by them he can compel People
to forsake and leave their Land and dwelling places.

Armies in the Earth.
Let us come to his Armies on Earth and Waters, And first concerning the Waters,
do not we see, Genesis 7. 21. that there were such huge Armies thereof, that at
Gods commandment they overflowed the whole Earth: That they drowned the
Egyptians, Exodus 14. 27. And the Whales in the Waters are Gods Host to devour
Jonas, Jon. 1. 17. Yea, to leave the great Army of Whales, and come to the Army
of Frogs which God has in the Waters, where you shall see, that God has such
great power in these weak things, that they can annoy the mightiest Kingdoms
upon Earth, Exodus 8. 14.

Armies of Earth.
For the Earth it self, that can swallow up Gods enemies, Numb. 16. 32. And on
the Earth you may take the Lions for a strong Army, 2 Kings 17. 25. but his
power is most of all seen in the weak Host of Grasshoppers, Exodus 10. 14. and of
Locusts and Caterpillars, Joel 2. 25. Yea, of Lice he can make such an Army,
that, etc. Exodus 8. 16, 17.

If we come to men, the Inhabitants of the Earth, they are Gods Host, but they
fight not against other Creatures, but with their own kind, not one against
one, but thousands against thousands, even in pitched fields; not with natural
Instruments, as the Boar with his tusk, the Bull with his horn, but with
artificial weapons of diverse sorts, with whose kind of forces the World is too
well acquainted.

Thus we see, that there is no creature in Heaven or Earth, but is a Soldier
in pay with God, and all these hoasts are in league with us; so long as we
serve God, Job 5. 23. And keep our sacramentum militare, which we make in our
Baptism; otherwise they come upon us like armed men, and are pressed against us,
to punish our disobedience: And every part of Heaven and Earth, then, will send
out an Army to conspire our destruction and overthrow; and this may suffice for
a brief view of these Armies.

A word of the third perfection, we have seen perfection (...) and (...), Now
we are to consider (...). First: The World was a great House, perfect in
respect of the parts, but yet the rooms were empty and unfurnished. Then God
replenished, garnished and furnished it with its hoasts, as we have heard. But
yet there wanted a third perfection, which is a head to guide, and an owner to
possess, manure, and occupy all.

Man the perfection of Gods work.
God made the Earth as his workhouse and shop, and Heaven as his chamber and
place for a rest and reward, and both for one; and that is man.

God made the Earth as the Tent to prepare our selves and to put on our Armor,
as the Field, Lists or Tiltyard, to try masteries or to fight in, against Gods
enemies 1 Pet. But the Heavens and Firmament he made as, locum triumphi, that
is, the Court to triumph in: So that when man was made to be a Soldier in the
one, and a Conqueror in the other; all was perfected.

God made the Earth in its parts absolute, and gave it erecta (...), depressa
vallium, and densa silvarum, and furnished it with beasts and cattle of diverse
kinds, but did perfect all; by making man the owner of all.

In a Battle, though the Field be appointed, the Ordinance planted and the
Soldiers encamped: yet all is unperfect, till there be a General of the field
to marshall them, and a Captain to lead them; so was all unperfect till man was
made.

Object.
Seeing man was the perfection of all things; what ayleth it now? That being so
many men, we can see nothing absolute and in its perfect estate?

David says, Psalm. 119. 96. I have seen an end of all perfection, but thy Law
is perfect, as if he should say; there is nothing else perfect now, the Heavens
are called often imperfect, Levit. 26. 19.

The Air is infectious, the Seas dangerous, the Earth also grows in her
imperfections; So the Beasts are unto us: In our bodies we find troops of
diseases, and in our souls heaps of sorrows, and care, which show our
imperfections.

Resp.
Perfectio creationis.
Though the finishing of Heaven, Earth, and Man be the perfection of Creation:
Deformatis (...) perfectionis.
Yet now we must understand, that the sin of man brought in death, and so an
imperfection or deformation. Finis peccati mors, Romans 6. 21. Et peccati finis
damnatio, Phil. 3. 19. verse.

Thus then stands our estate and condition: Ratio.
The reason of it is, because the Captain and Lieutenant [man] being set to
resist the enemy Satan, grew in a league and conspiracy with him against God,
and so apostatavit, non militavit, as says St. Ambrose, wherefore seeing he
was not content with his estate to be Lieutenant, but would be chief general
sicut Deus, Genesis 3. Therefore consequently followed his decay: And this is the
means, whereby from perfection, he came to desection, and so to imperfection;
for when he which was the perfection of all things, became imperfect; then all
things which were ordained for, and given to him, grew subject to alteration
and vanity, Romans 8. and so per consequence imperfect.

And thus says David, we have seen an end of all perfection under the Sun.

Perfectio redemptionis.
Yet that perfection of nature being lost (see the unspeakable mercy of God) we
have another new perfection 2 Cor. 5. 17. in Christ, In whom we are made new
creatures: And that perfection to the which nature would have brought us; that
is never to dye, but to be translated with Enoche, to the same will Gods grace
(through Christ) restore us again: And as in the sixth day man was here
perfected; So in the sixth age of the World, Christ came and made his
Consummatum est, which is the second perfection of redemption, at which time as
St. Peter says all things lost by nature shall be restored by grace.

Yet there is another further perfection, then this of grace and redemption,
that is the perfection of glory in the life to come; for then shall the last
end and perfection come, Matthew. 24. 14. When that which is imperfect is done
away, then that which is perfect shall come, 1 Cor. 13. verse. 11.

Quam autem perfecisset Deus die septimo opus suum quod fecerat, quievit ipso
die septimo ab omni opere suo quod fecerat: Genesis 2. 2. verse.

April 24. 1591.
THe other day I showed you that these two verses, do as links in a chain
depend one upon the other; for the Holy Ghost tells us, that when he had made
man, he perfected all his works; and here when he had perfected and finished
all, then he rested.

It is the right order to work and labor still, until we have attained to the
perfection of our work, which done, it is reason we should leave off and rest;
For, whereas that is perfect whereunto nothing can or may be added; and Gods
works now being so, having that perfection within which is called (...), the
fit joining and knitting together of parts and (...), which is the furnishing
and adorning of the parts, and (...) which is the setting a head over them,
there wants now nothing else to be added, but only an end and conclusion to
be made, which here God performs.

For as it is a fault in working to labor and not to perfect, so it is a fault
also not to leave off when the work is well and perfect, because by being over
curious we make the work worse, is we mar it not altogether, and so make it
imperfect again.

Yet there are some of so curious mind, and withal of so restless a spirit,
Heb. 10. 25. as cannot be content with perfection it self, but will depart from
the fellowship of the Church.

They are such as Solomon speaks of Prove. 30. 33. who will not be content
when all is clean, but will still be blowing the nose until the blood follow.

These may be called fellows of the preterpluperfect tense, whom nothing can
please, be it never so perfect, unless it feed their giddy and brainsick
humors.

But Moses tells us, that as God is not defective in his works, so he is not
excessive, sed manum detorquet, when all was perfect he stayed his hand, gave
over his work and betook himself to rest.

And thus much of the dependence of this verse.

Touching the parts, they are two in number.

1.
The one is the perfection of the works in respect of God.

2.
The other is his rest, when he had made an end.

For the first we have to consider three things. 1.
First, the action of finishing. 2.
Secondly, the time in which he did finish. 3.
And the third is touching the rest it self.

Touching the first, There was a beginning when nothing was made; after he made
all things, he comes to an end, and there finisheth all. If he be Alpha, i.
the beginning of a thing, he will be Omega, that is, bring it to a happy and
perfect end, Revel. 1. 8.

Man begins but cannot bring to an end, for these causes.
But with man it is otherwise, he begins many things which he finisheth not:
If he purposes good things, oftentimes his courage does quail before it come
in act, as Peter did: Or else, if they be (...) in their purpose, their
strength fails them before they can effect it, Psalm. 21. 11. They imagine
such a devise which they are not able to bring to pass, because their arm is
too weak and short to do it: Or if we have strength yet oftentimes the cost
and charge is too great, which the work requires. Luke 14. 30. So some men
take in hand to build houses, which, for lack of sufficient store, are not able
to finish.

Last of all, Man himself very often before he can finish and come to an end of
his work, has his days finished, and his years come to an end. Wherefore fear
not what man can do unto thee, seeing his breath is in his nostrills; for
there are many ways to prevent and alter or hinder their purpose, for God can
take away his breath before he can bring it to pass. But God is not as man, he
cannot repent or alter his mind, Numb. 23. 19.

If God says he will do any thing, Quis impediet? he would know Who can let
or hinder it? Esaias 43. 13. Therefore this is our comfort which Moses says
Deuteronomy. 32. 4. Omne opus Dei perfectum: And therefore if he has begun any good
work in us, he will thoroughly finish it in the end, Phil. 1. 6. Wherefore let
us also, when we have well begun, never give over any good thing until we have
finished it, and having well done one thing, we must not then and there leave
off and start aside like a broken bow from doing any more, Psalm. 78. 57. for
God cease not, he never gives over dixit, fecit, until the return came, and
fuit sic, and perfecit. We must persevere then, the Philosophers said that
Perseverantia est virtus virtutum. And Gregory says, Of all Virtues only
Perseverance is crowned. The goodness and good works of the wicked are as
shooting stars, falling and vanishing suddenly, and as a Land-flood or plash
of water, Ose 6. 4. which continue not, but are soon dried up: They are as a
fire of thorns, Psalm. 118. 12. Therefore let us not frame our selves to their
manner of doing well.

For Pharao ten times began well, but still declined from amending the faults,
which he knew and confessed, Exodus 8. 8. etc. This is their behavior. But the
estate of the Godly, is the state and manner of the Nazarites, as St. Augustine
says, that is, be holy and clean all their days; for if they touch any
unclean thing the last day, then all their days are reckoned unclean.

Now as we draw this from Gods perfection; so for the time when he rested
(namely the seventh day) we learn to avoid protraction and delays. For God
does not only end, but he ends also in a short time, even within seven days;
which is not the manner of men, who in good things are as a Snayle, Psalm. 58.
8. Seeing God then within seven days finished omnia opera sua, his great works
of Creation, what a shame it is that we cannot finish our opuscula, a few small
good things in many years.

Now we are come to opus suum quod fecerat, of which I will only show you some
notes, which St. Augustine has gathered out of it.

First, says he, We may see that all that which was created before, so
infinite Hosts of Creatures in number, and so diverse in kind on every side
and part of the World, all that innumerable plurality is here by God in one
rolled up, and is called opus suum.

Though Heaven and Earth be so far asunder, and so contrary in nature, yet
here they are brought to an unity and atonement; the means whereof, as he
says, is man, who being both of Heaven and Earth, became vinculum
perfectionis, joining both together in Man, as they both together were for man,
and under his government.

Now in that he says Opus suum quod fecerat, Agustine notes it, because there
are some men which do brag of opus suum, but they cannot boast of quod
fecerant, because there are some which do not only build upon another man's
foundation (which St. Paul would not do) but also upon another man's Timber and
Stones too, as one having gotten St. Paul's Parchments or Epistles, should say
and set them out as his own, but these cannot say, as God here does opus suum
quod fecerat.

Object.
Now touching the third point, I ask first, Whether God was weary of working
because he rested?

Resp.
To which the Schoolmen answer, That, rest is here not opposed to weariness
but to work, for he could not be weary of his work; because all that he did was
done without labor, for he made all, by saying only let it be.

But happily a man, with long and much speaking may be weary: But we see that
God spoke but even one word, at least few, and short words, and therefore could
not be weary so: Also a man is not weary of that which he does, with faculty,
and facility too: But God does all things not only with faculty, but with the
greatest facility that may be, for nothing is hard to him, or beyond the
compass of his power; therefore we cut off all weariness from God, and say,
That his resting was only a ceasing, or leaving off to make any more new
things, for his rest is only negatio operis, non affirmatio laboris.

Object.
The other question is, Does God then cease and rest from all manner of work;
has he ever since done nothing more?

Resp.
That is impossible, for seeing he is Actum primum; therefore he cannot be idle,
and rest from all things, as we may imagine; as he bath quietem activam, so
has he motum stabilem, a quiet motion, without any labor; and this we may
learn out of Moses words, for he says not simply, that then God rested, but he
rested from his works, and not absolutely from every work, but only from the
works which he had created, that is, A novis condendis, sed non a veteribus
conservandis.
from creating any more things, from the works of creation he rested a novis
condendis, sed non a veteribus conservandis; for this was the Sabbath days
work, which then he began: So says Christ, pater meus adhuc operatur, and ego
operor, John 5. 17. That is both in the propagation and bringing forth the
things which he made, and also in preserving of them. We say, in the Schools,
that there is a double cause of things, the one is causa sieri the other is
causa esse. The first, is the cause of making: As a Carpenter having made a
house perfect, forsakes it and cares no more for it, till it fall down or as
the fire is of heat, or as the clock keeper, is of the going of the clock, who
when he has set it to his mind, leaves it until the plumets fall down:
causa esse, is as the candle is of light, which being taken away, the light is
gone: So is God the cause of our life, being as a candle, whose being is of
light: And in that respect David says, Lift up the light of thy countenance,
as if God were our candle, who being taken away, our life and light is clean
put out, and become darkness, Psalm. 104. 29. If he take away his breath from
us, we dye.

We say then, that he rested not from preserving and governing, though he did
rest from making.

Hermes, by the light of reason, could say, That it were very absurd to think
that God should leave and neglect the things he had made; and God imputes it
as a fault to the Ostrich, Job 39. 18, 19 to leave her eggs without care and
regard in the sands, therefore God himself will be free of that blame and
blemish which he condemns in others. As we say of the Father, so we say of
the Son, which is the word of God, Psalm. 33. 9. He commanded and they were
made, there is creation, He said the word and they stood fast: which is the
second work of preservation and guiding. Also Psalm. 148. 5, 6. He first made
them with his word which is the first work of creation, long sithence ended,
and he gave them a Law, which they should not break, which is the other work of
establishing and governing things made: So Coll. 1. 17. Paul speaking of Christ
says, By him all things have their being or existence: and Heb. 1. 3. By him
all things have their supportance, and are held up.

He rests not also from the ruling and governing of the World. A Sparrow is
one of the basest and meanest Birds, Matthew. 10. 29, 30. Yet their motion is
directed by his providence and will, yea the hairs of our head ( are numbered,)
and none of them fall without his providence: how much more then is he
provident in disposing and governing man's motions?

He has a stroke in all that we do, Prove. 16. 1. The answer of our tongue is
guided by God, and in the 9. verse, the direction of our ways, and the end and
issue of their purposes and thoughts; yea he orders and governs our hands
and feet, Psalm. 33. 10. Psalm. 56. 13. He I say, fashioneth all our thoughts,
and knows them long before; so that we have no power in our heart to think,
in the tongue to speak, or hand to do ought, but as we are directed by God;
yea for things most casual as Lots and Chances which are attributed to
fortune, Prove. 16. 33. Even that is ruled by the Lord God, Act. 1. 26. The Lot
of Matthias and Joseph called Barsabas is cast into the Lap, but the Lord does
dispose it and causes it to fall unto Matthias.

That also which we call Chance-medley, as when many men walking in the street;
one of them is killed with a stone falling on him, of such a chance God says,
Ego Dominus extuli illum hominem, Exodus 21. 13. So that God has his stroke
even in ordering such things? If this be so, then let us not say as they did,
Job. 22. 13. Tush, God walks above and regards not the things on earth, or
with them, God sees us not; For he both sees, governs, and preserves all
on earth: For though the Lord be in heaven, yet he humbles himself to look
down and behold the sons of men, and considers that there is none of them
good, Psalm. 14. 2. And God has not only, Librum rerum creatarum, Psalm. 139.
16. But he has a register verborum and factorum, of words and deeds also, Mal.
3 16. And that we may know not our being only, but our preserving and guiding,
is of the Lord and his work: he will at the last bring all these things to
Judgment, Preach. 12. 14.

As for Gods rest after That he had made all things for himself, Prove. 16. 4.
Then did he introire in regnum suum, Heb. 4. 10. So that he went out of his
rest for our sakes, and having made all for us; he is said not to rest in his
work, nor after his work, but from his work, for he had no need of these
things, for he had most perfect rest in his own glory, which he had before the
World was made, John 17. 5. into that rest then he now returned.

Secondly, we see that in Gods rest his works go before it; for the word is
not quievit but requievit, which shows that if we be first employed about the
works of God and then rest; it may well be called Gods rest, but that rest
which is without work is Issachars rest, Genesis 49. 15. that is, idleness, and
such as give themselves to that, are called Cretians, idle and slow bellies, as
St. Paul calls them, and those shall never enter into Gods rest, for it is
pigra vocatio and not a return to rest.

If God had his work six days before he rested in creation, and if Adam had
his work in the state of innocence, then it is much more meet now, That man
should go forth to his labor until the evening, Psalm. 104. 23. They which are
not in labor hominum, Psalm. 73. But lie on their beds imagining mischief, Pro.
26. 14. They shall not rest in the Lord, because God made them for good works
to walk in them, Ephesians. 2. verse. 10.

There are a number of superfluous Creatures, as one calls the idle ones, of
whom if we should demand, What is thy calling or work? They cannot say, we are
exercised in the works of men; neither do they work in the will of God:
therefore if they do any thing, they busy themselves in meddling about other
men's matters.

It is strange to see how busy we are in taking in hand evil things, and how
earnest we are in doing them, and how constant in not giving them over, or
ceasing from such works, Genesis 11. 6. Judas, can watch all night, to work his
treason; but Peter, and the rest could not watch, one hour, to pray with
Christ, Mark. 14. 37. etc. Non habemus, tantum perseverantiae in bono, quantum
constantiae in malo.

Husbandmen in their works for earthly things are earnest, they follow his
counsel, Preach. 11. 6. Not to cease sowing from the morning until the
evening, but will make an end; but in the works of God, we cannot follow his
counsel, 9. 9. to do all that thou take in hand with all thy power and
strength, quicquid agis instanter age, says one, after the example of Abraham's
servant; who would not eat nor rest until he had done his Masters work, Genesis
24. 33. And as David who vowed, That he would not suffer his eyes to slumber,
nor his eyelids to take any rest, until he had found out a place for God's Ark, Psalm. 132. 2, 3. etc.

The proportion between work and rest.
Now we are come to the last point, which is the proportion between work and
rest; which is as great odds as six to one, for he wrought six days and rested
the seventh. This then if we apply will sit somewhat near us: for though
happyly we do some work at some times, and perhaps do perfect it at last. Yet
this is the manner of the world when they are weary of idleness, or can do no
other worldly thing, then it comes into their minds to say operemur opera
Dei, and when we take it in hand, we work not six days as God did, and rest
one; but we rest six daves and labor one: we should use rest as a sauce, and
labor as our meat, Job. 4. 34. And we know there is great odds and difference
between the dishes, in which they are served; but it is our fashion to use
labor as a sauce, to get us a stomach to rest. But we must not be as Jobs
Sons and Daughters, Job 1. 4. that is, to spend whole days yea many days in
delights and jollity, and few hours in the works of our vocation: for this is
not to rest after Gods example.

The last use which we are to make of this, is that which the Apostle gathers
out of the Heb. 4. 10. As God did rest from his works, so let us from ours: we
must esteem our righteousnesses and best works as filthy rags, Esaias 64. 6. Yea
as very dung, Phil. 3. 8. And say as Job did, Job 9. 28. Verebar opera mea:
thus we must rest from our own works, because there is no safety or quietness
in them, but leave our own righteousness, that we may rest in Christ and in
the works he has wrought for us.

And great reason it is, that we should only and wholly rest in him, Act. 17.
28. Quoniam in ipso movemur, therefore requiescamus in illo, if he be Lord of
hoasts, that is, of all works; then let him be to us the Lord of Sabbath also,
both are noted in this preposition ( in) for seeing our work and labor in this
life is in Deum, 1 Cor. 15. 10. Therefore let our rest, for the life to come be
in Deo, which St. Paul seems to join together, Romans 11. 10. We are of him,
that is, for creation: we are by him, that is, for preservation: and we are in
him, that is, our end and final rest in him: To whom be all honor, praise,
power, and dominion for ever.

Amen.
Et benedixit Deus diei septimo, and sanctificavit iplum: quum in eo quievisset
ab omni opere suo, quod creaverat Deus, faciendo. Genesis 2. 3. verse.

April 27. 1591.
WE are now come to the period or full point of the work of Creation. This third
verse containing in it, the dedication or sanctifying of that most wonderful
and beautiful work of the whole World, and all things therein contained: For
as in the Law both House and Temples, until they were dedicated and hallowed,
were counted profane and unclean, and not to be used of Gods people; though
they were fully made, as we may see, for Temples, 2 Chronicles. 7. 1. and for
houses, Deuteronomy. 50. 5. So we are to conceive of the frame of heaven and of earth,
and all the hoasts of them; for, both they and the governor, Man, were an
unhallowed work until God blessed it, for though God blessed and sanctified
the Sabbath: yet benedictio Sabati, tranfit, super observantes Sabati: As the
Fathers say, by which means, the blessing came to man.

Wherefore as we have said, his rest was active: So now we shall see it, in the
last greatest and chiefest works of all, for now in his rest, he blessed and
sanctified the Sabbath day.

As Man was the end of all, so the end of man is holiness, which is nothing
else but the Image of God, before spoken of, wherefore this is the performance
of that word of God, Genesis 1. 27. Let us make man in our Image that is, let us
make him a holy and a happy one, for man by Gods blessed work coming to
holiness in this life, shall thereby aspire to eternal happiness in the life
to come 2 Pet. 1. (...) and 11.

There are two parts of this verse, the first contains the blessing and
sanctifying of the Sabbath: the second contains the reason why he did so,
namely, Because in it he rested from the work that he had made: which reason
because it was before rehearsed in the second verse, let us first see the
dependence of it.

God does not rather extol the seventh day, than the other six days, as if he
did more favor and like idleness, then labor and work, for this is truly
affirmed, both of God and godly men (of the Sabbath,) which that heathen man
said of himself, Nunquam minus otiosus quam cum otiosus fui: for as one says,
Circumcisio cordis durior labor corporis, wherefore by this God only (...)
requiem sanctam, and not idle passage over the time.

Object.
But why did God pass over the six days and appropriate this special
exaltation to the seventh day only?

Resp.
Surely it was to teach us to pass by all the creatures which God had made, and
all that might be attained unto, by bodily labor and work: and not to seek for
blessedness in the six days work; but only in the blessing of the seventh
day, given by his word which is above and beyond all that is in the Creatures.

But the other reason is more sensible, which is, because every one of the six
days, brought his real blessing with it. Of which Jobs wife had skill,
Benedictus Deus in donis suis, Job 3. 9. Which is Oses blessedness, Benedictus
dominus quo ditati sumus, But the world has no feeling of St. Paul's blessings,
which are spiritual, who says blessed be God which made us rich in all
spiritual riches in Christ.

Wherefore that we may know, that we have more cause to, bless God, for his
spiritual blessings given unto us on the Sabbath day by his word, then for his
temporal blessings which we receive at other times by his Creatures, therefore
did he specially bless this seventh day: for God knows we are easily brought
to say, blessed be God, and blessed be this day in which we receive temporal
blessings, and that place we will call the valley of blessing, 2 Cro. 20. 26.
And on the other side, we think that day a cursed day, as Job did, in which we
receive evils, Job 3. 8. But seeing all true and eternal blessings do follow
and shine, from the blessing of this day: it is indeed to be esteemed a blessed
day.

Object.
But I will ask, Whether the other days were not also blessed?

Resp.
Yes every one of them as we may see, Genesis 1. chap. had his Benedixit, which
though they were temporal, yet they have a very good Analogy, and fit
proportion, with the spiritual blessings of this day, of this day; for as we
have a natural good use of the goodness of the Creatures on the six days, by
their blessings given them; So here on the Sabath we have a spiritual use of
the Creatures: For as the temporal and corporal use of the six days is ad
cultum corporis, so this spiritual use of the seventh day is ad cultum animae,
that so having blessings provided both for body and soul, we may by both kinds
of blessings come unto God, in whose presence is the fulness of joy and
blessedness for ever, Psalm. 70. 4.

Touching the blessing of the Sabath, We say that thing is blessed of God, to
which God vouchsafes some peculiar or special favor. So Isaac is called
Benedictus Domini, Genesis 26. 12. because God showed him such special favors. It
was the strife between Esau and Jacob, because of the blessing, that is, the
superiority, Genesis 27. 37. What makes the Sabath the chief day in the week.
Therefore this day having the special blessing, is by it made the head and
chief day of the week.

The honor which is given to this day is holiness, which is expressed by
sanctifying or hallowing, which consists in two things.

The first is Levit. 20. 26. which is separation or setting it apart from
common and profane uses, to the which they were or might be applied before,
before which they were called things common and profane. So was this day first
a common and an ordinary day, like to all the other ordinary days: yea, it
might be thought to us before a waste empty day, bringing no good with it to
us; but now being set apart, the day which the builders would refuse, by this,
is made the head and chief day of building; for as a man being set a a part to
be a Magistrate, is thereby made above ordinary men; so is this day now among
other days, being set a part by Gods word.

As the separation of it from profane uses is the first part; so consequently
ensues for the sanctifying of any thing the appropriation of it to Gods holy
uses, to the which he has appointed it, Levit. 27. 28. as the sanctified
Instruments of the Temple must not serve to any other uses, but to that holy
use and purpose in the Temple, for which they were made. If we then so use this
day and separate it from profane things, to holy exercises, it will be a
blessed day to us; for Gods blessing given to this day is a real blessing, and
will cause us to grow in holiness here, and by it to blessedness in the life
to come: For this must needs be granted, that he which (...) it blessed it for
some body; if for some body, then for himself, or for some other; but he made
it not for himself, for he is God for ever and ever blessed.

And as St. Paul says, Omnia munda mundis, Titus, 1. 15. so we may say, Omnia
sunt sancta sanctis; and therefore all things being holy to him which is
holiest of all, it is sure that he sanctified it not for himself.

Then it follows, that it must needs be either for Man or for some other
Creature; but not for any other Creature, because they themselves were all
blessed and sanctified for us and our sakes, so says Christ, Sabatum erat
propter hominem, non homo propter (...).

Now we come to the counsel of God in the institution of the Sabath, the
Psalmist says 111. 2, 3, 4. That the works of God are great, and to be sought
out of all them which have pleasure in them: And again That God has so wrought
his mavelous works that they ought to be had in remembrance.

It is Gods will and counsel therefore in these works, first that we should
have a remembrance of them, and not to forget his benefits in them; for he made
them that we should not only have a corporal use of them, but a spiritual use
also, as David had, Psalm. 143. 5. Recogitavi, or, recordatus sum omnia opera
tua, that is, it should be our delight and pleasure to call to mind again and
again his bounty and magnificence in his works, that blessing him for these
benefits, we may be blessed of him for ever in the world to come.

Thus we see the dependence of this work and the counsel of God therein, to the
end that this counsel of God may prosper and succeed well, that we may have
fit occasion to call to mind his works, to bless him for it, and to be
blessed of him: It was requisite and necessary that God should take order to
appoint a time, in which (setting aside all other worldly duties of our
calling, we should only and wholly, as much as our weak nature can suffer)
apply our selves to this Christian duty of meditation and serving God, which
here is set down to be the seventh day, in which circumstance of time we have
four things to consider.

1.
First, That some day or time must be appointed to that end.

2.
Secondly, That it should be a day or time certain.

3.
Thirdly, That the certain time should be in a certain number of days, which
the Fathers call taxatio temporis.

4.
Fourthly, That it should be the seventh day, which is taxatio diet.

1.
For the first we see, That reason consents to that which Solomon says,
Preach. 8. 6. That there is an appointed time for every action under the Sun,
but especially (...) it be a matter of weight and serious business indeed.
Then reason wills that we should make special choice of a time, when secluding
all other things, we may intend only and wholly to it alone.

For if we should not have a certain time appointed to us, we of our selves are
so careless, that we would make account of very few days or none at all, to
sanctify unto the Lords worship.

This matter then of Gods worship and Religion, being a matter of our soul, is
the most weighty and serious business that can be, in as much as the soul is
the worthiest part of us: And therefore it concerns the freehold of our souls
so nearly, that if we neglect or set light by it, Agitur de anima, our soul is
in jeopardy: But if we set light of our soul (which being so precious a thing,
is worth looking to) yet in another regard it is a weighty duty, and therefore
we ought to be careful of it, because God is worthy of this service and duty,
which is opus Sabati, wherefore indeed there is no time of our life, but that
we should think chiefly of this as the (...) held, That a man ought perpetually
to be present and conversant with God, And in our words send up short prayers
and praises to God. And that this is a bounden duty, daily to be performed, it
is agreeable to the word of God, Numb. 28. which was showed in their daily
sacrifice every morning and evening, offering oblations and incense to God.

But who is it that is able all the days of his life, night and day, to intend
his business as he ought; for this belonged as a duty, not only unto the Jews,
but unto every Christian now.

Seeing this one business is to be intended above all other, and every thing
is then best ordered, when we appropriate and apply the time and our studies
only and wholly to it, as the proverb is, Quod unice, id unum, quod solicit id
solum agas, for this is the wisdom of man in matters of this life: Then we
must needs hearken to the counsel of the Prophet, Psalm. 46. 10. Desistite, be
still, or leave off other things, that ye may know I am the Lord, etc.

And to the advice of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. 5. we may leave off other matters,
and must consent so to do for a time, that the more fully and wholly we may be
given to prayer and fasting.

This is called of some Induciae seculo, a truce taken with the world for a
time, that not being troubled with the affairs thereof, we may only set before
us (as much as our weak natures can) our duty in the service of God, which is
our sanctification. Therefore God appointed to this spiritual work a time at
large, that is, appointed some time, in which only and wholly Adam by necessity
was enjoyed to this work. Wherefore; by all conveyance of reason, by a much
greater necessity, must we know, that we also must have a time at large for
this business.

2.
The second point is, That it was necessary, not only that there should be a
time at large, that is, some time of our days, but also a certain set time or
day appointed for it, for otherwise God should have slender service, or scarce
any at all; for if it were left at our liberty, we would take liberty to serve
him when we list, and when we could intend it, and when we had nothing else to
do: Therefore one said well, according to St. Peter, Christiana libert as
pallium est pessimis moribus.

And I refer me to your judgment how well God will be served if there were
no time certainly appointed, seeing this which is set down is so ill kept:
Those therefore which urge Christian liberty and would not have a set certain
day, but every day a Sabath, they would have God stand at that portion of time
and service, which men's devotion and liberality would afford.

This then would be the inconvenience of uncertainty in this matter, that
perpetuum Sabatum and jejunium would prove none at all: And therefore God saw
it necessary that we must have a set and a certain time.

And in this the Law of Nature agrees with the Law of God; for the Heathen had
their statae feriae, set and appointed holy days: and the Hebrews call their
holy days by the name of Mogne, which is a staid certain time, still
unmovable, not at random, but set down and appointed firm and perpetual.

3.
Now we are come to the third point, That it must be one of the seven in the
week, which came not by natures light, but by Gods ordinance, his word setting
it down, therefore was it told Adam, that he should tell it to the Posterities
to come: By which means the Gentills came to the knowledge of it, and held it
by tradition; for in their books we shall plainly see it.

Lucianus testifies, that as the Jews kept their holy day (in which they
worship God) on the Saturday: the Turks on the Friday: the Egyptians on the
Thursday: the Assyrians on the Wednesday: the Persians on the Tuesday: The
Grecians on the Monday: And Christians now do keep their day of worship the
Sunday and first day of the week; So that in all quarters and parts of the
Earth every day and part of time is kept as a set day of divine worship. And
for the seventh day, we shall see that the Pythagoreans had received a
glimmering of this knowledge, for they called the number of 7 numerum quietis,
and the number hallowed of God, and the divine number, or Gods number, which
they had (no doubt) not by the light of Nature and reason, but by tradition
from their Elders, and so delivered it to their Posterity.

It is strange which Eusebius records out of two Heathenish Writers, 13. de
preparatione Evangelii, The one of Linus verse 2. That God made and finished
all things the seventh day: the other of Hesiod (we agreeing to that) says,
that therefore the seventh day is the Lords holy day. And on the seventh day
therefore the Gentiles called on their Gods, and had their meetings in it, and
called the number of 7 Minerva, by the name of their God. Macrobius affirms,
that the Gentiles did mean by Pan and Jano and all other names of Gods, only
the great God Apollo, as their chief God whom they served the seventh day.

But this is our rule most plainly revealed from Gods word, that it is his
will, that we should keep the seventh day holy; for seeing all the days are
his, he should have done no injury, if he had appointed and dedicated all the
days of the week to be spent and employed on his service, yet he has not done
so.

St. Augustine says, That if God had given us but one day of the seven to work
in, for our own commodity, it had been more than he had owed us, it had not
been given of duty, but of his largess and liberality.

But now seeing he has not given us one, or two, or every other day for our
business, but the whole six, and reserved but one of the seven for himself to
be served in; this is so equal, that none can complain or think to be hardly
dealt withal.

If any man shall now be so sacrilegious, having six days given him freely, as
to take from him that has but one reserved to himself, it is intolerable
injury, and not to be excused, and as David says, 2 Samuel 12. 5. he may well
be called the Child of death.

The fourth and last point is taxatio diei.

As the World had the knowledge of the former three points, so this point
stands upon very good and sufficient reason; for seeing that the day is or
deined in remembrance of this work and benefit of Creation (for that is the end
why the Turks and Jews did celebrate holy days, in them, to remember some
notable work and benefit) therefore it is reason that God should make choice of
such a day, in which the benefit might be best remembered: And of all the days
in the week we shall see the seventh day to be the fittest to retain and keep
in memory the commendation of this benefit and work of Creation. When God had
performed this great work of Creation, he took order also, because it was the
greatest benefit which as yet the World had or knew of, that the seventh day
should be always had in remembrance, because he had fully perfected all the
work in it; and the very same reason which made the Jews Sabath on the seventh
day, does now also move Christians to keep it on the first day in the week, for
it is Gods will that the lesser benefit should surcease and give place to the
greater, Jer. 23. 7. and that the benefit of Creation, as the lesser, should
yield and give place to the work of Redemption, which is the greater benefit.

When Christ comes, we shall not then extol and magnify the deliverance out
of Egypt, but that shall cease and not be counted the greatest benefit; But we
shall talk of Christ's work and deliverance from Hell and Satan: So the day of
Creation must give place to the day of Redemption.

Wherefore the Apostles, after Christ's Ascension, changed the seventh day unto
the first day of the week, which we shall see, is most fit to keep in memory
this greatest work and benefit of Redemption, as Athanasius and Ambrose do
hold and prove: Because if (B) were the Dominical letter when Christ was borne,
his Nativity was on the first day of the week, his Resurrection, Apparition of
the Holy Ghost, and Ascension, was also on the first day in the week. And also
the first day is most fit to retain in mind the restoration of the World: So
it is not unmeet to remember the Creation, which was begun the first day. And
besides all this, it may serve as the fittest time to cause us to remember the
benefit of glorification, for seeing our Inheritance is in light, Coll. 1. 12.
And God made light, the first day, to come out of darkness, 2 Cor. 4. 6. Genesis
1. 3. therefore it is most fit to put us in mind of that also.

We will begin the next time where we now leave.

And you remember the last time according to the division we then made, we
spoke somewhat of the institution and observation or use of the Sabath. The
former being employed in the word ( blessing) the other in the word (
sanctifying:) Touching which we say with the ancient Fathers, that quodlibet
officium Dei est beneficium nostrum. Therefore Adam, having received so many
benefits of God, was bound by necessary duty, to perform some service to God
for them, which every day in part he should have done as duty required; But
some one day he ought wholly to apply all the powers of his mind, and all the
parts and members of his body about it alone.

Wherefore we have showed, 1.
first, That there must be some one day or time set a part to the solemn
intending of the work and worship of God.

2.
Secondly, That it ought to be some certain day.

3.
Thirdly, That God, measuring out his vectigal temporis, the tribute of time due
to him, did assign it to be once in seven days, which revolution of seven
has a special use both in things natural and in things spiritual; for in
Religion, as in seven days is the Sabath, so in the feast of the seventh
month is the feast of the Tabernacle, or the feast of weeks.

4.
The last point is a positive day and time, namely, the seventh day, which God
chose as most fit for his work.

Touching which the Jews themselves did not so much stand, in the strict
limitation of the set day: For they held, That if a man by sleep or (...), knew
nor certainly which was the seventh day, it was not a matter absolutely
necessary, so that he kept one day of the seven. To this end therefore of
worshipping God, he would have us make a truce with the World. And as Augustine
says, we must have a vacation from the works of our Vocation. And as Christ
would have us, Luke 10. 42. we must lay aside Martha's part, that not being
troubled with many things, we might attend to Mary's part: The better for
separating our selves from worldly things, and dedicating our selves to
heavenly things, is the ground of this institution, Sabatum Ptradisi.
and this is the end and observation of the Sabath of Paradise.

Sinai.
But the Sabath of Sinai had three other accessory ends added to this.

1.
The first is Political, set down Exodus 23. 12.

2.
The second is Theicall or Ceremonial, which Ceremonies are excellently well
divided thus.

1. Some closures or fences.
Some were appointed as closures or fences, to enclose and defend or aid the
Law, Ceremonies of Sinay.
as the sixth Precept had this Ceremony for his fence, That men should eat no
blood, to signify (...) them how greatly they should abhor murder.

2. Rudiments to the Gospel.
The other Types or Ceremonies were rudiments and instructions leading us
darkly, as by Riddles and (...) to some necessary points of the Gospel.

So the Ceremony of the Saboth taught us a double Lesson and Document, the one
of a benefit already past and exhibited, as of the Creation done on the seventh
day. The other of a benefit to be exhibited hereafter and perfected also on the
seventh day, that is, the work of Redemption and Regeneration. So now the
promised Savior being come, that Ceremony of the set seventh day (...), and
the first day in the week is in its stead. There was also another Ceremony,
Heb. 4. 9. and that taught us to rest from finne in this life, and also it was
a type of the eternal rest in the life to come, Revel. 14. 13.

The third end was peculiar to the Jews for that special work and benefit of
their deliverance out of Egypt, Deuteronomy. 5. 15. wherefore the Jews say, that they
have a double right and interest in the Sabath.

1.
First, Because they are filii Adami.

2.
Secondly, Because they are tanquam filii Abrahami.

Our Savior Christ teaches us, (...). 19. 8. so to esteem of things as they
were in the primitive state in their first institution, a principio non fuit
sic: Wherefore when we say there was a Ceremony in this Law, and a Riddle, it
must be understood, that it was not so from the beginning in Paradise, but was
after added as accessory to it, and the reason inevitable to prove it, is set
down, Coll. 2. 17. where Christ is said to be the body and substance of all
shadows and Ceremonies.

Wherefore seeing there could be no shadow where was no body, we conclude, that
at this institution there could be no Ceremony, for where and when no sin
and loss is, there needed then no Savior. But there was no sin nor loss to
man, until after this Sabath was instituted, as appears in the next Chapter,
wherefore now it has no such ceremonial end; for the only chief end now was to
Adam, because he having but a finite soul, could not attend two things at once
but diviso cord, wherefore, that he might attend this toto cord, this was
ordained. And this was the principal end which was before the Ceremony, and
remains still to us after the Ceremony.

Touching the other Ceremony, which was a fence to the Law, it is set down
Exodus 35. 2. which also was accessory: for only we reckon that to be Ceremonial
in the fourth Commandment, which afterward was added to the first end, and
was ended in Christ; and thus we stop the mouths of Papists, which say, Seeing
the fourth Precept is ceremonial, why is not the second also? and of the
Anabaptists who reason even so against the third precept touching Oaths,
saying, Why should not it be ceremonial as well as that, because these
Ceremonies only were added for a time ad erudiendum intellectum, and ad
informandos mores: Wherefore the first end remains; So that as the Eve of the
Sabath is Nundinum ventris, the Market for provision for the belly, so the
Sabath it self Nundinum mentis, the Fair to provide meat for our soul. And the
Jews give a good reason why they were forbidden to go forth to gather Manna on
the Sabath day: For why should they be troubled with corruptible Manna, which
was subject to putrefaction and rottenness, seeing that day they were to
gather the Heavenly Manna which perished not.

There remains one point touching our positive day of keeping the Sabath, why
it is changed into the first day of the week. The reason is because the benefit
we received by Christ the first day of the week, is greater then the former of
Creation, here finished on the seventh day: For by Christ's work we are not only
postored to our first estate of Gods Image, in which we were made; but also by
it we are made partakers of the divine nature, as the Apostle says; Therefore
the former benefit of the day of Creation gives place to this of the
Redemption: For seeing his Resurrection was the perfecting of the work, which
was upon the first day of the week. Therefore the Disciples used to meet in
their Assembles ever after upon the first day, Act. 20. 7. and called it the
Lords day, Rev. 1. 10. And some of the Fathers do think (considering well the
22, 23. verses of 118. Psalm) that it is a plain prediction of the change of
the Sabath day, for the Prophet says, That when the stone which the builders
refused became the head corner stone, which was so wonderful in our eyes
(which was sulfilled at his Resurrection, for before he was the foundation
stone) then it should be said, This is the day which the Lord has made, let us
rejoice and be glad in it, and give sacrifice and praise to God.

Being therefore changable by the institution, we are not to trouble our selves
about the altering of the set day; but we will a little more return to the
consideration of the commandment as it is moral.

The fourth Commandment, in the 5. of Deuteronomy. begins with a Memento, which is
a calling to mind of all his benefits; and by adding a sanctification to it,
God shows quod in majori cultu colemus, and, as another does interpret,
sanctificavit, saying, Intimavit Deus Adamo, quod diem illum sibi consecrasset.
And though we find in the Commandment the word benedixit attributed to God
only as his proper action, yet sanctificavit is applied also to man, for which
we have this rule, that when such words are given both to God and Man, it is to
be understood, that it is affirmed of God sub modo destinandi, and to Man sub
modo applicandi; God sanctified it when he made this day (which seemed to man's
reason the meanest day) to be his day and the chiefest of days ordained and
appointed to a holy use and end, and our sanctifying of it is when we shall
with care apply and spend it to that holy end.

Object.
But now the question is, Whether the Sabath and seventh day were by Adam and
his posterity, after this institution to that end?

Resp.
The Jews make no question of it, and also the old and new Writers affirm it.
And they ground themselves upon two reasons. First, That otherwise God after
the institution should be said to suspend and defer the observation and
practice of it until the time of the Law, which is like to that foolish
opinion of some touching the Creation, which say that God created the matter of
all things from eternal, but put the work in execution at this certain time:
But as the Fathers answer to that, so we say to this, Tum sanctificavit Sabatum
cum vellet sanctum observari, not before he would have it put to the holy use.

The second reason is Memento, which is set at the beginning of the
commandment, which is, say they, quasi dicat, remember that thou keep it as it
has been observed before; for (say they) it was but now renewed, for it was
well known and kept before, therefore they thus expound it, Memento Legem hanc,
Legeipsa Antiquiorem.

But whether it were observed according to the institution in the time of
nature, before the Law that is not material, nor the point we stand upon. If
they say, Quis unquam legit Abraham Sabatum observasse? we may say likewise,
Quis legit Adamum aut Abraham jejunasse? yet they will not deny, but there is
now use of fasting, and so is there of the Sabath.

We must know St. Paul's rule to be true, 1 Timothy 4. 8. that as bodily labor
profits not, but godliness; so bodily rest avails not, but as it is a help
to sanctific us, and a furtherance to true holiness; for if it be a hindrance
to piety, or a cause to make us less holy, rest is evil, and far worse than
work and honest labor: Wherefore they which spend the Sabath day, not in the
public Congregation, but privately at home in their houses and chambers do
ill, and were condemned by that ancient Conncell of Gangren, which was holden
in France. And we read in 44. of Ezecbiel 19. that there were Officers to look
that the Sabath day should be well kept; it must much less then be made a
Sabath of belly cheer, spent in no other then such as whereof comes nothing
but dung, being the only fruit of their festival and holy days; and God so
hated it, that he cast it in their faces that so kept it, neither must it be
spent in wanton recreation and lascivious pastime.

Nor yet as the men of Ashedod did, Nehem. 13. 15. by making it a Market day
and Fair to sell their Merchandises; for this is to make our purse and our
belly, Mammon and Bacchus, our Gods, and to consecrate a holy day to them: Nor
as Shiloh did to dancing. Nor as our L. in frequenting Theaters and Plays,
Bear and Bull baiting, for this is to turn away our foot from the Sabath, and
from doing Gods will on the holy day: We must not do so, but we must call the
Sabath a delight, to consecrate it to the Lord, and honor it, not doing our own
ways, nor seeking our own will, nor speaking a vain word, I say 28. 13. but we
must, I say, delight in the Lord upon that day, and then his blessings of all
sorts shall light upon us, verse 14.

But let us come now to speak of these two things apart, which respects our
sanctification and observation of the Sabath to see what we should not do, and
then what we should do as is required of us.

Touching the rest from things inhibited, it is somewhat dangerous to speak of
it, because our nature is given to such extremes; for there are two ancient
Councels which do bewray our corrupt disposition. The one is Concilium
Aurelianense in France, which shows, that in those days the People were so
straight laced, that they were persuaded, that it was utterly unlawful to do
any thing either Adjutorem or ad necessitatem, to trim up their houses and
themselves, or to dress meats.

We read again within forty years after, that their minds were so (...) gone
wide from that, that they fell into the other extreme clean contrary, that they
thought it was lawful for them by Christian liberty to do in it what they
list.

To (...) which foul error, there was made the second Counsel of Mascon which
made a Cannon; That the people should sequester themselves, from all
mechanical works of their vocations.

Hindrances to the observation of the Sabbath.
The things which are now interdicted to Christians, as hindrances of this holy
(...) six in number.

1.
The first is bearing of burdens, Jer. 17. 24.

2.
The second is travailing journeyes, Exodus 16. 29.

3.
The third is earing, ploughing, carting, or taking in of harvest, Exodus 34. 21.

4.
The fourth for bearing merchandises, buying and (...) Nehem. 13, 15, 16, 17.
etc.

5.
The fifth not to build Temples or Churches, Exodus 31. 13. etc.

6.
The sixth idle plays and pastimes, to which men are too much given at such
times.

Which because they are diverse, and men are diversely given thereunto in sundry
places, I will name some which the Fathers in their times, have sharply
reproved and inveighed against, as the abuses and prophanings of Sabaths, in
their ages and several places, in which they lived; for we read that the
Councels of the Church, do not only concur jointly with Gods word, in
interdicting the former things, but also other particular abuses of their age
and place: As proper then, St. Jerome upon the 20. of Ezekiell sharply
reproves stage plays on that day.

Augustine 119. Epistle inveigheth against Dancing.

Gregory against Hunting and Hawking, which great personages then used.

Leo spoke against Dice and Cards, by which the Sabbath was profaned in his
time.

I will come to the Heathen, and we will see the things which they by the light
of reason, condemned on their holy days as profane abuses of them, which did
(...) them as they thought.

Of the which this is one of their rules, die sacra requiescat aratrum, for
they thought it a pollution to their holy days; for though they were lawful
and necessary on their days, yet they thought them not ad decorem hujus diei.

They which do these things inhibited and forbidden by God as a hinderance of
sanctification; God so misliketh that he appropriateth to this sin a special
punishment, Jer. 17. 27. and that is to send fire to their Cities: As this is
against the one extreme, so we are to give a caveat for the other, least while
men avoid profaneness, Preciseness ^ching the Sabbbath.
they fall into that preciseness of the Jews, as to think it death and deadly
sin to do any thing at all on the Sabbath day.

This was the jewish error of Kiffon a (...), who held it necessary that on the
evening before the (...), if any man were found siting, in the same place and
state he must remain sitting, until the end of the Sabbath: But Origin
speaking of him as too strickt, expounds that place of Exodus 16. 29. Maneat
quisque in loco suo, thus (in his place, says he) that is within the space of
two thousand Cubits; So that he thought it no breach of the day to keep within
that compass; but this is to strain at a Gnat, etc. For God has not made
restraint of works in such labors, in matters of piety and necessity: For
Christ says, That Priests in the Law did break their bodily rest, And yet were
blameless, as in blowing of Trumpets in stead of ringing of Bells, in fetching
water, carrying of wood, and killing of oxen.

These things being sacrorum causa, were accounted holy labors, as to go about
to see the Sabbath day kept, Ezech. 44. 14. He made custodes Sabati, to the
which use, are our Churchwardens to attend. So say we also for necessity: for
the Maccabes 1. Book, condemns those, which on the Sabbath day would not
fight to resist the rage of the enemy, then presently setting upon them. Elias
walking forty days must needs travail some Sabbath and break the bodily rest.

In this case of absolute necessity, the labor of Midwives and such as are
attending on so needful and present a business, may not be deferred,
Periculum animae pellit Sabatum, for it is a work of mercy to save a man's life,
God will have mercy rather than sacrifice; yea Christ will excuse them which
do toil and labor on the Sabbath day, to pull a beast out of the mire, Matt.
12. 11. But let not this liberty give occasion to the flesh, to make us
careless of our duty on the Sabbath day, for we must so do all things (as
abigail said to David 1 Samuel 25. 31. ut postea non sit, singultus cordis) That
there may be in us no scruple of conscience, nor sobbing of the heart, for the
breach of the Sabbath.

Time.
Now for the time of the rest.

The Counsel at Orleance, Decreed that the Sabbath should begin a vespere, and
some were so scrupulous in numbers of time, that because they would be sure to
begin it time enough, began it an hour before Sunset, the Eve before: But we
must not tie our duties so to times and places, for Ireneus in his fourth Book
says, that they kept diem unam integram, and that their duty of serving God
had perseverantiam diei. Eusebius lib. 3. cap. 8. says that, the Church then
kept it ab ortu solis ad occasum, not two or three hours, which we scarce can
endure to do.

Thus we see the manner and time of this rest: Now for the special duties in
this rest, which is the chief end.

The first Counsel of Paris sets down sanctification in these two points,
in imprimendo and exprimendo exercitia pietatis.

The means to imprint holiness in Adam, being yet in Paradise is called
contemplatio and hymnus.

Meditatio gratia^ctio: legere aeudire verbum Dei.
The Jews do think that the 92. Psalm, was made in Paradise by Adam, as the
title shows it, for it is a Psalm of the Sabbath, and it calls men to the
meditation of Gods works of Creation and preservation, and then a praise of
thanksgiving for it; Oration.
besides meditation of Gods works, the reading and hearing of Gods word, is an
exercise of godliness to be used on the Sabbath day, and so likewise prayer is
an excellent exercise, Act. 16. 25. Communitas Sacramentorum.
Likewise the receiving of the Sacraments, Baptism and the Eucharist or breaking
of Bread, a notable sanctitying of the Sabbath: So that by these four means,
sanctification is imp^ed in us on this day, in respect of the preacher.

But there are other duties to be performed in respect of the hearers, to
imprint and fortify godliness more deeply in them.

1.
The one is ruminating and calling to mind again, by serious meditation that
which we have heard, for we must not only go to hear what God will say to us
concerning our good, Psalm. 85. 8. but also meditate what the Lord has said
unto us.

2.
The other is conferrence after hearing, to reason, and talk, and commune of
that we have heard; for by that means the disciples came to the certain
knowledge of that which they doubted of before, Luke 24. for Christ will come
and become a teacher within to such.

Thus much of imprinting: Now a word of expressing sanctification; as the Psalm
of the Sabbath 92 begins with meditation, so the end is to tell men, that
they must be like good trees, to bring forth good fruit, for having holiness
in us, we must bring forth fruit in holiness, Romans 6. 22. It should seem, John
13. 29. that it was Christ's usual manner on the Sabbath day to give somewhat
to the poor, and I would men were persuaded in their minds, that the
observation of of the Sabbath consisted as well in ostendendo as imprimendo
sanctitatem, for by this means the poor should have somewhat toward their
relief: So would the 2 Benefacitote of St. Peter, 2 Epist. 1. 19. and St. Paul,
Phil. 4. 18. agree well in commending or hallowing this day: For by these two
means we shall come to be inheritors of both blessings.

Blessed is the man whose delight is in the Law, etc. And blessed is he which
considers the poor and needy, Psalm. 41. 1. For if we thus honor God in this
Sabbath here, it will come to pass, that God will requite it with this rebound
honorificantes me, (...), 1 Samuel 15. which we may be sure of, when Gods
institution and our observation do concur and agree together, that is, when
we shall apply and spend the day and rest to that holy end, and in those holy
exercises, to which God has ordained it, and which God requires at our hands.

Istae sunt generationes coeli and terrae, quando creata sunt: qua die Jehova
Deus fecit terram and coelum: Et omnem stirpem agri, qui nondum fuisset futurus
in terra, omnemque herbam agri, quae nondum fuisset oritura: quum non
demisisset Jehova Deus pluviam super terram, and nullus homo fuisset ad
colendum terram. Genesis 1. 4 5. verses.

May 4. 1591.
THESE verses as I told you in the beginning of this Chapter do contain in
them, the general conclusion, rehearsal, or recapitulation of the discourse
of the six days work specified before.

For after Moses had told us that the Camp, and the Capital were finished,
that is, the place of labor and rest, and that the Armies of Heaven and Earth
were ranged in their proper places, and man, the Lieutenant of God, had his
charge enjoyed, to rule the hoasts of the earth, and to sanctify the Sabbath,
what now should he say more: But shut up all in a short sum or conclusion,
which may best serve for a transition to the rest that follows.

In this fourth verse, we first see the three general terms, used in the
former Chapter, Barah 1. created, Gnasha 1. made; and Cagash 1 brought forth,
that is, creavit, fecit, generavit; the last whereof is the wheel of generation
(...) as St. James calls it 3. 6. by whose continual course all things
continued till now.

The first is creavit, that is, God alone does create and produce a thing of
nothing.

The second, fecit.

The third genuit, that is God and the kind does bring forth: and this is the
course of nature in generation.

Which three words do proclaim, that which Moses and the Prophets could never
(as they thought) sufficiently speak of.

The first is against, and refelleth the error of the heathen Pagans, which
held that the world was (...) not begotten but without bebeginning. But in
principio creavit she weth, that God was the father that begat this world, and
that it had (...), that is, a birth day wherein it began to be.

The true meaning of which is, that this world which now we see so old, and as
it were doting for age, and with increasing is now almost spent, and yet the
time has been, when it was but a young world, in his infancy and youth, it may
seem that it was but a young world, Exodus 18. For then men were so simple and
Child like, that they would be content quietly to be under government, but now
the world is grown wiser, and every one thinks it a childish thing to be
governed by others, thinking themselves old enough to rule others, it was but a
young world when Kings and men of great honor, could be content to labor all
the day, 1 Samuel 11. 5. I trow our World now is wiser, in which men hold scorn
of work: Then Jacob when he saw the money in the sacks, thought it some
oversight of Joseph, and therefore sent it again, Genesis 44. 12. But now men are
wiser, they count restitution a childish thing, and think other men's oversight
to be their good gain. It had an infancy then at the beginning at which time
God by his word conceived three children, Deformity, Confusion, Darkness, of
the first he made the Earth, of the second the Waters, of the third the Lights,
which may teach us to setch our Pedigree aright by lineall descent from the
first beginning; for we are all the sons of Adam, which was the son of
dust, which was the son of Deformity, which was the some of nothing; and this
is the first father and beginning of our generation, which may suffice against
the error of the Heathen Pagans.

2.
2. Another error there is, which they being forced by reason to acknowledge a
beginning, yet did with it hold, that it was (...), that it has been made from
everlasting ever since there has been a God; for they say, That as the beam
had his beginning when the light began, and as a shadow has his beginning with
the body; so had the World a beginning when God began to be, and then by
necessity it must needs be.

Against which Moses says not only, that it was produced, but it was produced
( in die) in a certain prescribed day, and therefore this proceeding was not
eternal. And here we must note, that in die, is not here taken for some one
only day, as some ground their conceit, as if God made all things in one day:
For the day in which the light was made, there was no Earth; and when the Herbs
were made, there was in that day no man, until the sixth day, as it is in the
fifth verse. This therefore overthrows the second error before, because all
was made in a certain bound of time.

3.
Another ^ort there was, which granted both these, that the World was made, and
that in die, but yet affirmed that it was (...), namely, that it was self
borne, and made it self, or was produced and came of it self, as a thing
casual and by chance; which foolish and gross opinion of Epicures was ever
(for the absurdity thereof) hissed out of Schools: but Moses meets with this
also, saying, that the Lord made it.

And because it may be thought that there was diverse Gods, he tells us by a
name which was never heard of before this time, by the which he describes him
unto us, and that is Jehovah.

Thus he has recapitulated all the former Chapter unto these three
considerations, which is all one with the first use of the first Chapter,
saving that here is expressed the name Jehovah, which is not there; for this
name of God is the most glorious name, Deuteronomy. 28. 58. and therefore Moses here
reserveth it till every thing in this glorious World be fully accomplished and
perfected. In the 6. Exodus 3. it is said, he was not known by this name before
then, that is, whilst he was bringing any thing to pass, and not yet
perfected, he is Elohim; but when he has fully performed it and set it on
foot, then he is known to be Jehovah, by whom the thing has his being and is
that which it is, for he is the essence and being of things that are.

There are many difficult mysteries in these names, which because some are too
curious in standing upon, and others have itching ears listening too much
after curiosities, I will omit; only this we must needs know, which the nature
of the word shows, that God is he which is of himself, and by whom all things
are, move, and have their being; for seeing we know not, nor can see the nature
of God, we must give him a name according to the greatest benefits which we
receive, and the greatest works which we have seen. But the work and benefit
which is most common to all things, is ( being:) Therefore by that name he is
most fitly called; for life, moving, and reason all things have not, but every
Creature has his benefit of being: and therefore he takes his name from this
general benefit which is seen in all.

Another reason of this name Jehovah is taken from the perfection of this being
Exodus 3. 14. which is set down Revel. 1. 4. because he was, is, and shall be
for ever.

Therefore no Creature but God, can ever say I am, this is my name; for if a
Creature of the time that is past should say, Before Abraham was I am, John 8.
58. he should make himself God.

So if a Creature should, in respect of the future tense say, I am with you
until the end of the World, Matthew. 28. 20. he should therein make himself God,
who by propriety of nature may still say ( I am) as it is his nature; therefore
this his name Jehovah, signifies that he has the perfectest being, and only
such a being. And thus much of the reasons of his name.

Elohim signifies Power and Judgment.

The one shows his Might in doing, the other his Truth and Justice in
judging, both which in his name show, that as it was he that did make the
World, so it is he also which shall judge the World at last; for that as the
one allureth us to love, so the other yeildeth us matter of dread and fear.

So Jehovah signifies not only Hagah (which is making of things) but also
destroying and dissolving of things to nothing again, Ezech. 7. 26. where it
signifies calamity and destruction: So does his name Shaddi import not only
plenty and nourishment, but also punishment and undoing of things. So that in
all his names this nature of Mercy and Justice is expressed.

There is yet a further thing to observe; for whereas before Heaven was first
placed, and had the precedence of Earth; here the pre-eminence is given to the
Earth, and the Heaven does come behind in the last place.

Which whether it be the propriety of the tongue (which usually begins with
the latter thing was spoken of before) or a mystery to show closely, that the
Heavens were made for the Earth, and not the earth for the heavens, or whether
it darkly shadoweth out to us, that in Christ Jesus Adam (which is earth, that
is our nature) shall be exalted above the highest heavens, in the day of
restoration; I will not curiously discuss but allow each sense, as having a
good and a godly use to such as be sober minded.

Et omnem stirpem agri, etc. Verse 5.

MOses in this verse passes over the first estate of Creation, and comes now
to the state of propagation, in which things now (...), that we may know, that
these things were not only made by the power of Gods word, Coll. 1. 17. But
also sustained and held up by the same power, Heb. 1. 3. So that it is q.d. I
must give a caveat to you, because you set your eyes too much on nature and
art, attributing things now to the influence of the heaven, or the industry of
things on earth, that it is none of these means, but only God, that still (...)
rule and maintain all; for under these two rain above, and man below, is
comprehended all other ordinary means, we are wont to ascribe all things to Sol
and homo. Therefore Moses to prevent that evil, that we tie not these things
either to nature or art, but that we may ever in all things look up to God,
which is before them, above them, and can do all things without them, and will
rule all things after them, therefore he does teach us this point, he tells
us that howsoever, things do concur, and meet together in humane matters
here below, yet we must defy these ordinary means, and evermore glorify God,
who is able, either without rain or the help of man to make the earth fruitful.

Now this which Moses speaks of rain and man, holds in all other things as
in Fish, Fowl and Cattle: But because it were too tedious to reckon up all the
particulars, therefore he makes choice of the earth and the fruits thereof,
which does most need the help of man, and benefit of rain; for other things
being put together, will alone bring forth and multiply by kinds without man's
help: But the fruits of the earth are most laborious, for before the earth can
bring forth, it requires our help both to till and plant it, and the influence
also of the heavens do most appear in these things: insomuch as the fruits of
the earth may seem to reason, to be the effect of man's labor, and the dew of
heaven.

But Moses by telling us that it is not so in this, teaches us how we may have
a right judgment in all the rest, for it holds in all, as in this: touching
earthly fruits, he sets down two kinds Virgultum agri, and herbas horti.

The first comprehends all that has wood in them, the other all which have
sinowy substance, as every green tender herb has: Touching which he reasons
thus, seeing these which need most the labor of man, and seasonable rain were
brought forth by Gods power, before either rain or man ever was; Then God is
much more able to do any otherthing without the help of man or any thing else.
The fruits of the earth do need two things.

1.
First, a power of being. Secondly, a power of growing.

2.
Remove rain, and the labor of the husbandman, and we cannot see how either they
should live or grow, yet says Moses, God without either plough or showers, did
cause all things to grow out of the earth, and to bring seed, grain, and fruit.

For the meaning of this verse we must mark these three propositions.

1.
First, that the original fountain of things natural as now they stand, is
from God, and his blessing, not of ordinary means; for rain, men's art and
industry, though they be natural, yet have they a blessing and virtue from God
by which they are available. But to speak more specially of rain, 38. 28.
Asks, Quis est pater pluviae? The answer is, God, for he granted out a writ,
decree, or mandate for rain, Job. 28. 26. He gives us rain and seasonable
times, Act. 17. 26. And as it is his royal power and authority to command it,
so is it to countermand it, and to give an inhibition to restrain it, Esaias 5.
6. And lest any should make exception against him, he says, Amos 4. 6. It is I
which do cause it to rain, upon one City and not another; It is not Plannets,
nor nature, nor fortune, but God himself, Judge. 6. 37. We see both set down,
his giving out a commandment, for the ground to be wet and restraint for the
flesh and contra, seeing then it is in his only power to give or restrain,
therefore there is a prayer made, a prayer nominatim for rain, 1 Kings 8. 35.
36. And there is a special thanksgiving for this benefit, Psalm. 68. 9. And
this is the reason says St: Augustine, why God made not the rain as a sweat to
evaporate out of the ground and so to moysten the clods, but would have it
rather to ascend upwards into his place, that we might lift up our eyes, to
know and acknowledge that it comes only from him.

2.
The second royal prerogative of God is, that though we have never so much rain
or men to help; yet all is nothing worth and cannot avail without Gods blessing
does accompany it, which is showed, 1 Cor. 3. 7. Paul may plant, and Apollo may
water, there is the husbandry and rain: but both the tiller and waterer is
nothing unless God gives the increase, therefore we must see and behold God
in them all, for if when God sends rain he give not his blessing with it and
make it pluviam benedictionis, Psalm. 80. 19. Or if he send in tempestivam
pluviam unseasonable rain, nor the first nor the later rain, Ezekiell 34. 26.
Or if he send it not in plenty, Esdras 10. 9. For they had rain yet they wept
for want, or if he sends too much, what good will it do the earth?

3.
The third prerogative of God is, that God without rain can make things
fruitful, but the rain cannot do so without God: It is not these means of
tillage or rain that can do it, Deuteronomy. 8. 3. But God without them can do it, 2 Chronicles. 14. 11. It is all one with God with a few for quantity, yea with no
means to do things; a little oil and meal shall streach it self out, and
increase until rain come: So Christ in want can make five loaeves and two
fishes to feed five thousand, and so for the quality, the worst and most
unnourishing meat, which they durst not give, Daniel 1. (...). for fear lest
they should not look fair, by Gods blessing, made them look with better
countenance than the rest which fared more deliciously.

Wherefore says Daniel, Try us, for we know that God can do it without means,
or with base means, 2 Kings 4. 40. the Prophet by Gods word (without (...)
quality, yea to show Gods power) could make poysonfull meat, which is contrary
to nourishment, to nourish; he made Coloquintida to nourish them, which of it
self would excoriate the intralls, and scowre them to death.

4.
The fourth and last prerogative is not only to do all this but to make that
which is by nature clean opposite and contrary to a thing, that it shall be a
means effectually to work his effect; as the putting in salt into salt water
can make the water fresh, which is contrary to nature, for it makes fresh
water salt, 2 Kings 2. 20. So Christ by putting clay upon a blind man's eyes,
caused him to see, which was enough to make him blind, John 9. 6. The rock of
(...), which is set in repugnance to water, Numbers 20. 11. yet out of it he
caused streams to gush. And this power of God appeared most in the beginning of
the Gospel, in setting abroad Christian Religion; for as he in the beginning
out of darkness brought light, 2 Cor. 4. 6. So by men of no learning, no
authority or countenance, strength or wealth did cause the Gospel to be
planted in all the World, that we may know this Caveat to be worth the noting,
that he is the cause of things natural now in the state of generation, as he
was of things supernatural in the beginning of Creation. And that we may know
that he is able to do things above, besides, and without, yea, and sometimes
contrary to these ordinary means; that so we may be taught neither in the
want of them to despair, nor when we have plenty to be proud and presuming in
them; but ever look back to God which is above all means, and of himself, as
able to do all in all: To whom be all honor, glory, power, wisdom, and
dominion for ever and ever,

Amen.
Aut vapor ascendens e Terra, qui errigaret universam superficiem Terrae, etc.
Genesis 2. 6,7.

18 May, 1591.
TOgether with the conclusion of the works of Creation in the fourth verse, I
told you that (...), in the 5. verse, adjoined a necessary Caveat touching
second causes, lest now we should ascribe the proceeding and doing of things,
either to ordinary means or second causes, either natural as to rain, or
artificial as to men's labor and industry, which two do include all other
means whatsoever.

To this end he declared that God is the Author of second causes; and
therefore, as he did all things before them; so now they are, he is likewise
able to do and bring any thing to pass as well without them, yea with means
and by causes contrary to such an effect, as well as with all the means that
are in the course of nature, or may be invented by the industry of men.

Moses then now passes from the Creation of other things, unto the narration
of the History of Man, by the 6. verse, which shows the generation of rain,
spoken of in part before, that so there might be an ordinary proceeding from
one thing to another.

Now then to speak of them both apart.

First, Touching the Creation of the Rain, we must lay this ground, That God
either without vapors or clouds can (if he please) bring store of rain to the
Earth, 2 Kings 3. 17. which plenty by Gods power, was without wind, rain or
clouds.

But for the natural generation of Rain, we must note, that there are two
issues proceeding from the Earth, which here are set down as the causes of it.

1.
The first is a moist or foggie steem or vapor.

2.
The second a dry smoke, fume, or exhalation.

It is not wonderful that the Earth should yield a dry fume, because it is
naturally inclined to dryness: but it is strange that the Earth should give
out a moist fume, for that is contrary to her nature and qualities.

There are three estates and degrees in the generation of Rain out of the
words, 1.
The beginning and original of it is vapor expirans, a moist steem loosned from
the Earth: 2.
The proceeding of it is vapor ascendens, lifting it self into a cloud above: 3.
The perfecting of it is vapor descendens, which is the dissolving of the cloud,
and so dropping down: these are three proceedings of this generation.

God is able to rostrain this course of the rain, Job 36. 27. and might have
caused (...) not to be loosed from the Earth, (...) ascend up, but to sweat out
to moisten the dry clodds, as it is in our bodies. But God caused it to lift it
self thither, that he might water the Earth from his Chamber, Psalm. 104. 13.

But being loosned from the Earth, the nature of such a cloud is vanishing and
dissipating it self in the Air to nothing, James 4. 14. therefore God binds
it together in a cloud, and makes it a compact and condense matter, Job 26. 8.
And for the dissolving of the clouds he is said Cribrare aquas, 2 Samuel 22. 12.

And these are the three proceedings of rain, and the three degrees ingendring
it.

Finxit vero Jehova Deus hominem de pulvere terrae, sufflavitque in nares
ipsius halitum vitae: sic factus est homo anima vivens. Verse 7.

NOw touching the 7. verse, at which I said (...) the repetition of the
History of Man and his generation; That we may not trust in him nor his help,
we read, Genesis 1. 26. that Man was created, but not whence, nor how, nor after
what sort: these circumstances are not there set down; there we read that man
was made Male and Female, but the order how is not set down.

Therefore that which briefly he touched, omitting some things there, now here
he supplyeth, showing that God first made the Man, and out of his side took the
Woman.

Concerning which, having showed that Man is made the chief Creature of all the
rest, both in regard of his superior part of the soul, as also of the inferior
part of his body: and also in the end of this verse he expresses more fully
the other part of his soul; and in handling both, he observes the very order
which he used before.

First, to speak of the less perfect and more base part of the body, and then
of the soul.

Touching the body in the first part of the verse, there is two things
expressed to be considered of: 1.
First, the Matter. 2.
Secondly, the Mould in which he was made and framed in his bodily shape.

The dust is the origin and beginning of Man, which though it be often
repeated, yet God is fain in the 3. of Genesis 19. (...) tell it to Adam again to
humble him, that he may know how absurd a thing it was for him once in pride to
imagine that he should be as God, for he must needs see by this, that he should
be but an earthen God (if he were any) which is as bad as to be of stone or
wood.

The Saints of God have ever confessed this to humble them. As Abraham, Genesis
18. 27. Job 10. 9. Psalm. 104. 29. 1 Cor. 15. 47. 2 Cor. 5. 5. which does show
that we must take notice and regard of this point to humble us, that the clouds
and rain were made before us, and of a purer, more fine, and better matter than
our bodies were, for they were of the vapor of the Earth, but we of the base
and gross clod and dust of the Earth; but (...) comfort us in this thought, he
tells us, that that which is wanting in the matter, is supplied in the form
and shape of our bodies.

God, by saying, that he framed Man, speaks after the manner of men, Romans 9.
20, 21. In which phrase of speech he is (...) and resembled to a Potten, which
does frame (...) out of the Earth with his hand; and to a Maker of glasses,
which with his breath and blast of his mouth, does fashion and maker his glass
of a frail and (...) substance, by which borrowed speech Moses does (...) show
that by the one he is willing to express, that God with more art and regard,
did make man's body in the outward form, than he did any other of the Creatures.

And by the other, that God did give him a more excellent and perfect soul,
which is the inward form within, than he did to any other Creature.

To this end he changes the word gnasha, used in making the other Creatures,
into Jelsar, which he applies properly to man; and we know that formare is
more than facere, because the form and fashion imports a mould in which it
must be made, or an especial Idea artificially conceived, after which it must
be made. It is therefore (as if he should say) you see that man is not made
outwardly in the proportion and countenance, which beasts have, for his face is
upwards, theirs downwards. That which the Earth brought forth looks down to
the ground; but those men which God made, do look up naturally to God who made
them and and gave them life. That which the Earth does producere, does also
prospicere terram. But we whom God did formare, do intueri Coelum.

The Prophets and Apostles do oftentimes delight to use this phrase of speech,
and these words, to show the framing of our bodies, now as Esaias 45. 9. Esdras
64. 8. Zach. 12. Romans 9. 20. Job 10. 9. Psalm. 139. 16. Jer. 1. 5. and diverse
other places, in which places they so speak, to show that the same frame and
fashion is now expressed in generation of us, as was in the creation of Adam,
and no other manner.

In the 4. of Job 19. he says that brick and tile, and we all, are made of
one, and the matter of the Earth: And therefore that which Saint Peter calls
Earthly Tabernacles, 2 Cor. 5. 1. Job calls plainly houses of Clay. That
which St. Paul in a better term says; Act. 17. 26. We are all of one blood,
Job says more plainly to the matter, Job 33. 6. We are all de eodem luto, made
of the same clay.

Esaias 29. 16. and 45. 9. Romans 9. 20. They demand whether it be reason, that the
clay should say to the potter, Why do thou make me thus or thus? to show that
we must avoid wandering curiosity and nice questioning to expostulate with the
maker, either about the matter, Why he made thee of this, and not of that? or
about the form, Why he made this man a Vessel of honor, and that man a
Vessel of dishonor? Romans 9. 20. 21. 2 Timothy 2. 20. 1 These. 4. 4, 5. We must not
search nor pry over curiously into the counsel of the Potter that made us, but
know that his revealed will is, that every one of us should possess our
vessels in bolinesse, and not in sin, and sorest.

The use of this is that which I have touched before, that seeing we be made of
Earth, yet that Earth signifies good and profitable mold; we were not made of
highway ground or sand, therefore we must not be unconstant or unstable; but
we are made of gleabe, to teach us to employ our selves profitably in our
calling, according to the matter of which we came; for else it had been better
that our Earth had lien still on the ground, to bring herbs rather than it
should now lie unprofitably and idly, in thy skin, to destroy the fruits of the
Earth.

Another point for us is, that which partly was showed also before, That if God
could frame us to this proportion and life, out of the dead dust, then why
should we once doubt, but that though we be dissolved and turned into dust
again, that he can raise us up by the same power? Phil. 3. 21. And this is our
hope for the resurrection.

Wherefore though this be our conclusion, Job 7. 21. we must return to our
dust, yet this hope is our comfort that God will one day say, Esaias 26. 19.
Arise out of the dust and stand up, even as he every year raises up the
flowers that were withered in the field, and this was Jobs hope and comfort of
the resurrection, Job 19. 26. saying, I know that my redeemer lives, etc. And
it was David's assurance, Psalm. 37. 5. Who at his death committed his soul to
the God of truth his Redeemer, And Psalm. 16. 9. does then let his flesh rest in
peace until he be awaked again.

This then is our stay in death, knowing that the same God which made us of the
dust, has the same power, and is able to raise us out of the dust again.

The second part of man is the Soul: touching which the Prophet by his phrase
of breathing into us the breath of life, is willing not only to tell us, that
the Soul is the more principal, superior, and excellent part of man, but also
that it is far a more excellent Soul, than the other creatures had, as shall
appear by the name and nature of it, here expressed.

1.
In the first part, of which we are to note, that Neshema, signifies a Spirit
of two lives, which God inspired into man.

2.
Secondly he says, That that Spirit of lives, was made a living Soul, neither
of which is affirmed of any other creature, but of the soul of man only.

In Genesis 1. 21. 25. We may see that of every other creatures soul, it is said
creavit Deus; God did beath the soul of man into him: Chrysostom says well,
that the Soul of all other things is, quasi cera rudis, as a rude roll of wax
without form or print; but anima hominis est cera regis, as a piece of wax
that has in it the shape or form of the King, and is made his Seal, out of
which for the prerogative of man, which we showed before, we may ad these.

First in respect of the substance, for Neshema signifies a spiritual and
heavenly substance, which consideration made David say, Psalm. 139. 14. I am
fearfully and wonderfully made, we have not then an earthly soul, as the
Beasts, nor a watery soul as the Fifties, which received them out of their
elements, but a divine and (...) Soul, which God himself gave unto us, Preach.
12. 7. As the rain is vapor terrestris, so our soul may be called vapor
caelestis, a vapor descending from the heavens, for it is of the same root and
nature, which heavenly Spirits are.

Another privilege is in respect of the cause, for God is the cause of it,
produxit Deus, it was his breath or inspiration, and therefore the Heathen
called it Divinae particulam (...), as the body was particula terra, a little
cantell of the Earth. Solomon, Prove. 12. 17. calls it Divina lux or lucerna
Dei, as it were the candle of God, and here it is spiritus Dei, which he
breathed into our bodies.

Now to consider of the words somewhat more seriously, we see that the soul, is
a breath, but so that it is Neshema, a spiritual and celestial breath, which
properly is understood of the wind and air, by which we see that is next of
kynne to the Spirits which have no body, as our bodies are next of kynne to the
worms that are in the earth, which soul for that cause is invisible but not
unperceiveable.

As we cannot see the wind and the pulse, yet we perceive them by diverse
effects: So is our Soul and the excellency of it made known and discerned. And
that it might not be imagined or thought, to be only a bare blast of breath, or
as a puff of wind, he therefore adds a spirit of lives.

And least we should deem the soul, and the life to be but one thing, and to
end and vanish away together, Job tells us 27. 3. that the spirit or soul of
a man is one thing, and (...) life is another distinct.

Though there be a spirit of life in beasts, and not only in earthly creatures,
but also in celestial spirits, yet only the spirit of man is spiritus vitarum,
that is, of more lives than one, which our Savior Christ tells us in Matthew.
10. 28. Men may take away the one life of our body, but they cannot the other
life of the soul, that is only in Gods power.

This then is the difference between the soul of a man, and all other things,
which confuteth the Epicures, 1.
which held that the Soul was but a hot salt humor, to keep the body from
rottenness and corruption.

Moses makes choice to compare the Soul to breath: First, because it has a
piercing and a searching quality, being Totus in toto and totus in qualibet
part, Pro. 27. 2.
This candle of the Soul diffuseth his light, and heat, and life in every
member, searching and piercing all.

Secondly, the Soul is compared to breath, to humble us and not make us presume
on this life, seeing the soul and body is but knit and conjoined together,
vinculo aereo by an airie thread, Esaias 2. 22. Man's breath is in his nostrills,
which being stopped, his life is gone, Psalm. 103. 14. 15. which causes our
life suddenly oftentimes; to be taken away, and our soul and our body in an
instant or moment, to depart a sunder, Psalm. 78. 39. Even because the union
that holds soul and dody together, is but a little blast of air and wind
easily broken and smitten asunder, so suddenly do we pass away and are gone.

This may teach us the shortness and sodainnesse of this life and death: The
use of which is, that seeing we received our life from God, therefore we must
now live, the life of all godliness, seeing we live by the spirit of God
naturally, we must seek for the spirit of God, and the graces of it, that we
may live holily: seeing our Soul is the light of God, let not this light become
darkness in us, for then great is that darkness.

Seeing our Soul is the Image of God, we must not deface it, with the ugly form
of Satan: The holy man, Job 26. 4. hearing his friends speak foolish and vain
words, asks; (...) spirit comes out of them? As who should say: seeing you
have the spirit of God, speak not such words, as if an evil or vain spirit
were in them: So must we say to those men that do evil works, Whose spirit,
or what spirit have thou in thee? These deeds are the works of evil Spirits,
but thou had in thee the good spirit of God.

2.
Now we are come to the second estate of our soul, which is set down in this. So
man became a living Soul, which is added to show that God not only gave that
spirit (inspired into him) a power of life, by which it could live, but also
another power unto the body, which before was a dead piece of Earth: wherefore
the soul being in every part of the body so made, by and by it was lively in
every part, and stood up and performed the actions of life, which now it does
in us: This is a good and profitable sense of these words, as some do
understand. But the best Divines (weighing these words more deeply) do find
out another state of the soul, which shows another privilege of the soul of
man. For besides that it is (as we have seen) a spiritual essence occupied in
spiritual actions, being immortal and pertaining and leading to another life.
Besides this special privilege it has here also another common prerogative,
namely, to inform the body; that is, in a word, besides being a spiritual
essence, it is also a natural essence, it had, has, and shall have a power to
live without the body, and also it has a power in the body to quicken and give
life to it, and every part thereof, that is, it can animare and informare
corpus, which we know the Angels and celestial spirits cannot; for when they
appear in a body, their souls of life (though they live) yet they do not
inform that body; but they are in it as in a Case, which they take to them and
leave off again. But our soul is not only a spiritual essence and consistence
(as the Angels) but also a natural consistence in the body to inform and
animate it, which the Angels have not. And this is the other prerogative.

There is none that do doubt, but they have naturalem animam, and thereof they
are called naturales homines, 1 Cor. 15. 46. But by their actions one would
think that their souls were only fleshie souls, because they never give them
selves to spiritual and heavenly actions, as a Celestial spirit shall move
them. But only they are given to actions of this bodily life, which is
temporal, yea to earthly, fleshie and sinful actions, as if the soul that
were in them were but after that fort a natural soul of life for a time.

They see by their natural studies, senses, motions, and actions, that they
have a natural soul of life quickening the body, which else could not live. But
they think not that it is a spiritual soul and heavenly essence, which shall
have an eternal being after this life, and therefore they never care to (...)
for such heavenly and spiritual actions of Godliness; wherefore we will
briefly prove and show that the state of the soul is celestial and (...), that
we may be moved to think of such actions as that estate does require.

And first that the soul, and the life, and estate thereof does not depend upon
the body, but has his being and life without the body, after the body is dead
and turned to the Earth, because it has his dependence on God, which is
immortal and eternal, which appears to reason in the judgment of the
Heathen, because the soul has in the will a power and faculty and ability to
effect and perfect an action, without any help of the body or power thereof
separately of himself, yea it causes a man to believe and know many things of
it self, even against the bodily senses, and contrary to them, as that the
bigness of the Sun and Moon is of a huge greatness, though it seem to our
sense but two foot, yea the same power of the soul causes us to desire many
things contrary to the outward sense, as that it is healthful sometimes to
fast and eat nothing, etc. Now of this they conclude that of these things there
must needs be principium agendi where there is potest as agendi; and therefore
a separate essence and being of the Agent Cause: Thus by this separate action
the Heathen rose up to this notice of the separate essence of the soul.

Again, the moving of this question, Whether there be a God and eternity, and a
Heaven and spirits. This we know, that there is no outward thing which gives
occasion to our senses to move this question, therefore the principium movendi
is the power of the soul in reason, who alone by his own light, according to
the state of his own nature moves these things; for a blind man that never
saw nor heard of colors, can never in reason make question of colors; So for as
much as there is nothing without to tell or move him to this, they conclude
that the soul only was the cause and beginning of it within.

Touching the coupling of soul and body together into one living Man, we know
that Gods purpose and meaning in it was, that the soul should rule the body,
and be a means to lift it up to Heaven and to God, that it might so be made of
the same excellent nature and estate which the soul had. But now it is
perverted, and by sin the course of nature and ordinance of God is changed,
and naturally our body does labor to pull down the soul, and make it earthly,
base, and miserable. But by grace we must endevor the contrary; it is Gods
will it should be so, and no reason to the contrary: But men seem by the care
and cost they bestow on the body, that the soul is worthy no care or cost at
all. But we must remember that many things and much time must be bestowed in
seeking to garnish our souls, Matthew. 6. 20. We must lay up treasure in Heaven,
Matthew. 19. 21. We must make friends of this Mammon, and put out our money to
the Exchangers, Luke 16. 9. for it is to lend to the Lord, and if there be any
truth in him, he will repay it to their soul, Prove. 19. 17. If we sow in the
flesh, the fruit of all that is but corruption; but that which we sow in the
soul and spirit has his fruit to be glory and immortality: and this is the
point which we are to cleave unto and hold.

You know how little we bestow on spiritual uses for the soul, and how much
daily we spend on our bodies; therefore I am an Intercessor to you for poor men
made de eodem luto and de (...) imagine, beseeching you that it may please you,
both in regard of the honor of God, who made us and them to this end, that we
which have should do good to them which have not, and in regard of Gods Image
in them, of whom we should have a care; and also in regard of our own duty of
employing our goods, of which God has made us Stewards, and of the reward and
gain which God will repay for it.

That therefore you would extend your liberality to their relief, Our Doctrine
is rain, Deuteronomy. 32. 2. If you as barren ground drink in the rain, and yield no
fruit, you may fear a curse, Heb. 6. 7, 8. But if you yield the fruit of
righteousness, then Gods blessing in this life is still to minister food and
all other things to you, and at the last, the end of it is everlasting life:
Wherefore, to the end we may show our selves not altogether earthly and
carnally minded, minding only earthly and bodily things, and things which make
only for this short life, let us in the fear of God, and love of our Brethren,
put on the tender bowels of compassion for their relief.

Ornaverat autem plantis Jehova Deus hortum in Hedene ab Orient: ubi
collocavit hominem illum quem finxerat. Genesis 2. 8.

June 5. 1591.
FRom the 7. verse of this Chapter unto the 18. thereof, Moses, as I have said
before, does deliver and add a supplement unto the history of man; for having
first, Genesis 27. briefly dispatched the Creation of Man, under these short terms
Marem and Foeminam creavit eum, he lightly passed it over there, purposing here
in this place to handle it more at large, and therefore he divides the treaty
here into two parts.

First prosecuting the History of Man from the 7. verse to the 18. verse; and
then of the Woman from thence to the end of the Chapter, he left out many
things there, which he expresses here, As in the 7. verse he shows the
matter of his body, and the pattern after which he was made, and the separate
substance of his soul: The manner of making of his body was as the Potters
frame the vessels; and the manner of making the soul was by inspiration
breathing it into him.

Now in this verse unto the 15. verse, he describes and sets down the place
in which he was settled; and from thence to the 18. verse, delivers the end to
which he was made: And thus are these verses, touching the gloss or
Commentary of the history of Man, reserved.

Touching this 8. verse, it consists of two parts.

1.
The first respects the place.

2.
The second, the placing or bestowing man in it.

The place contains three parts.

1.
First, The kind of place, a Garden.

2.
Secondly, The dignity of the place (as I may term it) in that it is said ( God
planted it.)

3.
Thirdly, The situation of the place, which is also described in the 6. verses
following.

Concerning the first of these three, we see the place wherein this Creature of
excellency is to be seated, we must needs conceive it to be some place of
excellency meet for him, and that either to be some place of pleasure within
door, or else some place of pleasure without, but there was no need for him to
have any place of covert or defense within, because there was no such
distemperature of air then; but that they might well enough, yea best of all
endure naked, therefore God resolves to appoint and prepare a meet place
without.

Certain it is, that all the Earth at that time was (in comparison of this as
it is now vallis lachrimarum) a paradise of pleasure; yet God made this
paradise and special place of the Earth, a more excellent place of pleasure
than any other, in so much that it far exceeded any other place wheresoever
in Earth, both in pleasure and profit, with Herbs, Flowers, Plants, and Trees
of all sorts, which were proper and special to that place alone. Gardens, as
we know are choice places, severed and set apart from common fields, in which
is store and plenty of many choice trees, and that not in confused sort, but
digested into a good seemly order, that so it may the better serve for pleasure
and delight.

It was a most pleasant place in respect of those tria bonorum genera, for he
ordained this place for profit, pleasure, and piety: And thus having made it,
he appointed it several for man, and therefore put him therein; Kings
themselves, as we see, 1 Reg. 21. 2. do not take so much delight in their
Royal Palaces, as in their Gardens of pleasure lying commodiously near their
houses: And we read of diverse Kings, which being weary of their princely
estates and delights, have chosen rather to live solitary in gardens and
orchards, and to bestow their time in trimming and planting them, and so to
have ended their lives, seeming to prefer this life of Adam in a garden
before the state of a King in his princely Palace.

And let this suffice of the kind of place.

Now secondly it was planted by God, which tends much to the dignity and
honor both of the man and of the place; for as God is said, for our service and
good, to translate himself into diverse shapes; As before he took on him the
form and behavior of a Potter, and a maker of Glasses; so here he is resembled
unto us by the name of a Gardener to plant an Orchard for us and our use: to
which end Christ represented and showed himself in that shape and form, John
20. 15. for it was he that trimmed up this Garden of Paradise for us.

Touching this place it is a special honor to it, that God did plant it, for
where he planteth he waters also, with the dew of his blessings, and causes
it to give increase, 1 Cor. 3. 6. and therefore when the Scriptures will
express a place of dignity and commendation in this kind, it is said to be
like this Garden of Eden, as Genesis 13. 10. Esaias 51. 3. Ezech. 31. 9.

Touching the word we must note that as before God does, (...) dicere propter
infirmitatem nostram, so we say in this place where God is said to plant; for
we say in divinity, that there is opus actus and opus authoritatis: In Preach.
2. 4, 5. Solomon is said to plant such Orchards and Gardens, and to build
houses; not that he did it himself, for no man will imagine that he did any
part of the bodily work: But it is said, as we say, such Kings builded this
Church, that is, they paid the charge, and we (at the cost of the founders and
by their authority) set workmen in hand about it; therefore when God is said
to plant this Garden, we must understand it, that God gave order and
commandment by his word and power, that it should thus be planted, why then it
is not said, as in the 1. Genesis 24. producat terra, etc. I answer that this
exquisite term is set down, to (...) the exact and special workmanship, and
more than ordinary course of making this Garden, as before to show the
extraordinary and special workmanship of God in making Man above the rest of
the Creatures, he changed the term, and took, instead of fecit, formavit, not
expiscavit; he spanned not, sed (...), breathed: So to show the (...) and
excellency of this place over all other places in the Earth; therefore he
alters the phrase of speech, and says not as before produxit plantas, sed
(...), etc. as if he had signified thereby that this only place of all the
Earth, was with care and special skill ordered and disposed for special
delight, as if other places of the Earth did bear and bring forth of their own
accord, but this was planted and dressed for this more special purpose.

There is no Garden of estate, as they say, but has a Maze in it; So surely
has this garden of God an intricate labyrinch of difficult questions, even
Mare questionum, a Sea of curious questions, as one of the Fathers says, but
such idle speculative heads, which busy their brains about such needless and
endless questions and curious points, as to know where the place is, and what
is become of it now, etc. they shall never find out any good in Paradise, but
(...) and amaze themselves in this Maze.

There are such, and I may say with the Propher, I pray God there be not such
found amongst us in Israel, for there are with us and in our age which draw
every thing to a figurative sense, and by that means of Gods Paradise, they do
make (as I may say) a (...) Paradise, expounding every thing in it
allegorically in another sense, as they do the book of the Canticles.

The Fathers distinguish the Scriptures after two (...) in (...) Chron. and
Cant. In the Canticles and Scriptures of that nature every thing is to be
reduced to a spiritual allusion and reference which it has to the spousage of
Christ and his Church.

Now they which take the Chronicles, containing matter of history, and draw
them to like allusions (besides that they do great wrong to those Scriptures)
they make themselves very ridiculous. Such there were in St. Paul's days, as he
testifies, 2 Timothy 2. 18. which made the doctrine of the resurrection an
allegory, affirming that if a man do rise from sin, then all the
Resurrection was past already.

So Origin drew Hell to an Allegory, as if there were no such true and certain
place.

But touching Paradise, Epiphanius, Chrysostom, and all the Writers, do
oppose themselves to such Allegorizers and Wresters of the Scriptures, to
overthrow their fantastical conceits herein; for what say they, though other
places besides this be called Paradise, therefore was there no such place
indeed. Because S. Paul says Gal. 4. 24. that by Sara and Hagar are signified
the old and new Testament; therefore shall we say, there were never any such
two women, 1 Cor. 10. 4. because that rock was Christ, was there therefore no
such rock as is spoken of Numb. 20. 11. Yes, no doubt, and because they were,
therefore the Spirit of God does take a proportion and an Analogy fitly, and
show it between these spiritual things, and them for our better understanding.
We do conclude then, that as there is in man two natures, as we have showed
before, the one consisting of the dust, the other Neshema, a spiritual separate
essence: So Christ is a person consisting of two natures, God and Man: So that
the first Adams resemblance to the second Adam, which is Christ, 1 Cor. 15. 45.
And as a man is said to consist of two men, the inward and the outward man, 2
Cor. 4. 16. So there are two Paradises of Gods planting spoken of in the
Scriptures, Esaias 51. 16. the heavenly and the earthly.

This is truth, there is a Paradise of Angels, Psalm. 103. 20. by which is meant
the joys of Heaven, of which man also (communicating in this life with their
holiness) shall be made partaker in the life to come, yet notwithstanding it
is as true that there is an historical Paradise on Earth, which is truly
called the Garden of the Lords planting, garnished with all trees for delight
and profit. It is no question but that man had his Interest then in both these
Paradises, and that above is far more excellent and glorious than this below
when it was in his best estate; wherefore we must so place the one which is
spiritual and invisible, as that we take not away the other which was visible
and temporal.

For Adams posterity dwelt near to Eden afterward, and serves in the
Scriptures to describe their certain places, by 4. Genesis 16. For Cain dwelt
toward the East side of this Garden Eden, and the South side of it was a Plot,
which, after the flood, Noah chose as the best soil to dwell in, Esaias 37. 12.

The Merchants which dwelt thereabouts and were planted about Eden had all
manner of (...) commodities as we read, Ezech, 27. 23. All which places were in
Asia, which as we know is the most (...) and fruitful part of all the world,
being set at the right hand of the earth, as having the pre-eminence of it, for
our right parts are most apt for motion or doing any action, and men do (...)
that people were first in Asia inhabiting it, and from thence came to all other
parts of the earth.

This also for the certainty of the place, is set out by the description of
Rivers which have their heads there, and flow from thence (...) other parts.
Also by the fruits of the earth, which abound there, as Gold, Precious stones,
Spices, etc.

Also the certainty of the particular place where this garden was, is made
known to man by the description of the obstacle and let, which keeps men out
of that place, for as Pliny and Toletus say, in fontibus Paradisi even in the
entrance, by which we should go to it, even unto this day, the place yields
out flames of fire, which no doubt is the fiery Sword which God placed there,
Genesis 3. 24.

We find by writers, that it was near the City called Babilonia (...) And that
three Cities in the (...) of Eden were builded and planted upon three of the
Rivers, which ran out of the Garden which Cities were called Babilonia (...)
and (...) which were builded there in Eden for the great store of all fruits,
which by Gods blessing abounded, for it is recorded that they had harvest twice
a year, and before the first harvest they were fain to eat it twice, so
exceeding fertile it was.

That which is set down to be the greatest and rare increase of Gods blessing,
Genesis 28. 12. Pliny records, was an usual and ordinary increase in those
parts, that is, to yield a hundred fold. And whereas it is usual amongst our
husbandmen to hearten and make fat our land, their industry and labor was
contrary, to take away the heart and strength of the ground and to prevent the
rankness of it, for the which they had barren waters (contrary to the nature
of Nilus) wherewith they watered their ground, because otherwise the ears of
Corn would be so great and weighty, that the stalk could not bear it.

These things remaining as yet in Eden, near about the borders of the Garden,
by the testimony both of the Scriptures, and of all other writers, do prove
unto us that there is such a certain and undoubted place upon the earth.

The word Eden does signify pleasure, Gen 13. 10. which does show us, that all
the Country was pleasant and delightful, and therefore the Garden of Eden, is
showed thereby to deserve the name of pleasure it self, as we shall see
hereafter both in respect of the pleasant Waters and Rivers, as also of the
pleasant Air, for in the 3. Chap. it is said that God did walk in it, as also
in respect of the most rare and delightful sent, verse 9. not only for Flowers
and Trees but for Spices, precious Stones, and Metals which grew (...) of their
own accord, as also in respect of the pleasant prospect and view of the place,
being as it were a hollow bottom, as Balaam describes this Garden, Numb. 24. 6.

Thus we have seen the seat of man, the kind of place, the dignity and
situation of it.

Secundae pars generalis.
Now for the placing of man in it, Deus locavit hominem quem formavit in horto
quem plantavit, for after man was made, God removed and brought him hither into
Eden, and put him in the Garden, 15. verse, God says, Levit. 25. 23. quoniam
terra mea est, and vos Coloni estis, etc. So this Garden was Gods planting and
his ground, Adam was a forreiner and brought in to be Gods Farmer and Tenant in
it, that Adam (not being born in it) might know that God which placed him
there, was the right and only true owner of it, and therefore all homage was to
be performed to him alone, for this taught him that Paradise, was vos gratiae,
non naturae, for God might have left him in the place, where first he made him;
Seeing then God of his free Grace brought him thither, it was not of desert or
merit, because as yet there was no Law given unto him, until after he was put
in possession of it.

This then teaches him thankfulness and obedience, in that it was without any
desert of his.

Secondly, it might teach him, that as he was in mercy brought in, so he might
in Justice be cast out, if he sinned and became ungrateful.

Wherefore we see that as it was Gods great favor, by which he was brought
hither, so when he had transgressed, there was no wrong or rigor showed in
thrusting him out again.

God first planted the senses in man, Psalm. 94. 9. And then he planted a
Garden, this is the first order; and another order he took, which is this, that
they whom he planted in the Garden, Psalm. 92. 13. 14. might strive with
Paradise in fruitfulness, that seeing God had caused Paradise not to be barren
or unfruitful to us Jer. 2. 27. Therefore we should not be a wilderness unto
God, but to be plentiful in good works being thus graciously planted in Gods
Church.

Concerning Paradise now we must know, it was not the deluge, but the cause of
the deluge, that is sin, which took away the excellency of Paradise as is
here mentioned.

But you will ask what is become of it now? This question may be well left out,
because as St. Augustine says, there is no use of it in regard of our
habitation, but of our instruction; this, for use, we see and learn, that Adam
did loose that happy place of joy by negligence, sin, ungratefulness, and
unbelief, therefore let us beware lest the like sins, make us loose the hope
and fruition of our Paradise in Heaven, but let us detest such detestable vices
which will cause men to lose such excellent glory, yet though we have all lost
these pleasures of Paradise by Adams fall, we need not, with too much sorrow
lament it, because that was temporal and not permanent, and we are put in
assurance through Christ of another Paradise much better, being eternal.

In respect of which, this below was a shadow and nothing else but quasi
vestibulum, and this first Paradise was but a show of such store of earthly
pleasures and blessings which God is able to bestow on his servan (...) in this
World. So Luke 23. 43. the second Paradise has in it a show and view of
heavenly pleasures and delights spiritual, which he will bestow on us in the
world to come. And as by the default of the first earthly Adam, we lost earthly
Paradise, which was temporal; So by the second Adam, which is heavenly, and
his rightcousnesse, we have hope of that heavenly Paradise which is eternal.
Again, as the sin of the first Adam did lock and chain up the first Paradise;
So the second Adam shall open the gate of Heaven, and make an entrance of free
passage thither. As this Paradise past was a bodily place for bodies; so the
other to come is the spiritual Paradise for our souls: This is Paradisus
veteris Testamenti, but that to come is foederis novi. And thus we must
understand all the places of the new Testament, which speak of Paradise now,
for by it are meant the joys of Heaven.

Seeing then we are not left destitute of a Paradise, but have the promise of
one which is more excellent than that, let us not fall into the same sins of
ingratitude and infidelity which we see was the cause of driving Adam out of
that Paradise, and will be the cause to keep us out of the second which is to
come, for no unclean person shall enter into it, 1 Cor. 15. for Christ will say
to such, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, Matthew. 7. 23. Wherefore these
sins must be detested, and infidelity, as the root of all; for his believing
the Devils nequaquam moriemini before Gods morte moriemini, was the cause of
his fall and of his loss.

Thus if we beware of this fall and loss, we shall at last not only come to
that Sabbatum cum intermissione, which was but once a week, but to that
Sabbatum sine intermissione, which Christ has appointed for us, and then by
Christ we shall be brought and placed, not in Paradise cum amissione, but sine
amissione, which is eternal in Heaven: In which place we shall enjoy an
everlasting Sabbath of repose and rest without any ceasing, and of such a
Paradise of pleasures as are without fear or danger of losing, as these earthly
ones were. All these things are provided for us all, if we demean and behave
our selves holily in the faithful steps of the second Adam.

Feceratque Jehova Deus ut germinaret e terra illa quaevis arbor desiderabilis
ad adspectum, and bona ad cibum: arbor quoque vitae in horto illo, and arbor
scientiae boni and mali. Genesis 2. 9.

June 8. 1591.
AFter the more particular setting down of the essentials of Man (being created)
in the 7. verse, I told you that Moses proceeds to set down the place in
which man was seated, from the 8. verse to the end of the 14. And the vocation
in which he was to be employed, from the 14. to the 18. verse.

2.
Touching the place we considered two privileges expressed, etc. 1.
One in regard of the situation of the Garden, being in the East or right side
of Eden.

2.
The other in regard of the Gardener which was God.

Now he goes forward to commend the Garden in another respect, namely of the
Trees and Plants, which were in it set down in this 9. verse: And also in
respect of the waters in the 10. and 11 verles, by which he tells us, that it
was both a well planted and a well watered Garden, and therefore could not
choose but be pleasant and profitable.

Concerning the plants and trees in it, first he propounds it in general, and
then in special, marking out two kinds of fruits by name, as the tree of life,
and the (...) of knowledge: Here are two kinds of commendations of the trees
and planting it.

1.
The first respects the excellency of the fruit that were both pleasant to the
eye and good for taste.

2.
Secondly, In regard of the plenty and variety, in that there was of every kind
and sort, that nothing might be missing in it, God made it Nemus, a grove of
pleasant trees good for shadow, and also Hortus, an Orchard of good trees for
our use and service, that we might not only rest under the shadow, but reach
out for the fruit to taste thereof. Both these degrees of excellency are
applied and attributed to this Garden and to the trees thereof.

Touching pleasure and delight, we know that there is voluptas remota and
voluptas conjuncta, the one removed far off, but being (...) unto us, applied
to the sense, is very good, and that is the delight of raste; for the eye has
its delight, though the object be remote, but the taste has no pleasure if the
object be not applied. The one delight is transitory; for that which is
pleasant for taste when we eat it it is consumed and wasted away in the use of
it, but the other pleasure of the eye is perdurable and lasts not only while
we look on it, but remains long after as delightful still. God then in this
Garden joined both these delights and excellencies together, making both
concur, that evermore the trees should be and speciosae and fructiferae, Jer.
11. 16. Thus much of the excellency.

Now I come to the plenty and variety of trees (for it is said) that out of the
ground God made to grow every tree, that is, every kind of tree pleasant to
the sight and good for meat, which is a special commendation; for as the
Heathen man says Non omnis fert omnis tellus: Therefore Solomon was fain to
send to Hyram for Cedar trees, which his Country afforded not, and Hyram was
fain to send to Solomon for Wheat and Olives, because his Country either
wanted that, or else it bare not plenty that year, 1 Reg. 15. 10.

So that all Countries, even the best and most fruitful, have not all sorts of
commodities, but are driven to have enterchange for supply. Only this place of
Paradise had plentiful store of all kinds of fruit, and wanted nothing: So
that we may truly say of this garden as it is said of Salomons time, there came
never in any place such trees and such plenty of all as was here, 1 Reg. 10.
12. This then shows the bounty and liberality of God, for he dealt not with
us sparingly nor with any envious eye, but poured out the abundance of his
blessings on him in this happy place, which shows Adam in all justice worthy
to be condemned as filius mortis, 2 Samuel 12. 5. in that he having such infinite
store of all good trees that were, yet was not content, but did impiously and
ungratefully take away and steal from him which had but only one tree.

From both these we gather, that it is not lawful in respect of Gods will nor
against the Law of nature, but it is allowed and permitted to man in the estate
of innocence to desire and to use and enjoy both plenty and variety of Gods
blessing here on Earth which are pleasant and good, that is, such good
Creatures which may serve for delight and profit: David Psalm. 23. 5. gives God
thanks for both, for God gave him balm, which is a thing for pleasure, and an
overrunning cup, which is for plenty: And Solomon, 2 Chro. 9. 21. and in the 1
King. 10. 22. when his Navy went to Ophir, he took order, according to the
wisdom God gave him, that they should bring him Apes, Peacocks, and Parrots,
etc. which we know are only for delight and has a use for pleasure, so he had
both a desire and fruition of such things, and our savior Christ, which is
wiser than Solomon, John 18. 2. he often resorted to and reposed himself in a
garden and took pleasure therein; and Luke 24. 43. there we see he cate of an
honey-Combe for the pleasure of taste; and St. Augustine gives this reason,
because God caused Bees not to gather honey for the wicked only, but for the
godly also.

The desire then and the use is lawful, only we must take this Caveat by the
way, and beware that we long not after the forbidden Tree, that is, that we
(both in respect of our wills and desires, in regard of the means to obtain and
get these things, and also of the use and enjoying them) must beware, that we
do not that which is forbidden: for to desire those things in affection
immoderately, to seek them by evil means inordinately and indiscreatly, or to
use them in excess unthankfully, is the abusing and making them evil unto us.
And let this suffice for the first part.

Now for walking about the Garden, Moses here calls us into the midst of it,
and we know that usually in the midst of their places of pleasure men will
have some curious devise, so God applying himself to the nature of men, is said
to have a special matter of purpose in the midst, which Moses will have us
now see and consider. We read in the 1 Cron. 16. 1. that in the middle of the
Temple, and in the midst of the middle part God caused the Cherubins and the
Ark to be set, where his glory and presence did most appear, for there he
contriveth and conveyeth the most excellent things in all Paradise, and sets
them in the midst thereof to be seen which were no where else (that is to say,
the tree of life, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil, which he
expresses by name, as for all the rest, he hudleth them up in a general term,
as not worthy the naming in respect of this.

Touching which two St. Austin says well, that we must note that they came out
of the ground, not out of the Air, that is, they were not fantastical trees,
as some men have imagined, but very true and substantial trees as the rest, not
differing, but only this in prerogative and special fruit, which by Gods
blessing they brought forth, fructus erat non ex natura arboris, sed ex gratia
Creatoris, as e contra, it was not an evil or hurtful tree, ex voluntate
plantantis, sed ex culpa comedentis; for by Adams sin it became deadly: We
see then that as Paradise was a natural place, though it had reference to a
spiritual place; for in this tree of life is both matter of History, which
proves the very true and essential being of it, and yet withal matter of
mystery: For as it is a true use to be applied to the body and natural life to
maintain it; So besides that History, in it was a mystery to signify a
heavenly matter, to be spiritually applied to our souls, as the Scriptures do
teach: And in these two respects we shall have a perfect comprehension of these
trees in the midst.

Touching the tree of life and the corporal use of it, we must remember that it
is said in the 7. verse, that God gave man a spirit of life, and made him a
living soul, that is, such a soul which could give life to every part in the
body, with the functions and faculties thereof, as to eat and drink, to move,
go, and stir, which the soul of Beasts also gives to them naturally.

Touching the natural life and living soul of Man, all Physicians do well
agree with divinity in this, that it stands in two points, and that there
were two causes ordained by God, by which it should be maintained or impaired,
the one is set down Deuteronomy. 34. 7. Humidum radicale, the natural vigor and
strength of nature in moisture; the other is called Calor naturalis, 1 Reg. 1.
1, 2. that is, natural heat: So long as they two are perfect and sound, the
bodily life does continue perfect; but when there is a defect or decay of them,
then the natural life does cease and end.

Wherefore God takes order that by eating and drinking there should be a
supply of that natural moisture, which should be spent in us by travail and
labor, Jer. 18. 15. And therefore it is called a refection and recovering by
food that moisture which before has been decayed in us, now because the
moisture and juice which comes of meats and drinks, would at last by often
mixture, become unperfect, as water being mixed with wine is worse, therefore
God gave this tree of life, for man's bodily use, that whatsoever natural
defect might grow in these two, yet the fruit of this tree shall be as balm, as
it were, to preserve his bodily constitution in the first perfect good estate
of health.

Secondly, though there be no decay of moisture, or that yet sin, which is
the sting of death, might impair or destroy this immortal life, 2 Chronicles. 15.
16. For when God does punish or chastise man, for sin, then even as a moth
fretteth a garment, so does sin consume our life, Psalm. 39. 11. Therefore God
ordained also the other tree of knowledge to a remedy for that, that as the
body should be sustained by that corporal fruit of life, so his heart also
might be propped up or upheld by grace, Heb. 13. 9. which this tree of
knowledge did teach him to apprehend: And thus much of the corporal use of
these trees, which were truly in the Garden as this History does show.

Now for the other part it is not to be doubted, but that as it has a true
matter of history: So it has in it also a spiritual mystery to be understood
as the Scriptures well teach us. Augustine says, that the tree of life, served
not only ad alimenta, sed etiam ad sacramenta for doubtless as Adam in his
estate of innocence had a bodily Sabbath, so therein he had a spiritual use of
these trees in the midst of the Garden, and that in this sort.

First, for the tree of life it was not so called, as if it gave life to him,
for God breathed that into him at the first; But besides that, the tree of life
was a means to preserve it; It was also a Symbolum, and memorial also to put
him in mind, to know that it was not (...) virtute arboris; but vi and virtute
divina, by which he had life at first, and by which his life and length of
days shall be continued hereafter. In the midst of the Garden was the
Pulpit, and this is the Sermon which was preached unto him, by these things
which the trees did represent, namely, That God was his life and length of
days, (...). 30. 20. And that this gracious visitation did preserve his life,
Job 10. 12. As he breathed out his life into him at the first: Again, it did
put him in mind, that seeing he had received a spiritual life of immutability
in esse, so also he received a spiritual life of eternity in posse.

Therefore he had matter and just occasion of thankfulness for the one, and of
obedience for the other.

Adam had two things enjoined him, the one was praeesse Creaturis, the other
subesse Creatori, he had no need of a Caveat for the one, for he was ready
enough to govern and bear sovereignty, but for his duty to God, he had great
need to be put in mind; and for the try all and practice thereof, he caused
this tree of knowledge to be planted there, with an inhibition not to eat of
it, upon pain of death, which now and ever has offended many. Some wish it had
not been in the Garden: Others wish Adam had never tasted it; But Saint
Augustine says, if it were good and pleasant, why should it not be there?

Gods purpose therefore in planting the forbidden tree, was that it might be a
trial of his obedience, and practice of his duty, that if he should continue,
as he might, and had ability given him, then he should have the greater reward
afterward. (...) says, Rev. 2. 7. Vincenti dabo edere de ligno vitae in medio
Paradisi: Well says St. Paul, But no man can overcome except he strive first
and fight the good fight, 2 Timothy 2. 5. And no man that will or can strive well,
but he abstaineth from something, 1 Cor. 9. 25. For which cause therefore, that
we might be rewarded, it was necessary that there should be a commandment and
forbidding for his abstinence, that when there should be a trial of the
Tempter saying, Eat of this, he should strive and say, I may not, and so get
the victory and be crowned, that is, eat of the tree of everlasting life, and
live for ever, with God in Heaven: On the contrary side 17. verse if in trial
he should wilfully fall, then for transgression, the tree of life should be a
tree of death Mortem morieris, And the reason of this choice, why God should
prescribe him a law and form of obedience, is because this should be primor
dialis lex, as one says, ut nostrum obsequi sit nostrum sapere, Deuteronomy. 30. 20.
This is our wisdom to know and do that which God will have us to do, if God
give a Law at large, every one will consent to it, As if God had said: No man
shall disobey or transgress my will, none will deny it: But let it come to
positive law, and bring the trial and practice of that general to a
particular (as to say) I forbid and restrain this tree, none shall break my
will, nor eat of it, then is the trial of obedience indeed.

Object.
But some may say, What hurt is it to know good and evil? For we read Esaias 7.
15. that Christ shall do that: And therefore it is no sin.

Resp.
I answer that God forbids not to eat the fruit, nor that he would have us
ignorant of that knowledge, quam quis quaerit a Deo, sed quam quis quaerit a
seipso, And no doubt Adam had the knowledge both of good and evil, per
intelligentiam and si non per experientiam. And he knew how to choose the one,
and to refuse the other, to pursue the one, and to fly from the other, he
understood it then, but when he would know both by experience, Genesis 3. 6. He
could not see why God should forbid him, and therefore the Tempter taking
occasion by it, made him make an experiment of it.

This is the cause then, why at last Adam came to know evil by sense and
experience, and saw to his shame, what evil was, for to take he knew and
confessed by experience, that bonum erat adhaerere Deo, as the Prophet says,
Jer. 2. 19. And now he knew by taste, how bitter a thing it was to forsake the
Lord, And that he knew, it appears, Genesis 3. 8. by hiding himself for fear, he
showed that he knew it, when he did feel ante-ambulatores mortis, which is
sorrow and sickness, and when he saw the Statute of death, that now it must
necessarily come to him, and all his posterity to dye the death, then he knew
evil by woeful experience.

You see the cause of the Law, and of his sin of good and evil; it remains
that we believe Adam in his knowledge and in his experience both of good and
evil: For by his good lost, we come to the knowledge of the means by which our
good may be lost; that is, if we seek to satisfy our lusts, and curiously (not
contented with the open knowledge of his revealed will) shall try conclusions
with God, and say, what if we should break the Law? Wherefore abandoning these
faults, which by experience we see were the cause of evil in him, it behooves
us to receive more thankfully of God the good things we have, and live
obediently resting on the Son of God for good things to come: And so at last
Christ will be unto us the tree of eternal life hereafter, as we have made him
the tree of knowledge, wisdom, and sanctification to us in this life.

Fluvius autem procedit ex Hedene ad irrigandum hunc hortum: and inde sese
dividit, ferturque in quatuor capita. Primi nomen est Pischon: hic est qui
alluit totam Regionem Chavilae, ubi est aurum. Et aurum illius Regionis
praestans: ibidem est Bdellium, and lapis Sardonyx. Genesis 2. 10,11,12.

June 10. 1591.
THe verse going before contains, as we have seen, the planting of the Garden,
and the devise of God framed and set in the midst of Paradise, which is a
plain resemblance of all Divinity, both touching our duty in knowledge and
practice, with the reward thereof: Now follows the watering of it, which in
the old Testament, Genesis 49. 25. is called Benedictio ventris and uberum, and in
the new Testament, Paul's planting and Apolloes watering, 1 Cor. 3. 6. So that
as the planting is showed before, so the watering is now set down to the 14.
verse.

1.
In the 10. verse, the man of God shows the end of the River, namely to water
and moisten the garden; for to that end is mention made of the particular
difference of all the Rivers which from thence were derived, and became into
four heads.

2.
Secondly is set down the means by which the whole garden was watered and took
the effect, namely, by the several branching out of the water into diverse arms
and streams.

3.
Thirdly, He shows the manner of branching the Rivers, dividing them into
their Coasts, upon occasion of which he (...) into a several discourse of them.

Object.
If one should ask, To what end, or what need there was of water and Rivers in
Gods Garden? Resp.
I answer, That whether we respect necessity or pleasure, it is plain, that it
was very requisite, that this supplement should be added; for by this element
God causes all his Creatures to drink and quench their thirst, Psalm. 104. 11.
whereas without it they would faint and die: And as this is good and necessary
in the great world, to have every part well watered; so in the little world of
man's body is there the like necessity; for in it the Liver is as a Well or
Cistern, out of which every part and member of the body, as it were, by the
little cords and buckets of the veins, do draw and receive moisture, without
which they would perish; and as the flesh, so the bones are not dry, but are
full of marrow to moisten and preserve them, Job 21. 24. And to have a general
comprehension of all, the soul also has a thirst, and must be satisfied with
liquor and water of life, Psalm. 34. 3. and 42. 2. or else it will be sick,
languish, and pine: therefore in the new Testament, John 7. 38. Christ, to
refresh such thirsty souls causes Rivers to flow to it.

As this necessity then tends generally to all, so does it especially to
Orchards and Gardens; for it is most meet, that the trees which God does plant
should be also full of sap and moisture, Psalm. 104. 16. For if the young plants
do once get but the sent of the waters they will rejoice and grow, Job 14. 9.
But without it David says, It is as the grass on the house top, which
withers before it can grow up, Psalm. 129. 6. And therefore when moisture and
waters do fail abroad, and a drought is come, Joel 1. 11. 12. it causes all
men of the Country to weep and howl, wherefore as it was requisite that the
fruits of the Trees and Plants should feed Adam, so they must be fed and
cherished and kept alive by the springs and rivers of waters.

For pleasures also, it was most meet and requisite that there should be store
of springs and waters, for the name of Paradise has in it the plenty of
waters, signifying that the well watering of it made it to be so pleasant a
place; for which cause pleasure and delight is fitly compared to a Well or
River, Psalm. 36. 8. So on the other side we say, the drought and want of
moisture is compared and likened to sorrow and misery, Pro. 17. 22. And in the
new Testament Christ compares grief and sorrow to it, Luke 21. 26. wherefore
we see that it is requisite both for necessity and pleasure of a place, and
also for profit: For as too much water makes a bad ground for fruit, and
unpleasant by reason of dyrt and mire, 1 Reg. 9. 13. So on the other side to
have a Country or City of too little water, makes the places dry and dusty,
and therefore unfruitful and unpleasant, 1 King 14. 15. wherefore much land is
nothing worth without this: But rivers and springs of waters do make the Land
rich and happy. There must be then in a good Soil not only good Plants and
well grafted, but also good Rivers that it may be well watered, or else it
cannot be either fit for profit or pleasure; wherefore God so ordered this
place, that it wanted not any thing, neither Paul's nor Apolloes labor, nor yet
his blessing of increase from above. And let this suffice for the counsel of
Moses in these things.

When men would plant and make Orchards or Gardens, they have no power to make
Rivers, that it may be watered well: For when King Solomon made himself Gardens
and Orchards, be only could digg Wells, and caused Cesternes to be made; (...)
God has a high (...) and power, for when he made a Garden, instead of a
Cestern if he will, he can make a Sea for his fountain, and instead of pipes he
can make whole (...) and (...) of Rivers, in several channells to come into
all places where he (...) for God does not only make Rivers, and that great
profitable and pleasant (...), but also commodious, making them to branch and
spread themselves out over every land, for God would not have Adam and his
people to take pains, to water the Garden and all their grounds with their
feet, as they did in Egypt, Deuteronomy. 11. 10. That is, to (...) a great way to
fetch waters in buckets, and then to water it so; therefore he would not have
his water in one channel, but to divide it (...) into (...) channells above,
as it does (...) in diverse water pipes under the earth. And by reason that this
Country was so well watered in every place, both for Errable ground and
Pastures. That as (...) (...), the people there are not only (...) to eat up
their (...) twice before every harvest, but also to drive their (...) out of
their Pastures, lest otherwise they should choke themselves with their own fat.
We see then generally why God divided and severed these waters, now let us come
to the particulars and several rivers, which (...) in number, and therefore
four because they were enough, (...) because there are but four pleasures,
which come to men by the use of spring and rivers, viz.

The profitable pleasure of waters. 1. To sail, row, fish, and carry in. 2. To
bathe, wash, and make clean. 3. To quench our thirst. 4. To nourisn plants,
herbs and trees.


Touching this description it is plain, that the ancient writers do gather,

1.
First, that Paradise was no fained or fantastical matter of conceit, but a
very true and a certain place.

2.
Secondly, it was an argument to induce them to think, that it was not all over
the world, but in one special (...) place, where those rivers were.

3.
Last of all, it was an inducement to cause them make (...) and conjecture by
search, to find out where that special place was, and in the process of
that, as Master (...) says, it became a great stumbling block to many in
Religion and Divinity, for where they compared this with the history of other
writers, and seek for a place, where are four such great rivers coming from one
head and fountain, they died in it.

And again, missing also in the knowledge of the Land of (...), taking it for
another Land, it grew to a marvailous difficulty, that they could not tell how
to reconcile this part of holy (...) with the histories of other men.

But I will come to the particulars, and touching the first River, it is (...)
after three names; first by name it is called (...): Secondly, by the (...) and
compassing of it about havilah. Thirdly, by the commodies of that Country
ophir, which being taken by (...), is included, by gold (...) and the (...),
for by Gold is understood all kind of metals, by (...) all kind of Perfumes
and Spices, by the (...) all kinds of Jewels and precious Stones.

Touching the name it (...) in Hebrew the rich and plentiful River, which name
(...) giew to be called Armelcha, the (...) call it the kingly, (...), or
stately River, if we compare this River to Saul, 1 (...). 10. 23. We shall see
it well called so; For as he was taller by the head and shoulders, then all the
men in Israel, so was this river (...) longer, and did pass with more state
then all other.

The second, is the circuit and compass by the coast, for it compasses and
runs along by the Country Havilah, the name of which Land and Country, made
the doubt amongst writers, because in the (...) we read of two Countries of
that name, the one in (...). 10. 29. For the son of Heber which is called
Havilah, did (...), and it is sure, that one of his sons also did plant
himself in Ophir.

The other is (...) Kings 10. 22. which is in the (...) parts of the (...) of
India. And the old writers, taking it for this, which is very (...) from that,
did (...) in the matter.

There was another Havilah, which came from (...) and (...), Genesis 10. 7. which
dwelt in that Country where the river (...) is, of which now some are called
(...). In Strabo this Land is called Chavilah (...), which as you see is very
like (...), and in this place was the Kings royal place and seat in the city
of Shushan, 1 Hester 2. 5. Which for the commodities of it, was called the
city of joy or pleasure, as indeed Chavilah signifies, for in Hebrew it
imports most fruitful, rich, and plentiful, as if it were ever bringing
forth, and yet ever with child. This is the Country then, that is next
neighbor to Paradise bordering nearest upon it.

Touching the third point, we necessarily infer and prove by the fruits and
commodities, which are here named that it must needs be this Havilah, of which
we have spoken, for only it has store of (...) things as Pliny and Strabo do
witness.

The particular fruits here specified, be those which in the opinion of all
ancient writers are set down figuratively, namely one chief for all of that
kind, for it was the infinite store of all these rich commodities, which made
the King of Persia so proud in the City Shushan, as we read in the, 1 Hester.

First, for Gold, we see that it had not only store, but also store of the best
Gold, for there were diverse sorts, as we do make difference of ours here,
though there was great plenty of base, and common Gold, which came from Ophir,
yet the best and purest Gold came from Havilah.

For the other kind of Bdelium, some take it for a precious stone, but indeed
it is a tree and not a stone, by which rare and excellent tree all spice and
sweet perfumes which did there abound are comprehended and understood.

The third fruit is of jewels and precious stones, where the best of all is
specified for all the rest, namely, the Onyx stone, for the Sardys is but a
compound of it, and of this kind of stone we read was set in Aarons breast
plate, and also we read it to be one of the gates of the City; and the Caldees
do call this stone the mother and seed of all other precious stones
whatsoever, and therefore does contain all the rest.

And thus ye see what he means by the fruits and commodities of this land,
by which Moses thinks he has sufficiently described unto us the place where
Paradise was.

Now we must note and understand that all these commodities are in Havilah,
which is without Paradise, and, as it were, in the backside and outhouses, for
these are not the things which do principally commend Paradise, but by this
Moses is willing to show the difference between the worldly Paradise and the
Godly Paradise.

For worldlings when they come to Havilah, and whilst they are amongst the
gold and sweet perfumes and spices and precious stones (which is before they
come to Paradise) they sit down there, as if they were at their journeys end,
and had found the Paradise and happiness which they looked for: But Gods
Children never stay nor rest themselves in Havilah amongst these earthly
things, but go on still till they come to the tree of life, which is in the
midst of Paradise.

And as it is erroneous to think that Gods Church is where all these earthly
things are: So on the the other side were it erroneous to conclude, that that
could not be Gods Paradise where gold and silver and prosperity is. Because
Havilah and this (...) is without the circuit and compass of Paradise; for
though indeed the tree of knowledge and of life be the works of it, yet the
other trees of pleasure and profit are not denied always to the Church of God:
For God willed the People (...) offer all their treasures, Exodus 35. 4. And yet
though these outward things do accompany the Church and profession of the
truth, yet we are not to rest in them as the true works of Paradise, but as
things adjacent, and as part of the world in the outside thereof, yet it is the
property of our earthly nature, more to admire these things than the true
treasures of Paradise: For when the Israelites saw (...) first, they asked what
it was? for they were ignorant of it, they could not understand it, nor tell
what to make of it coming from Heaven; but when they first saw gold
glistering, they called it by this name, give it me.

There is no comparison between lignum vitae and lignum Bdelii, nor between a
wedge of gold and the tree of knowledge, so says Job 28. 16. yet the world
thinks that Job was in an error, for they think all knowledge nothing in
comparison of a wedge of gold. But remember what our Savior Christ says,
Though we could get all the world, what would it avail if we lose our souls?
Matthew. 26. 15, 16. wherefore we must remember to say as Eusebius reports of
one Arcelius, who being busy about worldly (...), was wont often to say to
himself ( potes hoc agere, sed hoc non est opus tuum, that is, thou may do
this, but this is not the thing that thou chiefly come into the world to
do, for that is to be obedient to the good pleasure of almighty God, and to
do his will. Wherefore we must not stay always in Havilah, making that our
journeys end, for if we do, we shall never come to Paradise: But we must pass
through Havilah speedily and make haste to Paradise, and there make our aboade
and bestow our selves principally in the contemplation of his works and the
doing of his will. And thus much for the use of Divinity.

Nomen vero fluvii secundi est Gichon: hic est qui alluit totam Regionem
Cuschi. Et nomen tertii fluvii, Chiddekel: hic est qui labitur ad Orientem
Assyriam versus: Fluvius autem quartus est Euphrates. Genesis 2. 13.14.

June 12. 1591.
THese verses are the parting of the plot of Paradise; and the perfecting of the
parting of these Rivers as yet remains, St. Augustine says well, that
matters of spiritual instruction in the Scriptures are as the crop of Wheat or
Herbs of the field to be gathered: and the Histories of the Bible are as the
plat in which it is sowed, or as the pasture in which they grow: The
Chronology, Cronographie, and Topographie, setting down the places, times, and
persons, are as the lanes, ways, and bridges by which we pass and repasse to
and fro one to another, and there can be no orderly passage or conveyance
without these. To dwell altogether in these things is as if a man should
consume his time, bestow his study, and spend his labor wholly in mending of
high ways and bridges, and to let alone the care and labor (which is more
needful) in husbanding the arrable land and pasture ground.

And whereas in profane Stories many do spend whole leaves and long volumes
in these circumstances; we may see the holy Spirit uses very briefly, in a few
lines, to knit up all such things as are necessary to that purpose: Here, in
these two verses, he (...) us of the three other Rivers, whereof the two first
are (as the former) described both by name and also by the Coast which they doc
pass by.

2 River.
Touching the first we read that this River which is here called Gihon, is
called of the Heathen Writers Araxes, Naharses, and Narsines, yet they found
that the primitive name was Gihon.

This River was called fluvius Eunuchius, for as Kings delighted and took
pleasure in Eunuchs, so all took great pleasure and delight in this River, for
the water thereof was very clear, and therefore delightful to the eye.
Epiphanius faith, that it was sweet to drink and (...) of; and last of all (by
reason that it grew into so many Rivers) it became also shallow, and therefore
running swift and shallow, made, by that means, a murmurring noise and rushing,
and therefore was called fluvius abruptus and (...), and so was pleasant to the
ear; the nature of which River was (once a year about harvest time) to break
out and overflow, whereby it refreshed the Country languishing with heat,
Sirah. 24. 32.

Touching the Coast, It compasses the Land of Havilah, where by compassing is
meant, that it marched or ran through the Country; for so the (...) are said
to compass the Wilderness, Joshuah 15. 1. and the Scribes, Matthew. 23. 15. to
compass Sea and Land, that is, to pass or travel through or by it.

3 River.
The third river Hiddekell; As the former two names were significant, so are
these, though the first name of these remained among the Hebrews: yet the
Heathen Writers call it Tygris, and indeed the River has both these names
given for one reason, Hiddekell in Hebrew signifies an arrow, and a Tygre is
the swiftest of Beasts; so that of the strong, forcible, and swift motion of
it, it has the name.

This River has a head of it self, and passes along by the old Cities
Ninivie, and others, Genesis 10. 11. and it joyneth it self to the River Pishon
near the famous city Tesipho, and so run into one stream together into the
gulf of Persia.

For the Coast of it, He says it runs Eastward, for on that side is the
Land of Assyria, which was called the Land of Nodd before the flood, Genesis 4.
16. And after that Assure, Chams son, came thither, it was called Assyria,
Genesis 10. 22.

4 River.
The fourth River is called Euphrates, only he speaks of the name of this and
leaves out the bounds and coasts of it: the reason of this is, because that
River runs through the midst of Paradise, and so it could not coast; and
also because it was so well known that it needed not any other description,
Genesis 15. 18. it was a bound to the Holy Land, for God promised that they should
possess so far, which was performed and effected in Salomons days, 1 King.
4. 21.

This River enters into Babylon, which was builded over this River, and
passes by Massasha; and this River is spoken of last as the greatest, and
therefore by an excellency is called the great River; the fignification of it
plentiful a fruitful or plentiful River.

Solinus says, that when this River does overflow the Land, the slyme of it
passes all the dunging and earing which Husbandmen can use; and because it is
too rank with it, they are fain to use the water of Tygris to wash that slyme
away, and so to make it less fruitful.

Paradise they say had his name (...), of the well watering of it, and of the
pleasure, joy, and (...) that came to it thereby.

Jeremy 51. 63. Rev. 16. 12. Notwithstanding all these commodities, and
pleasures of these Rivers, when men abused the places to sin and
abomination, God threatened his wrath and vengeance on these Nations and Lands,
and as before he extended his benefits of his free mercy, so then he powered out
his wrath in just Judgments.

And this may suffice for the Rivers, because we may not stand more than needs
in mending highways and bridges.

Concerning these four Rivers, we have said of the ground of Paradise, that it
brought fourth all fruits which could be desired of any ground, So say we of
the waters, which God had so ordered, that nothing was to be desired of waters,
but that the pleasure and delight thereof might be found in one of these
Rivers. If we compare them together, in some of them was deepnesse, in others
shallowness, in some swiftness, in some slownesse, some pleasurable, others
navigable, the one of them far and fruitful, the other lean, and yet
profitable, Solomon says, Preach. 4. 12. If a man be bound with a threefold
cord it cannot easily be broken; wherefore seeing God has bound us with
fourfold benefits, yea with many fold blessings, what a sin it is to break
asunder those bands by transgression and unthankfullnesse.

Paradise it self thus is enclosed with four goodly Rivers, and has three
Islands, which though they be dis-junct, yet they meet in one point, and make
but one Paradise,; which Garden shows what an one the Gardener was, that is,
three dis-junct in person, and yet but one in unity of substance; which three
Islands Arselius calls the three Islands of blessing, and the Heathen do
call them Elisii campi: By which we see they had a glimering knowledge of
Paradise. The Land of Babylon, Choose and Ashur, and other places, as Writers
do testify, do carry in their names the men that first inhabited and
possessed them: But only the Land of Eden has in it the name and title of no
man, for God gave it the name. And therefore it is counted the most ancient and
excellent Country, in which man was first created and first set his foot; and
therefore some think Adam had his name of Eden, but there is no likelihood of
that: But whatsoever excellencies this Land had, yet now they are lost, though
relics and resemblances of them remain, which must teach us how vile and
dangerous a thing sin is; for as it caused the Ark of God to be taken away, 1 Samuel 4. 11. and the Temple and City of God to be wasted and destroyed, so we
see that the same sins were the overthrow and dissolution of the Garden of
God, and therefore we must beware of it.

As we have taken a view of the four Rivers, so now let us take a survey of the
four Regions, which are about Paradise, for Paradise was the center, and (...)
about it was the compass of these four (...) On the one side was Havilah,
where was Gold, and that the best Gold, and where such wealth and riches are,
from (...) any thing may be (...) and brought.

And on the other side was (...) from (...) came health, and the means of
health, namely, the best medicines, the flower and choice of all dreggs of
Physic. On the other quarter (...) Africa, which is the glory and pomp of the
world; And on the other side was Caldea, from (...) came all the learning and
knowledge of the world: So that (...) must needs be the (...) pleasant place,
being environed and compassed with all those blessings, namely (...) the midst
of health, wealth, honor, and learning, yet you may observe, that when sin
began in the center of the world, how all these blessings round about it, began
(...) curses to mankind, (...) and learning grew into (...) All the wisdom of
(...) Genesis 11. 31. grew into (...) (...) which was the glory of the world
degenerated, and fell into pride, and so to cruelty and (...) and so was made
the (...) of Gods wrath, which ever God (...) to threaten sin, Ezech. 12. 13.
Havilah became by sin, a means to draw (...) from Paradise, for they which
dwelt in this wealthy Country, became the most covetous, secure, and careless
people in the world, forgetting God, every man was there on horseback, by
reason of wealth and prosperity, which made them ride away from Paradise with
the more speed.

And for Arabia they enjoying bodily health, yet made them so presumptuous that
(as one of their countrymen says) they were (...) For by reason, they had
(...) for all diseases and infirmities of the body to preserve health, they
gave themselves to all (...) and (...) and to wallow in all (...) and (...)
knowing present help to recover their health again.

Thus we see that by sin and corruption of our nature, these things are used
contrary to Gods ordinances, namely, as means to remove us as far as may be
from the center of Paradise, and from the tree of knowledge and (...) which is
(...) the midst thereof.

If we fall into the pride of (...) into the (...) and security of Havilah, and
(...) our selves into all (...) of (...) and give our selves to the (...) and
Idolatry of (...) then (...) shall be like (...) those which were (...)
neighbors (...) Paradise, and yet were (...) off from (...) and therefore shall
be (...) to (...) or enter into it.

We have (...) this one thing briefly yet to note, and it is that which I (...)
(...) the (...) and (...) the Jew, and St. Augustine the converted Christian,
to make use of, by thinking on Paradise, for they all are careful to preserve
and (...) the (...) of this story, and to prove that these are not Rivers
running in (...) place imaginary, but (...) and cortain, known, seen and tasted
of by many, Genesis 13. 10. So for matter of my story, for spiritual use and
instruction, they gathered and delivered some good and profitable things, which
their age was able to bear, though our age hold it curiosity, and cannot abide
it. Arelius reports, that Zoroastes had this as one of his chief Lessons,
which he held and taught to all his Scholars, as an Oracle. That in this life
their chief care should be, to obtain Paradise after this life, where only
their Souls should find pleasure and joy.

The Caldeans also did see that it was a man's duty not to seek a Paradise upon
earth, but to contemplate a spiritual Land and place of pleasure, which the
heathen in their Books called Elisii Campi, In which they place the four
cardinal virtues, instead of the four pleasant Rivers which are here named:
And also Ambrose does, concerning the depth of Pishon to the profoundnesse of
wisdom, the shallowness of Hiddikell to temperance and sobriety, Tygris to
fortitude, and Euphrates to justice.

So does Philo the Jew, fall into the like spiritual meditation of Paradise
for his use, he said, this is the course which a man must take here, to seek
the light of knowledge, and hereafter the participation of the light of glory.

Sirah 24. labored in this comparison, likening the four Rivers in Paradise to
true wisdom, and that which flows from it: So there is a Paradise above,
which is spiritual, a tree of life and knowledge, and such streams and rivers
spiritual, which our Souls may apprehend for instruction and comfort.

St. Augustine and Ambrose, have gathered two other resemblances spiritual by
this out of the old Testament, Ezech. 1. 5. Rev. 4: 6. They lay, that Faith on
earth does apprehend Heaven, and therein these four things: 1.
God the Son as in the form of a man having a fellow feeling and compassion of
our infirmities and miseries on earth. 2.
And also as having the strength of a Lion to save and defend us. 3.
Thirdly, as an Ox to be made a sacrifice by his death: 4.
And lastly, as an Eagle to mount up again, by his Resurrection and Ascension.

They say, they are, as it were, the four streams, in which our Faith does run
and direct his course in, by meditation of heavenly Joys in Paradise above.

Again, he takes another out of Ezech. 15. 16. There are says he, four Wheels
on Earth, which have a sympathy between them and the Beasts above. And as these
Wheels move on earth, so do they move or stay in heaven. The four Wheels are
these, Job 4. 6. (...), fides, patientia, integritas, For if we so fear that we
have faith, and hope in Gods mercy, and patiently endure as Christ did, not
digressing from righteousness, for all the troubles of this life. As these
things in our hearts move well, or stand still on earth, so do these four
Beasts and streams in heaven move and flow to us, or stand still from yielding
us any comfort.

Thus does Augustine and Ambrose, make a profitable resemblance and comparison,
between these things on earth and that which is in heaven, that it may be a
course to lead us to Paradise above.

Accipiens itaque Jehovah Deus hominem; collocavit ipsum in horto Hedenis, ad
colendum eum and ad custodiendum eum. Genesis 2. 15.

June 15. 1591.
AT the eight verse before, as ye remember, we said that Moses did first deliver
the Treaty of the place of Paradise, which now he has ended.

And now he intends to set down the manner of his placing and employing him
in that place.

His placing is set down here in two points.

1.
First, By showing us the place from whence God took him.

Secondly, the place to which he brought him.

2.
Then he shows us that the things in which he was employed were double.

1.
First, in regard of his body, He was enjoined the duty of labor, as is showed
in this 15. verse.

2.
Secondly, In regard of his soul, the duty of Obedience.

In the two next verses, the Fathers term them Cultura horti, and Cultus Dei.

We must begin with his placing: Touching which first he tells us that God
took him from another place before he brought him to this. If we ask from
whence God took him? We are to understand that he was taken out of the common
of the World, as when he had transgressed the commandment, he was cast out
into the wide world again, Genesis 3. 23.

The Prophet Esaias seems to tell us, that it is a very profitable meditation,
to look back into the former place, and estate, from whence we were taken, Esaias
51. 1. So did Anna in the old Testament, I Sam. 2. 8. and Mary in the new
Testament, Luke 1. 52. in their several songs: God does raise the base from the
dunghill, and set them with the Princes of his People, Psalm. 113. 7. Joseph was
taken from the Dungeon and prison, Psalm. 105. 17. and brought from thence to be
chief Ruler in Egypt. Moses was a mighty man and of great personage, yet if we
consider from whence he came, we shall see he was taken out of the water, Exodus
2. 5. etc: to his great honor and renown. Gideon was taken from the flayle,
Judge. 6. 11. Saul with a nail in his purse and from seeking his Fathers (...),
1 Samuel 9. 1, 2, etc. David from the (...), Psalm. 78. 70, 71. with diverse others
in the like sort, the particulars would be over-tedious to recite.

This then being Gods course in Adam at the first, from baseness to honor,
from the wild field to Paradise; So ever after he used the same order in his
posterity; and therefore will have men consider and confess their unde, from
whence they come.

So the old Church were bound to acknowledge their unde, and to say, Deuteronomy. 26.
5. My Father was a poor Syrian, ready to perish with bunger, and was after in
cruel bondage in Egypt, etc. and from that poor and miserable estate the Lord
brought us into Canaan, etc.

This then kindly works in us the conceit of humility to consider and
remember that first Man was a companion to Beasts, both in the same common
matter and place, until Good took and brought him into a more excellent place.

As we have spoken of the place from whence, so now of the place to which he
was brought, That was Paradise, wherein we must note, that God brought him not
thither only to show it him, that he might see it, 1 King 8. 9. but that he
might inhabit it, enjoy it, possess and exercise himself in it, to which he
seems to have relation in the 10. Psalm. 14. which proves that Adam was not
there natus, sed positus, nor thereof Dominus, sed Colonus, and he had it not
by inheritance, but by Deed of Gift; not natura, sed gratia he was not a
Citizen but a Denizen; he was a Proselite brought in thither from some other
place.

2.
The second word was posuit, as who would say, Man was not able to put in
himself, he could not come thither alone, but it was a thing supernatural, even
a special grace of God who put him in this place, not man's natural wit or
industry.

Wherefore this being a shadow and resemblance of Heaven, it is sure that
(whatever we say) it is not our merit or worthiness, our wit or any thing else
which can bring us thither, but only the free grace of God, which, as it
teaches us humbleness in regard of our unde, so it teaches us thankfulness
in regard of our quo, whither; that is, Paradise: a place full of all pleasant
and profitable things, and our thankfulness must be with trembling and fear,
Psalm. 2. 11. Quoniam qui potuit poni, potuit deponi, and qui potuit far,
potuit etiam auferre, as he did indeed.

3.
The third point is his ut, that is, the cause and end for which God took him
from the World and put him into Paradise, which was to (...) him some service,
both in dressing and keeping the Garden, as also in doing homage unto him that
he might know that he was but a servant in Paradise, and had a Lord and Master
Paramount far above him, and therefore that it was his duty to be careful
and thankful to God for his benefits: Also this labor was imposed him, that he
might understand that this Paradise was not an estate and place of his rest and
all happiness to be looked for, but rather a place of strife, Rev. 2. 7. which
when he had performed at last, he should be crowned with this end, which is
double, and contains the two vocations of every man: The one respecting the
Commonwealth, The other God in his holy Church.

Touching the first, which is set down in this verse, concerning bodily labor,
there are two questions to be inquired of, the one of Adam, the other of
Paradise.

Object.
The question concerning Adam is, Why God should (...) him to such labor,
seeing God purposed to place him in a most happy estate? for it might seem a
thing very inconvenient to impose labor to him which might mar and hinder
all the felicity and happiness spoken of before.

Resp.
For answer to that, It is true which St. Augustine says, that indeed, if we
mean Laboriosum laborem, it would have been a prejudice and let to his
happiness; But if by this is understood only such a pleasant labor and
exercise of body, in which a man takes more delight and comfort, than by
sitting still, then we cannot otherwise think, but that it should have been
father a solace to him than any hindrance of joy. For the labor that makes us
miserable now and comes in as a curse for sin, Genesis 3. 11. 9. it consists
in three points.

1.
First, urgent necessity is irksome to many when they are enforced to it, or
else they should not eat.

2.
Secondly, when it is with the sweat of our face above our proportion of
strength, even to the straining of nature, not only to make us warm, but even
till we sweat again.

3.
Thirdly, so to labor hard as when we have done all that we can, there shall
come either unseasonable weather, or such a barren state of the ground below,
by reason of the curse, that our labor shall take no good effect, but shall
cause thorns, briars, and weeds to grow instead of Wheat which we did sow.

But remove these impediments, and then labor is a special delight; Solomon
says, that excessive labor is weariness and toil to the flesh: But when
labor is Condimentum volnptatis, as rest and (...) now to us is Condimentum
laboris, then such a labor is better than doing nothing at all.

This then being set down, that labor is not simply an inconvenience and
hindrance to a good life, but rather sometimes a help to it; then we infer that
amongst all other labors, the exercise of dressing and keeping a Garden or
Orchard, is most pleasant and agreeable to our nature, Preach. 2. 5. and
brings greatest delight to our experience and senses in seeing ever some new
and pleasant herb or plant springing up.

Therefore it seems to be even the labor in which Kings have taken delight,
Preach. 2. 5. though of all other men, they seem to be exempt most from bodily
labor, yet they have often used and tied themselves to this labor, which God
here assigned to Adam, his labor being therefore limited and allayed with these
considerations, there was no abatement of happiness or joy thereby.

The other question to be inquired of is, whether it may not seem superfluous
and more than needs, in regard of the Garden, for him to dress or keep it; for
seeing God made all things to grow in it, and the ground to bring forth all
things to be defired why should he labor to dress it? and seeing there were no
ill things to hurt or annoy it, what need he to take care to keep it? (...)
says, that the case stands alike with God and with Gods Garden in this
respect, for as man has more need to be served of God, than God has need to
be served of man (not wanting his service) so Adam had more need to be served
by the Garden, then the Garden to be served and (...) to by him. But all the
Fathers do agree in this, that it was Gods will that the Garden should bring
forth not only opera (...) of his own accord, but also by the industry and
diligence of man, it should bring opus voluntarium. So that diverse other fair
and pleasant things, should be bestowed on the Garden, and caused to grow by
his labor, and so he should both discere and docere, how many things by
industry might be done above nature.

Now for the keeping of the Garden, it may seem a great difficulty, because
there being no danger, it might keep it self without Adams care, labor, or
looking to: But the ancient writers say, there is a double keeping, the one is
from danger, the other to our selves for profit. And both these kinds are,
either of the keeping the thing it self, or else of the revenues and
commodities which come thereby. As for example, If Adam had not broken the Law
and commandment of God then he should have still kept the Garden to himself,
and for his posterity for ever to all our uses, without forgetting our estate
or causing a reentry to be made. Again, He should have kept the fruits of the
Garden to his own use moderately, and kept them from being wasted lavishly, for
those things are said to be well kept, Quae been dispensata sunt and non male;
So that by a moderate use, he should have kept the fruit from riot and waste.

Again, touching the keeping thereof from hurt, God closely tells him, that
an enemy should come, who by his cautelous wyles and subtle practices, should
seek to bereave him of his present Garden, and therefore that it behoved him to
keep it from such an enemy, who by indirect and sinister means did seek to
defeat him of it: And thus we see that this labor is necessary, without either
inconvenience or superfluity:

I come now to the first ( ut) for it is of three sorts; And this first is the
principal and greatest, for example (...) primus homo est lex posteritatis, In
what regard? In regard of his person in this, that seeing labor in a vocation
was good and requisite in the first estate of Innocence, therefore it must
needs be commendable in us, and the contrary idleness, to be condemned in
every calling whatsoever.

In Gal. 6. 10. It is said to be Gods will, not only that we should be doing
whilst we have time, but that we should be doing of good, and it is his will
that with such things we should redeem the time from idleness, Ephesians. 5. 16.
We must not be worse then Ants Pro. 6. 6. Nor like to Snayles, Psalm. 58. 8.
Consuming our time in vanities, Psalm. 78. 33. These idle ones are called
slow-bellies, Tit. 1. 12. and such God detesteth, because they set themselves
in no good way. The wise man says, Wisdom 33. 26. That Idleness does not
only consume good time, and good creatures, but also wastes a man's self, For
all carnal lusts and desires, are but firs, pangs and symptomata of this
idleness: As the idle man's Garden is full of weeds, so his soul is full of
sin, and when our soul is become such an evil and idle man's Garden, Esaias 5.
1.2. etc. then God made our Garden on earth like unto (...), namely, full of
weeds, thorns and thistles, Amos 5. shows what vices do grow out of this
idleness, For he said of them which fed of the fatlings, and drunk (...) in
full bolls, then they gave themselves to (...), stretching themselves on Ivory
beds, and therefore God hated the (...) of Jacob, Amos. 6. 4, 5, 6.

There is another thing, namely, that this our labor, is to be bestowed and
employed upon paradise and not on ourselves, as the Wise man says,
Ecclesiastic. 33. 16. That he did not only labor for himself, but for all such
as love nurture and wisdom: Many men will be content to labor, but it shall
be only for themselves, for to fill mouths and bellies and purses; they will
not help their brother scarce with one mite; and (...). 6. 7. they will eat all
the fruit of their own labors, none else shall fare the better for it: but our
chief intent must be to bestow our labor and service in dressing and keeping
Gods Garden, and Gods people, the Church and Common wealth. David, being a
King, was content to be serviceable to all, (...) 13. 22.

Therefore it may beseem us which labor in the Church and Commonwealth, not
only operari, but also servire; for there are many which will be busy and take
more pains than they have thanks for, because they will be Commanders and
prescribers and platformers, but they will take no pains to minister or do
service, and to be obedient which is meet for them according to their (...)
places; and when every one is a Master workman, and will not be subject or
ordered by others in their labor, it comes to pass that Gods Vineyard is
often spoiled, wherefore our labor must be employed by way of service in
humility.

Now for these two (as they are joined and (...) together (...) and operari)
are good companions; for as the contrary vices are the two things on which a
sluggard casts over his bed, Pro. 26. 14. So Moses sets these two as the
two hinges on which laborious and industrious men do move.

These two do go together after three sorts: First, there is a service in
respect of good and evil, (...) to labor and procure good to a thing, or to
drive away evil from it, that is, to preserve it from evil and in these two
is expressed the property of a City, Psalm. 127. 1. First, it is commodionsly
built, then there is a careful watch set over it, (...) keep it from all
danger and hurt, 1 Cor. 12. 21. there is a comparison between the members, the
head and the eye are profitable to custodire, the hand and the foot for all the
body in operation; so some in the Church and Commonwealth have their function
in custodiendo, standing in a (...) to defend, though they (...) not as others
do; and we must know that Custodes, as Magistrates, Ministers, etc. though
their function be not in (...), yet (if they (...) not idle in it) the (...) of
their heart is as great and painful as the (...) of the brows to others.

The second is this operari, which is the (...) or rather the bringer in: (...)
is the Steward or Auditor to (...) and to give a just account of that which the
other brings in. The Heathen (...) he that will not keep is worse than Judas,
for he could not abide perditio haec, for which Christ did not mislike him, nay
Christ himself would not have the Fragments lost, John 6. 12. So that as
operari condemns idleness and negligence, so does custodire condemn waste
and riot; for these two vices profusion and negligence do go together, Prove.
18. 9. as the two virtues Working and Keeping are brethren and go together
like friends.

The third and last is that of Ambrose, That though labor and work fails a
men, yet keeping holds out and lasts as long as we live.

Therefore custodire is called Muria virtutum, the pickle of virtue, and in
keeping we must persevere, continue, and hold out to the end, for that is the
chiefest virtue, Matthew. 24. 13. The Philosophers call it virtus virtutum.

Thus we have seen our unde, to teach us humility; our quo, to teach us
thankfulness; and our ut, to learn us carefullnesse and diligence in our
calling; and this is our translation and prelation, whereby we are taught to
keep in mind our two duties of operari and custodire; and this may serve for
the comprehension of our first duty in Paradise.

Interdixitque Jebova Deus Homini, dicendo, De fructu quidem omnis arboris
hujus horti libere comedes. Genesis 2. 16.

June 17, 1591.
YOu remember I made it plain, that there was two parts of man's Calling and
Vocation in Paradise, and a double duty enjoined him, done in the time of his
innocence.

The first is labor in an earthly vocation, about things belonging to this
life; The other spiritual employing the duties of his soul respecting the life
to come.

The one humane, which is our Art and Occupation in our several vocations.

The (...) is called divine by performing our duties and service unto God our
Creator, which here is expressed and remains to be handled.

We are content to labor and to do our duty in the ground, because we do see
the fruit thereof. Now if that be good, then our labor in Religion and in the
service of God is a more profitable duty than that of the ground, for the fruit
thereof is eternal life; we must not therefore be only Agricolae, sed and
(...), and labor to serve God.

What is this commandment and our duty prescribed?

When we have taken away the shell and driven off the husk from it, we shall
see that it is true obedience, obedientia autem est sola virtutum, as one
says, and nulla est obedientia nisi humilium, so that obedience in humility
contains in it the sum of all virtues else. This is the first speech and
dialogue that God had with man from the beginning: As therefore hitherto God
has opened only his hand to fill Adams hands with his blessings, his mouth
with laughter, and his heart with joy; So now God opens his mouth to show
what shall be his reciprocal duty for all his benefits, and what duty he
requires of him: It is not said before, that God spoke touching the delivery
of the former duty, because it was no need; for the very light of reason might
teach him the law of honest labor and industry, for the avoiding of idleness
in every estate. But this Law and duty of obedience is supernatural, and
therefore besides the instinct of nature it was requisite that God should (
viva voce) instruct him therein as a thing not within the reach of fleshly
reason, to know how we should serve God aright: This is the reason then why God
spoke now and said, Numb 12. 6. God is said to speak three ways, by vision,
dream, or mouth to mouth; and this last was the speciallest favor and grace so
to speak; If Moses then stood so highly in Gods favor, that he delivered his
mind by word of mouth, face to face, then no doubt did God much more speak
after this familiar sort to Adam now, because he was much more in the favor of
God then any of his sinful seed were, which the ancient Fathers do apparently
gather also by the 3. of Genesis 8. for in that it is said, that Adam heard God
walk in his own presence in the Garden, and heard also his voice speaking to
him, they conclude that God did, before sin, appear to man in a (...) shape
and speak to him, as we read the Angels did to many afterward.

As God in Paradise spoke to Adam, so did he always, both in the old and new
Testament, make known his will, and reveal our duty in Religion touching his
worship by the word of his mouth. The Prophets therefore had this for the
warrant of their Prophecies, Os Domini loquntum est; and the Apostles had this
for the seal and assurance of their doctrine Ego accepi a Domino quod tradidi,
1 Cor. 11. 23. So that if in Paradise to have the word of God as the rule and
direction to frame all their lives by, being in the state of innocence, then
no doubt our state now cannot be happy without the same rule, unless we have
Gods word among and us to live thereby. The Fathers for this cause do term
this as the Sermon which God made to Adam; and they say that he should have had
no other Scripture, nor Bible, nor Sermon but this, if he had obeyed it, and
stood in his innocence, neither should he have had any other Sacraments then
the trce of knowledge and life, So that in it was contained all divinity (...)
for Adam, and the sum of all divinity which is written to us in the holy
Scriptures: But the most part of Writers do call this a Law, because Heb. 9.
27. it is said, (...) est, etc. as who should say, God made a Statute or Law,
when he said, Thou shall dye the death; And indeed in all the course of Gods
proceedings against Adam, Genesis 3. is merely Judicial, as if God had tried him
and his actions by this Law which here he made.

There are two principal parts of this Law.

The one contains the authority of the Lawmakers, in the preface.

The other contains the tenor or sum of it.

In the Law it self there are three parts as it is in all Laws.

1.
First, A preamble, which is an inducement and persuasion for us to obey and
hear.

2.
Secondly, The restraint of the Law.

3.
Thirdly, The sanction and penalty of the Law.

And if we mark it, there is none of all these but contains in them an
argument very effectual and very plain, to make us have a care to serve the
Lord and obey his Commandments; for if we shall not obey his authority and
just right which he has to command us, we shall show our selves very proud and
perverse persons, which is the overthrow of humility; if we regard not his
liberality, we are unthankful men, which destroys humanity and civility; if
we transgress so gentle and easy a Commandment, it is exceeding negligence;
if we fear not, nor regard his threatenings, it shows that there is in us
hard-heartednesse and incredulity, which is the cause of all.

This is then as if he had said, hitherto God has been in a manner as no God,
he has showed himself as a Minister to man, taking on him the behavior of a
Potter, to fashion us of Earth; and of a Glasse-maker, to inspire our bodies
with his breath; and to be to us a Gardener, and to be one that has occupied
himself in making Rivers for water and all things needful for us, in so much
as no servant may seem to be in offices more meanly employed than he has as
yet undertaken for us: But now, says Moses, God will forget himself no longer,
but begins to show himself to be a God indeed, and to sit down in his Throne
of Majesty and royal authority, and call man to him as his servant and
subject, and gives him a commandment, and prescribes him a Law touching the
commandment. We first say that on Gods side and behalf, he has a power to
command, because he has made us and gives us all that we have; and so on our
side there grows and arises a duty and necessity to obey, because we have
received such and so many things, for so we say ex beneficio indebito oritur
debitum officium: So we see the field, receiving seed, is thereby bound to
return back somewhat to the sower: So the child naturally yeildeth himself
bound to obey his Parents, though there be no covenant or bond drawn between
them, and this is naturalis obligatio: So that this bond of nature and law is
so strong and binds us so strictly, that we shall be as surely bound by it,
if we obey not God and our Parents as if we had gone to a Scrivener and there
had an obligation drawn and made strong against us; yea, it does not only as
much bind us, but far more, because the obligatorie law natural is far
more strong and binds us more surely than the bond of the Law moral, and
indeed it sticks nearer unto us, in as much as this is by Gods finger written
in the Tables of our hearts; but this is only graven in tables of stone or
rolls of paper without. Man is called Imago Dei, and was made so, yet he was
not God, (...) to be left or ruled by his own will, for that is the main (...)
to which Satan would persuade Adam, Genesis 3. 5. namely, not to follow Gods
directions, but to do that which seemed best in our own eyes; and being
brought to that erroneous conceit, God faith, Lo, the Man now will be as one
of us, q.d. he will be no more subject to Gods will, but will shake off that
yoke and be equal with us; wherefore, that Adam might know his rank and row,
in which he is placed and stands under God, he gives out this commandment
and Law that he might know this, that though God has in mercy put all things
under his feet, Psalm. 8. 6. yet he reserved a power and prerogative to command,
and therefore we must acknowledge a duty to obey: Gods Will (...) and his
Wisdom must be out direction; if Gods will be praecipere, then our will must
be answerable to it in obedience, and our humane wisdom must be captived and
brought under, and made subject to the wisdom of God, 2 Gor. 10. 5. for this
is the chief part and perfection of obedience, to deny our wills and forsake
our own wisdom, Matthew. 16. 24. the reason is because our will and wisdom is
contrary and at enmity with the Will and Wisdom of God.

And thus much of the use of Gods authority forward from him to us in
commanding, and backward from us to him in obeying: And if we be willing
inwardly, laying down our own wills and wisedoms, and ready outwardly to
manifest it in action, then God will take on him to give us the tree of life,
and a promise of eternal blessedness for ever, and so we have a full
comprehension of his will and purpose in commanding and giving this Law.

There are now two difficulties and doubts which usually arise out of this
commandment, and therefore are to be assoyled.

Object. 1.
The first is, That seeing Adam now is in the state of innocence and perfection,
therefore Laws and Commandments are needless.

Object. 2.
Secondly, Seeing God knew Adam would break and transgress it, it may seem that
God was very hard and cruel in giving him that Law.

Resp. 1.
Touching the first objection, It is true that St. Paul says, 1 Timothy 1. 9.
Justo non est lex posita. Resp. 2.
And to the second, It is as true which he says, If there had been no Law, then
had their been no trangression, and so no punishment, and so it had been very
well with all men still: Indeed in some sense the words of St. Paul do sound
very well, if we understand them as he spoke them; for all Laws have two parts,
the one directive, the other corrective: So Paul says, That he which keeps
the first part of that Law which is directive, and so becomes just, he shall
never need to fear the other part of the Law which is corrective.

2. Object.
The second objection which accuses God of hard dealing, is like that other
objection in the new Testament, namely, Seeing that Christ knew that Judas
would betray him, John 6. 71. why did he make choice of him.

Resp. 2.
The answer to both is this, namely, That the foreknowledge of God is no cause
of any action, no more then our eyes, being open and seeing a man, is the cause
of his going; wherefore Gods foreknowledge is extra seriem causarum, as the
Schoolmen say: God gave Adam power and ability and freedom of mind to perform
a greater obedience than this, Preach. 7. 31. but man sought the inventions of
his own heart, and followed not the will and counsel of God; wherefore it is
sure, that seeing the Law given to man is most (...), and the power which man
had was most perfect, and seeing he was not constrained to transgress, but was
forewarned of it; therefore man knowing Gods will and yet wilfully breaking
it, is the cause of his own (...), and God is justified to be without all rigor
whatsoever, except we will say, Why did not God then make man immutable? which
question if we move, Romans 9. 20. we are not to dispute and plead with God,
though this reason may be yielded thereof, first, quia necessitas non habet
legem, God would not make him immutable, for then man must needs be God, for
only God is so. Secondly, because necessitas non habet laudem: for what thank,
praise, or reward could he have had, if he could not have chosen, but
necessarily must obey, as the fire by nature must needs burn and go upward;
wherefore we should rather (says St. Augustine) magnify Gods goodness and
benefits which worthily requires our obedience, and contemn our own
unthankful disobedience. This is a more profitable course of meditation than
to knit many knots and make many questions to reason with God.

Now we come to the Law it self, which I divided into the preface, body, and
penalty of it; of the which, the first is introductive, the second directive,
and the third corrective.

The body of the Law we see is planted between the preface and the penalty,
both which are to persuade us to the love and obedience of that in the midst.
It is therefore faced and guarded with the consideration of Gods love and
liberality, and it is backed behind with the fear of Gods just judgment, if
we break it. The first is set down as a spur to prick our dull natures forwards
to obedience; for who would not be stirred up with love and liberal rewards:
The other is set as a bit or bridle to keep us back, at least from
transgression: So that if persuasion or threatening, love or fear, fair means or
foul, will serve to keep us from sin and make us serve God, here God had put
them all together.

This preface is of the admirablenesse of his love and goodness which he
promises before he comes to the poor restraint of forbidding that (...).

There be four parts of his loving favors set out to us in it: First, Comedes:
Secondly, Comedendo comedes, that is, thou shall eat freely and frankly:
Thirdly, Ex omni ligno, not freely of one or of a few, but of all the trees:
Fourthly, Ex omni ligno totius horti, not of all the trees in one corner or
quarter, but of all in all the (...) of Paradise, and of all he (...) but one,
and one is the least that he should have restrained, so liberal is he and so
loath to deny us any thing he has; and he would not have forbidden this, had
it not been for our good also; such was Gods liberaliry to Adam, that (...)
does permit him to eat, not only libere liberaliter, that is, when he will,
what he will, how much soever he will, for his sufficient necessity and
strength, freely at his choice, liberally according to his desire.

In this plenty and variety granted, God permits to him the best, which is
the tree of life, and he gave him the means unde vivere, been vivere, and
semper vivere possit, for all the trees were means to sustain his life. The
tree of knowledge (being a testimony of his obedience) showed him how he might
live well, and the tree of life would have caused him to live for ever:
wherefore all these several blessings of God bestowed on him, might have moved
him to due obedience in this one and easy commandment; for seeing he had the
use of all the trees upon condition to abstain from this one, it is sure the
levis esset ejus continentia, si non deesset benevolentia. But if eating thou
shall eat could not allure him to obedince, yet dying (...) dye, one would
think should have been able to have kept him from disobedience, yet it did not,
and therefore mortem morier is is a just recompense to such wilful sin.

There is yet another thing which the ancient Writers do make (...) great
matter of in this place; that is, the marking That here first of all God and
Man do enter into a league, obligation, and covenant one to the other, by
which they prove, that Ecclesia and vinculum Ecclesiae is more ancient than the
state Politic, that is, that the bond ecclesiastical is of greater antiquity
than the bond of Commonweals Political or oeconomicall: For before Eve was
made, or ever Man and Wife, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants were
united with a bond of duty, which commends the bond of true Religion and
Divinity, which by obedience teaches us how to be inseparably united to God,
and made one of his Church, to whom is a promise of the tree of life.

De fructu vero arboris scientiae boni and mali, de isto ne comedas. Genesis 2. 17.

June 19. 1591.
THis Law of Paradise we sorted into three parts, the first whereof we handled
before, now follow the second and third parts to be spoken of namely, the
direction and correction, the Precept it self and the penalty, which
necessarily do ensue.

In these words then is set down the restraint of the forbidden (...), which is
the body of the Law it self; And then after it in the end of the verse insueth
the punishment, if we break it.

In this former part of the Law we observe two points, 1.
First, The subject of the Commandment, concerning which the restraint is made,
that is, the tree of knowledge. 2.
Secondly, The action it self restrained, that is, eating, which may be resolved
two ways, as the Schoolmen say, Quando actio cadit super materiam indebitam,
that is, either when an action is forbidden from lighting on it which should
not, or when it is invested with all his due circumstances.

In speaking of this, we will take this course, first to entreat of the subject
and action here expressed, and then of the application of it to us: The subject
is a Tree, and that but one tree of knowledge, which tree with the fruits of
it, were without question no more evil than the other trees, for all alike God
saw to be good, as we have seen; and therefore it was such as might have been
eaten, as well as the other, if this restraint had not been.

And again if this restraint had fallen on any other tree in the Garden as it
did on this, it had been as unlawful to eat as this: So that it is not the
nature of the tree, but of Gods word which made it evil to eat, for there was
no difference between them but in respect of Gods word and charge, which said,
Thou shall not eat thereof. In which respect it is called the tree of knowledge
of good and evil. We must understand that this tree has not his name of every
quality in it, but of the event and effect which should come by it, Exodus 15.
25. The Wise man calls it lignum dolorum, Eccles. 38. 5. of the effect and
event it had of these waters. So in Genesis 35. 8. there is a tree called Arbor
lamentationis, not that the fruits thereof would make a man sorrowful, but for
the casualty and event which happened and befell Israel there; not that it was
the cause of any lamentation: So we must know that whereas Adam before knew
good both ways, both by contemplation and experience, now having broken the
Law he knew evil both ways also: we had the knowledge of good and evil
moral by natural contemplation, Genesis 4. 7. so long as thou do good to thy
self, men will speak well of thee; So that to know good is been pati; while he
did been agere, Dicite just quia been, Esaias 3. 10. 11. The just shall eat the
fruit of their righteousness, and the wicked the fruit and reward of their
sin, and this is the other knowledge of good and evil, Numb. 11. 18. there
was knowledge of good and evil, by sight, sense, and experience, Psalm. 133. 1.
this is showed that malum culpae was the cause of malum poenae, and by feeling
the bitterness of the punishment, he knew how bitter a thing it was to forsake
God and not to fear him: So he knew the good of obedience, by the good of
reward, which was, the sweetness of pleasures before his fall; and after his
fall he knew the evil of sin by the evil of his punishment. The one
knowledge is, Genesis 18. 19. the other kind of knowledge is, Genesis 22. 12. If we
follow. St. Augustine and Tertullian, we may say truly, that it is called the
tree of knowledge of good and evil both ways, both in respect of the effect,
and also of the (...), Tertullian conceives that it was called so of the
effect, and duty which was to arise and be taught out of it, in which respect,
he calls it Adam's little Bible, and the fountain of all divinity, for as the
Bible is the perfect rule of knowledge to us; So was that to him, and should
have been (...), if he had not fallen, for by this dicendo it should have
plainly (...) Gods will, and so it should exactly teach that to be good, which
was according to it in obedience, and that to be evil which is contrary to it
by transgression; for the knowledge could not be more (...) set down, then by
this object and action, Thou shall eat of these, and shall not eat of this,
God then by forbidding them to eat of the tree of knowledge, did not envy or
grudge that they should have knowledge, but rather made this rule the root of
all knowledge to them, that the science of good and evil is taken only from
Gods dicendo, that is, things are therefore good because God by his word
allows them, and are evil because he forbids them.

Now touching St. Augustine, He says, this is called the tree of knowledge in
respect of the event, in regard of the exeperimentall knowledge, which man had
by it, both because by it he had felt the reward of obedience, so long as he
stood upright, and also by it he found and felt by experience, the reward and
penalty of disobedience, for when he had contrary to Gods word reached his hand
to the tree and eaten of it, he had experimental knowledge by and by both how
birter a thing it was to sin and forsake God, Jer. 2. 19. and also how good
and sweet a thing it was to stick fast to God by obedience, Psalm. 73. 28. He
found that in the action of obedience was life and happiness, and in the act
of sin was death and wretchedness, (...) before Adam had eaten of the tree
he had knowledge of good by contemplation and experience, and so for ever
should have had: and then he had argumentall knowledge by presumption and
contemplation also of evil; for he by the argument of privatives must presume
this conclusion, that if he do that which is forbidden he should be deprived
of the tree of life, and that happy estate, and so consequently must needs come
to death and all misery, which he found to be most true by woeful experience,
so soon as he had put it in trial: And thus much of the object and of the name
given to it.

Touching the Action which is the second part, in which I mean thus to proceed,
by way of certain positions and grounds, the one necessarily arising out of the
other.

We lay then for the first ground, that it was not lawful for God, nor
behoofull for us, that God should make trial of Adam who he had made, for it
is equally expedient and right in the practice and behavior of men, first to
make proof and trial of (...), before they will make any reckoning or
commendation of them as good laborers, so God tried Abraham, Genesis 22. 12. that
he might have experimental knowledge of his obedience, and say nunc scio, etc.
Now I know that thou fear God, seeing for my sake thou have not spared thine
only son: So he proved Israel at the waters of striffe, and Job by an other
trial. So God had knowledge of man whom he made, that then he was good, but he
would by trial see, whether he would continue so or not.

2.
Second, it was meet, that seeing a trial must be made, that it should be by
some external thing, in which this outward obedience and practice might
appear, as masters do make trial of their servants obedience in some such
work; Do this, Go thither.

So seeing Gods will was, that Adam should be a spectacle in obedience to
Angels and all other Creatures, therefore it was necessary, that he should
prescribe the place, and trial of it in a visible and sensible object, and in
a thing which might be manifest to good and evil Angels, to see and behold
him; This is the cause and reason, why God says not, Thou shall not desire to
lust in thy heart after the fruit of this tree? Because that action and trial
of the heart, soul, and thought, God only could discern, for he only tries the
heart and reins, 1 King. 8. 39. Therefore he says not, non concupisces, sed
non comedes, for that that action is apparent.

3.
Thirdly, it was convenient and seemed good to God, that it should be made by a
restraint and interdiction, that as before, idleness was forbidden and taken
away by labor, so here licentiousness of lust might be restrained by saying,
Thou shall not eat of this tree of knowledge.

4.
Fourthly, God saw it good and meet, that it should not be general but
particular, and brought to a special instance of this one tree.

5.
Fifthly, it seemed necessary to God that this trial should not be in a
particular of natural obedience, but rather in moral and positive obedience,
in which this commandment consists.

6.
Sixthly, as it was a positive and moral thing, so was it to be made in a thing
indifferent, for if it had been a thing natural and simply evil or good it
had been no trial: As Augustine says, if God had said, the fruit of this is
poison, he would not have done it, or if it had been such a thing which had
been a detriment or hurt to God, he would not have done it for the vile nature
of it, wherefore God placed this trial in a thing indifferent, which by its
own nature was not hurtful to man, neither could bring any hurt or detriment
to God; So that God would have the trial of his obedience stand, not in the
nature of the thing, but only in this respect, that it was Gods will to forbid
it, that Adams trial might be this. I can see no reason why I should not eat
of it, it is as good to eat, and as pleasant to look to, as any other fruit,
but God has restrained it, and said, Thou shall not eat of it, therefore I
will not.

Lastly, God in this trial gives no reason of it, but makes it an absolute
Law, simply saying, Thou shall not eat of it, for else man might think that he
might do it for the reason sake; for this makes plain the perfect pattern of
true obedience, when we do it only respecting Gods will and not looking for
any other reason whatfoever. Thus we see why God looked our this special tree
of knowledge, and laid this prohibition on it.

Now out of this we gather and say, that the making of (...) Laws by a
magistrate is lawful and good, 1 Samuel 14. 24. Saul may command his subjects
upon occasion to (...) as God did his servant Moses, Levit. 11. 1. etc. (...)
1. 1. etc. Also (...) may make a Law to command his Sons, to drink neither
wine nor strong drink; So Kings (in respect of the good of the Commonwealth
may make the like positive Laws, and bind their subjects to abstein, and not
to eat this or that, which of it self is lawful and good and not to be
refused, Romans 14. And subjects are bound to obedience, though they see no
reason but that the meat is good and allowed of God.

I come now to the applying of this to our selves, Matthew. 24. 32: Christ
wills them to learn a parable of the fig tree: So the wisdom which we may
learn out of this tree, is most excellent and profitable, even the whole body
of divinity: Before we come to the pith and marrow of it, we must first break
and pluck off the husk or shell, for the Leviticall Laws (as the Fathers say)
are as Aarons Almonds which his rod did bear, Numb. 17. 8. in which was Cortex
and medulla, and if we can (...) crack and take off the shell, the sweet
kernel of instruction will soon appear: The husk and difficulty of this
precept is, that God should inflict such a penalty for the taking and eating
such a fruit, this is that hard shell that few can crack: But our rule is, that
we must not stick still at the shell, but break it, and cast it away: Therefore
this is our rule in all such Laws, That not the outward presentation of the
thing commanded, but the power and authority of the commander and law maker is
to be respected, as the pith and substance of our duty; Therefore we say that
the principal sum and scope of the moral Law, and the pith of it, is
expressed in these two terms, Bonum ost faciendum, malum est fugiendum, Psalm.
34. 14. And this is known and received of all; but here is all the question,
what that good is, and what is that evil? If any make this question, why is
this thing good and to be done, and that thing evil and to be avoided? If we
say, as Eve did judging it by reason, and by the nature of the thing, as to
say, I see and know that it is good, pleasant and agreeable to our nature, and
therefore it is good, and I may do it, that were to fetch and draw the rule of
God from the nature of things, as if it were in the thing it self; but it is
said, 1 Cor. 6. 12. 13 Though meats be made for the belly, and the belly for
the meats, yet if we (...) them contrary to Gods word, they are evil, and God
will destroy both them and us, wherefore we will not take the (...) of good and
evil, from the nature of things, but make Gods will, expressed in his word, to
be the rule of all things that are good.

If we will then define good (...) we must not say, it is that which the reason
of man allows, which the sense of man does feel to be agreeable and pleasant
to our nature, neither may we say, that it is good and not to be refused, which
in it self (...) a nature delightful and profitable for man's use, for that
were to place the rule of good and evil, either within us, in our own reason
and understanding, or else without us in the natures and proprieties of the
things created, but we must not do so; for that only is good, which God
allows of and sanctifies by his blessed word allowing the use of it, saying,
thou may and shall do this, and so e contra, that is evil whatsoever it be
that God forbids and says thou shall not do it, for things are good and
lawful only, because Gods word says it is so, so that every thing takes his
goodness only from Gods word; And this is the pith and marrow of this
commandment, Therefore Deuteronomy. 12. 32. God says, Whatsoever I command you take
heed ye do it, thou shall put nothing thereto, nor take ought therefrom, As if
he should say, my commandment and will shall be the rule and direction of your
will and works; so in the new Testament St. Paul says, we must not be wise
above that which is written, 1 Cor. 4. 6. But that we be sober and know and
understand according to sobriety, which is to prove what every thing is, by the
perfect will of God, Romans 12. 2.3. This then is the difference between Gods
commandments; and those which men do make, when men (though they be the
greatest) do command any thing, they therefore do command things because they
be good and lawful, and when we deal with them, we therefore obey their Laws,
so far forth as the things they command are lawful and good, because their
words and commandments have no power to make things good: But when we deal
with Gods commandments, we simply obey all that he wills because his
commandment and word do make things absolutely good, ye though they before
may seem to be evil, yet after he has commanded them, they are made therefore
perfectly good, Nos volumus qua bona sunt; bona autem sunt quia voluit Deus.
Gods good will therefore is the best and most beneficial thing for us and our
good, and the things he commands are the wisest things for us to follow,
howsoever they seem to corrupt reason and sense, which are ill Judges in those
matters. Thus much then for our application and use, that when our actions are
agreeable to Gods word and law, then they are according to Gods will: And
therefore we may be sure that it is best for our behoof.

Nam quo die comederis de eo, utique moriturus es. Genesis 2. 17.

June 22, 1591.
EVery Law has in it two principal parts, the one contains the body and
tenor of it, the other comprehends the sanction and penalty: Touching the
body of the Law we have entrcated already, both of the subject, and also of the
action of it; Now therefore we are come to the latter part, to consider of the
punishment threatened to the breach of it; concerning which we say, That as
there is required necessarily in the Law giver authority and right to command,
so likewise in him must be a power and ability to correct and punish the
transgressors, or else his authority is without an edge. Both these therefore
are seen in the Lawmakers by the parts of this Law; the one being the directive
part, serving for direction, the other being the corrective part, which serves
for execution; And every one may be sure that he is subject and under one of
these. This then is as if Moses had said, Gods (...) is this, Non comedes, but
his (...) is this, If you will needs eat, and (...) your will before mine, and
your lusts before my love, then be ye sure of this, That in that day thou shall
dye the death, for death is the sower and bitter sauce of this sweet meat, Romans
6. 23.

Touching the punishment in it self, we are to know, that in every punishment
inflicted for offense, there is required Justice to give it in a due
proportion, that there be an equality between the punishment and offense; As in
the Law, he that will desire another man's Sheep and steal it, he in justice is
to restore fourfold. Again, reason and equity requires that the punishment
must be of greater force to (...) and discourage from sin, then the sin
must be to persuade and entise us to it.

Such an equality is in this; For because he took liberty to stretch his will
and desire further than he should, therefore that he should lose the first
liberty he had; for this is just and equal, (...) etiam poneret modum
beneficio, and that he that observes not the manner of using it, should lose
the right use which he had: It is therefore reason and right, that either we
should Dimittere voluntatem male vivendi, aut amittere facultatem been (...):
This we say to justify God, because men think that this sin of eating such a
fruit is not a capital offense, and that God was too hard to (...) this so
sore a punishment on it.

Touching the second point, which is concerning the cause of his death, which
must not be ascribed to God, because the cause is found in our own selves, for
God says, If you eat you shall die, that is, you shall be causes and authors
of your own death; your blood light on your own heads, for I am not guilty
thereof, which we shall the better percive and esteem, if we consider that
which before I have showed, that Adam was made immortal, non necessitate
naturae, sed vi (...) gratiae, not by natural necessity, but by the privilege
of Gods grace; for Adam consisting of contrary qualities, by his own nature,
they must needs, in regard of themselves, be the cause of death to them, as
they were to the beasts. But notwithstanding this subjection to mortality, and
possibility to dye, in regard of their nature, Gods grace did sustain their
bodily life, and kept them from death, so long as they kept themselves from
sin. But now si hence transgression, besides the necessity of nature, their
sin also did pluck death upon them, and was the cause of this curse: So long
therefore as man kept his first estate, he was united to God, which was life,
and had use of the tree of life, which then was (...) Deo, and had this grace
to preserve life; and by that means, so long, we had an immunity from death,
because we were (...) with the prop of Gods grace, which was the cause of our
immortality; but when (...) did cause that prop to be pulled away which
sustained the (...) of our nature, then we could not choose but dye both by the
necessity of nature and desert of our sin: If we had leaned still to the stay
of our nature, and not trusted so much to our own wills and wisdoms, it had
gone well with us: But this voluntary forsaking of God and leaning on the
broken staff and reedis stay of our own, was the cause of our fall into sin,
and so unto death. Thus we see God justified in this sentence saying, Morieris,
because he is neither the Author or Cause of Malum naturae, which is sin, nor
yet of (...), which is death. But man causing both culpam and poenam does both
ways clear God and condemn us, and our selves are proved to be the cause of
both.

3. Point: The kind of death
Now touching the third point, which respects the kind of death here
threatened, for there are several kinds of death, Rev. 2. 11. Rev. 20. 6. there
is the temporal and eternal, the natural and spiritual, the first and
second death, which of these is here in this punishment threatened? St.
Augustine answers, that God does here mean both whatsoever death may be
included from the beginning of our life unto the last death, all that is here
understood. Object.
But it may seem hard and unjust, that seeing only the Body did take and eat of
the forbidden fruit, that the Soul also should be condemned to this death as
well as the Body. Resp.
But to satisfy this doubt, the Fathers say, That as well the Soul as the Body
was in the transgression alike guilty, and therefore in Justice should be alike
punished, and this they make plain by this familiar parable and comparison: Be
it (say they) that a blind man and a criple or lame man should be in an
Orchard, and this one charge should be given alike to both, that upon pain of
death they should not take and eat of this one tree; The blind man of himself
could not steal of the fruit, because he could not find where the tree was;
the lame man for his part could not alone take of the fruit, because (though he
saw) yet he was not able to go to it: So when neither of them without other
could be guilty, they conspired both together and agreed, that the blind man
should carry the lame man to the tree, and so to take their pleasures, and
fulfill their desires, by which means they both became guilty of death: Such a
thing (say they, in resemblance) was between the body and the Soul; the Soul
had a desire and appetite (being forbidden) but could not perform the Action,
wherefore the inward affection within moved and conspired with the outward
action of the body, and so perfected the sin jointly, and therefore together
are worthy of this death.

Object.
Notwithstanding this, It seems to some, that here is meant only the second
death spiritual to be the punishment, and not the corporal and temporal;
their reason is because God says, In what day thou shall (...) of it, thou
shall dye: therefore seeing present death and (...) insued not the sin, but
some lived nine hundred years after; therefore they are induced to think that
God here intended especially the second death of the Soul.

Resp.
But to refell this opinion, we see Genesis 3. 19. that in the same day they
sinned, the sentence of the bodily death was denounced irrevocablo (...), and
in pulverem reverter is, which also is showed by debarring him from the tree of
bodily (...); And that it is plainly meant of the corporal death also, St. Paul
shows it Romans 5. 15. For only this death came to all Genesis 7. 21. 1 Gar. 15.
21. It is the death from which we rise again: wherefore we make no (...) but
that this is meant of the bodily death; and as of that, so we say of the death
of the Soul, we all being (...) and transgressores in Soul, are said (...) in
soul to be dead, and to have this sentence given out against us: Our Savior
Christ says, Matthew. 8. 22. Sinite mortuos sepelire mortuos, that is, let the
dead in soul bury the dead in body. Also our (...) is set out in the lost
(...), Luke 15. 31. He was dead but is alive again, that is, spiritually dead
in sin, and alive by repentance: And St. Paul more plainly says, 1 Timothy 5.
6. They being alive are notwithstanding dead: By death here is understood the
death of miseries, Rev. 9. 6. that is, the calamities and (...) of this world,
which sin will bring upon us, which are (...) more grievous and bitter than
death it self; for it is said that men being alive in those (...) wish and
desire death, as being less horrible than it; On the contrary side, to the
Godly there are provided such joys which are better than life it self, Psalm.
63. 5, 6. for Gods loving favor and the light of his countenance is better
than the (...) in this life; in which regard the (...) esteem (...) of life,
but wish to be out of this life, that they may enjoy that. The Jews by (...) of
this (...); eating (...) eat, and (...), do gather this, By the first, that he
might eat both for necessary use, and also for delight and pleasure; And so by
the second, which contains the punishment, they make this (...) (...) dye,
that is, (...), Heb. 2. 9. For the first and bodily death is but a sipping and
tasting or death, but when he says, thou (...) the death, that is (say they)
thou (...) suck and (...) up the very dreggs of death, both which are
comprehended in these two words, Rev. 20. 14. Mors and (...), Death and Hell.

Object.
Hereout then (...) another (...), that is, Whether God in (...) threatening
intended the pains of Hell fire?

There have been (...) men that have (...), that Moses in all his books spoke
not either of Heaven or (...), of (...) or of death; Resp.
but they were (...) (...) 32. 21. (...) conceive, that the (...) Statute and
Law (...) privilege of faith in Christ is reversed and taken away.

4. Point.
Now we are come to the fourth point, which is the time; for this has bred a
scruple, and been a bone for some to gnaw upon; for seeing Adam is said to live
so many hundred years after his fall, Genesis 5. 5. which is answered diversely of
sundry men. Some say out of Peter, 2 Epist. 3. 8. that with God (...) dies est
(...) mill (...); and therefore seeing Adam reached not to a full thousand
years old, he may truly be counted with the Lord, and in respect of his
reckoning to dye in the same first day. The ancient Writers do say, that by
assigning the time quo die is only an extent of the Law, and is not extended to
the punishment when it should take place; So that they say it is q.d. Thou
shall ever and at all times oboy, and no day break it: As the like is Luke 21.
Cavete ne qua die, etc. as if God allowed no day or hour in which the contrary
should be done, Et semper and ad semper faciendum est; so the negative binds
for ever. But touching this matter, the Judgment of Augustine and Theodoret I
like best, who say, That not the act and execution of Death was presently to be
inflicted the same day in which he should sin, but the sentence of death
should that day be denounced, as we see it was Genesis 3. non actum moriendi, sed
debitum mortis, for then death was made a debt, and became such an inevitable
sentence which should not be revoked: They received the sentence before the
execution of Gods Judgments: So did St. Paul 2 Cor. 1. 9. We received the (...)
of death in our selves, because we should not trust in our selves, but in God,
etc. And in the Law he is accounted a dead man which has his judgment and
has received the sentence of death. And after this sort Adam and all his
Posterity were dead in the same day. (...) erat in dominium mortis, says St.
Paul, Romans 6. 9. that is, God delivered him (being guilty and condemned for
sin) unto the Sheriff of death, to be kept and reserved unto the execution
day, which is at the good pleasure of Almighty God.

Therefore being delivered into the dominion and (...) of the Messengers and
Ministers of death, by and by he was subject to the Guives and Manacles of
death, which do seize upon all parts of our bodies for sin, Morbi enim sunt
laquei mortis, which is, we are held sure until we die; also the Ministers and
Servants which ever since that sentence was denounced, do attend upon us to
our end, are cares and sorrows within; labors and travails without, which
seizing on us do make our deaths, as sure as if we were already dead, for we
cannot escape it; therefore, says David, Psalm. 89. 48. Quis homo vivit, and
non videbit mortem? for all of us have sorrow, which is primogenitus mortis,
Job 18. 13. the same day (...) brought it forth, Genesis 3. and we have and feel
daily the forerunners of death, which are diseases, which make our bodies even
in this life (...) mortis, a body of death, Romans 8. 10. Wherefore we may be
sure that death it self will come most certainly, though the time be uncertain;
for it is a debt which must be paid, we must all dye, Heb. 9. 27. when the time
is come that God has appointed.

Dixerat autem Jehovah Deus, non est bonum esse hominem solum: faciam ei
auxilium commodum ipsi. Genesis 2. 18.

October. 1^. 1591.
THe Prophet Esaias 51. 1. exhorts the Church of God after this manner, Look
back (says he) (...) the stone out of which ye were (...), and to the (...)
of which you were dug; By which he (...) the Church of God, that there is a
very necessary and profitable consideration to be made out of the history of
Abraham and (...), and their lives, as it is expressed in the Scriptures. So
may we say of the history of Adam and Eve our first Grandfather and Mother;
for they are more properly indeed to be termed the first stone, out of whom all
mankind were hewn, and the pit, out of whose womb we all were dug and
taken: And so much more profitable is this (...) and the explication thereof,
because St. Paul faith, (...) (...). (...). that the creation of Eve and her
marriage, is (...), showing us the mystery of Christ, the second Adam, and his
(...) to the Church, which was his Eve taken out of his side. I told you that
from the 6. verse of this Chapter to the end of it, is (...) a Commentary upon
the 27. verse of the first Chapter, where Moses in one word dispatched the
Creation of Man and Woman, saying (...), which he so briefly passed over there,
because he purposed in this Chapter (...) a more large and ample discourse
thereof.

We have heard of the Creation of Adam in the former part of this Chapter
hitherto, which is nothing else but a (...) upon these words of the first
Chapter (...): Now therefore we (...) to the explaning of the other part, which
is (...), which he performs from this verse to the end of the Chapter. Two
princip^ points.
In all which verses, the Fathers say, than there are but two principal points
to be considered, the first is, The (...) of the woman, the other, The (...)
and marriage of her to the Man.

Touching the creation and (...) of Eve, it (...) partly a deliberation, and
then the work of creation (...) self, the (...) is in these words, (...), (...)
which contains also two parts, first the (...) in this (...) verse, and then
the occasion of it, in the verses (...).

But before we (...) of the consultation, (...) first consider (...) coherence
with that which (...) before, which is (...).

After the Almighty God had (...) the (...), which is his Church, by the (...)
made (...) God and man. Now in the next place he (...) to (...) of (...) estate
(...), which is of (...) by the duty of Man and Wife in Marriage: By which God
would (...) know, that by his will and ordinance all men (next after our (...)
to Almighty God, which is first) are bound to have a most special care and
regard of their duties in that other society, which is this, If they be
Husbands, their next care must be of their duty to their Wives; if Children, of
their duty to their Parents; if Servants, of their duty to their Masters; for
these duties of the private Families in the Commonwealth, are next in honor
and reverence to the divine duties which we own in the household of Faith, which
is in the Church unto God; for this society is lege ipsa antiqua, as one says,
and therefore we must give more honor and reverence unto it.

Now for the sum and scope of this verse, we will divide it into two parts,
first into Gods Dixit, and secondly into the tenor of his speech, which is, Non
est bonum, etc. and first briefly of dixit Deus, because we often heard of it
before, we must note, that qui dicendo facit, verbo facit, which teaches us to
give honor to Christ the second person in Trinity, who is the word of God, of
whom all things are made and ordained, John 1. 3. Secondly, touching this
Dixit, which we see by it and other singular prerogatives herein given to
Mankind, which we may add to all the former.

For in the creation of other Creatures, God used only the word of authority
fiat, but here he uses the word of his good will and pleasure which is faciam.

Before he ever directed his speech to that which was not, Genesis 1. 3. saying
fiat lux, when there was then no light but all darkness; But now he reflecteth
his speech to himself, as it were, consulting with deliberation about this
work, in that the Contents of his speech, in touching the good and happiness
of Man, in foreseeing what is not good for him, in providing that which is best
for him, we do not only see his care over us above other Creatures, but also
we are taught to acknowledge how well and reverendly we ought to esteem this
ordinance of marriage, for God knew that many speeches and reproaches would
arise among men against this work which God had in hand, of making Woman. Some
by way of jest and merriment to disgrace that sex, and others in contempt to
dispraise them, calling them necessary evils, etc. therefore God saw it
needful to express the absolute good which comes to Man by Woman, as being
so necessary that we cannot be well without them; for seeing we cannot deny,
but that God that does best know what we want and what is good, does affirm
that it is good for us to have Eve made, and that it were evil for us to be
alone without her, therefore that we pre^ume not foolishly in jest nor earnest
to contradict and cross Gods will.

The tenor or content of the Consultation stands upon two parts, The first is
a reason or cause which moved God to make Eve in these words, Non est bonum,
etc. The other is his purpose and Decree to make him a help; the form of both
which stands thus, I will make her to be a help to him, because it was not
good for him to be without help.

Touching which the Fathers do say, That now a pawse is to be made, because
this form of speech which is first used, is to set down the true and right use
of Logic, which is the art of right reasoning, or cause which moves God to
make Eve in these words, Non est bonum, etc. the other is his purpose by
argumentall conclusion; for they observe well, that all the speeches which
hitherto have been used, have been imperative, absolutely commanding things to
be done: So that Gods authority and will is the only reason of all that has
been done: But now at the making of Woman God uses a speech of argument and
reason, concluding and informing the absolute necessity of this work; which
also must teach us, to be ^ule to direct us in the immortality of our actions,
namely, to consider, as here God does, what is good touching our actions, and
what evil may come by doing and not doing it: if we in sound judgment can say
bonum est, then we are to conclude this, ergo faciendum est: If right reason
tells us this malum est, we are taught to resolve upon this conclusion ergo
non faciam: So that the rule of reason is in all things to consider, whether it
be good or bad. Again, He says not Non est bonum mihi, sed non est bonum
domino, that is, he respects more the good of others, than of himself, this
is Christ's reason which he used and moved in all his actions, expedit vobis ut
hinc abeam, John 16. 7. which is to teach us to do the like, for it is q.d.
all one because it shall be better for his, and the perfecting of his estate;
therefore for his sake I will make him a meet help, which example must teach
superiors how to frame all their reasons and actions, always respecting the
common good of their inferiors more than their own private commodity, for we
shall see it both here and elsewhere, that God makes the good and welfare of
his people the ground of his Decrees; so may we observe the like in the
reversing that which he had decreed, to punish them and destroy them for sin,
yet if they repent of their evil, God will reverse his Decree for their good,
which Jonas knowing Jon. 4. 7. says, that God does oftentimes by this means
seem to make his Prophets liars, because that for the good of mankind he does
often reverse and revoke the sentence denounced by them against wicked men;
wherefore we may well say, that Gods goodness is as much seen in caring for
the good of man, being made, as in creating man, which was nothing before: All
which he does that the consideration of his love and goodness to us might be,
as it were, cords and links of love to tie us unto him in all duty and
obedience, Ose 11. 4. and to teach us to frame all our thoughts words and deeds
to the augmenting of the glory of God; As to say, Because it is good and
acceptable to his glory I will do this, and e contra.

I come now to the reason, and first to the antecedent thereof, in which we see
that God does set his heart upon Man, being made, that now he takes a special
view to see whether he can epsy any good thing to be wanting about him which
he might supply. We read in the end of the first Chapter, that God, looking
upon man, saw all to be very good, yet here he that thought man by creation to
be very good, saw a detect of one good thing yet, which might make much for his
perfection: And therefore he takes order here to furnish him with it, that
nothing might be wanting to those that he loves.

By this therefore it appears that solitariness is counted an imperfection
in Mankind, but not in God; for he being most perfect, yea, the perfection of
all things, needs not any other thing to be adjoined to him as a companion or
help meet for him.

Therefore he is and ever will be set alone, and will be called solus sapiens
Deus, as the Psalmist says. Thou art God alone: But among the Creatures this
shows all things to be imperfect, in that it is not well with them, if they
be alone; For the perfection of Angels is in multitude, being an Host: The
perfection of Mankind, touching the civil perfection, is in societies, by
which Families, Cities, and Commonwealths are made; so we may mark that
solitariness: God in the Creation does at least double every thing, that it
might not be alone. In the firmament he made great lights and lesser lights:
The waters were made double, the upper and nether waters: The Earth had herbs
and trees: And as for Fish, Fowl, and Beasts, he made all things in abundance.
Solomon shows, in the 4. Eccles. 9, 10, 11. that above all other Creatures it
is most meet and convenient for man, in diverse respects, not to be alone, and
concludes the point with vae Soli, because it is not good for man especially
to be alone: And therefore when our Savior Christ calls his Disciples, it is
said, he sent them out by pairs, two and two, because he would not always they
should be solitary and alone, Matthew. 10. 4. Luke 10. 1. But there is no rule so
general, but that has his particular exceptions in some special causes,
unless it be in moral rules, of good things commanded by God, for against such
there is no exceptions to be taken. But in the rules of natural goodness
touching convenience, we may ever in some instance make an exception, As (
Husay 1 Samuel 17. 7.) this counsel is good, but not at this time: So we may
say, the light is good for all, yet it is evil and hurtful to ill eyes: So
may we say of solitariness, that sometimes it is most good and meet for a man
to be alone in solitariness; so it is good and most meet for some man to be
alone without company; for so Moses said Leprosus habitabit solus, that is to
avoid infection. God says of his Scholars Ducam eos in solitudinem and docebo
eos, showing oftentimes solitariness is best for Students, and so our Savior
Christ often frequented solitary places for private prayer, as most fit for
it. Thus we see generally how this is to be taken, but more particularly we
must consider of it in the special case of Marriage, to see how this is
verified in a single and unmarried life, whether (in that respect) it be not
good for all men to be alone.

It is not good for man to be alone.

Object.
A question may be made here of the truth and true meaning of the word of God
in this speech? Resp.
In resolving of which we must make a concordance and agreement, between these
two verses of the old: Testament, and that of St. Paul in the new Testament, 1
Cor. 7. 1. which says contrary to this, non est bonum mulierem tangere.

For reconciling of which we must remember, that in the 17. and 18. verses of
this Chapter is offered to our consideration a double kind of good, in the 17.
verse is spoken of bonum morale, to which is opposed the evil of sin and
transgression, but in this 18. verse is spoken of bonum natural, which is the
good of convenience either for our profit or pleasure, to which is opposed not
the evil of sinners, (...) of inconveniency and indecency, by reason of the
want of something which is requisite and meet, and of such a good is here
spoken: For St. Paul saying, it is not good to touch a woman, does not mean
that it were a sin to marry, for 1 Cor. 7. 36. he says, if a man does marry
he does not sin therein, for Christ says of the Angels, they neithey marry
nor are given to be married, and yet they are holy, they sin not, because
they do not marry, yea their estate is better without marriage, than Adams was
in Paradise being married; St. Paul tells us, Gal. 3. 28. That in Christ all
the faithful shall be, as the Angels without Sexes of male and female, and so
without marriage, wherefore the inconvenience for which it is not good to be
alone here on earth is in respect of circumstances, places, times, and persons,
of which Augustine says well, Distingue circumstantias and concordant, to be
understood, q.d. It is not good for man to be alone without a wife while he
lives on the earth, for we have seen that in Heaven this is not verefiable,
because it shall be (there) best for man to be unmarried, and as the Angels
are. In regard of the circumstance of time, we must understand this q.d. it is
not good now at the beginning of the World, that man should live and continue
alone, for if he had been always alone and without a wife, the world had been
as a waste wilderness without inhabitants to dwell on it, and in this respect
it had not been good in regard of the purpose and decree of almighty God, who
as it is in the Epistle to the Hebrews, purposed to bring many children unto
glory, and had said, Genesis 1. That mankind should so multiply as to fill the
earth, which had not been done but by means of marriage of male and female, so
that we say, in respect of the circumstance of persons, that though it is true,
that it is not good for such a man to live unmarried, which cannot abstain in
(...) lust from burning, yet if a man has received the gift of continency and
chastity, then it is good and best for such a man to be alone; But this end was
accessory and came after the fall, for in the state of innocence there was no
danger of such lust and uncleanuesse, and, as propter fornicationem, did not
concern Adam in Paradise; so the other end which was to (...) and fill the
earth, respects not us now, for we see the earth is so full of people and so
mightily replenished, that it may seem in this respect, more convenient now to
restrain the liberty of marriage in some, that fewer families might be: We see
then in what respect Moses ( bonum) must take place, and St. Paul's ( bonum non)
must give place and yield to it; To conclude for the (...) resolution of this
point, we must know that the principal good of man is Adhaerere Deo, Psalm. 37.
6. Which cleaving fast to the Lord as St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 7. 35. must be our
rule to know, whether it be good for us, not to marry or to marry at all, for
though it be a good and lawful thing to have a wife, yet we must know it to be
so far forth good, as it will further us in cleaving fast to the Lord.

For rather than marrying a wife, should be a means to divert and separate us
from God, which is our first conjunction by religion, we must never marry, not
be married, but count it evil and hurtful to us in this case to take a wife:
Again if a single life be found in us an occasion of fleshly (...) and
temptations, by which we are plucked further from God, and are less able to be
near unto him in Christian duties, then if we were married; in this case we
know that it is good for us to marry, and it is not good for us to be alone any
longer. If we (...) that the cares and troubles of this life, which the estate
of marriage brings with it, will be a means to keep and separate us from God,
then says St. Paul, in that respect a single life is better, 1 Cor. 7. 28. For
Christ (...) us, that many are separated and plucked away from God, by marrying
a wife, by attending to their Farms and Oxen, etc.

The (...) then stands inter solicitudinem and solitudinem, for that estate
which we find does least trouble our minds with the cares of this world, must
be thought best and fittest for us.

And thus Moses and St. Paul may be reconciled, if we shall advisedly consider
it will be a means to keep us from the two extremes which are in the world, and
make us keep the middle way wherein it is best to walk; For being (...) in this
we shall not be moved by St. Paul's words, to condemn and contemn marriage as
the Papists do: Nor yet on the other side shall we give our selves to that
licentiousness and liberty of the flesh, of which St. Paul speaks, 1 Timothy 3.
7. When men and women of wantonness do marry for (...) lust, and as the
superstition of Papists, and lasciviousness of wantonness will be avoided; so
by this means marriage and a single life shall be well used of all, as shall be
best for their good and the glory of God.

Object.
There is also a second objection made against this saying of almighty God the
occasion is, Seeing he says it is best for man to cut away all occasion and
alurement of evil. Therefore it may seem that God might better have said, it
were good for man to remain alone without a wife, etc. But they which object
this, do but cavell with the word of God and cross that which is here said,
God says, that a wife is good for man, but they say she is evil for him, and
God says she is a meet help, but they say she was a hurt and hindrance to him,
and a help in nothing but this, to help forward to a further misery. Therefore
(say they) it had been better for Adam to have remained alone still (...)
appinesse, than to have such a companion which would bring him to misery.

For answer to which it was not, causa sine qua non, as they would make it, for
though Adam had been alone without Eve, yet (no doubt) he might and would have
fallen as he did now: For as the Angels which though they were unmarried, yet
notwithstanding did fall and not keep their first estate: So (no doubt) the
Devil would have been as strong in his delusions to have made him to fall, as
he was in deceiving his wife; we may therefore lay the fault of this finne upon
Eve or the Devil; for as St. James says, Jam. 1. 14. It was not so much any
outward occasion as his inward and corrupt concupifcence which made him to
sin; But be it that she was the cause of fall, yet from whence then came that
occasion of evil to him, Non'e, e latere viri, why then, out of himself came
all this cause of sin.

But if any shall complain yet further of the woman's hurt and fault; let us
know that this woman was made by the counsel of God, the means and occasion by
which amends was made, and that with advantage for the evil, for all the evil
which she had first done, for as she brought forth sin and death, so she was
a means to bring forth a holy seed, which should bring eternal righteousness
and life unto all, for as the Serpent should deceive the woman: So it was Gods
purpose, that the seed of the (...) should destroy the Serpent and his works;
wherefore we must not so much with grief marvail that the woman's sin was made
the occasion of all our misery, as with joy and comfort to wonder, that God
made the seed of the woman to save us from sin, and to bring us to (...). And
thus much for the resolution of these two doubts.

Now for the second part, we see that after deliberation, God comes to this
determination and says, Faciam adjutricem, where we may mark that God says
not fiat, as when he made other Creatures, but faciam which is a word of
advisement and wise deliberation, whereas fiat is a word of haste, and
expedition to be presently done without delay, which almighty God does, to put
us in mind, that when we go about to get our selves wives, or to give our
children in marriage, that we must not (...) about it rashly or suddenly, to
post up such matters on the sudden, but with great discretion, wise advice, and
consultation, to attempt so weighty a matter, that is, first by considering
whether it be good or no for us that a match should be made; Again, seeing it
is plain that God only is the giver of good and meet marriages and wives, we
learn, that therefore it is our duty when we lack this help to pray earnestly
unto God, that it would please him to say unto us, as he said unto Adam, I will
make a meet help for (...), For want of observing which rules in (...), it
often comes to pass, that very unmeet matches and marriages has been in the
world, and foul corruptions and abominable abuses, have crep into this holy
ordinance to the slander and disgrace thereof, for this is set down as the
chiefest cause of all the monstrous sins of the first age of the world Gen 6.
2. Because the sons of God looking upon the daughters of men, took them wives
according to their own fancies, that is, rashly and headily without advice and
deliberation, and they took them at the first sight as pleased themselves, and
did not crave of God to give them such as might please him, Micholl, David's
wife, is said to be a wife of Saules making and giving, and therefore because
God made not the match and marriage between them, she was not a meet help, but
a snare to entangle him: And so God does threaten, Joshua 23. 12, 13. verses,
that if the Israelites do after their own wills take unto them heathenish
woman to be their wives, which he had forbid, they should be no helps to them
but hurts, namely, They should be thorns to their eyes, whips to their sides,
and snares to their feet, because they do not take wives at Gods hands, that
is, such as he allows and wills them to take.

Nam quum formavisset Jehova Deus e terra omnes bestias agri, omnesque volucres
coeli, and adduxisset ad Adamum ut videret qui vocaret singulas (etenim
quocunque nomine vocavit illas Adam, animantem quamque; id nomen ejus est.)
Genesis 2. 19.

October. 16, 1591.
THese words contain the occasion of the former deliberation, for that there
might be an orderly proceeding, it was necessary that man being alone, and
wanting a meet help, which was good for him, therefore that first a general
view and survey might be taken of all the Creatures which God had made, to see
whether amongst so many millions of goodly creatures, some one might be found
for Adam to be a meet mate for him, and then if the man should not find any
one fit for him, God might proceed in his former purpose in making one woman
meet for his company.

In these words therefore we have first to consider Gods commission and
warrant, for the ministering and bringing together all the creatures before the
man.

Secondly, Adams answer returned non est inventus, for after his diligent
search, it is said he found no meet help; for the first, because it is Gods
royal prerogative, to cause all the creatures to make their appearance at a
certain place and time, which man of himself might not presume to take upon
him; therefore God gives over his right by a letter of Attourny and dedimus
potestatem to Adam, by which he might lawfully, both take a straight survey of
them all, and also impose names to every one of them as he pleases, which
(see) that this writ and warrant is given out to all the living creatures here
below saving unto fishes, the reason whereof is, because that if there were any
likelihood at all, that man might find a meet companion and mate for himself
any where, then it must needs be amongst one of these two kinds of creatures,
either amongst beasts of the field, or fowls of the air, for there be some
agreement and conformity between man and beasts and birds naturally, but none
at all between the fish and us, the beasts (as we have seen) are made of the
same mould and matter which we are made of, and the fishes were made of the
slyme of the waters, and not of slyme of the earth: Secondly, because they have
naturally diverse notes and voices as well as man, but the fish are mute and
dumb, and therefore unmeet for our company. Thirdly, beasts and birds do feed
on earthly things as we, and breathe and live in the same air and place which
we do, and do delight naturally in the sight and company of man, and easily
will be made tame, sociable and serviceable for man, whereas e contra, the fish
neither feed nor breathe as we do, they cannot live in the same place and
element which we do, but are as it were inhabitants of another world below us,
and besides this, they will by no means be made tame and sociable to us, nor be
serviceable to us, but only at our table for meat, wherefore they being as it
were of another world, and of another nature and disposition diverse from ours,
they could not be meet for our company, and therefore in vain had it been to
have called them into this solemn assembly of earthly creatures, God is said
then to bring all these creatures before man, therefore they came not at man's
call, nor yet of their own accord, but by the special commandment of almighty
God: And indeed without Gods powerful commission we may come to them, for they
will not come to us, or if they come, it is to do us hurt, or to make us
afraid of them, Job 39. 12. This word then of God which brought them together,
is not an audible word, Sed vox in silentia, as Job says, Job 4. 16. And it is
called Gods whistle, Esaias 7. 18. for if he call, yea if he do but hiss and
whistle for innumerable Caterpillars and Froggs, they will speedily come in
swarms to do his will, Psalm. 105. 34. Thus we see that verbum illud quod
produxit, idem adduxit haec omnia Adamo: By which words we may observe, that
God does also now invest man into his rule and dominion over all the creatures,
by bringing them before him, as their Lord, to do their homage unto him, for
it was the like custom in Israel when any was anointed King, that all
Israel should suddenly come together before him, that they might know and
acknowledge him to be their ruler, 1 Samuel 10. 17. Such a like thing is here;
for all creatures by Gods appointment do as it were meet at a Parliament by
general consent, to anoint man to be their King: Now in the next place we
must consider the end; why this solemn assembly was made, the principal thing
indeed is to discover to Adam, that amongst all the creatures which were yet
made, there was not one meet and worthy enough to be his companion as it may
appear in the 20: verse. But withal, there is besides it a second subordinate
end, which is, that man should give names to all creatures, and to see how Adam
would call them, by which we see that God loves not dumb shows, and will not
have Adam idle in beholding his creatures, but would have him to exercise that
wisdom which God had given him, in giving them names, for it is said to be a
wise part, by the outward sight and view of things, to be led to an inward and
wise consideration thereby; by which he might learn instruction, so will God
have him too, while he looks over them, first, to be led to a wise
consideration of the natures of the things that he sees; and then to give fit
names to them, according to their diverse natures, which by sight he perceives,
which we have seen to be the very order that God uses, Genesis 1. 4. So soon as
he saw the light, presently he is said to consider of it, namely, that the
nature of it was good, and therefore presently proceeds to give it a fit name
agreeable to the nature which he saw to be in it.

In the first, God does establish in man (as a meet thing for that reasonable
creature) the speculative part of wisdom, which is the duty of meditation,
study, and contemplation, which is expressed by the word (seeing) for so the
prophers were called in the old times ( Seers) of this, 1 Samuel 9. 9. And again
we must know, that this speculation by study and reason looking into the nature
of things, is not only lawful and allowable in divine matters, which is the
study of divinity, but also in the general study of natural Philosophy, by
which we may look into the nature of all the creatures which God has made,
which is by nothing else but by meditation to call them to mind, and then as
having them before us, wisely to consider of their natures and names, so David
did confess, That he did often meditate of all the works of Gods hand, Psalm.
143. 5.

Another point, that Adam was not only enjoined to see and consider of their
natures and names, but also to utter in words and in names, the things which in
his wisdom he had conceived of them, by which God does as it were, untie the
string of his tongue and open his mouth, that by speech and audible and
sensible words, he might show and utter his wise conceits, for the
communicating of that knowledge which was in him unto all others after him, to
this end therefore God made him a tongue as well as eyes, that his wisdom and
learning should not be buried in his breast, but might be expressed for the
good of others, by which also we do see the approbation, commendation and
allowance, of two other notable Arts and Sciences given unto man, namely
Grammar and Rhetotick, by which our mouths are opened to utter knowledge
aright, God cannot abide, that men should misname things, as to call things
which are good, by evil names, or to call evil, good, Esaias 5. 20. Therefore
God will have him take a special view of all things, first, and then
afterward to name them: First therefore we must have knowledge by study and
contemplation, before we take upon us to profess it by eloquution.

But now a days, it is not as it was at the beginning, for we take upon us to
be (...), professors, and preachers of knowledge before ever we study, we
attain to the knowledge and understanding of that which we profess to teach:
This authority which man has to give names to all creatures, does first argue
his sovereignty and his supremacy over them all, Psalm. 49. 11. For there David
says, when men have houses and lands of their own, then they take upon them as
having most right, to call them after their own name, that is, to give them
what names they please to impose: So does God himself reason, 45 Esaias 4. I have
called them by my own name, therefore they are mine; It was God's course in 17.
Genesis 5. when Abram had vowed his subjection to God, by the Sacrament of
Circumcision, and given himself to be his servant; then God, to show his
authority over him, gave him a new name, calling him Abraham: So was it the
custom of kings and princes, having by force of arms made any subject unto
them, to show their sovereignty over them, they used to alter their names, and
call them by names of their own inventing, as we may read, 2 Kings 23. 24. for
of Eliakim is called Joakim, and Mateniah is called Zedekias, 2 Kings 24. 17.
So here God having made all things subject to man, and him the Lord and Ruler
over them, Psalm. 8. to declare that royal prerogative which he had, he gives
him also leave and authority to give them what names he pleases, and so they
for ever should be called.

Which also does argue the great and rare wisdom and knowledge which Adam had
in this happy estate; for it is a great point of wisdom, so to distinguish
the natures of Gods Creatures, as to give them fit and proper names expressing
their natures; he knew, as it appears, not only rerum Idola, but also was
able to give verborum idiomata, that is, such a propriety of words and names to
each several thing, whereby their diverse natures and qualities might be
discerned: The man therefore gave names to all the Cattle, etc.

The reason of the Mandate or Writ, as we have heard, was partly to honor man
as Gods Lieutenant on earth, and as Lord of all his Creatures, and partly to
express, the great and singular wisdom and knowledge which God then had
induced him withal: The Content of which, was to call a general muster and
assembly of all his Creatures before Adam, that a survey might be made, to see
whether any meet help for man might be found, to avoid solitariness, because it
was not good for him to be alone; and it was Gods purpose at this solemn
meeting and Parliament to invest man into his dominion, and to declare him to
be their Lord by giving them names.

Now in this verse is first contained the execution of the Writ, showing all
was so, and then in the latter end of the verse, is set down the retorn of the
Writ, in these words ( he found not a meet help for him. As the Commandment
had 2. parts, namely, the considering their natures, and giving them names; so
has all wise men distinguished by all the ancient Hebrews calling some men of
profound judgment and deep knowledge, and others, men of eloquence, and
excellent judgment and utterance: Both which gifts of God hardly are found
together in any one man, (...) are given to diverse diversely, as it pleases the
Giver: But to Adam, at the first, both were given in a full and perfect
measure, and both of them are here gounded upon Gods allowance, as being
lawful and good, and also upon Gods Commandment, as a thing most agreeable to
the nature of man, namely, to spend his time in study for the increase of
knowledge, and in declaration of his knowledge to others, by wise sentences and
words; for to this end God made man animal rationis and orationis particeps,
with which no other earthly creature is endowed, therefore the ancient Fathers
have noted in Adam's two estates, the one to be pater viventium; the other to
be pater scientium, that is, The Father and teacher of all knowledge; for as
Tubal is said to be the father and author of Music Genesis 4. 21. so may Adam be
said to be pater Theologiae, Philosophiae, Gramaticae, Rhetoricae, etc. he
was the first that practiced Contemplation, and the first that practiced
Eloquution, by that excellent light of nature which God had given him; and the
first, as here we see, that gave proper, sit and significant names and words
to express the natures of things, and he was not only the father of all the
liberal Sciences, but also of all mechanical Arts Genesis 3. 19. pater
agriculturae, etc. by all which we briefly see the perfection of his mind,
and the excellency of his gifts with which he was endowed: So that Adam then
must needs be granted to be the first and the chiefest Author of all
Knowledge and Learning that ever since, in all ages of the world has been
among men, for from him it was derived and spread abroad among his posterity,
into all parts of the world, for Adam's knowledge both of Divinity, and all
other natural things was derived to the house of Sheth, and from him to Noah,
and so conveyed to the house of Sem, and after remained amongst the sons of
Heber. Genesis 10. 21. and from thence was kept and continued in Abraham's family,
which were called the Children of the East Genesis 52. 6. from which East parts of
the world, this Knowledge and Learning, which was first in Adam, was spread
abroad among the learned men of Egypt, Acts 7. 22. In which learning of the
Egyptians Moses was trained up, and therefore was prepared not only by the
instrument of God's spirit, but also by the known received truth of the
knowledge of these points in all the world, to set down unto us these things of
our Forefathers, in the beginning of the world, and it may appear by this,
that Adam was worthy to be counted the Father of all knowledge and learning,
because herein is seen the perfection thereof in him, for to name all good
creatures so infinite in number, and so diverse in kind, and that to give to
every one of them a distinct name, and yet so fit and proper to them according
to their natures, as that God would not change nor (...) them, but say, so
shall they be called; this argues in him an absolute perfection of knowledge,
which has not since been had. As he was the Father of knowledge within, so was
he of utterance and expressing it by words, because we say that he was the
first Linguist that was in the world; and indeed intelligence and utterance
have very near affinity and friendship, as the Latin words show, for Ratio and
Oration do sound alike; and in Greek the word does signify not only the act of
contemplation for knowledge, but also the act of utterance for speech and
conference, by which it is made known, for the one is verbum (...), the other
verbum ore (...) and is agreed upon by all learned men, that the Hebrew tongue
is the original tongue and most ancient, by which Adam expressed his mind;
Hebrew the the ancient language.
and therefore it is called of many the holy (...) for this tongue went from
Adam to Noah, from Noah to (...) and from thence (...) is manifested, that it
continued as the general tongue and language in all the whole world, until the
confusion of (...), Eusebius (...). does prove this most plainly and (...),
that the (...) tongue was the first and most ancient from the beginding, and
that which Adam here used in (...) names to all the Greatures; for he of
purpose here confuteth the (...), which do affirm that all knowledge language
and learning are derived from Chaldea, which he first disproveth by the letters
of the Alphabet And that the Greek tongue was derived from the (...) proves,
because (...) and (...) which Greek words signify their men of learning and
knowledge, are words plainly derived from the (...) from (...) they do borrow
their (...) and original. As therefore (...) knowledge and wisdom being (...),
is most perfect and absolute, so is this tongue and language of (...), which
Adam (...) rich and sufficient of it (...). For whereas all other tongues, even
the Greek, do show their beggerlinesse, and argue and she (...) imperfection
in this, that they borrow words and (...) from their senior tongues, and
because they are sain to make (...) pounds to express their minds; but this
Hebrew and holy (...) on the other side; borrow (...) not of any tongue, (...)
all; and also (...) in such simplicity of words, and yet has such a (...) and
majestle in every phrase, that Eusebius faith well of it (...) (...) (...) and
(...) for so we see that God approves all the names which Adam gives to the
Creatures, saying, that as the man called them, so should their (...), and so
continue to the worlds end.

Now we are come from this general consideration of his tongue and language to
consider of the names in particular which he gave. Touching it I will give you
but a taste of a few, because it were infinite to reckon all the excellent
significant and most fit names of the Creatures which he gave: Adam having
first severed the Beasts from the Fowls, as being distinct in nature, among all
the Beasts he seeing a Horse, he knew that God had made him for man to ride and
trundle upon for his case and better speed, does therefore at the first sight,
according to the nature of him, give this name, which in (...) signifies a
swift Runner. So seeing the Sheep, and knowing that God had made them to bear
wool to cloth and keep warm, he by and by calls him the man clothier. An
Ass he names the mase Porter, because he knew his nature was to carry men's
burdens, etc. So for the Fowls, he seeing the Eagle to be the Prince and chief
of Birds, gives him a name of the nobleness of his nature: The Peacock he
calls a pround Bird, of that inward property of pride which he knew to be in
him: The Stork he calls the grateful, loving, or pitiful bird, for the
dutiful care and kindness which he has of his Damme. So for creeping things,
he calls the Serpent by the name of subtilnesse or deceivablenesse, which
knowledge of his dangerous nature might have made him beware and take heed of
him: The Locust has his name of going out in swarms: The Be has his name
given him of his artificial cunning workmanship, with which God has naturally
endued him, in making his Combs of honey and wax. By all which Adams great
wisdom and insight into the nature of things is seen, because the name does so
fitly answer the nature of things. And thus much of the execution of the Decree
concerning the denomination of Creatures.

Now we are come to the (...) of this Writ, which is set down in these words,
He found not a meet help for him: Touching which we may observe, that he
returns not the answer of this, that he had given meet names to all the
Creatures, by which they should be called for ever. But letting this pass, he
says, that He could not find a meet help for Man, which shows indeed that
this was the most chief and principal end of the assembling the Creatures
before him, that he might find a help and fit companion for him, if any were;
for not finding argues a seeking, and seeking argues a desire to have a
companion like him, and that desire argues a want, which want made him to seek
diligently, but he could not find; therefore here he returns Non est
inventus. This is then q.d. somewhat Adam found by search and seeking, namely,
the diverse natures and qualities of good Creatures which were made for his
good: But yet because they were all brutish and unreasonable, he refused them
all to be his mate; for in Adam God had placed naturally, not only appetitus
socii, sed etiam similitudinis, that is, to be one of his own kind, nature,
and disposition, but he found none as yet. This confession of his want, does
argue there this conclusion of his desire to God, as Augustine says, (...)
simile, non est simile; ergo Domine fac simile.

Vocavissetque Adam nominibus pecudem quamlibet, and volucrem Coeli, omnemque
bestiam agri: non aderat Adamo auxilium commodum. Genesis 1. 20.

October. 19. 1591.
I Showed that the Precept was directed to the Beasts and Fowl to come before
man, Gods Lieutenant, whereby he was invested with honor and supremacy above
the beasts, here Gods generation, in the 4. verse, is named by man: This verse
stands upon the execution and return of the Precept directed to man, which
commandment, as I told you, stood upon two parts, Seeing and Calling. The
Hebrews, in their tongue call themselves not only men of speculation, but also
men of utterance and practice: adduxit, ut videret, and vocaret.

It is received as approved in divinity, that in Adam are two estates: First
out of the fourth verse of this Chapter, that though God be Pater generationis,
yet Adam is Pater generatorum, the father of the World, as in the 20. verse of
the next Chapter, Hevah had her name for that she was Matter cunctorum
viventium. Adam pater contemplationis
And secondly, hence they say he is called Pater contemplationis; for by the
Divines, both ancient and new, there are in Adam two perfections, the one of
Mind and Understanding, the other of his Will; the one is gratia gratis dats,
the other is aceepta; the one concerns his Wisdom, the other his Justice:
Hence they gather his Wisdom, by the knowledge of natures to give apt names;
and his Justice out of the last verse of the first Chapter. God bash made man
righteous, but they have sought many inventions, says the Wiseman Preach. 7.
29. that is, God made man's mind without corruption; in the beginning his will
was free, his thoughts strait, his understanding without questions. The
multitude of Quarists and Quomodists, of those that make doubts and questions,
come from the Devil, who says in the beginning of the third Chapter cur
praecepit vobis Deus, ut non comederitis. Wisdom in contemplation and
utterance.
Tertulltan says well, that the knowledge of man stands either in scientiis
mutis, as in contemplation, in videre: or in scientiis disertis, that is, in
utterance, in vocare; that is, as the Schoolmen say, in the science of Reals
and Nominals: For the first, which is to weigh in silence, Paul in 1 Cor. 13.
2. says, There is a knowledge of (...) and of Mystery. Adam, as it were,
induced with a prophetical spirit in the 23. verse, said that she was bone of
his bone and flesh of his flesh, being before in an heavy sleep. There was in
Adam a science of Mysteries, in that he was made in Gods Image, the 26. of the
first Chapter; and by his obedience he knew the Mystery of the tree of life,
which was his erernall reward, as it is in the end of the 22. verse of the next
Chapter: Now last for the knowledge of The knowledge of Adam in naural
Philosophy:
Philosophy, it was in Adam: The knowledge of wisdom is as gold, of the
Creation as of silver, this of nature and of names as pearl. Of Solomon:
Great was the knowledge of Solomon, in natural Philosophy, who spoke of the
nature of Trees, of Beasts, and of Fowls, 1 Kings 4 33. Of Moses:
And Moses he was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, Acts 7. 22. Yet
by the Fathers, in this knowledge of the natures of things, above both these,
Moses and Solomon, Of Noah.
Noah is preferred, who knew the clean beasts from the unclean, which by paires
he took into the Ark, chap. 7. 2. The wisdom of all the Heathen Philosophers,
compared to the knowledge of these three, Noah, Moses, and Solomon, was but
ignorance: Adam a greater Philosopher than they.
Yet Adam was a greater Philosopher than those three: The reasons thereof.
For first Adam was created in wisdom, without corruption; their wisdom was
bred in corruption, and the Heathen are destroyed in their own wisdoms, Psalm.
9. 15. They three and all the wise men of the World had the light of their
understanding per scientiam acquisitam, by study and former observation: Adam
had his without observation, non per discursivam scientiam sed intuitivam, for
when he had beheld them he gave them names. Others got their wisdom by study
and travel, for in the multitude of wisdom is much grief, and he that
increases knowledge, increases sorrow, says the Wiseman in Preach. 1. 18.
but Adam in Paradise had no grief: No one of them knew all things; but Adam
knew all things, not only perfectly, but exactly: whereupon Austin says well,
that Ignorantia est paena lapsi, non natura originis.

Adam Magister viventium
Lastly, Adam is not only Pater but Magister viventium: God gave him wisdom, he
learned it not. Doceo requires a double Accusative in Esaias 28. 9. the Prophet
faith Quem docebit scientiam? Whom shall God teach knowledge? and whom shall he
make to understand? them that are weaned from the milk and drawn from the
breasts? But Adam was not weaned from the breasts, which had no Mother. (...),
a man of good learning, gathers out of the Greek Fathers, Adam sons scientiae:
that Adam was as a fountain of knowledge; From him comes others wisdom.
which came from him by tradition and observation unto Noah, and so to Abraham,
and so to his sons dwelling in the East Country, chap. 25. 6. in Chaldea and
Persia; from thence it came to Egypt. Solomon, in 1 Kings 4. 30. is said to
have excelled in wisdom all the wise men of the East and of Egypt: from Egypt
it came to Greece, from thence to Italy, and so to us in this West corner of
the World. He gave names apt.
And that the wisdom of Adam excelled all other, they ground it upon this, for
that he gave them names, which God approved Non dedit nomina ex suo arbitrio,
he gave them names not by chance, but with discretion, the name agreeing fitly
with the nature, and infinite fit names in one day did he give unto a multitude
of Creatures, which argues great wisdom to be in him; which he could not have
done unless he had looked into their natures; and the naming is allowed, for
that God praises it, as it is in 2 Cor. 10. 18.

Rehoboams name unmeet.
Our names sometime, by unskilfulnesse, prove just contrary, as Solomon named
his son Rehoboam, a delighter, but he was a destroyer of the People: Elimas.
Elymas had his name aright, for he was a Sorcerer, Acts 13. 9. Naomi, Marah
Naomi, after she was in misery, would no more be called Naomi, which is
beautiful, but Marah, which is bitter, Ruth 1. 20.

This is the ground of Lologie.
Secondly, From hence they gather the institution of Lologie, that is of speech,
both in videre and nominare is great wisdom; in silence and speech is a
wiseman known; the Greeks in logos do express both; the Latins in two words
differing but a letter, the one ratio, the other oration: Aaron was wise in
speech Exodus 4. 14. Paul in 2 Cor. 11. 6. says, though I be rude in speaking,
yet I am not so in knowledge. Apollos is said to be a man of knowledge, an
eloquent man, Acts 18. 24.

The original tongue has natural.
The original tongue by the names expresses the natures, which tongue was the
most ancient when all the world were of one tongue; And though that in the
days of Peleg the son of Heber, the son of Shem, the son of Noah, the
earth was divided by diversity of languages, chap. 10. 25. yet Peleg kept it.
Peleg kept the original. The Greeks tongue from it.
Eusebius says, the Greeks do boast that their tongue never came from other
but from it self: But quoth he, from whence have they a and o, their first and
last letters? have they them not from Aleph and Beth of the Hebrews: Magus and
Sophos, wisemen in Greek, comes not the one from agath, the other from zopho in
Hebrew? Cadmus, from Heber, brought Aleph and Beth into Phoenicia. It borrows
nothing.
This tongue borrows nothing from any other tongue, all tongues borrow from
it; it is the most sufficient tongue: Fire and water in Greek have their
original from the Hebrew. It is without composition.
All other tongues, says he, are full of composition, this in simplicity and
majesty excels all other; for no tongue is so capable of trope and figure
as is this, as they know well that have skill in the tongue: The antiquity,
quality, and dignity of the original.
And after that Eusebius has showed the antiquity, the quality, and majesty
of this tongue, he concludes thus, lingua haec digna est Adamo institutore,
and Deo approbatore.

The name agrees with the nature.
Now for the naming, the names agree with the nature of the thing named. The
ignorant man names a thing following not esse (...), but scire suum, not the
nature of the thing, but his own knowledge: But Adam as a man of exact wisdom
gives names according to their nature, that have stood since the beginning,
and shall stand so to the end of the world. The name expresses the property.
The nature of a thing is called the essence or the property; he gave a name
according to the nature, not of the essence, but of the property. Gassanus, a
learned man, says a Creature of it self is nothing, but from God all things
receive their essence. In Hebrew God is called the name, The name of God who
can tell? says Esaias. Gods two names.
God has two names, one qua est, which is of his essence incomprehensible; the
other is qua c^sa est, this is the name of his goodness, and so we may
conceive him. All names man gives is of the property; we say commonly this is
the nature, scilicet, the property of a thing: Property sensible or
intelligible.
The knowledge of which properties is either sensible of outward things, or
intelligible of inward qualities. The names of things after Adam were of
properties sensible, as Esau was so called, for that he was red and rough with
hair: Jacob was so called, for that at his birth he held Esau by the heel, his
brothers supplanter, Genesis 25. And Peleg had his name aright, namely
division. Adams names of inward properties.
But Adams names came from inward qualities, which he could perceive partly by
the light of nature; wherein are to be considered three things, as you may see
by 1 Kings 4. 29. Adams knowledge:
In Salomons wisdom was knowledge; By the light of nature:
Secondly, intelligence or understanding; Of grace.
And thirdly, he had a large heart, even as the sand on the Sea shore, that
is, he was able to comprehend all things by the capacity of his memory: But
these were more excellently in Adam than in Solomon, who had no vanity to
seduce him, no sickness to weaken him, no temptation to hinder his wisdom, as
Solomon had. He could also see these inward qualities by the light of Grace: In
lumine tuo videbimus lumen, says David, Psalm. 36. 9. In thy light O Lord shall
we see light. The divisions of the light of grace.
The Fathers do say, that lumen gratiae, is either per Deum or Angelos: This
light of God came to men either by apparition, as to Noah, Moses, etc. or by
revelation, which is inspired into us: By vision many saw this light, Wisd. 17.
6. and Gods knowledge slideth into our hearts. The other light we see is of
Angels, by their visitation, as Gabriel visited Daniel and made him understand
the vision, Daniel 8. 16. Which visitation of Angels Adam had. The light of
glory.
Beyond these there is lux gloriae, the light of glory; Whereby Adam saw his
reward in the Heavenly Paradise, by obedience; visio essentiae divinae, is the
reward; to see and enjoy the essence of God was his reward, whereunto Adam,
whilst he lived obedient in Paradise, hoped to be translated from the earthly
to the heavenly Paradise; To him that overcommeth shall be given a white stone,
and in the stone a new name written, which no man knows but he that receives
it; the name is reward and honor, Revel. 2. 17. Then shall we see God face to
face, that is, in lumine gloriae, in the light of his glory, whom now we see
through a glass darkly, 1 Cor. 13. 12. Two glasses whereby we see God.
The Glasses whereby God is seen in this world are of two sorts: the one is
dark, the other bright: the one is dim as the light through an horn: the
other is a light through a Glass. Adam, we, the Angels, see God.
We see God in this world as through a dim light, Adam in Paradise in state of
innocence, as through a bright Glass, The Angels see him in heaven
essentially. Our sight was from the earth, where is misery: Adams from
Paradise, where was grace. The Angels sight is in the heavenly Paradise, where
glory beholds glory. Our knowledge of God is inaenigmate, is as in a
Riddle: The knowledge of God by Adam in Paradise was as through a clear Glass:
But the Angels in the heavens knew God face to face.

The things named.
Now of the object, and what was named by man: There were Six names God gives.
six individual names given by God himself; as the light God called day, a time
active. Seconly, The darkness he named night, a time to recover strength
called, lagela leagala. Thirdly, The firmament he called heaven, from whence is
the influence of the air and the wind. Fourthly, The dry land he called
earth. Fistly, The Sea, which of its own nature would swell fifteen cubits
above the highest hill, was altered by the name, from turning magim to jagim.
Lastly, he called Man Adam that is, of the earth.

Adam gives apt names,
Here Adam gives names, first to the beasts that are serviceable; and then to
the birds and fowls that fly in the Air: To the Beasts.
He at the first sight, without a Counselor, gave apt names to every beast, to
all the Cattle of the field, which are infinite; and this we may see, for all
the Cartell, in the names of three, to the Horse he gave a name to be man's
currer, to the Sheep to be his Clothier, to the Ass to be his Porter, for so
the names of these do sound in the Hebrew tongue. To the Fowl.
Likewise he gave apt names unto the Birds, as the Eagle is a noble bird, for it
preyeth not upon the bird that keeps him warm all the night, neither does he
fly that way in the morning, that that bird flies: the Peacock is proud; the
Stork is kind; the Serpent a slider; the Ant bites the end of the Corn, that
it should not grow, the Ant called a Gnawer; from the Elephant to the Ant did
he give apt names. The Locusts of the swarms, the Bees of their government have
their names. Naming for distinction of kind and property.
So the virtues of naming are two, for the distinguishing of kind and of
property: So that the argument is good from the thing to the name, and from
the name to the thing; according to the name is the nature, and according to
the nature is the name. Jacob had his name aright, his name was Supplanter, and
he supplanted his brother.

But for Adam there was not a meet help.
Briefly of the return, But for Adam was not found an help meet for him; A Non
est inventus is returned, a Creature suitable to man's nature found he not; and
that he should not want a meet help, Woman was taken out of man. Not finding
implies a seeking, seeking a desiring, and desiring implies a want: A
neccessarie conversion.
And that we do want we desire, and that we desire we seek, and that we seek we
shall find. Adam, among the beasts, found not a meet help, yet he sought an
help, which he desired because he wanted: Non invenit (...) bestias adjutorem
(...) sibi, yet did he behold the beasts; and the end of this contemplation is
not fruitless; there is a curious contemplation: such was that of Hevah chap.
3. 6. The end of Man's contemplation in Paradise was in humility; and the end of
the contemplation of the Beasts and Fowls here, you see is a supply of an help:
For the first you do see, Preach. 3. 10. that the travel of men is given them
by God to humble them: David, in Psalm. 8. 5. says, Quid est (...) memor es
ejus Domine? When he has considered the natures and beheld the beasts, and
finding among them no meet help, then he desires a supply: And happy is the
meditation when it (...) (...) oratione, in prayer. Among Beast helps, not meet
helps.
Among so many beasts no doubt he found some helpers, but they were mute,
without conference, brutish, without reason, all of them looking downward: But
man before his fall was in honor positus, he was straight both in body and in
mind, Psalm. 49. 20. Among them (as I have showed) he found many helpers, as
the Horse to ride upon, the Sheep to cloth him, the Ass to bear his burden;
Not meet to be his mate.
But among them he found no meet help to be his mate; in Adamo fuit appetitus
socii and similitudinis, a helper according to his likeness found he not:
Totum hominis scientia Dei, says a Father, the knowledge of God is only to be
ascribed to man: yet some beasts draw nearer to the reason of man than other
some; as the Fox nearer than the Ass, but in none of the beasts is the
knowledge of God.

Eve how meet.
But a fit help for comfort, for conference, for cohabitation, for procreation,
for equality in each thing, found he not for man; There is none shall want his
mate, says the Prophet, Esaias 34. 16. every bird has his match: there is
aequus and equa; of all beasts there is male and female, every beast had his
match. They all had that man wanted; and therefore, for that man wanted that
which all the beasts had, God, out of man, for man, made a meet help, ut salvum
sit verbum suum; and Adam, as it were, confesses, I want such a meet help,
which I desire, which I have sought, which I cannot find; and because I cannot
find such a help which I have sought, which I have desired, and which I want;
therefore, O God of help, give unto me a helper meet for me: This expresses
Man's consent to have such an help. As God before regarded his person, provided
him a place, gave him authority; so here he takes care that he might have an
help: And as before he received at Gods hand Paradise to dwell in it: and by
dominamini rule and sovereignty over the beasts and fowl: The last benefit God
gives is a mate.
So here man receives the last, not the least benefit at the hands of him,
Mulierem gratiosam, a discreet Woman, a meet help: For he that wants an help,
and desires it of God, seeking for it, shall find it; And he that finds a
good wife, finds a good thing, and receives favor of the Lord, Prove. 18.
22. Thus much shall suffice concerning the 20. verse.

Quapropter injecit Jehova Deus, soporem altum in Adamum quo obdormivit. and
desumpta una de costis ejus, inclusit carnem pro illa. Genesis 2. 21.

October. 21. 1591.
AFter God had in the 18. verse, as ye have seen, entered into his deliberation,
and saw that it was not good for man to be alone, and therefore was moved in
the 19. verse, not only to resolve to make him a help, but also caused man to
take a survey of all his Creatures, to see whether there were any already made,
which might fit his fantasy. Now after man had made his confession, that he
found a want, being in solitariness, but could not find a fit supply;
therefore in this verse insueth the narration of Gods workmanship in the
Creation of woman.

In speaking of which, first it may seem a course strange and incredible to
flesh and blood, and unsavorie to reason, that woman should be taken out of the
side of man. But St. Augustine demands this question Cur magu mirabile sit ut
e latere viri, quam ex utero faemina homo nasceretur. For if God had made this
an ordinary course of nature, that woman should always and usually have been
taken out of man's side, as now it is to take them out of the womb of the woman,
then would that have been no less strange than this, and this course and birth
of man would have been (...) more wonderful and incredible than that which is
here spoken of. In respect of God therefore we must know it to be all one, as
easy a thing, and of as litde labor for him to make a man of the side of man,
as to cause him to be made of the seed of man, though in respect of us (which
are sensual) that seems most credible which is most common and usually seen
of us.

2.
The second thing is, That the Woman is said to be made of one of his ribs, of
which, if any seek a reason, this may serve for an answer, Quia sit aliquid
ipsius, for this is that which makes the bond and knot of Matrimony sure and
fast, when they consider and account themselves to be a very natural part one
of another; and therefore St. Paul says Ephesians. 5. 28. they must love one
another as their own flesh; for how could Adam choose but love her, being bone
of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, seeing it is natural for man, not to hate
his own flesh. Also it is for the better procurement of love of Parents toward
their Children and Posterity, that Parents and Children might thus think, Quia
sumus ex uno, sumus unum: for all this is especially to commend unity between
man and wife, because they be but one; and also between brethren and sisters,
yea, and all the Posterity of Adam, because they all came of one. This all men
should think, especially brethren, because we were hewed all out of one rock
and dug out of one pit; therefore why should we be divided asunder, rather
we should say as David does, Psalm. 113. 1. Behold it is a good and pleasant
thing for Brethren to dwell together in unity. This consideration then, must be
a means to establish unity and peace among all men, especially between man wife
and children, and their family.

Object.
But another question may here be made, Why she was taken out of his side,
rather when he was fast asleep than when he was awake, for it is sure, that God
could as well have done it when he was awake, if some special purpose had not
moved, in which it seemed best to him to have it thus.

Resp.
To answer this objection we may say, that men have sought out many inventions
and devises: Some, to satisfy it, have imagined that it was done, because Adam
should not feel any smart or pain in the opening of the flesh and taking out of
the rib, which being awake they think he must needs suffer otherwise, and (say
they) Quia agritudo and dolor est poena lapsi: therefore God would not, nay
(say they) he could not in justice let them suffer in Paradise, so long as he
continued holy: But it is sure, that if that only had been all the reason, that
God, to have prevented that, could have so taken her out of his side, that he
should have felt no grief or pain thereby, though he had been awake and looked
upon him; for if God had but suspended the act of sense for a time, which at
the first he gave him, he should have had no grievous sense of pain on that
part.

But indeed this rather may seem to be the reason, Because God in his work
would have none seen or present with him. But be as it were, by himself alone,
least any should fasly and foolishly suspect that Adam being present and
awaked, should have been some help or means, and had somewhat to do in the
Creation of the Woman; therefore he would be alone, that he alone might be
known to be the only maker of the Woman, and that he had no help or Counsel in
the framing of her: For the like cause God suffered the Disciples to fall into
a deep and heavy sleep in the garden, when Jesus Christ our Savior was in the
agony, that it might not be doubted but that he alone wrought and brought to
pass all the work of our Redemption without the help or comfort of his
Disciples, as it was prophesied of him before, Ille Torcular calcavit solus. So
Almighty God purposing to have all the glory of the whole World alone, and that
Adam might not challenge any jot thereof, therefore without his counsel, help,
or consent, he would do it while Adam was fast asleep; Which must teach us
this Lesson, That especially in this weighty matter of Wyving, when we see we
want that holy help, we must not think by our own policy and strength to get
us one meet and good for us, but rather by prayer commend that work to Gods
care and providence, who then (no doubt) will bring that work to pass which
shall be most fit and meet for us, while we are fast asleep.

Object.
If any ask, Why she was taken out of his side, which is the middle part of man's
body, and not out of his head or foot? Resp.
This answer may stand with good reason, That she was not taken out of his head
or shoulder Ne insolesceret foemina, that is, lest affecting a superiority over
the Man she should take upon her arrogancy to be the top of his head or to
ride over his shoulders: If any do so, let them know, that it is not the
Woman's part nor place to exalt herself so high. On the other side, God of
purpose would not have her taken out of the foot, Ne eam homo sub pedibus
contereret, and make her too much an underling as scarce good enough to wash
his feet: If any so use their wives, let them know, God made them not to so
base and contemptible offices, but would have good and virtuous women to be set
next themselves as their matches in all duty and love; for God has made her
of his side that she might be collateralis, that is, be thought worthy to
stand, and sit, and lie by his side; therefore it is said, that the Kings
spouse being brought to him was set on his right hand, Psalm. 45. 9. And indeed
if women did consider their estate, they would know it to be far better and
safer for them (being the weaker vessel) to shroud themselves under their
husbands arms for defense, as their protector, than to sit above his shoulder
as Lord and superior over him. Again, Women may see that God made them of a
rib, which is a strong bone, that they might be a means and prop to their
weakness, to uphold and be a stay to them and their estate, and not a weakening
and decayiug of their estates and strength, as many do. And as they learn this
of the nature of their matter, so they must learn to avoid one thing, which is
the bone of which they were made, namely, they must not be crooked and perverse
and (...) bones to their husbands heart, for such wives, says Solomon, are not
bones to help us, but putredo in ossibus, and a grief to their heart. Now we
may consider that of this matter God made him not many wives, not two wives,
yea not more than only one, which condemns (...) for many reasons and
respects: for many inconveniences and griefs come to the man and the family,
where more than one has been, it was the cause and occasion of strife and
brawls, as we may see in the example of Elkana his two wives 1 Samuel 1. 5. 7. 8.
for they did not only vex one another, but both of them were a vexation to
him. The like example we have in Sara and Agar, so ill did they agree under one
man, that one house was not able to hold them; wherefore Gods ordinance is (who
knows what is best for us) that one man shall have but one only wife.

A word now of the supplement; for it is said that God taking out a rib made a
wound, and healed it up again, and made flesh to be the supplement thereof: By
which we (...) becanse Woman is the weaker vessel, therefore God would have her
to have some of the Man's strength, and lest the man should be too strong and
rigorous, he has imparted some of the Woman's weakness to him: Which must
teach man and wife to know that God has made them so that they should bear one
with another infirmities. And there is nothing which does more make void the
bond of love and unity, which God has so strongly confirmed, between man and
wife, as this one thing, that the one does not bear with the others infirmities
and imperfections.

Extruxitque Jehova Deus ex costa illa, quam sumpserat de Adamo, mulierem:
eamque adduxit ad Adamum. Genesis 2. 22.

October. 23. 1591.
IN these words, according to our last division, are contained the manner and
fashion of her Creation, which is here said to be after the manner and form of
a building, and also the end why she was made, namely, that she might be
brought to man and given him for his help. It is the Counsel of God, that if we
will purpose to make a house or building, that we first of all prepare matter
and stuff where with all to build it, Prove. 24. 27. and then after to settle
upon the work; which course of wisdom we do see God does here take and
observe; for having taken the rib out of the man's side, as the meetest matter
to build this beautiful matter for man, now all things being in a readiness
and nothing wanting, he proceeds without delay to the framing and perfecting
of this work of Woman: Touching which, we must know that it is not Moses
purpose in this place to treat of the making of the Woman's soul, but only of
the frame of the body; for he had before, in the 7. verse of this Chapter,
sufficiently and fully performed that narration, showing, that God having made
the body of Man and Woman, then he breathed into them the breath of life, and
made them, both alike, living souls, which confounds that profane and
shameless objection of irreligious men, which (whether in jest or in good
earnest I know not) have said that Women have no souls, because in this verse
Moses speaks not, but only of the frame of her body. To falsify and disprove
which saying, ye shall hear Rebecca say, Genesis 27. 46. Taedet animam meam vitae
meae: And the Virgin Mary will confess that she has a soul as well as Man,
Luke 1. 46. saying Magnificat anima mea, etc. But we must know that this soul
the Woman had not of the man, but of God, the Creator, as Adam had, for it is
verified of both, Quod Deus creavit Marem and Foeminam, as he had made both
alike: so did he both parts of soul and body, in both alike. Touching the body
of the Woman, we must know, that though God might truly have been called the
Creator of Woman, as before, yet Moses chooses rather to call him the builder
of Woman, which style and title is also given to God in Heb. 3. 4. who is said
to frame and build all things; and the reason why he alters the phrase is,
because the word Create signifies the making a thing of nothing; but she was
made of something, namely of his rib. And also God uses this phrase, comparing
himself to a Carpenter and the Woman to an house, because he did purpose to
make Woman, as it were, his storehouse, in which he had laid up all the race
of Mankind, which should thereafter come out of her womb to replenish the
Earth, for she was the rock and vault out of which we were dug, Esaias 51. 1.
Out of this house, here builded, came all Men and Women whatsoever, both fair
and foul, strong and weak, rich and poor, Regum turraes pauperum tabernae; yea
out of this house came all the houses and Families of the World, both Domus
Jacobi, that is Gods house and his Church, and Domus Judeae, that is the Kings
house and the Families of all Commonwealths. When this was builded God laid in
her the foundation and hope of all these buildings both private and public;
therefore God in the Scriptures of Kingdoms and Commonwealths, does compare
them to Women Ezech. 23. 4. For under the persons of Aheth and Aholiah are
represented the two Kingdoms of Samaria and Jerusalem. So in Revel. 12. 4. and
Revel. 19. 2. in this Sex God sets out all Churches and Religions, comparing
the true Church to a Woman in travail, and the Antichristian Church to the
proud Whore of Babylon, To show that all Commonwealths and Churches, both good
and bad came out of Woman-hood, which is here reared and builded in this place,
the lesson which Women may learn out of this, is to know and consider that God
has therefore builded them to be as houses, that they might build up houses in
the World, and that not only in their own private houses, by good huswisery and
diligence, but also Gods houses, by beinging up their Children in the fear of
God and true Godlinosse; and to this end she is builded as a house that she
might be in the house, and not gad abroad to allure others to the liking of her
person, because such, says Solomon, do pull down their houses, Prove. (...)
But as snails (for so St. Paul remeth a Woman by the name of a Snaile Domi
portans, 1 Timothy, to show that if she will build up a house as God builded her,
she must not be a wanderer abroad, but a keeper and a feer to the house within.

Now we are come to the last point of this verse; In which is showed that the
end why God builded Woman, was, that she might be brought and joined in
marriage to the Man: Here then is the first beginning and bringing together,
and Adam might have said as the Church said of his spouse, Cant. 3. 1. Quasivi
and non inveni: But now the time of her Creation being come and fulfilled, he
might say as the Church did after. Tandem inveni quam dilexit anima mea, though
all his seeking in the world among the brutish Creatures, could find none
meet for him, yet now in Gods hands he finds one without seeking: In which we
see the fruit of Gods Adduxit, for he recompenceth it here with his Reduxit,
rendering a thing (...) better and more excellent than that he took away from
him, if we can be content patiently to bless God with Job, when he takes away
that we have, though it be as near and deer to us as our ribs; yet at last God
can come again and render three fold, yea an bundred fold, Job 42. 10. If he
wounds Adams side, he will make it whole again. If he suffer God to take from
him Costa informis, he will bring to him Evam formatam and formosam to make him
amends. In this word Adduxit is generally included, he would not put them
together without regard, as he did the brutish and (...) Creatures, but does
solemnly, as it were, bring her by the hand to Adam, and deliver her into his
hands, as having a most (...) and honorable regard and care of them; By which
we see that God cannot abide such brutish coming together, and conversing one
with another, as the Horses do seeing their Mate, according to his kind,
knowing her, never stays till she be brought, but will (...) in the rage of
his (...) lust unto her: But says Esaias, chap. 5. Man ought not so to demean
himself; for though Adam (no doubt) knew the Woman to be his only Mate, yet he
joyneth not himself unto her, until God both brings and gives her unto him.

By which we see another honor and special favor, which God (...) Mankind
above all other Creatures, namely, himself in his own person to make the match
and bring them both together in marriage that all may know that it is a state
most holy and honorable by his own ordinance; for it has not been seen or
heard among all other Creatures, that such a Solemnity and grave Ceremony was
used, at the meeting of any but only of the man and woman; we may gather by
Christ's interpretation, Matthew. 19. 6. In this word Adduxit is understood Gods
conjunxit, his coupling and joining them together in marriage; for we see the
woman first takes God by the hand religiously, before she takes Adam by the
hand; for unless women do first dutifully and devoutly resign themselves over
into Gods hands, to be disposed and ruled at his will and pleasure, they can
never be joined most holily in marriage, to the building up of their own house
in the Commonwealth nor of Gods house in the Church; that is, if we do
dispose our selves at our own wills and pleasures, being led to our choice, not
by Gods hand our heavenly Father, and by his Deputies our Parents on earth,
which now must bring and give us in marriage. Let us know that such matches and
marriages, are neither allowable in the sight of God, nor honorable in the
sight of men, and therefore shall not be comfortable but hurtful to our selves.

Wherefore to conclude this, we gather that it is not sufficient that there
should be consent of both parties together only, unless they be brought
together before God in holiness, and by the Parents which have this right made
over to them to bring together:

Tum dixit Adam, hac demum vice adest os ex ossibus meis, and caro ex carne
mea: haec vocabitur vira, eo quod haec ex viro desumpta est. Genesis 2. 23.

October. 26. 1591.
THe Prophet having ended the history of woman's creation before, and showed
Gods bringing them together and joining them in marriage. Now in these words he
goes forward and shows what liking he had of her, and also what name and
title he gave unto her, for so in his speech we are to consider his affection,
and her name which is here expressed before in the 19. and 20. verses: We have
seen that Adam seeking and searching among all the Creatures of God, could
find no meet help or Companion for him, for he saw only muta, bruta and
versuta, that is, brutish things without reason, speech, or any other
resemblance or likeness to him. But now he awaking suddenly out of sleep, and
but one only creature being brought to him, he, at the first sight perceiving
her both in nature, body, and mind, to be most like unto him, seems with the
joy of a Bridegroom to say, why; this is mine own self, one, even after my
heart and desires, even another new Adam, saving for the sex. This may seem to
be his confession at the first sight, when he had found her: In which
confession is expressed his joy and affection toward her, as it may appear in
the emphasis of this word jam nunc, for so we shall see it often in the
Scriptures, for a note of some joy or gladness conceived within. So it is Genesis
29. 32. Now my husband will love me likewise, 35. verse, Now I will praise the
Lord, etc. In which words Leah shows her joyful affection at the birth of
Juda and Levi, besides, the utterance of the words do argue her rejoysing; for
we may observe in the former verse, that whereas, not his placing and pleasu in
Paradise, not the presence or enjoying of the Tree of life, nor any else, which
he saw there, could make him open his lips to talk of it, as not being much
moved or delighted with them; yet now, as soon as ever he sees and enjoys
her presence and person, he could not contein, but breaks out into this
triumph of joy and love, as who should say, I do not esteem and take any such
love or comfort in the pleasures or treasures of Paradise, nor in the Lordship
of the Creatures, nor in the possession of the whole earth, nor all that is
therein, as now I do in the presence and possession of this Woman, which God
in singular love and of his special grace has given to me. In which he
teaches us nothing else, but that which Solomon says of a good and virtuous
wife, Pro. 19. 14. riches, lands, and possessions may men give us, or may fall
to us by inheritance, sed mulier intelligens est denum dei. q.d. she is far
more precious than all things, and most worthy to be esteemed, which we see is
most plainly found in Adam in this place, who could not be drawn to such a
joyful speech until now: Because all the things in Paradise were small joy or
comfort to him, so long as he was in solitariness and wanted the companion of
his life. If we look into the nature of these words ( (...) and bone) we shall
see that by them are fitly expressed the two ends for which woman was made; for
by this phrase he signifies, that if she was of him, of the substance of his
flesh and bone, so was she made for him to be as helpful and as necessary for
his good, as his flesh and bone.

The bones of men (as we know) are the strength and props to uphold the body,
so should there be an ability and strength in the woman, to help and sustain
the man and his (...).

And as this is the help of society, so as she is flesh, she is as good a help
and means to bear children to the man, which is said to arise out of the
nature of the flesh, John 1. 13. for all Adams sons are born after the will
of the flesh; and to this end God has placed delight and pleasure in the
flesh, which is called the (...) of the flesh, John 1. 16. So that the end of
the woman's creation (...) and ad problem.

And thus much of the speech, as it (...) her denomination, in which we may
see, that God does not give him the honor only to give names to other
Creatures, which were made to be his servants, but also he gives him leave to
impose a name to his wife, which is after a sort equal to himself. In which
denomination he does communicate and impart his own name unto her, and would
have her to wear a part of his own name, by which she may be known to be his
own; which custom we see is yet (...), and continued amongst the children of
Adam; yea, even amongst the heathen, whose saying was to them whom they vowed
to make their wife, ubi ega sum Caius tu eris Caia, that is, thou shall be
entitled and endowed first with mine own name: So we see that after the
Wedding, in which the wife is brought and given to the man, her name is for
ever eclipsed, as our Law says, and she must shine by her husbands name; and
the giving this name to her, does not only argue a propriety and right in her,
but also a sovereignty and power over her as her head, which also is manifested
in this, that she was not only made ex eo, sed propter eum: she was not only
brought ad eum, but also had her name de eo, which four prepositions, propter,
ad, ex, and de are four strong arguments to prove her subjection. Again we see
that Adam gives her not every name by which he was called: But his special
and chiefest names is Ish, out of which the name Ishah, which is woman. This
his name Ish, is a name of dignity and honor, which (as some say) is taken
for the word Jashah, which signifies he is the Monarch and only Ruler of all
Gods Creatures: wherefore if Adam was preferred to this title of honor to be a
King, then he will impart it to his wife, and make her as Queen and Empress
with him.

We may read in the Scripture this note of difference touching his names being
diversely applied; for Ben Ish, which is filius hominis, is spoken in honor of
those that are the best and excellent men. But Ben Adam, which is fillius Adam
implies the common and basest, for Adam is a name of humility, to put him in
mind of the matter he was made of; but Ish is a name of nobility, to show him
Gods mercy in exalting him on earth. But we shall best conceive what Adam meant
in naming her thus, by the reason which he rendered by calling her so, Quia
sumpta erat ex viro, which is, as if he had said, this is the cause why I would
have her called so, because in this name all may see the wonderful work of God
in making her so: and that all may know I love thee as my self, therefore this
shall be thy name.

To conclude concerning this name, we must note that the woman has threee
names in the Scripture as well as man. The first is the general name in
respect of the Sex, Genesis 1. 27. by which they are called male and female, which
is given as he is the Stock, and she is the Storehouse of all mankind. The
second is Adams matter and Eves mold, which in him is the name of his, and in
her is the name of her fruitfulness, that she is the mother of all living
Creatures. The third is the honorable name given in marriage, which is Ish and
Ishah man and woman, which signifies the dignity to which God exalted them
both. And this may suffice of their names:

Idcirco relicturus est vir patrem suum and matrem suam: and ad haerebit uxori
suae, eruntque in carnem unam. Genesis 2. 24.

30. October, 1491.
IN these words, God the Author of matrimony sets out a Law and Statute to
all the posterity of Adam, to observe concerning the matter of marriage, and
Adam is here instead of the Clerk to proclaim it unto all; which Ordinance of
almighty God, our Savior Christ in Matthew. 19. 4. shows and avoucheth to be
the only pattern and plat-forme for all married men for ever to look unto; (for
says he) this is the original Canon and the Rule to be observed utrum ab
initio fuit sic. And if we mark the contents of this Rule, we shall perceive
that it is Gods will, that the conjunction of man and wife shall be so near and
dear, and the knot of (...) so surely knit, that rather they should dissolve
and break asunder all knots of friendship and bonds of propinquity, than either
wilfully to untie, or violently to break it asunder by separation or divorce,
after the knot and covenant be once lawfully and solemnly made before God and
his Church.

So that this is made a perpetual Law, not for Adam only and specially, but
for all Adam's posterity in general.

For we see that it respects not so much Adam as us, which follow him,
because God does not direct his speech in the second person, as saying, thou
shall, etc. But indifferently to all mankind as is more apparent thus, because
Adam and Eve cannot be said to have left father and mother, therefore it
properly concerns them, which afterward should have father and mother, as
all his sons and posterity had: we see then there are two parts of this Law
here set down; the one is, that married folks shall leave all other; the other
is, that they shall cleave fast and inseparably each to other: the bond and
chain of natural affection, which binds fast the parents and children, is
wonderful strong and near, and therefore the heathen do call it vinculum
Adamantinum, an Adamant chain, more strong than Iron, we see this love and
natural affection is very great and forcible, even in dumb creatures, which
are led thereto only by the instinct of nature, wherefore if it should not be
in men, endued with reason, Moses would have such stoned to death, Deuteronomy. And
Solomon prophecieth of such (...) children, Prove. 30. 17. That the Crows of
the Valley shall pull out their eyes, yet notwithstanding this bond of natural
affection being so great and strong, God says, that he would have married
folks rather violate and break that, then break this bond wherewith man and
wife is united, and tied together, not that God would simply tolerate and allow
any breach of duty between parents and children, but only in respect of
cleaving to his wife, and the wife to her husband, wherefore we must know and
beware that we do not think it lawful for us, being once married, so to
forsake our parents which brought us forth, and bred us up, as to set light by
them, and not to regard them as many unnatural children do under this
pretense, for to take away that savage and brutish disobedience, Quod hoc non
extinguit affectionem sed ordinat, This freeth us not from our duty which Gods
Law and the Law of nature binds us unto, but it teaches us how to dispose it
aright, that is, how to cleave to our parents in duty as we (...), and how to
be united to our wives in love as we ought also: By this then appears that it
is Gods will that the link of love between married folks, should exceed in
strength and measure, if it be possible, even the natural bond of love and
affection that is between parents and their children; and there may be rendered
sufficient reason why it ought so to be; first because his wife was made of the
very true and real flesh and bone indeed, but children do come only of the
seed of the fathers and blood of their mothers, so that it may truly be said
that the wife is flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, but their children
are only flesh and bone of his seed and blood. Again children are only the
fruit of their loins which is farther from the heart than the wife which is of
the ribs which is most near and therefore most deer to the heart. Lastly,
because men do love their children tanquam aliquid sui, but they love their
wives tanquam semetipsum, Ephesians. 5. 28. Seeing therefore self love is the
greatest and most perfect love, we conclude also that that marriage love must
be nearest and most like it, by the ordinance of God; for our use this does
seem to give us a caveat, touching the evil and shameful divorce and
separation of man and wife, which are too rife now a days, for if so be that
Gods knot of marriage, should be so surely knit, that it must not be broken,
for our deer parents sake, but of the two, choose rather to forsake them; then
no doubt it is not his will that for every slight and trifling cause and
occasion they should sue divorces, and forsake one another, for this is the
divinity which our Savior Christ does gather out of this place, Mark 10. 4.
And thus much of the first part.

Now touching the other part of the position, we are to consider two points:
first, the union and conjunction of their hearts in love, which is called their
cleaving together: The other is the union and combination of their bodies,
expressed in these words, they shall be both one flesh; the first is called of
some conjunctio mentis, the other is copulatio carnis, both which are ordained
of God as holy and good, for the first we see that this unity of mind by
unfeined love and affection is called vinculum perfectionis, Colos. 3. 14. So
that this spiritual love is the best glue to make them cleave together without
separation.

For so indeed this word signifies glue, or a kind of glueing and sodering
together, wherefore as two things are by glue or soder united and made but one,
so by love ought man and wife, which shows, amor conjugalis must be
reciprocus, respecting and taking hold of both sides alike as glue does.

There must be amare and Redamare amorem impendere and rependere, for if love
be not mutual, if it cleave fast but to one side, they cannot live together as
one, but needs must fall asunder as we may often see, and to make this glue
hold fast for ever, it is requisite that it be tempered with the knowledge of
God, that it may be a religious love, for carnal love is vinculum Ethnicorum;
but godly love is vinculum Christianorum: Solomon cleaved to many wives, but
because it was not in a holy and religious love, therefore they made him not
cleave to God, but caused sin to cleave fast to his soul: And thus much of
the eternal cleaving together in affection.

Now for the other which is carnal and external, it is that combination which
God says, makes two but one flesh, and that not only in that honorable
estate of an undefiled bed, but also in that wicked and filthy conjunction of
harlots, as it is 1 Cor. 6. 16. For they which converse with harlots are said
to make themselves one with them.

For marriage we may say in some sense, it is begun in the spirit and does end
in the flesh.

This knot of carnal copulation, St. Paul expresses in most godly and
reverent terms, and so wisely, that sober ears cannot be offended thereat, 1
Cor. 7. 3.4. First, he calls it due benevolence, due in regard of the right,
which the one may lawfully challenge at the others hands, benevolence, because
it must be granted willingly with love and good will, for if one deny the other
he says in the 5. verse that it is a frauding of one another right; for which
cause, he says, that neither party has potestatem sui corporis, but one has
right and interest in the other. Now of this union man and woman becomes but
one flesh, and, as it were, members of one another body, and not only so, but
of this conjunction of them two comes, by Gods blessing, one flesh, that is,
the fruit of children, which proceeds from them both, and so an unity of the
the flesh in the body born, is the fruit of their two bodies so united, as Leah
says, Genesis 30. 20. is very effectual to be another link of love, to bind man
and wife more near together, for which cause children are called pignora
amoris; This then (to conclude) is the cutthroat of polygamie and adultery, of
polygamie, because God says, they two shall be one flesh; therefore more than
two in the conjunction is intolerable; of adultery it is the overthrow,
because he will have two by this combination to be but one body, wherefore it
is an abomination and monster of nature, for one man to be two bodies, for he
which joyneth himself to a harlot, thereby made one body with her, 1 Cor. 6.
16. And here we see that he is also one body with his wife, and so Gods
ordinance is perverted, who would have two but one body, but these leachers do
make their one bodies become two.

De septem versiculis, a versu 18. usque ad finem 24. qui de Matrimonio, Viro
and Foemina agunt.
November 4. 1591.
FOr that our Savior Jesus Christ, in Matthew 19. where the question of
divorcement is propounded, alleges this place, that a man shall cleave to his
Wife, and leave Father and Mother, and they twain shall be one flesh, this is
his further commandment, Let no man put asunder that which God has coupled
together; for indeed this bond may not be broken at man's pleasure. Hence we
learn discipline for the framing of our Judgments, That Marriage inviolable is
the ordinance of God: And again, Hence we learn the duties of Marriage to be
natural for the begetting of Children, and civil for mutual help in household
and civil affairs. But above these duties in adduxit Deus is a religious
institution by God, and a possessing of their bodies in sanctity and holiness
of life, not being stained with filthiness, vain jesting or wantonness, which
are things uncomly, Ephesians. 5. 4. But their Marriage should be moderate, without
excess of lust, because God sought an holy and Godly seed, Malachie 2. 15. And
therefore God ordained but one wife, and that each should sanctify other; for
what knows the Wife whether she shall save her Husband, or what knows the
Husband whether he shall save his unbeleeving Wife, 1 Cor. 7. 16. so that
Marriage is for sanctification.

As for the special institution of Marriage here, in regard of the time and
place, It was instituted in time of Innocence in Paradise; which state of
Marriage is not only a thing tolerable, or a thing alowable, as a thing
indifferent, or commendable in some alone; but Marriage is honorable among all
persons, all degrees, as it is in the 13. Hebrews 4. according to that in the
Psalm, Man being in honor, which time of honor was in time of Innocence. 7.
Honors of marriage.
Now there are seven honors of Marriage, 1. Necessity.
The first is of necessity; for that since Adams fall the disease of
incontinencie is common to all sorts of men; therefore Marriage is offered to
all sorts of men without respect. 2. Antiquity.
The second honor is of antiquity, which was the next instituted to the Law of
obedience, Lex Matrimonii est ipsa lege antiquior. 3 Causality.
The third honor, as the Schoolmen call it, is of causalitie, see Exodus 12. 20.
4 Place.
The fourth and fifth honors are out of the place in Paradise, in the presence of
Heavenly Angels, 5. Time.
and out of the time in time of Innocence. 6 Gods presence.
The sixth honor which makes Marriage most honorable, is the presence and
presidence of God himself, by his dixit in the 18. verse, God said it is not
good that man should be alone; and by his adduxit he brought her to the Man;
and by his conjunxit, whom God has joined; and by Gods benedixit, in the 1.
chap. 28. and God blessed them 7. Mystery.
The last thing which makes Marriage honorable is, that it is Mysterium
magnum, wherein is a resemblance even of Christ and of his Church, the 5.
Ephesians 32.

Thirdly, in respect of the persons of Adam and Eve, it was good for Adam to
have a wife; it is permitted to Bishops to have one wife, Titus 1. 6. 1 Timothy 3.
2. the Apostles themselves had wives, 1 Cor. 9. 5. There were never such Saints
in the world, as were Saint Adam, and Saint Eve in the estate of their
innocence and integrity, yet were they married. There are none, of what degree
soever, that are so holy, but by the example of Adam and Eve, they may take
upon them this estate of marriage, which is honorable among all men: it is
honorable in all, it is not intolerable in some. Hebr. 13. 4. 1 Cor. 4. 1.
this may be restrained in some sorts of men, not to be condemned in any; for
Marriage, which is honorable in all men, dishonors no man. Thus much for
the framing of our Judgments.

Now of the practice, which we will divide into the precedents before Marriage,
the duties in Marriage, and the dissolution of Marriage.

Before our marriage must be deliberation
First touching the precedents; we are not to enter into it unadvisedly, but
with deliberation; and to seek with Adam for a meet help, which if we cannot
find, then to commit our selves to God; which we may gather out of Gods
speeches, who said faciamus and not siat: And again Adam slept while she was
framed by God.

General deliberation.
This deliberation is general; whether it be good to marry at all? or else it
is special, whether it be good to marry such or such a person? For the first
God sees it is not good for man to be alone. Good is not taken there (as I
told you heretofore) for opposite to evil, but to inconvenient; and the good
of convenience, is gathered by the circumstance against both the extremes: the
one is the forbidding to marry, 1 Timothy 4. 3. The other extreme is, for that
they saw the daughters of men to be fair, they took Wives according to their
own lust and liking, chap. 6. 2. The one of the circumstances is grounded upon
the person, the other upon the time; for as it is in the Preacher 3. 5. there
is a time to embraee, and a time to be far off from embracing. I suppose
says Paul 1. Cor. 7. 26. it is good to be single for the present necessity,
in time of affliction. Yet in Malachi 2. 14. the Prophet calls the wife uxor
faederis, the wife of thy covenant, from whom at no time thou must go to
cleave to another; but as thou must continue in obedience to God during thy
life, Psalm 146. 2. so thou must cleave to thy wife so long as you both shall
live: It is not trouble that must break the bond of marriage: It is not age nor
sickness must part them. Rebekah when Isaac was old provided meat for him such
as he loved: she forsook not Isaac in his age: Genesis 27. 9. and in sickness
Amnon knew Tamar would visit him and cherish him, the 2. of Sam. 13. 6. nothing
may part them but for Fornication and Adultery. At touching the circumstance
of the persons: there are some that cannot be married, says Christ, Matthew
19. 12. for some, faith he, are chaste from their Mothers belly; who are, say
the Fathers, borne chaste by some incurable disease and are unable to marry;
and there be some that be made chaste by men, such as are gelded and cut; and
some are chaste which have made themselves chaste for the Kingdom of Heaven,
that is, to whom God has given thgift of continency and (...), as Paul
expounds it, 1 Cor. 7. 7. yet as Paul speaks in the 28. verse, If thou take
a wife, thou sennest not; If a Virgin marry she sins not: such as are
married have trouble in the flesh, as wordly cares of their Children and of
their Families, they are troublea with a prick in the flesh.

Adams cleaving to Eve must be a way and means to cleave the faster unto God,
to cleave unto the Lord without separation, as it is in 1 Cor. 7. 35. Now there
are two spirits which would withdraw us from this conjunction, the one is of
the world, the world and the cares thereof, the other of Fornication: There be
those that seek their own, and regard not that is Christ's, Philip. 2. 21. And
the spirit of fornication will not suffer them to know the Lord, Osee 5. 4. And
lest that man should be exalted over much there was given to man a prick in the
flesh, 2 Cor. 12. 7. So that as Paul says, 1 Cor. 7. 38. He that gives his
daughter in marriage does well, but he that gives her not to marriage does
better, for that through man's (...), not by gods institution, Marriage brings
cares and troubles: So that St. Paul's bonum, It is not good to touch a Woman,
and Moses bonum here, It is not good for Man to be alone, in regard of diverse
(...), may both take place; and by good deliberation, If I can (...), it is
good to be alone, If I cannot, to avoid fornication, it is good to (...).

But, if we do conclude with Moses, It is not good to be alone, it is good to
marry: We must then, not resolve to be as a dog, as it is in Deuteronomy. 23. 18. God
commands, not to bring the hire of a whore, nor the price of a dog, that is,
an Whoremonger into the house of the Lord. We must resolve to follow Adams
example, who had but one wife; not of wicked Lamech, who took two wives, chap.
4. 19. and brought in Polygamic first, who brake the institution of Paradise,
that they two should be one flesh: And if any might have had Polygamie, Adam
might above any; But yet God took out of Adam but one rib, brought unto Adam
but one Eve, that they two might be one flesh; and better and more holy was it
to have one than many wives. Two wives are an impediment to unity, it
breeds much dissension in the house, and disquiet to the husband, as I showed
you in the example of Hannah and Peninnah, the two wives of Elkanah, 1 Samuel 1.
7. and it breeds dissension between the seed (...) them two: there was not
only dissension between Sarah and Agar, but even that Ismael the Child of the
Bondwoman, could not agree with Isaac the son of the Freewoman, but mocked
him, chap. 21. 9.

The particular deliberation.
Now touching our particular deliberation, (...) we must have but one, to
consider what persons are mere, and what (...) meet, this is for our choice and
our refusal. First, we are to seek a meet match, and if we cannot find such
an one, then we are to pray for one at the hands of God, not to say, I will
make to may self a meet help, not to persuade in himself, to be any such
ability; but recommending our selves to God, to fall asleep with Adam, that
is, to lodge up our own senses and affections, not to follow the example of
those in chap. 6. 2. who seeing the daughters of men to be fair, took them
wives of all they liked, not such as God appointed, for such wives shall be as
snares to their husbands; Saul he gave his daughter Micholl to deceive David, 1 Samuel 18. 21. Adam, the father of Mankind, and Abraham the Father of the
Faithful, recommended themselves to God in this matter, as in chap. 24. 12.
the servant of Abraham that went to find a wife for Isaac, prayed God to send
him good success: And in the 63. verse Isaac was at prayer in the field, when
he beheld his wife coming with Camels, In the 27. chap. 20. when Isaac asked
his (...), How he had found him meat so quickly: Jacob answered, because the
Lord thy God brought it to my hand. And if we trust in the Lord, he will bring
a wife into our hand, as he did here into Adams hand.

What Marriages are excepted.
And by the course of these seven verses, exception is taken to three sorts of
Marriages.

1. With Infdels.
First, Against the matching with Infidels, For that Marriage was instituted,
not only for the Oeconomicall estate and strength of household; but for the
Church, for the Ecclesiastical union. Secondly, The wife must be an help to
make us cleave to God without separation. Thirdly, She must be like unto him in
the best part of his likeness, wherein he is like unto God, that is, in
holiness and righteousness of life. Fourthly, God is said to build the wife,
for the spiritual edification of them both. And fifthly, Because Deus non
adduxit uxorem among the Infidells. These reasons make such Marriages to be
excepted; for that wives that are without virtue, and the fear of God, are
hindrances to Man, whom God will not bring to Man; wherefore Paul says, Let
every one marry, tantum in domino, only in the Lord: So that Heathen and
profane Marriages are excluded, and wantonness is excluded; such was that of
Sampson to Dalilah in Judges 16. 4.

2. (...) Marriages.
Secondly, All incestious Marriages are excepted: For, say the Fathers, when God
made Eve, he made her not of the loins or seed of Man, not by any mixture of
his blood naturally, but she was made of a rib, of a bone, artificially. We are
to forsake Father or Mother, or any of our kin, where there is any mixture of
blood, to cleave to our Wife, so that we must not marry with our parents, or
our kindred: God himself says in his Law These be unlawful Marriages, and are
forbidden in Leviticus 18. 5. touching consanguinity; in the 11. touching
affinity: There was no affinity between Adam and Eve, neither any
consanguinity: and as it is in Leviticus 18. 9. We must not marry with the
daughter of our Father or of our Mother, whether she be borne at home or
without, whether she be lawfully or unlawfully begotten, and this must be a
(...) Law to all the Nations of the Earth.

3. Marriage with an (...) or one (...).
The third sort of Marriages that are excepted follow. She that was Adams wife,
was taken out of Adams side, was Adams ribbe: So that those Marriages, on the
contrary side, that are conjoined with those that have been joined with other
men, I mean in Adultery, are disallowed, for he that coupleth himself with an
Harlot is one body, 1 Corinthians. 6. 16. To match with her, that is joined to
another by carnal company, or by contract, is not to be permitted. These
three sorts of Matches are unfit.

The direction to choose a wife.
Now for the directing of our choice. Pleasure, Profit and Virtue.
3There are three allurements to love and liking, Pleasure, Profit and Virtue:
For the first, Eve had beauty in aedificavit Deus, in that God builded her. For
the second, She had profit in adjutorem, in that she was a meet help, her
matter for strength, was of a bone. And for the third, She had virtue, in that
Deus adduxit. The solder must be tempered of all these together, for the
direction of our choice out of Boaz choice, who took Ruth to be his wife. Why?
Not only because she was beautiful, or because she might be an help unto him
in his age, but because all the City knew that she was a virtuous woman, Ruth
3. 11. for he knew that favor is deceitful, and beauty is vanity, Mulier
autem timens Dominum ipsa laudabitur, as it is in Prove. 31. 30. where a great
Dowry, or a woman's beauty is the glue of this bond, there the glue will go
asunder, if wealth decay and beauty perish; and sometimes riches take the wings
of an Eagle and fly away: It is virtue that makes man and wife cleave faster
together. Next to virtue and the fear of God, we must choose a woman of like
disposition unto us, or that by her discretion may be of a likely disposition,
a Woman, as Peter speaks, of a meek spirit: Abigall was a woman of singular
wisdom, who by her meekness and discretion salved the foolishness of her
husband; she saved the life and preserved the wealth of Naball from utter
destruction: Abigall, that was wife and gentle, by her discretion, did agree
well with Naball, who was foolish and a Churl: and (...) a gracious and modest
woman attaineth honor, Prove. 11. 16. She opens her mouth with wisdom, and
the Law of grace is in her tongue, Prove. 31. 26. And thirdly, as she is builded
by God, so she must be such a one as will build up her husband; for (...)
Solomon, in Prove. 14. 1. A wise woman builds her house, but the foolish
destroys it with her own hands: This property here that I mean, is that she
should be a good Houswife, as we call her, such a one as overseeth the ways of
her household, and eats not the bread of idleness, Prove. 31. 27. they should
be as a snail still at home: And Paul in 1 Timothy 5. 13. bids us to refuse
such women as be wanton, idle, goers about from house to house, pratlers, and
busybodies: A wife must be modest, and such a one as can govern her house,
such a one as will bring up her Children in virtue that her sons in their
youth, may be as flourishing plants, and her daughters as Ivorie Palaces, Psalm.
144. 12. She must both preserve and enlarge her husbands wealth; for if she be
like the Merchants ship, she will bring her food from far, Prove. 31. 14. She
considers also a field and gets it: And lastly, they must leave that is
bad and cleave to that which is good, and unto Gods Laws, and their love must
be without dissimulation, Romans 12. 9.

Thirdly, When such a party as we have spoken of is found, we must not like
Horses, ran after them neighing, as Jeremie speaks: nor we must not
assumere nobis uxores; we must not take wives our selves for our selves; but we
must take her that shall be given unto us, God here brought Eve and gave her
unto Adam: Parents consent.
which authority and prerogative God gives unto Parents, to give their Children
1 Cor. 7. 38. in Marriage, and to take wives for their Children: In chap. 24.
4. Abraham appoints whence a wife shall be taken for his son Isaac; and
Abraham's servant craved the consent of the Parents of Rebekah, the 51. verse of
that chapter. Ishmael was content to have such a wife as his mother took for
him out of the Land of Egypt, chap. 21. 21. Not only Isaac was content with the
wife his father had provided him, but even Ishmaell, that was ungratious, was
content with the wife his mother had ordained for him: So that in Marriage
nothing must be done without the consent of the Parents. Though Sampson were
fervently in love with the woman he saw in Timnah, which was a Philistine, yet
he came to his father and mother saying, I have seen a woman in Timnah, of the
daughter of the Philistines, therefore give me her to wife, Judges 14. 2. The
very Heathen do regard the consent of Parents, in chap. 34. 8. Hamor who was
an uncircumcised man, came to Jacob to ask his consent for Sechem, that he
would give his daughter Dinah unto his son for wife: And in 2 Samuel 13. 13.
Tamar answers Amnon, Defloure me not, speak to the King my Father for me, and
he will not deny me unto thee. As there must be no giving nor taking in
Marriage without Gods consent, I mean, the Israelites might not take wives
among the Idolatrous Heathen; for God himself, in Deuteronomy. 7. 3. says, Neither
shall thou make Marriages with them, neither give thy daughter unto his son,
nor take his daughter unto thy son; so must there be no marriage without the
Parents and friends consent, the Law is in the 22. of Exodus 16, and 17.
verses, That if a Man entice a Maid that is not betrothed, and (...) with her,
he shall endow her, and take her to his wife: Yet if her father refuse to give
her to him, there was no marriage; but he should pay her money, according to
the Dowry of Virgins. The consent of the parties.
Secondly, In respect of their own consent, The consent of the Woman is
required. After the Parents of Rebekah had agreed to give their daughter to
Isaac, yet they would have her to be called, that she might also give her
consent, chap. 24. 39. and 57. God drew not Eve to Adam perforce, but lead her
willingly; she was brought to him with joy and gladness, as it is in Psalm. 45.
the 15. verse. Hereby all enforced matches are condemned, and all extort
agreements are abrogated, As those under age, those that are made by mad and
drunken persons, are disalowed, and may be undone: The consent of such makes
not a match, for tales non adduxit Deus, such God brings not together. Yet if
a Christian man have a wife that believes not, if she be content to dwell with
him, let him not forsake her, for the unbeleeving wife is sanctified by the
husband, their Children are holy, which else were unclean, 1 Cor. 7. 14. This
is for their consent.

The contract and betrothing
After the Parents and parties themselves have given their consent, then comes
the contract, the affiance, and the espousals between them, before the face of
God; for as soon as God had brought Eve unto Adam, he said now, in this present
time, She is bone of my bones, she is my lawful wife; which you may see in the
law of Nature, for in chap. 19. 14. Lot called them, his sons in Law that
should have married his daughters, after they were betrothed unto them; if she
be not betrothed she is called a Maid, Exodus 22. 16. and after she is
betrothed to an husband, she is his wife: Mary the mother of Jesus conceived by
the Holy Ghost, after she was betrothed unto Joseph, before he knew her
carnally, before he was publicly married to her, as may appear by the 1. of
Matthew 18. for Marie and Joseph were even then Man and Wife before God; and
therefore the Fathers say well, that contractus facit consensum animorum.

The solemnity.
Next to the Contract, is the Solemnity: As in the Marriage of Adam and Eve, it
was solemnized before the glorious company of heavenly Angels, God himself,
as the Priest, joined them together; he, as a Father, gave her unto Adam, chap.
3. 12. and it was God that coupled them together, Matthew 19. 6. She first
entered into Gods house, then into Adams house; she first took God by the hand,
and then Adam by the hand. And this Marriage must be our example, for this is
the Marriage Sermon to the whole world, Man shall leave his Father and Mother
and cleave to his Wife; and after this, they be Man and Wife before God and
before Man: Then follows Gods blessing of them in chap. 1. 28. God blessed
them, and God said unto them, increase and multiply, and fill the Earth. And
the last point is of the unity; By this union they are become one flesh, and
carnal conjunction is permitted them: Abimelech, for that out of a window he
saw Isaac sporting with Rebekah, said therefore, of a surety she is his wife,
chap. 26. 8. But he that joyneth himself with his neighbors wife, is not
innocent, Prove. 6. 29. The Wife has not power over her own body, but her
Husband; nor the Husband bath not power over his own body, but his wife, 1 Corinthians. 7. 4. The Gentiles are inheritors of the same body with the Jews, and
the partakers of the same promise in Christ by the Gospel, the third to the
Ephesians 6.

2. The duties in Marriage.
Now concerning the Duties in Marriage, whereof we will speak in general, and
then in several.

Faithfulness and Love.
The general duties which do concern Man as well as Woman, and Woman as well as
Man, which do concern them both, are two, Faithfulness and Love. Which two we
must alienate from all other Women, and appropriate them only to our Wives. The
heart of the husband trusts in a faithful wife, Proverbs 31. 11. see 1 Cor.
7. 4, and 5. The one has power over the others body: Marriage is honorable,
and the bed undefiled; but Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge, Hebr.
13. 4. Faithfulness is promised in the celebration of Marriage; but the
faithless Woman forsakes the guide of her youth and forgets the Covenant
of her God, Prove. 2. 16. the paths of a strange Woman are movable, Proverbs 5.
6. there is no faith to be reposed in such a Woman.

The other duty is Love: For that Woman was taken out of man's side, she was
his (...) closse to his heart, which is the seat of love. Man must love her as
his part; and she must also love him, for that he was wounded mortally for her
sake, and had been in great danger of his life, had he not had so excellent a
Physician and Surgeon to close up his side again. Man is the Image and glory of
God, Woman is the glory of Man, 1 Cor. 11. 7. And again, A virtuous Woman is
the crown of her Husband, Proverbs 12. 4. There is a communion of their name
and of their nature, which will move mutual love, which procures inward
comforting and outward cherishing; for no man ever yet hated his own flesh, but
nourishes and cherishes it, Ephesians 5. 29. The Woman must be subject to the
Man, and the Husband must give honor to the Wife, as to the weaker Vessel, 1
Peter 3. 7. The man is as the stock, the woman as the branch; the wife must be
loving; for a contentious and angry Wife is condemned, Proverbs 21. 17. And
Husbands must love their Wives, and not be bitter unto them, Colos. 3. 19. This
mutual love must be above the love to the Parents or to the Children, there
was a great regard in times past not to abuse another Concubine, 2 Samuel, 3. 8.

In several, there are in them two other Duties: In the man understanding and
wise government; there is, I say, in the husband direction, and there must be
in the woman subjection, to be subject to his direction. And here I am to
admonish women of seven things, to make them to honor their husbands. First,
they must consider, that Adam was formed first, and then Eve, 1 Timothy 2. 13.
Secondly, Man was not created for the Woman's sake, but Woman for the Man's sake,
1 Cor. 11. 9. Besides he was wounded that she might be made. She was taken out
of him. She was brought unto him. She was made to help him. She received her
name of his name; his name was Ish, her name Ishah: She had in her name a
letter of five in number less than man, to show she was but a diminutive: All
these do imply woman's subjection.

There are two other Duties several, of the man and wife: The Man must protect
his Wife in danger, chap. 20. 11. Providing is required of the man, to provide
for his household and family, 1 Timothy 5. 8. And the woman is to preserve and
enlarge that her husband has provided; the domestical duty of preserving the
house and household pertains to her, as it is in Proverbs 31. 21. She should
be of the property of the Snail, still at home; but a foolish Woman is
troublesome, Proverbs 9. 13. The house in holy Scripture is taken for the
Children, whom she must bear and bring up in the fear of God; The Wife through
bearing of Children shall be saved, says Paul, 1 Timothy 2. 15. The house is
taken for the Servants, whom we must govern well: And the house is taken for
the implements, which she must order and enlarge. She must be not as Ivy,
which cleavth to the tree, and is not profitable, though green; but as the
fruitful Vine on the sides of thine house, she shall bear Children like to the
Olive plants, round about thy table, Psalm 128. 3.

3. No divorce after marriage.
And this cleaving of each to other, implies a perpetuity of this bond, out of
the 2 of Kings 18. 6. Man shall leave father and mother to cleave to his wife:
And in 1 Cor. 7. 10, and 11. Paul says, I command those that be married; not
I, but the Lord, Let not the Wife depart from her Husband, and let not the
Husband put away his Wife. It is true Quos Deus conjunxit homo non separabit,
whom God has joined let no man separate: Yet God himself may sever them,
either by death; for when the Husband is dead, she may marry to another man,
Romans 7. 3. or God may sever them by divorcement for lewdness and whoredom,
not for every light matter, but for a very weighty cause, as it is in the 24.
of Deuteronomy 1. Divorcement is called in Hebrew a sawing, and the divorce of
man and wife should be as the sawing a (...) from the body: If a man have the
dead Palsy in some part of his flesh, he will not presently have it cut off,
unless it (...) some other part.

Divorces for two causes.
The Wife, so long as her Husband lives, is bound unto him, 1 Cor. 7. 39. But
if the flesh be not only dead, but corrupted, then may there be a proceeding to
divorces, and that upon two causes, as the ancient Fathers do say out of the
Scripture; The one is for Fornication and Adultery, And who so puts away
his Wife except it be for fornication, causes her to commit Adultery, Matthew
5. 32. except it be for Whoredom, Matthew 19. 9. And, as I told you,
adulterous flesh is rotten (...), it is (...) flesh in the thighs; and this
divorcement for carnal copulation in Adultery, they do gather quia adherebit
uxori (...) out of suae to his own wife, and she to her own husband must cleave.

The other cause of divorce, is for spiritual Adultery, which is (...), as it
is called in the Scriptures: If thou have an unbeleeving Wife, if she be
content to dwell with thee, for sake her not; for in that she is an Infidel,
she is dead flesh; but in that she is content to dwell with thee, she
putrifieth not: but if she seek to draw thee to Idolatry, in such things thou
may not yield, but there may be a departure, 1 Cor. 7. 15. God suffers
separation and apostacy for spiritual Fornication, which is Idolatry; and
where God does make separation, there his Deputies, which are his Priests; for
Incontinencie and Apostacy may suffer divorcement, for that the People
committed Fornication both bodily and spiritually with the daughters of Moab;
Moses, in the name of God, ordained they should be slain; and Phineas, with his
spear, appeased Gods wrath, Numbers 25. In Ezra 10. 4. after they had resolved
to put away their strange wives, they came to Ezra the Priest, saying, Arise,
for this matter belongs unto thee; who bid them, in verse 11. to separate
themselves from their strange wives, as you may see there at large: But Paul's
counsel, in the 1 to the Cor. 7. 11. is my counsel here, that but for argent
occasion a man should not put away his wife; but if she depart, let her remain
unmarried, as if she did retain only to her Husband, or let her be reconciled
to her husband, and this reconciliation makes no new marriage, but by
repentance she, if she have offended, must renew her life in honesty and
holiness, and this reconciliation must be a renewing of their love; and the man
must heartily forgive her, as he would have God forgive him; then there must be
a forgetting of any sepatation, as though there had been no breach at all, that
so faith and love may ever after be preserved; that so their love may be not
only more dear than that to Parents, but that it may grow daily more and more,
that God may bless them and their Children, that their union in the flesh may
breed the unity of their minds, that they may be united each to other, as
Christ and his Church, we in him and he in us, who by his Incarnation became
our flesh, and he is one body with his Church, who was tormented and scourged,
who dyed, whose very heart was pierced with a spear, whence his Church was
taken; he forsook his Father in the Heavens, and was incarnate; he forsook his
Mother, and suffered death, that he might cleave to the Church, and the Church
to him, that so they might be one spirit; that so this bond might continue
perpetually, and that this knot that joyneth Man and Wife might be indissoluble.

Erant autem illi ambo nudi, Adam and uxor ejus: ae non erubescebant. Genesis 2.
25.

November. (...). 1591.
THis verse at the first sight may seem (...), and to small purpose; but the
wisdom of the Holy Ghost did add the same to the rest for good purpose. If it
be referred to that which went before, in regard of man in state of Innocence;
or that which (...) in the next chapter, in regard of Man after his Fall.

Naked before their fall.
In regard, first, of that which goes before this verse, The man and his wife
were naked, yet were not ashamed, left that any should think any evil to be in
them, lest any (...) should be suspected to be in this time of Innocence, it
is (...) a man (...) marry (...) Virgin, 1 Cor. 7. 36. In their (...) then was
no uncomelinesse; for, says St. Austin, in the time of Innocence, in the
marriage of Adam and Eve in their bodies or (...), (...) calor, there was
(...), (...), there was no (...) motion; but since the fall it is otherwise,
when David saw (...) naked (...) her self, 2 (...). 11. 2. her beauty (...) his
(...); after (...) committed (...) and murder. But the state of Adam and Eve
in Paradise was otherwife, whose minds were pure and chaste, there was in them
(...) shame, for there was no cause why they should be ashamed; which shows,
that if any, then (more than any) Adam and Eve were Saints, and their state was
Angelical.

Naked after the fall.
In regard of that which follows this verse, There was no shame before the
Fall, in that their life was so innocent, that there was nothing whereof they
should be ashamed; but now by sin shame came into the World, and want of
shame now argues wickedness. Man was in honor and regarded it not; but Adam
and Eve, by disobedience and breaking the Law of God given them in Paradise,
turned their glory to shame, which shame continues in all their posterity: so
that this verse is necessary in respect both of the precedents and
subsequents. The state of Adams Innocence is grounded, by the Fathers, out of
this very verse; and they make much account of the 7. chapter of the Preacher
29. where the wiseman says, This only have I found, that God has made Man
righteous, fecit Deus hominem rectum, God has made Man straight and upright in
regard of his mind, his wisdom is without busying himself with many
questions: such was his wisdom in the 20. verse, you see that he gave to all
the Beasts apt names, agreeing with their natures; the other straightness was
of his will, there was in his will no perverseness; the first of these the
Fathers do call gratiam gratis datam; the other they call gratiam gratum
facientem; it was knowledge that made him after the Image of him that created
him, Colossians 3. 11. And again, as concerning his mind, God created him in
righteousness and in true holiness, Ephesians 4. 24. Man's original
righteousness was like that of the new man Christ after the Image of God, his
body was straight and his mind was upright.

But some will ask, Why was not man's wisdom in the 20. verse, and his
uprightness in this verse? Why were not both these joined together? Wisdom,
say they, is appropriate unto Man before Woman was; and the wisdom which Woman
has, is from Man, in whom silence in public place is commendable: and if
they will learn any thing, let them ask their Husbands at home, 1 Cor. 14. 35.

Innocence was their attire.
But Man is not said to be innocent and upright until that Woman was made: And
the Fathers say well, that innocence and righteousness, before the fall, was
vestis nuptialis, the wedding garment, which made them more seemly in the sight
of God, though they were naked, than all the rich and costly attire that is to
be found in a Princes Palace: original wisdom and righteousness made Adam
and Eve wise as serpents, innocent as Doves, Matthew 10. 16. there was in them,
as the Fathers say well, prudens simplicitas and simplex prudentia; they were
ripe in knowledge, innocent in life: So that neither ignorance, nor error,
which is worse than ignorance, did distort their wisdom, pejus est errare,
quam ignorare. There was in them no malice, no perverseness to distort their
will; they counted Godliness great gain, and were content with their estate,
as it is in 1 Timothy 6. 9. They laid themselves upon the strong foundation of
their obedience, that so in the end they might obtain life eternal; that so
there might be continual quietness of mind and peace of conscience that
passes all understanding.

The division of the verse.
This verse divides it self into two parts, the one is in respect of their
body, in that they were both naked; the other is in respect of their mind, and
they were not ashamed. First, We will speak of these parts severally, then
after of them jointly, though they were both naked, yet were they not ashamed.
First of them severally.

Their body naked.
In respect of their body, they were both naked: they were borne naked as we are
borne, Naked came I out of my mothers womb, says Job in his first chapter 21.
and so were they created. The ancient Divines do draw out of that, that Man is
borne naked without any covering, not with a thick and hairy hide, but with a
thin and smothe skin, without claws, without talents, without horns or hoofs;
they are borne inermes, having no weapons: whereby they argue that man is borne
not to do any harm or hurt, but to be harmless: He is borne for love, and
the first words that Adam spoke, were words of love: Adam and Eve, Man and
Woman, are borne ad adhesionem and unionem, to cleave together and be one
flesh; that they should be not as Lions, but as Lambs, like the immaculate Lamb
Christ Jesus; that they should be not as Griffins, but as Doves, like the Holy
Ghost, which descended like a Dove: we should be gentle as Lambs, innocent as
Doves: It was Tubalkain that came from Cain, who was a murderer, that first
brought in weapons to be instruments for War and dissension between men: Adam
and Eve in time of their obedience, were naked in body, innocent in mind they
were the two Lambs, the two Doves in Paradise, born to no harm.

Nakedness opposite to vestimentum.
Nakedness stands here opposite to apparel, which is either to cover us or
to adorn us: For the first use, it is sufficient that our apparel be comely,
with shamefastness and modesty, 1 Timothy 2. 9. For the clothing of man, in Esaias
61. 10. God has clothed me with the garments of salvation, and covered me with
the robe of righteousness, he has decked me like a Bridegroom; with this was
naked Adam arrayed. Apparel is either ornamentum or indumentum, the one for
comeliness, the other to cover nakedness. Adam and Eve had no need of apparel
for these two uses, Man then regarded not his outward apparelling, but he cared
that the hid man of the heart might be incorrupt; as it is in 1 Pet. 3. 3.
Though we are borne naked, yet so we cannot long continue: No weather, no
wind, could pearce them in time of Innocence, they were impassible, they felt
not the heat nor the cold; but after the fall they were passible, and then they
made them garments.

Nakedness opposite to Ornamentum.
Again, Nakedness is taken against ornament, with costly apparel, which is to
please the eye, as it is a^ large described in Esaias 3. 18, etc. But Adam and
Eve needed not the beauty of apparel, they needed not the silk of the
silkworm, nor the wool of Sheep, not the skins of rare beasts, nor any cloth
of gold, nor any needle work; the softest raiment, and the richest apparel
would have been no grace but a disgrace to Adam in Paradise; he was naked, and
yet the robe of righteousness was his attire; when Christ was transfigured
upon the mount Thabor, his face did shine as the Sun, and his clothes were
white as the light, Matthew 17. 2. Christ was bright as the Sun: For that
Adam and Eve were conversant with God, they had that brightness, which passed
the glory of the richest apparel, their brightness was like the shining of
the Sun; if the Sun were covered with velvet, it were no grace but a
blemish to the Sun; and if Adam had been adorned in rich attire, it would
have disgraced the bright shining beams of his innocence: And though that Adam
by his disobedience, lost this his brightness, and we also lost it by his
transgression; innocence and the robe of righteousness was their garment, but
after they were apparelled with shame; But by Christ Jesus we look to be
restored to the first state of Paradise, to be covered with the robe of
righteousness, Esaias 61. 10. then this corruptible body shall put on
incorruption, and this mortal shall put on immortality, 1 Cor. 15. 53. then
shall the just men shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father, Matthew
13. 43. then shall our beauty be without blemish, our mind shall be upright,
our glory unspeakable: Then, as it in Esaias 24. 23. the Moon shall be abashed,
and the Sun ashamed; when God shall reign in Sion, and glory shall be before
his Saints.

Why Man created naked.
For what cause they were created naked, and were not clothed? The Fathers
answer that there is a resemblance between nakedness and innocence.
Nakedness is to be bare from outward clothing: Innocence is to be bare from
inward naughtiness, and there is a resemblance between deceit and a covering
or mask; there be those that have a show of Godliness, yet have they denied
the power thereof, 2 Timothy 3. 5. there be those that cover their deceit with the
hood of (...), as Peter speaks, and with the cloak of shame, as Paul speaks
in 2 Cor. 4. 2. they cover their craftiness: Let then our minds and thoughts
be innocent, let them be naked from all kind of wickedness; for as Paul
speaks in Hebrews 4. 13. God discerns the thoughts and intents of the
heart, neither is there any Creature which is not manifest in his sight; all
things are naked and open to his eyes. Innocence to Adam and Eve was a
glorious garment, the robe of righteousness was their attire; the man that
went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, in Luke 10. 30. and fell among thieves was
robbed of raiment and was wounded to death, which is the case of Mankind after
the fall, was restored by the tender compassion of Christ, the true Samaritane,
to be apparelled in the glory and raiment of righteousness.

They were not (...).
The second thing is the state of the soul, they were not ashamed, they were not
confounded, their soul was not troubled: In Revel. 19. 8. the wite of the Lamb,
which is the Church, shall be arrayed in pure fine limaen; and the fine linen
is the righteousness of the Saints: their thoughts were honest, their soul at
rest, but the disquiet of the soul is by passions and perturbations: Yet God at
the first did create in Adam and Eve affections, as in (...). 5. 22. Love, joy,
peace, long suffering, gentleness, meekness, temperance, which are the fruits
of the spirit: Adam had joy and love, which were his (...) affections, and as
the train to wait upon his original righteousness, but the corosive affections
which are in Man is shame grief, (...), etc. which are the fruits of the Devil
and of the flesh; these (...) the Devils Sergeants to arrest Man. God himself,
after the (...), would have these to be in us, to punish us, and to tyrannize
over us; As the Jebusites, which were in Jerusalem as a scourge to them, the
which was called the City of the Jebusites, Joshah 23. 7. and 18. 28. shame
and sin do scourge us with whips, not heard, their stripes are worse than of
an iron scourge, as a Father says well, peccata nos surdo vulnere verberant.
The original has, and they were not confounded. So long as sin has shame in
his cheeks, (...) is counted a virtue; to be (...) in Paradise was accounted to
be an evil, and the least evil it is now: If this small blemish shame were
not to be found in Paradise, then greater offenses were not; for shame is
called primitiae peccati, the first fruit of sin, and after shame came fear,
as it is in chap. 3. 8. and after fear sorrow seized upon Man. This word of
confounding is taken from a troubled vessel, where the lees being stirred do
(...) up to the top; and shame we see brings a great part of the blood of the
heart to the face. When Adam and Eve had transgressed, they then were ashamed,
and covered their shame, chap. 3. 7. and men cover their faces that are
ashamed; after shame seized upon man, his peace was dishonored, his
bleslednesse was taken away; if a man now be innocent, we do say he is not
ashamed: and thus, and that very well, the Schoolmen do reason; If the steps
of sin, as shame, be not found in man, then the fruits of sin are not in
him, the fruit of sin is shame, and the end thereof is death, as it is in
Romans 6. 21. see Proverbs 28. 14. that after shame a man hardneth his heart
and becomes shameless, but after that comes punishment, Esaias 24. Shame,
fear, sorrow, are the Devils Livery; it is the Devil that does cloth Man with
shame as with a garment: But innocence and righteousness are Gods plants, God
made Man without sin without shame.

Now of these two jointly: They were naked, and yet they were not ashamed. They
wanted shame he says not, and he felt no want of apparel. And Austin says
well upon these words of Moses, Non laudat (...), sed innocentiam mentis: for
in that he was not ashamed, he was innocent; and he that sins not, has noe
cause to be ashamed: and now if a man have committed a fault and shameth not,
we call him impudent: But if he be innocent and shameth not, we say not that he
is impudent, but that he is courageous and confident, for the wicked flies
when none pursues, but the righteous are bold and confident as a Lion,
Proverbs 28. 1. When a man has done (...), either he shameth, which as we say
is a sign of grace, or else he hardneth his face like a stone and is not
ashamed, but shameless; this is objected against the People of the Lord in
Jeremie 3. 3. that though they were wicked, and punished for their wickedness,
yet they would not be ashamed. Harlots were wont to cover their faces, to cover
their shame, but now Harlots are become shimelesse; this was the reason that
Judah supposed Tamer to be an whore, chap. 38. 15. for that she had covered her
face: God cannot abide the sinful man, but he will punish sharply those that
will not be ashamed when they have committed abomination, Jeremy 6. 15. Now we
are clothed and ashamed; for the mind condemns the deformity of sin by
shame; and to be ashamed at our faults now, is accounted a virtue; shame now
bewrays the sin that is covered: Adam and Eve were naked in body, innocent
in mind, and were not ashamed of their nakedness. But since the Fall it is
otherwise, as in chap. 9. 22. Ham saw the nakedness of Noah his father, and
was accursed; but Shem and Japheth went backward and covered the nakedness of
their father, whose nakedness they saw not; and for that they shamed to see
their fathers nakedness, they were blessed. God, in the 20. of Exodus 20.
commands Moses, not to make steps up to his altar, lest, when he went up by
the steps, his filihinesse were discovered thereon; when the young man in Mark
14. 52. that was clothed in lynnen upon his bare body, and they would have
caught him, he left his linen cloth and fled from them naked, as being
ashamed: In the 21. of John 7. when Christ appeared to Peter and heard him
speak, he cast himself into the Sea, not naked as he was, but gyrded to him his
coat. But what makes nakedness lawful and laudable, what makes want of
shame (commendable in Adam and Eve) to be now a thing blamable, and whereof to
be ashamed? There were certain Cynical Philosophers, and notable Heretics,
called Adamites, that went naked; but at length they were weary of their
opinion, they were not able long to continue naked, and were at last ashamed of
their nakedness. But to answer the said question, we will consider first Adams
original state, and then the state of him and of Mankind by his Fall.

The (...) of Adams Innocence was when the word of God was above all, when
man's reason was subject to Gods word, when his will was obedient to his reason,
when his concupiscence to his will, and when his flesh was subject to his
concupiscence; so all in Man was straight and right, he was upright within and
without; his reason was obedient, his will was not perverse, his concupiscence
was chaste; the nakedness of the body corrupted not the soul; it was original
righteousness that was the complexion of Man's soul; when Man was innocent,
there was then no hindrance of good, nor any inclination to evil: All this
while there was no shame, for there was nothing whereof man had cause to be
ashamed: Innocence and uprightness brought forth chastity, chastity brought
forth courage, and this it is that made them, though they were naked, not to be
ashamed.

But after the Fall, when all came out of joint, as Paul speaks, our
concupiscence became a Rebel to our will, our will to our reason, and our
reason to the Law of God; man's body would not yield obedience to his soul, nor
his soul unto God, according to that of Paul Romans 7. 23. I delight in the Law
of God concerning the inner man, but I see (...) Law in my members, rehelling
against the Law of my mind, and lending me captive to the law of sin, which
(...) in my members: the corruption of the fleshrebelleth and rises against
our spirit, our carnal members do raise up the flesh against the Law of the
mind, and against our will, and these members (...) called the firebrarnds of
(...). It is not the hand, not the leg, not the arm, not the seemly parts, but
the basest part, the unseemliest member, that striveth against the spirit: Yet
by Marriage upon those members of the body which we think most unhonest, put we
most honesty on, and our uncomely parts have more (...); for our comely parts
need it not; but God has tempered the body together, and has given the more
honor to that part (...) lacked, by this bond of Marriage, whereby they two
become one flesh, Levit. 18. 6. And in diverse other places God faith, (...)
shall not come near any of the kindred of his flesh, to (...) her shame, though
it be under title of marriage, the uncovering of which shame turpe est vobis
dicere, it is a shame to tell: though marriage be honest and honorable, yet
there is a shame in marriage, which is the shame of the carnal members,
whereof both Man and Woman have their shame; Man may be ashamed of his
firebrand of concupiscence, all finnes are to be shamed at, but lust above all
is to be ashamed of, which causes other sins, as in (...) Adultery and
Murder; and the members of lust and carnalitie we are to cover, and so to
cover our shame: and to this shame of (...) men are subject, which sin (...)
us more like bruit beasts than othervices: the thief by the Law might make
(...), (...) he that committesh adultery destroys his own (...): the wound
and (...) of that teacher (...) man was death, Prove. 6. 33. neither the Law of
God nor the Law of Nature admitted any (...) for this (...). (...) before Amnon
committed his inceft, 2 Samuel 13. 13. she said to him, Commit not this folly,
how shall I put away my shame? and than (...) be (...) of the fools of Israel,
he should be accounted even as a beast that has no regard of kindred: he should
for that inoest be esteemed as a (...) person, He that is enticed by the
flattery of an Harlot, and felloweth her, is as an one that goes to the
slaughter, (...) 7. 22. He is like (...) neighing after his neighbors wife,
(...) 5. 8. (...) God that begat him, and that formed him, Deus. 32. 18. It is
(...) begets sin, and sin begets (...); there was no sin, no
filthiness in Adam and Eve at the first, where fore though they were naked,
yes they were not ashamed: But in chap. 3. 7. after their Fall when they knew
they were naked, they made them (...) to cover their privy and incomely parts,
and yet: the covering of their shame takes not away (...) shame. And we should
(...) thus of apparel, that it is to defend our nakedness, we being passible
of weather, to cover our shame: and we have (...) great cause (...) thereof,
seeing it is but as a clout wherein we do wrap and cover our own shame; we
must take heed that we make not our shame to be our glory: apparel should be a
covering to shame, but alas, it is even now become a provocation and an
allurement to sin: The costlinesse of the apparel shows the pride of the
mind. Job, in 29. 14. says, I put on Justice and it covered me, my judgment
was as a robe and a Crown; Justice and Judgment did cover and adorn Job. Esaias
prophecieth in chap. 61. 10. that Christ shall cloth the faithful with the
garment of salvation, he shall cover them with the robe of righteousness, he
shall deck them like a bridegroom or a bride with her jewels. Adam was created
after the image of God, that is, in righteousness and true holiness, as it is
in Ephesians. 4. 24. in a word, the spouse of the Lamb Christ Jesus, whose wife is
the Church, she shall at the latter day be arrayed with pure fine linen and
shining, and the fine linen is the righteousness of the Saints, Revel. 19. 8.
The apparel that covered Adam was his innocence and the robe of
righteousness, melior est vestis Innocentia, quam Purpura, Innocence is
better apparel than purple or scarlet, say the Fathers out of the first of
Proverbs 31. 22. where Solomon, speaking of the wise woman, says, that her
family are clothed in scarlet, and purple is her garment, that is the outward
vesture. But in verse 25. he says, strength and honor is her clothing, that
is, say they, the inward decking of the soul, it is not the outward apparel
that God regards, but as Peter says in his first Epistle chap. 3. 4. If the
hid man of the heart be incorrupt with a meek and quiet spirit before God, it
is a thing much set by. Purple and scarlet are the chief colors, and most
esteemed of by men, yet, yet they are the colors of shame and confusion. Man
in his Innocence was in honor, innocence and righteousness were then his
clothing; but when Man obeyed Satan and disobeyed God, he put on the Devils
livery, which was sin and shame, according to that in Psalm 132. 18. God
says, He will cloth his enemies with shame* Homo spoliatus honor, indutus
pudore, after man's fall he was spoiled of his honor and wrapped in a few clouts
to cover his shame: this was his change, from honor to misery.

We must now labor by all means, to recover this first innocence; and seeing
that we are become wretched and miserable, poor and naked, we must follow the
counsel of the Angel in Revel. 3. 18. We must buy of Christ the white raiment,
that we may be clothed, and that our filthy nakedness should not appear: We
must put off the old man with his works, Coloss. 3. 9. And we must put on the
new man, which is Christ, who is renewed in knowledge after the Image of him
that created him. Jacob, the younger son, must put on the clothes of his
elder brother Esau, chap. 27. 15. And we must put on, say the Fathers upon that
place, the apparel of righteousness of our elder brother Christ, eldest son
to God: the faithful are called the Children of Abraham, Galath. 3. 7. But we
by the faith we have in Christ Jesus, hope to become the Children of God, and
heirs of everlasting life; as in the Gospel it is said, that his wounds do
heal us; so may it as well be said, that his nakedness must cover our
nakedness: by his passion he washes away our sins; he dyed us with his
purple blood; he dyed an Innocent that we by his death might be unblamable; his
apparel is red, and his garments like him that treads the Winepresse; it was
he alone that trod the Wine Press, and all his raiment shall be stained, Esaias
63. 3. It was the purple of his blood that dyed us again in original
righteousness: the soldiers when they had crucified him, took off his
garments, so that he hung naked upon the cross, John 19. 23. You see by the
12. to the Hebrews 2. that he endured the cross and despised the shame, to
deliver us from shame and eternal punishment: So that we must repose our
selves in him, and not be ashamed of him; for who so shall be ashamed of
Christ, Christ shall be ashamed of him, when he shall come in his glory, Luke
9. 26. But all our glory and rejoicing must be in the dear and only begotten
son of God, in whom we have redemption through his blood, that is, the
forgiveness of sins, who is the image of the invisible God, the first born
of every Creature, by whom, and for whom all things were created, 1 Coloss. 14,
15. We must put off the old man and put on the new; and if we be apparelled
with Christ's righteousness, we shall not be ashamed: We must not cloth our
selves with our own works and our own righteousness, which is corruption and
shame; but we must cloth our nakedness with the nakedness of Christ the
immaculate Lamb. In a word his wounds must heal us, his nakedness must be our
clothing, his shame must be our glory, his death must be the means to attain
our life. Then we shall hunger no more nor thirst no more, we shall be
impassible of cold and of heat, and the Lamb which is in the midst of the
faithful shall govern them, and lead them unto the lively fountains of waters,
and God shall wipe away all tears from our eyes, Revel. 7. 17. And if we be
washed with his blood, we shall be whiter than the snow; then shall we be
clothed with innocence by him, our corrupt bodies shall put on incorruption;
and after the mortality of this our body we shall be clothed with immortality
of body and soul, 2 Cor. 5. 4, etc. This is it that I thought good to speak for
the opening of this verse.

AMEN.
LECTURES PREACHED UPON the third Chapter OF GENESIS.
LECTURES. Preached in Saint PAUL'S Church, LONDON.
Serpens autem erat astutus, astutior quavis bestia agri quam fecerat Jehova
Deus. Genesis 3. 1.

November. (...) 1591.
HITHER TO has been showed at large the happiness and perfection of Adams
estate while he continued upright in Paradise. Now, lest any of us comparing
our estate with Adams, and finding so great an alteration and difference
between him and us; because he was holy, we corrupt with sin; he was happy
and blessed having all things, wanting nothing which might increase his
happiness, we miserable, subject to all calamities and distresses which may
increase our misery; he without shame or sorrow, we confounded with them both:
Therefore lest we should enquire how this Change and Alteration came to our
natures, the Prophet in this Chapter will show it us, that we may be out of
doubt.

As therefore we have had hitherto, the building, beautifying, and perfecting
the Frame of all the world and of all the works of God: So now we shall see the
ruin and lamentable overthrow of all, which Saran by sin brought unto all.
For whatsoever God has done in the great world in general, as it is set down
in the first Chapter, or whatsoever we have seen excellent and glorious in the
little world, which is in the state of man, described in the second Chapter:
All that shall we see in this Chapter to be overthrown by the work and malice
of the Devil.

At the sight and consideration of which Tragedy, as St. Augustine says, all
the Creatures, especially mankind, ought with sighs and groans to dissolve
themselves into tears, to think of our and their utter and irrecoverable
confusion, were it not for this which is annexed unto it, namely, the hope of
the seed of the woman, promised to come at the fullness of time, to restore all
things which were lost in Paradise, and to bring us a more excellent Paradise
than that ever was.

The cause of all these evils which we see in us, and in the world, Moses here
relleth us in the beginning of this Chapter, to be the verifying of that
Prophecy which God (...) Adam, Genesis 2. 17. that is, what time soever he should
sin, and break the Commandment of God, he should die; that is, have all the
Messengers and Ministers of death ferzing upon him, until death it self, the
reward of sin, should take hold on him; which first part of the Chapter we
shall divide as St. Paul does teach us Romans 6. 1. into two parts, the first he
calls peccatum, the other peccati obsonium, that is, into the cause and
nature of sin, and into the effect and punishment which follows it:
Concerning the transgression, he sets down first the temptation of sin, in
the first 5. verses; then the preparation which is the sin it self, in the 6.
verse; then follows the stipend and hier of sin from that verse unto the
15. verse: In which verse then the prophet shows that God in justice
remembered mercy; and as St. James says, caused his mercy to triumph over
justice in the promised seed, without which remedy Adams sin had been
incurable, and his case and our condition had been most desperate; whereas by
this means, as St. Augustine says, the Devils envy is foelix invidia, and
Adams sin is foelix culpa, that is, falls out to the greater glory of all
the elect sons of God.

Now more particularly we are led to consider two things in the temptation;
first of all the persons, both agent and patient, and then the allurements and
inticements thereof: The chief in this temptation was the Devil and the Woman,
and then in regard of consent, Adam himself grew accessory and guilty thereof,
so that there were three causes of sin: The chiefest Author of it was the
Devil; the next is Eve the yeelder to him; the third was Adam, the consenter
to them both.

Serpents we know speak not, for they were not made to reason and dispute,
therefore we must needs understand another high person besides he Serpent,
which spoke in him, and used him as his Instrument and means to effect this
evil devise.

And in this respect, the Devil is called Rev. 12. 9. the old Serpent as his
name appellative, by which he was once called, and Satanas Revel. (...). 2. as
his proper name, by which his (...) and malicious nature is made known.

As therefore the Devil craftily and closely did put into Judas head and heart
by his suggestion, how to seek Christ's fall and death John 13. 2. so does he as
sly lie put into the Serpents mouth this temptation, by which he might betray
the first Adam and bring him to death; and therefore as Christ truly, though
not properly, called Judas Satan because he saw the Devil used him as his
Instrument; So by the same right and reason may we call the Serpent the Devil,
because it was he in this Serpent who did bring this thing to pass.

If any do ask why Moses did not make mention of the Devil in all this
Chapter? we may say, that it was Moses purpose to perform the office and duty
of a Historiographer, which is only to make a plain and true report of the
outward accident, and thing which was sensibly done, leaving the hidden and
secret meaning and true understanding of those things which are mystical, unto
his Interpreters and Expositors: For to this end, Moses had some always in
Gods Church, which did not only read the letter and words of his writings, but
also expound the true meaning thereof; and what Expositor is there, but by the
consequence of this story, and by conference of the Scriptures, can otherwise
understand this then of the Devil. Our Savior Christ tells us that the
Devil was a liar and murderer from the beginning. John 8. 44. that is, he is
the primitive and principal Author of all untruth and evil, therefore is he
called that evil Matthew. 13. 19. and the deceiver of mankind, Revel. 12. 9.
and therefore Moses does first deal with this evil one, and sets him down
as the chief author of this evil, under the form and name of a Serpent.
Touching him therefore, we must know as I told you Chap. 2. 1. that when God is
said to make the host of heavenly Creatures, that then also he made the
Angels, as David says Psalm 148. 2. which Angels God made (...) and (...),
to be his ministering spirits Psalm 104. 4. but some of them kept not their
first estate, Jude 6. but fell away from their holy and blessed estate in which
they mere made, and so there they became evil Angels reserved in chains to
everlasting fur.

Of this fall of Angels, Job seems to have knowledge Job 4. 18. God says he
found folly even in his Angels. Christ makes mention of their fall Luke 10.
18. and the cause of their fall is said to be sin 2. Pet. 2. 4. and the
particular sin may seem to be pride, Isaiah 14. 13. 14. ero similis
altissimo, for which cause that sin is called morbus Satanicus, and as the
wiseman says initium peccati est superbia; But we will not curiously inquire
what special sin it was which caused his fall, because indeed it is
sufficient for us to know in general that sin was the cause thereof, that we
may the more beware of it. He then being fallen, became not only an adversary
to God, which cast him off for ever, but also an envious enemy to mankind;
for not being able to wreack his mal ceagainst God, he maliciously invented and
attempted all the mischief and evil he could against man, which was the Image
of God, and the only Creature on whom God had set his heart and delight to do
him good: For as they which love the Father, cannot but love and show kindness
to his Children, which are dearest to him, as we see in David's example. So e
contra, hatred and malice make evil minds, to do their enemies hurt (...)
despite, even in the things which are most deer and precious unto them; so is
the Devil said to do Rev. 12. 13. when he was not able to hurt the Woman, he
pursued with hatred and rage her Child, which she brought forth, and because he
could not reach to him (being ascended) therefore he still persecuteth his
Church which professes his name: By this means then the Devil became not only
envious, but also an enemy to mankind; and to effect the plot of his mischief
which he had imagined, Moses tells us that he does use the means and
Instrument of a Serpent, which was the subtillest beast of the field, of which
we shall have occasion to speak the next time

Serpens autem erat astutus, astutior quavis bestia agri quam fecerat Jehova
Deus. Genesis 3. 1.

THe persons which concurred in this temptation I showed were of two sorts,
first the Tempter, and then the Tempted; The persons tempting are of two sorts,
the one plainly expressed by name to be the Serpent, the other necessarily
implied, and to be understood, namely, the old Serpent, which is called the
Devil, and Satan, the destroyer and deceiver of mankind, Rev. 12. 9. so that
we must conceive in this place, that Satanus hic est personatus, and Serpens
est inspiratus, the Devil is in the shape of a Serpent, and the Serpent is
possessed with the Devil; for we know that Serpents cannot speak and reason,
therefore it must needs be somewhat in him: Herein then we see the disposition
of evil and damnable Spirits, who being fallen into misery, do seek to draw
all others into the same calamity in the which they are wrapped and plunged,
for the Devil will not only perire, but also perdere, and therefore, as we see
does use all forcible means to bring it to pass.

But because he knew that he should never bring about the destruction of man,
so long as man should be united and tied fast to God in love and duty, obeying
his will; therefore first of all he labors most subtly to untie the knot,
by dissolving the Law and Commandment of God, through the transgression of
man: and thus much of the chief actor in this temptation, which is the Devil.

Now we come to the second person, which is the means and instrument which he
used for this purpose, namely, the Serpent.

Touching which, we shall see that the ancient Philosophers and wise men of the
world may seem to have had some knowledge, for they call the evil Spirit the
Serpentine Devil, and a hellish Fury in the form and shape of a Serpent, as if
they had had some notice that he made choice of this Creature, especially above
other, to do the greatest mischiefto man.

In considering of the entrance of the Devil, possessing the Serpent, we must
needs know, that if the Devil will needs tempt Adam unto evil, then he must
of necessity do it either with some inward suggestion or motion within, or
else by some external temptation and allurement without: But the Devil knew
that Adam then, in that estate of innocence had no evil concupiscence or
corruption within, by which he might fasten any ill motion or suggestion, for
his lust and affections were not as tinder, that is, were not apt to take any
spark of the Devils temptations, as ours are, for we are not only as tinder
very prone to take evil; but as Gunpowder, which with every spark is wholly
enflamed, and violently is carried away with the desire of evil, his soul was
not yet poisoned, with the corruption of sin as ours are, therefore he saw
that then there was no time nor place, to assault him with inward temptations
or persuasions to make him do evil, and therefore uses some sensible and ex,
ternall allurements to besiege him without.

To this end therefore, he must needs appear in some visible and sensible shape
and resemblance, and that must either be in some form and shape suitable and
agreeable to Adams nature, or else in some other apparition and form unlike
him, if he had appeared in some ugly and loathsome shape like to himself, he
knew that though he could not be terrified with fear (being innocent) and
therefore without fear, yet Adam and Eve would have contemned such an
instrument, and not have suffered him to have set abroach his assaults, for
which cause his policy and devise was, to cover himself with a fairer mask and
vizard, that he may seem better and more beautiful, then he was indeed.

Object.
But why did he not choose a better shape then of this Serpent?

Resp.
I answer, that no doubt his will was good, for he would have fashioned himself
into an Angel of light, or have put on him the shape of a grave and sage
Prophet, as he did in deceiving Saul, 1 Samuel 28. 13. But it must not be as the
Devil will have it, but as it pleases God to appoint and permit him: And the
fathers do think that almighty God of set purpose, did allot him this creature
and restrain him all other, for these two respects: first, thereby to punish
the pride and the ambitious nature of the Devil, that he might see and all the
world perceive, to what this sin of pride had brought him, because he which a
little before was so vainglorious as to presume to exalt him in Gods throne and
be as God, is now cast down in most vile and miserable sort, basely and
contemptibly crawling upon the ground and being as the abject and most hated
worm on the earth: that so all men might see and consider what pride and
ambitious vain glory will bring them unto, but the Devils malice and envy
toward man, being now greater than his pride was before, therefore it is no
matter how vile and base the instrument and means be, so it will serve his
turn, he will refuse nothing no not the Serpent, if by his means he might bring
man to the same condemnation and wrath, in which he is already plunged.

The other respect, (they think) was that the temptation of Satan might be more
easy for Adam to resist and withstand, for who would not think it most easy
for Adam and Eve, being so wise and excellent, and furnished with all graces of
Gods spirit, to epsy and contemn such ill counsel, which would have him
withdraw his allegiance and duty to God his gracious Creator, especially being
solicited thereto, by so vile, and base a creature as a Serpent is? Who would
not think it impossible that a weak worm should prevail against Adam in the
prime and excellency of his strength. Again the very name of the Serpent, which
Adam according to his wisdom gave unto him, might have given him a caveat and
warning to sulpect the fly (...) and subtilty of his nature for as Satan's name
is by interpretation Tempter, so in Hebrew Serpentare is as much in
signification as Tentare, and therefore such as are (...) and eggers on of men
to do evil, are in that tongue called Serpents for their flynesse and craft,
because as Solomon says, Prove. 30. 19. A Serpents way can hardly be discerned,
So that Adam had a greater (...) age of the Devil in this, and might have
taken such warning hereby, as one would think it should have been easy for him
to resist and overcome.

Surely all this was for his advantage and ease indeed, but seeing he yielded
cowardly to the Devil, notwithstanding all these helps, therefore they do
(...) his sin, and make it more (...) and more immeasurably sinful before
God and man.

Now it is said, that the Devil did possess and enter into the Serpent, as
being well content to try, whether this instrument and means would serve his
turn, and this is not a thing any whit strange or incredible, but very usually
seen and often heard, that the Devil can and has really possessed and dwelt
in the bodies of earthly creatures, as he entered into man, Luke 11. 24 Into
Swyne, Luke 8. 33. Acts 16. 16. All which do make this matter plain and easy
to believe.

But for the other point of the Devils power, to make a dumb creature to
speak, this has been a stumbling block at which Athiests and carnal men, led
by corrupt and sensual reason have stumbled and fell down into flat
infidelity, saying they would never believe it, but we must not be moved with
the infidelity of such: for the truth of Gods word shall stand undoubted and
true, in despite of them which resist it. One father showing the truth of this
place, says thus, what will you not believe, that the Devil can speak in a
Serpent, nor make a Serpent to speak, because it is against his nature to
speak, will ye think that which is strange in reason, to be impossible to the
Devil; God permitting him to do it? Then (says he) if ye will believe
nothing, but that for which a reason may be yielded, give me a reason of the
nether Jaw or Chap, which only having a small little sinew as a thread to hold
it up, is notwithstanding (in some) of such strength as to be able to bite in
sunder a ten-penny nail, tell me (says he) how the Liver and Stomach having in
them such a (...) heat, as can consume and digest very substantial things, and
yet notwithstanding should not be consumed or wasted thereby it self.

Again (says he) are there not in all ages of the world, many strange and
wonderful things seen and heard of, which are most true, of which no reason at
all can be gathered, why then should this thing seem incredible and so strange,
as that ye should deny ever it was done. And thus much of his answer to their
incredulous objection.

Ille dixit mulieri, Et jamne edixisse Deum, ne comedatis and omni fructu
arborum hujus horti? Genesis 3. 1.

HAving spoken of the principal actor in this temptation, and of the
instrument which he used, we are now by order come to speak of the manner of
this temptation,: For here we see that it is said, that the Devil used the
Serpents tongue, that by way of speech and conference he might entrap mankind;
where first we see the policy which the Devil uses for his advantage, that
is, not to set upon the man and the woman being both together, but to watch
when he might take them separate one from another, and being asunder, he
assaulted not the man, but the woman, which is the weaker Vessel, thinking that
if he could make her his friend, and to consent to (...) persuasion, that then
she being so deer to the man, might be a means the rather to enforce and draw
him also thereto.

And the best means he can invent to persuade the woman to (...), is fair
flattering speech, full of falsehood and lies; and that his speech might be
affectuall, he does not only lay siege unto the ears by his Dixit, but also
lays an alluring object before her eyes, and so by both offers the thing
forbidden unto her taste. He has venom like a Crocodile to infect the eye, and
cunningly conveyeth his poison also in by her ears, and so at the last makes
it take hold upon (...) heart to her destruction, as we have heard, in Genesis 1.
16. 17. God Sermon teaching him his commandment and duty; so (...) we shall
hear the Devils Sermon, to disgrace and disannul (...): In which speech of the
Serpent, the scope of the Devil, at which he (...), is to separate man and
God, and to undo the knot of love by which they were united; for he knew that
the dissolving of the Law would (...) the undoing of man, and so the overthrow
of all the world.

To this end therefore, he does falsely and blasphemously here (...) and accuse
God unto man, to make his holy word become odious unto him: And whereas the
Devil had many ways to bring into hatred Gods Commandment, and to call in
question Gods good will, as he might have taught her to quarrel with God, and
to make her believe that he was durus Dominus, very hard to them, because God
had denied them many things which the dumb Creatures have granted to them,
namely, because they cannot (...) as Fowls do, (...) run as swist as
Horses, nor go as strong as Lions do. But he (...) all such petty quarrels,
he will (...) issue with her in the (...) weighty matter, that is, namely, to
make God odious in his word (...) commandment which he gave them: and so it
comes to (...) that he qui in veritate non stetit, etiam veritati resistit,
knowing that Gods Dixit is that by which all things were made, and that by
(...) all things are maintained, and therefore hoped, that (...) (...) be
ruinamundi; and he deals not with Gods general word of (...) but with his
special word of Commandment, which (...) knew did most properly, and that
only, belong upto man in (...) for by it Adam held Tenure of Eden, and by it
only he enjoyed (...) of life and the favor of God; and it being broken, then
(...) presently morte morieris, that is, all miseries of this life which (...)
to a miserable death.

First of all therefore, the Devils devise is to call in question, and (...)
make a doubt of the truth of Gods word, and thereby at last (...) to bring a
plain and flat contradiction of it, denying, yea, opposing his false word to
the truth thereof; for from dixitne, we shall see him come to non dixit deus:
Thus we see what he laboreth to wring out of the heart of Eve by little and
little, the love and delight she had in the word of God. To which end he
craftily makes his first Dixit, to be a speech of question or interrogation,
asking whether God indeed and in good earnest ever said so, and from thence he
proceeds unto nequaquam moriemini, which is a positive speech of presumption,
that though they break that Law, yet they should not die. In the first he is
the interogative Devil, but at last he is the negative Devil, not only
doubting, but denying (...) the truth thereof. A Serpent has a double tongue,
under one is the gall of bitterness, which is doubtfullness, under the other is
the poison of Aspes, which is open unbeliese.

The first speech dixitne is called sibilus Serpentis, but his last speech in
the 5. verse is rugitus Leonis, in which he bewraieth himself at the full, of
which two, the first is but introduction to the other mischief ensuing.

For this is not the least policy of the Devil, not to set upon her bluntly,
But like a Serpent slily and slowly to creep in her by little and little,
until he has espied some vantage: Therefore his order is, to bring her from
questioning in talk, to a doubt in opinion, and from that, to an error in
judgment, and so at last, to a corrupt action in practice; and to corrupt her
mind within, first he uses this order, to tickle her ears with curiosity,
and by that, to cause her to have a giddyness and swimming in the brain, by
fantastical imaginations and surmizes, and then to make her secure and
careless of the truth, and so at last makes her somewhat inclineable to error
and falsehood.

Now let us come to the particular word of God, which the Devil in his
dialogisme does mean to entreat of, which we see is that which is set down Genesis
2. 16. 17. In propounding of which, we may consider how craftily and corruptly
he deals with the sacred word of God, to make it the better serve his turn in
the temptation, for he pareth off all that might make against him, and instead
of that, puts in by addition more than ever God spoke, that so it may be the
fitter for his purpose; he leaves out first both all that went before and that
which is after the Commandment, that is, he keeps from her the consideration
of Gods love and liberality, which is in the 16. verse, which was set to urge
and induce them to willing obedience, and also he (...) off the consideration
of Gods severe judgments, which was set after to keep them by fear from
disobedience

If we shall compare this also with that original in the 16. and 17. verses
before, we shall see how he depraveth and corrupts the text; for whereas it
is said precipit Jehova: the Devil does extenuate it, and says dixit Deus.
q.d. If he did say it, he did but speak it by way of talk as if he would not
urge it for any matter of weight and importance. Thus we see the Devils
subtilty and sophistry in disputing, and the Devils Rhetoric in propounding
this question; the end of all which, is either to make them doubt, or at least
to set light by the commandment of God.

Though he seems to give her good counsel and to advise her as a friend, to
consider of this thing more seriously, for the bettering her estate, yet his
intent is at least to leave a scruple in her mind.

The chiefest poison that is hid in this dialogisme, is in the interrogation
cur, or quare, or as some will have it, ne, by which he demands whether it be
so indeed, said so: It is scarce credible that God, which makes show of
favoring you, should so hardly deal with you, as to impose so hard a Law as
this is: and withal, this his speech is so cunningly devised, that it
enforces by way of insinuation a doubt and diffidence (...) her thus, q.d.
Surely I for my part can hardly be induced to believe, that God would enjoin
you such a Law; I see no reason why it should be so: By all which we see how he
teacherh and brings her on to doubt and waver.

Last of all it is a flattering and cogging kind of speech q.d. Though I may
err and be deceived, being your poorest and simplest Servant, yet you my Ruler
whom God has made wise as an Angel to judge uprightly of all things, may
happily conceive more of this matter than I can.

And withal it is a kind of cunning, to curry and keep in favor with her
whatsoever effect the temptation should take; for if she should have misliked
of his speech, he could have excused himself thus; alas I made but a bare
motion, I neither affirmed it, nor durst deny it, but according to my
simplicity asked the question, and therefore I trust you will have me excused.

Tum dixit mulier Serpenti illi, etc. Genesis 3. 2.

November. (...), 1591.
WE have seen before what the Devils Rhetoric and Sophistry is in his
deceivable Dialogues, both to bring a wavering doubt into her mind, and at
last to bring Gods holy word in discredit and contempt; all which vile and
blasphemous things, if the Devil had said to Adam, no doubt, he would have
dealt wisely as a Serpent with this wyly and wicked Serpent; for he would have
either stopped his ears; and abhorred to hear the deceitful words of this
enchanting charm, or else he would have shaked him off with apage as Christ
did, Matthew. 4. 10. and said avaunt Satan get thee hence, etc.

And so it may be thought to have been the greatest wisdom either to give him
no ear or no answer, or else a sharp check or reproof for these wicked
tempting words. This we may conjecture that the Man would or might have done:
but let us see what the Woman answered unto him in this verse.

In which we have two things to consider before we come to the effect of her
answer: First we gather that in this estate of Innocence, the Woman was not
afraid of the Serpent, but without fear durst see a Serpent approach to her,
and speak unto him; for as all things were subject to mankind as their Lord and
Sovereign, so Adam, as we have heard, Genesis 2. 23. made Eve Mistress and Lady
to rule with him; and therefore all Creatures, as yet, stood in a reverend awe
of them, and they were without any fear of them at all; for fear came into our
nature with sin, but as yet, there was no sin, and therefore no fear:
Again, as yet there was no war proclaimed between the seed of the woman and the
Serpent, and therefore no cause why they should fear one another. The other
thing is, that as she was not moved at the sight of the Serpent, so no more was
she astonished to hear the Serpent speak; she knew no doubt that it was not
natural to Serpents so to speak, but she knew not, or at least considered not
well, who it was that spoke in him; What then, was there ignorance in Eve in
the state of Innocence? I answer, that no doubt there was both in Adam and Eve
the ignorance which is called Nescientia, but not that which is properly termed
Ignorantia, The difference between Ignorance and Nescience.
for this is the difference between these two: Ignorantia is a not knowing of
such things which we are bound and ought necessarily to know, and this kind we
say was not in them, for it is an evil imperfection in whomsoever it is,
because as Solomon says in 19. Prove. 2. without this knowledge which is
absolutely necessary, the soul of man is not good; therefore we hold that they
had given them a full and perfect measure of knowledge of Gods will, so far
forth as it necessarily pertained unto them; but as for the other kind which
deserves not the name of Ignorance but Nescience, it is a not knowing of
things needless and impertinent to our duty, that is, of superfluous and
curious points which belong not to us; and this is that holy and godly
Ignorance which is said to be even in the Angels of heaven, and in the Son of
God, (as he is man) 24. Matt. 36. and of such things Christ says to his
disciples, vestrum non est haec scire, 1. Acts. 7. Therefore this is no sin
or defect in them, though we grant it to be in them; yea it rather well agrees
with the holy estate of innocence not to know needless points of curious
knowledge. But now to the answer, In which we may observe diverse steps and
degrees by which she descended to him until at last she came even to him in
opinion and consented to him.

And the first descent is because she, being a woman and therefore the weaker,
would notwithstanding (without the help and counsel of her husband) take upon
her to dispute and reason with the devil, which is most deceitful, for if she
had given no answer, the devil should have had no advantage, but by her
answer to this question, she gave him some holdfast by which his temptation
might somewhat fasten on her; It had been her wisest course to have stopped her
ears, and not to have vouchsafed him the hearing, but if she would needs hear
the Serpents talk, yet she might have set a watch before the door of her lips,
Psalm. 141. 3. and so condemned his speech as not worthy the answering. Si enim
aut non audiverat aut nil dixerat (says one) been esset, but seeing she must
needs fit him an answer, she should have done well to fetch an answer from her
Husband, and to say I will go to him which heard God speak that thing which
you doubt of, he can better answer and resolve you in this point than I can;
for if Paul would not permit a Woman to speak in the Church, but to be silent,
then much less would he suffer Women to dispute and keep Problem with the
Devil; for their duty is to learn of their Husband at home, if they doubt; but
she (according to the nature of Women) will not answer per aliam: they think
themselves able to answer alone, and therefore let us see the tenor and
contents of her answer, which we see is a rehearsal and repetition of Gods
Commandment, Genesis 2. 16. 17. but yet so faintly and coldly set down, that
the Devil might easily perceive that his temptation had begun to corrupt her
mind; for, first in that she is able to say Gods Commandment without book:
the Devil took this hold against her, that she did not sin upon ignorance
but wilfully against her knowledge, which proves that she did it presumptuosly
which augmenteth her sin, that so he may well say to her, ex ore tuo te
judicabo. If we look into the particulars of her answer, we shall see it stand
upon two points; the first is Gods grant, the 2. verse; the other is Gods
restraint, the 3. verse; by both which we may see that Eve simply and plainly
instructs the Serpent as her friend in all the whole will and counsel of
God: first she sets down Gods goodness and liberality, and in expressing it,
she does extenuate and lessen the greatness thereof; but when she comes to the
restraint, she does so amplify and enlarge that, that the Devil might easily
perceive she received the one not thankfully as she should, nor yet was well
pleased, but murmured as much misliking the other, whereas she should have said
God is not bound to us, either by duty or desert to give us any thing, yet of
his gracious goodness he has freely permitted us the use of the trees of the
Garden, which are many in number, and in variety diverse and choice, therefore he
is not durus and avarus pater, as thou would have us to think, but he is
bonus and benignus, and therefore we will thankfully keep this easy
Commandment. Thus the consideration of his bounty and free goodness should
have been a prick to stir her up to thankful obedience, but her unthankful
mind which regards not his goodness, was a preparation to disobedience. Thus
we see what her answer should have been to have stopped the Devils mouth, but
she did not so; therefore we are now to consider what she did say, and what
answer she gave unto him.

De fructu quidem arborum hujus horti comedemus: At de fructu arboris istius
quae eft in horto hoc; dixit Deus, Ne comedatis ex isto, neque attingatis eum:
ne moriamini. Genesis 3. 2.3.

November. 18. 1591.
WE have considered the temptation both on the Serpents part, and also on the
Woman's behalf, and we have seen what occasions she offered unto him before he
could do her any hurt.

Touching which it is our part to learn, to beware by her hurt and evil, quia
(as one says) Ruinae praecedentium, sunt cautiones sequentium. Therefore God
has set down the manner of the fall of our first Parents, ut illorum pathemata
nobis essent mathemata, for all is written for our instruction, 1 Cor. 10. 11.
Now for the better observation of her answer, we shall see, it does consist of
two parts, the first is Gods permission in the 2. verse, the other is Gods
prohibition in the 3. verse: for the first we have seen that the Woman had just
occasion to amplify Gods loving and most liberal dealing with them; but she
clean contrary, being tickled by the Serpents speech, does (...) it, as if it
had been a matter of very small regard, and therefore in a word lightly passes
it over, making a very slight and slender confession of Gods goodness, in so
much as we may well say, that it is oration magis querelae quam (...), rather
complaining at Gods hardness, then giving thanks for his goodness.

Now for the prohibition in the 3. verse, because she does enlarge it, we must
stand longer upon it; It (...) therefore partly on the restraint of the
Commandment, and partly on the penalty thereof, which we will handle
severally: where good will and willingness is, there every duty commanded will
seem very easy, and then we are ready to do it; but e contra, when any do
enjoin us any duty whom we fancy not, nor esteem as a friend, by and by want of
good will makes us cavell with the difficulty and hardness thereof: Therefore
this making so much ado, and so many circumstances of the restraint, as if it
were a heavy burden and an uneasy yoke, does plainly bewray an ill willing
mind, and murmuring against God the Commander.

To this end as being malecontent, she names not the tree as God did, but
describes it by the place where it stands, quasi pigeret nominare, quia non
liceret eam gustare; therefore it seems that it went even against her stomach
so much as to name it; besides this, she also (...) the Commandment making it
heavier than indeed it is, amplifying the severity thereof, making it as
heinous and odious as may be, saying we are forbidden not only to eat of it,
but also we are restrained so much as once to touch it, which we see is not
once mentioned in Gods precept, for it was not a restraint of the fingers, as
to say touch not, handle not; but only of the teeth and tongue, taste not,
neither eat of it. To alter Gods word is a foul fault, but with an ill mind to
add or detract from it, has a grievous threatening and curse annexed to it,
both by Moses the first, and St. John the last penman of the word of God: we
see then, that this her addition is signum displicentiae, which secret dislike
of Gods Law, being cast into man's hearts, does at last make them break out into
that outrage and rebellion against it, as to say, Psall. 3. 3. Let us break his
bonds, and cast away his yoke from us, which are called the Sons of Beliall,
that is, such as willingly would be subject to no Law; it makes men first in
mind to esteem Gods word as a heavy burden, Jeremiab 13: 33: and it causes
men at last to say as they did, John 6. 60. durus hic Sermo est quis ferat? As
therefore that is true which St. John says, 1 Jo. 5. 3. Qui deum diligunt iis
man data ej us non sunt gravia; so e contra we may infer this general rule
Cui displicet praeceptum aggravat illud, for want of will does make Verbum
veritatis esse Jugum Servitutis, and so with offense, the wicked ones of the
world do cast it from them.

Now we come to the punishment, of which we say, that as we ought to amplify
Gods goodness and liberality, to stir us up to obedience, so we should
enlarge, and plainly set out Gods justice and severity, that fear thereof might
keep us from sin.

But it is Gods judgment oftentimes seen, that they which will not see Gods
goodness by thankfulness, shall not see fearful vengeance until they seel it,
because of the hardness of their hearts. Eve which before so enlarged Gods
restraint, making a mountain of a (...) molehill, now is as far wide on the
other side, abridging the penalty into two words, whereof the one is but as it
were half a word, because forte shows that she half doubted of that she said,
for whereas God doubled both the argument of his liberality before, saying
comedendo libere comedes, and also the argument of his severity, saying
moriendo certe morieris, the one the rather to make them obey, the other to
keep them from sin: Eve takes upon her to single them both at the last,
because fear might not too much terrify her; she qualifieth with forte q.d.
peradventure if we sin you shall die, and peradventure no; so that the full
persuasion of the truth and certainty of Gods word is decayed in her; and
indeed this is the behaviors and natures of all wicked ones, by this ne forte,
to encourage themselves to go forward in sin and transgression; for if they
did persuade themselves and fully believe the certainty of Gods word, that God
indeed would so severely punish sin as his word does show, no doubt then they
would never dare to break Gods Law, it would be as a bridle to pull them back
from evil.

This her dealing then is an argument of the decay of her faith by wavering
doubts, for as she has let go her hold and hand-fast of love and liking Gods
word, and made the knot of faith very loose, so now there is nothing but fear
of punishment which enforces her yet to hold her to God, and to keep her back
from open rebellion and disobedience for if it were not for ne forte which does
trouble her mind, if she were once sure of nequaquam moriemini instead
thereof, why then the match were fully made, and she would without delay eat of
it, as we shall see hereafter. Now we see unto what the Devil has brought
her, love is gone, faith is faint, and fear is feeble, hanging but by a small
thread, for she is come to that pass as to make death a peradventure, a thing
very doubtful whether it will come or not, saying forte moriemini, whereas
indeed she of all other things in the world might have been most fure of this,
and said certe moriemini, for this is the Decree of God, that seeing we dallyed
with his judgments threatened, and doubted of it as a thing of hap-hazard;
therefore God by his Decree has made it a Statute of all other most certain,
never to be repealed or reversed to any; for it is made a Law and Statute, that
all sinful men shall once most certainly die, to teach us that this threatening
was not in vain, and to make us not to dally with the fearful judgments of
allnighty God, not to doubt of them as our Grandmother Eve did. Now let us work
the means and degrees by which the Serpent led her from innoceny unto finne.

First her mislyking conceit, not content with Gods goodness but suspecting his
hardness, corrupted her will, and decayed her love to God and delight in his
word: Then these questions cur and ne corrupted her faith, which showed it self
in her ne forte; so that faith being qualified, instead thereof the Devil did
plant doubt and unbeleefe; love being allayed, instead thereof he places
coffeehouse and mislike: God gave her sure hold-(...) and bound her to him
by a threefold Gable, which one would think should not be thus easy broken,
namely by love, faith, and fear; but the Serpent having shorn asunder the cords
of faith, and also filed the links of love, now all the hold she has is only
by fear, which when the Devil sees to be somewhat loose, and that it stood
upon forte, we shall see how suddenly he will snatch that out of her heart, and
so make her reach out her hand unto finne.

This then is fumus incendio praecedens, we shall see the fiery flame ensue
this smoke, wherefore we must listen to the counsel of the Wiseman ergo nos
quantum in nobis est e lubrico recedamus, for where the Serpent has made the
ground slipperie, there our nature can scarce stand upright; let us not
therefore give any occasion to the Devil; open not any gappe to his
temptations as she does, but resist the Devil and he shall fly from thee
without doing thee hurt. And thus much of the first part of their conference.

Dixit vero Serpens ille mulieri, non utique moriemini: Novit enim Deus, quo
die comederitis ex eo, aperturos se oculos vestros: and vos fore sicut Deos,
scientes boni and mali. Genesis 3. 4.5.

November. 20. 1591.
THese words do contain the Serpents rejoinder or reply in his second Dixit to
the Woman, in which he now having occasion, does plainly lay himself open and
discover himself to be (...) a blasphemous mouth, opposing himself to the holy
word of God; wherefore though at the first sight he was hid under a Mask, yet
now he seeing the time does uncover himself, bewraying how foul a spirit he is
by his impudent lies, and horrible impiety, by which one would think that she
might now at last and not too late have espied him, though at the first sight
in simplicity she took him for a Serpent indeed; for she might well know, that
no Creature of God unless he had by Apostasy rebelled and oppugned the truth
and will of God, that ever could speak such horrible and impious blasphemies
and lies as these.

But it may seem that she giving such ear and credit to the spirit of lies,
having the knowledge of Gods truth, that by Gods just judgments she was
blinded and could not see, as it oftentimes comes to pass, Romans 1. 21. 24. 26.

Now we are come to speak of the particulars of this reply, in which we see
first his drift and intent is, to remove and take away that little fear of Gods
judgments which was yet remaining in her, and kept her from eating the
forbidden fruit; wherefore in this speech he seems friendly to reprove her,
q.d. Alas! you are more timorous and fearful a great deal than needs; you are
all this while in an error if you persuade your self, that you shall die for
eating this fruit, for I tell you and will prove to you, that without all
peradventure you shall be so sarre from any danger of death hereby, that you
shall not once taste of death at all.

Thus we see him with an impudent face and blasphemous mouth, to face her out
with his bragging argument drawn from his own authority; for if we consider the
matter of his speech, it is nothing at all but that which comes out of his
forge of lies, for he is a lier from the beginning, John 8. 44. Thus he
opposes his own word to the infallible word of Gods truth, and would have it
taken and believed before that which God has said, q.d. You are too credulous
to believe all that God says to be true, for I tell you in this point it is
not true, for you shall not die.

Now because there might be a question and doubt, whether all this that the
Devil says be gospel and true; therefore he craftily rendereth a reason for
the proof and confirmation of his assertion. His first reason to (...), is scit
deus, which is a calling of God to witness by way of protestation and oath, to
appeal to the knowledge of God for (...) that he says true, which ever since
has been the practice of the Devil in wicked men, to teach them by swearing
to call God to witness against the truth, as if he were the maintainer of their
falsehood and lies, which is not only the taking of Gods name in vanum but also
in falsum, which is most divelish.

Secondly, he will take in hand by a plain demonstration, that they should not
die by eating of this fruit, after this sort; God does envy your good estate,
which by eating this fruit you may come unto; for God knowing that by eating it
you should become equal to himself, does therefore take this order and course
to keep you from it, namely, to tell you and make you believe, that if you once
eat of it you are poisoned and undone, as if it were deadly, whereas indeed it
is most sovereign and precious; In which you see how impiously and bla
phemously he charge Almighty God of envy and of a malicious mind, and that
of a Serpentine malice, such as is indeed the Devil, namely, that he (under
the color and pretense of good will) does cover and hide his hateful and
spiteful mind withal, which might have made her to say of the Devil, as
Paul did of Elimas the Child of the Devil, Acts 13. 10. O pater mendacii and
plenus omni dolo; O inimice veritatis and justitiae: For as blasphemous
Rabshakeh did Isaiah 36. 15. so does the Devil here facet Deum falissimum and
falacissimum, the rather to deceive simple men.

Now for the second part of his speech; it contains a promise to open their
eyes, to deifie them and make them as God if they eat this, q.d. Tush, what
talk you of dying the death; God which makes a show of loving you as a friend,
does go about to hide and keep from you the fruit which is most precious and
more beneficial to you than all the trees of the Garden besides; for it is not
only good and wholesome for meat, but also of such rare and divine virtue, that
it will make them that eat thereof as God knowing all, etc. So that by advice,
ye should rather forbear all the trees in the Garden than this one which is
forbidden you. This may seem to be the effect of his speech; but now
particularly he will go forward to show her what the special hidden virtues
of this tree are: first says he, it has a power to open your eyes: In which
speech he seems to persuade her, that as yet they were in the state of blind
men, as if the eyes of their minds were hooded and blinde-folded, so long as
they had not the knowledge of evil as well as of good: So the Devil misliketh
their estate because they knew not evil, but God would have had them so holy,
harmeless and good, that they should not so much as once know what any evil
should mean, much less to do or seell evil; but the Devils intent and desire
was to make them know evil, both by act and also by woeful experience to their
utter overthrow. But suppose that it were a want and imperfection in them, we
know that their duty had been to have sought to God for remedy, who in Revel.
3. 18. wills all such blind ones to buy eye salve of him, but they making
the Devil their Physician, became indeed stark blind, and had both eyes (...)
clean out.

The second bait wherewith he does fish to take and entrap her is, sicut Dei,
in which he does promise to deifie her, and canonize her as a God in heaven;
he would persuade her that it were too base an estate for her still to remain
as a Lord and Prince on earth, he would have them to aspire to all Honor,
Power, Glory and Majesty, that they might once come to be as God, without
check or control of any other superior power.

This apple of preferment renown and dignity, is the bait at which all
ambitious and vainglorious men do greedily gape after and are taken by the
Devil. By this then appears that the devil was the first which went about
to make and have more gods than one, and his speech is to this effect q.d. Your
God is a jealous God, and by his good will would not admit any other to be as
good or equal to him, he cannot abide a partner; but I will tell you how you
shall attain to this honor whether he will or no, only eat of this and it
shall be so. Thus the Devil begins to set up another kingdom against the
kingdom of almighty God.

The third and last bait is of knowledge, which he adds for the more
assurance, lest the former two should not take; for it is q.d. Although happily
you can be content with this estate in Paradise as sufficient for you, yet if
that move you not, then look to this excellent gift of knowledge unto which you
shall attain hereby.

Now even upon all these principles and reasons, he infers his conclusion
thus. Seeing you shall reap and receive all these benefits safely and without
danger of death: Therefore why doubt you? why forbear you any longer to eat
of this fruit? Surely, if the spirit of lies had not blinded her eyes, the
image of light and knowledge which was in her might have persuaded her this.
That all these things which the Serpent had spoken could not possibly be true:
Because it stands with common sense and reason, That God which made all
things, would never make such a Tree which should be so prejudicial to his own
glory.

Therefore she might have well answered the Serpent to all this. That if it be
a Tree of such force and virtue, he should first begin to her and eat of the
fruit, that then she might see him to be as God knowing all things she might
know that he said true, and then follow his counsel and do the like; But this
shows that the Spirit of error had blinded her eyes and bewitched her heart;
for it is Gods just judgment that when men are thus far overgrown in pride
that they should be blinded, Psalm. (...). 7. and that so blind that they shall
say with the (...), Tush God sees us not, there is no knowledge in God.

Quum ergo videretur mulieri bonum esse fructum arboris illius in cibum, and
gratissimam esse illam oculis, ac desiderabilem esse arboris fructum ad
habendum intelligentiam, accepit de fructu ejus and comedit: etiamque dedit
comedendum viro suo secum, qui comedit. Genesis 3 6.

November. 23. 1591.
AT our general handling the temptation of Eve, in the entrance of this chapter,
we referred the sin it self to this verse we are now to handle; which verse
contains as it were a third temptation of Eve, in that she saw the tree good
for meat, pleasant, and profitable, as the Devil in Christ's temptation, in the
fourth of Matthew, uses three sorts of temptations: The first is Distrust, the
second Presumption, and the third is Inticement and Allurement of honor:
First, when Christ was hungry, he would have him turn stones into bread, he
would have him distrust God and his word: Secondly, he set him on a pinnacle,
and would have him cast himself down, by unlawful means he would have Christ
presume of God: Thirdly, he tempts him setting him upon a high mountain,
offering him all the kingdoms of the world and the glory of them, to worship
him. So here Satnan by his first question tempts Eve to distrust Gods
commandments and goodness: Secondly by presumption he tempts her to eat,
by making her to believe that though she did eat the forbidden fruit, yet she
should not dye at all: And then, thirdly, he comes with his enticing
temptation, if you will be as Gods and know all things, you must eat here of.

In this last is a spectacle of delight, the fruit was sweet and wholesome,
pleasant to the eye, whereby to get knowledge: Whatsoever wealth and honor was
to be desired, was showed her; whatsoever delight and pleasure might be
desired, was showed her by Satan the tempter of him and her. Christ was
tempted with all wealth, and Eve with all knowledge. But as it is in James 3.
15. this wisdom descends not from above, it is earthly, sensual, and
devilish. The Serpent by his last temptation does labor not only to quench
faith, but to kindle lust; he will by the kindling of lust extinguish faith: In
Ephesians. 4. 14. we must not be carried away with every wind of Doctrine and
craftiness, whereby Sathanlyeth in wait to deceive; but as it is Ephesians 6. 16.
above all things we must take the shield of faith, where with we may quench all
the fiery darts of the wicked; which are said to be fiery darts because they
set on fire our concupiscence, which faith is able to extinguish lust: Now
there is fides per charitatem operans, faith that works by love; and fides
per timorem operans, faith that works by fear: and therefore Satan, to (...)
the faith and obedience of Eve, deals with her love first, and with her fear
after: By his non omnino he extinguisheth love, for love she was not obedient,
fides per timorem operans, only faith by fear did retein her in obedience, lest
peradventure you should die; fear, not love, made her yet a little faithful;
but he took order also for her fear; as before he extinguished love by
affirming that God was a hard and fearful Lord, so now to drive away fear, he
will have her to make an account of him as a God of clouts, not to be feared:
and now he inkindleth the concupiscence of Eve: By those two he extinguished
faith, in making obedience painful and prejudicial, and making disobedience
pleasant and beneficial; edite, eat, and eritis sicut dei scientes bonum and
malum, and ye shall be at Gods knowing good and evil. Here by setting a fair
show to the eye, he affaulteth the eye with a glorious show. Austin says that
there are two manners or means whereby lust is provoked and kindled; the one is
the care by hearing, and the eye by seeing: Bernard says there are two ways
(...) Satan; the one is circuitio, the other circumventio; the one is going
about like a roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour, the other is his
circumventing a man in all subtilty, the one is in speaking swelling words of
vanity, and beguiling in wantonness; 1 Pet. 2. 18. his circumventing is taken
out of the 2 Corinthians 2. 11. Here he uses both the means, by bringing Gods
word in question, in all subtilty extinguishing love, and his opposing the
falseness to the truth, saying, though you eat you shall not die, expelling
fear, and showing that obedience was burdensome and disobedience full of
delight; and thus besieging them on every side, yet would not give them over
till he had made them both to eat; for so long as any spark of Gods word is
remaining in them, he will not leave them, nor give over his temptation; such
is his diligence in his tempting: It is the Law of Satan's mouth that leads
man captive unto the Law of sin, Romans 7. 23. In Jobs temptation Satan
brings one grief upon another; his Oxen were taken away, his Servants slain;
then another came and told him his Sheep were burnt, another his Camels were
taken, another his Sons and Daughters were slain, etc. Satan in his
temptation of Eve begins at the ear, and from the ear to the eyes, from the
eyes to the fingers, from the fingers to the mouth; his proceeding was from
hearing to seeing, from seeing to touching, from touching to tasting: Satan
first made a question, Eve she made a doubt, per adventure we shall die, which
doubt Satan resolved, you shall not die at all; these are the three parts of
Eves inward temptation: Vidit, tulit, comedit, she saw the forbidden fruit, she
took it, and she did eat thereof; these be the three parts of Eves outward
temptation, seeing, taking, and eating. As before the hearing of the ear was
the temptation to incredulity, so here the seeing of the eye is the temptation
to sensuality; as before esca intellect us was the bait of the understanding to
know both good and evil, so here esca sensus is the bait of the sense, that so
Eves reason inwardly, and her sense outwardly might be deceived, which
temptation of the sense is treble here; of the eye that sees, of the fingers
that touch, of the mouth that tastes The Serpent full of subtilty will make
noe visible temptation until he has thoroughly infected the heart; when
neither for love nor for fear he sees Eve regards the commandment, then he
knows that she will be allured easily by the sense, and therefore he brings
her where she may see the Tree: But did not Adam and Eve see the tree that was
forbidden, in the midst of the garden, in the time of innocence? Well says
one Non dedit Deus iis legem ae arbore quam non v derunt, God gave them not a
law of restraint from a tree which they saw not, for they did see this tree
before their fall in love and in fear, their love then to God and his Word was
such that much water could not quench it, neither could that love be bought
with all the substance of the world, Cantic. 8. 7. and then their fear where
with they feared the Lord was to them His method in his Temptation
a wellspring of life, to avoid the snares of death, Prove. 14. 27. but when
the mist of incredulity did arise in their heart then satan had hope of
prevayling in his temptation, then he begins with corrupt speeches; You shall
not die at all, you shall be as Gods knowing good and evil, and evil
speakings (as you know) corrupts good manners, 1 Cor. 15. 33. The end of his
Temptation.
and then with vain shows of pleasure he tempts the sense; this is the
subtlety of the devils method in tempting Eve. Now the subtlety of his end in
his temptation, is partly to withdraw the mind, partly that of a spark there
may become a flame, that from seeing the fruit she may be brought to the eating
of the same, and so do that God has forbidden; albeit that his speech eritis
sicut Dei, scientes bonum and malum tickled her mind, but that was not the
very end, yet it is plain that every lie runs lamely, yet every liar
covers the imperfection; that then there might be no delay nor no stay, the
serpent presently brings her to the tree, and shows her the fruit, that her
sense might verify so much as he had said, Non vidit and tulit lignum quia
prohibitum sed quia bonum: she looked on the tree, she took of the fruit
because she was persuaded that thereby would come to her all excellency, all
knowledge, and that by the eating of it she should not die at all, They probably
thought they should not die at all, in the 17 of the 2. chap. it is called the
Tree of knowledge of good and evil, wherein they thought to be the virtue of
all knowledge, and the tree of life they had still, which persuaded them they
should live for ever, they were persuaded that they should have still the
sacrament of immortality and of universal knowledge, and indeed plus posse,
plus noscere is that wherewith satan has infected us all, for he persuades us
we can do more then we can do, that we shall live still and know all things:
Satan thought that delay would be dangerous and that if he had given her any
leisure the sifting of the Commandment would have been prejudicial unto his
temptation, and therefore presently he brought her to see the Tree, the fruit
whereof he had so highly magnified, that so she might break the Law of God.

The Fathers do say well, It was not the force of the devils words but Gods
punishment that made her believe the devil and fall from God, qui dubious est,
infidelis erit, he that doubts Gods word, shall become an Infidel and
believe the devils words; this is Gods punishment of incredulity, to believe
a liar, even the father and founder of Lies: for if men will not believe Gods
writings nor his words, John 5. 47. God therefore shall send them strong
delusions that they should believe Lies, 2 These. 2. 11. so that the believing
the Serpent rather than God is not the force of the devils words, but Gods
punishment of their incredulity, poenalis est necessitas, God, as it is Zepha.
1. 17. says, tribulabo homines and ambulabunt ut caeci, quia domino
peccaverunt, I will bring distress upon men, that they shall walk like blind
men because they have sinned against the Lord, so did God deal here, say they
with Eve and Adam. Here Satan after his dixit comes with vides, so soon as he
had took her though she did eat she should not die, but enjoy all happiness,
he showed her the forbidden tree, that she beholding it might busy herself
with the pleasure of seeing that which was so pleasant and so much to be
desired, that so then when she had most cause to fear and tremble, the pain
which she should incur by her eating thereof should not so much as be thought
upon; this is Satan's subtlety, to proceed from saying to seeing, from
debasing their state present, wherein they knew nothing but good, to extol
their fallen state, wherein they should know good and evil. As Chrysostom
says, from hodie to cras, from this day to to morrow, from things before our
eyes, to see what hereafter we shall enjoy; as much as if he should say, I will
show you what I tell you, you shall see that I say truly, let your sense judge
of my speech; believe your sense not me; you see the fruit is pleasant to
behold, when you taste it you shall find no poison in it, the show is
correspondent to my words, and when you eat of it you shall find the virtue I
have said to be in it; you do see it is pleasant, you shall taste it is
wholesome, in a word, the Tree will speak what I have said: Thus the devil
magnifyeth his word and her sense, that so by the eating and seeing his dixit
might receive their Sentence of allowance. Thus much may serve for the
withdrawing of Eve from her belief by a matter of sense.

Seeing.
Now for the manner of alurement: She seeing the Tree was good for meat and
pleasant to the eyes, though the ear by hearing of excellency and knowledge
do move her, yet hearing these things does but warm her desire and
concupiscence to transgress; it is the eye, and the beholding of the pleasant
fruit which sets the concupiscence on fire to eat thereof; It is the eye
that makes the heart like a bakers Oven, that makes concupiscence to burn as
a flame of fire, Osee 7. 6. Seeing moves much more than hearing; when we tell
you of the joys of Heaven, which are inestimable, of the pains of hell, which
are intolerable, by our speeches you are nothing moved; but if you might see
with your eyes the joys of Heaven, you would be enamoured of them; might you
see the pains and torments of hell, which sinners have, you would abhor sin,
and tremble at the torments; Eve was moved more by seeing than by hearing. In
chap. 45. 28. Jacob was moved with joy to hear the report of his sons that
Joseph was alive, but yet he believed them not, but when he saw the chariots
which Joseph had sent to carry him, then he was revived, and he said My son
Joseph is yet alive; it was the seeing of the (...), not the saying of Israel,
that made Jacob say, descendam and videbo illum antequam morior, that kindled
his desire to say, I will go and see Joseph before I die: The desire of the
buyer and of the seller is moved by the sight, the buyer is desirous of the
ware, not because the seller says it is good, but for that he sees and
discerns the goodness, of the cloth or other thing, by his eye; and the
seller is moved the more when he sees ready money laid forth before his eyes;
seeing, in things lawful, is much more effectual than hearing; and seeing is
much more dangerous than hearing of things unlawful: the Serpent thinks he
cannot bring his temptation to full effect, unless he brings her videre
lignum, and therefore the Serpents petition, as it were, to Eve is but this. I
will not bid you so much as touch the Tree, nor eat: only vide and ne
comedito: Hear me what I shall say, do but behold how pleasant the fruit is,
and see if you can abstain; it is expedient to see that which we may not eat,
and to know sin that we may avoid it: But seeing the Tree is an occasion to
eat of the fruit; the occasion of sin (which is the seeing of the fruit) is
to be cut off; hearing was an occasion to make Eves heart proud, and beholding
the Tree caused her haughty looks, and as it is, Prove. 21. 4. A haughty
look and a proud heart is the plowing of sin; they had liberty to stand or
to fall, but we must not use our liberty as an occasion to sin, Galat. 5.
13. S. Chrysostom upon that place says, That not only sin, but the desire
and the occasion of sin, by all means, is to be cut off.

Though that the seeing the forbidden Tree were not semen peccati, the sowing
of sin, yet it is like plowing of sin, it is a means to persuade us to eat,
by seeing to take an occasion to offend, without regard of Gods commandment,
not being wary when we have forsworn sin; if we retain the occasion of sin
we may easily be caused to sin. Exodus 10. 7. Pharaoh was content the
Israelites should depart, yet he would have their beasts remain behind, which
were an occasion of offense; neither sin nor occasion of sin must be left, but
must be cut off; the eye is an occasion to desire and a means to discover
(...). There are two ways to convey sin into us, by the ear and by the eye;
and there are two ways to discover sin, the mouth and the eye, because the
eye is a way both in the conveyance and in the discovery of sin; therefore
say the Fathers, God has placed lachrymas, the tears of (...), which are the
blood of the soul; and by the eyes; the yellow-Jaundis is discovered by the
eyes, wherethey do insinuate That the eye is the broker to all sin. In chap.
6. 2. for that the children of God did see the daughters of men to be far,
they took unto them wives of all they liked, And chap. 10. 13. Lot lifted up
his eyes and for that he saw the plain of Jordane was well watered and very
fruitful, he chose it for his dwelling; It is the eye that provokes to lust
and to pleasure, it is the eye that provokes to (...): Ahab desired Naboths
Vineyard, because he saw it did adjoyn to his palace. He that beholds the
clouds and observes the winds, shall nor sow, nor reap, Preach. 11. 4. The
eye is a mean to make the man idle; seeing provokes to covetousness, Joshua
7. 21. Achan by his seeing among the specil a goodly Babylonish garment and a
wedge of gold, he covered them and took them. Satan, when he saw that Eves
concupiscence was loose, he knew she would easily yield to the temptation; if
she might but see the fruit, the jaundise of concupiseence might be perceived
in her eyes. In 1 Samuel 18. 9. When Saul saw how David was esteemed, it is there
said, that he had one eye on David, as if he looked asquint, in that he looked
on David with a learing eye, for that he envyed and hated David: So a learing
eye is the jaundise of a dogged nature; He that winketh with the eye works
sorrow, Prove. 10. 10. for often a fair countenance covers a mischievous
heart: So in such an eye is the jaundise of deceit. Solomon Prove. 30. 13. there
are those whose eyes are haughty, and whose eye lids are lifted up: There is
the jaundise of pride. Esaias 30. 16. the daughters of Sion are said to walk with
wandering eyes; wherein is the jaundise of lust. Prove. 17. 24. The eyes of a
fool are in the corners of the world, says Solomon: By such a foolish eye you
may know the jaundise of foolishness: An unchaste eye is the sign of an
unchaste heart. The Devil (says a Father well) by the eye conveyeth the nose
of his bellows to set her even in a fire, to eat of the fruit: Visus solet
excitare somnientem; and quod incautus aspicit invitus despicit, he that
unwarily beholds the fruit, perforce shall look into it. They served the Lord
at first in fear, and (...) in trembling, Psalm. 2. 11. But the seeing the fruit
did not only stir up but also increased sin: Amos his continual seeing of
his sister did increase his love to Thamar; and when sin is banished away,
yet seeing recalleth sin: And therefore, that all may be well, not only
sin, but the occasion of sin must be removed, the inside and the outside
must be taken away; and therefore David, Psalm. 119. 20. says not only
iniquitatem (...) viam iniquitatis move a me Domine, take from me O Lord, the
way of iniquity.

The Seer is active, the (...) is passive, say the Fathers, which was her
yielding to (...) behold the tree; who tells Eve, as it were, you have
liberty to see, and to have your eyes to wander about the world. God himself,
Numb. 15. 39. would have them have fringes upon the border of their garments,
that even by looking of them they might remember all the commandments of the
Lord: This is Jobs protestation in Job 31. 7. that he has not walked after his
eye, he has not accomplished the lust of his eye. The eye enticeth the heart
to sin. By apparel the eye is enticed to pride, which, as the Fathers call
it, is vexillum superbiae, the standard of pride, and nidus luxuriae, the nest
of lasciviousness: And by the standard of pride thinking to be as Gods; and by
the nest of laseiviousnesse, we are drawn to believe the words of Satan, and
to sacrifice unto the Serpent. If Abraham, in chap. 19. 28 looking toward Sodom
and Gomorrha, did behold and see the smoke of the Land, as of a furnace; it was
because he was not commanded to the contrary: But in 17. verse of the same
chapter, Lot might not look back upon Sodom which was full of vain pleasures,
for he was forbidden to look behind; we must rather suspect our infirmity with
Lot, than think to look, and to be constant as Abraham: Better it is not to
behold the pleasure of the (...), because it was forbidden, than by beholding
it to fall from her obedience. Let not us look upon vain pleasures least we
fall with Eve. It is the counsel of our Savior in Mat. (...) 29. If thy eye
cause thee to offend pull it out and cast it from thee, he means that we
should pull away vanity and wantonness from our eyes, and that we should
refrain our eyes from beholding vain pleasures: For faith a Father very well,
nisi tu caveas, unless thou be careful of thy eye, hereafter thou would
have wished that he had meant the pulling out of the eye it self; that so by
not seeing vanity and by losing thy eye, thy whole body might be delivered
from Hell torments. The ancient Fathers do observe out of Acts 5. 3. that by
the eye Satan filled the heart of Annanias and Saphira, to conceal the money
he had for his (...): It is the eye that makes a meet soil in the heart to
entertain sin; but we must not entertain sin nor retain the occasion of
transgression.

Quum ergo videretur mulieri bonum esse fructum arboris illius in cibum, and
gratissimam esse illam oculis, ac desiderabilem esse arboris fructum ad
habendum intelligentiam, accepit de fructu ejus and comedit, etc. Verse 6.

November. 25. 1591.
THis last temptation, as I told you, was of the sense, which by the eye allured
Eve to eat that God had said, you shall not eat at all, for seeing the tree
made her take the fruit and taste thereof; by the sense supposing to have been
as Gods, and to attain knowledge. Our Savior Christ, in Luke 17. 32. bids
us to remember Lots wife, who looked back to Sodom, Genesis 19. 26. But he that
secketh by the sense to save the soul, shall lose (...): So we must from hence
remember not to look upon the tree least we eat of the fruit.

Now we will consider the object which she saw, which is said to be the Tree,
the properties of which Tree are said to be three fold, good for meat, pleasant
to behold, and to be desired to get knowledge. In this triplicitie first is the
meat: Secondly, is the delight of the eyes: Thirdly, it is to be desired to get
knowledge. Which triplicitie, first for the meat, we do reduce to the good
that is profitable; The delight of the eyes to the good whieh is pleasant: And
that it is to be desired for knowledge, we do reduce to moral good, as it is
in Prove. 19. 8. Here are all the Bonums, utile, jucundum, and honestum.

Every man stands upon three faculties, the one is Vegitative, the other
Sensitive, and the third is Reasonable. Now by the three kinds of good, of
bonum utile, jucundum, and honestum, he tempts severally each of these
faculties. The faculty Vegitative, whereby man lives, is allured in that it is
said to be good for meat: The faculty Sensitive, of the sense, is tempted, for
that by the second the eye, which is the very chief of all the senses, by the
pleasure of the fruit, is allured. And for the third faculty, which is
reasonable, he had this inticement, That the reason should be advanced, and
should have greater knowledge. In 1 John 2. 16. these are the three inticements
of the world, The first is concupiscence of the flesh or carnal pleasure: The
second is lust of the eyes, which is the wantonness of the looks: The third is
the pride of life, or ambition; and with these was Eve enticed, as eye service
pleases men, Coloss. 3. 22. so pleasure delights the eye here, the lifting
up the eye to be as Gods, and the curiosity of knowledge; the one is the pride
of sense, the other is the pride of reason. She supposed that in the tree there
was not only utile and delectabile, but even omne desiderabile, what ever good
might be desired: She took this tree to be as the Pandora of the Heathen,
wherein were all the gifts and graces to be desired, to be found: And by the
eating of this tree, so adorned with all things, she accounted to be Mistrisse
of all pleasure, of all knowledge.

Good for meat
First, It was good for meat. True it is, that man must have meat to preserve
life, cibus enim habet umbr am naturae nostrae, meat has the shadow of our
nature; we are bound in a statute and strong band, by meat to save and preserve
nature; this is the band of necessity which he has bestowed, not only to eat
of one tree, but he had the variety of all: And though God had allowed him
many more trees than ever he could eat of; yet he will be looking upon the
only tree God has reserved to himself, yet must she needs desire to taste of
fructus vetitus, the forbidden fruit; She is so dainty mouthed that she must
needs eat thereof, though even with a curse she were forbidden it; thinking
because it was forbidden, it would be more pleasant; for, as Solomon says,
stolen waters are sweet, and hid bread is pleasant, Proverbs 9. 17. It is a
general fault of all Mankind to desire to eat, or to have that is forbidden,
or that we ought not. In 1 Chronicles. 11. 17. David longed to drink of the waters
of the well of Bethlehem, which were the waters of blood and bitterness gotten
with peril.

To be desired to get knowledge.
But happily the belly might be satisfied with the fruit of some one of the
trees that were permitted; yet all the pleasure of the other trees in Paradise
were not so pleasant in Eves eyes, as was this. The eye is not satisfied with
seeing, nor the ear with hearing, Preacher 1. 8. That every tree in the Garden
of Eden was pleasant to the sight and good for meat, chap. 2. 9. In Eves sight
this tree was more pleasant, and better for meat than all the other trees in
Paradise. In 1 Samuel 6. 19. the men of Beth-shemash would needs be looking into
the Ark of the Lord, which none might touch, into which none might look but the
Priests; this was the reward, God slew fifty thousand and seventy men. Eve will
eat that she might not eat: But when we will see that we ought not to see, this
desire of vanity will admit the fruit of the forbidden tree to be both good
for meat, and full of pleasure.

The chiefest of the three goods is, that it is atres to be desired to get
knowledge, whereupon chiefly she relieth that she shall attain the knowledge of
good and evil; every one desires knowledge. Triplex est tentatio, this latter
temptation is treble: Eve, seeing the tree, is tempted by necessity, by
vanity of the eye, and curiosity of reason: she should have followed the advice of Paul in Heb. 12. 1. seeing she was compassed with such a multitude of
assaults, she should have cast away every thing that would have withdrawn her
from obedience: she should have taken away the occasion whereby sin would
have hanged on; she should not have beheld the tree.

This amplifying of the goodness of this tree for meat, for pleasure, and for
knowledge, and for what so might be desired, argues a notable fetch in the
Devil; that she, busying her eyes in beholding the same, and being employed in
thinking of the great good that should come to her by eating thereof, might at
length take and eat, and never think of Gods words in quocunque die
comederitis mortem moriemini; but rather regarding the Serpents words, in
quocunque die comederitis ex eo, eritis sicut Dei, scientes bonum and malum. He
cloyeth her with pleasure; he makes no mention of punishment. The Children of
Israel, in Exodus 16. 3. being a little pinched with samin, they could murmur
and remember their flesh pots in Egypt, and that then their bellies were full
of bread; but they bring not in remembrance the sirie furnace wherein they were
enforced to make brick. Satan, in Matthew 4. 8. in the (...) of our Savior
oftendit sibi regnum mundi, and gloriam regni, he showed him the Kingdoms of
the world and the glory of them, but he showed him not the cares and dangers
that are in Kingdoms: For Kings themselves have termed their Governments of
their Kingdoms splendidam servitutem, a glorious service or servitude.

Here the Serpent causes Eve to see three things in this tree, The fruit was
wholesome for meat, the pleasure to the eye, and that it was good to be desired
to get knowledge, So he might have told her of three things written, for the
eating of this fruit, which he omitteth, The first whereof, is Gods wrath; the
second, is death; and the third, death again, moriendo morieris, dying thou
shall dye; the one is the death of the body, which he incurred willingly; the
other the death of the soul, which he must consequently run into; for the
reward of sin is death, and for the goodness of the tree, it shall have the
bitterness of sin; for the beautiful fruit which his eyes beheld, tenebrae
exteriores, outward darkness; for the desire to know all things, man shall
have Gods nescio vos, I know you not: In every sin there is an allurement and
a punishment, as it is in 1 Timothy 6. 9. there is an allurement and a snare, as
in covetousness. Lust bath a bait and an (...) covered and not seen, as may
appear by James 1. 14. When a man is tempted, he is drawn away by his own
concupiscence and is enticed, Tenebantur eorum oculi, their eyes were holden
that they could not know Christ, Luke 24. 16. And here the eyes of Adam and Eve
were holden that they should not see the truth; for it is Gods punishment
because they will hearken to the words of the Devil, because they have sinned
against the Lord, therefore they shall walk like blind men, Zephaniah 1. 17.
God he saw that if they did eat of the tree forbidden, they should (...) die,;
the Serpent he saw they should not die at all, but if they did eat, their eyes
should be opened, and they should be as Gods, what God saw they would not see,
but what the (...), that would they (...). Here Eve saw that the fruit was good
for meat; for meat for the body, and for meat for the soul, that is knowledge,
where with Paul Philip. 4. 18. says, he was filled. In 2 Kings 4. 39. they put
(...) in the (...) and knew it not, and were not poisoned. The fruit of this
tree was to Eve such meat as was the wine of the Vine of Sodom; for (...) it is
in Deuteronomy. 32. 32. The Vines of Sodom and Gomorr ah were pleasant to behold, but
what follows, the wine of those Vines is the poison of Dragons, and the cruel
gall of Aspes: So here the tree is pleasant to the eyes and beautiful in
outward show, but the fruit to them is most (...) in the taste.

The former part of this verse is Eves sin, the latter (...) sin, which we
will not now handle; for the occasion of (...) was in her, seeing the goodness
whereof, res ipsa loquitur. Her disposition to (...) is in her taking the
fruit, and stretching her hand to the same: The sin it self is in the eating
of that which God has said you shall not eat: Eve by seeing took the fruit; A
Father says well, Dedit Deus (...) propter bonum, dedit palpebr as propter
malum: God gave us eyes only to behold good, and eye lids that we should not
see evil. But seeing they have abused Gods commandment, God has put this tree
as a stumbling block of their iniquity before their face, as it is in Ezech.
14. 3.

As before we did justly reprehend Eve for her harkening to the Serpents first
speech, which was a question; So now much more Eve is to be reprehended for her
harkening to the Serpents second speech, which is merely repugnant to the word
of God; you shall surely (...) says God; you shall not dye at all, Satan
says: Where she hears not a speech of his dissimuled subtlety, but even the
speech of (...) maliciousness and open blasphemy apparent to the simplest; for
now she should have stopped her ears, she should have stepped upon the
Serpents head, and she should even have stamped the Serpent (which was so
malicious) under her foot. Every one cannot spy Satan when he appears as a
friend: When Christ would have gone to suffer at Jerusalem, Peter as a friend
in words of compassion says to him, (...) thy self, this shall not be (...)
thee. Christ he perceived friendly Satan in Peter, Matt. 16. 23. But in the
gross sin of Idolatry, (...) down and worship me; and in this notorious
sin of (...), you shall not die at all, any man may easily discover Satan.
But Eve she was not moved at the report of an Angel of light, but at the
words of a base Serpent or buggish worm; she was not only content to hear his
needless questions, his reproaches to Gods word, and his blasphemous terms
against God himself, but which is more, she heard him willingly, she believed
him, and she was very forward to do as the (...) persuaded her: Aspiceret
(...) timentibus oculis, she should have beheld the Tree with twinkling eyes,
as it is (...) 1 Samuel 3. 11. with tingling ears she should not have striven
about words which were to no profit but to the perverting of the hearers, yet
hear you that Eve gives her eyes to behold the Tree, her ears to hear
blasphemous words; she gives her hands to take of the fruit; she gives her
mouth and belly, yea all her body unto the (...): But it is not good to eat
much honey, nor to seek glory by the sense. When that she could not refrain
her appetire, she was like a (...) which is (...) and without walls, Proverbs
25. 28. and her inward parts were battered.

We find in the outside three things, vidit, tulit, and comedit, she saw, she
took, and she did eat: The first was the concupiscence of the eye; The second,
the stretching out the arm to take of the fruit, was the attempt; The last was
the actual sin and the (...). The ancient Divines do call the first
desiderium; the second conatum, the endeavor; the last actum, the
accomplishment. The The desire of the eye, and the endeavor of the hand, do
argue a consent; and by the assent of reason she yields to eat.

Seven degrees in every sin.
The ancient Fathers do make seven degrees in every sin, out of this very first
sin of Eve: But five of these degrees are past before we come to tulit, and the
other two last, one concerns the taking, the other the act. 1. Suggestion.
The first of these degrees they call a suggestion; 2. (...)
the second they call the invading of the consent; 3. Consent to delight.
the third they call consensum in delectatione, a consent to sin with delight;
4. Lingering.
the fourth they call moram, a lingering and stay in the delight; 5. Consent to
sin
the fifth they (...) call (...) in actum, a consent to the very practice of
sin: 6. Taking.
Then after these five degrees comes the (...), which is tulit, the taking the
fruit; 7. Eating.
and the seventh, which is comedit, the very act of sin.

These seven degrees are seven several motions, and distinct, as you may easily
see in this sin and disobedience of Eve: The first suggestion in Eve to
disobedience was wrought by the Serpent; but now the suggestion in our minds,
is by our selves: Here the Serpent made question of Gods goodness, now the
corruption of our own nature makes many needless questions. Satan has two
ways to convey concupiscence, either by his Pipes to play unto us pleasant
notes, or by his Glass, therein to show us many allurements: But after the
Fall the Devil needed not to use his suggestion; for behold, all the
imaginations of the thoughts of man's heart were only evil, chap. 6. 5. Christ
calls these suggestions cogitationes ascendentes, mounting and ambitious
thoughts.

She saw three things, which are three degrees; and all the three are the
second general degree. The first degree of the seeing they do call
allubescentiam, an entertaining of the luggestion; and we call it here aspectum
and intuitum arboris, the beholding of the outward show of the tree: The second
degree of seeing, is by beholding it, to withdraw our asfection from the fear
of God, which we call (...) a (...), our turning our selves from God.

3. Cons^ sua cum delectatione.
The third degree I told you was called a consent with delight, which is a
further bair, not only willingly, but even wishly to behold the fruit, and to
look into the nature of the fruit: This degree they call inspectum and
contuitum; vidit quod delectabile, she sees that which is delightful to the
sight, and this is consensus intellectus, a consent of the understanding as it
is in Job 20. 13. when wickedness was sweet in her mouth, she hid it under her
tongue, and favored it, and would not for sake it, but keep it close in her
mouth.

4. Morosa delectatio.
The fourth degree is beyond the third, it is mora and morosa delectatio, a
lingering of the del ght; this makes her dote on every circumstance, on the
beauty, on the virtue of this tree: Hereby when we have removed from us the
thoughts of sin, sin is resumed; this is non inspectio, sed introspectio,
she sees knowledge, not to be seen. Hereby she sees quod concupiscendum, this
degree is the hunger and thirst of sin, a burning desire to sin, wherein
she sees lignum delectabile and desiderabile, that the tree is pleasant, and
to be desired to get knowledge.

5. Consensus in actum.
The fifth degree, as I told you is called consensus in actum, the consent to the
act it self, thinking with themselves, If the beholding this tree be so
pleasant, having in it to the eye all variety of pleasure, what, and how
wonderful delightful will the taste thereof be: surely it will be full of all
pleasure; and therefore I think it expedient to take thereof, and I do long to
eat of the same: this is the consent of reason ad opus malum, to work
wickedness, even with greediness; and they do call this last degree of sin
vidit aberrationem cordis, a wandering astray of the heart. See Prove. 20. 1.

6. Conatus.
In the sixth place comes the sixth degree, which is conatus, the endeavor to
streatch our the hand, and to apply our hand to the pulling of the fruit from
the forbidden tree.

7. Actus peccati.
In the seventh place comes the last degree, which is the eating of the fruit,
the consummation of all, even the sin it self.

These seven degrees are compared to the seven degrees of (...) of a child in
the mothers belly, by the ancient Divines, and that out of James 1. 15. where
the Apostle says, When last has conceived, it briugeth forth sin; and
sin, when it is finished, brings forth death. And indeed Eve, by seeing,
was brought to bed of sin, which was the first begotten of Satan.

The Cavilists do say of suggestion here of Satan by his question, that the
suggestion is, as it were, the woing of the woman, which is with some (...).
The second degree, allubescentia, the invading and entertaining the thought of
sin, is as the yielding of the woman to the Suitor. The third, the consent
with delight, this is the prostitution and submitting her mind to the Serpent.
The fourth, (...) delectatio, the lingering and soothing up the conceived sin,
the (...) the delight to sin, is as the conception of the child in the
mothers womb. The fifth, which we called consen sum ad opus, the consent to
put in practice the sin, is as the quickening of the child. The sixth, which
is the endeavor and disposition to sin, in the taking of the fruit, is as the
labor of the woman in Childbed; that was the wickedness of the hands, as it
is in Psalm 7. 3. The seventh, which is the eating, is as the birth of the
child; for this eating the forbidden fruit is sin it self, which is the first
born of the Devil.

Now will we speak of the endeavor of the Woman, in the taking of the fruit of
the forbidden tree.

The taking of the fruit came per (...) Serpentis, and pulchritudinem arboris,
by the guile of the Serpent, and by the beauty of the tree: These are the two
motives in Eve to take of the fruit from the tree; for as Jeremiah speaks, in
his ninth chapter the twenty first verse, death is come up into the windows,
and sin is entered into our palaces; sin is already in our eyes, and is
entered into the palace of her heart: Hence it was that her feet were (...),
carrying her body from the trees permitted, to the sorbidden tree. David, as
he speaks in Psalm. 119. 59. That he has turned his feet into Gods
testimonies: and in the 101. verse of the same Psalm, As for evil, I have
refrained my feet from the evil way, that I might keep thy word. But Eve here
turns her feet from Gods testimonies and his word; and she turns her feet
to the Serpent, to go in the way of evil: At the first she (...) say with
Job, as he protests in his 31. chapt. 5. verse. If I have walked in vanity,
or if my foot have made haste to deceit, let God weigh me in his just balance
and he shall find mine aprightnesse: But behold now Eve, she walks to see
(...); such are the feet of Eve, they are swift in running to mischief, as
Solomon speaks of the (...) of the wicked, in Proverbs 6. 18. It is the
prayer: of David, in Psalm 36. 10. Non veniat mihi pes superbiae, that the
foot of pride would not come upon him. She came with a proud foot to behold
this tree: And as it is in the said 10. verse of the 36. Psalm, The hand of
the wicked moved to evil. Eve here she takes the tree with an high hand; she
takes of the fruit with an out stretched arm. God he will do well to those
that be good and true in heart: But says David, in Psalm. 125. 5. Those that
turn aside to their crooked ways, the Lord shall lead them with the workers of
iniquity: So does God here, lest they should put forth their hands to take of
the fruit of this tree. Eve her self, in the third verse, confesses that God
commanded she should nottouch it. God he guides the meek, and teaches the
humble their way Psalm. 25. 9. Eve she says she may not touch the fruit, yet
she takes the same in her hand; This is iniquitas and contradictio, evil and
absurdity: She does not only touch the fruit, but takes the fruit of the tree:
As her inward soul was infected per imposturam Serpentis, by the flattery and
deceit of the Serpent; so her senses of seeing and taking or touching, were
enticed per pulchritudinem arboris, by the (...) of the tree: There was a time
when the eyes of man waited upon the Lord, as do the eyes of the handmaid
upon her Mistrisse, Psalm. 123. 2. God he was the guide of man, Psalm. 48. his
hands touched nor the mouth tasted nothing but that which was permitted: But
now she is content instead of God, to have the Serpent for her guide; she will
give her ears to hear his speeches, her eyes to behold vanity, her feet to
run to deceit, her hands to work mischief, and her mouth to taste of sin,
thus giving to Satan all her members, as weapons of unrighteonsnesse unto
sin, as Paul speaks in Romans 6. 13. She was possessed with an itch, as may
appear by the form of answer, Ne forte moriar; and by the pleasantness of the
fruit in her sight, the jaundice of concupiscence might be perceived in her
eyes. Her feet would be gadding where they should not, whose feet cannot abide
in her house, Prove. 7. 11. Her hands were as lime twigs; her fingers itched
till she were fingring of the fruit forbidden. When she had taken of the boughs
and fruit, fuerunt aridirami, and putrida radices; quia non cepit quod caperet,
because she took not of the tree which was permitted; cepit de fructu arboris
per quam capitur, she took of the delightful and pleasant fruit, where with
her self was taken: even as the fish which takes the bait, but is taken it
self of the hook, See chap. 15. 16.

And she did eat.
And she did eat. This is the consummation of sin; for the accomplishment of
Eves disobedince is in actual sin: If Conatus, the endeavor to sin, if the
practice of treason (though the treason be not fully accomplished) deserve
death by the laws of man; if the concupiscence of the eye, which brought David
from the adultery of Bersabe to the murdering of Urias, deserve the
punishment and revenge of God, then the beholding, with concupiscence, the
beauty of the forbidden fruit, deserves Gods wrath: Much more then, perfected
disobedience, which is in the comedit, deserves the death; for comedendo
comedes, moriendo morieris. Do as God has commanded thee, and eating thou
shall eat of all the trees; but if thou eat of the forbidden fruit, moriendo
morieris, dying thou shall dye. To eat that which God has said you shall not
eat, implies a plain contradictorie to Gods word, and a manifest disobedience
to his commandment; and by ones disobedience many were made sinners, as Paul
speaks Romans 5. 19. Esau did eat his broth and bread with a good stomach,
and in regard of them contemned his birthright, chap. 25. 34. In Genesis 37.
25. they regarded more the plasure of their own; Jacobs sons were eating when
Joseph was in the pit. It is David's prayer in Psalm. 141. 4. Let me not O Lord
eat of the delicates of the wicked. The bread that the wicked eat, says Osee
in chap. 9. 4. shall be as the bread of mourners, and all that eat thereof
shall be polluted. By sin primogenitura, the birthright of Eve is gone with
Esau, The pleasure he took in his pottage was but short, while he was hungry.
The space of every pleasure is but short, as the Fathers say, it endures no
longer than while a man may be eating an apple; the continuance of all pleasure
is momentarie; the pleasure remained but while the fruit was a eating: The
punishment of disobedience.
But for this transitory and vain pleasure she incurred endless pain of body
and of soul; for as the Fathers say well, the ear that would not hear the
words of love, ne comedite, eat not of it, shall once hear this speech of Gods
wrath, discedite maledicti, depart you accursed into everlasting fire, prepared
for the Devil and his followers: The eyes that beheld with joy and delight the
pleasure of the forbidden fruit, those eyes shall be weeping and wailing for
their amiss, all whose tears shall not avail them: The feet that did run unto
iniquity shall be bound in iron and heavy chains; the hand of Gods wrath
shall be stretched out against that hand that presumed to stretch forth it self
to take of the fruit that was forbidden, as it is in Esaias 9. 12. And the mouth
that did eat of the forbidden fruit, thinking thereby to attain all pleasure,
shall be full of gnashing of teeth, according to that, In Hell there shall be
weeping and wailing and stridor dentium. In a word, the worms in the grave
shall devour and eat her body that did eat of the fruit which the was
forbidden, and the Dragon shall devour her soul; both her body and soul shall
be in endless pain, still dying, never dead, for the reward of sin is death.

God has said, they should not eat, yet she did eat, and by eating fell into
many sins, simplex est Dei verbum, but multiplex comedendi peccatum. Twelve
sorts of sin.
The ancient Divines upon this place say, that there are twelve sorts of sin;
whereof the first three they do call peccatum occasionale: the second three
they do call peccatum primitivum: the next three peccatum derivativum: the
last three peccatum instrumentale, which they gather out of Job 24. 13. They
abhorred the light, and continue not in the paths thereof.

Three occasional.
1. Ingratitude.
The first of the three occasionals is Ingratitude, or the neglect of the due
measure of thankfulness to God for all the benefits whatsoever bestowed upon
Eve in Paradise and us in this world; in that the mouth is not employed in the
praising of God for all his benefits; but he fills his mouth with this ne
forte, lest peradventure. This first is the neglect of love.

2. Security.
The second is a neglect of fear, which is a security: God he has made me
Monarch over all the Creatures; he has given me all the trees, which are
infinite, in Paradise: what though I eat of an apple, surely I shall not dye?
for so small a matter God will not punish me.

3. Careless curiosity.
The third occasion is negligence of that wherein we ought to be most careful:
we should not enter when God had forbidden the tree; this is carelesle
curiosity, by the seeing the pleasure of vanity more than the will of God
himself. These are the three causall sins, The neglect of love, the neglect
of fear, the negligence of that is commanded; and the curiosity of that is
needless.

Three primitive.
The three primitive sins concern the superior part of the soul; the three
derivative sins the inferior part of the soul: Of them in order; first of the
superior, after of the inferior.

1. Incredulity.
First, the reason is infected with incredulity to God, and credulity to the
Serpent; whereby they believed not, that if they should eat they should dye the
death, but if they did eat, they should be as Gods.

2. Tediousness.
The second primitive sin is Discontent, a malecontented mind; which is the
tediousness of this yoke, whereby this commandment and easy restraint is a
burden unto them.

3. Self-love.
The third sin of this kind is of the lower part of the soul, which is
self-love; Accounting her self as if she had made her self, not as if she were
made by God: I see the tree is wholesome and to be desired, why should I then
seeing this refrain from it?

Three derivative.
Now for the three derivative sins: 1. Stupiditie.
First from Incredulity in Gods word comes a Child, which is the credulity
in the Serpent, which is called stupor, an astonishment at the Serpents
speeches, which is a blockish patience in being content to hear the most abject
Creature, a silly worm, a subtle Serpent, which is pejor omnibus viventibus,
worse than any living Creature, even (...) God.

And from self-love are derived two other sins, 2. Pride.
for from thence comes pride, 3. Ambition.
and from pride comes ambition: pride and ambition are not one sin but
several sins, for ambition is the lifting up of that which pride has
conceived: So that pride and ambition are the two Daughters of self-love.

Three Isntrumental.
The last is the isntrumental sin: 1. A licentious seeing.
The first whereof is that of Jeroboam, who stretched out his hand to take the
Prophet of God, and his hand withered, 1 Kings 13. 4. 2. A presumptuous
reaching.
The second is that of Lots wife, who would look back to Sodom, yet was
forbidden, to see the vain pleasure; wherefore she became a pillar of salt. 3.
A greedy eating.
The third is Esaus eating of his pottage for which he lost his birthright.
Eves eye saw the fruit, her arm reached to take the same, her mouth did eat
the same. The first is, a licentious beholding; the second is, a presumptuous
taking; the last is, a greedy eating and devouring of the forbidden fruit.

Etiamque dedit comedendum viro suo secum, qui comedit. Verse 6.

November. 27. 1591.
THese words I have now read unto you, I told you contained Adams sin: which
words, if you mark them, do contain Adams first sin and Eves second sin;
for after she had eaten of the fruit her self, she gave of the fruit to him,
there is her second sin; and he did eat, there is his first sin.

The Wiseman in 42. 17. of his book says very well God has appointed that his
saints should declare all his wondrous works, which he has stablished by his
Majesty. But behold, Eve, who was a Saint, when she became a sinner, published
not Gods commandment, but the Serpents words, and the commendations of the
forbidden fruit: this is the woman that represents iniquity, Zach. 5. 7. She
is as the woman in Rev. 17. 13. that gave her power and authority to the
Serpent. Not only to eat her self, but to give also to Adam the forbidden
fruit, is, as a Father says well, propinare Adamo, to drink to him in the
golden cup of sin, in giving him the fair and pleasant fruit of iniquity, that
they (...) may eat. The Serpent in his first question speaks of him, and
here, Dixitne Deus ut non comederitis? has God said ye shall not eat? (...)
speaking of both: And again, in his second dixit he says, They shall not dye
the death; and their eyes shall be opened, and they should be as Gods: By his
saying they and their, he means not Eve alone, but Adam also: This plural
dialect of the Serpent, argues that he tempeth both Eve and Adam.

At what time the Serpent begins his temptation, he begins with one, not
with both; with the woman, not with the man; with the weaker, with her that was
but a rib of man's strength, with one that is more credulous of his word than
man, to whom the commandment is delivered; in a word he makes her to fall,
who is less able to stand: So that there were then but two sinners in the
world, the Serpent and the Woman; Adam was still upright: But here when Adam
eats of the forbidden fruit, he makes up the third sinner. So that Satan,
Eve, and Adam are all sinners. Satan, in the Serpent, enticed the woman by his
curious question in all subtilty to commit sin, and indeed profane and vain
bablings, they do increase to more ungodliness, 2 Timothy 2. 16. The Serpent
when he has played his part and made her eat, he is gone: But as the Sepent was
the Devils instrument to tempt the woman; so here the Devil, instead of the
Serpent, will work the destruction of the Man by the Woman, causing her to give
the forbidden fruit unto him. Satan by the Serpent, which was the most crafty
and the most sabtle, made his first assault: And here he made his second
assault upon Man per charissimam, by her that was most dear unto him: for in
that he says of her in chap. 2. 23. she is now bone of my bones, and flesh of
my flesh, she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of man; that she
weth his affection of his earnest love to her: He uses subtilissimum and
charissimum, that which is most crafty, and that which is most dear, as his
two instruments; He tempts the weaker and simpler by subtlety, the wiser by
affection. As I told you before, he assaulteth the weaker, Woman, that was but
a ribbe, having the commandment but by tradition from her husband, who had it
from God himself; and so here in his temptation of man, he assaulteth the
affection, which is the weaker part of man's soul; For S. Gregory, says very
well, Quod est vir and uxor in vinculo nuptiali, idem est ratio and affectio in
vinculo naturali, that which the man and his wife is in the bond of Marriage,
that is the reason and the affection in the bond of Nature: reason is the
stronger, as the husband; affection the weaker, as the wife. Satan he knew
well, that such was the affection of Man to his wife, that he reposeth such
trust in her, that he will not examine what she demands, nor refuse what she
offers; for the heart of her husband trusts in her, Prove 31. 11. he (...)
semitam animae suae, the way of his soul, and that way will he assault Adam. In
2 King. 3. 14. Elisha the Prophet, not because of Jehoram King of Israel, who
was wicked; but only that he regarded Jehosaphat King of Judah, he would not
have looked toward Jehoram, nor seen him: So the Serpent does here deal with
Adam; Adam he would not have looked toward the Serpent, nor toward the tree,
had it not been that he regarded the presence of Eve. This is his means, by the
persuasion of the Woman, to get his affection, and that so Satan may seize
upon it: But this is the counsel of Nahum, chap. 7. 5. Trust not in a friend
nor in a Counselor, keep the door of thy mouth from her that lies in thy
bosom: There is neither trust in friend nor wife: this is the mithridate for
this poison: we are to beware of Domestical servants and professed friends,
which do draw men to mischief more than sworn enemies; wherefore follow the advice of our Savior, Matt. 18. 8, 9. If thy foot or thy hand cause thee to
offend, cut them off; if thine eye cause thee to off end pull it out: better is
it, to go into life halt and blind, than to go with a sound body to Hell
fire: Cast from thee whatsoever is near and deer unto thee, even the wife of
thy bosom, rather than to be tormented in the everlasting flames of Hell fire.
The Devils resolution here is by the woman, whom Satan had enforced to assault
man: Perverting Gods Council and purpose.
So he shall be sure first to pervert the council of God; Secondly, the woman
shall enter deeper into sin, by making man to sin; Thirdly, that Satan
might be Master thereby of them both. The disordering of Gods purpose is in
this; he has made her for an help, but Satan makes her an hindrance to
obedience, The wife should be beautiful as the Vine upon the sides of thy
house, Psalm. 128. but she is become as the Ivy, to destroy the tree whereby it
grows; she gives the fruit to Adam to choke him: he gives her to Adam as
Saul gave his daughter Michal to David, that she might be a snare unto him, 1 Samuel 18. 21. He made her to him as Jezabell was to her husband Ahab, who, by
her counsel, sold himself to work wickedness; by her counsel he gave himself
wholly to serve sin, 1 Kings 21. 25. But woe be to the man by whom offenses
comes Matthew. 18. 7. 1. The woman's deeper entrance to sin.
It was one thing peccare, to sin and peccare facere, to cause another to
offend: In that she took of the fruit and did eat her self, she did sin; she
gave to Adam, she caused him to sin, and this is an aggravation of sin to
make her sin the more. 2. The Devils gain, and Adams loss.
Lastly, is the Devils gain by the loss of Adams soul, which stands upon two
parts, the one is on Eves part, and the other on Adams part; Eve gave to her
husband, and Adam did eat.

For the former, Eve, after she had eat of the fruit, she wiped her mouth, and
gave of the fruit to Adam; like the adulterous woman in Prove. 30. 20. that
eats and wipeth her mouth, and says I have not committed iniquity; after she
has satisfied her own desire, she makes as though she had not offended: When
she had sucked the gall of Aspes, and when the Vipers tongue had slain her, Job
20. 16. she then wipes her mouth, as though there were nor death nor danger in
the same; and having eaten her self, she gives to her Husband to eat also:
Evil did Satan do, and knew it to be so; Eve she had after the fall
flattering inticements in her mouth, her words were as oil, but the end of her
speeches was bitter as wormwood; her feet go down to death, and her steps go
down to Hell, Prove. 5. 4.5. But yet Eve here thought she had done well.

Sins brings forth sin.
You shall see the nature of sin, that sin brings sin, unless it be
extinguished by repentance; for Austin says well of sin, Quod nisi deleatur
duplicatur, which, unless it be extinguished, it is doubled. In Esaias 14. 29.
the Prophet says, That out of the Serpents root shall come a Cockatrice, and
from the Cockatrice egg shall come a fiery flying Serpent, and here from the
Serpents malice came Eves sin, and from Eves sin came Man's fall, the
Serpents temptation brought forth Eves disobedience, and that Cockatrice egg
hatched Adams downfall, and so they were both robbed of their righteousness:
This is their discending from Jerusalem to Jericho, Luke 10. 30. Rebellion with
sin.
Again, after the woman has eaten, this her giving of the fruit to her husband
to eat, is a further circumstance in the nature of sin, to add rebellion
unto sin; for the devil will not only seduce the woman, but (by her) will
seduce man; for he draws also the mighty by his power, Job 24. 22. The
Serpent will destroy both the weak and the strong, the foolish and the wise.
The sociablenesse of sins.
Thirdly, Sin will be associate; for the sinner will try the righteous if he
will offend, that even here Adam may be as deep a sinner as her self; for
indeed good fellowship is not so apparently seen as among sinners, for they
join hand in hand, manum in manu, says Solomon, Prove. 16. 5. They do consult
in heart, and make a league against the Lord, Psalm. 83. 5.6. The Ishmaelites,
and Moabites, etc. Sinners are as thorns folded one in the other, Nahum 1. 10.
This is the sociablenesse of sin. Sin infectious.
Fourthly, it is hence observed that sin is infectious. The Serpent he
infected Eve with his breath of craft and maliciousness; made her believe him
and eat of the fruit; and she being infected her self, infected him; This is
called Pollution: He that touches pitch is defiled. She went not only out of
the way her self, but she caused many to fall from the Law, Malach. 2. 9. her
word did fret as a canker, as Paul speaks 2 Timothy 2. 17. for sin is
contagious, it poisoned Eve and Adam also. See 1 Timothy 1. 6.

Austin upon this says well, That if God struck blind the soul of Eve, she
could not see her own misery from her original righteousness: The Serpent
gave, and Eve gave the fruit.
The Serpent gave to Eve, and Eve gave to Adam the same material fruit, but not
with like affection. She in giving to Adam of the fruit, thinks she does him an
especial favor, and that whereof he needs not fear; for though by the giving
him the same, she take away from him original righteousness, the favor and
fear of God; yet she accounts that she makes him a great reward: But this her
reward may well be compared to the present of Ehud, Judges, 3. 16. who
presented Eglon the King of Moab with a curious made dagger, wherewith after he
killed him: The Apple wherewith Eve presented Adam was his destruction; but yet
(as I said) she did it not with the mind of the Serpent; for he caused her to
eat of a malicious mind, knowing it would be her bane: Yet Eve she gave it to
Adam of a good affection, not of any malicious intent.

2. Means that women seduce men.
Now the means wherewith she induces man, to bring him to eat, are of two
sorts, which are the two means that women use to seduce men withal; both are
by the voice, as you may see in 17. verse following; Adam obeyed the voice of
his wife, so that it should seem that she used some oration to persuade him,
and blanditiarum verba, 1. Flattery.
and flatterring words, 1 King. 11. 4. The idolatrous wives of Solomon turned
his heart to Idolatry, blanditiis, by their flattery: And here Eve says to
Adam as it were thus, You may see that I have eaten and find the fruit to be
pleasant; I have eaten, and yet I am living: and thus with a protestation of
love, she wishes Adam that he would eat. Adam, in the mean while, as a Father
says well, stood in doubt either to eat or not to eat, inter preces uxoris,
and co^minationes Creatoris, between the prayer of his wife and the threats of
his Creator; God had said, in the day they did eat thereof they should die, he
saw she had eaten and yet was living: Salomons wives, blanditiis, by flattery
overcame Solomon.

2. Importunity.
The other thing wherewith women overcome men, is Importunity; It was this that
Delilah used to overthrow Sampson, she was importunate with him continually,
and therefore he told her all his heart, Jud. 16. 16. So that these are the two
means wherewith woman overcommeth man namely blanditiis and importunitatibus,
by flattery and importunity.

And he did eat.
Now it follows to speak of Adams sin, And he did eat. In the 17: verse of
this chapter, God curses man because he had obeyed the voice of his wife, and
for that he had eaten of the tree, whereof God had commanded him that he should
not eat; whereby you see, that not only the giver of the forbidden fruit, but
the taker thereof also; both the perswader and the consenter to sin deserve
death. The manner how he consented is in this ( with her:) Adam he came to her,
not she to him, say the Fathers: For although God had created Man in
uprightness, though he were placed by God in Paradise, and though Gods love to
man were showed in making Eve to be his help, yet he gave no ear to the
speeches of Gods love, nor to his threats, but rather hearkened unto Eve and her
allurements: The woman hereby is convicted of carelessness, and the man of
negligence, in that he permits her to wander from him where she pleases:
but the woman must not depart, no not a little, lest she fall. A third thing is
Eve and Adams curiosity of this tree; they would eat it to try what virtue was
in it; they would try a conclusion, if they should eat thereof whether they
should dye, as God had said, or be as Gods, knowing good or evil. Moses
commanded That there should be no manna reserved till the morning; yet Exodus
16. 20. some there were that would try conclusions, that obeyed not Moses, but
reserved it till the morning, and it was full of worms, and it stank. Again, as
it appears in that chapter, to try conclusions some there were, contrary to
Moses words, that upon the Sabbath day went forth to gather Manna. Paul 2 Cor.
11. 3. says, I fear lest as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so
your minds should be corrupt from the simplicity that is in Christ. In Adam
his body from his soul, his sense from his reason should not have swerved. Eve
believed not God, but the Serpent; Adam believed not God but Eve. Paul, Coloss.
2. 7. would have us rooted and builded in Christ, and stablished in the faith:
But the root of all bitterness is infidelity; for Adam seeing Eves case, that
though she had eaten of that pleasant and forbidden tree, yet she was living,
and that there was as yet no apparent sign of any ill, thought the rather
surely God spoke not this in earnest, neither for the eating of a small apple
shall man dye. But should have accounted Gods word to be infallible, and that
mortem morieris was a sentence of condemnation: Faith should be rooted in Gods
word; but from incredulity, which is the root of bitterness, it comes that
he believes Eve, by an inordinate love, not of lust, but of necessity to his
wife; which we call a bashfulnesse; and the Fathers call it noxia verecundia.
In 1 Kings 2. 4. So long as David's sons shall walk in the way of truth with
all their hearts and all their souls, their posterity shall inherit the
Kingdom. Adam, by eating this fruit showed a desire in him to grant her
request; he loved her entirely, for that she was taken out of him, and given
unto him by God, and then there were no more women in the world: He did eat
that he might be accounted indulgens maritus, a most loving husband: that as
Austin says, In unitate peccati etiam socius sit, that even in the unity of
iniquity he might be her companion. The Heathen call necessarium (...)
mulierem, a woman to be a necessary evil: So entire is his love to his wife,
that as S. Gregory says well, Plus credit uxori quam (...), he believes more
his wife, who is his helper, than God who is his maker. St. Ambrose says, Man
will be content to hear blasphemous and obscene speeches, ut offendatur Deus,
ne offendatur amicus, that God may be offended, rather than his friend
displeased.

Now by the 22. verse you may see the ambitious desire of Adam, to become as
God himself to know good and evil: therefore it is by the Fathers presumed,
That by Eves information he presumed to be so: He was now weary of credere and
obedire, to believe and obey God and his word: He desired now to command and
control; to be non sub Deo, sed sicut Deus, to be no longer under God, but as
God: his faith and obedience became a burden; he was not content with his
knowledge of good alone, but he would needs by eating attain the knowledge both
of good and evil; he began frige fieri in affectu, to wax cold in his
affection toward God: And lastly, he made full account that he should be
preferred; he should not be punished; none should be so excellent; he should be
equal with God. But if that God were angry with him, yet Adam had his excuse,
that he for the love and entire affection to her which was taken out of
himself, for a good mind which he had to her, gave her his consent to eat of
the forbidden fruit; which they gather out of the twelfth verse of this
chapter, where Adam says, The woman which thou gave to be with me, she gave
me of the tree, and I did eat: He did behold what Eve did see and thought that
thereby he should attain knowledge. But here the Holy Ghost, to avoid
rediousnesse, briefly without any farther repetition, says, And he did eat.
Adams understanding it was corrupted, his will it was infected, he was
persuaded that he should be as a God, and that there was great virtue in the
tree, whereupon he transgressed, that is, he went beyond the Commandment; God
said he should not eat, but he did eat. Whereas Paul says, 1 Timothy 2. 14. Adam
was not deceived, but the woman was deceived and was in the transgression. The
Serpent deceived Eve and Eve was Satan's instrument to deceive Adam. Upon which
place the Fathers do make inquiry of Adams sin, saying, That Adam yielded
to Eve, though he were not properly deceived by her; this his sin, say they,
is the sin of necessity, not of his will. Solomon, for the love he did bear
to his wives, was tempted to Idolatry; Ahab, for fear, committed murder: It
was neither love nor fear of God could keep man in Gods commandment, and yet
they impute malice to God, and they are even set on mischief, Exodus 32. 22.
Adams sin came out of himself, out of Eve which was his rib. Wickedness first
came from the Devil himself, and his Cockatrioe egg that hatcheth iniquity
is malice; he that imagines to do evil, men call the author of wickedness,
Prove. 24 8. According to the old and ancient proverb in 1 Samuel 24. 14.
wickedness proceeds from the wicked. Satan's wickedness is of malice, Eves
wickedness is of error, Adams is of infirmity; then comes noxia verecundia,
a guilty shame fac'dness. Adam he fell of infirmity, in that he loved his wife
more than he loved God.

The ancient Divines, considering Adams sin, do consider the same by the
circumstances, which are seven. 1. The person.
The first circumstance is of the person. Adam he was Gods vassal, from whom he
received infinite benefits, whom he made governor of Paradise, as if a County
Palatine, to whom he gave a short Law, and an easiness not to sin; to whom
he gave strength to withstand all violence; to whom he permitted all the trees
in the Garden, reserving but one to himself; for whom also, being alone, he
made woman to be to him a meet help: The bond of love unto God was before ever
there was any Eve: It was love that linked Adam unto Eve, it was fear and love
that linked Adam unto God; he therefore should have regarded more the word of
God, than of woman. 2. The Object
The second Circumstance is in respect of the object, against whom he offended;
he sinned against God that created him, that gave unto him the government of
Paradise, as a Father says well, Quem nunc despicitis (...) fecit, he whom now
you despise is your maker: Besides it was he that made her to be an help, but
now she sets her self against God: He gave to Adam a commandment,
brevissimum and levissimum, that was most short to be remembered, and most easy
to be observed seeing that he will offend him that is so gracious, seeing he
will break that Law which so easily may be kept, this circumstance makes the
sin of Adam to be the greater. 3 The motive and retentive to and from sin.
Thirdly, They do consider the motive to sin, and the retentive from sin: What
was it that moved Adam to sin, and to lose Gods favor? It was but an Apple,
a small fruit that seemed pleasant to the eyes, wherein there was but a short
and transitory pleasure, while the fruit was a eating and in the mouth. But
the retentive was in the highest degree, mortem (...), thou shall dye the
death, thou shall dye eternally; the fear was (...) greater than the pleasure.
Paul, Philip. 2. 8. faith of Christ, That he humbled himbled himself, and
became obedient unto the death, even the death of the cross. But here on the
contrary part, Adam exalted himself, he became even disobedient unto the
death, the everlasting death of body and soul could not withhold him. The
motive to sin was small and (...): the retentive was great and terrible. 4
The manner.
The fourth circumstance is the manner of sin, It was cito factum, soon
committed. Peter's denial was ad vocem ancillulae, at the (...) of a silly
made. Adams transgression was without delay at the voice of his wife. 5. The
Place.
The fifth circumstance is of the place, It was in Paradise that he was
polluted: But though Lucifer were the most glorious in the Heavens, yet for his
pride God sent him headlong from the Heavens. Man was Monarch of the earth, all
in Paradise were at his command, yet for his disobedience God sent him out of
Paradise. 6. The Time.
The sixth circumstance is of the time, He was servent in obedience in the
beginning, but he continued not therein many days; time as a file filed away
his righteousness; he sell in the beginning. 7. The Punishment.
The seventh circumstance is of some notable hurt, aliquod damnum, that should
come to man by his disobedience, whereby both God and man are damnified: It
before, while he was righteous, he were in the image of God, for in the
likeness of God was Adam made, chap. 5. 1: then surely, by man's disobedience,
Gods Image in man was defaced: Adam, who was now unrighteous, was no more like
God, who was only righteous and (...) of Wisdom, but Adam, as David speaks
Psalm. 73. 22. was foolish and ignorant, he was even as a beast before God: and
his sin was not only his own confusion, but the ruin of us all, of all
mankind: It is Christ Jesus that will make our sins and iniquities to be no
more remembered, Heb. 10. 17. It was the transgression of Adam that brought
grave jugum super (...), a grievous burden to all the world: from this sin
came all sins; hence came the heap of all evil. The Fathers say that Omnia
(...) sunt appendices (...), all misehief does depend upon this disobedience of
Adam; and they say that because this is the greatest sin, it deserves the
greatest punishment.

The ancient Divines consider a difference in Eves sin and in Adams sin.
Eve she sinned in three respects; First, In hearing Gods name reproachfully
blasphemed: Secondly, In that she heard this blasphemy, not from the mouth of
an Angel of light, but from a paultry and abject Worm: And lastly, In that she
became scandalum, a means to slander God and seduce Man.

Adams sin is seen in three other respects; First, The man was stronger and
yet he was seduced by the weaker: Secondly, Man was made as the woman's head;
and therefore when he heard her say she had eaten, when he did see her offer
him of the forbidden fruit, it was his part to have reproved her: Thirdly, the
root of nature was in him, not in her; yet the corruption of all came by Eve
unto Adam, and from both to us all; which hearing the words of the Serpent and
the Woman, which seeing the pleasant fruit, which eating of the forbidden tree,
did bring the punishment and death of body and soul to all men living.

The Remedy.
But the remedy for this so vile and (...) a sin, and the redress of this
punishment, is by the promised seed, our Savior Christ, born of a Woman. It
was our Savior that, for the flattering (...) of Adam, heard all reproaches:
Adam beheld the fruit, which was pleasant in his eyes; Christ he was buffetted
about the eyes Adam took the tree in his hand; Christ was fastened to the tree:
for the stretching out of Adams hands to take of the fruit, his hands were
stretehed out and nailed upon the cross: Adams eating of this pleasant fruit,
was (...) by his eating of bitter gall and sharp Vinegar, according to that
Psalm. 69. 21. They gave him gall in his meat, and in his thirst they gave him
vinegar to drink: Man had his side pierced; but Christ had his heart opened.
All these things did God do to deliver us out of that misery whereinto, by
Adams sin, Mankind had fallen: who shall deliver me from the body of this
death, but God through Jesus Christ. In Ezechiel 3. 3. they that shall eat the
roll that God shall give them, it shall be in the mouth as honey: In believing
Christ's name we shall have life, John 20. 31. If then we eat of the forbidden
tree, and eat not of the promise which we have in Christ, we shall dye the
death, both body and soul shall be tormented: We must not say Quid mihi tecum
Christ? Christ, what have I to do with thee? but we must receive him that is
our Redeemer: In the (...), we must therein eat of the bread, which is his
body, Mat. 26. 26. who brake the bread in his Supper, and offered his body on
the Cross Christ, through suffering death tasted death for all men, that
through affliction the Prince of our salvation, might be consecrated, Heb. 2.
10. And by our faith in him death shall be to us but as the tasting of the
poison, which death shall not swallow up our soul; though our body dye our soul
shall live for ever. But the sinners that eat of the tree, that commit
wickedness, if they repent not, shall be cast into endless afflictions. As by
Adam we all eat of the forbidden tree in the midst of the Garden, in the
beginning of the bible; so by Christ the blessed shall eat of the tree of life
in the mi'dst of the heavenly Paradise, wherein there are twelve manner of
fruits, and the leaves thereof do serve to heal all the Nations of the Earth,
Rev. 22. 2. The leaves of this tree in the end of the Bible, will serve for
medicine here in this life; but after this life ended, this tree of life shall
fill us all with (...), joy, and glory everlasting. Which God of his infinite
mercy grant, etc.

Amen.
Tunc aperuerunt sese oculi amborum, noveruntque se nudos esse: and consutis
foliis ficulneis fecerunt sibi subligacula. Gen 3. 7.

January 25. 1591.
THE opening the eyes of our first Parents, by which they saw that they were made
naked, which was the former part, was sent from God; that they seeing that sin
(which was against God) was a loss of their glory, which is called bonum
utile; and that instead thereof brought unto them nakedness, shame and
confusion, which was against bonum honestum, and also that it did cast them
into that distress and anguish of mind, that they could not tell what to do
or find to cover their shame but figg leaves, which was against bonum
jucundum; which opening of the eyes, coming from God was to this end, that, by
seeing this, they might return to their own hearts. Esaias 46. 8. and enquire, as
Esaias wills them 5. 19. wherefore they had done this, and transgressed Gods
holy laws; that seeing their sin against God, they might confess it, and so
have pardon and forgiveness. For it is not in Gods Court, as it is in the
Courts of men, where the way to confess the fault and fact, is the way to be
condemned; but with God the only way to be absolved and acquitted from sin is
truly and unfainedly to confess our sins unto him; and this is the end, why God
in mercy does send to them the opening of their eyes, that they might see their
sin, and it began to prevail that we may see the effect it had of them; for
though as yet the nobleness of their nature was such, that they feared nor (for
there was yet no fear to them) yet we see they were ashamed, and by it were
driven to seek a covering to hide that shame with all; but that effect of their
seeing and shame was not good; for whereas it should have made them return
penitently to God from sin, which was so shameful, they instead of turning to
their own hearts, and to God, do run to the fig tree leaves to make them
coverings withal; and so this Counsel of God in sending their sign was
disanulled and perverted from turning to God to stepping to the fig tree. And
so whereas God appointed and sent the opening of their eyes for their good and
conversion, the Devil does cause it by this means to turn to their greater
destruction.

By which we see how the Devil and sin does infatuate men, and make them
foolish and ignorant how to do that which should be for their good and
salvation; but as the Prophet says, Jer. 4. 22. The Devil and sin whetteth
their wits making them very sharp and wise to do evil, to hinder their
salvation, and to make them coverings and excuses to conceal, cloak, and
color their sin withal: at this we are very good, and have a present
invention to coynelyes and excuses, but we are dull and blockish to prevent the
danger which sin does bring. This practice of the Serpent we see in this, in
that Adam goes not to a tree of small or narrow leaves which were not fit for
his purpose, but to the fig tree, which in that country, as Pliny reports
have leaves instar peltae Amazonum, as broad as a Target, and therefore most
meet to make a covering withal: Then besides their present sharpness in
choosing the fittest matter to make this covering: we (...) in the next place
their ingenious art and invention, in that on such a sudden without study they
are able to sow and piece them together; so that they did serve instead of
breeches to hide that nakedness withal, this we are able to do of our own
natural inclination, sine Magistro: which disposition of our corrupt nature we
see by experience in all men even until this day; for do we not see wicked
men given over to all evil, which in any good matters are very dull and
blockish, and in Religion very senseless and rude, yet in this to be very
ingenious and witty, to invent diverse excuses to hide and color their sins
withal; herein their wit and art never fails them, but ever serves them
well, wherefore of us may the Prophet also say Jer. 4. 22. they are wise to do
evil, but to do well they have no understanding.

The second default that Adam and Eve made in this was, that the devil takes
up the whole room of their hearts, with the care and consideration of their
bodily defects, not regarding the spiritual nakedness and shame of their faults.

The third is, in that they seeing their nakedness, do not seek to take away
the cause of the shame, of their sin, but the effect, which is their
nakedness and shame; which is as if a man, seeing and knowing himself to be
sick, should not seek to remove the cause of his disease, but the Symptomata
and outward accidents thereof; as if a man should only be careful to take away
the pimples of his face, which are but outward accidents of his disease, and
never regard to remove the heat of the Liver, which is the inward cause
thereof, and this is the third offense quia dolebat, and cur abat dedecus
peccati, non peccatum, his care was only to be rid and acquitted of the shame
of sin, and not of sin it self.

Fourthly, if this nakedness which they see be so evil and so odious, then
this also is another fault of theirs, quia nolunt tollere sed tegunt eam, for
indeed their desire should not be so much to cover as to care it; but their
care, e contra is, non curare, sed velare, and this is the nature of men now a
days in their distresses to seek involucra, non remedia, that is, maskes to
cover and hide, not means to care and remedy their soul offenses.

The last and sift, is that vanity of this covering of the fig tree leaf; for
as Saint Ambrose says, Will thou needs have a covering of thine own seeking
and making to hide thy sinful nakedness, then thou art foolish and mad to go
to the fig tree for leaves, thou should rather have gone to the Rocks and
Mountains, and cried to them Cover us, Ose 10. 8. for they are thicker and more
able to cover, or if thou will needs have it of leaves, why wentst thou not to
the Tree of Life, whose leaves are said Revel. 22. 2. to serve for medicine to
cure and heal withal;
This then was another fault, in that they rather went not to the Tree of mercy
Christ Jesus, but to their own Tree of hypocrisy; or why went they not to the
Olive Tree, because that seems to be a tree of mercy? Genesis 8. 11. for the
Dove bringing a branch of that, showed that Gods anger was appeased, and was a
sign of mercy; or else why did they not make a covering of that of which the
mercy fear was made? One of the Fathers says, I have heard indeed, Esaias 38.
21. that a cluster of figs had a virtue to cover and heal, but as for the
leaves of that tree, they quickly fade and fall away to nothing, Esaias 34. 4. or
though the substance of the leaf could endure, yet the thread wherewith they
are sewed together would not hold, but be broken when God does tear them off,
the 13. of Ezekiel, the 20. and the 21. and then where will be their covering
which they have made. But of all the rest, the greatest fault of all was, in
that they rested quietly and securely in this vain covering which they had
made, saying pax, pax, tush, all is well enough, we are safe and need not
fear, and in this secure carelessness they continued until the evening: This
made St. Augustine say, I suspect this garment and covering, for it seems to
be a fit reward for their eating the forbidden fruit, that after they had eaten
that fruit, they should have for their labor a handful of fig leaves, What
fruit had you of your sin, whereof you are now ashamed? Romans 6. for God gives
shame and confusion, and the devil sends only a handful of vanity for all
that (...) have done, Romans 11. 8, 9. God sends spiritum compunctionis, and
the Devil sends a snare and stumbling block for the recompense of their sin.

Learn a Parable of the fig tree, says our Savior Christ, Math. 24. 32.
which Parable, as the best and ancient writers think, is taken from this here;
for by way of Parable they say, that this Fig Tree which the devil planteth
fast by the Tree forbidden, has two mighty great and main arms which grow
out of it, each whereof has diverse branches and maine leaves growing thereon.
The one is the arm of excuses, whose leaves are to hide sin and shame by
excusing it, Psalm. 141. 4. The other has growing on it diverse pretenses to
defend their sin, by making policies to cover it withal.

The first, chief, and principal is, when men will set a good face and
justify their ill-doing as Jonas did, Jo. 4. 9. Do thou well to be angry?
Yea (says he) I do well to be angry at the heart, this is a fig lease of
justifying and defending his fault.

The second is tergiversatio, Mark 14. 68. when one is challenged and accused
of a fault, to seem ignorant and simple, and therefore innocent of any such
matter; I know not what you mean! I hear you not!

The third is Recriminatio, 1 Reg. 3. 16. that is, To lay the fault on another,
as the Harlot being accused to smother another woman's child, she thinks to
shift it off this way, She has smothered my child.

The last is, translatio, when we confess the deed but yet can post and put
it off to another from our selves, as Jacobs sons did Genesis 37. 32. Joseph is
slain, here are his clothes, and it is like that some wild (...) has done it:
this is a fig-leafe to lay the fault on the innocent; for the other there are
fig leaves of circumstances to excuse sin when we cannot defend it; as the
circumstance of place, time and person.

For the time, Hushaye says 2 Samuel 17. 1. at this time and occasion it is not
good, so some will say at this time, and upon this occasion it is not ill, for
the place and person they say though it were evil, if any other had done it,
in another place, yet this man doing it here, it is not evil but good and
lawful, there is no vocation or trade of life but has these fig leaves of
excuse; the Lawyer has his excuse and pretense saying, This is the Law, we
cannot help it, so did the Jews, We have a Law, and by our Law he must
dye, there is no remedy, we cannot do it; Divinity and Religion have their
figleaves and excuses to cloak sin. Jacobs sons pretended circumcision Genesis
34. 15. Absolon pretended Sacrifice, 2 Samuel 15. 8. And Jesabel a Religious fast.

The last pretense and excuse is, that which is, Romans 9. 19. to excuse their
sin, by saying it was Gods will that I did it, and who could resist or
withstand it, as Christ says to Nathaniel, John 1. 48. I saw thee under the
Fig Tree, so may it be said of us, for it is all our case naturally to be
under this veil of hypocrisy, thinking our case well being covered therewith,
and this Christ sees, and finds us when he comes to convert us; but Christ
before he went to his passion, is said to curse the Fig Tree, Mark 11. 12. 13.
14. Maledixit ficui, because it only had but leaves on it, without fruit, to
show us, that until the leaves of hypocrisy fall off, and till our figTree
bear fruit, Christ's passion will do us no good.

Deinde audiverunt vocem Jehovae Dei itantem per hortum ipsum ad ventum illius
diei: quare abscondit se Adam and uxor ejus a facie Jehovae Dei, inter arbores
illius horti. Genesis 3. 8.

January 29. 1591.
UNTIL the cool of the day, that is, until the Evening, Adam and Eve remained
in their covering of figleaves, and so long God patiently waited expecting
their Repentance: But we see that so long they never betook themselves to
God, but all this while yet thought themselves in very good case, being secure
in their own Covert, which they had made, therefore God must show one mercy
more to them, seeing shame will not excite them, or else they would have
perished in their sin.

God expected patiently all the day long their coming unto him, but they hid
themselves all this while, and therefore he vouch safeth to come unto them;
Elizabeth said Luke 1. 43. ut veniat ad me matter domini? Usus.
but how much more then may Adam say, how is it, how comes it to pass, that my
Lord himself comes to me? wherefore all along in this history we may mark and
see, that God in justice remembers mercy to miserable men.

A Second consideration of this is, that as shame is the outward Sergeant which
seizes on the body and flesh appearing in the face, so fear is the Seargeant
of the heart, seizing on the Soul within, and as shame for his object is seized
with ignominy and infamy; so fear has for his contrary object danger and
doubts of evil, either present or imminent, and shame belongs and is seen in
them only or especially, which have some grace and ingenuity, and humane
disposition or reasonableness: for beasts are not said to blush or be ashamed,
for it pertains not to unreasonable Creatures. So long as we have any grace,
reason, or hope of humanity and ingenuity, God (...) to win us by shame, but
when men are become brutish and as beasts without understanding, then he
sends them the other Sergeant of fear, which we know is effectual to move
bruit beasts, for the dullest Ass is moved with fear; Differentia inter
pudorem and timorem.
thus we see the different nature of fear and shame, the one moves those which
are ingenious and have grace and wit in them, but the other is sent to move
those which are brutish and blockish and of a servile nature.

Now we will come to the words of this use, in which we are to consider two
points, the one is in Adams part, the other in Gods behalf; that which
concerns God is set down in four special points.

Walking, that was the manner of his coming. First, that God came: Secondly,
that he came walking: Thirdly, that he came with a voice, and was sensibly
heard: And lastly, for the time of his coming, that was in the cool of the
day, which is the evening, of which four points: First for the first we must
know, That when God is said to come, to walk or to speak, that Gods spirit, in
the Scripture, uses those poor phrases and manners of delivery for our
weakness and infirmity, because we cannot otherwise well conceive these things
in God, for to speak properly to come to a place which indeed in his own nature
is every where, and fills all places with his presence, Jer. 23. 24. The
Prophet Isaiah 66. 1. says the earth is but his footstool, and we know that
one cannot walk on his stool, he properly can but stand on it; therefore some
think to satisfy this place, that God is said to have appeared here, and was
heard walking and speaking, not in his own personal presence, but per
dispensationem, sending an Angel, as it were, in his (...): But there are some
which do think that it is not necessary, and that we need not grant here any
such extraordinary and visible apparition and presence of God, in any shape or
resemblance; and that that which Moses says Deuteronomy. 4. 15. of Gods appearing in
Horeb, may truly be affirmed and avouched of this place, namely, that they only
heard a voice, but saw no shape or visible likeness, or representation which
appeared to their eyes, and therefore that they perceived and knew Gods
presence coming to them, not by the eye seeing any thing, but by the care only
hearing a sound or voice; for so we read that he came and appeared Moses and
Elias, in such a strange manner of voice and sound, that they might by it know
that no creature but only God the Creator, which could come in such a
majesticall, and glorious sound and in this sense, we may take these words,
because it is said, they heard Gods voice walking, and not that God came
visibly walking; he was heard speaking, not seen walking.

The second point on Gods part is, quod venit Deus ambulando, by which walking
is commonly meant, such conveying as Judges use when they come to judgment, and
to try matters to be judged, Prove. 8. 20, 2. It is said of Samuel which judged
Israel, that every year he walked and meant about all places in Israel, as
Judges do go their circuits and perambulations, to Judge the people, 1 Samuel
7. 16. So that this in effect and substance is that which is said before, and
signified by his coming, namely his purpose to give sentence and to execute
just judgment against their sin.

The third point concerning God, is, that his walking was not in silentio, as
Job says, but with an audible voice, Job 4. 16. and that such a voice as Ely
heard, 1 Samuel 3. 11. which should make their ears tingle and glow, that it was
a terrible and fearful voice terryfying them for sin.

The fourth and last thing is the time, that is, in sero, in the evening, And
therefore does God wait until the evening, Esaias 30. 18, because he would
willingly have mercy on them, which rather by right and reason should wait for
him; But when we regard not Gods sending, God does oftentimes wait and tarry so
long before he comes to Judgment, that his delaying, late tarrying and
waiting, sometimes becomes offensive to the godly, and scandalous to the
wicked, for so the godly cry, Lo how long will thou tarry to be revenged of the
blood of thy Saints, and the enemies of God do slander the foot steps of his
anointed, Psalm. 89. 51. saying, where is the promise of his coming? he is
long coming. As this therefore is the first regard and acceptance of the
time, that God surely and certainly comes at last, though late in the
evening: So the second is the reason why he comes then, because temptation
and the time of lust and committing of sin is aestus diei, as it were the
heat of the day, and then God sees, that it is no time to come to man, for
then all his senses and wits are taken up with the heat of lust and
concupiscence, and therefore it is Gods wisdom to choose out this cool time of
the day, in which the rage and heat of sinful lust is overpassed and abated.

That course which Abigail took, 1 Samuel 25. 36. is the course which God uses,
that is, in the spirit of discretion, to deal with men when the fit or rage of
sin is past, and when their blood is cooled, for it is no meddling with a man
in his drunken fit or in his fury of heat and rage, because their advisement
and senses are then taken away, the Prophet Jer. 2. 24. would have us to see
the wisdom and discretion of men of experience in this case, who will not seek
to take the wild Ass when she is lusty and light, for then at that time she
will snuff up the air proudly and scornfully, and none can turn or tame her,
therefore says he, take her in her month, when she is great with young, and
then she may easily be caught and tamed, this must be our wisdom and
discretion, when we see them rapt and bereft of their senses, to bear and
suffer them until the tempest be overblown, and the heat of their sin cooled
and somewhat allayed.

Now to the second several point, which is Adams part, which shows the
effect which this voice of God wrought in them, and how they demeaned and
behaved themselves, when Gods voice came to them, which is set down in two
things: First, They heard it: Secondly, They hid themselves from God, which is
amplified after two sorts: First, That they hid and shrouded themselves in the
shrubs and thickest of the trees: Secondly, That they hid themselves from the
presence of God, and this is the effect, which his coming and voice wrought
and heard in them, for which (because, between hearing and hiding, there must
go something) the writers do find out these several things.

First, for the hearing we say and may see, that it is a mercy and favor of
God, in that he did not only open their eyes being blind making them see their
foul sin; but also open their ears, being deaf, that they might hear of the
danger of their sin, but this is a new counsel, a stratagem of the Devil,
the evil counselor, to make them fly away at that voice, which should have
been the means to have brought them to God again, Peccatum est fuga, as divines
do say, therefore the Devil will have them bis fugitivi: having fled from God
by sin, now to fly again further from him by despair and there to hide
themselves, as who should say, without doubt your God comes in just and angry
mood, to make an end of you for sin, therefore by mine advise haste and fly
away from him; this is the Devils custom and comfort, when he has brought men
into sin, as plainly he shows himself, 1 Samuel 28. 16. When he had brought
Saul into sin, he says, why come thou to me, seeing God has forsaken
thee? God will surely punish thee as he said, etc. Where he shows himself in
his right kind: This is all the comfort we shall find at his hands, when we
have committed sin; for when we have followed his ill counsel, he will say
thus to us, you hear how angry God is, how terrible and fearful his voice, his
steps toward you and presence is, wherefore fly, for how will ye be able to
abide his hand and vengeance, which are thus afraid at the sound of his steps
and voice? But if Adam and Eve do and needs will (...) will they (...)? surely
from the presence of God, and is not God their only life, joy, comfort, hope,
and help in this misery? see then by the craft of Satan and sin, they are
willed to (...) from their life, health, liberty, and hope of all the good they
have, that so the Devil might be sure that they should perish in their sin.

To conclude, we see into what misery man is fallen for a little vain pleasure
of sin, which lasted but the space while the apple was chewed in their
mouths, but that vain short delight being vanished and gone, now remain their
extreme miseries for ever, except the mercy of God provide a remedy; For first
we see it brought on them nakedness and shame: Secondly, blindness and
senselesness, that they could not see their shame and sin: Thirdly, the worm
of conscience when they saw it for as a garment breeds a moth which will
destroy it, so does sin breed his gnawing worm, which will torment and
destroy sinners: Fourthly, when it was seen, it brought on them confusion of
face without: Fifthly, a horrible fear and trembling of the heart within:
Sixthly, to avoid and cover it, it taught them the folly and fondness of vain
hypocrisy, with fig leaves to cover it: Seventhly and lastly, it brake out
into a desparate madness and frenzy, in that sin and Satan persuaded them,
that they must fly from God, and hide themselves from him, as without hope of
his mercy. And therefore we see now that they had lodged themselves in the
brakes and thickets of the shrubs and bushes, but all in vain, as we shall see
hereafter, for that which they had made their Castle and Covert to lodge, hide,
and keep themselves safe, God makes to be as it were their Goal and Prison,
out of which he will bring them to judgment, and to the Bar to be araigned,
as we shall see in the next verse.

Inclamavit autem Jehova Deus Adamum, and dixit ei, Vbi es? Genesis 3. 9.

Februry 1. 1591.
THE whole course of Gods proceeding in this judgment, is called by the Fathers,
Spectaculum clementiae divinae, and dementiae humanae, a spectacle and clear
view on the one side of the loving kindness of God, and on the other part of
the foolish blindness of man. All this verse, as the ancient Writers term it,
is as the voice of an Archangell crying before the first Judgment; 1 Thessalonians. 4.
16.
for as at the last day of general judgment, shall first an Archangell be sent
out with a voice of a Trumpet to site and summon all flesh, to arise out of
their graves, in which sin has hid and lodged them till then: So we see at
the first Judgment of man before God begins, he first sends out a voice
calling and crying to Adam and Eve to arise out of their prison, and to appear
before God to receive according to their deserts and works, for God did usually
use the voice and ministry of Angels, by whom he did commonly speak unto men,
as Genesis 16. 8. God spoke unto Agar by the voice of an Angel, and that voice by
which God spoke, was the voice of an Angel, Deuteronomy. 5. 22. 26. and that also,
John 12. 28. 29. And the reason why God speaks to men by the ministry of
Angels is, because his voice is not proportionable to our hearing and weak
ears; it is far above our reach, and therefore he speaks by Angels,
framing their voice more fit and agreeable to our nature, and thus generally of
the words of this verse.

More particularly we are to observe two parts; first, that God did call to
Adam: Secondly, the effect or contents of his calling. The first is a
proclamation, the other the tenor and substance thereof: The matter and
contents of his calling is judicial, but as Gods song over is as well of mercy
as of judgment, Psalm 101. 1. and his works of bountifulness, as of severity and
justice, Romans 11. 22. so will we proceed in the handling and declaring of this
his speech, first showing his mercy therein, and then speaking of them as they
declare and set out his severity and justice.

Touching his mercy which he remembers in judgment, the matter thereof here
contained is two sold: First, as Gods mercy has been seen in these four
points, In sparing them; In making them see their sin; In sending his
Messengers to them; And in coming himself to them. First point.
So this is the first point, and a degree of mercy above and beyond all, in
that as he came, so he (...) to speak and talk with him, which I doubt not to
make the fist degree and step of further mercy.

These things considered, that every use and action of God does set out a new
mercy unto man, is a verifying of the gracious saying of our Savior Christ,
Matthew. 23. 37. quoties te congregare volui, ut gallina pullos suos sed
noluisti? And this is a fault in Adam, that he did not first go to seek the
Lord and cry to him, ubi estu domine? rather than God should come to him and
say, ubi es Adam? or when he had perceived that God was walking toward him
first. This is his second fault, that he did not prepare himself with fear and
humility, to meet the Lord, and fall down low before his footstool; for Shemey
in policy saw it best when he had offended David, and heard that he was
coming into his Country again, first to make haste to run and meet him with
submission and humility, that so he might procure grace and pardon, as indeed
he did 2 Samuel 19. 19. 20. but Adam, instead of crying to God as David did, de
profundis, does betake himself to flying, and therefore God as a friend
pitying his estate, does pursue and follow him in his flight, and speaks to
him in his silence, and so preventeth him every way, that he may be saved. And
all this is done to him, to set down to us, that men might be moved hereby to
say as David does, I will sing of the loving kindness and mercy of the Lord; my
tongue shall ever be talking of his praise, Psalm. 149. 1. and that we might
consess with thankfulness, that his mercy is above all his works, Psalm. 59. 16.

The second general point, is the tenor and contents of the voice and
proclamation; where we must note, that this question ubi es? is not vox
ignorantis, sed increpantis and tamen clementis Dei; For the tenor of the words
does savor much of mercy, for when God had found Adam all hid, he breaks not
out into the cruel and bitter invective as Shemei did, 2 Samuel 16. 7. Come
forth, come forth, thou murderer and wicked one, etc. Which severe voice man
deserved and God in mercy might have justly used, but God according to his
goodness and nature does mildly begin to deal with him, saying, ubi es? And
thus writers gather, because the Hebrews have in their tongue a double ubi, the
one is a reproachful and sharp ubi, but this here is that which Jeremiah in
his Lamentations does often use, and therefore is a sorrowful ubi, as who
should pity them which are not where they should be? wherefore this voice and
question is without any exprobrations or bitter taunting words, lest he should
be overcome with despair and grief, but hereby God does as it were give him a
safe conduct, as it were, giving him free leave to answer for himself the best
he could, as it is said favorably to Paul Act. 24. 10. You are permitted to
speak for your self, you shall be favorably heard, which is a special grace
and mercy of God, because whereas he might have cut him short off, and stricken
him dumb, yea and dead too, without any more a do.

Now to the tenor and matter of this verse, as it shows and lets out the
Justice of God, for as God is merciful and loving, so Justice must come forth
to judgment against sin, Psalm 94. 15. For this is a matter of consequence,
that albeit God is for a long time patient and merciful, yet at length he will
show himself to be righteous and just by coming to judgment: but indeed even
Gods very judgment is a mercy showed to men, as I have showed; for so is this
judicial proceeding in judgment set down, as a favor and mercy Luke 19. 15.
showed to servants and subjects; for verse. 27. it is said to be the state of an
enemy to be slain without judgment, for of such God says, bring him forth,
slay him before my face presently: Again, carry these away, bind them and cast
them into utter darkness. They therefore which will not hear God ut
consulentem patrem, shall hear against their wills, ut condemnantem judicem:
And he which will not obey the Judge willingly, shall obey the Hangman whether
he will or no.

This course of Gods judgment holden, being the first, is a pattern and
platform of the whole proceeding of judgment, in all Courts and places of
Justice, that shall be in the end of the world; for here in this place we may
gather the whole right proceeding of Justice in a place of Judgment; for in the
7. verse. God sends out first a process to arrest and cite them; which they
refusing, in the 8. verse. God sends an attachment, which is a more peremptory
kind of vocation more effectually, by fear, to constrain them and bring them
to their answer; which, when they had shifted off also, he came himself; and in
the 11. verse. brought them to their trial and purgation; then in the 12. ver.
there follows the confession of his guilty conscience; and then follows the
just sentence in the 14. verse. and in the 22. verse. begins the execution
thereof; and so an end.

Gods course therefore is first to call forth Adam to his answer; but this may
seem at the first sight, to be a defective course, because here is none but the
Judge, and the party arraigned, to accuse, and to be a witness against him;
upon which the Judge might proceed; for, no other person being there, it must
needs be, that either God must proceed in this Judgment ex officio, or else
make Adam accuse himself: Foelix, Act. 25. verse. 16. says that it was not the
manner of the Romans to arraigne any, before there was brought in evidence
against him by accusers and witnesses; but to answer this, we say, that as it
were erroneous to hold that there was no third person to accuse him, for here
is the Devil which is the accuser of all men, therefore there wanted not an
accusation; and besides him which accused by suggestion, no doubt Adams own
conscience within, and evident action without, did accuse and witness against
him; for Adams flight and hiding himself, accused him of fear and shame; and
fear and shame argued him to have a guilty conscience; and his guilty
conscience accused and testified against him that he had done some heinous
offense against God; and so the evidence of his crime being manifestly laid
open before them all, God might, and must orderly proceed in Judgment against
him. Error.
Therefore it is also an error in those which hold that there may not be any
just, lawful, and ordinary proceeding judicially against any unless there be
brought (...) face to face to accuse them; for it is plain and evident, that
upon such strong presumptions, one may be called before the Judge, and the
Judge may judicially proceed against him thereupon; as we see in the case of
murder how God proceeded against Cain, Genesis chap. 4. verse. 9, 10, 11, 12. and
how God proceeded against Sodom and Gomorrah, Gen, 18. 20, 21. and how they
proceeded in an extraordinary course against Jeremie, Jer. 29. 26. when the
matter concerns the trouble and confusion of a Country or Commonwealth; for
if it was permitted to a private man by the Law of Jealousy, to make his wife
purge herself, and to bring her to trial upon surmise and suspicion, Numb. 5.
14, 15. etc. then much more may (men in authority, who must be jealous over
the Commonwealth and State of a Kingdom, when they see it in danger by
troubles and tumults that arise) use such an extraordinary manner and course
of judgment in bringing men to their trialls, of whom they have a strong
suspicion, and surmise to be the causers thereof: for so did Joseph to avoid
danger to the State, upon surmise and suspicion, call his brethren before him,
accusing them for spies.

Qui dixit, Vocem tuam audiebam in hoc horto: extimui autem, eo quod nudus sim,
and abscondi me. Genesis 3. 10.

February. 3. 1591.
WE have heard how vain a thing it is to dissemble or hide either our selves or
our sins from God; for well may a sinner set himself in such a place, and case,
that God may be hid from him, and where he may not see God and his gracious
presence; but it is impossible for any to set himself in any place so secret or
close, where God shall not be able to see him; ergo it is a folly to hide our
sins, either by denial or dissimulation, yet we see the Devils voice and
counsel to sinners is still cover, hide, fly, deny, and dissemble your
sins; in no ways confess it: for if you do, there is no waybut one with
you, that is, that God in severity and justice should proceed in judgment to
condemn you to death; so that this is the Devils art and endeavor to make us
believe, that confession is a deadly poison to kill us, which indeed God has
ordained, and made to be a special means and mithridate to save our souls from
sin, being committed: As before it was his subtilty to make us believe, that
the Tree forbidden did bear so virtuous a fruit which would make us as Gods,
when he knew that it would be as poison to our bodies and make us damned
Devils. Now this following of the Devils counsel and advise in this place, is
so much the worse in Adam, and so much the more to be condemned, because twice
before he had followed it with ill success, and saw he was deceived, which
might have been a double caveat and fair warning to him now to beware; but as
he had followed the Devils counsel twice before in practice and deed, so we
shall see him to follow it twice hereafter in word: For first of all touching
his word and speech, the Devil teaches him a piece of his Sophistry, teaching
him that he must needs answer, to put non causam pro causa: And secondly, in
the other place he teaches him a piece also of the Devils Rhetoric, which is
called translatio criminis, a laying the fault upon another, and so shifting it
from himself, outward covering, and inward dissembling has a very good
correspondence, and therefore hypocrisy is compared to a Cloak or masking
Hood. Job says 31. 33. If I hide my sin as Adam did, concealing my sin in
my bosom, will not God find it out and punish it?

But Adam being bewitched and infatuated by the Devil, that spirit of error,
had learned to make choice rather to strive with Gods justice, than to appeal
to his mercy for favor and grace, whereas by confessing he might have had
pardon, he by defending it, brought himself the more deeply into judgment, and
his sin the more into question and trial.

By confessing his sin, Christ would have been his advocate to plead for his
pardon, but by defending and justifying it, he made him to be a Proctor to
plead against him, and Judge to give sentence against him; whereas by
confessing his disease, God would have been his Physician, to heal him; he e
contra by taking on himself to heal his own sickness, made himself and his
disease more grievous and more desparare.

But let us come to see how he seeks a quia and an ergo, that is a good
reason and argument to defend and justific his deed: Let us I say come to the
particulars of his answer, and see the strength and validity of his reasons,
for if it be good and justifiable, it will hold the proof, and the examination
will do it no hurt: Concerning which; first we know it in corrupt policy, that
it is good always to begin a lie with a truth, or at least with great
likelihood of verity, that so the lie may after run more current and go more
roundly away; therefore at the first, in the forefront of his answer, he places
indeed a manifest and known truth, that he heard Gods voice: and the second
also is truly said, that nothing might be suspected, namely, that he was
afraid. In which two truths confessed, the Fathers do say, are contained the
first and second degrees, which by Gods Decree should have been the two chief
inducements to move men to repentance; and therefore in that he was not moved
to submission and confession of his fault, thereby they gather that this part
of his confession also is against himself; therefore these two evasions are
nothing but to make against his cause.

The second excuse is of decency and (...), or comeliness, as who should say;
I saw it a shameful thing, and very unmeet and undecent to appear before thee
being naked, and therefore I hid my self, in which he does make his thought and
imagination a rule to measure Gods estimation and judgment by, as if that
which he thinks inconvenient and uncomely, God must think and esteem to be
unseemly and unmeet also: The Prophet Samuel says 16. 7. 1 Samuel 16. 7.
That God sees not as man sees, neither are our thoughts his thoughts, he is
not moved with the like passions that we are, for Job in sterquilinio was more
precious and amiable in the eyes of God, and more acceptable to his mind quam
Heredes in solio, as a Father says, and the reason is, because he looks to
that holiness which is within, and accepts a man thereafter, and regards
not the outward estate of the body whether he be (...) or in poor aparrel, as
men of corrupt judgment do, Jam 2. 3. 4. therefore Adams thought and conceit
of his bodily nakedness which seemed unseemly to him, ought not to be taken as
a rule to measure Gods thoughts, and to prove and determine what is undecent
and unreverent in the eyes and judgment of God touching the outward things; for
seeing that nakedness is factum dei, it cannot simply displease him, or be
detestable in his sight, for he saw all that he had made was passing good,
nothing to be ashamed of as undecent; therefore it is certain that if this had
been all the matter which he pretends, he might have boldly, for all his
nakedness, have presented himself without shame or fear before God; for as I
have showed that nakedness of their bodies in which they were made, and which
they enjoyed being innocent, was no matter of blushing, but of beauty, no
blemish or undecencie, but an ornament and glory to them; as the nakedness of
the Sun and Moon, is such a glory and beauty to them, that if any should put
upon these glorious bodies, a Cloak of velvet or Cloth of gold, it would be so
far from beautifying them, that it were a blemish and disgrace undecent for
them; and this is the hope and expectation of the Sons of God, one day to
enjoy that happy estate again, in which they shall want no bodily garments to
cover them, but shall all shine in glory as the Sun in the sky. Thus we see
that this quia and ergo will not stand; it is not Gods art or workmanship nor
his voice that made him fear, fly, or hide, but somewhat else which he had
done and committed, whatsoever it be, which God will bring to light and make
apparent hereafter.

Now let us come to the consequence here set down, ergo abdidi; for which we
shall perceive that this is no good or right reason or consequence, which he
should have inferred upon the premises; for thus he should have concluded: I
was afraid and naked and fled for conscience of my sin; therefore I confess
humbly my sins before thee, and do crave pardon for them. Thou did open
mine eyes that I saw my sin, and thou openedst mine ears by fear, that I
knew thy judgment; ergo now also open my mouth, that I may confess humbly, and
open my heart, that I may repent truly for it; thus he should have made his
consequence: I heard thy presence with majesty coming, ergo I prepared my self
to meet my Lord right humbly, confessing my finnes, that I might have found
pardon: this was Jacobs resolution and conclusion in policy, Genesis 32. 7. when
he heard that Esau came against him, he feared and was troubled, and therefore
used all means preparing himself to pacify his wrath, and prevent the danger
by praying to God, and offering presents to him; but of all his follies which
are yet seen herein, it most appears in that which Adam here uses for his
purpose, makes most against him, in that this which he uses and challenges
for his defense and appoligie, is indeed the very occasion of his condemnation,
as we shall see in the next verse; in which God makes this his confusion of
his nakedness, wherewith he charge God to be the very ground of his occasion
and interrogatorie, which he cannot avoid, nor find any color nor evasion
for, but to confess himself guilty.

Dixit vero Deus, Quis indicavit tibi nudum esse te? An de fructu illius
arboris, de quo interdixeram tibi ne comedas ex eo, comederis? Genesis 3. 11.

February 5. 1591.
NOW we are come to proceed in the judicial part of Gods cause and manner of
judgment, concerning which we have seen before, this order to have been
observed.

First God sent a Sergeant to arrest him, and ascite him to make his appearance
to answer for that which should be laid and objected against him, in the
seventh verse.

Secondly, he sent out an attachment more forcibly to lay hold on him, and to
apprehend him, which he fled from, in the eighth verse.

Then God came himself, making search for him being hid, and brought the
Malefactor out to his arraignment, and to answer to ubi es, in the ninth verse,
which is his indictment and accusation.

Then God will have him make his plea to his indictment, which he does in the
tenth verse, pleading not guilty; for though he confesses the fact laid
against him, that he is out of his ubi, and is fled and hid, yet we see that he
so confesses it, that he traverseth the right and lawfulness of that deed done
by him, which is quia and ergo, saying God was the cause of it: he could not
do otherwise, for God spoke so fearfully to him, that he could not but fly,
and God made him naked, and therefore he hid himself: In saying which he
seems so to maintain and uphold his doings, as if he had said, I have
therefore done well in thus saying and hiding; yea, I should not have done well
if I had done otherwise; and so his plea is, that he is not to be charged of
any ill or offense in this behalf.

Now to this answer God makes a rejoinder and answers that plea of his, by a
double interrogation: In which God first of all joyneth issue with him in that
one point, which is plain and evident between them both by his own confession,
namely, that he was naked, and then brings in such an ergo against him, that
Adam could not choose but confess his offense, and could not conceal or shift
it off any longer.

For God proves to him that it could not be, that he should come ever to the
knowledge of his evil and shameful nakedness, but only by the act of eating
the forbidden tree, so that he takes out of his own mouth and words confested,
that whereby he will make matter enough to judge and condemn him, namly, that
he knew that he was naked and ashamed to show his face; for upon this point, he
joyneth issue with him, and upon the strongest part of his quia and reason, as
who should say, be it true which you have said, stand to the words confessed
already, let us both grant and agree in this point and issue, that you know
that you were naked and ashamed. I demand of you but this one thing, answer me
if you can: How came you to know that you were naked? thus he begins to
debate the matter to the proof: let us therefore now see, how he traverseth
this point with him; his reason must be framed after this form.

That which was evil Adam might not do, this is a moral ground; but it was
evil that Adam being naked, should know it to be a shameful thing, and to
hide; therefore Adam in knowing this his nakedness, has done some ill. Thus
stands the reason.

Now God would know of Adam, how he knew nakedness to be evil, and the reason
of the doubt and question is, because it is certain that Adam presented himself
naked (before he sinned) without any shame or hiding, therefore here grows
the question, how he knew it to be so now? Adam knew his nakedness was evil:
God asks how he came to the knowledge of any evil, q.d. who brought thee
acquainted with this knowledge of evil? there is no man in the world to teach
it thee, and there is no other means in the world by which thou may attain to
it, but only by eating the forbidden tree, which of this effect has his name,
to be the tree of knowledge of good and evil. Ex arbore didicisti, ergo de
arbore comedisti, for there was no ordinary way or means to come to this
knowledge by the decree and counsel of God, either to the knowledge of evil
by privation of God, or else to the science of evil by woeful experience and
sense of evil, but only this way, by eating of this tree forbidden.

This then is that point in which God joyneth issue with him, to make and
enforce him to confess the truth; by which two points; the one of joining issue
in one instance, and so closing with Adam therein.

The other concluding by an invincible proof, the breach and transgression of
that negative Law of God, non comedes etc. We gather necessarily thereout, that
this is the right and orderly course of proceeding in upright judgment, and
determining of causes here taught and allowed by of God, to be imitated and put
in practice, namely, that after the indictment and accusation laid against any
man for transgressing a Law, either for doing evil forbidden, or not doing a
necessary God commanded, that then the party so accused, must be brought to his
answer personally, and permitted quietly and freely to put in his answer
thereunto, for the acquitting himself if he can.

For these are two other parts of Justice and right Judgment, according to Gods
Law, and this is a good and a lawful proceeding, as we may see by the example
and practice of the Church of God; and this is called a course of Judgment,
according to law and equity, (...) 10. 3. and as St. Paul says, Judge aright
according to Law, Acts 23. 3. of which every good and just Judge must have a
special care.

Another point of this proceeding further is, that after the party accused and
arraigned has put in his answer and pleaded not guilty, that then the Accusant
do go forward and see the issue joined with the Defendant, and a plain
evidence and proof of his act done to convince him and prove him guilty, by
his own words or deeds, if he can.

For so does God deal with Adam here, saying thus; It appears by your own
confession that you knew your self to be naked, and you cannot deny but that
you informed your self with that knowledge of evil, and it is plain that
there is none in all the world which has taught or told you so; therefore I
conclude against you that there was no way for you to know this, but only by
eating of the forbidden Tree of knowledge, whereof I therefore challenge and
charge you. These then are the two points of proceeding.

That there be a state of the question in controversy made, drawing it to an
issue, and then that there be proofs and arguments brought to convince the
falsehood and to show the truth, that so controversies may be justly determined;
as we may see in this Case which is brought in trial here, Adam saiththat he
did fly and hide himself indeed, but the motives and causes which induced him
to do it, and the reasons why he did it were, because Gods voice was so
fearful, and because God had made him naked.

Now God joyneth with him in the point, and will prove that it was not Gods
workmanship, nor his voice, but Adams own sin, which was the true cause of
his flight and hiding; So in Acts 24. 14. S. Paul being arraigned and indicted
before Foelix, he does not absolutely deny the matter which they laid against
him, but confesses how far he is guilty, and in what respect he is not,
saying; I confess that I worship God after that manner which they lay against
me and call Heresy, but it is not Heresy; let them prove that, and I will
yield, for it is according to the Scriptures.

Thus he showed how far he did that they accuse him of, and how far he will
(...) and show good reason that he did not so as they charged him falsely; that
so the matter in Controversy before the Judge might grow to an issue and point
agreed upon between them, and that the state of the question might be known
truly unto all.

There be two things therefore to be performed on both parties in strife, which
the Judge must take order for, that the matter may be decided.

The one is called Citatio realis.

The other is probatio realis, and both of them are most necessarily required
adcognitionem rei; for they must not only be caused to appear before the
Judge, but also when they have made their appearance, they must not stand dumb
and speechless before the Judge, but both speak and declare for themselves;
And we may see it warrantable by Gods word and the practice of the Church, that
not only a party may be caused to witness a truth before the Judge, for or
against his neighbor in a matter doubtful, and that upon his oath, as we may
see Leviticus the fifth chapter and the fourth verse, and the first of Kings
the eighteenth chapter and the tenth verse, but also in the clearing of himself
being suspected, as we see, Jeremiah the thirty sixth chapter and the
seventeenth verse, Acts the twenty third chapter and the twentieth verse; yet
there are exceptions to be taken in this matter, as we see Jeremiah the thirty
eighth chapter and the fourteenth verse; when the King would bring Jeremie to
examination in a matter that concerned himself, Jeremie made his exception; If
I confess and tell all, will thou not kill me? for if the matter be capital
and concern man's life, he will not, to endanger his own life, answer no to the
King: and the reason why a man, in that case, should not be bound to be a
witness against himself is, because the Devil says, Job the second chapter
and the fourth verse, A skin for a skin, a man will do or say any thing to
save his life, and therefore no reason to urge a man so hardly in so high and
capital a point: But in other cases which only concern the loss of goods, or a
matter of some punishment and mulct, a man must not refuse to answer, and that
upon his oath, and this we see also warranted even by this judgment of God; And
so consequently all these actions in our course of judgment, being laid to this
rule of Gods first judgment, and the proceeding of justice being weighed in
this balance, in the twenty eighth chapter of Isaiah and the seventeenth verse,
that is, all things being done uprightly, agreeable to this pattern of Gods
proceeding, we may be sure that it is good, lawful, and just.

Cui dixit Adam; Mulier ista quam posuisti mecum, ipsa dedit mihi de fructu
illius arboris, and comedi. Genesis 3. 12.

February 10. 1591.
ALmighty God having in the former, out of Adams own mouth and confession in his
answer, joined issue with him upon the discovery of his nakedness, and upon it
so effectually concluding his sin and transgression which he could by no
means avoid or dissemble any longer; therefore here we shall see how he is
enforced to confess it, which confession of his, as St. Gregarie says, whereas
it should have been such as might have made an end of all, and procured a
pardon; but says he, I would it were not such, as makes him more culpable,
and his sin more heinous, for we shall see and find, that this his
confession needs a pardon as well as his transgression, for it is a
confession extorted and wrung out of him, whereas if it had been done willingly
and of his own accord, it had been far better and more acceptable.

In the tenth verse before Adam did offend, as we saw in his Apology,
defending his sin, now being beaten from that hold, he flees to his Castle
of excuses, and as his defense stood in two points, quia nudus, and qui aaudivi
vocem; so his excuse also consists of two points, God and the Woman; for
says he, the Woman which thou gave me, gave me of the apple, and I did eat,
that is, as it is not simple, so it is not sincere.

For Pride, as we said, has two twins; the first is before the act of sin
before the fall, namely, to desire to be better than they are, and to be in
higher estate than God has placed them. The other after the fall, namely, a
desire not to seem so ill as they are indeed.

Arrogantiae est tumor in tremore, Humilitas tumor in timore.
The first is Arrogance; This is Hypocrisy, both the whelps of pride, and vain
glory, which at last turns to shame: But the last is so much worse than
pride, because it is tumor in timore; it is as much as to be proud when one is
at the lowest; and so to life up himself, which is most unseemly: That real
Hypocrisy in action, of which we have spoken before, consisted in two points;
In volucro, and in latibulo. So here now we may see a double verbal,
hypocrisy in tongue and speech: That is, if there be any good thing praise
worthy, that we must have ascribed wholly to us; but if any evil thing be
apparent, that must be put as far from us as may be, Before his drift was by
defense to put clean away all the fault from himself; but now he labors by
excuse to be seen to have as little part in the fault as may be; and to have
the show and appearance of that evil to be put away from him, that he be not
brought within the compass of the offense.

His first defense, in effect is non feci: But now this excuse is feci, sed
been feci: When that would not serve his turn, his third excuse is feci male,
sed non multum. q.d. though inceed I cannot deny, but I am in the compass of
the offense, yet I am not in the fault; I did not much of the evil that was
done: And this is our nature when we cannot defend our selves a toto, then we
excuse us a tanto, as Adam does, which says you must not lay all the fault on
me; for God and the woman have parts and shares therein, the woman for giving
the apple to me, and God for giving the woman to me.

This excuse then has two parts, the woman and God, both which we will examine
to see where the fault is indeed.

As it is a foul fault in a man to seek to excuse himself by accusing another;
so it is another fault worse than that, that a man should make a silly woman
the matter of his excuse; for we say it is manhood in men to pity and spare
especially that sex, as the weaker; and a foul shame to seek to entangle and
draw woman into danger or hurt, but rather to support and defend them as much
as with modesty and honesty we could, Adam might have considered, that she
heing the weaker, the first of Peter the third chapter and the seventh verse,
that it had been his part to have made a buckler for her shelter and defense,
for men willingly should, and naturally are taught to forbear, and not to wreck
their malice and anger upon woman-kinde. But the fault in him which passes all
is this, that this woman is his wife which he accuses as the cause of his
evil, and brings in as the principal in this fact; for by this there is
perfidia on his part, a breach of Faith and wedlock-love; for it is most
unseemly and unnatural for a man to accuse his own wife: If we consider that
he which before in Genesis 2. 24. confessed that he should forsake Father and
Mother for her sake; yea, which before (by sin) was content to forsake God
and all for her love; if he did love her so well, why does he not show it now?
for he should have stood out between Gods wrath, and her, for her defense,
which no doubt would have been more acceptable to God, for it is a thing
commended in Moses Psalm. 106. 23. and in David, 2 Samuel 24. 17. that they
offered themselves to be punished to acquit and save others there from; for
they were content to bear Gods displeasure themselves that others might be
set free, but here e contra Adam was willing to be in the society of the fact
and fault, but now he will pull his neck our of the Collar, and will not have
any society or part with her in the punishment.

Adam blames God.
Now I come to the other part of his excuse, in which he lays part of the
blame on God, as bringing him also within the compass of this evil committed,
vtinam hoc tantum dixerat Comedi, says one, for to challenge God for giving
this woman to him, and to come to upbraid God to the face with this, The woman
which thou gave me made me to sin, is another offense most intolerable.
He will not be content with one excuse, but will have two strings to his bow
for failing, that if the woman will not serve to be his excuse, then this may.

To bring God into the fault, and to say directly that he is in the society,
and had a part therein, is intolerable blasphemy. The woman's excuse, which
she alleges in the next verse, is far better; in accusing the devil: But to
say Data a te dedit mihi; sin was her gift, and she was the gift, thou gave
me the woman, and the woman gave me the apple of offense; wherefore if thou
had not given her to me, the apple had not been given, and so I should never
have sinned against thee, q.d. I did not pluck it, I was not the author nor
cause of it; If I have sinned I may thank you for it; you were the (...) of all
which gave her to me; you would needs give me a wife; if you had meant me that
good which you pretended, you should not have given me such a one as would give
me this forbidden fruit; or at least, if you must needs make and give her, you
should not have joined, nor put her together with me in the place and garden
where I am, but put her in a garden by her self, apart, and separated from me;
for I knew not else what she should mean by staying with me.

Thus we see that his excuse and allegation for himself; is partly an
expostulation with God, and partly an accusation against him; In both which he
seems to say this in favor of his fault; it did not become me to suspect her
of any evil whom thou gave to be a meet help and good for me; I thought
that whatsoever she did, or should persuade me to, would have become good and
helpful to me; ergo I yielded to it.

This we see is a foul fault to quarrel with Gods goodness, and to charge God
with sin; whereas all iniquity and sin God does utterly abhor: There is no
affinity between God and evil, for no evil comes near his dwelling, est ne
iniquit as apud deum? says Saint Paul, the second to the Corrinthians the
sixth chapter and the fourteenth verse, to such which thus impudently reason
against God: What agreement has righteousness with unrighteousness; why then O
man do thou charge God with sin? so that he fetches the Pedigree of his
sin which he committed, and derived it thus even from God himself. The sin
which is, came by eating of the apple, which was the gift of Eve, which was the
gift of God. Thus to make his sin inmeasurable sinful, he deriveth his sin
from the holiest of all, and wrappeth not only the woman his wife in the
transgression, but also fetches God in for company, as partner with them in
this their evil.

Tum dixit Jehova Deus mulieri, Quid hoc est quod fecisti? dixit autem mulier,
Serpens iste seduxit me, and comedi. Genesis 3. 13.

February, 12. 1591.
IN the end of the last verse before, ended the trial of Adams offense; for as
you have seen from the seventh verse, has been the trial and examination of
the crime committed: In the seventh verse was the arest; in the eighth verse
was the second process, which being served on him, was of force to shut him
close in prison in the bushes; in the ninth verse he is brought forth of his
Goal and arraigned, having his indictment and accusation laid against him, and
he is permitted to speak for himself; in the tenth verse he pleads not
guilty, alleging reasons why; in the eleventh verse, God traverseth the cause
by joining issue with him; and in the twelfth verse, we have seen his
confession and his allegation, why sentence should not proceed against him.

Now in this the other party guilty, which was accused before, is brought to
her trial; in which for the Judicials and manner of proceeding, the general
intent of God is not only to convent before him a Malefactor, but not to give
over until he has found out the principal, that is, to find who has been
chief in the trespass, and as some say, to make diligent search, whose hand was
deepest and most (...) in this offense. In Physic we are taught to search to
the bottom and go to the Core. In Logic we are taught to bring and reduce
every thing that is said or reasoned upon, unto the principal action or rule
by which it is scanned. In Divinity, it is a point especially material, as
our Savior Christ says, to go to the beginning and first institution of
things; to see how it was then, And this is Gods course in judgment, to find
out the principal and chief cause of evil things which are committed.

The way and manner of finding this out, is by inquiry, and by way of
interrogations, ministering interrogations unto him for all crimes and sins
being works of darkness; and therefore as much as may be hid and concealed from
apearing in the light and sight of men, therefore the praise and labor of a
Judge is to find and search it out; that being brought to light, ill works may
be reproved, the third of John and the twenty first verse: For this cause this
duty is enjoined by God to all Judges after two ways, the thirteenth of
Deuteronomie and the fourteenth verse, ut perscrutarentur and interrogarent,
that by search and diligent inquiry, the truth might be boulted out: It is the
course to be taken in the case of murder, the twenty first of Deuteronomie and
the fourth verse: In the case of adultry, the fisth of Numbers and the
fourteenth verse: In the matter of theft, the twenty second chapter of Exodus
and the eighth verse: 1 Reg. 8. 31.
And it is the course which may be holden in any Crime or Cause whatsoever, that
upon good and sufficient presumptions and detections, they may proceed to
inquire diligently, and the party called in question is bound to make answer,
to purge and cleanse himself, which is suspected or accused; for this is the
ground and foundation on which God frames his action against Eve. Adam says
that thou (his wife) did entice and persuade him to eat thereof: The
question therefore which I demand of thee is, why have thou done this: And
this is that, to which she is bound to answer.

Now if we look to her answer, which she makes unto the interrogatorie
propounded to her, we shall see it very frivolous; for God asks quare, and
she answers to quis; Some think that it was for fear, or shame; or else, as
others say, for the defect of a right and a true cause: For well may one
allege the tempter and occasion which moved or solicited us to sin; but
otherwise no right or proper cause of sin can be assigned. But howsoever it is,
we must take her answer as it is: First, we see that she is not mute or silent,
but knows how to shape an ill answer, and to make an excuse as well as her
husband: God says, in the fiftieth Psalm and the one and twentieth verse,
because I held my tongue, and envyed no more against men's sin; therefore the
Devil hare Eve in hand that Adams excuse went for good payment, and put God to
silence, as if it had been so full an answer to God, as that he could say no
more against him; and therefore seeing that held so well; he persuades the
woman to take the same course; for we shall perceive that both her and her
answer are so like, as if they had been framed in one forge; for the like pride
we see in both, which will not seem so ill as they are, but do lay the fault
upon another to excuse themselves.

Secondly, the method and form of answering is alike, and even the same in both
their answers, but the substance and matter of the excuse is not one and the
same, for Adams excuse was his wife Eve, but her excuse is the Serpent; so that
if we compare Adams answer and Eves together, we shall see in what they agree,
and wherein they differ; both of their confessions are extort and indirect,
both are maimed and unperfect, and neither of them can plainly say peccavi, etc.

Usus.
Out of which we learn, that both these came from one Schoolmaster Satan, the
Author, Accuser, and Procter of all sin; and he does mankind more hurt when
he is an Advocate and Proctor, giving us counsel how to defend and excuse our
sin, than when he is an accuser, accusing us of sin to God the Judge of all;
because when the Devil is only an accuser against us, Christ will be our
Advocate to plead our cause for us, and an Intercessor and Mediator for us to
his Father; and he being on our side, we need not fear though he Devil be
against us. But if we entertain the Devil for our Proctor, Christ will be a
(...) Judge against us to condemn us, and oppose himself to the Devil.

Therefore the Devil cares not what excuse we allege, though they lay the
blame of their sin upon him, he is content to bear it, rather than they
should confess their sin plainly, and make Christ their Advocate.

To cover and conceal sin is a double sin; and not to confess it plainly
is partly pride, and presumption, or else servile fear and despair, fearing
lest they should confess all to God; as though he had not goodness or mercy
enough to forgive them: or else they conceal it of pride, presuming that God
cannot see and find out that which they dissemble and hide from the eyes of
men.

So we see that it is a compound sin; though the woman be in impari sexu, yet
she is pari superbia, as proud as he; and as far dead in hiding and
dissembling sin as he, and as well able to say for herself as he; A
difference of Confessing finnes.
thus pride makes men ashamed to confess, or else so to confess, that one may
see a plain difference between the confession of a proud, and a poor humble
sinner; between the confession of the good and faithful, and the evil
Infidells: Between Saul's confession and David's; Saul's confession smells of
pride, in the first book of Samuel, fifteenth and the thirtieth verse;
Peccavi, says he, ( sed honora me:) That is, he would so confess his sin,
that he might keep his credit, and have his reputation, and not to lose one
jot of that.

But David's confession is (...) otherwise, for he not only confesses plainly
against himself, saying to Nathan, I have sinned; but also he makes a Psalm of
it and sets this preface to it, or caused it to be set before it, A Psalm of
David to show his repentance, after the Prophet had rebuked him: As if he
should not stick to shame himself in this world, that he might be without blame
in the world to come: And indeed it is a perfect sign of an humble and a good
mind, when one can say from his heart, let me bear the shame and punishment of
my sin, as a fatherly correction in this life; only, O Lord, pardon and
forgive me; that I may escape thy wrath and Judgment in the life to come: He
that can be content thus to do, is one of a good humble and contrite heart:
But Saul's spirit of hypocrisy will not confess his fault, unless he may
keep his credit, and avoid the shame and discredit of evil in this world.

Thus we see that as the same humor and Teacher was to them both: So Eve
shapeth her excusive answer by Adams pattern, which went before: For as Eve
taught Adam to sin after the pattern and example of her deed; so, to quit it
now, we see here, that Adam taught Eve how to excuse and cloak her sin;
according to the pattern which he had set, and showed her before.

Here he ends his Lectures in St. Paul's Church, and those which follow, he
preached in the Parish Church of St. Giles without Cripplegate.

LECTURES Preached in the Parish Church of St. GILES without Cripplegate,
LONDON.
Quapropter dixit Jehova Deus Serpenti illi: Cum feceris istud, maledictus esto
prae omni jumento, and prae omni bestia agri: super ventrem tuum ito, and
pulverem comedito omnibus diebus vitae tuae. Genesis 3. 14.

June 18. 1598.
THE third Chapter of this first book of Moses contains only matter of the
Fall of Adam, the first man; and it may well be divided into two parts, First,
his falling into sin; Secondly, his falling into misery, the fruit of sin.
In the former are two things to be considered, first his temptation to sin,
from the first verse to the fifth: Secondly, his committing of the act and
sin it self, verse 6. And upon these two stand and depend his falling into
sin. The other part which is his falling into misery, begins at the
seventh verse and continues to the end of the Chapter, and is divided into his
Judgment, and the execution of the Judgment. The Judgment of our first
Parents begins at the 7. verse, and continues to the 22. the execution of
it from the 22. verse to the end of the chapter. In the Judgment are two
parts, the Trial and Sentence, the Trial went before, from the seventh verse
to the thirteenth; the Sentence begins at this verse read unto you, and
continues to the 22. following.

The sentence is exceeding worthy the meditation of all men in respect of the
contents of it; for that as it sets down the mother or original curse, from
whence all other curses proceed, as those Levit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28. which are
nothing else but a laying out in special and particular of that which is here,
So likewise, as the Lord is said in wrath to remember mercy, Hab. 3. 2. it
contains also the blessing, yea that great blessing, in respect whereof all
other blessings in the Scriptures are but glasses to behold this blessing; for
you have in the sentence of this Curse, as the bitterness of Gods wrath, so
the consideration of the goodness of Gods promise, which the Apostle calls the
most great and (...) promise, 2 Pet. 1. 4. whereby we are made partakers of the
divine nature: The sentence is threefold, as the persons arraigned are three,
that is, against the Serpent, the Woman, and against Adam; wherein generally we
are first to note the exact course and order of Justice that is kept in the
Sentence and Trial. The order is this, First against the Serpent, as the
principal Author, in the 14. and 15. verse following. Secondly, Against the
Woman by good and due order, because as the Apostle puts us in mind, 1 Timothy 2.
the Woman was first in the transgression, and it has a double respect; for
whereas Adam sinned only in receiving it of her, but she both sinned and caused
him to sin; therefore the second sentence is against Eve in the 16. verse,
the third against Adam in the 17, 18, 19. verses following.

The second thing generally is this, that albeit there are three Sentences
against three parties, yet not all alike, or of one scantling, but there is a
great and main difference between them: For it being the rule of Justice that
the punishment be proportioned according to the offense, as Deuteronomy. 25. ut pro
mensura peccati sit poenarum modus, And that there be a difference put in
having compassion, as Jude speaks in his Epistle verse 22. Therefore their
offenses standing upon diverse degrees; one, that is the Serpent, being fraudis
inventor, the other giving their assent; the one being the deceiver, the other
deceived and seduced: there is great difference to be made, whether a man fall
by himself or by another; for to cause others to sin, is a far greater
sin than for a man to sin himself alone. The first punishment and Sentence
sets down the difference of Judgment which God uses here: There is the
punishment consignatorie, called Virga, that is Moses rod; and another
punishment when the rod becomes a Serpent; for the Serpent, that is not to
chastise, but to denounce a punishment of cutting off. In such a case the
chastisement of the party is not sought, because there is no hope of
amendment, but a correction (...) of others; and therefore the Sentence of
punishment is greater against the Serpent, the Author of this mischief, than
against the other.

A third thing general is, As an order and difference is kept, so an Analogy
and proportion is well kept in setting down of the Sentence; for in as much as
we find it was the sin of the Serpent in himself, his pride in lifting up
himself into Gods seat; as the rule of Justice is that contraries be punished
with contraries, so nothing was more analogicall than for his pride to be
thrown down with extreme abjection and humiliation; therefore his punishment is
to go upon his belly, and eat the dust; And as in the second person, because
it was pleasure that caused the Woman to sin, for seeing the Apple was fair
to the eye, and good for meat, she was lead to eat of it; and therefore this
pleasure of her is punished with pain: And in the third, For as much as Adams
crime is set down two ways, first, loving his own ease too much, and not able
to resist the temptation of the Woman alluring him, his punishment, says
Augustine for his too much safe, in not taking pains to withstand her, is
labor and travail, wherein is observed a very just analogy between the sin
and the punishment.

I come now to the particular sentence against the Serpent, wherein before we
can entreat of it, there are two questions to be handled, First, when he speaks
of a Serpent, we ask, What Serpent? because there is a visible Creature called
a Serpent, but so also there an old Serpent, which is the Devil or Satan,
Apoc. 12. that is a spiritual and mystical Serpent, as well as a natural and
bodily Serpent, and the Sentence is against both; and as it is certain,
according to the letter, all cannot be meant of the one, so neither can it be
meant of the other: therefore, as the ancient Fathers teach, it is mystically
and not literally meant of both; for as it is said that the Devil eats no
dust, so for the other Serpent, we say not that the seed of the Woman shall
bruise his head; therefore is it to be referred to both, the natural Serpent
as well as the other; as our Savior Christ, John 3. 14. by the elevating of
the Serpent in the wilderness, shows there is another Serpent to be lift up,
that is the Son of Man. By our Saviors warrant that this stretches, as to
the spiritual Serpent called Satanas, so to the natural Serpent also.

In the second place we inquire, Whether it were in Justice that that Serpent
should be punished, in so much as being a brutish Creature without
understanding, he could not understand that which he was set about by the
Devil? The answer is, That it was great Justice, as to punish sin it self,
so the instrument all cause of it; For the Creatures being created for the
benefit and service of Man, when it became a cause adjuvant in the destruction
and overthrow of Man, so as he loses the blessings and becomes subject to the
curse; in this case it was but Justice to punish that Creature: It will better
appear of like importance, the righteousness of which dealing is in the Law;
for Exodus 21. 28. God says, If an Ox gore a Man that he dye, the Ox shall
dye: And the reason of man does accord to it, and Levit. 20. 15. If a man lie
with a beast, the beast shall be slain. But that which the ancient Fathers
stand most upon is this, That the body of Man, the arms and other parts and
joints of the body are nothing but the instruments of sin, as the Apostle
speaks Romans 6. 13. The members of the body are but weapons of unrighteousness,
We make no question but the body may be whipped or burned, the ears and hands
may be cut off, howbeit the sin is in the soul, and the body, the soul being
gone out of it, can do no such act; therefore the Sentence against the
Instrument is according to Gods Law; therefore God himself gave order that the
golden Calf should be burnt to ashes, Deuteronomy. 9. 21. there was a Sentence
executed against a thing not only void of reason, but without sense. But more
fully to our purpose is the judgment executed by Ezechia upon the brazen
Serpent, 2 Reg. 18. 4. If that sentence might be pronounced upon that Serpent
that healed those that looked upon it, then without question this sentence may
be executed upon the natural Serpent that was the Devils instrument to work
man's destruction, the rather if we add hereto, that God had an intent, not only
to punish the Serpent, but to make him an exemplary and visible chastisement,
that he remaining so, the horror of him might strike into man's mind how he is
punished, and that thereby they might be put in mind to take heed that they be
not the instruments and occasioners of sin; for here we see that they that
are occasioners and helpers in any sin, are subject to the sentence of
Justice. And that may suffice concerning the outward Serpent; for so the other
which the Prophet calls the crooked Serpent, Isay 27. and St. John calls, the
old Serpent, Apoc. 12. there can no question be, but that the sentence may
justly and must reach to him, that it is agreeable to equity and great reason,
in as much as it was he that spoke in the Serpent, that Qui in Serpente
loquitur, cum Serpente maledicatur, says Augustine, and he does receive it in
that order, because in the habit of a Serpent he presumed this, as 1 Samuel 28.
where the spirit that appeared in the likeness of Samuel was called by the
name of Samuel; after the same manner the Devil making his apparition in the
likeness of a Serpent, carries that name still.

In the Sentence it self we have to consider two things, that is, the Reason
and the Punishment; the reason comprehended in these words (because thou have
done this) therefore the punishment or Sentence follows (thou art cursed)
wherein there is yet another thing to be noted before the particular handling
of it, because in comparing this verse with the verses following, we shall see
a diverse course holden; for there to the Woman and Man God says Quare fecisti
hoc, alowing them their trial and examination for the justifying of
themselves, before he proceeded to give sentence: But no manner of trial is
allowed to the Serpent, but says he, Quia fecisti hoc, thou art cursed; he is
not permitted to come to his answer, the reason is plain; for if we take it
spoken to the natural Serpent, he being void both of reason and speech, could
render no reason, he comes only under the cause isntrumental; and for the
other there was no reason of a reason either to be rendered by him or to be
demanded of him, for he was before condemned, as the Fathers have noted, Isay
14. 14. and out of the sixth verse of Judes Epistle, And consequently, being in
the state of a Rebel, was condemned already, and so was not to have the
benefit of the Law, as Paul says, Romans 2. 12. They that sin without the Law,
shall perish without the Law, as on the other side it is just, ut qui sub lege
peccat sub lege pereat; but there is no reason that the benefit of Justice
should extend to Rebels that are lawless; and therefore in Military affairs,
we see that Military Law executes such without sentence. Again, God knew that
that which was committed by man and Woman, came not by themselves but by the
malice of the Devil; and therefore he ordained that they should have more
favor, and have their trial, that they to whom the malice of the Devil had
been prejudicial, to them the goodness and mercy of God should be beneficial,
that they might be saved by the goodness of God, that had been cast away by
the envy of the Devil; and therefore, says Augustine, he seeks them out when
they fled from him, and not only so, but he gives them a time to repent, and a
time of answer, because there was in them hope of recoverie and amendment: But
for him that was so indurate in malice, that to his power exalting himself to
be like God, added this malicious and envious seeking of the fall of others,
there was no hope either of pardon from God; or of amendment in him; for when
Christ came into the world, he said to Christ Quid nobis and tibi, there was no
hope of him, being in the state of a Rebel, and so the seeking of the
examination and trial of him, as of the other, would not avail.

Now to the first part, that is, the Reason; In which we are to consider this,
Why God begins not absolutely, Maledictus es, but Maledictus quia, and so
renders a reason why he is accursed, so executes the sentence, though not
judicially according to course of Law, yet justly, that the mouth of all the
world might be stopped, and that the infernal spirits themselves might be
enforced to acknowledge, that the Lord is righteous and his judgments just,
Psalm. 119. 137. That the judgment is just, though the trial hold not, the
reason is quia fecisti hoc, he was the doer of that, and was the contriver of
the platform of that act; and therefore God begins with him, wherein, as the
ancient Fathers note, God would have us to observe two senses, first the sense
of the emphasis; and the second of difference.

For the emphasis, Gods meaning is, because thou have done this, quia fecisti
hoc, that is, that thou have overthrown Man, for whom all things were created,
and consequently so much as in thee lay, have sought to overthrow my
determinate Council, and to bring to naught all that I have made, therefore
thou art cursed for doing this. Then for as much as we see this emphasis of
Heaven and Earth, it should make us consider the greatness of sin, which
moved the son of God not only to take our flesh, but to shed his blood also
even for this hoc: That men would remember when they sin that they are about a
hoc that brought all the curses which followed after; that therefore they
should not make a light account of it, reckoning it a small matter, but to
reckon of sin as God, quare (...) hoc.

And as it serves by way of vehemency, to aggravate the offense of the
offense, so it serves for distinction, As if God should say another thing,
Thou have done, but because thou have done this, therefore the sentence is come
upon thee, Thou thoughtest in thy self to make thy self equal with God, Isay
14. and because thou have done that, that is come upon thee which Christ says,
Matthew. 25. Ever lasting fire is prepared for thee: But now because thou wast
not content with that, but have mingled poison, whereby thou have venomed and
poisoned others; because thou have been an homicide, for that is his second
fault, John 8. 44. there is thy punishment for doing this. Now we see the
ground of Gods proceeding with him.

The sentence in it self consists of four parts which we reduce to these two,
one concerns himself, the other us: That which respects him is in this verse,
that which concerns us is in the next: The first is threefold, First, That he
is cursed above all Cattle, and above all the Beasts of the field. Secondly,
That he shall go and creep upon his belly. Thirdly, He shall eat the dust of
the Earth: Wherein, as in the beginning generally, so here in special, you are
to consider the Analogy of every part of his punishment. First, then he is
maledictus, and the reason is quia maledixerat, maledictio does in justice
befall him, quia loquutus est male, as you may see in the five verses before,
not that God had done it, but it came of himself, for he had defamed God,
speaking evil of God; great reason it is then that evil speech should befall
him: So there is an equality between the Devils sin and his punishment. Now
in regard of the second, which is in the 15. verse, That he should go upon his
belly, for as much as he does take upon him to exalt himself, Isay 14. And for
that he tells Eve, If ye eat of it, eritis sicut Dii, therefore he is cast
down: the proportion to him that will fly, is, by the contrary, to creep; not
to go on his legs, but on his belly: So the Serpent, because he would fly
up into the highest place, is made to creep on his belly; So the second part
of the Sentence stands with equity: As also the third; for his temptation was,
that they should eat of the forbidden fruit now cibi prohibita poena is, that
he that lusts after that he should not eat, shall be forced to eat that he
would not, as Augustine says: In Psalm. 106. they that long for meat which they
ought not to desire, shall be punished with eating that which their soul most
abhors, that is for the equity kept in the three branches of this Sentence.

Concerning the Serpent himself, In the first branch (which is, thou art
cursed) are two points very necessary to be considered: First, That God says,
Maledictus es, and not Maledictus sis, for thereby God plainly shows, that it
comes not from him, but from the Serpent; for then he would have said,
Maledictus sis, but it is Maledictus es, showing that the Serpents curse comes
from himself; So all the curses, miseries, and calamities of this world, and
torments of the world to come, proceed not from him, but from himself, as Job
calls them, sparks, Job 5. 7. So they are the very sparks of the fire of
concupiscence, of sin that is kindled in us; as also the Prophet says, the
fruit and crop of that seed of sin is calamity and misery, Hos. 10. 13.
which was, is, and ever shall be the fruit of it, therefore called the Revenues
of sin, Prove. 12. 16. and the wages of sin, Romans 6. that is, there was an
evil in him, first to speak evil of that party in whom was noe evil, and so
malum ad se malum trahit, one evil brings another, the Serpents evil speaking
is the cause that evil is spoken of him; for that is it that makes the
difference, as Pro. 26. 2. there is a curse that is causlesse, and that shall
return upon himself as Shemeis curse against David, 2 Samuel 16. So should the
curse of Balaam, if he had cursed the People of God; but he was wiser, and
said, How shall I cursewhere the Lord blesses? but it is otherwise when Noah a
just man (...) Canaan, Genesis 9. And when Elisha cursed the Children that called
him baldhead, 2 Reg. 24. they were cursed indeed, for when it is a just curse,
and has root in (...) es, then it takes place, for we see there was a
maledictio in those persons whom Noah and Elisha cursed; they had spoken evil
before, and therefore evil is spoken of them, for one evil is a loadstone or
jet stone to draw another evil; It is that which Jerome notes upon, 1 Samuel 2.
29. those that honor me I will honor; their own evil shall bring forth this
crop, it shall be the sparks of their own sin.

The other point is this, That God shows us plainly that there are in (...)
many and diverse degrees, in that he says not only, he is cursed, but cursed
above all Cattle and every Beast of the field; there are curses in lesser
degrees and in greater degrees; for as the Fathers note, there is stillans
maledictio, a curse that comes by drops, as Dan. 9. 11. And there is a curse
that is powered upon us by whole buckets full, as it were, whole Seas full of
curses; And in the next Chapter God pronounces Cain accursed, as here the
Serpent, but not in the same degree that the Serpent is cursed. Now for as much
as no beast is venomous and has poison but the Serpent, thereby we see he has
received a curse above all other beasts. Now we see how it is verefied both of
the natural and spiritual Serpent, (...) natural malum justi venenum, says
the Philosophers; for all other things had and may have and use, and were good
for some purposes; so that if we go to nature, naturally there is no evil but
in the Serpent. Touching which evil, we say in the Creation, as we make no
question but that the body of Man, being natural, was subject to mortality,
except it had been preserved by Grace; (...) being united to the soul, a
spiritual substance, thought it were (...) it should have been preserved by
Grace from being mortal; so we make no question but the venom and poison of
the Serpent was made so, but it should have been preserved in the (...) it
should have been no curse, and no (...) should have come (...) by, and so being
evil maledictus it draws evil consequently, as evil (...) and evil reports, it
can be no otherwise said of them, then as (...) speaks, Matthew. 23. 33. The
Serpents, the generation, of (...) should they escape the damnation of Hell?
Thirdly, we say (...) so in respect of every beast, both wild and tame, they
do both (...) and reversari serpenti, not only man, but all beasts are (...)
the Serpent, and abhor and fly his (...); so there is in (...) that natural
curse above all other, but that is not so much (...) as the other, the
verefying of it in the mystical and (...), in whom is such evil and mischief
that Christ (...) him evil it self, and having evil in (...) man (...) in so
much as the wicked and ungodly do curse him, (...) (...) even they that are
the children of the curse, as Jude (...) is none, be he never so the Devils
child, but will speak evil of him; as the children of wisdom are justified of
her enemies, so the children of folly and the Devils will not stick to curse
him.

Thirdly, Maledictus prae, this curse takes deeper root in him than in any
other Creature, as his evil is in a further manner in him than in any other;
there is no beast does that which he causes man to do; for there is no wrath
in wild beasts so malicious as in man, submitting himself to the pleasures of
drunkenness and whatsoever sin else; no beast will drink more than shall do
him good, nor be drunk as man, nay it is a shame to speak the things that are
done of them in secret, by the instigation of Satan and malice of the Devils
wrath, Ephesians. 5. 12. and the beasts never banded themselves together with
weapons to fight as men do, and they fight but with those weapons which nature
yields them, but man has devised Guns and Spears one to goare another; neither
do they give themselves wholly to all excess, as man does. This evil
wherewith man is infected by the Serpent is above that which is in bruit
beasts, yea above all evil of Creatures, both wild and tame: And it is said in
that respect only, but in this also, that there is no beast of the field, nor
Creature in Heaven or Earth, but keeps and continues in his first condition and
estate wherein he was first created, but the Devil has left his, and man, by
the seducing of the Devil, has lost his state also, and keeps not his course
in obeying his Maker, as all other Creatures do, as Psalm. 110. where a reason
is rendered of it, and Psalm. 32. Man is compared to the Beasts, yea like Horse
and Mule which understand not: If it be thus with beasts, then much more may
man be ashamed, that has reason and understanding, and yet commits these
things which bruit beasts refrain; and therefore when there is a comparison
between man and the beasts, as Chrysostom says, Pejus est comparare bestiis
quam nasci de bestiis; and that man that shall live so like a beast, is worse
than he that is turned into a beast, as Nebucodonoser. In these three respects
he is cursed above all other.

The last point is that which the ancient Fathers set down upon this division,
that God puts down and names both these beasts that man has service of; and in
beasts, those that he has no use of, wild beasts, as Tygres and Lions, and
such; and this degree says Augustine, that the Devil translates himself into
both names both shapes, which shows that the Devil can take either shape, and
as we know in his livelie temples wherein he dwells, as Sorcerers and such, he
shows himself sometime in them Jumentum, a tame beast to help and serve man, as
Acts 16. in the Maids possessed with a spirit of Divination; and sometime he
will be in them a roaring Lion, to fear us: But in whether shape he appears,
whether in Maids or Boys, he is maledictu in both, for his intent in both is
accursed, namely to seek our ruin and destruction; so that whether we respect
the condition or comparison, it is verefied in the Serpent above all other
beasts.

Mulieri dixit, Admodum multiplico dolorem tuum, etiam conceptus tui, in dolor
paries liberos: quin erga virum tuum appetitus tuus esto, and ipse praeesto
tibi. Genesis 3. 16.

August 27. 1598.
THE brief of his divisions upon the Text were, Eves Punishment
That this was Gods just Judgment upon Eve in this Sentence upon her, Parere
and Parere.
which the Fathers very briefly and aptly express by these two words, parere
and parere, that she should bring forth with pain, and obey; in the first is
an apt correspondence to her offense: her pleasure is punished with pain, her
delight with sorrow, according to the old Proverb, sweet meat and sower sauce,
and so likewise is there an apt correspondence in the other part of the
punishment; for whereas she took upon her to have more knowledge than her
husband, and by her means he was seduced from his obedience, she shall be
obedient to her husband; she is punished first in the law of Nature and of
Nations, for all that bears young does it with a groan, and by all laws of
Nations, the husband is above the wife.

Touching the particulars of the Text. Her Sorrow.
First, he will greatly increase her sorrows; besides the sorrows in
conception and bringing forth children, her sorrow is afterward increased;
many a woman breeds and bears her own sorrow; she may bear her child to
misery, if she see it beg it increases her sorrow; she may bear it to
execution, as we have too many lamentable examples: but the sorrow of a mother
is much more increased if it live so wickedly that she bear it to hell fire.

For the sorrow of Childbearing, in the Psalms, and throughout the Prophets,
the greatest sorrow is compared to a woman's laboring with child, which is so
great that many a one dies of it, as did Rachell, Genesis 25. 18. never was
child borne without pain, according to that old verse, Nascitur haud sine vae,
fuerit qui filius Evae.
But here God shows even in judgment his mercy; for she sinned in soul, is
punished but in body, and that punishment is temporary, though the sin
deserved death eternal; and which is further, there is a blessing even in this
Sentence; for to have children (though with pain) is a great blessing, and by
the ancient Fathers is called the blessing of the womb and breasts: and
barrenness of woman is held a greater sorrow and pain, than to have children
with much grief and pain; for when the child is once borne, the pain is
forgotten, but barrenness is to her a continual grief, in the 30 of Genesis
verse. 1. When Rachell saw she was barren, and Leah fruitful, she envied her
sister, and so great was her desire of children that unless she had children
she would die: So it is a Sentence of Justice mingled with Lenity, the
punishment is not with rig or but with indulgence, it is tanquam fraenum, non
flagellum, as a bridle rather to check, than a scourge to bruise, it is but a
chastizing of sin in Eve, non est quasi Coluber, as a Serpent to sting, but
an easy correction.

Her subjection
The second part of her punishment is, That she shall be subject to her
Husband, and there is mercy in this also, for the best are of opinion, that in
time of integrity there was order and subordination, for order is the mother
of perfection; The two ends of marriage.
here is a subordination of affections, the woman's to the husbands, and of
occonomicall government, for generation and cohabitation are the two ends of
marriage, and in both she is to be ruled by her husband: some idleheaded
fellows gather hence, That seeing women are to be subject to men, therefore
men ought not to be subject to women; but mark, he says viro tuo, to thy
husband: Touching the Rule of Women.
now the rule of women as in most Commonwealths has been allowed, even so in
Scripture, for Candace Queen of the cast, and Sabaes Queen are commended, nay
it is Gods own Law, Numb. 27. 8. That if a man die without a son, his
inheritance shall fall to his daughter, then the daughter of a King is not
barred government, which is her inheritance; but oeconomicall subjection here
is chiefly understood, that made Sara call her husband Lord. In the first of
Ester you see Vasbti the Queen punished because she would not obey Ahashuerus
the great King of Persia, a great Monarch, she came not when he sent for her,
advice was taken how she should be punished for her disobedience, this
offense was not only against the King, but by example against the Princes and
People, for in the seventeenth verse of that Chapter, This example among other
women shall make them despise their husbands, and therefore a solemn Sentence
was pronounced against her That she should be divorced and deposed, the end
of which Decree was, as appears in the end of that Chapter, That all the
women through that huge Monarchy should do their husbands honor both great and
small, and further the King sent forth his Letters to every People after their
language That every man should bear rale in his own house: Esther her self
was example of this, who worshipped with reverence her King, she must be
subject unto man in regard of her weakness and infirmities, as Paul speaks
in the Corinthians, Woman is not her self, her own, for at marriage she gives
not her self, but is given to her husband by a man, and after marriage she
loses her own name and bears her husbands; be the husband wise or simple
he must bear rule over her, for subjection is the condition of all Wives, to
all Husbands. Abigaiell, in the first chapter of Samuel and the twenty fith
verse, must as well obey Naball her husband, as David, even of Religion this
obedience is; this is the Mercy, that though he shall rule her, yet they both
shall rule their household, he shall rule her not as a King his subject or a
Lord his slave, not in fear but in love.

Adamo vero dixit, Quia auscultavisti voci uxoris tuae, and comedisti de fructu
arboris illius quo interdixeram tibi, dicendo, ne comedas ex isto: maledicta
esto terra propter te; cum dolor comedito proventum ejus omnibus diebus vitae
tuae: Eaque spinam and carduum proferto tihi, tu vero comedito herbam agri. In
sudore vultus tui vescitor cibo, donec revertaris in humum, cum ex ea desumptus
fueris: nam pulvis es, and in pulverem reverteris. Gen 3. 17.18.19.

September. 17. 1598.
SAint Chrysostom writing upon this place, says sedet Judex, non surgit, God
who is the Judge sits still and rises not, Adams punishment.
he continues his Court and give^h not over till he has given judgment upon
all the offenders: This is as it were the third O yes says that Father upon
Adams offense: which sentence is contained in the 17. 18. and 19. verfes: In
the Sentence upon Adam two things.
In which sentence are contained two parts, the one is the fault contained in
the beginning of this verse, the other is the penalty contained in the end of
the 17. vorse to the end of the 19. verse.

First the Fault; Secondly, the Penalty.
Of both these in general, these are the proceedings of God whence the rule and
pattern of all Justice is grounded; for God goes here to sentence upon a cause;
because thou have heard the voice of thy Wife, and eaten the forbidden fruit:
and upon a Cause not alleged by an Accuser, but confessed by the Offender, the
12. verse before; so that in justice God will say to Adam ex ore tuo te judico,
I will judge thee even out of thine own mouth thou evil Servant, Luke 19. 22.

In the sentence two things.
Particularly, In the fault are two parts or branches, first there is an
inordinate consent, the other a disordinate act: The first is the hearing the
voice of his wife; The second is his eating.

Inordinate Consent.
Touching the first, The giving ear to the voice of his wife, it is nothing
unless it be accompanied with another circumstance, he may hear the voice
of his wife, if she speak that is reason, and so the superior may hear the
voice of the inferior. In the second of the Kings the fifth chapter and
thirteenth verse, the Master must hear the voice of the Servant, in reason, If
the Prophet (says Naamans servant to Naaman) had commanded thee a great thing
would thou not have done it? how much rather when he says to thee but this,
Wash and be clean? and there Naaman heard the voice of his servant; so that
licet audire vocem (...), the words of reason are to be heard from our
Inferior, be it Wife, Child, or Servant; for reason rules all out of the
mouth of whomsoever it comes; but we must not hear words noisome and of
wicked desire, but when they are brutish, senseless, and of foolish desire, we
must not hear them, but above all, not words contrary to Gods word, for vox dei
praecipiens commanded him not to eat, vox uxor is disuadens persuaded the
contrary, yet he heard the voice rather of his Wife than of God; so the fault
is disobedience to God which is not alone, but is accompanied with another
fault called Ignavia, negligence, carelessness, not regarding Gods Commandment.
This laying the bridle carelessly on the neck, is to be subject to her voice
that was subject to him, and by such negligence was drawn to transgression, the
(...) act: It was no excuse to Joab that he had David's letters to murder
Urias, as it is 2 Samuel 11. 14. nor Solomon's Idolatry was not to be excused
because he was persuaded thereunto by his Wives: It is a great offense non
contristari mortiferas delitias, not to be sorry for deadly delight: The
pleasing voice of Eve was no excuse to Adams breach of Gods Commandments.

2. The disordered Act.
The other branch is the disordered act of Adam, which is a second degree of
sin; for to have heard the voice of his Wife, and there to have stayed and
not to have sinned, had been worthy commendation: to have remembered the voice
of God and not regarded the voice of Eve had been commendable: before he
hears the voice of God, but here he obeys the voice of Eve. Out of this act
of sin the Fathers gather two Circumstances; the first is, that the voice of
God might easily have been obeyed; Of all the trees in the Garden thou may
eat, de illa arbore, of that one tree alone thou shall not eat: in such plenty
one might have been forborne: so that great was the disobedience when so small a
matter commanded by God was not obeyed by Man: according to that of St. Austin
upon this place, Magna est iniquitas, ubi non magna obediendi difficultas; here
is great ingratitude, not to for bear this one having all other in abundance.
The Second Circumstance in this act of sin is to do it though charge were
given before to the contrary with pain of death, in the 17. of the former
Chapter, It was otherwise with Paul, 2 Cor. 15. he remembers their obedience
to be with fear and trembling: Not death shall separate Paul from his
obedience, but Adam was disobedient, though death were denounced, disobedient
to death; so that the aggravating the act is the contempt of Gods denouncing of
death and punishment. So much may suffice of the Fault.

The Punishment or Penalty.
Now touching the Punishment. Cursed is the earth for thy sake: in sorrow shall
thou eat of it all the days of thy life, etc.

I consider this Punishment of Adam after two sorts, either as a Sentence or as
a Law. Now we will speak of it only as a Sentence; hereafter, by Gods patience,
we will handle the other as a Law. Herein we will consider the proportion of
that Fault, with the Punishment, with the Fault, and with the Act it self: In
the Sentence are two Punishments: The first, cursed be the earth for thy sake,
etc. The second, in the sweat of labor shall thou eat thy bread till thou
return to dust, for dust thou art and to it shall thou return: The one part of
the Punishment is a hard life, the other a corruption by death.

In Proportion.
As Eves, so Adams punishment is in proportion: First his desire was unlawful
and the Act was sin; for according to 1. of St. James 15. When lust conceives,
it brings forth sin; and sin, when it is finished brings forth death:
Eves lust made her sin and she was punished: Adams neglect to suffer an
Inferior to prevail against God, is punished with labor, for labor is poena
ignaviae, and Man's ingratitude to God is punishment with the Earths ingratitude
to Man; he was disobedient, the earth shall be unfruitful; he offended in
meat, and he is punished in his meat; the earth that should feed him, is cursed
for him; he offended in unkindness active, he is punished with unkindness
passive; he dealt unkindly with God, he shall suffer the earths unkindness: Eve
her punishment was in bringing forth life, Man's is in bringing forth living to
maintain and nourish life, which is a great difficulty; both have their pain,
labor, and sorrow: Hers is in intension, great but for a few hours; his is
great in extension, to endure all the days of his life. And so much generally
of the Punishment.

In his meat.
Now in particular: the first part of man's Punishment is in his meat: Men must
needs have whereof to eat, for life without living and maintenance will not be
preserved: there is not only a bringing forth of Children, but there are also
curae oeconomicae, household cares: meat and clothing must of necessity be
had, according to that of the Wise man, Preacher 6. 7. all the labor of man is
for his mouth, and the 16. of the Proverbs and the 26. is to like purpose: he
must eat, and the herb of the field must be his meat; fuel must maintain the
fire, and meat must maintain life; Adam came of the earth and must live by the
earth; the earth that was his Mother must be his Nurse, and from thence
mankind must be maintained, even all, the meanest and the Monarch; for as it
is Preacher 5. 8. the abundance of the earth is over all: the King consists
by the field that is tilled. The herb of the field and bread was the only
sustenance of the Patriarchs before the Flood, but after the waters had taken
away by over much moisture the strength that was in herbs and bread, God gave
them then other meats and drinks of strength, in the 9. Chapter of this Book
20. Noah planted Vineyards, and drunk the wine thereof: But that Adam is here
to (...), is the herb of the field and the bread of his own labor: These two
wereable to strengthen man's heart, as it is said of the one, Psalm. 104 15. So
long as Adam was obedient unto God the earth yielded all abundance without
travel of it self; for thorns there grew fur trees, for nettles the myrrh
tree, as it is Isaiah 55. 13. then was the earth a kind and fruitful Mother,
but by this course of man's disobedience the earth is become a Stepmother, and
without labor she yields (...) sustenance; yet for all man's labor it may
yield barrenness, according to Jeremie 12. 13. they have sowed wheat and reaped
thorns; they have no profit of their labor because of Gods anger.

Upon the Malediction of the earth follows a necessary consequence of man's
labor; for if the earth that was blessed before, the 12. of the 1. Chapter, is
here cursed for man's sin, the fruitfulness must be recovered by man's labor;
so that labor is a consequence of the earths Curse: Three things in the Curse.
And in this Curse we observe these three things: First the earth cursed:
First the earth it self is cursed: In the 1. Chapter God said that the earth
should yield herbs with seed, and trees with fruit of it self, it was so:
there was fertility and fecundity by Gods breathing: that in the Scriptures is
called a blessed field, wherein is plenty: If man had stood upright there
should have been plenty without pain taking; yet man should not have been idle,
there should have been labor with pleasure, but sin has made it with pain.
The staff of bread should have endured; but God will break the staff of their
bread, Leviticus 26. 26. There shall be no more plenty but penury; and of it
self germinabit spinas and tribulos, it shall bring forth weeds, thorns, and
thistles, and in abundance. Secondly the Cause:
The second thing is the Cause of the Curse, for thy sake. In the 3. of Habakkuk
8. The question is, whether God were angry against the Rivers, the Floods, and
the Sea? as much to say they have not offended. Here the earth has done no
offense: it was not cursed for it self, non in se, sed propter te in quantum
maledicta fuit propter te: It is all one to the earth in regard of it self,
whether it be barren or fruitful, for when it does fructify it is not for it
self: it is insensible of punishment, but it is all for man's sake. Man is as
the great Sphere, the primum mobile to the other Creatures; his obedience to
God draws the obedience of Plants, Trees, Beasts, and all the Elements unto
him (...) during his obedience all Creatures are serviceable unto him; but
afterward the earth was unkind, and as he moves all Creatures move with him:
if he move against God all move against him. The original world of man's
integrity was a Mirror, for the ancient Fathers are of mind that the Sun was
more clear, the waters more pleasant, the earth more fruitful, all things more
perfect; then all the trees of the field did clap their hands, as it is the
fifty fifth of Esaias the twefth verse: But man, changing, all was turned upside
down, all things were changed; the Sun was (...), the waters overflowed, the
air with cold pierced, the earth was barren and herbs poysonsome, and the one
and thirtith of Job verse the fourtith, requiteth that of the fifty fifth of
Esaias before mentioned: Thistles grew instead of wheat, and cockle in stead of
barley, and as it is in the hundred and seventh Psalm and the thirty fourth
verse, God has turned a fruitful land into barrenness, the cause is given,
because of the wickedness of the (...). In the twenty sixth of Leviticus, the
eighteenth, twenty fourth and twenty eighth verses, God says, If they will not
obey for love nor for fear, he will punish them seven times more according to
their sins, and yet seven times more then that, and if for all this they will
not obey him, but walk stubbornly, God will chastize them from seven to seven
times more, and still increase their punishment seven times. The causes must
be distinguished, the earth, of it self, before was fruitful, now of it self
it is infertile, because the Creature Man is subject to vanity, in the eighth
of the Romans and the twentieth verse, and as it is in the twenty fouth of the
Prove. and the thirtieth verse: the field of the Sluggard is grown over with
thorns and with nettles: If man be sluggish the earth must be fruitless; so
that the earth must be labored, and that labor must be qualified; the labor
must be great, else it brings forth the cockle for corn; this is the perfection
of punishment; for according to the sixth of the Hebrews and the eighth verse,
The field that bears thorns and thistles is near unto cursing, whose end is
to be burned: Thirdly, Labor continued.
and this labor must be continued, which is the third thing; the continuance of
it, which is of three forts. First, It is not simple labor for a day or two,
but cunctis diebus vitae, in youth and in age even to death, as it is in the
nineteenth verse, In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy bread till thou
return to earth. St. Austin says there is perpetu^ corruption and perpetuus
labor, sloth is punished with continuance of labor: in the second of Samuel
the eleventh chapter and second verse, thy idleneness fell to lust, and as it
is in the first to Timothy the fifth and the thirteenth, idleness leads to
all sins. Secondly, It is continued with patience; what if thou labor and it
brings forth spinas and tribulos, thorns and thistles, yet must thou bear it,
and labor still in the sweat of thy face? like him that planted a Vineyard
with much pain and great cost, and he looked it should bring forth grapes, and
it brought forth wild grapes; and as it is in Psalm 127. the labor is in vain
unless God bless it: Plenty comes not by man's labor but by Gods mercy: Vain
therefore were they, the first of Habakkuk the fifteenth, That took fish with
the angle and the net, and gathered it in their yarn; and when they had done,
did sacrifice to their net and burned incense to their yarn, because by them
they thought their portion was fat and their meat plentious: Their labor is
even nothing without Gods blessing, lest as in that place of Habakkuk, they
should deifie their own labor: though the earth be unkind labor thou still,
and boast not of thy labor lest it be vain. Thirdly, as it is in the 10. of
the Preacher the 10. If the Iron be blunt it must be whet to have an edge, and
if need be of a better edge, then it must be whet with more strength: And here
if great labor will not serve greater must be added, harder labor must be
used, it must be labor sudoris; if thou will have herbs for thy meat only
smaler labor will serve, but if thou will feed upon bread, thou must use much
labor, thou must labor and sweat; thy nutriment must be by an excrement, bread
is the interest of thy continual labor: this is the yoke of the sins of Adam.
God in punishing the Israelites will remember the land which he gave them,
Leviticus 26. 42. and they must suffer the punishment of their iniquity; yea,
when you shall remember your own wickedness, ye shall judge your selves worthy
destruction for your iniquity, in the thirty sixth of Ezekiel and the thirty
first: Paul, in the first of the Corinthians the ninth and the fifteenth, says
it were better for him to die than not to do his duty.

The use of the Scripture.
Now this sentence upon Adam has this use for us, spinae and tribuli, the
thorns and thistles when we walk in the field speak to us as Gods book does,
and make us a Sermon, telling they should not have grown there but for us, the
earth should not have been cursed with barreness but for our wickedness: if the
thorn prick; or the nettle sting thee, it will say hoc propter te; I was first
brought and still I grow to make thee remember thy obedience; so that the very
nettle that is good for nothing shall put thee in mind of thy (...): Be not
angry with the earth if it be barren, for it will say it was so non propter
se, sed propter te. To conclude this point well says a Father, we must have
not only sensum poenae in corpore, the feeling of punishment in our body, but
sensum irae divinae in mente, the seeling of Gods wrath in our soul.

But now not to leave you plunged in despair with consideration of grievous
punishment, in a word I will touch the alay of this punishment: be comforted,
though God be just yet he is merciful, non est Crux sine Christo, have thou a
Cross then have thou Christ to comfort thee. Mercies in this Sentence are five.
God has left five signs of his mercy in this sentence, which the ancient
Fathers term vestigia miserantis gratiae, impressions of Gods merciful favor.
1.
The first is, non dixit maledictus tu, cursed be thou, as he said to the
Serpent, but terra maledicta, cursed be the earth: the nature that sinned is
not cursed, nor is it like Cains curse in the fourth Chapter and eleventh
verse, for there is he cursed from the earth; but here the earth of which Adam
was made, not Adam himself was cursed. 2.
Secondly, he is punished but with a little labor to his great sin, with a
watery drops of sweat, and the sweat is but an easy sweat of the face, not like
Christ's sweat in his prayer, the twenty second of Luke the forty fourth verse,
which was like drops of blood trickling down to the ground. 3.
Thirdly, God might have suffered the earth to have been fruitless let man have
labored never so much, but that man for all his sin, yet with his labor
shall make the earth fruitful, in my opinion is a great mercy, which I ground
out of the one hundred twenty eighth Psalm: when thou eatest the labor of thy
hands, says David, thou shall be blessed,: It is a blessing when the Wife is
fruitful as the Vine upon the house side, when thy Children are as the Olive
plants about thy Table: and it is a blessing that yet with labor the earth
shall bring forth fruit: It is a comfort that your labor shall not be in vain,
as St. Paul speaks, the first to the Corinthians the fifteenth and the fifty
eighth. God in mercy sends rain to water the earth, what to do? Isaiah
tells you in his 55. chapter and 10. verse, to give not only bread to the
eater but even seed to the sower: It is a comfort when we sow that we shall
reap; he that sows, eareth, reapeth, thresheth, does it in hope, the first to
the Corinthians the ninth chapter and tenth verse. God gives bread to the
hungry and the seed to further increase by labor, dat acquisitum, that thou
have gained through thy labor. 4.
Fourthly, it is a great mercy to call it panis taus, thy bread, thou shall eat
of thy own bread; this is mercy, I say, to term that man's which is Gods.
Lastly, this labor has a date and an end, it has tempus refrigerii; upon the
amending your lives, God will put away your sins, and a time of refreshing
shall come from the presence of the Lord, Acts 3. 19. Let this be lastly your
comfort, that though you labor long, yet you shall have a resting after your
labor.

In sudore vultus tui vescitor cibo, donec revertaris in human, cum ex ea
desumptus fueris: nam pulvis es, and inpulverem reverteris. Genesis 3. 19.

October (...) 1598.
NOw are we to handle the other part of Adams Sentence and punishment; The
ground and nature of the Sentence.
and in the Sentence we are to consider the ground of it, and the nature or form
of it: Disobedience is the ground of this sentence, and this Sentence is made
even a Law; for according to that of Paul, Romans 6. 2. The Law of life which
is in Christ Jesus, has freed me from the Law of sin and of death, so that
sin is the cause of death. Hence sprung the Pelagian heresy; condemned by
the Council of Carthage: Council Carth. 7.
That said that though we sinned, yet we were freed, though we lived never so
dissolutely, yet we were saved. After Christ's coming death was not the reward
of sin: but mark what St. James, in his first chapter and thirteenth verse,
says, When lust has conceived, it (...) forth sin, and sin, when it is
finished, brings forth death; and St. Paul, in the fifth to the Romans the
nineteenth and the twenty first, says, Death.
That as by one man's disohedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience
of one many were made righteous: and further, That as sin reigned unto death,
so grace by righteousnese might reign to eternal life.: Truth it is, that
through sin came death, and that death has rule over all; Adam at the first by
sin brought death, the last Adam by obedience brought everlasting life; and
as Paul, in the first to the Corinthians the fifteenth chapter and the twenty
sixth verse, says, That the last enemy that Christ should destroy was death;
for as it is in the same chapter, As in Adam all die, so in Christ all shall be
made alive; and the very wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is
eternal life, says Paul in the sixth to the Romans and the twenty third
verse. The nature and form of sin.
Touching the nature and form of the sin, God is not cause of sin.
God is not the agent in sin, but the cause of sin is only from Adam
himself. And according to that of the Wise man in his first chapter and
thirteenth verse, Adam and sin cause of death.
God has not made death, neither has he pleasure in the destruction of the
living; and in the eighteenth of Ezekiel and the twenty third, God has no
desire that the wicked should die, but if even the wicked return from his ways
he shall live: so that Adam and his sin was the cause of death, death was
made by him, for God is the God of life. It was the sin of Nineveh that made
God to threaten destruction to Nineveh within forty days; but when, as it is
in the third of Jonah and the eighth, they returned by repentance from their
evil ways, God showed mercy and they were not destroyed. Adam he forsook God
of himself, and so he brought death to himself: So long as he showed his
obedience unto God, the other Creatures were obedient unto him, there was no
enmity between him and the other Creatures; in time of obedience he was not in
danger of death: God breathed into Adam life, Adam brought death. The Prophet
in the 104. Psalm 29. says, If thou take away their breath, they return to
their dust; so that life is Gods, but dust is their own, ground and they have
their moisture, and when that moisture is dried up and taken away it turns to
dust; ex argilla fabricavit hominem Deus: Job in his tenth chapter and ninth
verse says to God, Remember that thou have made me as the clay, and will thou
bring me to dust again: for if the moisture of the grace of God be taken away,
what are we but dust. The Heavens send down the dew from above to moisten the
Earth, Isaiah 45. 8. It is the spirit of God that gives the moisture to
belief, John 7. 39. If that be taken away we are but dust. Thus far of it as
a Sentence.

A Law.
Now of this as of a Law: To dust shall thou return.
First touching the certainty of it in these words, to dust thou shall return;
of the uncertainty when, donec, until. There are those that escape the first
part of this punishment of Adam, that live not in the sweat of their face, qui
non vivunt ex labor sudoris, there are those that live at ease and yet fare
daintily, that have abundance and take no pains, that lie upon their Beds as
the door turns upon his hinges, Proverbs 26. 14. But though they escape that
part of the Sentence, this part takes hold of all, for all must die; this is
universal this is certain Statutum est, it is a Statute and a Law that all
must die, from the first to the last Adam, the fifth to the Romans the
fifteenth. David himself says of himself in regard of mortality of the body,
Psalm the twenty second and the sixth, I am a worm and not a man. We have
comfort in Jesus Christ to live for ever: this was it that Jesus said, that
John should not die, the twenty first of John and the twenty third, and by him
we look for the resurection of the body. This it was that made Job, in his
nineteenth chapter and twenty sixth verse, to say That though after my skin
worms destroy this body, yet shall I see God in my flesh. A universal Law.
Touching the extent of this, that it is universal to all to die, it is plain
not to be denied; for as it is in the eighty ninth Psame and the forty eighth
verse: What man lives and shall not see death? shall he deliver his soul from
the grave? Though God has said to Kings and Princes and Judges of the earth,
ye are Gods and Children of the Almighty, yet ye shall die as men and fall
like others, Psalm the eighty second and the seventh, laquei mortis, the
snares of death compass about the Godly; their body goes to the grave, but
their soul returns to rest, Psalm the one hundred sixth and the seventh
verse; and as it is in the second of the Preacher and the sixteenth, The wise
man dies as well as the fool: Look what sentence is given upon man, falls upon
the rest of the Creatures, for man is the great Count-palatine of the world,
and the chief mover in the Sphere; as he moves all are moved, and the
Elements, and Birds, and Beasts were subject to Man's change; his disobedience
made all disobedient and out of order; yea as the Wiseman says in the
nineteenth of Ecclesiast. and the fifth All the living know assuredly they
shall die. So much for the certainty to all.

Uncertainty.
Donec until.
Now of the uncertainty of the time, donec until, which is very uncertain.
Isaac though he were old and near his death, yet in the twenty seventh of
Genesis and the second he said, senex sum and diem mortis nescio, I am now old
and know not the day of my death. The men of this world have their Portion in
this life: there are the gates of death, as David speaks, and laquei mortis,
the snares of death. This time cannot be discerned, it is nighest us when we
think our selves most secure: For when the rich man had laid up store for many
years, and said to his soul take thou thy rest, even then came it, hac nocte,
this night thou shall die. Death is pronounced upon all, but a flaming fire and
vengeance belongs only to the ungodly, the second to the Thessalonians, the
first chapter and the eighth and ninth verses.

Mercy in death
Now touching the mittigation of this death in this sentence of death; for as
the Wiseman speaks in the seventh chapter and the seventeenth verse The
vengeance of the wicked is fire and (...); this bitterness must be alayed; for
as Bernard says, non est crux sine Christo, non est punctio sine unctione,
there is no cross without comfort, no punishment without ointment. The fear of
death.
Christ delivers them from the fear of death (that is Gods anger) that all
their life were subject to bondage, the second to the Hebrews and the
fifteenth: The hope of life.
so then the fear of death must be alayed with the hope of life. For though the
wicked be cast off for his malice, yet the righteous has hope in his death;
the fourteenth of the Proverbs and the thirty second. This is joy to us even in
death, that Christ will change this vile body, that it may be fashioned like
his glorious body, the third to the Philipians and the twenty first, and
according to the fourteenth of the Revelations and the thirteenth, their hope
is with a blessing; beati mortui qui in domino moriuntur, blessed are the dead
which die in the Lord, for they rest from their labors. Now in the very
words of the Sentence are implied two sorts of this delay: Donec implies an
end of labor.
Donec implies that they shall labor until; then until implies no
eternity: there is a consummation of labor: there is end of labor and an
assurance of rest, the blessed rest from their labors: tempus est refrigerii,
there is a time of refreshing, the third of the Acts and the nineteenth. They
that live in ease are weary of it: Solomon, in the first of the Kings the
eleventh chapter and the fourth verse, died in his age. Abraham, in the twenty
fifth of Genesis and the eighth, yielded the spirit and died a good age; Death
is a resting from Labor and from sin.
and death is not only a resting from labor, but from sin also. Paul, in the
seventh to the Romans and the twenty fourth, desires to be delivered from the
body of sin, which he calls the body of death. The holy Fathers on that
place; but this difference, that the Martyrs desire to die that they might not
sin, the Malefactors because they have sinned.

A delaying of the punishment.
The other part of the delay is the chiefest, which is the consideration, that
there is an exemption of death from the best part of man a qualifying of the
punishment; A bodily punishment.
for the soul and body both offended, but the body only is punished; the soul
man's better part is free, that is not touched. He says not here thou shall die
the death, but thou shall return to dust; for as it is in the third of the
Preacher and the twentieth, all (...) of the dust and all shall return to dust:
It is the body only that returns to dust, but the soul returns to God that
gave it. Man's heavenly part shall be free from this sentence: The Soul
immortal.
the head of man, his soul, which is nearest God shall be safe, though his heel
be bruised: The earthly part shall return to that it was, but the heavenly
(...) still the immortality. If Christ be in us, the body is dead, because of
sin; but the spirit is life for righteousness sake, the eighth of the Romans
and the tenth. This then gives comfort in death, that though the body die the
soul shall live for ever: This gave comfort to Adam that he had thus well
escaped, Hevah the Mother of the living.
that in the very next verse he calls his Wife with joy Hevah, which is the
Mother not of the dead but of the living, for Hevah is matter viventium. In the
twentieth of Luke the thirty seventh and thirty eighth verses, The Lord is Deus
viventium.
The Lord is called the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob; yet is he not
the God of the dead but of the living, for all live unto him: yet then the
Patriarchs were dead; but though the Grave had their body, God had their soul:
the Patriarchs died, their soul lives, the third of Exodus the sixth, to be
compared with the former place; for after death they were not dead, but removed
to another state of life. God will bring his again from the depth of the Sea,
Psalm the sixty eight and the twenty second, The first death
so the godly shall suffer the first death; Revelations the twenty first and the
eighth, expounds that place: But the wicked and the accursed shall have their
part in the Lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second
death: The second death.
the first death is the death of all, the first death only is the death of
Saints, but the second death is the death of sinners. David's soul is delivered
from the sword, Psalm the twenty second and the twenty first; but death
seedeth (...) upon the wicked as sheep feed upon a Common; and as their life
was without repentance, so their death shall be without end: the godly wish for
death to rest from their labors the wicked wish for death that live in
torment, which is great, Revelations 9. 6. The gates of death are mentioned in
the Psalms; and in the seventh of the Proverbs and the twenty seventh;
Penetralia mortis, the Chambers of death. The wicked live not only in the
Gates, in the Courts, in the Chambers of death, but even in the Dungeon of
death, in the twenty third Psalm and the fourth verse, and in the seventh of
the Romans the twenty fourth, are to be delayed: in the one is mention of umbra
mortis, in the other corpus mortis; they are to be delayed, with the 9. of
Mark, the 1. where it is said, that some there are that shall not taste of
death, till they have seen the Kingdom of God come with power: So that the
first death takes hold of the gody, but the second death touches them not; For
they that be faithful unto death, shall be crowned with a crown of life,
Revel. 2. 10. and in the 11. verse, the godly that overcome shall not be hurt
of the second death: Isaiah 26. 19. Death natural and eternal.
they are subject to the natural death, but free from the eternal death: This
is their comfort in the first death, to have deliverie from the second death,
Resurrection.
By the resurrection of the dead to life is a second return; for by the first
return the body returns from dust to dust, but the second is from dust to
glory, Return.
which is a return not of the soul, but of the body also; according to that of
Job, This body of flesh shall be covered with immortality: and according to
that of Hosea, the 13. Chapter and the 14. verse; The godly shall be redeemed
from the power of the grave and death: and according to that place of the
Prophecy, Christ will be the death of death it self; but most plain of all, is
that of the 1. of the Revelations the 18. spoken of Christ, That he is alive
but was dead, but now he is alive for evermore; and he has the keys of hell
and of death: This then does alay and qualify the bitterness of this sentence.
The use hereof is diverse to learn.
Hence now may we gather use to our selves in these five things: 1. Humility
The first is though it be bitter yet it is wholesome: the first use is taken out
of pulvis es. Learn hence unde es from whence thou art; thou art but of a clod,
be not proud; thou treadest upon that thou art made, let that put thee in mind
of humility; boast not of thy honor, for thy honor is in the dust. There is
nothing in the grave whither thou go, Preacher 9. 11. Quid ergo attollis
cervicem in pulverem reversuram? this is a means to learn humility, learn of
your selves what you are and then be humble. Austin says that the time will
come to give an account to God of thy doings; remember thy own frailty and be
not proud, for God knows whereof we be made, he remembers we are but dust,
Psalm. 103. 14.

2. To regard things of this life as dust.
The second use is out of pulvis in pulverem, dust to dust. We must remember
whither we are to go: we are now dust, but sub aliena forma in the likeness of
flesh, but we shall be dust in the likeness of dust it self; our flesh of dust
shall be turned into dust: and according to that of the 14. of the 11. Thy
pomp and pleasure is brought down to the grave, the worms shall cover thee:
then with Job. 17. 14. (...) may say to corruption, thou art my Father, and
to the worm, thou art my Mother and Sister; and as it is in the 26. of Isaiah
and the 19. the dust must be our dwelling: joy not then in the joys of this
world which are but dust and corruptible; they are as Austin says gaudia
privanda; but sorrow for gaudia aeterna privanda, sorrow lest (...) be deprived
of eternal joys.

3. Our life unconstant, or death uncertain.
The third use for instruction is out of (...), (...) The state of our life is
always in motion and in revolving like a Ship a sailing. Job, in his 14.
chapter and 14. verse, called the resurrection after death a changing, it is
like a shadow, it is still turning and returning; Paul says in the thirteenth
to the Hebrews the fourteenth verse, We have here no continuing City, but we
look hereafter for one, our life is unconstant, our death uncertain, always
changing: this the inconstancy of man's life is the motive to good, as the
other is the retentive from evil. Paul says, he dies daily, from sin; here
on the earth we must not seek for the hill of certain repose, but look in
heaven for a perpetual City. The Tents and Tabernacle are taken away,
therefore (with Abraham) We must look for a City having a foundation, whose
builder and maker is God, the eleventh of the Hebrews, and the tenth verse.

4. A time to return.
The fourth use is out of donec reverteris, until thou return, a time of
returning, where we must learn to return by repentance unto God, before we
return to dust, that so we may return again from dust (...) God, let men
be always ready, spend not thy days with the wicked that go suddenly down
to the grave, the twenty first of Job and the thirteenth; the forty fifth of I
saiah and the eighth, And as they live so they die like beasts, the third of
the Preacher and the ninteenth.

5. We must return to God.
The fifth and last is, that we must return to God; For shall the dust give
thanks unto thee, the thirtieth I salme and the ninth verse: The godly shall be
delivered out of temptation, though the unjust be reserved to judgment, the
second of Peter the second and the ninth. We must return to God per
poenitentiam. Let it not be thought incredible that God should raise again the
dead, the twenty sixth of the Acts and the eighth, the first of Jea. and the
eighth. So a man shall return to God very well, by due consideration of these
things; from the first, pulvis es thou art dust; to return to God by humility;
by the second, not to joy in this world but in God; by the third, to rest our
turning and returning in God; and by the fourth, to comfort our selves, that
out of the grave we shall rise to live with God. Abraham adds ashes to dust.
But what made Abraham to add ashes to dust, the eighteenth of this Book and the
twenty seventh, he says I am O Lord but dust and ashes. The Fathers upon this
place say that dust is our beginning, and if we do not obey God, by fire we
shall be turned into ashes, ashes will be our ending: We are all naturally
dust, and we are all by desert also but ashes: and although (by no means) you
cannot avoid to be dust, yet by an upright life you may avoid to be ashes:
though we cannot but incur the first death, let not the second death take
hold of us: Though the grave enclose us, let not hell swallow us. All we eat,
all that we care for in this world is but for dust, and for that will turn to
dust. If we be nothing but dust, if we hope for nothing but dust, if we care
for nothing but dust, we shall be swallowed up in dust. Let us remember we are
clay, but God is the Potter, Isaiah 64. 8. Above all regard thy soul.
Above all regard thy soul, then shall thy body of dust return to dust, and from
dust shall return again to God that made it, and thee, thou; and thy body shall
return to glory.

Vocavit autem Adam nomen uxoris suae Chavvam: eo quod ipsa matter sit omnium
hominum viventium. Gen 3. 20.

December 10. 1598.
ADam here calls his Wife by a new name, not by the former name in the 23. of
the former, which was Woman. The mystery of this name compared with the former
Sentence is great; she is called here Hevah, she has no name of dejection and
despair, but of life and of comfort: Hereby is to be gathered, that
notwistanding the sin committed and sentence pronounced, yet there was in
Adam some matter of hope, for he believed the promise made in the 15. verse
before, that the seed of the Woman should break the Serpents head: This was as
it is in the (...) to the Corinthians 2. 16. The savor of life unto life.
Abraham believed in Gods promise, the 15. of this book the 6. by this Scripture
Adam left a Monument of his belief, as in the other, Abraham left a Monument
of his faith. The seed of Abram in his age was promised to be, in the 5. verse
of that chapter, as the stars of heaven. Abraham desired to see the day of
Christ, and he saw it by faith.

Herein we will consider these two things, first the imposition of a name, and
then of this name. For the first, the imposing of names is an argument of
superiority and power: in the 19. of the former chapter it is showed, in the
naming of all the Creatures by man, which names were properly given by him. In
the thirty fifth chapter and the eighteenth verse, Jacobs Wife before her death
called her sons name Ben-oni, but his Father changed that name and called him
Benjamin, from the son of sorrow to the son of (...). Jacob was after
called Israel, the tenth of the same chapter: the name of Sarai was turned to
Sarah, the seventeenth of Genesis and the fifteenth verse, as of Jacob by the
Angel into Israel, the two and thirtith chapter and the twenty eighth verse:
and out of these new names is taken matter of great mystery; And Adam before
called her Ishah, woman, as another from man, but here he changes that to
Hevah, which is a name of life to others. Now then touching the imposition of
this name, wherein we will consider the signification of this name, and then
the quality thereof. In the seventh of the former chapter, God (...) into man
the breath of life, and man was a living soul, and here her name is a name of
life; now life is two fold, either for a time, or for ever; she is a mother of
life, in regard of this life, for that her birth is not of an abortive it is a
blessedness, production and education are in regard of this life, that of the
twenty ninth chapter and one and twentieth verse is, that of this life my term
is ended. Zathaca, this name belongs to all females, in respect of this life,
for all bring forth life, though to die. It only this life were here regarded,
the ancient Fathers that came from her, though they lived long, yet they died
and have long layn dead, and in regard of the length of their death, she might
have been called the mother of the dead, therefore this name is understood of
the other life which is eternal, for after death they had hope of another
life. David in the twenty seventh Psalm and the thirteenth verse, Should have
sainted but that he believed to see the goodness of God in the land of the
living. And in the hundred forty second Psalm and the fifth verse, he had his
portion and hope in the land of the living. God is the God not of the dead but
of the living, the two and twentieth of Matthew and the thirty second verse.

Now where there is a Commandment or Promise of life, there is meant eternal
life: He that does the Commandments shall live, not a mortal but an
immortal life, the Covenant of life to the Priests and People in the
Leviticall law is that life: That was it that made Job in his ninteenth chapter
and twenty fifth verse, to assure himself that his Redeemer lived, and so
should he; but most plainly speaks Christ himself, the eleventh of John and
the twenty fifth verse, of himself; that he is life, and he that believes
in him though he mere dead yet shall he live, and in the very nature of the
word it self is a double being, the one temporal, the other permanent, which
is expressed in the original by difference of one letter, Hagab and Havah, all
have the common life, but there are those that are strangers from the life of
God, the fourth of the Ephesians and the eighteenth verse, and there are those
to whom God is life and length of days, the thirtith of Deuteronomie and the
twentieth verse, so that not by consequence, but by the very essence of this
name is meant life eternal; God has his book where he writes the living,
the thirty second chapter of Exodus and the thirty second verse, there is a
book of life, the sixty ninth Psalm and the twenty ninth verse. God promises
to give to him that overcommeth, to eat of the Tree of Life, the second of the
Revelations and the seventh verse, and the ancient Fathers upon that place, non
dedit corollam, sed coronam vitae, he gave a crown of life, which is life for
ever.

There is a mystery also in the quality of the name, which is comprehended in
the word it self, which is a bringing of good news and glad tidings; as are
cold waters to comfort the thirsty, so is good news from a far Country, the
twenty fifth chapter of the Proverbs and the twenty fifth verse; When Jacob
heard that Joseph his son was yet alive, in a far and strange Country, and
that they had brought him Chariots, these tidings revived Jacob that was in
age, the forty fifth chapter and the twenty seventh verse; this name of life
is even as a name of joyful tidings; If in matters of this life it be so,
then much more in things spiritual, after we have sinned and deserved
punishment, then absolution and remission is a joying of a man's heart, and
there is joy in this name, that word is life, and vita est ex verbo, man at the
first was made a living soul, the seventh of the former chapter. In the sixth
of Saint John's Gospel the sixty third verse, The words Christ spoke are spirit
and life, and again in the sixty eighth verse of the same chapter, Peter says
to him, thou have the words of eternal life; It is observed by the Greek
Fathers that the seventy Interpreters did put down Hevah under the same letter
Evangelium, which is good tidings, this word is the abstract of the eternal
word. In the first to the Corinthians, the fifteenth chapter and the forty
fifth verse, the first man Adam was a living soul, the last Adam was a
quickening Spirit, a living Soul is in it self, a quickening Spirit is unto
others, in the word was life, the first of Saint John's Gospel and the fourth
verse, and in the first Epistle of Saint John the first chapter and the first
verse, Christ was the word of life, and life it self, verbum vitae, and vita,
hence we receive Grace here and hereafter: And herein is the manifestation of
the Trinity given in this very name of Evah. The mystery of salvation was
known to Adam before he gave the name; God has given to his son power over
all flesh, that he should give eternal life to all them that believe in him,
the seventeenth of Saint John and the first verse. The Promise of Christ was in
this, that the seed of the woman should break the Serpents head, not the
seed of man, but of woman, therefore he still keeps his own name, but
changes her name from (...) to Evah, saying with himself I am Adam still,
from me is nothing but earth, but from the Promise made by God to the woman
he gives her the name of Hevah, and from Hevah he gives life to the end of
the world; for the Fathers gather out of the first of the Corinthians, the
fifteenth chapter and the one and twentieth verse, That by Adam came death, he
is pater morientium, but by the Promise of Christ in this name, she is matter
viventium, the mother of the living; for by Christ we live, and he is
therefurrection of the dead; the ancient writers observe that Adam was (...),
and in pulverem reversurus, he was dust and to dust he should return, that
is, of his own nature, but by Hevah is promise of Grace, and though we, as by
nature, die with Adam, yet God will raise (...) up by Jesus Christ, the second
to the Corinthians, the fourth chapter and the thirteenth verse, It is he that
rayseth the needy out of the dust, according to the hundred and thirteenth
Psalm and the seventh verse, this is it that made Paul, the second to the
Galathians and the twentieth verse, to say, That I live, yet not I but Christ
that lives in me; and in that I now live in the flesh, vivo in fide fiilii
viri, the just lives by faith, and shall live the life of Grace; she is here
then called the mother of that life; set this verse aside we have no memory
that the promise before made was of eternal life, hence then is a fountain of
life, which was by transgression the original of death, for she transgressed
and thereby came death, but God brings light out of darkness, and life out of
death: But what is faith without (...), even nothing; for faith works by
charity, the fist to the Galathians and the sixth verse, then as from hence
there is faith to be taken, so out of this name is a work of charity to
comfort us and Eve her self that was dejected and miserably plunged in sorrow
by seeing she had cast down her self and all mankind by her sin, making
her, by her new name, partaker of Gods love and charity, this Charity is not
contained in Eve alone, but continued in her posteri ie unto the end of the
world: Abraham had great comfort, the twelfth chapter and the third verse, that
omnes gentes, all the Nations of the earth in him should be blessed, the
eighteenth of the same chapter and the eighteenth verse, and the two and
twentieth chap er and the eighteenth verse, but this promise of all blessedness
was that in her, omnes viventes, all living should be blessed; for all that
have been, all that are, and all that shall be, are partakers of this
promise, for it reaches from Eve to the end of the world; In the first name
Isha, she is the mother of nature of them that live and then die, but by this
name she is the mother of Grace of them, that though they are dead yet shall
live for ever: by the one the mother of mankind; by the other of the Church.
Job in his tenth chapter and twelfth verse says, vitam and gratiam tribuisti
mihi, which life is the life of God eternally: Therefore Adam by this name did
comfort himself, his wife, and all others in their miseries, in that we must
be not only the seed of nature by her first name, but the seed of Eve, of
Grace, of the Promise, and of Hope, and so children of the Church, of the holy
seed, to obtain the life of God eternal; And lastly, according to that of the
second of Malachy, We shall be partakers of the Covenant of Peace and Life.

Fecitque Jehova Deus Adamo and uxori ejus tunicas pelliceas, quibus vestivit
eos. Genesis 3. 21.

Dec. 7. 1598.
THIS verse is, as it were, the opening of Gods warehouse, and giving thence his
liverie and aparrell, wherein is mercy and favor even in judgment, for after
the Sentence God promises life, and here gives aparrell, so that as Abacuck
speaks, this commends Gods mercy in his anger; as there was a mercy
precedent in the Promise, so here is a mercy subsequent in this provision, and
God mingleth mercy with judgment, and joyneth Provision with punishment,
according to that of the seventy eighth Psalm and the twenty ninth verse, this
favor God vouchsafes, before he ends his Sentence he gives hope of life
everlasting, and here adds aparrell as the sign of his favor, for all the
care of this world is for food and the back, but seek the kingdom of God, and
these things shall be ministered unto you, the sixth of Matthew and the three
and thirtith verse.

Five parts of this verse.
This verse does offer in it self five parts, as they lie in order: The first is
the persons of Adam and his Wife: The second is that God made: The third is
aparrel: The fourth is of Skins: The fifth is, that therewith they were arrayed.
Out of each of these there is a double consideration of good use.

To begin then in order: 1.
Out of the persons of Adam and Eve we learn, that though they were sinners yet
God gave them his providence and provision: The Sun shines on the good and on
the bad, the rain falls on the just and the unjust, the fifth of Maithew and
the forty fifth, he is kind nnto the unkind, in the sixth of Luke and the
thirty fifth; If God then give not over the wicked, much more he will not leave
the faithful.

Secondly, he extends his providence not only to sinners but even to the
bodies of sinners, which is showed in his providence before for the belly, and
here for the back; both these are expressed in the tenth of Deuteronomy and the
eighteenth: Food and raiment is all we should desire in this world, the first
to Timothy the sixth and the eighth; yea Gods providence goes further than for
the belly and back, for by it all the hairs of the head are numbered, the tenth
of Matthew and the thirtieth; his providence watches over the soul and the
body, over the wicked; then much more the good.

2. God made
The second point is God made: he arraied the Heavens with stars and the Earth
with grass, and here he arraied Man with skins: Here let us not search into the
curiosity of the Jews how God made them and what skins they were. It is said
in the holy Scriptures, that God builded an house, it is not meant that he was
a Carpenter, and here it is to be understood not that God was their Tailor, but
that God gave them power to kill beasts, and capacity to make and shape
apparel; he was not the Workman himself. In the seventh verse before they
made themselves Breeches of figge-leaves to cover their nakedness; they were
for no use nor continuance, they were but vain: God must teach them and direct
them their clothing; Man's reason without God has a show of wisdom, but is
without understanding, the second to the Colossians and the twenty third. In
the first of Samaell 15. 15. Saul in his own conceit thought he had done well,
to save the best of the Sheep and Oxen. That apparel that Adam made was cold
and could not hold.

3. Coats.
The third is Clothes or Coats; in the original tongue it is expressed that
which is to cover and to defend. Before Adam in Paradise had a care to have a
Cover, ad honestatem, for shame: there is a Commandment against the uncovering
of shame, in the eighteenth of Leviticus and the sixth: which Paul in the first
to the Corinthians the twelfth chapter and the twenty third verse calls our
uncomely parts. Sem and Japhet will cover shame, though wicked Cham will
discover it. The brutish Savages respect not their nakedness: The Sect of the
Cynicks and the Adamites were shameless of their shame: in the sixth of the
Revelations shame must not be seen. Adam by the light only of reason covered
his shame, that so this covering might be Velam verecundiae, a Vail of shame
fastness. We must beware that we change not our clothing in vexillum superbiae,
to be the standard of pride: at the first it was ordained for a covering for
lust, we must not then make it a provocation for (...) it is made by God to
suppress lust, we must not then make it as a procurer of sensuality: Such is
the attire of an enticing Woman, in the seventh of the Proverbs and the nineth.
St. Jerome upon this place, says, that it is opposite unto this use or first
institution of apparel to make it nidum luxuriae, a nest for lasciviousness.
The second reason why God made them apparel, was for defense both of the cold
of Winter and the heat of Summer, to save them from the weather. St. Paul, in
the second to the Corinthians the eleventh chapter and the twenty seventh
verse, among other miseries rekoneth cold and nakedness; and as it is in the
fifth of the Lamentations and the tenth, the Prophet speaks heat makes the
skin black as an oven, so these clothes defended the skin from the offense of
all weather; For in nature every one nourishes and cherishes his own flesh,
the fifth to the Ephesians and the twenty nineth; he nourishes his belly with
meat and cherishes his back with clothes. We do account our selves debtors to
the flesh; the eighth to the Romans and the twelfth, These two are meant by
things needful for the body, the second of St. James Epistle and the
sixteenth; but as it is in the thirteenth of the Romans and the fourteenth; Put
you on the Lord Jesus, and take no thought for the flesh; facere and non
perficere, were vain to make a Creature and not to preserv it, God will not:
but here we must learn to take heed that we make it a defense for necessity,
and not an offense for superfluity, the first of James and the twenty first.

4. Of Skins.
The fourth point is, that this apparel was made of skins: Herein are two
things to be learned; first that they were skins of beasts, and then that the
beasts were destroyed: the beast was made to be destroyed, but man was to be
regarded: they must die that man may be preserved from death; God has greater
regard of us than of all the beasts; we are of more value than many Sparrowes,
the tenth of Matthew and the thirty first: he is allowed here to kill beasts
for his apparel, and after to make their Tents of skins: God has given us
more understanding than the beasts, and more wisdom than the fowls of
Heaven, the thirty fifth of Job and the eleventh The second thing is the
quality of the apparel, which is the first that God gave to Man, which they
wear for his liverie; they are coverings of great frugality; they are unlike
unto ours which are for show and not for durance. It had been as easy for God
to have made them of Silk and of Wool, But God regarded not the gorgeous show.
This simplicity of apparel confounds the multiplicity of apparel in these
days, which they may well call a world of apparel: The gorgeous attire of
the daughters of Zion, the third of Isaiah and the sixteenth, shall be altered
to beggerie, so that they shall discover their secret parts. Here apparel was
made for the body, but we make apparel for apparel, vail upon vail: the
frugality confounds the riotousness and madness of apparel, and this
simplicity our sumptuosness: we are ashamed of Adams attire, but Adam would be
ashamed of us and our prodigality. This apparel was without pride: Christ
commands us not to care for our body, what to eat or to put on, in the sixth
of Matthew and the twenty fifth; the body is better than raiment, but now men's
apparel is much more worth than the body; for as far as earth is from
heaven, so far do we differ in apparel from the ancient world: and now men
consume their days in vanity, as it is in the 78. Psalm and the 33; before
plainness was sufficient, but now cutting and imbroiderie and needle work on
both sides, nothing will suffice: Esau for his belly sold his birthright, in
the twelfth of the Hebrews and the sixteenth: Achan for a little costly
apparel lost his soul, in the seventh of Joshua the twenty first, and with
his (...) he went to Hell: it was a goodly Babylonish garment: the simplicity
of apparel was from Paradise, but the pride of apparel seems by that place to
be from Babylon. The sumptuousness of apparel leads men into sundry
tentations, the first to Timothy, the sixth and the eight verse; this is it
that makes men to be lovers of themselves, as it is in the second to Timothy,
the third chapter; It draws men to extortion, but say rich apparel be worn
without extortion or oppression or ill means, yet it busieth the mind with
vain thoughts, and hinders charitable works; for often that too is bestowed
upon vanity, which might better be bestowed in charity.

5. Adam was content.
The fifth point and last is, Adam looked not scornfully upon his apparel, but
was content with it, which few of his posterity are; for still, though it be
never so well, yet one way or other they still mislike: that is the first.
Secondly, We must think well of such as wear such simple skins, and not
account vilie of them for having such apparel: For those that went up and down
in Sheeps skins and Goats skins, were such quibus non dignus erat mundus, of
whom the world was not worthy, the eleventh to the Hebrews the thirty seventh:
But he, in the sixteenth of St. Luke, the tenth verse, that fared daintily,
that was elothed in purple and fine linnnen every day, for all this he was not
worthy of the world. Solomon in his Canticles says, That the Kings daughter is
beautiful within, God respects the inward heart more than the outward show,
the glory of apparel of gold, or such like; But if the hid man of the heart be
incorrupt, and a spirit of humility before God, is a thing much more set by,
the first of Peter the third chapter and the fourth verse. Now we desire to be
like golden sepulchers; if the out side be gorgeous we care not how foul and
filthy the inside is: well therefore say the Fathers, that nimia cura corporis
ducit incuriam animae; too much care of the body causes the carelessness of
the soul. Secondly, They came hereby into Gods favor, by wearing his liverie
they became his servants, and so of his household: They are of the Princes
house, to whom he gives bread and clothing, the third of Esaias and the sixth
verse; If they were Gods servants, then God was their Master, and so it is
said, the sixth to the Ephesians the ninth, that the Master of us all is in
Heaven.

Out of these five clauses, for things corporal, we learn that out devising,
without Gods making, cannot stand, but is vain; that God regards us more than
all the beasts he had made; he preserves our life, though by their death;
hence we may learn frugalitie, and to fly vanity; we may learn contentment and
hate of pride; hence we may learn that apparel was first instituted to cover
lust, not to provoke it.

Spiritual use.
And further than these literal points we may gather not only a bodily use, but
also a spiritual instruction: He might have taken the hair of the Cammel, or
the wool of the Sheep, but the covering him with skins does teach him
humility to exalt him to glory; hence then may we gather matter of repentance
and of humility; hereby he has to deject him in four regards, the first is,
That by sin he lay open, in that he was after thus covered, it put him in
mind of his sin, though it was seemly to cover his shame; for to cover a
star or the Sun is a blemish to either; a Rose or a Lilie are best
uncovered in their proper natures: and so Adams nakedness in his innocence was
best without apparel, The just man shall shine like the Sun in the Kingdom
of his father, the thirteenth of Matthew the forty third verse. The second
regard out of this covering or clothing is, That the birds are covered with
their own feathers, the beasts with their hair and wool, but man must die for
nakedness, unless he has his clothing from others. Thirdly, Go to the
brute beasts, and wear their skins, and by looking on them learn that if thou
had been obedient, thou had not need of such clothing; and repeat that of
the forty ninth Psalm the twentieth verse, Man was in honor and understood it
not, and now he is become like beasts that perish. Lastly, From the beasts
being slain, To put him in mind that though he may preserve his body for a
while, yet in the end in pulverem reverteris? though these must die to feed and
cloth thee, yet in the end thou must die thy self. These penitential
meditations may be taken from this model of apparel.

The nakedness of the soul.
Now touching the nakedness of the soul, and the covering thereof spiritually,
hereto may be applied that of the sixteenth of Ezekiel the seventh verse,
Jerusalem was naked and barren, but thou have got thee excellent garments; we
are wretched, poor, and naked, the third of the Revelations the seventeenth
verse, then this nakedness, which is of the soul it must be covered; it is
that whereto that of the sixteenth of the Revelations the fifteenth verse, has
relation, Blessed is he that keeps his garments, lest he walk naked and men
see his filthiness: And God through his mercy covers our sin; and it must
be covered with a covering of skin; the brutish affection must be covered
with moral virtues; the brutish affection of anger of the Lion must be covered
with patience; the brutish affection of (...) of the Goat must be clothed with
chastity; the pride, the skin of the Lamb of God, which was the (...) of the
Serpent with the humility of the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world,
the thirteenth of the Revelations the eighth verse, must be thy clothing, and
we put on Christ by Baptism, the third to the Galathians the twenty seventh;
Jacob was clothed with skins which did represent this: If then we go to the
soul, it is to be clothed analogically with the body, the nakednesie thereof
is to be clothed by faith with Christ Jesus the Lamb of God.

Et dixit Jehova Deus, Ecce, homo estne sicut unus ex nobis, cognoscendo bonum
and malum? nunc igitur videndum ne extendens manum suam accipiat etiam de
fructu arboris vitae, ut comedat victurus in seculum. Genesis 3. 22.

Januar. 14. 1598.
IN the former verses of the Sentence I told you their several uses, and that in
the last of them was matter for penitential meditation. The execution of the
Sentence I told you was laid in these three last verses. This verse contains
a deliberation, or a resolution of what God should do, and it is, as it were,
the writ for execution. In the two next verses is contained the execution it
self. God hereby seems so respective of them, that he is so unwilling to
execute upon them, yet is he careful of his truth; for he said at the first
restraint, in the seventeenth verse of the former chapter, Thou shall die the
death if thou eat the forbidden fruit; and that God has said must be
performed, for his words are not bruta fulmina: and therefore that all may
concur, in his Sentence was imposed on him a painful life; and that it may be
more painful he is here deprived of Paradise, and likewise the corruption of
life was appointed him, which in him and his posterite we see daily verefied,
that dust returns to dust; and here it is made more manifest by the taking
away of the tree of life.

This verse divides it self into two general parts, the one in these words,
Behold, the Man is become as one of us, to know good and evil; the other in
that which remains.

For the first part, I agree fully with the opinion of the ancient fathers,
which are the most wise and the most learned, that these words, the man is
become as one of us, etc. is no Ironie, but as one of them says very well est
vox magni fragoris, it is a voice of great thunder, wherein is written the
misery that Adam is in; as Christ at his death had a superscription whereby was
expressed, wherefore he suff red, Jesus Nazarenus Rex Judeorum; or as
Malefactors have written in Papers on their heads, wherefore they are punished:
So these words are a publishing, wherefore they are thus used, because they
would become as God, knowing good and evil, that they and others may know the
cause of their fall, that as it is in the twenty ninth of Deuteronomie the
twenty fourth verse If any shall ask, wherefore has the Lord done thus? They
shall answer, because they have broken the (...) of the Lord their God, because
they went and served other Gods and worshipped them; even Gods which they knew
not: And here because Adam obeyed the Serpent whom he knew not and disobeyed
God whom he knew; because he would be as God and know good and evil, he tasted
the deserved punishment of Gods wrath.

The form of the words.
Now for the matter contained herein, the ancient Fathers do gather hence,
Matter of faith.
first matter of faith, quasi unus ex nobis, Adam is like one of us; hereby is
taken a certain apprehension of the Trinity, to refute the Jews, that God
speaks not as Princes do, and like Emperors, We charge you, It is our
pleasure, etc. that though he be one that speaks, yet he uses the plural
number: but this does resute them; for what Prince or Monarch says Like one of
us, to show the unity of Godhead and trinity of persons; he said not like unto
Angels, but like one of us: In which words he shows both a remembrance or
token of the unity and the Trinity, in the fourth of John the twenty third
verse, the person of the Father; in the twenty seventh verse there following
the person of the Son says, I am he: So that in one is the Godhead, in us is
the persons. So much of the character.

Ironie.
Secondly, It may seem God speaks this as an Ironie, in a scorning sort; for
surely it cannot be spoken directly, for he is not become like God that knows
all things, but rather like the brute beast without understanding; he is become
by his disobedience liker the Serpent that seduced him, than God that made him.
Sarcasmus.
Some take them as Ironicall, or which is more, as a Sarcasmus or biting speech,
Behold, they are as God, they would have a quaternity instead of a trinity,
they know both good and evil: in the first of the Kings the eighteenth and the
twenty seventh, Eliah mocketh the Priests of Baal, saying, Cry aloud, for he is
a God, it may be he sleeps, and must be awaked: surely this was a scoffing
speech: Hitherto apply the first to the Corinthians the twelfth chapter the
thirty first verse. Solomon, in the first of his Proverbs the twenty second
verse, says the Scorner takes pleasure in scorning; so does not God: yet in
the twenty sixth verse of the same chapter, Because you have despised my
counsel and not regarded my correction, I will laugh at your destruction, and
mock when your fear comes: and yet surely this speech is not altogether
without an Ironie, though it be not altogether Ironicall, for according to that
of the Proverbs before cited, God scorneth them that scorn and despise him:
but it is unusual, and not to be showed in any one part of the Scriptures, that
God uses scorning to the penitent sinner, though to the obstinate, whom
neither love of mercy nor fear of punishment can draw to repentance. So then
this speech is not a triumphing over them in misery, or a derision of their
simplicity, but rather a publishing or laying open of their sin by Ecce,
behold. Jacob, in the thirty second of Genesis the thirty second verse, though
he wrestled with the Angel and had a blessing, yet the sinew of Jacobs thigh
shrank. A speech of affection.
This speech of God here is with an affection, it is the speech of affection, an
unperfect speech without a period, it breaks off before it be full, like that
speech of our Savior Christ, the nineteenth of Luke the forty second verse,
Oh if thou had known, at the least in this thy day, those things which
belong unto thy peace, but now are they hid from thee; affection stays the
course of the speech, it is a speech of commiseration, ecce homo: pity
breaks off the period. In the nineteenth of John the fist verse, when Christ
was showed to the People crowned with a crown of thorns Pilate said, Ecce
homo, Behold the man: And Austin, upon that place, says they are words of
commiseration, and why are not the very same words here also? So much for the
character or form of the words.

The matter in them.
Now of the matter of the same. It was concupiscence, desire of honor, belief of
error, that they should be as God, that made them sin. The Serpent promised
them that they should not dye at all, and that they should be as Gods, eritis
sicut Dei: they heard the voice of the Devil and obeyed him. Now remember that
promise of the Devil is false; hereafter believe me and be not deluded by the
Devil: So that God gives them an audible word to ring in their ears in this,
and a lesson to continue in their heart for ever, that so he may say with David
Psalm 43. Deliver me O God from the (...) and wicked man; for he lies in wait
for blood, and lurketh for their lives, the first of the Proverbs the
eighteenth verse; and so detest him that mislead them from life to death, from
the sight of God to the heavy indignation of the Lord. This must work
compunction, to see the loss of Paradise and the separation from Gods
presence, and that through the illusion of Satan they had fallen from so great
blessedness to so great misery. So much shall suffice for the matter of the
publication of his fall.

The Divills promise.
The Serpent, as you remember in the chapter before, made them two promises, the
one eritis tanquam Dei, the other (...) mini: God here in his Sentence shows
that they have found the contrary of both; Falsified.
for he says Pulvis es and in pulvere^ (...), that is a bar to their
immortality; and in labor and (...) comedes (...) tuae: So they shall neither
be Gods nor immortal. The tree of life was the ordinary means to maintain him
in time of innocence; but here God deprives him of that means: he was placed
in Paradise, where was the tree of life, he is deprived both of the tree and of
Paradise it self, privatur loco and indumento: He must labor and clothe
himself, or (...) and die. The tree of life, as the ancient Fathers say well,
was symbolum or tessera vitae, a seal or token whereby life was warranted
them; for God gave them life, and not the tree of life; and they were
excommunicated from this seal and banished from this place of Paradise: Deus
est vita, God was their life and being severed from God, so they were severed
from life. Adams banishment.
This was the very first pattern of civil banishment. He would needs taste of the
tree which was to him the tree of death, and would not keep the Commandment
nor the Law of Paradise; wherein he was; and wheresoever one lives under a Law
and breaks the Law where he lives, deserves punishment: the reason why he
should be banished, lest he put forth his hand and take also of the tree of
life. And this we see to be the general desire of all men, that they are
willing to prolong their life even in misery: rather then he would die, he
would take of this tree and live in misery eternally; for says a Father well
Cupidiores homines vitae producendae, quam terminandae, men dote more upon the
prolonging, than upon ending their life: God saw that this desire was
inconvenient to live for ever: Christ himself died, but now being risen from
the dead, jam non moritur, mors illi ultra non dominabitur: the sixth to the
Romans the (...) verse, Christ has triumphed over death, but Adam, after his
fall, had lived, if he had had his own desire, in misery perpetual, an evil
eternal: Our labor and pain is but temporal, till thou return to dust, but
the Devils shall be perpetual: God turned the desire of Adam of evil eternal
to an evil temporal, with a donec. This also is another reason, why it is not
expedient that he should have his desire: God before has promised life in the
very promise of the seed of the Woman: If God have promised a better life by
another means than Adam desired, or the tree of life yielded, that is in his
Son our Savior to live a Heavenly life in eternity both in soul and body;
for he changes the terrestrial life of the body subject to pain and misery,
which he desired, to a heavenly life full of joy and endless glory: So that
in that God debarred him to put forth his hand to the tree of life, was mercy
even in judgment. St. Gregory upon this place says well, Materia est
misericordiae in providentia divina, God by his providence shows great mercy
even in Judgment; it was just that he should die; but if you consider it well
in this Judgment, here is not only a conjunction of mercy and justice, but
here mercy triumphs over justice; for though God depriveth us of this tree,
yet he planteth a better, the seed whereof gives a fruit better than of that,
that is, of eternal life: Zecharie, in his third chapter the eight verse,
tells you, that the branch of this tree is his servant: He is the green tree
spoken of in the twenty third of Luke the thirty first verse: And the right of
them that do his commandment is to be ingrafted in this tree of life,
Revelations 22. 14. and in the second of the same book, the seventh verse,
Christ is called, that tree of life in the Paradise of God.

Ne jam.
The ancient Fathers, out of ne jam, lest now he put forth his hand, do gather,
that though he were now debarred to put forth his hand and take of that tree of
life, yet God gives him comfort that yet hereafter he should not be debarred of
the putting out of his hand to take hold of the other tree of life Jesus
Christ. Man's pride.
God says here, that Man would be like one of us, such was his pride and
disobedience: Christ's humility.
to help that, the Son of God will be like one of us, such was his love and
humility. The Fathers upon the fiftieth of Esaias the sixth verse say, that
Christ was Vir doloris, he was smitten, scoffed, and spit upon like one of us:
He was tempted in all things (sin excepted) like one of us, the fourth to the
Hebrews the fifteenth verse; though he were not subject to our infirmities, yet
was he subject to our passions, he lived, he suffered, he dyed like one of us.
Ecce homo.
God says here of Adam in his judgment, Ecce homo; and (...) in Christ's
judgment says Ecce homo, behold the man: So that God became man like one of
us, to meet with this, that Adam would be like God: He suffered all misery
like one of us, And he himself bare our sins in his body on the tree, that we
being delivered from sin, might live in righteousness, the first Epistle of
Peter the second chapter the fourth verse, In a word, behold the Son of God
is become like one of us, that we may become like unto him, and has sound in
himself the trial of our infirmities. He, I said, is become like one of us,
according to that place in the 17. of John's Gospel 21. verse, which are Christ's
own words, that as I am in the Father and the Father in me, so you all may be
also one in us, and in the twenty fourth verse there following Christ says,
Father, I will that they whom thou have given me, be with me even where I am.
This then is here the separation of us from God, but by Christ we are reunited
into Christ, as he is into his Father: and hereby is a restitution to the place
where Christ is there shall we be. And to conclude we shall be restored to
life, to glory, to (...), to be indeed like to God, by incorporating us into
this tree of life, Whereby most great and precious promises are given unto us
that by them we should be partakers of the heavenly nature, and that we should
fly this earthly corruption, the second of Peter's Epistles the first chapter
and the fourth verse: And though the miseries of this life be great, yet
according to St. Paul's words, they are not to be compared to the joys of the
next life, which are eternal.

Emisit itaque eum Jehova Deus ex horto Hedenis, ad colendum terram illam ex
qua desumptus fuerat. Genesis 3. 23.

Januar. 21. 1598.
THat which was lest before as a broken speech and unperfect, is here supplied
and at large expressed; The execution of Adams Judgment.
for in these two are contained the execution of the former Precept: And in
these two are the two parts of the Execution; His sending out of Paradise
In this is the first part, the sending him out of Paradise: Four parts hereof.
and this very verse does offer in it self four several points to be handled,
First, The sending forth. Secondly, from Eden. Thirdly, Whither? To the Earth.
Fourthly, To what end? To till the Earth whence he was taken.

1. His sending.
First then touching the sending. Sending, as a motion from place to place, as
an ordinary moving, it is indifferent: The Angel, in the sixteenth of this
Book the eighth verse, asks Hagar from whence, and whither she goes? and
bids her returnback: So that we must come to the other part Whither; for the
sending is known to be good or evil, by knowing whether the place whereto they
are sent be good or evil: as to be sent with the Children of Israel out of
captivity is good, from bad to better: But when the place from whence is good,
and the place whither is bad, the sending from such a place to a worse is a
penal punishment, as here it was to Adam and Eve.

2. To the Earth.
Secondly then, They were sent to the Earth from Paradise. To live then in the
Earth, is the state of us all, yet we had no experience with Adam of this
blessed state of Paradise; but they had trial and experience of all the
pleasures of Paradise, so much more penal was it to them to be deprived of a
garden, of a garden of Gods own planting, full of all variety and contentment,
of a garden, the like whereof all the cunning and travail of man shall never
make, and to come from thence to a ground untilled, barren, and full of
thistles; whereof he that had lived before at ease must now be the tiller
himself, for it shall not be tilled nor dressed to his hand. God dealt not here
with Adam as he deals with the Children of Israel; He brings them from
capativity to a Land filled with Cities which they builded not, full of goods
which they brought not, of wells which they dug not, vineyards and olive
trees which they planted not, Deuteronomy. 6. 11. There is a great difference from the
sending them to a land so dressed and provided, and to a place shall bear
naught but thistles and thorns, which with all his labor and travail he shall
not recover to the least part of the excellency of this garden. If Adam had
been sent to a place where fruit had grown without labor, or fruitful with
labor, it had been somewhat; but he is sent to the Earth cursed before by God
in the seventeenth verse, from a place fully blessed, from a garden to the
ground, from pleasure to labor.

3. From whence he was taken.
Thirdly, Unto the earth whence he was taken. This is not unprofitably added,
for there is use of this interram de qua sumptus. The ancient Fathers do
gather hence, first this use, That it is a remedy against pride and for
humility; hereby they should remember their former and present state, they
should remember from whence they were fallen and repent, the second of the
Revelations the fifth verse; or according to that of the fifty first of Esaias the
first verse, They should look to the rock whence they were hewed, and to the
hole of the pit whence they were dug: This then planteth in them humility;
for no question but only for humility there needed no mention of these words (
whence they were taken) God had said in the 19. verse, Out of the earth wast
thou taken, dust thou art, and to dust shall thou return; And Moses in the
second chapter before, the seventh verse says, Man was made of the dust of the
ground; and here again, Out of the earth were thou taken: this iteration of the
same thing in effect is not needless; for the holy Ghost setreth down nothing
that is needless, for true is that saying, that Nunquam nimis discutitur, quod
nunquam satis: But this is (...) so often to put us in mind of humility, lest
that should stick still in their stomachs which made them first to transgress,
and to banish the thought from their minds, that they should be as Gods, which
thought were enough to cherish pride; but rather that in remembrance of their
sorrow and repentance, they should cast dust upon their heads, with Jobs
friends, the second of Job the twelfth verse. The second use is the
Justification of Gods righteousness and equity. Man was not a native of
Paradise, he was a stranger, he was not borne there; for God took him elsewhere
and put him into this Garden at the first, the fifteenth of the former chapter,
He was brought from the Earth and put here: And again here non est sumptus unde
missus, but missus unde sumptus, he is not taken from whence he was sent, but
tent to the Earth from whence he was taken; He was brought I say to Paradise,
not made there; for this Garden of Eden was given him to take all pleasure and
full use of it, at the first upon a condition he should keep Gods Commandment
in the seventeenth of the former: but he brake the Law of Paradise; and
therefore, according to his just demerrits, he is sent to Earth from whence he
was taken, and this answers with Gods truth and his Justice. Yet this Justice
is tempered with mercy, for God sends him but to the Earth from whence he
was taken. The sin of the Devil you see in the 14. Of Esaias the 14 verse, what
it was, He would ascend above the height of the Clouds, saying, Ero (...), I
will be like the most high; but God brought him down to the grave and sent him
to Hell fire, spoken of in the twenty first of the Revelations the eighth
verse. So man carries upon his forehead his sin, Ecce homo factus tanquam
unus (...). Adam would be as God knowing good and evil; the very same crime
then that was in Satan is in Adam, the transgression of them both is one and
the same: This was mercy then not to punish them alike, not dealing so with man
as he had done with the Angel Lucifer. Adam is here made as a escape Goat that
had all the sins and (...) of the people upon his head, and so was sent into
the (...), the sixteenth of Leviticus the twenty first verse. Adam had his
sin upon his forehead by the last verse, and here is sent to the earth to
till it: So that this is mercy with judgment.

4 The end of his sending.
The fourth point is, the end. Ut operaretur terram; to serve to till, to dress
the ground from whence he was taken; this is the end: Not to walk up and down
unprofitable and to be idle, nor to be at case and do nothing, but to be
occupied in labor and service; for none are to be exempted from this labor,
none I say, as Job speaks from him that grindeth in the mill, to the Prince
that sits upon his (...); Paul, in the first to the Thessalonians the fourth
chapter and the (...) verse, admon sheth them, to love them that labor among
them in the Lord for their work sake; yea, even the son of Man came not to be
served but to serve, the twentieth of Matthew the twenty eighth. The servant
which is idle and unprofitable shall be cast into utter darkness, the twenty
fifth of Matthew the thirtieth verse, there is his punishment. Sr. (...) says,
That God sent not Adam out of Paradise to the earth; to make the earth a
Paradise or garden of pleasure, but a place of labor, (...) operaretur, that
he should work and till the Earth; for though the rich man in the sixteenth of
Luke lived at case and fared (...) every day, and made this world a world of
pleasure; whereas Lazarus lived in pain and labor, yet mark what was the end;
It was said by Abraham in the twenty (...) of that chapter, Remember that in
thy life time thou receivedst thy pleasure and Lazarus pains; now therefore he
is comforted and thou art tormented; so was he punished for making this world
to himself a Paradise. Abraham made not this world a garden of pleasure, but
removed his tent from place to place, the thirteenth chapter and the eighteenth
verse: Idleness and fulness of bread is afterward punished: The office of
the Priest is not to be idle but to serve, the forty fourth of Ezechiel the
sixteenth. Mare mortuum made by labor.
The best Writers are of opinion that where now is mare mortuum, the dead Sea,
was heretofore in times past made by man's labor, only for a place of pleasure
as the Garden of God, but God changes it into the contrary. Tyrus sometimes
lived as in Eden the garden of God, the twenty eighth of Ezechiel the
thirteenth; but in the seventeenth verse God will cast Tyrus to the ground and
bring it to ashes. And if we will live in the earth in (...) and in pleasure,
as in Eden, and make it our Paradise, be assured there will follow pains and a
great torment. The second use.
Secondly, He must do this service to the ground. And so was Kain said in the
second verse of the chapter following to be a tiller of the ground: In the
twenty second verse, they wrought metals taken out of the ground, as brass and
iron; and in other places they work in quarries of stone, as in mines of metal,
we labor the earth for bread and for drink: all must operari terram. Apply
hither the thirty second of Jeremy the forty third verse; Kings themselves
live in this world but to serve; they are Gods servants in things holy and in
things civil, for they are the Ministers of God to reward the good and punish
the wicked, the thirteenth to the Romans the fourth verse; And in the sixth
verse, for this cause pay you tribute to Princes for that they are Gods
Ministers: If the King say put this man in prison and feed him with the bread
of affliction, it is done, the 1 of the Kings the 22. 27. The reign of the King
is the service of God; for in the thirteenth of the Acts the thirty sixth verse,
it is written David, after he had served his time slept with his fathers: yea,
in the fifth of John's Gospel the seventeenth verse, Jesus says, His Father
works and he himself works also; for Jesus for our sakes made himself of no
reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, the second of the
Philippians the seventh verse; and only by this his obedience, as a servant he
has made us all righteous, the fifth to the Romans the ninth verse.

The third use.
Take this also for a third use, ut operaretur terram de qua sumptus est, to
teach us that we must do service to the Country wherein we live: Every one is
content and forward operari terram quae est, to take pains and labor in
trimming the earth, de qua factus, whereof he was made, his own person, a man's
private every one respecth, and will for flow no means to perfect his own
state, but he must operari terram de qua desumptus est; he must occupy his
diligence and service in the earth from whence he is taken: It is the office of
the Prince, the Priests and People, to pray for the peace of Jerusalem, Psalm
122. 6. The King, the (...), and the Soldiers or Captains join in the building
of the City, Nehemiah 2. And according to that of 2 Samuel 10. (...). The
Soldiers are (...) and valiant for their People and the Cities of their God;
they fight for the (...) they were taken. Solomon the King bestows his (...)
and his pains (...) enrich and better his land: Not only (...), but the (...)
Queen Hester, though with danger of her life, resolved to make petition to the
King for safety of her People, Hester 7. 3. she prays not only for her own
life, but also for the life of her People; and if they had been sold only for
servants or handmaids, she would have held her (...). And Moses, after the
People had fallen to (...), such was his zeal for the safety of his People,
that he (...) more than once for the safety of them, and that God would pardon
them; or if he would not to (...) or raze him out of his book: And Christ
himself would (...) rebukes for our sakes, Romans 14. 3. We must wish and work
the good of the Land wherein we live, both for this life and for the life to
come, though it be with the (...) of the loss of our own lives, with Moses,
Hester, and our Savior.

Women not exempted.
Further that we may join Women in this also, who, though they are not named,
yet they are not exempted from occupying themselves in this service of the
Earth; for though her husband be employed abroad, yet she overseeth her
household, and she (...) the bread of idleness, says the wiseman, Prove. 31.
27. She is to do her husband service; She will do him good and not evil all
the days of her life: She seeks wool and flax, and labors with her
hands; And with her hands she planteth a Vineyard: And by the whole discourse
of that chapter it appears that she is not to live in idleness. Here shall
be work in the earth for women also; For she shall eat of the fruit of her own
hands, and her own works shall praise her in the gates, the thirty first of the
Proverbs the thirty (...) verse. And Paul in his second chapter of his Epistle
to Titus, the fourth and the (...) verses, shows the duty of Women, to love
their Husbands, to keep at home, and to be subject unto them.

The especial matter of consideration is this, that we were not altogether
taken from earth, but we have also a Heavenly part, God breathed in us the
breath of life; we had a breathing from God: So that as we owe service to the
earth from whence our body was taken, so we owe service to God from whom the
Heavenly part of our soul came; for the soul of man is (...) substantia; then
we owe not all our service unto the earth, but a greater service unto God; for
vain is it when man (...) all his labor for his mouth, but his soul is not
(...), the sixth of (...) the seventh (...); God (...) for the soul: As the body
is (...) so the Soul is (...) by man's service unto God; for ut anima est (...),
so (...) vita animae, the soul is the life of the body, and God is the life of
the soul.

Besides, as heretofore we have considered in his other (...), that he joyneth
Mercy with Judgment; so likewise he joyneth Mercy here with his Justice; yea,
his Mercy exceeds his Justice: Mercy and Judgment are joined together in a
good man, the hundred and twelfth Psalm; and God is merciful and full of
compassion, the hundred and eleventh Psalm the fourth verse; yea, which is
more, by the hundred forty (...) Psalm the ninth verse, His mercy is above
all his works; yea, his (...) shall not only be joined with his Justice, but
even triumph over Justice.

The ancient Fathers do gather the second mercy by, or out of this sending,
and they do express it out of the eighth chapter of this book, by the sending
of the Raven and the Dove out of the Arc; for Noah sent forth the Raven which
returned not when the waters were diminished from off the Earth; but after the
waters were abated the Dove returned with an olive leaf in her bill: The Dove
when she came brought hope of returning to the earth, from whence Noah and his
family were taken: In the forty seventh of Genesis the twentieth verse,
though Joseph bought for Pharaoh all the Land of Egypt; yet after Joseph gave
them seed, and only the sift part of the increase was for Pharaoh, the rest for
themselves, and they were well content to till and husband the land, and to
become for this relief in their famine the servants of Pharaoh.

And out of Missus they gather another mercy: God shall send us one, and his
name, says Jerome, is Missus, one sent, upon the word Shiloh mentioned in the
tenth of Genesis the twenty fourth verse, and of Silo or Siloam, which is by
interpretation sent, the ninth of John the seventh verse: Moses in the fourth
of Exodus the thirteenth verse, when God would send him to Egypt says, Oh my
Lord, send I pray thee by the hand of him whom thou should send: The
Prophet, in the sixteenth of Esaias the first verse, says, send ye a Lamb to the
Ruler of the world from the rock of the wilderness: This Lamb there
prophecies, and that was sent was our Savior. And this word Missus, sent, is
appropriated to Christ, and he is sent that we might return again to Paradise.
Adam had hope that by one which should come from the promise in the seed of the
woman, he should once return again. You have a plain example in the twenty
third of Luke the forty third verse, of the two Malefactors that sufferd with
our Savior, he says to one of them, Hodie eris mecum in Paradiso, to day
shall thou be with me in Paradise, there is the return of one to Paradise. And
again, in the 2 Corinthians 12. 4. you have another taken up into Paradise:
this is then a sending of the Dove with a branch in his mouth in hope of
return; it is no (...) of the Raven not to return. But this returning is to the
Paradise of God, for unto him that over comes will God give to eat of the
tree of life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God, the second of the
Revelations the seventh verse: So that that place shows a manifest return to
eat of the tree of life, and to take again the benefit of Paradise. And in the
twentieth of John's Gospel the fifteenth verse, Christ appeared to Mary Magdalen
as a gardener; whence the Fathers infer, that he shall bring us again into a
better Garden then was Eden, into the heavenly Paradise, there to eat of the
Tree of life; by mercy through his own son shall he send them in again, as
with Justice mingled with Mercy he sent them out. So much for this time.

Quumque expulisset hominem; instituit a part anteriore horti Hedenis
Cherubos, flammamque gladii sese vibrantis, ad custodiendum viam quae ferebat
ad arborem vitae.
Januar. 18. 1598.
THIS is the putting forth of Adam and Eve from Paradise, for they being sent
forth before from the garden of Eden, it may seem that God dealt with them
with such mercy that he spoke to them but in jest: But to show that this
execution was in earnest, and that not only the Sentence should be executed,
but the execution prosecured with effect; it follows in this place to show
how the man was cast out of Paradise, and how it was fenced, and how the
passage to the Tree of life was stopped with a (...) sword shaken: The occasion
whereof was the slipperiness of man's nature, who though he were in misery yet
would desire to eat of the tree of Life, and so live in eternal misery,
seeking by all means to shake off this penitential life, and therefore God
uses all means to draw him to repentance, and to think of his former
happiness and of his present misery. In this verse then a caveat must be had,
that there be no daliance in the execution, but that the execution in all
points be fulfilled, whereupon they are cast forth, there are Cherubins set who
are armed with fire and sword, to prosecute the sentence and execution, and
defend the passage into Paradise; that so all his statutes may be found true:
For all that God does and says, are done in equity and truth, the hundred and
eleventh Psalm and the eighth verse.

The Tree of Life fenced. (...).
Another point is this, that of God and Justice, he fenceth the Tree of life
with an armed Angel, with fire and sword: And therefore look where the precept
and law of God is contemned, a Cherubin and a Sword follows, according to
that of the twenty sixth of Leviticus, and the twenty fifth verse: Mittam
gladium super vos, I will send a Sword upon you, that shall avenge the quarrel
of my Covenant: In the twenty second verse before in the sentence, the Tree of
life was not fenced at all; therefore here God provideth for it a fence and a
better guard, which is Cherubins and a Sword: The Seraphin in the sixth of Esaias
and the sixth verse, Had a hot (...) in his hand, which he took from the Altar:
Another Cherubin in the tenth of Ezekiel and the seventh verse, Stretches
forth his hand (...) the fire, and gives of it to him that was clothed with
linen, thus then was the pastage of Eden guarded with an Angel, a Cherubin
armed with a fiery Sword, in regard of the justice of God.

The end of the fencing.
The end of this fencing thus of Paradise and of the Tree of life, is, as the
Fathers say, because that it is the will of God, Inseparatio Paradisi and ligni.
that the Paradise of God and the Tree of life, should be inseparably together,
that none should enjoy the Paradise of God, but should east of the Tree of
life, and none should have the Tree of life, but should likewise enjoy the
Paradise of God, that so whosoever should enjoy the one should have the other;
for as it is in the thirty fourth Psalm and the twelfth verse: And likewise in
the first of Peter the third chapter and tenth verse: Every man naturally has
a longing desire after long life, and to see good days, and to live long and
happily, to have eternity and the Paradise of (...): for small is the comfort
to live long and have no happiness, or to have happiness and not enjoy it
long: and therefore man when he was cast forth he was debarred hereby, both of
the state of felicity and of eternity, that God might be true in his words, and
just in his works.

A Cherubim and a fiery Sword.
Now touching this guard it self, this fence, it consists of two parts: the
one is a Cherubin taken and sent from Heaven above, the other a fiery Sword
from the Earth below, that Adam and Eve might consider, that Heaven and Earth
were armed against them, to be a terror to their Soul and Body: this was a
spiritual and civil punishment, for there was in Adams sin an inordinate
desire of the Soul, to seek curiously into Gods secrets and to know good and
evil, and likewise an inordinate appetite of the body to behold and taste of
the forbidden fruit, thinking that was a fruit more pleasant than all the trees
in the garden, and God doubts in the twenty second verse, that he will put
also forth his hand and take of the tree of life, and live for ever: and
therefore to fence this Tree he sets an Angel, not naked but armed to
defend it, I say an Angel with a shaking Sword in his hand: Cherubims.
And that these Cherubins are Angels, it is doubtless by the whole course of
the Scriptures both new and old, and there of the ancient and new writers make
no doubt: they say, that as the committing of sin was by an evil Angel, so
emissio the punishment for sin was by an Angel, their putting out of
Paradise was by means of the evil Angel, and the passage was kept against
them by an Angel armed with a burning Sword: he came like a Serpent to provoke
them to sin, and he was punished by a Cherubin an Angel of that order:
mention is made of the Cherubins in the time of the Law, in the twenty fifth of
Exodus and the eighteenth verse: And in the building of the first Temple of
Solomon; were placed the Cherubims in the inward house, the figures of
Cherubims compassed the house, and the doors of the Oracle were graved with
Cherubims, the first of Kings the sixth chapter and the twenty seventh verse:
And likewise in the second building of the second Temple, in the forty first
of Ezekiell were there many Cherubims. And likewise the Angel in the
fourteenth of the Revelations and the seventeenth verse: with the sickle that
came from Heaven, was taken for a Cherubim; and why was it a Cherubim that was
appointed to defend this passage to the Tree of life, to punish Adam and
debar him of Paradise with Sword and Fire? It (...) by the (...) of Ezekiell
and the twelfth verse; That the Cherubim had a body with wings, and took (...)
coals and scattered them over the City; and being appointed for a guard for
Paradise, therefore it is requisite they should be watchful; therefore it is
said they were full of eyes round about, or according to the fourth of the
Revelations and the seventh verse, they were full of eyes before and behind,
which shows their knowledge which is requisite in them: To this also it is
necessary that there be added, that they be armed with power of Fire and Sword,
for as the Cherubims of themselves were fearful, so Fire and Sword makes the
passage more fearful; for to behold the Sword which will cut and the Fire
which will burn it is dreadful, for incisio in the one and insentio in the
other, the edge of the Sword and the flame of the Fire are both more terrible;
and it is very usual in the Scriptures to see them armed: The Angel that
stood in the way of Balaam riding upon his (...), the twenty second of Numbers
and the twenty third verse, had his Sword drawn in his hand; And in the first
of the Chronicles the twenty first chapter and the sixteenth verse, The Angel
that appeared to David was armed with a drawn Sword in his hand, And the
Cherubim in the tenth of Ezekiell and the seventh verse, was armed with Fire
against Jerusalem, and again in the second to the Thessalonians, the first
chapter and the eighth verse, The Angels of God do appear in flaming fire,
rendering vengeance to them that do not know God nor obey the Gospel, And here
the Angel of God appears to Adam, both with a Sword and with Fire to punish
him, because he would not obey God nor his commandment. That we may conclude
then, that God has sufficiently fenced this passage, with his Angel thus
armed with a burning Sword: the very Ass which is of least understanding,
feared the Angel armed with a drawn Sword and perceived it before Balaam, but
to be armed with Fire it is more fearful than with a Sword, for many a one
would run upon a Sword that by all means would shun the Fire, look what scapeth
the sword shall be devoured by the fire, and the ancient Fathers upon Job. 22.
20. And S. Jerome upon this place says, That the Cherubims are thus armed to
show that they have not only plenitudinem scientiae, by their many eyes; but
plenitudine mpotentiae by being armed in this sort; God takes order that they
should have both to be watchful and powerful. But what does this visible sign
of Cherubyms and of a Sword shaken mean? To make them to have a continual
remembrance of their sin, and likewise a (...) griese to think of the pleasure
and happy place that they (...), and to see themselves lest to misery, and
(...) of returning to that blessed Paradise, by so strong a guard, so strongly
armed that there is no hope left to enter again into that former state
happiness, and again how grievous is it to see the elect Angels above, and the
damned Angels beneath, yea all Gods creatures to become his enemies, and to be
banisheed from Gods presence; all his pleasure turned to labor, all plenty to
necessity, all joy to sorrow, so that all that he saw without him was terror
and fear, and all that was within him was lamentations and mourning and woe, as
it is in the second of Ezekiell and the nineteenth verse, And as we see when
the Angel appeared unto David in the time of the great mortality, that slew
with the pestilence seventy thousand, David in sackcloth mourned and said, it
is even I that have finned, but what have these sheep done, alas they have not
sinned, I should have been punished and my fathers house, and not this people,
the first of the Chronicles the twenty first chapter and the seventeenth verse,
And what greater grief could be devised than to be banished Paradise, and to
have no hope left of return, not to live any longer there but to live in the
barren earth, in the valley of Achor, the second of Osee and the fourteenth
verse, which is interpreted the valley of mourning, and yet as the Prophet
says there, that valley shall be for a gate or door of hope, for in that God
does not pull up the Tree by the root, nor does he cut it down as unprofitable,
we have hope that we shall have use of it hereafter, for it is fenced to some
use, neither is Paradise laid waste nor utterly destroyed, which gives us a
gate of hope.

The shaking of the Sword.
Secondly, the Fathers say, we have further matter of hope in regard the Sword
is but shaken, the Angel shakes the Sword but strikes not with the Sword, St.
Austin upon this shaking of the Sword says, that qui dicit percutiam non
percutit, minatur mortem non occidit, minae ejus, medicinae ejus: He that says
I will strike strikes not, he that threatens death, slays not, his
threatenings are as his curings: and again, he places the Cherubims armed in
the East of Eden at the entrance into Paradise, as the evil Angel that
provoked them to sin, came with fair words and was in show a friend, but
proved a deadly enemy, so they say that though the Angel that keeps the
passage of Paradise, do seem an outward enemy, yet in the end he will prove
our very friend.

Versatilis.
Thirdly, there is matter of hope in this that it is a moving Sword, why then
says St. Jerome, may it not be removed, if Adam repent and remove himself far
from his former sin? Why may not God likewise repent of this Punishment?
neither is it unusual that God does so, for in the first of the Chronicles the
twenty first chapter and the fifteenth verse, After God had sent his Angel to
destroy Jerusalem, as he was destroying, God repented of the evil and said to
the Angel that destroyed, it is enough let thy hand cease, and that Angel had
a Sword drawn in his hand: and after that David had built an Altar and made a
burnt-offring, in the twenty seventh verse of the same chapter, The Lord spoke
again to the Angel, and he put up his Sword again into his sheath: It was
David's case, the seventy seventh Psalm and the seventh verse, In sorrow and
great grief he said, Will the Lord absent himself for ever, and will be show
no more favor, has God forgotten to be merciful: no doubt God will show the
mercy that he found in his misery; or if with the Prophet, Jer. 47. 6. we fay,
Oh thou sword of the Lord, how long will it be ere thou cease, turn again
into thy scabbard, rest and be still, no doubt God will be merciful. And for
the Cherubyms, the Cherubyms that covered the two ends of the mercy seat, in
Exodus the 25. chapter and the 18. verse, were Cherebims of protection that
covered with their wings the Mercyseat. And in Ezekiel 28. it is said, That the
king of Tyrus had been in Eden the garden of God, and verse 14. That he was the
(...) Cherub that covers; it was a Cherubym of protection: They no doubt that
accompanied the Lamb, Revel. 14. were Angels and Cherubyms singing and harping
for joy; and these Cherubyms that here are appointed with fire and sword, if it
please God to be merciful, may turn their shape, and lay down the Sword, for
if Gods wrath be appeased, no wrath is executed, as in the case of David, and
of Jerusalem, and of Ninivie, where God stayed the hand of his Angel, and his
wrath ceased; for God gives power to Angels in Heaven and Princes on the
Earth, and all the shields of the world belong unto God, Psalm. 47. so that if
he be appeased they yield their power, and if God will have mercy upon man, and
will say deliver him that he go not down the pit, for I have received a
reconciliation, then shall he be restored to his former state, Job. 33. 24.
Upon man's repentance God will deliver his soul from destruction, and if here
God were once reconciled, the sword should be taken away from the Angel, and
he should put it up into his sheath, and man should recover his former state.
and the Angel shall become an Angel of mercy, like the Cherubyms, Exodus 25.
(...) covered with their wings the mercy seat or Propitiatory: Now the means
of reconciliation is a Propitiatory sacrifice, for Sacrifice is the way of
Reconciliation. When Abraham, with his offering of his son, had pleased God,
the Angel stayed Abraham's knife, and he found favor with God, chap. 22. After
David by his sin had procured the punishment of his people, he repented him
of his sin, and offered him up a burnt offering and a peace offering, and
then the Lord answered him by fire from heaven upon the Altar of
burnt-Offering, and when the Lords wrath was appeased, the Angel sheathed up
his Sword, 1 Cron. 21. 26. and here if, in Adams Case, Gods wrath be appeased
and he reconciled, the Angel will lay down his firySword, and flamma quae
ardet, and gladius qui mactat, the fire that should burn shall be
extinguished, and the sword that should slay shall be sheathed, and by a
Sacrifice Gods wrath shall be appeased for Exodus 12. chapter, Where God sees
the blood upon the (...) of their houses, God and his Angel will pass over
their houses, and plague nor destruction shall not fall upon them; the token of
blood shall be a reconciliation of Gods favor, and the Angel passed by: This
brings us to the great Propitiatory Sacrifice, the like whereof never was in
the world, in the which is not the blood of Lambs, Goats, or beasts, but the
blood of the immaculat Lamb Jesus Christ, Gods son and man's Savior, who
offered his precious blood for the sins of us all, who was the only and all
sufficient Sacrifice to apapease the wrath of God, and reconcile man to his
Love; this Sacrifice drew the alliance of Men with Angels, made a
reconciliation with God, and restored man to the tree of life and the Paradise
of God, and the Angels shall rejoice and be glad at this reconciliation and
that Christ was exalted, the eleventh of the Revelations, and the fifteenth
verse. And the seventh place the Fathers do allege that this place is a
poynting even unto the Gospel, that in the fencing thus of Paradise, it was
foretold that one should come that through his obedience should remove the
armed Cherubyms, and give unto mankind a passage into Paradise, and this they
ground upon the first of Ezechiell and the tenth verse: and upon the tenth of
Ezechiell and the fourteenth verse, and the fourth of the Revelations and the
seventh verse, they agree that there were four Cherubyms in the first of
Ezechiell and the tenth verse, they had the face of a Man, the similitude of
the face of an Ox, of a Lion and of an Eagle, and in the tenth of Ezekiell and
the fourteenth verse, one had the face of a Cherubym, the other of a Man, of a
Lion and of an Eagle, and for the Cherubyms in the fourth of the Revelations
and the seventh verse. The one was like a Lion, the other like an Ox, the
third like a Man, the last like an Eagle, and these four beasts in the
Revelation theydoe refer unto the four Evangelists: But the other places,
and this also, they do refer unto the four principal acts of Christ in our
reconcillation. They do apply the face of the Man to Christ's nativitie, who
was borne man of a pure virgin. The face of the Ox to his passion, who
resembled his death to the death of an Ox sacrificed for the sins of the
People, and the face of the Lion to his Resurrection, who thereby triumphed
over death, even he that was a Lion of the Tribe of Judah. And lastly they
compare the face of the Eagle to his glorious ascension whereby he mounted,
like an Eagle, above an Eagles pitch, only to reconcile us unto Gods favor. And
if the Sacrifice of Christ be applied unto us then does it appease Gods wrath
to us. David applies Nathans rebuke to himself, after all his sorrow and
acknowledgment of his sin, in the one and fiftith Psalm, with deep and
hearty repentance, he shows that the Sacrifices of God are a contrite spirit,
and a broken heart he despises not; and if with David in the fourth Psalm and
the fist verse, We examine our own heart and offer the Sacrifices of
righteousness, and trust in the Lord: this application of our Sacrifice to
this Sacrifice is by our hearty repentance, and then shall the Sacrifice of
Christ Jesus be unto us a reconciliation and a propitiatory Sacrifice even to
us that are penitent; for he that mourns and sorroweth for his sins, that
repents from his heart of his former wickedness, shall be sure to have a
part of this blessed Sacrifice once offered for all upon the Cross: And this
is Paul's Sacrifice in the twelfth to the Romans and the first verse, offer
upyour bodies a living Sacrifice holy and acceptable unto God, which is your
reasonable serving of God; these then that sacrifice their Souls and Bodies by
Repentance shall be assured to have a part in Christ's sacrifice. If thy eye
offend pull it out, the ninth of Mark and the forty seventh verse; apply by
thy repentance Christ's passion to thy self and Paul the first to the
Corinthians, the second chapter and the second verse says, he esteems the
knowledge of nothing but of Jesus Christ and him crucified; And the Tree of
life is fenced with Cherubyms, which is taken for knowledge, and the Sword for
power. Paul in the first to the Celossians and the 24 verse, Rejoices in his
afflictions to fulfill the rest of the sufferings of Christ in his flesh, And
Christ himself by his sufferings entered into glory the twenty fourth of Luke
and the twenty sixth verse; and if we with a contrite heart, in repentance, make
a Sacrifice of our sensual and brutish affections, and with patience bear
our afflictions, we shall pass with Christ to everlasting glory; the Angel
shall lay down his Sword, the Cherubyms shall become our friends, we shall be
partakers of Christ's Sacrifice, which works reconciliation between God and
man, and the wrath of God being appeased, then follows the restoring of us to
the heavenly Paradise, And to him that overcommeth God will give to eat of the
Tree of life in the midst of the Paradise of God, the second of the
Revelations and the seventh verse. And so much shall suffice at this time.

AMEN.
LECTURES PREACHED UPON the fourth Chapter OF GENESIS.
LECTURES Preached in the Parish Church of St. GILES without Cripple-gate
LONDON.
Deinde Adam cognovit Chavvam uxorem suam: quae ubi concepit and peperit
Kajinum, dixit, acquisivi virum a Jehova. Postea pergens parere, peperit
fratrem ipsius Hebelum: Genesis 4. 1.

February 7 1598.
THIS continuance of the story of Moses begins to set forth the increase of the
world, after Adam and Eve were expelled Paradise. The sum of all set down in
this Chapter to that end, is of two parts. First, the propagation of mankind.
Secondly, the partition of mankind, set out in Cain and Abell. The propagation
is the fulfilling of that Prophecy of Adam, who foretold of his wise that she
should be, matter viventium, in the third chapter and the tewentith verse, and
it is indeed a resemblance of the tree of life, in that by means hereof, albeit
life cannot continue in any singular person because of the Sentence pronounced
by God, that as he is dust, so shall heereturne to dust, Chapter the third;
yet there is immortalitas speciel, that is, a perpetual succession of life in
the posterity of Adam: As a Tree, albeit in the end of the year it casts his
leaves, yet still there remains a substance of life in it, which makes it send
forth leaves again, Esaias the sixth and the thirteenth verse, so it is in
mankind; for as the old life falls, so there rises up a new. When the Father
dies, the Child stands up in his place, and so is life still preserved. This
is done by generation, which is a kind of creation; as it is said of Adam,
that he begat a Child in his own likeness, after his Image, Genesis the fifth
and the third verse: For as there is in God diffusiva virtus, whereby he
communicates his goodness to others; so it is a thing to be desired, that
Adam having received life should show the same to others; that when Adam dies
Cain and Abell issued up in his stead, which desire is so planted in man, that
albeit God when he said to Adam, that in sorrow and the sweat of his brows he
should eat his own bread, told him, that he should have enough to do to get
a living for himself; yet Adam being scarce able to provide for himself,
begets children; And albeit God said unto the woman that she should bring
forth children in sorrow and travel, Genesis the third Chapter and the
sixteenth verse, yet she not only brings forth Cain, but having tried the
pain of childbearing, she said not as Rebecca, Genesis the twenty fifth
Chapter and the twenty second verse, but adds yet and brings forth Abell, so
high a reckoning did Adom and Eve make of continuing their kind:

In the propagation we have two parts. First, Adams knowing: And secondly, Eves
conception, unto which two things are to be added: first the manner of
expressing the carnal copulation of Adam and Eve, by this term of [
knowledge.] Afterward.
Secondly the circumstance of time, noted in the word [ afterward.] For Adams
knowledge, and the generation of mankind, we see that the transgression of the
Commandment of God, in Paradise, does not hinder marriage, so as it should be
a sin to beget children; but contrary wise marriage is a remedy against
sin, the first of the Corinthians the seventh Chapter and the second verse.
And that which God affirms touching the joining of man and woman, Genesis the
second Chapter and the twenty fourth verse, That Man shall leave father and
mother and cleave to his wife, and they two shall be one flesh, is not
repealed by God; for we see the accord of marriage between Adam and Eve is
continued, and they company together and bring forth children. And as the
estate of marriage was not taken away by sin, so was not the blessing of
fruitfullnesse and conception: Therefore, as before they fell, God said Bring
forth fruit and multiply, and fill the Earth, the first Chapter and the twenty
eighth verse, so here Eve receives from the Lord strength to conceive and
bring forth Cain and Abell. Now the woman brings forth not only a seed, but
the seed promised in the third chapter of Genesis and the fifteenth verse, and
that a holy seed, Matthew the second chapter and fifteenth verse, not only Men
in Earth, but Saints in Heaven; and the end hereof is, not only that we should
desire to have our own names continue, but as Joshua speaks in the seventh of
Joshua and the ninth verse, quid fiet magno tuo nomine, that is, that not only
we may magnify Gods name while we live, but that when we fall, another
seed may stand up and praise his name, that the seed may serve him, Psalm
the twenty second and the thirtith verse, A people that shall be borne shall
praise him, the hundred and second Psalm and the eightteenth verse. Know.
Touching the carnal copulation of Adam with Eve, where God expresses it by
the term of [ knowledge] it shows us the holiness of this tongue wherein
the Holy Ghost writ this, then which there is no tongue that uses so modest
and chaste speeches, and therefore is called the holy tongue, and it withal
shows us, that the Holy Ghost, by his own example, commends unto us
modesty and chaste speeches, for that modest speech which he uses here to
express the company of man and woman, he uses also Matthew the first, where
he says Joseph knew not Mary, and this thing he calls by another term,
Debitam benevolentiam, I Corinthians the seventh and the third verse, that is,
he exhorts us to avoid fornication, uncleaness, and filthiness, Ephesians the
fifth and the third verse, so he might provoke us by his example: for as that
broad speech uttered by Saul, was after the Lords spirit was taken from him,
and another evil spirit vexed him; so unclean speeches proceed not from the
holy Ghost, that delights in modest terms. 2.
Again, the term of knowledge is used as opposite to passion, to teach men that
they must dwell with their wives as men of knowledge, the first of Peter the
third and the seventh verse, that they be not like fed horses, neighing after
their neighbors wives, Jeremiah the fifth chapter, and the eighth verse:
Afterward.
The circumstance of time, is noted in the word Afterward; That is, not before
he was deprived of Paradise, but when he was driven out. For the pleasure of
marriage is a mortal pleasure; For as Christ says, In this world men marry,
but they that shall be counted worthy of the life to come, neither marry nor
are given in marriage, but are as the Angels of God, Luke, the twentieth
chapter. The use of marriage is, that because men die, they should beget
sons, and leave a posterity to stand up after them: But the Children of the
Resurrection dye as men, and therefore he was made to beget Children. And, for
spiritual joy or comfort it is none; But postquam spiritus deficit, venium ad
solatia carnis. It is a carnal pleasure: For as Cain being cursed out of Gods
City, built himself a City, in the fourth chapter of Genesis: As Saul being
cast out of the Lords favor, would be honored of man, in the first of Samuel
fifth chapter; So Adam being deprived of spiritual comfort and pleasure, uses
marriage as a carnal pleasure. P^itio.
For the point of division jointly, in these, this pair of Brethren, we have a
view of all mankind. Adam had more Children; but the Holy Ghost contenteth
himself to set out mankind in these two; Even as the (...) says of Abraham,
that he had two sons; one born after the flesh, another after the Spirit,
Galatians the fourth chapter, and the two and twentieth verse. So were the
sons of Adam. To Cain are reckoned as his posterity; Henoch, Lamech, Nimrod,
Pharaoh, and all the wicked: To Abell, Enoch, Noah, Shem, Abraham, Isaac, and
all the faithful; which is the great partition of mankind. For the holy
Scripture sets out which is Gods City, that is Sion, and Jerusalem; and
which is the Devils City, by Babylon, The one answering to Abell; the other to
Cain: They set out the Devls city, by amor sui ad contemptum Dei; Gods city, by
amor Dei usque ad contempium sui. Again, by Abell is set out those that are in
state of grace; by Cain they that are in state of nature: By the one are set
out all them that are born after the flesh; by the other such as are born anew,
and led by the Spirit, Galatians, chapter the fourth. And this partion is made
of all mankind through the world, till that last (...) which Christ shall make
of the Sheep from the (...), in the five and twentieth chapter of Matthew. This
partition we see in these two: For that although they were both of one Father
and Mother; Contrary natures.
yet such was the diversity and (...) of their nature and disposition, as they
fitly represent the diverse state of mankind. The (...) is in respect of their
names, the (...) in respect of their works; for the one rose up against the
other and slew him. Cain and Abell why so called.
The Devils (...) in respect of their names is, the one is called Cain, that
is, a purchaser or possessioner, that is such a one as thought it his (...) to
enjoy this world, and, contrariwise, misery to lose it, and the possessions
thereof: Abell (...) sorrow and vanity
But the other Abell, that is, sorrow, and vanity, such a one as does, with
Solomon, account all things in this life vanity and vexation of spirit, in the
first chapter of the book of Ecclesiastes; such a one as has sorrow by reason
of continual sins, whereby he offends God: of them Christ says, in the
(...) chapter of Matthew, Blessed are they that mourn and sorrow, for that
they are out of their place. As the Prophet speaks, in the one hundred thirty
seventh Psalm, By the waters of Babylon we sat down and wept, when we remembered
thee O Sion. For Abell was not a City of this world, as Cain; but was one of
those that sought for a City in Heaven, that was to come, Hebrews the
thirteenth and the second verse; He is called Abell, that is vanity, 1.
First, in respect of the shortness of his life, in which regard, every man is
altogether vanity, Psalm the thirty ninth. 2.
Then in respect of the afflictions of this life, in which respect he says,
Every man is vanity. And therefore they that are of Abell will say, We are
strangers and sojourners as all our Fathers were, Psalm. 39. They are such as
though they be in the world, yet use it as if they used it not, the first to
the Corinthians the seventh chapter: They set not their felicity in this
world, as Cain, but reckon all things in this world vanity and vexation of
spirit, and long to be restored to their heavenly Country.

2. Contrary works.
Secondly, As they have diverse dispositions; so their works are contrary: For,
as the Apostle says of Ismael and Isaac, Gal. 4. He that was borne after the
flesh, persecuted him that was borne after the Spirit: So did Cain persecute
Abell, as the Apostle witnesses, Joh. 1. 3. that Cain was of that wicked One,
and slew his Brother; Why Cain slew Abell.
And wherefore slew he him? Because his own works were evil, and his Brothers
good: So as their dispositions were diverse, their works were contrary: So in
Cain there is a resemblance of all the persecutors and oppressors, that have
been in the world: The Wicked persecute the Godly by hand and tongue.
And Abell is a pattern of all the Martyrs, that have been slain by the hand of
Cain, or wounded and persecuted by the tongue of Ismael, who by mocking
persecuted Isaac, in the fourth chapter to the Galatians. In these two is
fulfilled that envy which God proclaimed between the woman and the Serpent, and
between their seeds, Genesis the third and the fifteenth verse, who was not
only of the seed of that evil one, Joshua the first and the third verse, that
was of the Serpent: and the reason why the name of Cain is set down in the
Bible, is, to show the performance of that Prophecy, Genesis the third and the
fifteenth verse, and to show his wrath upon the Vessels of wrath, Romans the
ninth and the twenty second, such as was Cain, Cham, Pharaoh, and
Nebuchadnezar, and all the wicked ones of his Race, for the order of their
coming into the world, as Cain who was first born, was worst, and Abell the
last born, was best; so it is with all mandkind: For as the Apostle says,
first comes that which is natural, and then that which is spiritual, the
first to the Corinthians the fifteenth chapter and the forty sixth verse; 1. We
possess an evil mind before a good.
so first we are possessed with an evil mind, before we can have a good mind.
First Cain was born, after he begat Enoch, and then Tubalcain, then follows
Lamech, and at last Enosh a good man; so God says, there is first the root of
bitterness planted in our hearts, Deutcronomie the twenty ninth and the
eighteenth verse, before we can be rooted in says well, Colossians the first
chapter, that we are first wild olives, and must be ingrasted into the true
Olive, Romans the eleventh. Nature does not well at the first, but is first
inclined to evil, till it please God to give grace: And whereas Cain had Abell
for his Brother, so we learn that the Companions and Brethren of all worldly
possessions, is vanity and vexation; first, in getting, then in keeping, and
lastly in losing them. And in Riches are thorns and cares.
When we find that in riches there are thorns and pricking cares, Luke the
eighth, Riches and Grief are Brethren.
that riches and grief are brethren, then there is a way to grace. If we speak
of them severally: To begin with Cain, in that which Eve speaks of him, I have
purchased a man of God. There is something to be commended, and also somewhat
to be blamed: That which deserves commendation is of two sorts. First, her
thankfulness and consession which she makes after her deliverie; for she
ascribes it not to her self, or her husband, nor to the strength of nature,
Children come by Gods grace and blessing.
that she had brought forth a Son, but that he came by the grace of God,
wherein she does as much as God requires to be done by women that come to be
purified, Leviticus the twelfth where he took order, Our duty is thankfulness
to God.
that in token of thankfulness to God, who had preserved them, they should
offer: And it is as much as David confesses, Psalm the one hundred twenty
seventh, that Children and the fruit of the womb are a blessing that comes
from the Lord. Secondly, if it be meant that she had obtained a man for God, as
some will have it to be expounded; for thereby she declared her joy, to be
chiefly in that she had a Son; not only to fill the earth, and to serve for
Adam when he was dead; but one that should serve God, and magnify his name
when they were dead; whereas she called her first son by a name that did set
out Gods goodness, and the second by a name that showed man's vanity and
misery, that is, to be commended; In misery consider Gods goodness, and why
so contrary.
for we must consider Gods goodness with our misery, left we be driven to
despair; and when we behold Gods goodness, we must join the consideration of
our misery, left we wax proud and forget our selves. But in that whereas she
thought she had that seed which God promised should break the Serpents head, in
the third chapter of Genesis: therein she is to be blamed; for albeit her faith
is to be commended, because she believed that promise; What defect of Faith is.
yet her defect of faith is to be blamed, in the 1. Epistle to the Thessalonians
the third chapter and the tenth verse; that defect was, that she made too much
haste for the peformance of the promise. The Prophet says of the true faith,
Qui crediderit non festinat, in the 28. chapter of Isaiah: But she makes too
much haste; for the promise is not made of the seed of the first woman;
therefore this was defect of says to be blamed in her. That there was a
reconciliation to be received, neither she nor any other did ever doubt; for
all did look for the seed of the woman, to make this reconciliation. He is the
desire of all Nations, in the second chapter of Aggai, and the eighth verse.
The heathen did all equally worship this Redeemer, Acts the seventeenth, though
ignorantly. But to take Cain for Christ, and Bar-Iesus for Jesus, is a great
error.

But, if she had not this conceit, yet she is to be blamed for the error of
her hope, in that she calls her first son Cain, a possession, as if he were
the only Jewel, and the other Abell, that is Vanity, as if he were one to be
despised, and of no reckoning. Wherein she shows that which is our common
fault, We judge after outward appearance, but God contrary.
for we always judge after the outward appearance, whereas God rippeth the
heart, and makes most account of those things that seem to be of least
reckoning. This was Samuell's fault, when in choosing one to annoint among the
sons of Issa, did judge the tallest to be the party appointed by God: Whereas
it was David the least, and of meanest reckoning among them, whom he had
purposed to annoynte, in the first of Samuel and the sixteenth chapter. But
this joy which she had of this son was vanum gaudium. It was a great error in
her, that she accounts him the greatest Jewel, that was of the seed of that
evil one: and despises him that was the first Saint; who therefore is set
down to be the first and chiefest of all the faithful, in the eleventh chapter
to the Hebrews, and the, second verse: Much more might she have called her
first Abell, who became vanity and came to naught, who endured sorrow for ever;
And have called Abell a possession, for that he was the beginning of all
Saints: Such a one as placed his felicity in the possession of the heavenly
joys.

Note. The state and reckoning of the Godly in this life.
Whereby we see what reckoning is made of the faithful in this life: Of them
Christ says, In mundo pressuram habebunt, in the sixteenth chapter of St.
John's Gospel; And ye shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice: Cain
shall build Cities in this world but as for you, be of good comfort, for I have
overcome the world. You shall sorrow, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy;
And though you be disunited here, yet in me ye shall have peace. These are the
points to be sound fault with in Eve.

Fuitque Hebel pastor gregis, and Kajin fuit agricola. Gen 4 2.

Februar. 25. 1598.
YOU remember I told you that the Tree of generation, is a shadow or resemblance
of the Tree of life: for though since the fall of Adam, the state of mankind
for the continuance of it, be not like the Ivy or Bay Tree, which never cast
their leaves, Ezekiel the forty seventh chapter and the twelfth verse: 1
Division.
yet it is compared by the Holy Ghost, to the Oak or Elme-tree, Esaias the sixth
chapter, which though they cast their leaves, yet there springs out new the
next year: So albeit man must return to dust from whence he was taken, Man
shall leave a seed behind him.
yet he shall leave a seed behind him. Cain and Abell resemble all mankind,
Elect, Reprobate, as the variety in names; so in natures and dispositions.
Secondly, you heard that from this tree, do sprout two branches, that is, a
pair of brethren, to whom all mankind may be reduced, from whom both Sion the
City of God, and Babell the City of Satan, take their beginning concerning whom
in the variety of their names: we observed the variety of their natures, the
one called Cain, that is, a possession, sets out those people whose felicity is
to get, and which count it the only misery to lose the things of this life, the
other called Abell, that is, vanity, does set out unto us, those which reckon
all things in this life to be vanity, as the Preacher teaches us to value
them; thereby we considered, what account we made both of the one and the
other: In the world Cain is called a great Jewel, and Abell despised as a
thing of naught.

Second and third Division.
Now we are come to a second and third division: 1 In their Trades.
For in this verse, they are divided by their trades and calling, 2. In their
Religion.
in the next, by their religion and profession in the service of God, both which
divisions have their ground, the second chapter and the seventh verse: Man
consists of Body and Soul, to fill both Earth, and Heaven.
For where man is said to consist of two parts, body and soul; the one formed of
the dust of the earth, the other breathed by God; that is, to show that as
according to Gods commandment, the first chapter of Genesis and the twenty
sixth verse: He has a care to fill the earth, by bringing forth children: so he
must be as careful to fill heaven, by a second generation, that as he was to
till the earth from whence his body was taken, chapter the third: Man's vocation
maintain life and religion, a spiritual life.
So he must employ his study in Gods service, from whence he received his soul,
his care must be not only to leave behind him a long generation, but semen
sanctum, Mal. the second chapter, as they must have a vocation, whereby to
maintain natural life: So they must be religious and offer sacrifice, that
leading a spiritual life here on earth, they may obtain eternal life in
heaven. 1. The natural life, then the spiritual, and why?
But as Cain was first born after the flesh, and then Abell: So always flesh
goes before the spirit, nature before grace, as the Apostle witnesses, the
first of the Corinthians and the fifteenth chapter, That is not first which is
spiritual, but that which is natural, and then that which is spiritual.
Therefore God was first to feed the Israelites with Manna, and to give them
water out of the rock, the sixteenth chapter of Exodus, before they would
receive the Law, which after was published upon mount Sinai, the twentieth
chapter of Exodus, For as the Apostle shows, there is a debt due to the flesh
Romans the eight chapter, which must be paid before the spirit can with
quietness attend upon Gods service, which being provided for, the spirit is
the fitter to attend upon Gods worship.

Children are not to be trained up in idleness, and why?
Before we come to their several vocations, we have first to consider in
general, that Adam would not have either of his children trained up in
idleness, and therefore he sets not only his younger son; But to labor in a
vocation.
but even his heir to a trade and occupation: knowing that whereas God has
ordained, that man shall live by some painful vocation, chapter the third,
there is a thing, that both touched him and his, the necessity whereof is such
as Job says, Man is born to labor, even as a bird to fly, the fifth chapter
of Job and the seventh verse: And as he imployeth in trade, as well the eldest
as the youngest; So Abell the good, no less then Gain the wicked son, for
the godly have no liberty to live without some honest calling, and therefore
the Apostle says, Let a man abide in that calling wherein he is called, the
first of the Corinthians the seventh chapter and the twenty fourth verse: If
the godly may not live idly, much more ought wicked children to be set to
some trade of life, The second point to be observed is, that there is no sooner
mention made of the birth of these two brethren, but presently the Holy Ghost
sets down their trade, commending unto us from Adams example, that which
Solomon after teaches, the twenty second chapter of the Prove. Teach a child
in the beginning of his ways, and he will not depart from it when he is old,
Seasonable instruction in youth, and why?
for without seasonable instruction, children and youth are but vanity, the
eleventh chapter of Eccle. and the third verse: All are not fit for one and the
same calling, and why?
Both these sons are not set to one vocation, to show that all men are not fit
and meet, for one and the same calling; for as there is this diversity in the
earth, out of which man is taken, that one part of it is sandy, some clay, and
some gravel. And as in the heavenly light, there is that diversity which the
Apostle speaks of, the first of the Corinthians the fifteenth chapter and the
forty first verse, one star differing from another in glory: So the like
variety appears in the dispositions of men, in so much as we see, all men are
not meet for one thing. Fourthly, from hence we learn, that albeit the labors
and trades of men be diverse: Callings must be such as God allows, and are
serviceable to the Commonwealth, and why?
yet they must be such as both God allows, and such as are serviceable to the
public wealth; we may not say because Cain, a reprobate, was a husbandman,
that therefore God dislikes husbandary: for God affirms of Noah that he was a
just and upright man, and yet he was an husbandman, Genesis the ninth chapter;
nor that the office of keeping sheep, is therefore lawful in Gods sight,
because Abell the just was a sheephcard, for Juball the son of wicked Lamech
was the father of them that dwelt in tents, and kept Sheep, Genesis the fourth
chapter and the twentieth verse: and yet himself a wicked man, the person does
not make the calling lawful, but it must be taken from God himself, and be
such as God allows; touching husbandry Christ says, My father is the
Husbandman, the fifteenth chapter of John and the first verse, and you are Gods
husbandry, says the Apostle, the first of the Corinthians the third chapter
and the ninth verse: Therefore the calling of an husbandman is allowable; for
the other calling, God himself is called the Shepherd of Israel, the eightieth
Psalm and the first verse: and Christ says of his Church, I have other sheep
which I must gather under my government, that there may be but one shepherd,
and one sheepfold, the tenth chapter of John and the sixteenth verse:
Husbandry and keeping sheep lawful, and why?
By which titles we may collect, that both their callings are allowed of God,
and for the profit, that they be serviceable; the wise man says of them, the
King is maintained by husbandry, the fifth chapter of Ecclesiastes and the
ninth verse: And for Abells trade, the seventh chapter of the Proverbs and the
twenty sixth verse: The fleece of the lambs serve for thy clothing, and the
goats milk for thy food, So that both are profitable: And in regard of the
great profit, that God vouchsafes to mankind by both, all men do testify
their thankfulness to God, for so great a benefit, not only at the bringing of
harvest, in the ninth chapter of Esaias and the third verse: but at their
sheepsheering, in the first of Samuel the twenty fifth chapter and the second
verse: And in the second of Samuel the thirteenth chapter and twenty third
verse: by the example of Naball and Absalom, from whence we learn, not to set
our selves to vain and unprofitable trades, but such as are both allowed of
God, and serviceable to men. More particularly, if we ask what ground Adam had
for this division, we shall find, that there are two of great importance.

1. Reason. From Gods commission the ground of both trades.
The first, From Gods commission to Adam, in the first of Genesis and the twenty
eighth verse, where he wills him to till the earth, and to bear rule over
all the beasts and Cattle on the earth. So that God will have men to do two
things, the one to follow husbandry, the other to keep sheep and other
cattle: For Gods will is not that the earth shall be covered with nettles,
like the slothful man's vineyard, in the twenty fourth of the Proverbs; nor
that the cattle should wander about the mountains, and be scattered without
any shepherd to seek after them, in the thirty fourth of Ezekiell: But will
have the one painfully tilled and dressed, by the hand of the husbandman; and
the other diligently and carefully looked unto, by the shepherd. This was
Adams commission, and therefore he trained up his sons accordingly.

2. Reason.
Again, The earth it self taught Adam thus to dispose of his Children, which, as
we know, divides it self into arable and pasture ground, the one to bear Corn,
the other to feed and rear up Cattle: whereupon, as we see, Adam delivers to
Cain the charge of Tilling, that part which is arable, and to be plowed; and
Abell is seized of the pasture grounds. The prioritie is given to husbandry,
which is a calling of more excellency than the other, and therefore is
committed to the elder son. For the earth being tilled and sowed by the
husbandman, brings forth bread to strengthen man's heart, in the hundred and
fourth Psalm: and the necessity whereof is such, as albeit it be an unkind
part for Cain to kill Abell, that is, that no ground be left for pasture; yet
it is a more unkind part for Abell to kill Cain, that is, that pasture should
eat up arable ground.

The second ground.
And this ground taken from Gods commission, brings forth a second ground: For
if there must be diverse works, as there must be where God appoints diverse
vocations, there are required diverse gifts, for the performance of those
works; Cain must have a gift meet for him that shall till the earth. And Abell
being a shepherd, must have that ability that is fit for that vocation.
Several gifts required in several vocations, and why?
In regard of which variety of works, the Apostle says, Every one has his
proper gift af God, one after one manner, another after another, in the first
to the Corinthians, the seventh chapter, and the seventh verse, to teach us
that several gifts are to be employed in several vocations. We live either by
care of mind, or labor of body: and why?
In the sentence uttered by God we have seen, that it is Gods will that every
one shall live either by the care of his mind, or by the sweat of his body.
For as members of our natural bodies have their several offices, in the
twelfth chapter to the Romans; and the twelfth chapter of the first Epistle to
the Corinthians; So (as all the members do not labor, for some do only take
care, as the eye and the ear, other do labor and sweat, as the hands and feet)
in the body Politic there are diverse members, and they accordingly have
several gifts from God. For as there is not only labor, but danger; so God
has qualified some men with gifts of mind, fit for the preventing and
avoiding of the one; and to others he has given strength of body, to endure
and sustain the other. Some callings require more the first than the latter:
and why?
As there are some trades that require sweat and labor, and very little care;
so there are callings that require great care and providence, and less labor;
and therefore God distributeth several gifts for the performance of them: To
some he gives more strength of body and great limbs; to others he gives
excellency of wit, to foresee and prevent danger: Gifts given to one, denied to
another: and why?
He gives not to all men gifts alike but denies to one that which he gives to
others; That the eye should not say to the foot, I have no need of thee, in the
twelfth chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, but that all might be
ready to succor one another. The tilling of the ground requirethgreat pains
and labor, and consists of great strength of body; but the office of a
shepherd is not a matter of pains, so much as of foresight and providence:
And therefore husbandmen that take great bodily pains; after their seed is
sown, have many holidayes, and a long time of rest; but the office of keeping
sheep and the care belonging to it never cease, but lasts day and night:
Such was the care that Jacob had of Labans sheep, in the thirty first chapter
of Genesis, and the fourtieth verse: Such care did the shepherds take every
night, whom the Angels found watching all night, in the second chapter of
Luke: Therefore God gives Cain a more strong body; but Abell, as his calling
required less bodily pains, so he was more weak of constitution, and was
(...) with more sharpness of wit, than his Brother.

Before we speak of the second calling, because this diversity requires a
choice to be made, Abell must not be made a husbandman, nor Cain a shepherd.
Children to be set to trades they are capable of, and why?
That example, of Adams distribution in this point, should make us set our
children to such trades as they are capable of: David was not accustomed to
bear Saul's heavy Armor, but was fitter to use the sling, in the first of
Samuel the seventeenth chapter and the thirty ninth verse: Another confesses
himself unfit to be a Prophet, seeing he was always an husbandman: therefore
men must followthose trades of life, for which they are fit; The want of which
discretion, is the confusion of Church and Commonwealth. Inconvenience of the
contrary
There are says Solomon, that have the price of wisdom in their hands, and
have not wisdom in their hearts, in the sixteenth chapter of the Proverbs:
Such as have preferment in places, where they deserve it no; contrary-wise it
is a great benefit to the Commonwealth, when men set their children to such
trades as they are fit for.

Examples.
So Jacob seeing that Isaac had great bones made him an husbandman; and
perceiving that Zabulon delighted in the waters, he employed him in navigation;
and perceiving that Juda was strong, and politic fit to bear rule, made a
magistrate of him, in the forty ninth chapter of Genesis and the thirteenth
verse: Which thing when it is not observed, when Saul a mighty and strong man
fit for war is among the Prophers, in the first of Samuel the tenth chapter,
then is there a great confusion. Such as will employ themselves in the
ministry of the Gospel, must not be young Scholars, in the first of Timothy
and the third chapter: Nor (...), in the second of Peter and the third chapter:
Nor without ground, and soundness of judgment and knowledge, for such
undertake that, which they are not fit for.

The conclusion is, that which the Apostle St. Paul says, Such as have diverse
gifts, we should employ them to the glory of Christ our head, from whom we
receive them, in the twelfth chapter of the Romans and the sixth verse: And
that every one, as he has received the gift, so he do dispose and minister
the same one to another, as God disposes of his manifold graces, in the first
of Peter the fourth chapter and the tenth verse.

Ground of Abells calling, keeping sheep.
The second calling wherein Abell was sent, has this ground, the husbandman is
occupied in tilling the ground, which is a thing without life: But sheep are
living things, and they that undertake to keep them, must have an oversight to
keep them in order. And because they are of all cattle most subject to wander,
they must be kept in with bands, in the eleventh chapter of Zachariah: In
regard of the great care, that shepherds take of their flock, the Governors of
Commonwealths are termed by the name of shepherds: So the Prophet Jeremiah
speaking of temporal Magistrates, I will give you Pastors, which shall feed
you with wisdom and understanding, in the third chapter of Jeremiah and the
fifteenth verse: And the false Prophets are called false Shepherds, in the
eleventh chapter of Zachariah: The necessity of temporal and spiritual
shepherds, and why?
And of the people that are without a Governor, it is said, Let not the Lords
people be as sheep without a shepherd, in the twenty seventh chapter of
Numbers: And for ecclesiastical government, Christ saw the people As sheep
that have no shepherd, and had compassion of them, in the ninth chapter of
Matthew; and in the thirty fourth chapter of Ezekiel: That which is performed
to sheep by the shepherds, as the leading of them forth, the bringing them in
pasture, the gathering of them together being dispersed, the defending of them
from violence: All this is ascribed to the Prophets, that should teach Gods
people, and sheep of his pasture, The sheep are subject to be torn in pieces,
by the Bears and Lions, in the first of Samuel and the seventh chapter: And
The fat sheep, will kick against the young and weak sheep, in the thirty fourth
chapter of Ezekiel: Against which injuries the shepherd is to defend them,
which is a representation of that oversight, that Magistrates have of the
people: Therefore God took Moses from keeping of sheep, to be governor over his
people, in the third chapter of Exodus: And David from following the ewes great
with lamb, was chosen to be King over Israel, in the seventy eighth Psalm: As
if by keeping of sheep they had been trained up and made fit to govern men:
Therefore as in Abell, is represented the care and oversighted, that temporal
magistrates have over their people and subjects; So Joseph is called the
shepherd of Israel, in the forty ninth chapter of Genesis; And Cyrus is
called Gods servant and shepherd, in the forty fifth chapter of Esaias: And for
ecclesiastiall government, that is no less set out in the care of shepherds.
And therefore Christ who is the chief shepherd says to Saint Peter, Pasce
agnos meos, in the twenty first chapter of John.

Fuit autem post dies multos, quum obtulit Kajin de fructu terrae munus
Jehovae. Et ipse quoque Hebel obtulit de primogenitis gregis sui, and de adipe
eorum: Gen 4. 3.

April 22. 1599.
THESE two Brethren, as we have heard, Abell a pattern of the Saints, Cain of
the wicked.
are the great pattern of the maine division of the world; that is, Abell is a
pattern of the Saints and Church of God; and Cain of fleshly and wordly minded
men. Concerning whom from the beginning, we have already considered two parts.
First, the disposition of their natures. Secondly, their vocations. Thirdly, we
are at length come to their Religion; which, howsoever it be last regarded of
men, yet ought it to be first in place: First provides for religion, Secondly,
for trades, and why?
For howsoever Adam after the fall did provide for Religion in the last place,
yet as Christ says, Non sic fuit ab initio, in the ninth chapter of (...).
Therefore we are first to enquire of Gods service, and after to provide for
trades and occupations, as the Prophet exhorts, Stand in the way, and behold,
and ask for the old ways, in the sixth chapter of Jeremiah, and the fifteenth
verse.

Division in four parts touching this Religion.
Touching their Religion we have to consider four points: First, the antiquities
and generalities of it. Secondly, the kinds of it, that is, Cains oblation,
and Abell's sacrifice. Thirdly, the ground and reason why they performed this
service to God. Fourthly, the warrant they had for it.

1. The antiquity of it being first.
First, for the Antiquity of this kind of worship, in offering up to God, we
are to know, that there is no act of Religion remembered in Scripture before
this offering of Cain and Abell: Examples.
And therefore the Apostle shows, that the Sacrifice which Abell offered up to
God, was the first fruit of faith, that ever was showed, in the eleventh
chapter to the Hebrews and the fourth verse. 1. In the law of nature.
As it was the first before the flood, so in the new world, when all things had
been drowned with the flood, the first service done to God, was the offering of
Noah, upon an Altar which he made, as it is in the eighth chapter of Genesis
and the eighteenth verse: 2 In the wr^ten law.
In the law of nature we see it is first, and so it was first in the law of
Moses; for before he spoke of any worship, he willed that they should sacrifice
unto the Lord their God, in the third chapter of Exodus and the eighteenth
verse: 3. As in the old; so in the new.
So is it the first, not only in the old Testament, but in the new; for, the
first service performed to Christ the son of God, was the oblation of the
wisemen, in the second chapter of Matthew and the eleventh verse.

2. For the generality, both offered, and why?
Secondly for the generality: As mention is first made of oblation; so it is
said generally, that Cain and Abell offered: For there is no Religion, be it
true or false, that is without offerings and sacrifices. Not only the Jews had
them but the (...) also: And of them not only such as were godly, as it is said
of Job, that be offered a sacrifice, in the first chapter of Job and the fifth
verse; but even those Gentiles that were not regarded of God, had their
sacrifices; as (...) had his service altars, upon which he offered oxen and
rams to God, Numbers twenty third. Our Christian Altars, the Lords Tables.
And for the Christians, that they have always had their offerings is plain,
for of them the Apostle says, Nos habemus altar, in the thirteenth chapter to
the Hibrewes, that is, as the Jews had their altars upon which they offered
those sacrifices which did praenunciare mortem Domini; so the Altar of the
Christians is the Lords table whereon they do anunciare mortem Domini, in the
first Epistle to the Corinthians, the eleventh chapter and the twenty fifth
verse. As the Jews Sacrifices were figures, so our Sacraments are memorialls
of Christ's passion, in the twenty second chapter of Luke, and the nineteenth
verse, Facite hoc in memoria (...).

2. The kinds of offering,
Secondly, the kinds of their offering are, as the Apostle says, in the fifth
to the Ephesians, and the first verse, 1. Oblation.
An oblation of a sweet smelling savor, 2. Sacrifice.
and a sacrifice which the Hebrews call Minchah and Zebach, and the Greeks
(...) and (...) the Latins Oblatio and Sacrificium. So the Apostle she weth
the division where he says, Priests were appointed to offer up to God, on the
behalf of the people, gifts and Sacrifices for sin, in the fifth chapter to
the Hebrews and the first verse: These were offered in the Tabernacle, in the
ninth chapter to the Hebrews, and the twelfth verse; and had their ground in
Cain and Abell; after whose example, their posterity offered those oblations to
God.

The oblation was a thing offered up whole as it was, without alteration; But
the Sacrifices were changed and consumed with fire. Such an oblation was that
which Abell offered: And therefore the Apostle says, it was a sacrifice, in
the eleventh chapter of the Hebrews and the fourth verse: By faith Abell
offered a better sacrifice. 2. Kind of gifts distinguished.
Which two kinds of gifts or offerings, are thus distinguished; 1. To please.
as there are munera placentia, such a gift was the Mandrakes which Lea gave to
Rachel to please her, in the thirtieth chapter of Genesis and the fifteenth
verse: 2. To pacify anger.
And munera placantia to pacify anger, such as Jacob gave Esau, when he had
offended, in the thirty third chapter of Genesis; Examples.
And the brethren of Joseph when they had offended him, in the forty third
chapter of Genesis: 1. To please Angels offer up praise to God, common also to
men, and why?
A present of Spices, the first kind of oblation which is to please, is common
to us, with the Angels themselves; for they offer up to God praise and
thanksgiving, because they know God is pleased with them. 2. Praises to men, to
offer gifts to pacify Gods wrath.
But the second sort, is proper to men only, who as they have procured Gods
anger by sinning; so they are to offer those gifts which may pacify his wrath.

3. The ground and reason why they offered.
Thirdly, the ground and reason why they offered, 1. For oblation.
is first for oblation. Albeit God forbad to offer to Idols; yet his will is not
that we should not offer at all: And though we may not offer to God, to the end
wemight supply his need, seeing he is not hungry, in the fiftieth Psalm: In
testimony of thankfulness, and why?
Yet he will have us offer in testimony of our thankfulness to him; as he
says, offer to me the sacrifice of thanksgiving; So that as a Prince, having
made a conquest of a City, does distribute it to his subjects at his pleasure;
yet so, as he reserveth to himself a rent or service, be it never so little,
that they may thereby acknowledge, that whatsoever they have they hold it of
him; so God will have us after the example of Cain and Abell, in fine dierum,
On the Sabbath to offer our quit rent to God, and why?
that is on the Sabbath, to offer to him our quit-rent, we may not come before
him empty handed, the twenty second chapter of Exodus; 1. To acknowledge all we
have, to have it from him.
but bring something with us, to acknowledge that whatsoever we have, we have it
from him; Not only by a vocal, but a real confession.
So the people were to bring their first fruits in a basket, and to offer to God
by the Priest and to make not a vocal, but a real confession of Gods
goodness, and providence for them, in the twenty sixth chapter of Deuteronomie:
As David acknowledged, all comes of thy hand, Note.
and quod de manu tua accipimus, ca damus tibi, in the first of the Chronicles
the twenty ninth chapter and fourteenth verse: Even so as God gives us our
spirits, in the twelfth chapter of Eccle. 1 To offer in soul spiritual
sacrifices.
We must offer to him spiritual sacrifices, in the first of Peter and the
second chapter: And seeing corpus aptavit nobis, in the tenth chapter of the
Hebrews: And in the fourtieth Psalm: 2. In body the (...) of our lips.
We must glorify him both in our bodies, and in our spirits, in the first of
the Corinthians the sixth chapter, that is, we must offer up to him the calves
of our lips, in the fourteenth chapter of Hose, that is, the sacrifice of
praise to God, which is, the fruit of the lips, in the thirteenth chapter of
the Hebrews and the fifteenth verse: 3. In our substance, and why?
And thirdly, it must not be a vocal confession, but we must really acknowledge
it, by offering of our substance to him, we must not come empty handed, in the
twenty second chapter of Exodus; But as we confess before the Lord, that we
were like to perish till he provided for us; so we must give him a present,
even the first fruits of that we have, acknowledging that all came from him, in
the twenty sixth chapter of Deuteronomie; The ground of our oblation is to
testify;
so as the ground of our oblation, 1. our thankfulness.
is the testifying of our thankfulness. 2 our subjection to God.
Another end is, the testifying and acknowledging of our subjection to God, that
as he gave us our souls; so we confess we ought to bestow our souls on God.

And that we shall do, if when our own reason cannot attain to see, how that
should be just which he requires: 1. to give and subject our souls to God.
yet we be content to make our souls subject to him, and to bring them into the
obedience of Christ, in the second of the Corinthians and the tenth chapter: If
as we have grieved the spirit of God with our sins; so we be content to
grieve our souls, and to break them with sorrow, which is a sacrifice to God,
in the fifty first Psalm and the seventeenth verse.

2. to subject our bodies to God.
Secondly, as we have received our bodies from God; so we must make them subject
to God, by abating the desires which our flesh delights in, that we may
delight in that which God requires, and that we be content to impoverish the
body, to chasten it, and bring it under by fasting, in the first of the
Corinthians and the ninth chapter: From both soul and body, our mouths must
show forth Gods praise.
that it may be more fit for his service, we must not only acknowledge in our
soul, that we owe our selves, both soul and body to God, but we must open our
lips and show forth his praise with our mouths, in the fifty first Psalm.

3. We must honor God with our substance.
And lastly, we must honor God with our substance, in the third chapter of the
Proverbs: And not content our selves with the oblation of the lips, as a
sacrifice that cost us nothing, in the second of Samuel and the twenty fourth
chapter: The sacrifice also has two grounds.
The sacrifice also has two grounds.

1. The confession of our sins, and why?
First, The confession of our sins, for in that the poor Lamb, or other beast
whatsoever, has his throat cut; what is it else but a confession, that what
the Lamb suffers, the same we our selves deserved to suffer: As the Lamb
dies, so we deserve the death both of body and soul: And as the Lamb was burnt
to ashes; so we deserved to be burnt in the lake of sire and brimstone, in the
twentieth of the Apocal. and the tenth very: For sine effusione sanguinis non
est peccatorum remissio, in the ninth chapter of the Hebrews: And so in that
the poor beast has his blood poured out; we do thereby confess, that we
cannot have remission of sins, without the shedding of blood, if we seek it
in our selves.

2 The confession of our faith in Christ, which makes the other perfect, and
why?
But there is a second ground of the sacrifice, and that is, the confession of
our faith, which makes all the other confessions perfect, for how is it
possible that a Lamb should be worth a Man, and that the death of an
unreasonable creature, should be a sufficient satisfaction for the sins of a
reasoable soul; the Apostle says, It is impossible that the blood of Lambs and
Goats, should take away sins, in the tenth chapter of the Hebrews and the
fourth verse: It cost more to redeem souls, then so vise a price, or the price
of the most precious things in the world, in the forty ninth Psalm: Christ,
the Lamb slain, by whose blood we have remission of sins, and why?
Therefore the reason why they offered sacrifice, was to make confession of
their faith in Christ, whom they confessed to be the Lamb of God, slain from
the beginning of the world; by whose blood we have remission of sins: So the
Lamb which Abel offered, in the fourth chapter of Genesis, which Esaias foresaw
should stand before his shearrer, in the fifty third of Isaiah; whom John
Baptist pointed at, John the first chapter, and the twenty ninth verse, Ecce
Agnus Dei, is Christ the Son of God, slain from the beginning of the world, to
take away sins, Apoc. the thirteenth chapter; And in the blood of that Lamb
are the sins of the whole world purged, as it is in the first Epistle of St.
John, the first chapter and the seventh verse.

4. The warrant whereby they offered oblations and sacrifice.
Fourthly, The warrant whereby they offered their oblation and sacrifices, was
not any express command of God in the Scripture; and God only knows what
kind of service best pleases him; and of themselves they were not to devise
any thing; 1. Adam was instructed by God, and they by Adam.
but they were taught by Adam, and Adam was instructed by God: As Adam had
experience that God was able to bring light out of darkness; so he taught Adam
by his spirit, that, as by the tree of life he would give life; so by death he
would give life: For as in the Sacrifices of the Law, the Jews were taught,
that out of death God would give them life; We by our Sacraments,
so now in our Sacraments, Christians are assured, that by the death of Christ
whereof the Supper is a commemoration, the faithful obtain life. Made known,
1. By the light of nature.
The means whereby God made this known to them, was first the light of nature,
That they had offended God.
which told them, that seeing so many infirmities and sicknesses lay upon them,
it was for that they had offended some body. 2. That they owe thankfulness for
all they had, to be acknowledged, in heart, word and works.
Secondly, that all they possessed was from some superior power, to whom they
ought to be both thankful and dutiful, and to acknowledge both these in
words, as well as in heart, and to express this subjection by works, that is,
by offering something to God: 2. For the confession of faith, no reason or light
of nature taught but by Gods spirit.
But as for confession of faith, no reason of man, no light of nature, that
could apprehend that; but as Christ says, in the sixteenth of Matthew, it was
the Revelation of Gods Spirit, which taught them, that Christ the Lamb of God
should be offered as a Sacrifice for sin; of which all the sacrifices that
went before were types.

Concerning Cain and Abell we are to observe two points; First, what they had
in common. Secondly, what severally.

All, both poor and rich must offer.
For the first, As we learn that all must offer, both in the Law, in the
thirtieth chapter of Exodus; for God will have his offering, be we rich, or
poor; and in the Gospel, where Christ allows and commends the poor widows
oblation, Luke the twenty first: So both Cain and Abel bring their offerings to
God. The things they had in common are Three: First, Offerings. Secondly, To
offer to God. Thirdly, They offer of their own, and that which they had gotten
by their honest vocations.

1. We may not worship God with empty hands, or give that which cost nothing.
First, In that they both offer something, it is plain, we may not worship with
empty hands, Exodus the twenty second, and give him that which cost us nothing,
in the second of Samuel and the twenty fourth chapter: Our service must be as
Paul speaks, in the first to the Corinthians, the ninth chapter, and the
eighteenth verse, (...). such are worse than Cain, for he brought something, and
therefore shall condemn those that content themselves with the sacrifice of the
lips. The oblation is originally Mincah, that is, a thing brought, not (...)
from them; they must proceed of a willing affection; and therefore also are
called in Greek (...) as the Psalmist says, in the twenty ninth Psalm,
afferte Deo: They thought it not a weariness to serve God as the people did,
Matthew the third: They considered he was a God of infinite Majesty and power,
in comparison of whom, all the Kings of the earth are but crickets and
grasshoppers, Isaiah the fourtieth, and the twenty third verse.

2. Both offered to God, and not to Idols.
Secondly, They both offered to God, not to Idols, Hosea the second; not to the
creatures, as the Sun, and Moon, and stars, (of whom they say, Jer. the forty
fourth and the seventeenth verse, Let us offer up Cakes to the Queen of
heaven:) Much less do they offer to Devils, in the first to the (...) the
tenth chapter, and the twenty sixth verse: nor to their own bellies and backs,
making their bellies their God, and sacrificing to their backs, on which they
think they never bestow cost enough.

3. Both offered that which they had lawfully gotten.
Thirdly, they both offered of that which they had gotten by their own labor
and industry: It was not the fruit of sin; for God says, I will not have
the price of a whore, in the twenty third of Deuteronomie, and the eighteenth
verse: no sacrifice, be it never so beautiful, shall come into Gods house if
it be unlawfully gotten: But we must offer to God that which we have gotten, by
following some honest calling.

Three several differences in the sacrifice.
The things which they had in several, are three.

1. The time when they offered.
The first is the time when they offered; which circumstance, and the rest
shows, that there is a great difference between their sacrifice; for the Holy
Ghost is (...) diligent to set down Abell's sacrifice than Cain's. Of Cain it
is said, he offered in fine dierum, that is, it was long before he could (...)
in his heart to give something to God; but Abell gave primitias, the first thing
that ever he had. Cain served himself first, and God after, But Abell did
contrary.
Cain served himself first and God last; but Abell was careful of Gods service
in the first place, and after provided for himself. And this is a material
point diligently to be considered. There are none so hard hearted all their
life long, but if they draw near their end, and that sickness come, then they
will offer, in fine dierum, and in novissimo die, Jer. the fifth: Those are
times that will compel men to be mindful of God: But if we will have our
offerings pleasing to God they must be primitiae.

2. Difference in the things which they offered.
Secondly, that which they had in several, was the thing it felf which they
offered, which was diverse and different. God does not (...) fault with Cains
offering, but makes choice of Abel's; Cain's was that which came next to hand,
for Cain offered to God that which came first to hand; any thing, as he
thought, was good enough; Abel's was the first and fattest of his sheep.
but Abell made choice of the fattest of his sheep. As God is the first and best
thing; so he offered to God the first of his sheep, and the fattest among them:
But Cain confounded this order: Of the difference of whose minds in offering,
these verses are witnesses: Abel, when he would offer, says, Sacrum pingue
dabo, nec macrum sacrificabo: Cain says, Sacrificabo macrum, nec dabo pingue
sacrum. Cain was of the same mind, that the Priests were, that would be served
before God had his part, in the first of Samuel, the second chapter, and
sixteenth verse: So Cain will have enough for himself, before he will once
offer any thing to God.

Secondly, when he does offer he makes no choice of his oblation, but thinks
any thing good enough; but the Prophet says, Cursed be he that offers a lame
offering to God, and sacrifices a corrupt thing; for I am a great King, Mal.
the first chapter, and the fourteenth verse: Offer such to thy Prince, would he
be content to accept such offerings? but we will offer the best things to
earthly Princes; how much more to the great King of Heaven; and therefore the
Wiseman says, Honor God with thy substance, and that with the first fruits of
thine increase, Proverbs the third and the ninth verse.

3. Difference in the persons that offered
The third thing observed by the Apostle, is the person of the party that
offers: Abel was a faithful man, and that made his sacrifice the better
accepted, Heb. the eleventh and the fourth verse, By faith Abell offered a
better sacrifice than Cain: the faith of Abel was his assurance, that God was a
great God, and would not accept of lame offerings; and therefore is careful to
bestow the best and first thing he had: Abel's was to testify his faith in
Christ, and to express his thankfulness.
For knowing that sacrifices are testimonies of the thankfulness of the heart,
Abel, to testify his faith in the blood of Christ, and to express his
thankfulness for the same, does choose out of his flocks, the fattest of his
sheep: Faith makes men offer often, and of the best things.
Faith makes men offer often, and better things; but they that are without
faith, care not how few times they offer, nor how small their oblations be.

We are to know therefore, that these two may not be severed, neither fides
from obtulit, nor obtulit from fides, where there is faith, there will be
offerings; for, so says the Apostle, that from the increase of faith, there
was an increase of offerings in the Church: But when there is little faith or
none at all, as in Cain there are offerings seldom made, and when they offer,
it is the smallest and meanest things they have, the second to the Corinthians
the eighth chapter and the seventh verse, As ye abound in faith, and word, and
knowledge, and in all diligence, and in your love to us; so see that ye abound
in these graces also.

Respexitque Jehova ad Hebelum and ad munus ejus. Ad Kajinum vero and ad munus
ejus non respexit: Gen 4. 4.5.

April 29. 1599.
WHich words contein the acceptance of the service of Cain and Abel with God,
which is the matter of greatest moment, and which puts the greatest
difference between them and all the world, and is a pattern of the distinction
which is between the godly and the wicked, begun in this life, and perfected in
the great day of the Lord, when he shall set Abell and histure Worshippers on
his right hand, and Cain and his false Worshippers on the left. In the
denomination of the name which Eve gave her first Son, I told you what is the
worlds censure, viz. that Cain is a name of great price in the judgment of the
world, but as for Abell, that is a name of great contempt, and such as Abell
was, are persons of no account; but here we see Gods censure upon them both is
otherwise; for as the Apostle says, He that praises himself is not allowed,
but he which God praises, the second to the Corinthians the tenth and the
eighteenth verse; so Cain that was so precious in the eyes of the world, is of
no account with God; but Abel which was of no reckoning with men, but despised
as a thing of naught, he is highly accounted with God, for he has respect to
his oblaion, but as for Cain and his oblation, he respected them not: So we see
that as on the one side, God makes the stone that was refused, to be the head
stone of the corner, Psalm the one hundred and eighteenth and the twenty second
verse, so on the other side we see it true in Cain and Abel, which Christ
affirms in the sixteenth of Luke and the fifteenth verse, that which is high
in the account of man is abominable with God. The words contain two points;
first Gods regard to Abel and his offering; secondly, his want of regard
toward Cain and his oblation; first that we may understand what is meant by
regarding; respicere is not only aspicere, for God beheld Cain and his offering
no less than Abel; God sees all things be they never so private, he sees
Sarah when she laugheth behind the Tent door, Genesis the eighteenth and the
twelfth verse, whether we fly up to heaven or lie down in hell, he is present
with us, we cannot go from his spirit, nor fly from his presence, Psalm the
one hundred and thirty ninth and the seventeenth and eighteenth verses, but
respicere is when one likes a thing so well, that he looks on it again, as we
behold those things that we love, God sees all things, and all present; when
he loves, he beholds with an amiable look.
for ubi amor ibi oculus; so God beheld Abel and his offering with an amiable
look, as not contenting himself to look once upon it, The example of a Nurse.
Isaiah 66. 12.
which gracious respect of God is set out by a loving regard that a Nurse has
to the Child when she bears it on her lap, Isaiah the sixty sixth and the
twelfth verse.

Of the next oblation, offer this which Noah offered to God: it is said that
the Lord smelled a savor of rest, the eighth chapter of Genesis and the one and
twentieth verse; by which smelling, and by this seeing and beholding with the
eye is meant, nothing else, but that God received them in good part, and
therefore the Paraphrast expounds these words suscepit Dominus, which
exposition is grounded upon the words of the Prophet, Malachy the first chapter
and the eighth verse, the offering is no more regarded nor received acceptably
in his hands. On the other side the Lord beheld Cain and his offering, but he
suffered not his eye to stay upon it, for he did not allow of it; Testified by
visible signs.
this acceptance the Fathers say was testified by a visible sign, and they
ground this opinion upon the word, for the Apostle says, the eleventh chapter
to the Hebrews and the fourth verse, God bears Abel witness that he was
just, for it was usual with God to testify his liking of the service of his
servants, by outward and visible testimonies, Leviticus the ninth chapter and
the twenty fourth verse, there came fire from the Lord and wasted Aarons burnt
offering, to show that he allowed it; so he approved Gedeons Sacrifice,
Judges the sixth chapter and the one and twentieth verse, when the Angel
touching the flesh with the end of his staff, caused fire to come forth and
consume the flesh, whereby he knew that his offering pleased God; So, when
Solomon had ended his Prayer, fire came down from heaven and consumed his
Sacrifice and Oblation, the second of the Chronicles the seventh chapter and
the first verse, but it is plain in the first of the Kings the eighteenth
chapter and the twenty fourth verse. By fire.
The God that answers by fire let him be God, says Elias, to show that the
true God does by outward tokens testify who be his true worshippers.

But to come in particular to Abels Oblation, Gods liking is upon two things:
upon the Person, and then upon the Gift; for non ex seipsis placent munera, sed
ex offerentibus, and St. Augustine. non ex muneribus Abel, sed ex Abel muner a
placuerunt, And St. Ambrose, prius is qui dabat, quam ea quae (...) placuerunt,
so the person has the first place; but he respected not the person only, nam
ne vanae putentur oblationes, it is not said he had respect to Abel and not to
his offering, but respexit ad Abelem and munera, that is not to Abel alone, but
to him and his gift; The person must first be pleasing to God before his gift
be accepted.
the person must first please before the gift can be accepted, but as he
respects the person, so will he have the gift withal; and therefore God that
said, I will have no Bullock out of thy house, nor Goats out of thy folds,
says gather my Saints together that make a Covenant with me with Sacrifice,
the fiftieth Psalm and the fifth verse, and where he says thou desire no
sacrifice, he means, God chiefly respects the persons of men that they be such
as may please him, otherwise all their oblations are to no purpose; but when
they are so qualified that they can offer to him a contrite and a broken heart,
then God will accept of their Sacrifices which they offer upon his Altar, the
fifty first Psalm and the ninteenth verse, non est detrahendum oblationis, sed
adjiciendum (...); as Abel offered by faith, the eleventh to the Hebrews and
the fourth verse, so we may not take away obtulit, but join fides with it; so
shall our oblations please when our persons are by faith in Christ reconciled
to him: the person of the Offerer has a great privilege, for be the work
never so excellent, if it come not from a person qualified in such fort as God
may take liking, it is to no purpose. The same words, I have sinned, used by
David in the second of Samuel and the twelfth chapter, pleased God, but in
Judas were not respected, Matthew the twenty seventh chapter; so for prayer,
both the Pharisees and Publicans went to one place, for one purpose, but the
one departed justified rather than the other, Luke the eighteenth; for the
Sacraments; Simon magus was baptized and never the better, but Saul and the
Jailor were baptized and obtained remission of sins, the eighth of the Acts
and the sixteenth verse; so Judas was partaker of the Supper with the other
Apostles, but he only was an unworthy partaker. The reason is, If the fruit be
good, we must make the tree good also, Matthew the twelfth: It cannot be good
fruit that comes of an evil tree: The same work of mercy done by an Heretic
and profane person, is not respected, but in a Christian is highly accounted
with God; God is no respecter of persons, but looks upon the heart.
not that God respects persons, for he looks not as man looks, but he looks on
the heart, the first of Samuel the sixteenth chapter and the seventh verse, and
regards no man's person, Matthew the twenty second chapter; for if he should
respect one more than another, then he should regard Cain rather, being the
first born. But yet there is something in the person of Abel, which made him
more respected than Cain, and that is that which God respects in men's persons,
Jeremiah the fifth and the third verse, occuli tui recipient fidem; and the
Apostle says that it was by faith, that Abels offering had the pre-eminence,
the eleventh to the Hebrews and the fourth verse; And respects faith that has
relation to Gods promise.
which faith because it had relation to the word of God, was accepted of God;
for Abel believed the word of God, uttered Genesis the third and the (...),
touching the blessed seed, that should break the Serpents head, and give an
entrance into Paradise, which was kept with a shaking sword. This word of God
is a great and precious promise, the second to Peter and the first chapter,
which Abel respected more than all things besides in the earth; as David says
of Gods word, that it was the joy of his heart, Psalm the hundred and ninteenth
and the one hundred and eleventh; so because Abel so much respected the word
and promise of God, that it was the only joy of his heart, therefore God had a
special respect to him more than to Cain: as his name did signify vanity, All
things to be counted vanity, in respect of God and his Word.
so he counted himself and all the world nothing but vanity, and gave not
himself to vanity, Proverbs the thirtieth chapter and the eighth verse: As
David says Psalm the seventy third and the twenty fifth verse, Whom have I in
heaven in comparison of thee, and there is nothing on earth which I desire
besides thee? so Abel had this account of God, that he desired nothing on earth
in respect of God and his word.

Touching his Oblation, if there be an unfeigned faith, the first to Timothy the
first chapter and the fifth verse, then there is a fained and counterfeit
faith; Abel's faith true, and visible by works.
but that we may know that Abels faith was a true faith and not fained, we see
it had opus fidei, the first to the Thessalonians the first chapter and the
third verse, It was a visible faith, for he shemed his faith by his works,
James the second and the eighteenth, that is, by the effects of faith
proceeding from it; for as there is spiritus fidei, the second to the
Corinthians and the fourth chapter, so it has a body; and in that regard, the
faith of our Father Abraham is said to have steps wherein we must walk, Romans
the fourth and the twefth verse, but a spirit has no steps. That which proved
Abraham's faith to be true and nufained, was the work of faith which he
performed; of which it is said obtulit Abrahamus filium, Hebrews the eleventh
chapter and the seventeenth verse; and the same thing proves Abels faith to be
a true faith, Hebrews the eleventh and the fourth verse, fide obtulit Abel; For
Imitation.
and the offering faith, is that faith which is commended to our imitation.

Steps of Abel's faith.
The steps of faith which were in Abraham and Abell are, 1. Gratitude.
First, Gratitude, whereby we offer a little of that we have, in thankfulness
to God, from whom we acknowledge all to be received.

2. The act of Obedience.
Secondly, the act of Obedience, when by yielding fomething of that we have, we
acknowledge our selves ready to lose all we have for his sake, that gave us all.

3. The act of Humility.
Thirdly, the act of Humility, when, by offering a lamb to God, we confess
thereby that we our selves deserved to suffer, that which the poor beast
suffers; and such an act of faith God respects, ad quem respicio? ad
humilem, in the fixty fixed of Isaiah.

4. The act of Hope and persuasion.
Fourthly, the act of Hope and persuasion, when being persuaded that the death
of a corruptible beast, is no just recompense for the life of man, we hope to
be saved and cleansed from our sins, in the blood of Christ the lamb of God,
which was signified by Abel's lamb. These acts are the steps of the faith of
Abel and Abraham, and God there looks upon such as testify their faith, by
these effects.

The faith of the Elect ever showed these effects.
And, that we should bring this faith and these oblations, we are to consider,
that such has been the faith of Gods servants, from the beginning: Before the
flood, Abel's offering was in faith; after the flood, Noah in faith offered,
Genesis the eighth chapter, and the twentieth verse. In the time of the law God
gave charge, that both poor and rich should offer, Exodus the thirtieth
chapter, and the fifteenth verse. During the Tabernacle; which was carried
hither and (...), Exodus the thirty fifth chapter God commanded, whosoever was
of a willing heart, let him bring an offering. When the Temple was up, David
prays to God, O Lord, the people have offered to thee willingly with joy,
accept it therefore, and keep this for ever in the purpose and thought of
their hearts, that they may still offer, the first book of Chronicles, and the
twenty ninth chapter. After the Gospel, they brought all that they had, and
laid it at the feet of the Apostles, in the fourth chapter of the Acts of the
Apostles. Not only the rich were to offer, as it is in the one and (...)
chapter of Exodus; but the poor that could not bring jewels, were to offer
Camels hair, to the building of the Tabernacle, as it is in the (...) fifth
chapter of Exodus; and therefore the poor widow was commended no less, for that
little which she put in of her penury, than the rich men, in the one and
twentieth chapter of Luke. The Churches of Macedonia were so careful hereof,
that in their extreme penury, their liberality abounded, in the second Epistle
to the Corinthians, the eighth chapter and the second verse; they were willing
to their power, and beyond their power, to shaw their liberality.

The difference between alms and offerings.
There is a difference between alms and alms, as Paul shows, in the twenty
fourth of the Acts, and the seven centh verse, I came and brought alms and
offerings. That distribution which they of Macedonia made, to the poor (...) at
Jerusalem in the fifteenth chapter to the Romans, and the twenty sixth verse, is
not that oblation which the Apostle speaks of, in the fourth to the
Philippians, and eighteenth verse, where the Apostle says, I received from you
an odor that smells sweet, a sacrifice that is acceptable and pleasant to
God. That which is offered to Christ, and given to holy uses, is one thing, and
that which is given to the poor is another.

Note.
For the offerings themselves, both Cain and Abel offered, but not alike: Abel
had respect what he offered, and made great choice of his oblation; he offered
not in firse dierum, as Cain; but primitias gregis, and not the meanest, but
the fattest of his sheep, and therefore God has special regard of Abel: But
as for Cain, as he had no regard what he offered; so God had no repsect to his
(...). The quality and quantity of Abel's sacrifice.
As here Moses shows the quality of Abel's offering, that it was the fattest
he could find; so the Apostle shows the quantity of it, obtulit plurimam
hostiam, in the eleventh to the Hebrews, and the fourth verse; for he had a
regard to the Majesty of that great God, from whom he received all that he had,
and therefore serves him with the best.

How Gods eye was upon Cain and his sacrifice.
But to Cain and his oblation he had no regard; Gods eye upon Cain was not as
the eye of a Cockatrice, that is hurtful; only he deals with Cain
privatively, and not positively, withdrawing from Cain that favor and good
liking which he showed to Abell. The question is therefore, why Cain was not
regarded? If the same faith had been in him, which was found in Abel, he had
been respected. He had obtulit as well as Abel, but not fides; but because he
wanted faith, his oblation and his person was not respected, quia sine fide
impossible est placere Deo, Hebrews the eleventh chapter, and the sixth
verse. What an oblation is:
Oblation is an outward testimony of that inward reverence we have of God, whom
we acknowledge to be our superior; How to be offered.
from whom we receive all help and succor; Note.
and to whom therefore we submit our selves. This persuasion of Gods goodness,
must first be settled in our hearts, and then we outwardly testific our faith;
that when we offer to God a little, we testify that all comes from him: But
this faith and inward persuasion Cain wanted, and consequently, in making an
outward testimony of that which was not in him, he played the hypocrite, and
was therefore rejected. Men do first require the heart, and inward affection,
and then the outward testification; much more will God require it at our hands,
and we cannot deceive him with outward shows, who tries the (...) and heart.

Second question.
Secondly, but why did Cain offer? If he had offered by faith, it would have
brought forth as good effects as Abel's faith did: Respects why Cain offered.
But therefore he offered not by faith; yet he must of necessiry offer for these
respects; 1. fearing more to offend his Father than God.
First as Esau forbore to kill his brother, till the days of mourning, for his
Father came, Genesis the twenty seventh and the forty first verse,because he
durst not offend his Father; so Cain offered, because he durst not offend his
Father. Adam being a religious man, would have been offended if he had not
offered, so the reason why his offering was not respected, was because his fear
toward God, was taught by men's precepts, Matthew the fifteenth chapter; this
was the way of Cain, of which the Apostle says, woe be to them that follow the
way of Cain, Jude the eleventh verse: Men pleasers hypocrites.
Secondly, he thought he must of necessity offer to please other men, for he was
in the number of those that have a show of godliness, but deny the power
thereof, the first to Timothy and the second chapter; and this makes the
sacrifices of the wicked abominable before God, because they come as though
they had respect to serve God only, but it is but to please men.

Third question
Thirdly, seeing faith is the gift of God, why was he not endued with faith,
which might make his person and his oblation acceptable to God as well as
Abels? The answer is out of Job, He was one of those that are abhorrers of the
light, rebels lumini, the twenty fourth chapter of Job and the thirteenth
verse: What the light of nature taught Cain in offering.
what ground had Cain to offer, but only the light of nature? which taught him,
that God only is able to help in time of need, and that it is he that gives all
things: But it tells us not only thus much, but shows us what kind of oblations
must be offered to God, that is, prima primo, and the best things to him that
is best and of greatest majesty. The Lord is a great King, and his name is
terrible, the first chapter of Malachi and the fourteenth verse, therefore we
must beware what we offer to him. Question answered Rebels to the light of
nature, deprived of the light of faith; and why?
But Cain was rebellious to this light, and because he used this talent evil,
he is deprived of this light of faith, the twenty fifth chapter of Matthew and
the twenty eighth verse; for the light of nature is as the light of a candle
shining in a dark place, till the day star, that is, the light of faith, arise
in our hearts, the second Epistle of Peter the first chapter and the nineteenth
verse; And he that is not faithful in little, how shall much be committed to
him? the sixteenth chapter of Luke and the tenth verse; he had respect to
nothing but to please men that are but flesh and blood, and therefore the
meanest things he had served his turn.

Note well the sum of desires to be prayed for,
Lastly, If this be the sum of all our desires, which David prays, Psalm the
one hundred and ninteenth and the one hundred and thirty second verse, Look
upon me, and be merciful unto me, as thou usest to do unto those that love
thy name: And to imitate.
We must imitate them, that by faith have pleased God; we must have both the
faith and offerings of Abel and Abraham; and unto these we must add, that our
offerings come not from us agree, in fine dierum, but that they be primitiae;
they may not be the leanest of our sheep, but the fattest; The offerings of
Wordlings.
but if we examine the faith and offerings of the world, we shall find the
greatest part go the way of Cain; they offer in sine dierum, and without any
choice, the vilest things they have; and many are worse than Cain, for whereas
he offered, many desire such a Religion wherein they may come before God with
empty hands, they would offer a sacrifice that cost them nothing, the second of
Samuel, the twenty fourth chapter and the twenty fourth verse, the first to the
Corinthians the ninth chapter; and there is another degree of men, that content
themselves with pirituall scrifices: some will be content to add, vitulos
labiorum, that is not only conceive some good meditations for a time, but hear a
Sermon and praise God with a Psalm; but as for a real oblation they bring none.
But this was not Abels faith, his was an offering faith; and if we will be
saved as he was, we must bring his faith to God, and show the effects of it:
Fides and obtulit must not be severed, for that is abomination. Examination of
offerings.
If our offerings be in fine dierum, if they be the meanest things we have, then
they are (...) sera, and rejectionis oblationes: We must consider and balance
that which we offer to God, with that which we offer to our belly, whom we
make our God, as it is in the third chapter to the Philippians; and that we
offer to our backs, in the first Epistle to Timothy, the second chapter, and
the ninth verse, in costly apparel. If therefore we have been slack and
unwilling to offer to God; Note.
we must henceforth offer more franckly, and pray that God would continue this
purpose in our hearts, to offer to him, in the first book of Chronicles, the
twenty ninth chapter, and the (...) verse; because this is a savor, and
smells well, and is acceptable to God, Philippians the fourth chapter and the
seventeenth verse. If we will have the true faith, it must be that faith that
does work by love, in the fifth chapter to the Galatians, and the sixth verse;
that it be like Abraham's faith, which did cooperare operibus, in the second of
James and the twenty second verse: and such a faith, as has joined to it love,
and all other virtues, in the second of Peter the first chapter and the second
and third verses: For where there is great faith, there will be great
sacrifices and oblations, in the eighth chapter, of the second Epistle to the
Corinthians.

Qnapropter accensa est ira Kajini valde, and cecidit vultus ejus. Gen 4 5.

May 6. 1599.
IN which words, as we see the original taint and corruption, that came into
our nature by the disobedience of man, breaks forth; for here original sin
shows it self first in Cain, in whom we see that verified, which the Apostle
affirms of all men, that there is a spirit in us that lusts after envy, in
the fourth chapter of James, and the fifth verse: For here the envy of Cain is
manifest, in that he is angry, because God did approve Abel's sacrifice, and
respected not his. This envic and malice of his proceeded from the Devil, who
is called the envious man, Matthew the thirteenth chapter, and the nineteenth
verse, for that he sows envy and all other vices in the hearts of men. There
went another sin before envy: For where Abels sacrifice was done in faith,
and therefore respected; we have showed that Cain offered only to please men,
and consequently whatsoever he did was hypocrisy; which, albeit it go before
his envy, yet it is only in the heart. But the first sin that showed it self
outwardly was his malice and envy against his brother; where we are to note the
proceeding of sin. Envy begins with Hypocrisy;
First, He began with hypocrisy within, Hatred follows,
and then follows hatred and envy without; Breach of faith to God, causes
breach of charity to men.
for if shipwreck be made of faith toward God, charity toward men will not
long be unbroken; If the end of the promise, which is faith in the blessed seed
of the Woman, be not regarded, the end of the commandment, which is love, in
the first epistle to Timothy the first chapter and the fifth verse, will little
be respected; For, as Saint John says, This command we have from him, That he
which loves God, should love his brother also: But he which loves not his
brother, which he sees, how shall he love God which he has not seen? the
first epistle of John and the fouth chapter. In the words themselves there are
two things expressed, First, a heaviness or anger conceived: Secondly, the
abating of his countenance, that is, Cains sin in an inward imposthume, and
an outward jaundise.

But in the first we are to mark, It is not said, he was displeased or angry,
but wrath, and exceeding wrath, the inward infection was come to a suppuration:
It was not envy only, but also hatred, which made him proceed to the murdering
of his brother, the first epistle of John the third chapter. Note. The heart
heavy, it is distempered.
If we inquire, why he was heavy? We shall find that to be, for that his heart
was distempered, either against God, or his brother; either against him that
did respect, or against him that was respected. Heaviness the first fruit of
sin
The first passion or affection of our nature mentioned in Scripture, as we see
is heaviness, which is the first fruit of sin, and of it self is neither to
be condemned nor commended; for, ex peccam (...) tristitia: And as the worm
cats out the timber wherein it was bred, so sadness, being bred of sin, is
the bane of sin; for there are two sorrows, in the second epistle to the
Corinthians and the second chapter, Tristitia secundum Deum, and tristitia
secundum seculum: The Godly sorrow is commendable, for it brings forth
repentance; but the worldly sorrow causes nothing but death and eternal
destruction. If Cain was sorry because he offered not his sacrifice in faith,
as Abel did, he is not to be blamed; but his sorrow was a worldly, sorrow and
therefore to be condemned. As the King said to Nehemlah, Why is thy countenance
sad, seeing thou art not sick? this is nothing but sorrow of heart, Nehemiah
the second chapter and the second verse: So where we see Cain heavy and his
countenance cast down, we may gather that he is disquieted and sorrowful for
(...) and charity, whose property is to think the best, the first epistle to
the Corinthians the thirteenth chapter, would that we should attribute it to
sorrow for sin, that it was because his sacrifice pleased not God; but it is
not that godly sorrow, but the worldly sorrow that brings destruction of body
and soul. The carfulness of Cains sorrow must be considered by the cause and
effect of it; Sense of evil, the object of sorrow.
If God be the cause of his sorrow, it is not to be commended; for although the
sense of evil be the natural object of sorrow, yet God may be the matter of
sorrow: As if some good befall our enemy, then we have just cause of sorrow;
but if good befall our brother, the law of Nature and Gods law will not suffer
us to be sorry for that. But to be sorry for the good of our brother, that
comes without any detriment or hurt to us that is intolerable, and can be no
just cause of sorrow; and therefore Cain in that he conceives sorrow, for the
good that came to his Brother, without his hurt, is guilty of a worldly sorrow,
that is to be condemned.

The effect of his sorrow may be of two sorts.

First, If he were sorry to the end he might punish and be (...) of himself for
his carelessness in Gods service, Godly sorrow.
then it was a godly sorrow, and worthy commendation; but if instead of working
revenge upon himself for doing ill, it makes him persecute his brother for
doing good, then it is no good sorrow.

Secondly, If it were such a sorrow as did provoke him to emulation, as Gods
purpose in receiving the Gentiles that (...), was to provoke the Jews to follow
their faith, the eleventh chapter of the Romans and the eleventh verse, then it
was a godly sorrow; but if it be such a sorrow as makes him worse, then it is
no good sorrow.

If we examine Cains sorrow, we shall find first it was (...), and therefore
evil; for if God know not the cause, as appears in that he asks why art thou
sorry? then no doubt he had no cause to be sorry. If we come to the supposed
cause of his sorrow, it was not any evil that happened on his part, for then
he would have sought to remove it; but the cause of his sorrow was good, not
the good of an enemy, for then it were tolerable; but (...) and bonum
innoxium, such as was not hurtful to him, therefore it was an (...) sorrow:
For the effect of Cains sorrow, godly sorrow does vindicare malum in se, the
second to the Corinthians, the seventh chapter verse the eleventh, it has two
effects, (...) and (...): it is not only a grief of heart for sin committed,
but a taking of revenge for the same; and as it makes a man sorry for the sin
past, so it makes him careful and zealous of himself for the time to come, and
this makes the sorrow of repentance acceptable to God; Sorrow of envy
but the sorrow of envy is no such sorrow. Cain was not grieved for that he had
not served God as he ought, neither took he envy of himself, but he does the
more hurt, for through envy he slew his brother, the first epistle of John and
the first chapter, so far was he from being provoked by his example to good.
Secondly, where the effect of godly sorrow is to do less evil and more grod,
he did not chasten his body and bring it under, the first to the Corinthians
and the ninth chapter, but he proceeded de malo in pejus, the first to Timothy
and the third chapter. The goodnsse of Abels sacrifice did not provoke him to
do good but to do hurt: Why slaies he his brother? because his brothers works
were good and his own evil, the first of John the third chapter and the
twelfth verse. The Wise man sa th, anger is cruel, and wrath is raging; but who
can stand before envy, the twenty seventh of the Proverbs and the fourth verse;
Envy and (...) is joined with murder.
where anger and envy take place, there is nothing but murder, therefore they
are joined together, the first of the Romans and the twenty ninth verse, the
fifth of the Galatians and the twenty first verse, Examples.
and this is plain in Esau, who, so soon as he maligned Jacob for the birthright
and blessing, vowed to kill him, Genesis the twenty seventh: This was the
effect of the envy of the Sons of Jacob against their brother Joseph, Genesis
the thirty seventh; so because David was respected of the people more than
Saul, of whom they sang David has slain his ten thousand, and Saul but a
thousand; Saul was moved to envy and sought to make him away, the first of
Samuel the eighteenth chapter and the seventh and eighth verses. And the cause
why the Jews put Christ to death, was propter invidiam, the twenty sixth of
Matthew and the eighteenth verse: Envy stays not it self till it brings
forth murder, and therefore is to be condemned and avoided.

Envy the daughter of Pride and selflove.
Touching the original of envy, which as we see is accompanied with such
effects, it is the daughter of pride and self-love, a drop of that poison where
with the Serpent at the first infected Eve, and which Adam received from her,
and was derived from them both to their posterity, by means whereof there are,
as the Apostle says, certain blind and absurd men, the second to the
Thessalonians and the third chapter, indeed beasts in shape of men, so blinded
with the love of themselves, that they think no man should be respected more
tham they, they think themselves the only men in the world, the twenty first of
Job and the first, and take to themselves that which God only challengefh to
himself, Isaiah the forty ninth, ego sum and non est praeter me.

The absurdity of Cain thorough envy and self love, was so much that he
persuaded himself, God ought to respect him though he did never so ill, and
that he (...) not to respect Abel how well soever he did; he thought Abel ought
not to be better, nor offer to God a better facrifice than he: But if any man
may lawfully strive to please God, he is not rightly offended with Abel,
because he labored to do God the best service he could. Cains displeasure
against Abel was in respect of his good service, wherein we see that verified
which the Wiseman says, that there are some which fret against the Lord, the
ninteenth of the Proverbs and the third verse; as Jonas to whom the Lord said,
do thou well to be angry, the fourth of Jonas and the fourth verse; but the
absurdity of this passion against God is more absurd, for as the Rebels spoke
of Moses in the sixth chapter of Numbers, will he put out this peoples eyes; so
he seeks to take away. Gods justice, in that he thinks much that God does
regard the good service of Abel. We cannot take away his justice no more than
his providence, for as he sees the sacrifice of both, so in justice he
respects the good and rejects the evil. Cain said as the wicked do in their
heart God does not regard, Psalm the tenth; but if Cain desires that God should
not regard Abel nor his good service, he desires a thing unpossible, for God is
not unjust, to forget the labor of our love, Hebrews the sixth and the tenth
verse, Shall I justify the wicked balance and the bag of deceitful weights,
the sixth chapter of Micha and the eleventh verse; therefore whether we respect
God or Abel, this cause of Cains sorrow is unjust, and his envy is not only
(...), but also (...): And therefore whereas other sins are punished only in
the world to come, and have pleasure in this life, as if that future punishment
were not sufficient for envy: The envious man is a torment to him self.
God takes order that it shall have punishment in this life, for the envious man
is a torment to himself, as the Wise man says, the fourteenth of the Proverbs
and the thirtieth, invidia est putredo ossium.

The degrees of Cains heaviness were, that he was iratus valde: It was not one
of the first degrees of anger which the Philosophers call (...): There are
passions which are no sin at all, as in the fourth chapter of the Ephesians,
irascimini and nolite peccare, and the Lord says do thou well to be angry
Jonas the third chapter, meaning there is some anger that is good, so there is
an anger that is no sin, for the first motions of anger are not so heinous; for
the nature of men cannot keep away these passions, no more than birds may be
kept from lighting upon trees. The Preacher says, Ecclesiastes the seventh
chapter and the eleventh verse, ira nidificat in sina (...); whereupon one
says, that although anger will light upon our nature whether we will or no,
yet we may keep it from making a nest in our hearts, and so long it is no
sin; therefore Cains sin is great in respect it was not only without a just
cause, but for that he suffered anger to rest in his heart.

Note. The tongue the trumpet of the mind.
The falling down of his countenance is a fruit of the abundance of his heart,
as our Savior Christ says, Matthew the twelfth chapter and the thirty fourth
verse, ex abundantia cordis os loquitur, the tongue is the trumpet of the
mind, The countenance the glass of our affections.
and the countenance is the glass wherein we may behold the affections of the
heart, as the Preacher says, heaviness will appear in the countenance,
Examples.
so it did in Labans countenance, Genesis the thirty first chapter; no less
than it does here in Cain; so in the Brethren of Joseph, Genesis the thirty
seventh chapter, Hatred cannot speak peaceable.
in so much as they could not speak peaceably to him; so Saul ever after looked
asquint on David after he conceived displeasure at him, the first of Samuel and
the eighteenth chapter; Pride of heart appears by proud looks.
so the Scripture shows that the pride of the heart appears in the
countenance, by the proud look, the one hundred and first Psalm, and the high
looks, Proverbs the sixth chapter, the adulterous mind is showed by eyes full
of adultery, the second of Peter and the second chapter: Countenance cast down,
a sign of ill.
when the mind imagines evil, then the light of the countenance is turned
into darkness, and the countenance which should be upright is changed in ruinam
vultus, with casting down of the countenance, because it is both an effect and
sign of ill; and the Apostle wills that we abstain from any appearance of
ill, the first to the Thessalonians and the fifth chapter, therefore we are to
avoid it, tristitia vultus est hostilis tessara, the outward badge and token of
some inward evil conceived in the heart, and abscedendum est non (...) a malo,
sed ab omni specie mali. For the conclusion, as we have already once seen the
way what it is, that we might not follow it, Jude the eleventh verse, so here
again we are to consider his way, which is of three sorts.

Note.
First, not to rest and be content with that which God will have come to pass:
he was displeased because God respected Abel and not him; Be content when God
respected, and contrary.
whereas he should have said with Eli, the first of Samuel and the third
chapter, Deus est, faciet quod bonum videtur in occulis ejus, and with David,
the one hundred and ninteenth Psalm and the seventy fifth verse, I know Lord
thy judgments are right, and that of very faithfulness thou have afflicted me;
but to stomach God for any of his doings, is a thing that every one must avoid
that will not walk in Cains way. Fret not thy self because of the ungodly,
says the Prophet, Psalm the thirty seventh and the first; we may not think
much that God does respect the wicked and bless them with temporal blessings,
much less are we to repine at the good of the godly. Fret not at the
prosperity of the wicked.
The Prophet affirms that he was offended at the prosperity of the wicked, in
so much as he said, I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in
innocence, Psalm the thirty seventh, he could not tell what to think of it till
he went to the (...), and there he learned, that albeit they flourish in the
world, yet he sets them in slippery places, that they may fall down to their
destruction; therefore we may not fret our selves, considering that those
things prove to Gods providence. This was David's meditation on the Sabbath,
Psalm the ninty second and the sixth and seventh verses, That albeit the unwise
know it not, and fools do not understand so much, yet he was assured, that
when the wicked did grow as the gross, and all the Workers of wickedness did
flourish, then they should perish, so that we have no just cause to be
displeased with God, if he respect the wicked seeing it is for his hurt, but if
he respect Abel and his good service we are to be glad: When righteous men are
in authority, then the people rejoice, Proverbs the twentieth chapter and the
second verse; (...) it is: he joy of the world, that the godly are respected of
God, and enjoy his favorable countenance; and he that will not follow Cains
way, must confidere virtuti suae, and alienae non invidere; Some rise not by
virtue, but by others fall.
when men do not labor to exalt themselves by their own virtue, but rise up by
the fall of others, that is Cains way, which we must carefully avoid, as we
will ascape the wrath of God.

Thirdly, the example of Abels good service, and the favor which God
vouchsafes to him for the same, should have provoked Cain to a godly
emulation, debuit fratrem mutatus imitari non amulari, I have observed that
nothing is done but upon emulation, says the Preacher, Ecclesiastes the fourth
chapter: If that be taken away all desire of virtue will die. That which we are
to apply from hence to our use is, that If Gods doings, which are just, be
subject to the unjust construction of men, as it falls out in Cain: We ought
not to marvel if our doing be hardly censured which many times are wrong,
notwithstanding howsoever we may rightly be reproved oftentimes for our doing,
yet God is always to be acknowledged righteous when he is judged, Psalm the
fifth, for he is righteous in all his ways, Psalm the one hundred and forty
fifth, and no iniquity in him, Psalm the ninty second.

Tum dixit Jehova Kajino, Quare accensa est ira tua; and quare cecidit vultus
tuus? Nonne si been egeris, remissio? si vero non been egeris, prae foribus est
peccatum excubans? Genesis 4 6 7.

June 10. 1599
WHICH words of God do let us see, Cain's sorrow of malice and envy.
that the sorrow of Cain was not the sorrow of repentance, but of malice and
envy; and therefore he finds fault with it saying, Why art thou wrath? and
why is thy countenance cast down? God knew no just cause of his sorrow, and
therefore it was not a good and godly sorrow, but malicious and full of envy.
Gods first sermon the ground of all others.
These words contain a sermon of God, and the first that was preached after man
was sent out of Paradise; and it is the seed-plot of all other sermons, that is
in the Prophets and Apostles.

To bring sinners to repentance.
In which generally, we are taught as much as the Prophet after affirms of
Gods goodness, That he delights not in the death of sinners, Ezekiel the
thirty eighth chapter; That he will not have any to perish, but come to
repentance, in the second of Peter, the third chapter, and the ninth verse. And
hereof we have a plain example in Cain, who is the first of all the reprobates,
which, not withstanding God labors to bring to repentance.

Again, here we see the blessedness of man's state; for albeit the Angels be of
all creatures most excellent, yet in these two respects man's estate is more
blessed than the Angels. For the sin of Angels is incurable, as Jude
shows, Jude the sixth, The Angels that kept not their first estate, but lost
their own habitation, are reserved by God in everlasting chains to judgment:
Whereas the sin of man may be cured. Secondly, in that God when he was to
redeem the world, would not assume the nature of Angels, but took the nature
of man, in the second chapter to the Hebrews, and the sixteenth verse. For
there is cure and physic for man's sin as the prophet speaks, Let there be
an healing of thine error, in the fourth of Daniel, and the twenty fourth
verse. Therefore the people acknowledged, that albeit they have trespassed
against God, in taking strange ways: yet there is hope in Israel concerning
this, in the tenth chapter of the first book of Esdras. And if ye repent,
iniquitas vestra non erit in scandalum, Ezekiel the eighteenth chapter, and the
twenty second verse: Means to cure the sin of man.
There is means to cure the sin of man. Thirdly, therefore seeing sin is not
incurable, we may not neglect sinners, but must labor to restore them, as God
deals here with Cain. And this is the duty (...) both the Prophets and
Apostles do stir us up: We desire you to admonish them that are unruly, in
the first to the Thessalonians the fifth chapter and the fourteenth verse: And
he that converteth a sinner from his way, shall save a soul, James the fifth
chapter and the twentieth verse. Gods word, Physic for the soul.
Further we learn, that this cure is wrought of God by means of his word, for
that is the physic of the soul, and the balm of Gillead, Jeremie the eighth
chapter and the twenty second verse: And not only by the rod, but also by
discipline as appears verse the eleventh. Fifthly, As the diseases of the soul
are double; so is the spiritual medicine of Gods word double. 1. of comfort.
When Adam and Eve were cast down with sorrow for their sin; then God cured
them with the word of comfort, telling them of the blessed seed, in the third
chapter of Genesis, amd the fifteenth verse: 2. of reproof.
But here he meets with one of another disease, and ministers to him the word
of reproof, rebuke and threatenings. In respect of the one the word it self is
compared to honey, Psalm the nineteenth and the tenth verse; and in respect of
the other, the Ministers of the word are called the salt of the earth, in the
fifth chapter of Matthew, and the (...) verse: The one is the word of mercy, the
other the word of judgment: The one is set out by the oil poured in the wounds
of the sick man, whose nature is to supple; the other is signified by wine,
which has a peircing power, Luke the tenth chapter. Therefore out of Christ's
side came out only blood, but water also, John the nineteenth chapter, and the
thirty fourth verse. There is a cure both by compunction of heart through
sorrow, in the eleventh chapter to the Romans; and by unction that is, by the
Holy Ghost which anoynteth us with the oil of gladness. Therefore we must
mark what disease the soul has, for it is as unkindly to heal wounds with
sweet words, as it is in the sixth chapter of Jeremiah, as to apply oil to
those parts that require (...).

The parts of the sermon are four: And by ancient Writers are reduced to these
four uses of holy Scripture, which the Apostle notes in the second to
Timothy, the third chapter and the sixteenth verse: To reproof belongs, Why
art thou angry? and why is thy countenance cast down? To doctrine, If thou do
well sbalt not thou be accepted? To correction, If thou do not well, does not
sin ly at the door? Lastly, for instruction, he tells Cain, that albeit the
desire of sin do assault us, yet it shall not have dominion over us. Or, as
other interpret this place, it contains (...) motives and arguments, why sin
should be hateful to us. First, because sin is a (...) thing, and such as no
reason can be given for. Secondly, it will deprive us of our reward. Thirdly,
not only so, but we shall be cast down into hell, to be partakers of the wrath
of God for ever. Fourthly, albeit the Devil do labor to make us commit
sin, yet the seed of the Woman shall give us grace and strength to resist
sin and the desire thereof.

In the first part are two questions: Question of the mind.
One of the mind, Why art thou angry? Quest. of the countenance.
The other of the countenance, Why is thy countenance cast down? Concerning both
which (in that God knows no cause of Cain's sorrow,) it is plain, that it
was an evil sorrow; for God allows not that sorrow, for which we cannot give
a reason: Note. A reason to be given of our sorrow and actions.
And as God will come one day to ask an account of our works; so we must every
one give a reason of our actions, in the fourteenth chapter to the Romans and
the twelfth verse, and in the first cpistle of Peter, the fifth chapter. But if
we be not able to give a reason of those things which we do, then are we as
brutish as unreasonable beasts: God teaches man more than the beasts of the
earth, and gives him more wisdom than the fowls of heaven, Job the thirty
fifth chapter, verse the eleventh: Therefore man ought to do God more service
than they. Therefore the Prophet says, in the thirty second Psalm Be not like
horse and mule that have no under standing. We are, as the Apostle speaks, men
of understanding, in the first to the Corinthians, and the tenth chapter; such
as ought to do nothing, but what they can give a reason for: Therefore the
word is called, (...), in the first epistle of Peter, the second chapter, and
the second verse; and the service that God requires of us, is (...), in the
twelfth chapter to the Romans and the second verse; and they that do otherwise
are not only evil but absurd and unreasonable men, in the second to the
Thessalonians, the third chapter and the second verse. All kind of sin is
unreasonable.
As God sets this brand upon all kind of sin that is unreasonable; Chiefly
hatred.
so chiefly the sin of Cain for his hatred toward Abel, was not for evil,
but for good. In natural reason we are to love good things and hate evil, but
where he hated his brother, because his works were good and his own evil, the
first epistle of John, the third (...) and the twelfth verse, it appears that
his sin was brutish and unreasonable; which unreasonable kind of dealing
the holy Ghost expresses, Is thine eye evil because his is good, Matthew the
twentieth chapter and the fifteenth verse.

We must make account for gestures of our bodies.
Secondly, for his countenance; God will have an account of the gestures of our
bodies; for as they were both created and redeemed by God, so we must glorify
God both in body and spirit, the first to the Corinthians, the sixth chapter
and the twentieth verse, God allows no affection that is causless, and
therefore condemns unadvised anger as a sin, Matthew the fifth chapter,
which was Cains sin. The second motive is, If thou do well, shall not thou
be rewarded and accepted? where in he wills us to look, not only to the ground
and cause of our actions, but to the end of them; as if God should say, if
reason cannot move you to hate sin, yet let affection move.

Affections, Hope, Fear.
Now there are two chief affections which move the life both of man and beast,
that is hope, and fear; first God moves with the hope of reward, If thou do
well shall thou not beeaccepted? then with the fear of punishment, but If thou
do evil sin lies at the door. By the first question, Gods meaning is, Am I
such a one as do not regard well doings? All Scripture affirms that God
tendreth goodness, dicite justo quia been and erit merces, so says Jehosaphat
to the Judges in the (...) Isa. Be of good courage and (...) it, for the Lord
will be with the good, the second book of the Chronicles and the ninteenth
chapter, with whom the Apostle agrees, Be steadfast and unmovable, quia labor
vestra non erit inanis in Domino, as it is in the first of the Corinthians and
the fifteenth chapter, and the conclusion of the whole Scripture is, Behold I
come shortly and my reward is with me, the two and twentieth chapter of the
Revelations and the second verse. If our love were perfect it would cast out
fear, and we should not need to be drawn to do well with hope of reward,
but because there is great imperfection on both parts during this life,
therefore we have need to be stirred up to do well, with the one, and
terrified from doing evil with the other. The reason why David hearkened to
Gods statutes was, propter retributionem, Psalm the hundred and ninteenth;
Moses was contented to suffer adversity with Gods people, for that he looked
to the recompense of reward, Hebrews the eleventh chapter, so that it is Gods
will we should take notice of this word of comfort, that if we do well we
shall be accepted. The word Neshah used in the original has two
significations, both to reward, and to forgive, as it is in the thirty second
Psalm, Blessed are they whose intquities are forgiven; the first sense has
reference to the fourth verse, where it is said, God had respect to Abel and
his sacrifice; And for the other sense (thou shall be forgiven.) It is
agreeable to the Scripture, which teaches, us that to ridd our selves of sin
we must break off iniquity with right dealing, Daniel the fourth chapter; and
mercy, Joel the second chapter and the thirteenth verse; sanctify a fast, call
an Assembly, then shall the Lord be merciful; and Peter to Simon Magus, Pray
to God if so be the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee, Acts the
eighth chapter and the twenty second verse.

But Abel did well, and that was (...) rewarded in this life, for his brother
killed him, he was not rewarded here, therefore it follows he was rewarded in
the life to come, For God is not unrighteous, to forget the labor of our love,
Hebrews the sixth chapter and the tenth verse: though God forget us on earth,
yet we shall be remembered in heaven. It is a righteous thing with God to
recompense them ( which are troubled, with rest; when the Lord Jesus shall show
himself from heaven, the second to the Thessalonians, the first chapter and the
sixth and seventh verses. So that the second motive to drive us from sin is,
that it deprives us of the reward, and sets us out of the hope of Gods favor:
In which case we must practice the counsel of the holy Ghost Apocal. the
second memor esto unde cecider is and resipisce. The third motive is, that if
thou do not well, sin lies at the door, which is the corrective part, as if
God should say though neither reason can move nor hope of good; yet let this
move us, that sin does not only deprive us of God, but brings eternal
destruction: si bonus non infructuose, si malus non impune? for God takes order
that neither good shall be unrewarded, nor evil unpunished; sin shall not
only deprive us of our hope and shut us out of heaven, but lock us fast in
hell, to endure torments for ever. This is a thing worthy our consideration,
That if we do not well we shall be punished, for sin lies at the door, and
if we sin against the Lord, be sure your sin will find you out, Numbers
the thirty second chapter and the twenty third verse; Note.
for sin does entangle men as it were with cords and snares, Proverbs the
fifth chapter. Sin lies at the door, first in diem judicii asservatur;
wherein are two points: First, concerning the lying of sin: Secondly, the
place where it lies. By lying is understood the act of sin; and as that
which lies is said to rise again, so sin is not so low nor so asleep, but
after it has lain a while it will rise again, that is, after the act performed
there (...) a remorse of conscience for the sin committed; for the act of
sin, howsoever the lips of a strange woman drop as honey, yet of the remorse,
he says the end is more bitter then wormwood, Proverbs the fifth chapter and
the third verse; for sin is never so sweet in committing as it is bitter in
remembering: The bread of deceit is sweet to a man in the act of sin, but
after when he is touched with remorse, it fills his mouth with gravel,
Proverbs the twentieth chapter and the seventeenth verse. Whosoever devoures
holy things, they prove a snare to them, Proverbs the twentieth chapter, and
the twenty fifth verse: How goodly a color soever the wine have in the cup,
and how pleasantly soever it go down; yet in the end it will bite like a
Serpent, Proverbs the twenty third chapter and the thirty first and thirty
second verses. They that are desirous to fall asleep, hide themselves in some
private corner, that they may not be (...); so there is a secrecy of sin, and
men would fain hide sins, but there is a day of the Lord, which when it
comes, it shall illuminare occulta tenebrarum, the first to the Corinthians
the fourth chapter and the fifth verse, then the most secret sins shall be
laid open, for there is nothing covered that shall not be known, nor hidden
that shall not be revealed, Luke the twelfth chapter and the second verse.

Touching the place where sin lies, it is at the door or gate; and this it
makes sin to awake: For it cannot sleep by a door, where there is continual
knocking. But there is a double interpretation of the word door.

First, it is referred to the door of a man's conscience, of which it is said,
Behold, I stand at the door and knock, in the third chapter of the Revelations,
and the twentieth verse. And according to this sense, Gods meaning is, that
when sin is once committed, a man's conscience will easily be disquieted with
the least knocking, for the sleep of sin is like the sleep of him that
sleeps upon the top of a mast, in the twenty third of the Proverbs and the
thirty fourth verse, which being tossed to and fro of the wind, suffers him
not to take any quiet rest. And that sin is wakned by the door of the
conscience, we have a plain example in the Children of Jacob; Affliction
knocks at the door of conscience, to awaken it being asleep.
for when affliction did knock at the door of their consciences, they remembered
their sin and confessed; that all that misery was befallen them for their
cruelty toward Joseph, in the forty second of Genesis and the twenty second
verse: and after Jacob was dead, the remorse of conscience did so waken them,
that they would not be quiet till they had asked Joseph forgiveness for their
cruelty toward him.

Secondly, because there are some that can sear up their consciences, so as
they will not be touched with any remorse: Therefore there is another door
whereat sin is said to lie, that is the door or gate of death, Psalm the
ninth, Isaiah the thirty eighth and the tenth verse, I am going to the gate of
death. This gate or door cannot be shut up; we cannot escape death, and Judex
stat prae foribus, Jeremiah the fifth chapter; as soon as we are out of the
door of death, we shall see the Judge ready to give sentence upon us, and to
condemn us for our sins: Sin barketh like a dog.
then sin shall not bark like a Dog, but howl and roar as a Lion, not
suffering us to take any rest, but keep us in continual torment: The
consideration of so great misery as is procured by sin, should terrific us
from sin, unless we be worse than beasts, who by no means will be brought to
run into the fire or any other apparent danger, use what extremity toward them
you will.

At erga te est appetitus illius, and tu praees illi. Genesis 4. 7.

July 21. 1599.
WHich words, as heretofore I have told you, contain a very gracious and
merciful admonition, or (if you will have it so) a Sermon, and that the best
Sermon that ever was made by God to Cain, concerning the reforming in himself
of those inward trespasses of hypocrisy to God, and malice conceived against
his brother: Of which, as the ancient Fathers have divided them, be four parts.
First, by way of expostulation, Why art thou wrath? etc. Secondly, a point of
doctrine and direction to the promise, If thou do well? etc. And the third a
point of correction, (...) by God by way of commination, If thou do not well,
sin lies at the door. And these three we have already handled, now come we to
the last, which is the manner how God will deal that he shall be inexcusable
saying, erga te erit appetitus ejus, the meaning whereof it is good that we
know, for indeed the diverse taking of the word ejus, where unto ejus should be
referred, makes that the words are (...) diversely translated, yet are all true
and of due and high regard, and have very fruitful and godly meditations; for
there (...) that refer this word ejus to Abell, that is, thy brothers desire
shall be to thee, which is not here meant. There are others that refer it thus
because no mention is made here of Abell, but that sin is the last thing
spoken of, therefore they refer it to sin thus; the desire of it shall be to
thee, which is the best translation, and the most fit and congruent sense,
agreeing with the words. So then to deal truly and uprightly, I have told you
that the words may bear both senses well and with good profit, therefore I will
take them both first together, and then tell you which is best: If then we
understand it to be Abel, which cannot be referred to any man's person so well
as to Abels, take it so, as if God should say, indeed I respect thy brother,
and if thou rejoycest that Abel is respected, thou do well, for so thou
should do; but thou art grieved thereat: Why then art thou so sad? Here God
expostulates with him, and it is a condemning of his action, because it is a
foolish thing to do that which has no good reason to be rendered, to warrant
the doing of it; Therefore God divides the sense into two parts; either the
reason must be in God or in Abel, in God for favoring him, or in Abel, because
favored of God. Now God in the former part has acquitted himself, saying, If
thou do well, shall not thou be accepted? for behold I am just, and will
regard thy well doing, therefore thou have no cause to be grieved for that: Or
else thou shall be rewarded according to justice, and that in bounty and
liberality, which is by ancient Fathers grounded upon the words of God to
Abraham; Fear not, for I will be thine exceeding great reward, Genesis the
fifteenth chapter and the first verse, that is, If thou do well, thou shall
be (...) be rewarded for it; but if thou do not well thou have no cause to be
grieved neither; for as I am just and will talk with thee, and one day thou
shall hear of it; so yet my justice is full of mercy, I intend not presenly to
take thee by the throat, but give thee space to repent, (...) shall but lie at
thy door; so that not only Gods justice (...) herein, but his mercy is
exceeding great and mixed with justice. If God took order, that after his sin
committed, Cain should (...) by and by come to judgment, but should have time
first to (...) himself of it; this is matter of comfort, that no man should
despair by and by when he has sinned; far that God is a (...) God, and would
not the death of sinner, and therefore gives him time to repent: This shows
that God gave him no cause of grief. There remains that the grief must be
conceived against Abel, because God so much respected him; but so the sense is,
as if God should say, Cain art thou grieved for Abels good, and fear he
should grow insolent by the favor I have showed him, and so he should despise,
and thou should be vile in his eyes? If Abel have offended thee, why his
desire shall be subject to thee, but that is no cause why thou should be
grieved; for he being the Child of grace, does not affect any such manner of
superiority as thou fear, but is as modest and as humble as he was before,
and so thou have no reason of impatiencie against him.

And not only that first, but this second, that God showed plainly that it is
his will that in and by the sin committed no man should lose any privilege
which of right is due to him, and which before he had; and every motion, in a
Superior, to sin does not discharge him of his authority. Which is contrary
to that false opinion and censure of them which think that even Princes
themselves, after sin committed, lose all their prerogative and supremacy of
government which they had before, and that their Subjects are not bound to do
their service any longer to them, but that ever after their allegiance shall
cease, which is false and contrary to all reason, and not Gods intent and will
here. For as in the chapter before, after Adam had sinned, yet Eve was still
subject to him; so the same God says, and ratifieth here, that Cain though he
had thus sinned both against God and his brother, yet being the elder and first
born, and so before Abel, so there should be a superiority and dominion that he
should still retain by nature: And it is Gods assertion, that that superiority
should be retained still, and that Abel should not seek to be his Superior;
neither did he. That was the prerogative which Cain had before Abel, as the
elder. But to yield this obedience, has been the continual practice of all
the Saints and Children of God: King Saul was a wicked man, yet David rebelled
not against him, because he knew him to be the Lords anointed; so the Prophet
Jeremy says of Nebuchadnezar a wicked King, that he will visit the Nation and
Kingdom that will not serve him, the twenty seventh chapter of Jeremiah and
the ninth verse; and for the new Testament, both Paul and Peter confess the
same; Paul in the first to Timothy, the second chapter and the second verse,
and Peter, in the first epistle of Peter, the second chapter and the fourteenth
verse, do will, that duty and allegiance be given to the higher powers, not
only if they be good, but though they be Tyrants and wicked Princes that fear
not God: And it is it that God says by Job, Job the thirty fourth chapter and
the thirtieth verse, that by him the Hypocrite reigns, that is, for their
sins God will send wicked Princes, and Cain shall bear rule over Abel: God
does not only alledg, that thus it was, but thus he would have it. This
Government thus by God established, in the beginning was by David, Jeremy Paul,
Peter, Job, and all the rest of the Patriarchs and Saints of God confessed and
allowed: So that if we regard Abel either in respect of himself or his
demeanor toward Cain, or we respect Gods goodness herein, no just cause can
be of grief, neither was it Gods will that Abel should resist, neither does he
any such thing; and so indeed there was no just cause why Cain should fear it
or be grieved: And this may suffice for the first, which I will shut up with
this Caveat of instruction (...); Our own sin (of malice and envy,) is cause
of our grief.
that for as much as the grief of malice and envy cannot be (...) from God who
is just, nor from Abel who is mild and modest, then it remains that it came
from Cain himself, whom God repeats four times together in the words of this
Text ( thou and thee) and so he must return to his own heart, and remember how
his own sin is cause of his grief, as God himself speaks by Isaiah the
forty sixth chapter and the eighth verse, Remember thus and be ashamed, bring
it again to mind you transgressors: Note.
And for the new Testament, Luke the fifteenth chapter, the prodigal Son when
he came to himself, confessed his own unworthiness, and said, Father I have
sinned; which is another main point of Divinity established from the beginning,
that as God says, Hosea the fifteenth and the ninth perditio tua ex te Israel,
salus autem ex me, so our well doing or ill doing is cause of our regarding or
destruction; so says James, no man is tempted of God, for God cannot be
tempted of ill, neither does he tempt any man, but every one is tempted of his
own concupiscence, James the first chapter and the thirteenth verse: So that
from the first we have this Doctrine, that if God be judged he is innocent, and
if Abel, there is no fault in him, and to come to Cain, he is in all the fault.

But now if we come about and say, it is not meant of the person, but of the
things, that is sin; then we must proceed another way, yet true and very
profitable; and so say ad te appetitus ejus; ejus says Augustine, cujus?
numquid fratris absit. Nay says he, it is appetitus peccati; and Augustine
does ground this upon Jeremiah the fifteenth chapter and the ninteenth verse,
where it is said, If thou return; and in the same verse ipsi convertantur ad te
non tu ad illos: and so after Austin, St. Jerome says excellently, ne peccatum
illi, sed ille peccato dominaretur, not that sin might have dominion over
him, but he over sin; and so in a manner dealt all the ancient Divines. It is
well known St. Jerome knew the tongues, and was well acquainted with the
Scriptures, and so the sense is more perfect and complete this way than the
other. This then is the point of instruction, as before by way of praise and
threat; so here God deals by way of admonition, which is brought in by way of
supposing an excuse, as if one should say, I would not (...), but I cannot do
otherwise, I have no power over my self to rule my self or (...) this grief;
how then can I rule over it: that is, over sin. But against this supposition
of Cain, Gods instruction is thus; though sin be turned toward him, yet God
says he may be Master over it that he needs not yield to it; as if God should
say to Cain, I would have thee do that which my grace offers unto thee, and
not that which the concupiscence of sin leads thee to.

Here are two things propounded: First, our own state in these words, but unto
thee his desire shall be subject: Secondly, our duty what to do, thou (...)
rule over him. For the first, I grant it, thou can not live without it, for
sin lies at the door, knocking, and will run in and embrace thee if thou
open the door to it; it is not possible, but ad te appetitus ejus, sin will
be taking hold of thee, as it is exactly set down, Hebrews the twelfth chapter;
sin hangs on fast. This is your state says God, and take notice of it, but
then do your duty; when sin knocks, look that you shut the door against it;
when sin runs to you, see you turn your back on it, and when it desires, let
it be in vain; and then says St. Austen, and surgendo and proferendo frustra
defatigetur, ut tandem mihi proferat, and discat amplius non surgere; and this
it is that God would have us to remember, to repel sin by striving against
it, and not become Slaves to it by serving the lusts of it; For as many times
as a man refuses the conversion and turning of the oportunities of sin, it
is the redoubling of so many rewards and crowns in the Kingdom of heaven: so
that I tell you (as often I have) that it signifies both comfort and
exhortation, that that which exhorts should comfort, and that which comforts
should exhort too.

First for comfort; not that any man should think himself forsaken and out of
the compass of Gods favor, when sin runs to him; for therefore it is called
conversion, it is the motion that water has in hollow places, that howsoever
on hills or steep places it runs down, yet in hollow places it staieth,; such
is the nature of sin: As if God should say, seeing your nature is such, that
it is naturally inclined to sin, by the teint and corruption of the poison of
that Serpent which first beguiled your first Parents, which every man in his
own nature has sense of, yet he feels no more than all the dear Saints of God
have felt. Therefore that it should not seem strange to any man when he sees
sin run to him, and finds those temptations of sin and motions thereunto;
for it is no other thing than what is incident to all, the first to the
Corinthians, the tenth chapter and the thirteenth verse, No temptation has
taken you, but such as is incident to man. Now that is our inclination
natural, which we cannot avoid here in this life, and that is comfort against
the objects of sin, that our case is no worse than other men's. But withal to
this comfort God joins exhortation, that for as much as we shall be continually
provoked and assaulted by sin, and sin will run to us and ly at the door, yet
we are not to go and meet it, and if not go meet it, we must take heed we
draw it not to us with cart-ropes, as if it came not fast enough, Isaiah the
fist chapter and the eighteenth verse; and as Ezekiel speaks, we may not be as
dragons sucking still, Ezekiel the fourth chapter and the second verse, nor put
the stumbling blocks of iniquity before our face, Ezekiel the fourth chapter;
we may not plough for sin, Proverbs the twenty first chapter and the fourth
verse, as if he should say, sin will come fast enough in the fallow grounds;
therefore we need not to provoke our selves by pictures, lewd songs,
enterludes, and such like means (...) draw it to us, but to abandon them all:
It is that which the Apostle exhorts all men to; in the second to the
Corinthians, the eleventh chapter and the twelfth verse, to cut off all
occasions to sin, observing what that is that provokes them to sin, and
cut that off that we draw not sin to our selves, and so be accessory to
sin, and cause of our own woe: If the water be coming, that we give no
passage to it; if the coals lie before you, spit on it you may, but beware you
blow it not; and if sin would have passage, stop it, (...) serving sin you be
carried away captive of sin; for of whomsoever a man is overcome, his servant
he is, the second of Peter and the second chapter; and his servant you are to
whom you obey, Romans the sixth and the thirteenth verse: Therefore give not
your members as weapons of unrighteousness to sin, but give your selves to
God. This is our duty which we must do and perform; for as the former part is
set down for our comfort, so this serves for our instruction; So there is a
comfort in our estate coming by this exhortation, and there is exhortation out
of the comfort, to do our duty on sin, which shall stand us in great stead
in the day of the Lord.

Here are four divisions or distinctions.

First, God says, There is sin in body, and sin in soul; there are as well
corporal sins as mental, and as well actual as cogitable.

(...) a sin against man as well as God.
Secondly, Si been feceris, nonne acceptaberis? so that God says plainly, he
that bears malice does not well, that is, he sins against his brother, for
a man may as well sin against man as against God, for that Gods command is,
Love thy Brother or Neighbor as thy self; therefore a man should not imagine,
that except he offends God, he sins not. That is a second distinction.

Sin sleeping and waking.
A third distinction is, peccatum cubans and vigilans, that is sin sleeping
and lying still, and sin waking, that is the temptation of sin before and
while it is committed, and then the remorse after.

The fourth and last distinction, is that which (...) a difference between the
Children of God and of the Devil, between the reprobate and the regenerate;
that in the godly there is peccatum (...) but not dominans, sin rules but
reigns not; from hence is grounded that which the Prophet says, in the
nineteenth Psalm, Keep thy servant from presumptuous sins; and in the one
hundred and nineteenth Psalm, Direct my steps, that no iniquity have dominion
over me; so the Apostle in the sixth chapter to the Romans, Let not sin
reign in your mortal bodies; yet he confesses, in the seventh chapter to the
Romans, that sin dwells in him: By which we may see plainly what it
means; for sin would command a man's body, his eye, foot and hand, yea, set
all the parts of his body a work, about that it (...): But that party when
sin bids him (...) and go, (...) still; when sin bids him stretch
out his hand, can clasp it close; when sin bids him delight his eye, can
shut it close; when sin bids take to heart, and one does with sighs shake
it off; he that when sin comes running, shuts the door against it, and
avoideth all provocations; in such a one, there is peccatum currens but not
dominans. That is for the division, and the difference between these two sorts
of persons.

But secondly, we have a main foundation, which the ancient Fathers and Doctors
ground upon the thirteen verses of the third chapter, where God uses the same
words to the woman, that he uses to Cain here, Why have thou done this? And
the Woman said, The Serpent beguiled me; It shows that the proceeding of Cains
sin, was as the first sin was; for the Serpent first showed her the fruit,
and she did eat; and then after, she showed it to Adam, and it pleasing his
sight, he likewise did eat. This is the proceeding of sin, from the Serpent
to Eve, from her to Adam, and so here the presuming of reason in Cain, contrary
to reason, was as that in Eve and Adam; and therefore, as after God said to the
woman, Thy desire shall be subject to thy husbands, and he shall rule over
thee; so here he says, Cain shall bear rule over sin, and the same shall
befall in man's sensuality, that is, his lusts and concupiscence, which befell
his uper part, which is his reason, alluring him and drawing him to sin:
Therefore they call the understanding and reason, which is the uper part of the
soul, Adam; and the lower part, that is the affection, Eve. The desire and
pleasure of sin, that is the apple, and sin is as the Serpent. As this is
grounded upon the speech of God; so is it upon the similitude and manner of
sin; whereby man is caught as a fish with the bait, in the first chapter of
James; for reason takes the bait first: Such a proceeding is in all sin, and
there is no other temptation to sin now then there was in the beginning to
Adam and Eve. Thus much for our state and duty arising by way of instruction
and exhortation, to behave our selves so, as sin get not the rule over us.

I come now to the last in these words, But thou shall bear rule over it:
Wherein we ask, How shall this be fulfilled? can we give to nature that power
and freewill? nay, it is plain, we cannot, neither is Gods intent so to do,
for we are not able of our selves, as from our selves, to think a good thought,
as it is in the second to the Corinthians, the third chapter, and the third
verse; for we have all been as an unclean thing, all our righteousness is like
a filthy cloth, in the sixty fourth chapter of Isaiah, and the sixth verse: so
that he that has no more in him than the strength of nature, is as he that
follows the steps of an harlot, whose case is like to the ox that goes to
the slaughter, as it is in the seventh chapter of the Proverbs. Therefore it is
not to be desired, neither is it in our strength to do it, for where God
says, Tee shall rule over it; Is our strength able to do thus? No. Further as
Moses said, in the 30. of Deuteronomie, and the 14. that Gods meaning in giving
him the Law, was not that he could do it, or should of himself, but it was
verbum fidei; the word was as near to thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart
to do it. This word is the word of promise, as Paul expounds it, in the
tenth chapter to the Romans: The means to rule sin is as near thee as sin
is. Say not in thy heart, who shall go up into heaven? the means is the word
of faith, which assures thee of Christ the promised seed, who shall for thee
break the head of the Serpent, as it is in the third chapter of Genesis, and
give thee the victory over sin; for else this doctrine had been false, if
that promise had not gone before; then there is Christ, without whom we can do
nothing but sin, as himself speaks, Sine me nihil potestis facere, in the
fifteenth chapter of John and the fifth verse; It is he that gives repentance,
in the second (...) to Timothy, the second chapter; by whom they come (...)
amendment, (...) of the snare of the Devil. And therefore as the Apostle
says, We must be strong in the Lord, that we may be able to resist, in the
sixth chapter to the Ephesians, For we are able to do all things in him that
strengthens us, as it is in the fourth chapter to the Philippians, that is, by
the strength of his grace enabling us: For the performance whereof, we must sue
to him and beg it at his hands by prayer. And that is the meaning of the
words, that we should ire ad Dominum, ut in Domino dominemur; (...) must go to
him that has trod upon the bead os the Serpent, and overcome the power of
Hell, Sin and Death, and he shall tread down Sat an under (...) feet, in the
sixteenth chapter to the Romans, and the twentieth verse: In the one hunderd
and tenth Psalm, He shall bear rule over his enemies; then he may justly bid
us bear rule over sin, seeing he is both able and milling to help us. There
is no man has set it down more excellently than St. Gregory, who says, Justus
Deus instat praecepto, quia cum instat ptaecepto, praecurrit auxilio; so that
if a man can remember what Christ has done, how that he which has broken the
Serpents head, will give us power to bear rule over sin; as he is able, so
will he, if we be earnest suitors to him for (...), give us grace and strength
whereby to resist temptations of sin. So says the Apostle, in the second to
the Carinthians, the sixth chapter, and the first verse, If we receive not this
grace in vain, or if we be wanting to it, by falling away from the grace of
God, in the twelfth chapter to the Hebrews, and the fifteenth verse, then shall
we be able to have dominion over sin. As this is true, and cannot be denied,
that God has shut up all under sin, to have mercy over all; so he will pour
out his spirit upon all flesh, in the second of Joel, and the twenty eighth
verse. What spirit? The spirit of grace and prayer, in the twelfth chapter of
Zechariah; that is, Psalm the (...) and the (...) verse, He fails none that
seek him, and call upon him, that is, he offers grace to all, if they put it
not away from them; by strength of which grace they may resist sin, and bear
rule over it. Then we must go to Christ, and as he says, in the sixth chapter
of John, and the thirty seventh verse, venientem ad me non (...); we offering
to him our prayers, he will not be wanting to (...) us, that when sin comes
to us, which is occursus poccati, (...) ad Christum, we must nun to Christ,
the seed of the Woman. As the seed of the spiritual Serpent is sin; so God
has made it here, saying, Sin lies at the door; so the seed of the woman is
Chist, to whom we must have recourse for help, and say, as the spouse does, in
the first chapter of the Canticles, and the third and fourth verses, Trahe nos,
nam curremus ad te: We will run to those persons, in whom we feel the sent of
their ointments, such as shall be able to give us good counsel and
instruction. Albeit, it is certain we shall not need to run to Christ, for he
says, Revelations the third chapter, verse the twentieth, Ecce, sto ad ostium
and pulso, it is but to open the door, and let him in. When sin lies at the
door, Christ lies there too, so that it is but to open to him when he
knocks, and sin will away: For let Gideon arise, and his enemies will fly:
So will sin fly if Christ come; and we shall come safe out of our doors, if
we let Christ in.

To conclude: Then seeing we see our estate by nature, and what Gods will is,
who has left us a means whereby we may bear rule over sin; we must take
notice of it, that is, run to the promised seed of the woman. It is needful
that we know the sense of dominion, that is, that we have a sense of those
contrary solicitations to sin, as Paul says, I delight in the Law of God,
touching the inward man, but I have another Law, in the seventh to the Romans,
and the twenty second verse; There is a continual combat and strife between
the flesh and spirit, the flesh lusting against the spirit, and the spirit
against the flesh, the fifth chapter to the Galatians, and the seventeenth
verse. When we cannot tell what sin is, nor what be the effects and fruits of
it, and how it solliciteth and desires, and when it reigns we are ready to
meet it, and run as fast to sin as sin comes to us; and that is
dangerous: Therefore we must take notice of his conflict, and know, that
between the heel and the head, this conflict shall for ever be, Genesis, the
third chapter and the fifteenth verse; and every man shall have either peccatum
habitans, vel occurrens; but which shall have dominion, whether flesh or
spirit, nature or grace, it is excellently said by Solomon, in the sixteenth
chapter of the Proverhs, He that rules his own mind and lusts, has a greater
victory than he that wins a City; for they that win Cities, are
oftentimes slaves to their own lusts, and a small appetite overcomes them;
This is not the conquest here spoken of but the masterie over our sensuality,
is it that God means, and he that overcommeth it shall receive a crown at
Gods hand, as the Apostle says, I have fought a good fight hence forth is
laid up for me a crown, in the second epistle to Timothy, and the fourth
chapter. Now every man is not in case to go into the field, to encounter with
his enemy, and to win Cities; but every Christian is in state to strive
against his own lusts, and to fight with sin, which is the Serpents seed:
There must be a bruising between the heel of Adams seed, and the Serpents head;
this combat we must all undergo: whereof we have matter of comfort, if we
overcome in this conflict; and also of instruction and admonition, that seeing
God mislikes sin, promising reward to them that do well, and threatening them
that do evil, saying, that sin lies at the door; that as one day shall
come, when this condition shall be as between the Creditor and Debtor, between
the Judge and malefactor: But withal he shows, that howsoever our nature be
inclined to sin, yet as Gods conclusion to Cain is, that sin shall not get
dominion over him, but he shall rule over it by grace offered to him; so if we
by prayer be earnest Suitors to God for grace, and take hold of it being
offered, we shall be conquerors over sin in Christ and bear rule, and in the
end we shall obtein the reward promised, which is eternal happiness in the
Kingdom of heaven.

Post colloquebatur Kajin cum Hebelo fratre suo: evenit autem quum essent in
agro, ut insurgens Kajin in Hebelum fratrem suum interficeret eum. Genesis 4. 8.

July 29. 1599.
HItherto we have heard Gods Sermon preached to Cain, and in this verse is set
down the success and effect that it took, and it shows that it was in vain,
in regard of the effect for which it was preached, though it were uttered by
God. The end of hearing Gods word.
For the end both of this and all others is, that the Auditors might be drawn to
repentance, but we see that Cain becomes more obdurate and hardened in his
sin: And where the end of hearing the word is, that sin might not have
dominion over us, but we bear rule over it; we see Cain is not the better for
Gods Sermon, but like Ahab, sells him to be the bond-slave of sin.

Not to harden our hearts.
Now in the hearing of Gods word, the chifest matter required at our hands is,
That we harden not our hearts, Psalm the ninety fifth; but if a man be of Cains
mind, if he shall harden his heart as (...), Exodus the eighth chapter and the
fifteenth verse, If he shall say, the word that thou have spoken to us, we will
not hear it, but will do whatsoever goes out of our mouth, Jeremiah the
forty fourth chapter and the seventeenth verse: In such Gods word takes no
effect. Now it is plain why Cain was not moved at the word preached by God; for
there is no means ordained by God more effectual to work repentance, than the
word of reprehension: Then the showing of the promise which God makes to them
that do well; and on the other part, the danger of the (...) that belong to
them that do evil; and when withal we (...), that (...) will set upon us,
yet it shall not prevail against us, but we shall have the mastry over it, if
we accept of Gods grace offered to us.

Now seeing God labors by all these means to drive Cain from sin, and he
notwithstanding continues hardened in it; we see the Prophets words verefied,
that God orders his works in (...) fort, That the mouth of wickedness may be
stopped, Psalm the one hnndred and seventh and the forty second (...) God may
in this respect say to Cain, and every wicked man, quid debui facere quod non
feci? I saiah the fifth chapter; so that we are not to accuse God that Cain
proved so wicked, for he is to be justified when he is judged Psalm the fifty
first. The use hereof (...) to those that are Preachers of the word, that
seeing the Scholar is not above his Master, seeing the Messenger is not greater
than he that sent him, we should content our selves, if our preaching have not
that success we with, seeing Gods Sermon made to Cain did want effect: And yet
we see our weakness in the Prophet, who seeing that his pains took no place
with his auditors, resolved that he would speak no more in Gods name, Jeremiah
the twentieth chapter and the ninth verse, but Esaias made a better conclusion,
Isaiah the forty ninth chapter and the fourth verse, For albeit he confessed,
he labored in vain, and spent his strength in vain; yet he will go on still,
for that he knew his reward was with God. Heb. 6.
When God preaches, and Cain never the better; Our labor is not in vain in
the Lord.
when Christ in his first Sermon could do no good, we are not to think it
strange, though our preaching want success, Though others profit not.
feeing nothing befalls but what befell God and Christ, the Prophets and
Apostles; for it was St. Paul's case also, the second to the Corinthians and the
second chapter; Note.
it is better it should want effect being preached, than it should not be
preached at all; and better it should perish in the ears of the hearers, than
in the mouths of such as are Ministers. Thus much we have to observe on Gods
part.

It is Cains way not to profit by Sermons, but to grow worse after.
Now on Cains part we are to note, first what is Cains way, that taking notice
of it, we may labor to avoid it; for the Apostle says, Woe to them that walk
in the way of Cain, Jude the eleventh. Now the way that Cain walked in, was to
hear Sermons, but not to profit by them: As he was careless in his sacrifice,
and thought any thing would serve to offer to God, so when God preaches to him
he had no respect how he heard, and therefore he had no profit thereby. When
God had used all means that could be to draw him from sin: First, by showing
him that it was an absuid thing to finne, more (...) a bruit beast than a
reasonable man. Secondly, by showing him not only that he should by finne
deprive himself of God, but procure his own woe, and be brought to account for
it. And lastly, by ministering to him comfort, that from the blessed seed of the
woman, that has broken the head of the Serpent, he should receive strength to
subdue sin; yet for all this he stops his ear like the deaf Adder, Psalm the
fifty eighth, and says with them, Jeremiah the forty fourth and the sixteenth
verse, Say what you will, we will do what pleases our selves. This was Cains
humor, and this was theirs also that heard Jeremy: Ezekiel the thirty third
chapter and thirty first verse, They come and fit before thee; they hear thy
words, but do them not; but their heart goes on their covetonsness, and
runs upon their worldly affairs. Cain was the Patriarch of all such, and as
they walk in his way, so they must come to be partakers of that woe that
belongs to him and to all his of spring. But we are further to note, that Cain
was not only not a whit better, but far worse after the Sermon; he went as the
Psalmist speaks, Psalm the sixty ninth, from one wickedness to another; Note.
he proceeded from wrath to deadly hatred, and from hatred to murder, from
peccatum in affectu to peccatum in effectu, for the word that goes out of Gods
mouth, shall not return to him void, but shall accomplish that which God will,
and prosper in the things whereto he sent it: Heb. 6.
It is like the rain that falls down from heaven and waters the earth,
which though it bring not forth good corn, yet it causes thorns and thistles
to spring up, Isaiah the fifty fifth chapter and the tenth and eleventh varies:
and so the Apostle says, that the Gospel preached by him is not in vain, but
is either odor vitae ad vitam, or odor mortis ad mortem, the second to the
Corinthians and the second chapter; and this effect it has, not that it is the
nature of Gods word to bring forth evil, Example.
but as the nature of water is to coals, and never to kindle unless it be in
lime, which is hot and kindled by means which naturally cools and quenches
all other things; so where the nature of Gods word is to kill sin, if it be
uttered to the wicked which perish, sin is made unreasonably sinful by the
word, Romans the seventh chapter; and wicked men are the more hardened in their
sin, when by the word they are reproved of sin: Hence it is, that men being
reproved and checked of sin by the word, have proved more sinful: Note. The
worse by reprehension.
As Abner being reproved by Isbosheth, was the worse, in the second of Samuel
and the third chapter, so Asa being reproved of the Prophet was the worse, in
the second of the Chronicles and the fifteenth chapter.

For the pariculars of this verse, we must know, that Cain's sin is not a
sin presently committed, but that kind of sin, which is plowed for: He
goes about and fetches a compass, before he commits the deed: He had
already resolved to murder his Brother, if opportunity would serve, before he
spoke word to him: And as he that looks after a woman, to lust after her,
has already committed adultery in his heart, in the fifth chapter of Matthew;
Murder in heart, not acted.
so Cain was already guilty of murder, though it were not actually committed;
and so it was with Judas, so soon as he had agreed with the Scribes and (...)
to kill Christ, he was guilty of murder before God, as if it were already
done: All the while that he was compacting with them about his death, he was in
that sin as Christ says of him, Quod facis fac cito, John the thireenth
chapter, and the twenty seventh verse; only Cain and Judas wanted but
opportunity, which so soon as they had obtained, they committed their sin
actually.

The causes of Cains proceeding to the committing of this act, are diverse down
after diverse sorts.

First, he seeks a convenient place and opportunity, and makes choice of the
field, because he would not be hindered in doing the murder; for he could not
have any opportunity at home; for Adam and Eve being at hand, would have been
ready to hinder him. And as he makes choice of this place, not to be hindered;
so, in that after he denied the fact, it appears, his desire was as well not
to be discovered, as not to be hindered. Wherein we have to respect first his
great blindness, that could not see the nature of sin; for in that he sought
such a place for the doing of it, as might be hid and unknown: It is strange he
could not perceive it to be a work of darkness; his own conscience did condemn
him, for he durst not be seen to do that which he did, but in hypocrisy would
seem not to be what he was; this was his way, and we must beware that we walk
not in it. Again, it is strange that he was more afraid of Adam a mortal man,
than of the omnipotent God, and was more fearful, that Adam his Father, a
mortal man, should see him, than that God who is able to grind him in a
mortar, should behold his fact. Wherefore as sin is a dishonest thing,
persuading against all reason, to fear man more than God, so is it a dishonest
thing; for that we will not be seen to commit sin, as a thing that stands
not with their credits, and therefore make choice of such places as are fittest
for the concealing thereof.

Note.
Secondly, he devises how to draw Abel to that place, and what means to use,
that Abel might go confidently with him thither: To that end, though he have
not now spoken to him of a long time, yet he is content to speak kindly to him.
The heathen man says, that if a man will hate, he must do it aperte, unless
he will be worse thin wild beasts, for they violenly fly upon those things
which they hate; Dissembled hatred discovered by silence.
but the Devil has taught men to dissemble their hatred, that they might be
worse than beasts. Hatred commonly is discerned by silence: one argument of
that hatred and grudge which Joseph's brethren bare to him, was not potuerunt
alloqui illum, Genesis the thirty seventh chapter; and so Absalom having
conceived hatred and displeasure against Ammon spoke neither good nor ill to
him, the second of Samuel and the thirteenth chapter, but as the (...) when he
most of all hated our first Parents, would seem to be touched with some
commisseration of their estate, Genesis the third chapter; Note.
Has God indeed said ye shall not eat? Nay, but he knows, etc. So he (...)
Cain to dissemble his hatred with fair words, which dissimulation is a sin,
condemned not only of the heathen, but abhorred by the Saints of God: For when
such a one as walks in the house of God with him as his friend and companion,
should deceive him, then David had cause to pray against such a one, Psalm the
fifty fifth; Let death seize upon him. Cain though he hated his brother and
purposed his death, yet to accomplish his purpurpose, he makes a fair semblance
of love: Example.
So Absalom being minded to murder Ammon, pretends great love to him; he must
needs have Ammon to the Sheep-shearing, or else all his cost is lost; But shall
not Ammon my brother come? the second of Samuel and the thirteenth chapter;
this course took Joab with Amasa, the second of Samuel and the twentieth
chapter; so Judas dissembled his malice with hail Master, and kissed him, John
the twenty ninth: This sin is abominable, yea, it contains seven
abominations, as the Wiseman tells us, Proverbs the twenty sixth chapter and
the twenty fifth verse, and they that (...) hatred with love and slattering
words, walk in the way of Cain. That which Cain spoke with Abel when they were
alone, as St. Jerome thinks, was that he (...) Abel what God had said to him,
and what he had taught him: the (...) referres it to this verse, that his words
to him were eamus ad agrum, whatsoever it was he said it was abominable
hypocrisy.

Thirdly, we see that Abel obeyed the voice of his elder brother, for that it
was Gods will he should bear rule over him; so he went thinking all had been
well, The best natures not suspicious.
for the best natures are least suspicious, as we have an example in Gedaliah,
who believed that Ishmael had no purpose to hurt him, Jeremiah the fourtieth
chapter, for charity is not suspicious, in the first to the Corinthians, and
the thirteenth chapter, especially Abel had little cause to suspect him that
was come from a Sermon, and seemed to be a new man, Note.
so that he spoke kindly to him that had not given him a good look along time.
This change in Cain made Abel to go with him, and being in the place
appointed, Cain arose and slew him.

Degrees of Cains sin (...)
Touching the death of Abel, we are to observe from the words, First it was a
violent death, for his life did not go out of him, but as the word signifies,
it was rent from him. Secondly, it was a bloody death, as the words of God to
Cain show; The voice of thy Brothers blood which thou have slain cries to me,
verse the tenth. Thirdly, it was a sudden death, and therefore more grievous,
because thereby not only the body is killed but the soul also, of such a party
that is in state of sin, and has not respite granted to repent thereof.

In this act of Cain, we have to observe these things whereby his sin is
aggravated: First, the sin which he commits is murder, a sin the more
grievous, for that it is the defacing of Gods Image, Genesis the ninth chapter.
Secondly, his fact the more odious, for that the party murdered is one more
weak than himself, for he was younger than Cain, therefore it was a cowardly
part to set upon his inferior: It is the thing which the Wiseman complains,
Ecclesiastes the eighth chapter, I saw one man bear rule over another, not for
good: so the authority and superiorty which was committed to Cain, should have
been for Abels good, but he abused it to the hurt of his younger brother.
Thirdly, where God will not have any innocent blood shed, but sacrifice must be
offered, Deuteronomie the twenty first chapter, Cain kills innocent Abel, which
does in a third degree aggravate his sin; for to shed innocent blood is a
thing that Pilate himself could not abide, and therefore washed his hands,
declaing that he was clear from killing Christ, Matthew the twenty seventh
chapter and the twenty fourth verse. Fourthly, he breaks the bond of nature,
for the party murdered is his brother, and so he becomes (...) Romans the
first chapter. Fifthly, he fears not to kill him though he know it will be to
the great grief of Adam and Eve his Parents, wherein he deals worle than Esau,
who would not utter his hatred against Jacob till the days of mourning for his
Father were past, Genesis the twenty seventh chapter. Sixthly, it was not done
ex irae impetu, but ex odii habitu; and against such the Prophet prays, be
not merciful to such as sin of malicious wickedness, psalm the fifty ninth.
Seventhly, his hatred was not open, Cloaked hatred under color of friendship.
but cloaked and hidden under a show of love, which makes it more grievous. It
was not mine enemy that did me this dishonor, for then I could have born it:
It was not mine adversary, that exalted himself against me, for I would have
hid my self; but it was thou my companion, my guide and familiar friend,
therefore let death seiz upon him, Psalm the fifty fifth and the twelfth,
thirteenth and fifteenth verses. Eighthly, this sin is committed after Gods
admonition, who had uied all means to draw him to repentance. Ninthly, not only
being admonished, but seeing his Father made an example of Gods wrath, whom he
saw daily laboring and moyling in the earth for his disobedience to God.
Tenthly, that which makes Cains sin out of reason sinful, Romans the
seventh, is the cause, not for any offense that Abel had committed, but for
doing his duty in Gods service, as the Apostle notes in the first epistle of
John, the third chapter and the twelfth verse, Wherefore slew he him? because
his own works were evil and his brothers good.

Cain Patriarch of hypocrites, and persecutors of the Godly.
As before he was the Patriarch of all hypocrites, so here Cain is the Patriarch
of all persecuting Tyrants; for that he slew his brother for no other cause but
for well doing, and for this good sacrifice whereby he pleased God. Abel the
first righteous, Martyr.
And as Abel is said to be the first of all righteous men, Matthew the twenty
third chapter and the twenty fifth verse,so here we see him the first Martyr,
wherein we see the works of the Devil, who is a mutherer from the beginning,
John the eighth chapter and the forty fourth verse, Anger conceived, hatred is
murder of the soul.
for he did not only murder our first (...) in Paradise, but he makes Cain a
mutherer, first of his own soul, by conceiving hatred against his brother and
purposing his death, and then by killing the body of his brother. Envy the
means.
As this is the effect of the Devil, so he makes the sin of envy the means;
of which sin the Wiseman says, Proverbs the twenty seventh chapter and the
fourth verse, Who can stand before envy? there is no way but death with them
that are envyed. Examples.
The Brethren of Joseph were content with nothing but the death of their
brother, but that two of them did withstand it, Genesis the thirty seventh
chapter. It was envy that made the Scribes and Pharisees crucify Christ,
Matthew the twenty seventh chapter. Of hatred (...) murder.
We see how Cain proceeded against his brother, from envy to anger, from anger
to hatred, and from it to murder: these degrees must be observed, Note.
that we may avoid them in our selves, because there is no man but may sall as
well as Cain, except the grace of God do stay him.

To conclude: It is a necessary point, that we consider aright of of this
matter; for the Prophet complains in the fifty seventh chapter of Isaiah, and
the first verse, The righteous perishes, and no man considers it: So it is a
fault if we do not consider the death of righteous Abel. The Wiseman
complains, in the seventh chapter of Ecclesiastes, and the seventeenth verse,
In the days of my vanity I have seen a good man punished in his justice, and a
wicked man continue longer in his malice. This was Abel's case: but when a man
shall consider, that death was at the first inflicted upon sin, because it is
the wages of sin, Romans the sixth chapter and the last verse; and that (...) is
the means by which death entered into the world, Romans the fifth chapter; and
yet that Abel a righteous man, is the first that drank of this Cup, in the old
Testament, as John Baptist was in the new, it will make him say, Hoc est onus
Jehovae, as it is in the twenty third chapter of Jeremiah, and the thirty
fourth verse; and hic est durus sermo, John the sixth chapter: The Apostle
says, Godliness has promises both in this life and the life to come, in the
first epistle to Timothy, the fourth chapter and the eighth verse; and among
the promises of this life long life is one, in the sixth chapter to the
Ephesians, and the third verse, which God promises to them that honor their
Superiors. On the other side God threatens, that the blood thirsty and
deceitful man shall not live out half his days, Psalm the fifty fifth: And yet
Cain lived long, and Abel a godly man dyed soon. Therefore, when we see the
righteous dye quickly, and the wicked live long, we must take heed we stumble
not at Gods doings, but justify God, and acknowledge that he is just and true,
and every man a liar, Psalm the fifty first, Romans the third chapter.
Therefore to make this point plain, it is true, long life is promised as a
blessing of God; which he promises to the observers of his command; but
withal we must know, there are certain causes, wherein this rule holds not
true, that the dutiful and holy man shall live long in this world.

The exceptions are:

First, in respect of the parties themselves, to whom this blessing is
promised: It is with a Godly man, as with the fruit of trees, if after it is
once ripe, it besuffered to continue on the trees, it will be rotten; so it is
with good men in this world: And therefore the Wiseman says of Enoch, that
because he lived amongst sinners, God translated him, and he took him away,
least wickedness should alter his understanding, and deceit beguile his mind,
Sapi. the fourth chapter. In such a case it is not a benefit, but a detriment
for a man to live long: And there is no man, but in such a respect, will be
content, that God shall break promise with him.

Secondly, Another exception is in respect of the punishment of sin: If a
party that pleases God, should by living long become miserable, he would not
think long life a blessing; and therefore God in mercy took away good Josiah
that he should not see the miseries that were to come upon the Jews, by the
captivity, in the second book of Chronicles, and the thirty fourth chapter;
this favor he vouchsafed to that godly King, because his heart (...) at the
hearing of the book of the Law, and did not harden his heart as Cain.

Thirdly, in respect of God; of whom August. says, God bestows on some men
the blessing of long life, because he will be known to be the Author of it: But
lest we should think there is no other life but this, therefore he takes the
blessing of long life from some of his servants, to show that there is another
life, wherein they shall be partakers of the promises; for if God do not
reward the godly in this life, doubtless it stands with his justice to
reward them in the world to come. God will try the patience of his servants,
and the obedience of them that keep his commandments, Apoc. the fourteenth
chapter, and the twelfth verse; he will have it appear, that we are not
mercenaries and hirelings, that serve him for temporal benefits. The Children
of God are not such as Satan thought Job to be, that is, one that would not
serve God for naught; and God to show that Job served him, without any such
respect of present reward, took away all that he had, and so made the patence
of that holy man appear. So Abel served not God for a temporal reward; he was
as willing to sacrifice himself, as the lamb which he offered; so is it with
all godly Saints. The Apostle St. Paul cared not for his life, so he might
finish his course with joy, Acts the twentieth chapter; Note. Gods favor
better than life.
They esteem more of Gods favor than of life, Psalm the sixty third. And
therefore Abel said with himself, I will rather forgo my life, than not offer
to God such a sacrifice as should please him: Whereby we see Gods end in
depriving of the godly of outward blessings, that it is to try their patience;
and though they dye, yet death is to them no loss, but advantage, as it is in
the first chapter to the Philippians: For if Abel for long life on earth, have
eternal life in heaven, he has no wrong done him; if for a life of vanity, as
Abel's was, God give him a life of verity, he has no injury offered him: But
God performs his promise of long life, much better than if he suffered them
to continue long in the flesh; for no man lives so long but his life shall
have an end; and nihil est longum, quod finem habet: If in stead of vanity and
sorrow, he have happiness and glory, he has no cause to complain. Besides,
the Righteous though they dye never so soon, yet they shall be had in
everlasting remembrance, as it is in the one hundred and twelfth Psalm; And the
memorial of the just is blessed, in the tenth chapter of the Proverbs: No man
but would wish to be in Abels case, to enjoy everlasting happiness in heaven,
and to be praised of men on earth. If the husbandman bruise the grape on
purpose to make wine for the comfort of the people, they have no cause to
complain of his dealing; so we are not to murmur at Abel's death, that being a
righteous man, yet he enjoys not the promise of long life; for he is made our
example as the Apostle says; in the eleventh chapter to the Hebrews, Abel
defunctus loquitur. But what is that which he speaks, Noli aemulari? That
which Abel says is, Fret not thy self, because thou enjoyest not the outward
blessings which the wicked have: It was my case says Abel, I served God
carefully, yet I lived not long upon the earth, I offered unto God of the
fattest of my sheep, whereby God was pleased, and yet was for that and for no
other cause hated of the world. Propter (...), non solum odium fratris
sustinui, sed etiam mortem; as I have done, so do you. This is the juice that
is given us to drink, out of the example of righteous Abel.

Quamobrem dixit Jehova Kajino, Vbi est Hebel frater tuus? qui dixit, Non novi:
An custos ego sum fratris mei? Genesis 4. 9.

August 12. 1599.
THat the death of Gods Saints is precious in his sight, Psalm the one hundred
and sixteenth and the fifteenth verse, it appears as by many other arguments;
so by this, that he makes inquisition for their blood, Psalm the ninth; for at
this verse God begins to hold a judgment concerning the wicked and unnatural
fact of Cain in murdering Abel, which judgment is continued to the sixteenth
verse; for the ninth conteins an Inquiry or Examination, the tenth a Conviction
of Cain, the eleventh and twelfth the Sentence is pronounced upon him, in the
thirteenth and fourteenth he is permitted to say what he can for himself, in
the fifteenth is set down his repriving, or mitigation of his punishment. But
before we proceed we must call to mind that this is the second judgment which
God held: The first was held upon our Parents in Paradise, Genesis the third
chapter: This second is held upon Cain out of Paradise, from whence we gather,
that albeit man was now cast out of Paradise, yet not out of the compass of
Gods providence; for as the Apostle says, Though we believe not, yet he is
faithful and cannot deny himself, in the second to Timothy and the second
chapter; so whether we be in Gods favor or out of it, yet his providence
extends to us; which providence of God has appeared in nothing so much as in
the discovery of blood; Cain not out of the reach of Gods providence.
for albeit Cain were out of Paradise, yet he was not out of the reach of Gods
providence so far, but God knew well the murder which he committed, and
therefore calls him to account for it; and many such testimonies does God daily
show of his providence in the discovery of bloodshed, which make men confess
verily there is a God that judges in the earth, Psalm the fifty eighth.

Secondly, from hence we are to note, that whereas the first Judgment in
Paradise was for an offense committed immediately against God himself, and this
for an offense done to man; so his will is, that justice shall proceed, not
only for trespasses done against himself, but when we offend one against
another: Note.
Therefore in the Commandments of the Law, God has allowed one Table to
himself and another to man, to teach us that he will call us to account, not
only for the breach of faith toward himself, as he did Adam and Eve, but for
breach of charity one man toward another; as Cain for the sin he committed
against his brother.

The point it self is a citation or conventing of Cain by God before his
Judgment Seat, not by any secret or inward working of his spirit, which is the
usual way whereby God works repentance in men's hearts, but with his own
audible voice from heaven: Out of which is offered both matter of comfort to
Gods Saints, which are the posterity of Abel by imitation; and also matter of
terror to the wicked, which are the offspring of cursed Cain: For albeit it
seemed God had no care of his faithful servant Abel, in that he suffered him to
be slain; yet we see he takes care for his blood, so that it shall not be shed,
but he will call Cain to account for it. So that they may learn this for their
comfort, that howsoever we reckon of it, Yet the death of Gods Saints is
precious and of high estimation in Gods eye, Psalm the one hundred and
sixteenth; and that whether they live or dye they are the Lords, in the
fourteenth chapter of the Romans, for as both our bodies and souls are Gods, in
the first to the Corinthians, the sixth chapter and the twentieth verse, so no
doubt but he takes care of both; wherewithal we are to observe that God is so
careful of his servants, that he cares not for himself, to show his care to
them, for he had received many indignities himself from Cain, in that he,
without any regard, offered to God that which came first to his hand, not
making choice of his sacrifice as Abel did; Note.
And again, when notwithstanding the Sermon which God preached to him, he
doubted not to proceed from one sin to another, till at last he had murdered
his Brother; but yet God calls him not to account for these, but only for the
wrong which he did to Abel his Servant: A comfort.
and so the godly see to their great comfort, God sees our wrong to revenge it.
that howsoever in regard of present afflictions, God seems to have cast off
all care of them; yet he will forget himself, that he may be mindful of them.

The point of terror to Cain and his posterity is, that howsoever they (...)
themselves, Psalm the ninety fourth and the seventh verse, The Lord shall not
see, neither will the God of Jacob regard it: yet here we have a plain
instance, that God does see Cain murder his Brother, though he do it in the
field; He sees Sarah laugh within her self behind the Tent door, Genesis the
eighteenth chapter; His eyes behold the way of the Adulterer, though he wait
for the twie light, and say no eye shall see me, Job the twenty fourth chapter
and he does not only see them and their works, but videt and requiret, in the
second of the Chronicles, the twenty fourth chapter and the twenty second
verse, that is, as Job and Solomon affirm, He will after this life call them
to an account, and bring them to judgment for every thing they have committed,
be it never so secret, whether good or evil, Job chap. 19. Ecclesiastes the
twelfth chapter and the fourteenth verse; wherewithal we are to note, that
that is here verified which Jehu spoke in the second of Kings and the tenth
chapter, that is, that no word of the Lord shall fall to the ground. For before
Cain had committed this murder, God told him, If thou do evil sin lies at
the door. And we see here, that albeit Cain used all the means he could to
cover his fact, yet it is discovered by God; and though his sin seemed to be
asleep, while he concealed it within himself, yet God will not suffer him, but
wakes him out of his sleep: Note.
And so we are to know, whosoever are guilty of these or the like sins, that
we cannot keep them so closs, but he that has the key of David, will open the
door of our consciences, and bring them to light.

The Examination stands upon two parts, first Gods Question, and secondly
Cains Answer.

In the Question we shall see that the ways of God are Mercy and Justice,
Psalm the twenty fifth.

First, Touching his Mercy; if we ask what was Gods intent in asking Cain this
Question? we shall find doubtless that it was not to learn where Abel was, for
he knew that Cain had slain him, though Cain thought within himself that his
fact was unknown to any. For his intent, St. Ambrose tells us what it was,
ignorantiam simulat, ut confessiones urgeat; and as Austen says, non
interrogantis ut discat, sed invitantis ut poeniteat; The gate of repentance is
confession of sin.
the gate of repentance is confession of sin, and God makes as if he were
ignorant what was become of Abel, that so he might provoke Cain to confess his
fact, and so consequently show himself sorry for it; for the sore or wound
cannot be healed so long as it is kept secret, but when it is disclosed, the
Physician is willing to cure it; and as a Judge is the more provoked by the
importunacy and obstinacy of the offender, so nothing does appease him so
much, as when the offender does willingly confess his fault, and by voluntary
confession show that he has grace. This was that which God desired in asking
this Question, and the reason is, that Cain by his voluntary confession, if he
had not been hindered with the hardness of his heart, might as Joshua said to
Achan, Joshua the seventh chapter, Give glory to God, that is, by accusing
himself to clear God: We must confess that we are (...), it was Cains part to
have confessed, that as he was the cause of Abels death, so he slew him being
not enforced thereunto; but using all means he could to dispatch him, and that
God is not to be charged for his death in any respect, for that he labored
before by all means to diswade and withdraw him from that vile fact. Touching
which voluntary confession and accusing of our selves, the Fathers out of
Proverbs the eighteenth chapter and the seventeenth verse, say justus in
principio sermonis est accusator sui, and they read these words of the Prophet,
Isaiah the forty third chapter and the twenty sixth verse, dic tu iniquitates
prior, utjustifioeris, for the way to be justified before God, is to accuse and
condemn our selves, for it is a thing acceptable to God, that we accuse and
judge our selves worthy to be destroyed for our iniquities, Ezekiel the thirty
sixth chapter and the thirty first verse; Judging our selves, we prevent Gods
judgment.
for as the Apostle says, the judging of our selves is the way not to be judged
of God, in the first to the Corinthians the eleventh chapter, for by this means
we prevent his judgment; so that Gods intent herein was an intent of mercy,
wherein we are to observe these three qualities whereby God draws men to
repentance, his goodness, and his long suffering, and patience, Romans the
second chapter and the first verse, which goodness of God toward Cain appears
herein, that having already used persuasions and preservative physic to keep
Cain from sinning, he contents not himself, but ministers medicine curative
now he has sinned. Here the words of the Prophet are fulfilled, Psalm the
sixty second and the eleventh and twelfth verses, Semel atque iterum loquutus
est Deus, and both speeches of mercy; the first in the seventh verse, ne
peccet, the second in this verse, ut si peccasset, poeniteat: The first speech
was as the Apostle speaks, in the first to the Corinthians the tenth chapter,
qui stat, videat ne cadat, but now that he is fallen, he speaks again, ut
resurgat and poeniteat, Jeremiah the eighth chapter and the fourth verse, Shall
they fall and not arise? both which effects of Gods goodness the Prophet notes
in these words, Psalm the one hundred and forty fifth and the fourteenth
verse, Note.
The Lord upholdeth them that are ready to fall, and lifts up them that are
down. Gods mercy.
Secondly, his long suffering appears in that, post tot scelera, after that he
has sinned, both against God and himself very grievously, and against his
Brother, yet God cease not to call him to repentance; and whereas the Lord
says, For three transgressions and for four I will not turn, Amos the first
chapter and the sixth verse; yet when Cain has sinned not three or four times,
but five or six, and adds transgression to transgression, yet still he
continues to be mercfull to him, if he would accept of it; as Job shows, God
speaks once and twice, and man sees it not; in dreams and visions of the
night, then he opens their ears by correcting them: Lo all those things will
God work twice or thrice with a man, that he may turn back his soul from the
pit, Job the thirty third chapter and the twenty ninth verse. Thirdly, to long
suffering we may add patience: in that God speaks to him, non increpando, sed
interrogando, medici instar potius quam judicis; and so we see Gods intent in
asking the question, is an intent of mercy, that by his goodness, long
suffering and patience, he might have drawn Cain to repentance, had he not in
the hardness of his heart heaped up wrath for himself against the day of wrath,
Romans the second chapter.

Secondly, for Gods justice showed in this Question, the advised proceeding of
God in the matter of Cain and Abel, is a pattern for all Judges, how to proceed
in judgment, namely, that albeit they know the party accused be guilty of the
fact, yet they may not proceed against him till they have made him confess the
fact, which was the purpose of God with Cain; for so he dealt with our first
Parents in that first judgment: He knew Adam had eaten of the tree, and yet he
asks, Have thou eaten? in the third chapter; so he dealt with Sarah, Genesis
the eighteenth chapter and the fifteenth verse. Secondly, from Gods example
they are taught to proceed with favor, not with a headlong and furious spirit,
but with the spirit of meekness, as Joshua with Achan, Joshua the seventh, My
Son give the Lord glory, and confess; so the Apostle wills, Galatians the
sixth chapter, If any be overtaken, restore him, in spiritu (...). Thirdly, from
hence they have a good ground to make inquiry and examinafor the shedder of
blood, not only upon the finding of a dead body, but if the party be missing,
as God, for that Abel was not present, examineth Cain where he is, and what is
become of him.

Now follows Cains Answer, wherein first generally two things offer
themselves. The (...) of sin.
First, the nature of sin is set out unto us, which is to draw men from one
sin to another, for so Cain was drawn from hypocrisy to envy, from envy to
murder, from murder to hardness of heart, and so to defend and excuse his
sinneThis the Prophet calls a twisting of sin, when he says of sins that
they weave the spiders web, Isaiah the fifthly ninth chapter and the fifth
verse: sin is like fire-bushes or thorns, that are folden one within another,
Nahum the first chapter and the tenth verse; it is like the disease called the
canker which fretteth, in the first to Timothy the second chapter; even so
sin makes men to proceed unto more ungodliness, and to go from one sin to
another. Of this we have a plain example in Cain, and not in him only, but even
in David the the Servant of God, who after he yielded to one sin, stayed not
there, but proceeded to the committing of another, in the second of Samuel and
the eleventh chapter. Secondly, we are to consider the hiding of sin, that it
is such a thing as desires to be concealed, and not to be disclosed: So it was
with Adam in the matters of concupiscence, and in Cain in the matter of
revenge, both (...) and (...), lust and wrath are such things as we would have
concealed, and not come to the hearing of all men; Note.
that is, we have in us not only sinful souls, but guilefull spirits, Psalm the
thirty second, Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and in whose
soul there is no guil: The Prophets meaning is, that we do not only sin
against God, but we would beguile God in hiding our sins from him, if it were
possible, as if we were other manner of persons than indeed we be, and as if we
were altogether free from those sins which God sees we have committed.
Therefore we are to know, that as confession is the door to repentance, Hiding
of sin shuts the door of repentance.
so the hiding of sin is the damming up of the door of repentance; for (...)
we will have favor at Gods hand, we must confess our sins, but if we say we
have no sin, we deceive our selvse, whereby we see that sin is a thing to
be avoided. Secondly, that it is unlawful in that whosoever commits sin,
does that which he dare not avouch or acknowledge; for the Apostle says,
Romans the fourteenth chapter, Blessed is he which does not allow in his act
that which he covers, for many allow and approve of that in their actions,
which in word they dare not but condemn. They which commit murder as Cain, or
adultery, whether it be lust of revenge, or the lust of uncleanness, howsoever
they yield to it in the practices of their life, yet they cannot justify it by
word of mouth, be they never so wicked; whether they will or no their
consciences will make them confess they have done that they ought not to have
done. Adam and Eve made a confession of their fault, though it were with
excusing themselves, by laying the fault one upon another; but in Cain we
find, not only an excusing of it, but an obstinate denying of it. In which
regard his sin is of a greater last and scantling than Adam's; and hereby he
(...) himself not to be of Adam, but ex maligno illo, John the third chapter
and the twelfth verse.

Of the Answer there are three parts: First, Abnegatio veritatis, in these
words, I know not. Secondly, Abnegatio charitatis, in that he denies that he
is his Brothers keeper. Thirdly, Abnegatio humilitatis, in that without all
modesty, he answers by a question, Am I my Brothers keeper?

For the first, In saying he knows not where his Brother is; that is a lie
with two additions.

First, Mendacium impium, In that he lies not to man, but to God, in the fifth
chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, and the fourth verse. The Wiseman says
of Kings, which are but mortal men, in the sixteenth chapter of the Proverbs,
and the thirteenth verse, Righteous lips are the delight of Kings, and the King
loves him that speaks right things; Then much less can God, which is the
King immortal, away with lies; for lying lips are an abomination to the Lord,
in the twelfth chapter of the Proverbs, and the twenty second verse: He
knows all things, and his Majesty is greater than all the Kings of the earth:
Therefore Solomon prays, in the thirtieth chapter of the Proverbs, Take from
me vanity and lies.

Secondly, As it is impious and ungodly, so it is foolish, in that we seek by
ly es to blind Gods eyes, To whom the darkness is no darkness, but all is
light, Psalm the one hunded thirty ninth: For the Wiseman says, the 14. of
the Proverbs, and the 22. Errat omnis qui facit iniquitatem; that ignorance and
wickedness are twins and inseparable companions, (...) and (...). Cain
shows his folly in that he believes the Devil the Father of lies, that he
may conceal his fact from God, so as he shall not know of it. Secondly,
because God might object upon his denial, thou wast seen go into the fields
with thy Brother; since which time he was not seen: he prevents this objection,
and justifies his lie, and withal defends his sin; for he says he is not
his Brothers keeper; that is he denies that he is to take care of any but
himself.

We are to have care of our Brethren in three respects.
That position of Cain is false; for he was to have a care of his Brother,
First, if he had been but a man. Secondly, in that he was his Brother. Thirdly,
for that he was his inferior, committed to his government. The law of humanity
would teach him to be careful of Abel, in regard of the first. The law of
natural affection, or (...), will enforce him to respect his Brother. And in
that he was his inferior, made subject to him, the law of nature will enforce
him to have a regard of him, being (...) to his trust: This is the law of
nature says Chist, in the seventh chapter of Matthew, That what we would have
men do to us, we do the same to them, for that is the Law and Prophets: If
our neighbors ox go astray, or fall down under his burden, Gods will is we
succor him, Deuteronomie the twenty second chapter: Much more are we to have a
tender regard of men, because they are our own flesh, from whom we may not hide
our compassion, in the fifty eighth chapter of Isaiah. But if that will not
move Cain, yet let natural affection provoke him to take care of Abel; because
he is his Brother, issued out of the loins of Adam, as he himself was.
Thirdly, he is to take care of him, because he is under his government.

Secondly, As Cains position is false, so is it wicked: For if all men should
take care only for themselves, and not for others, it would be the dissolution
of all society: But the law of nature wills that the members of the body
have the same care one for another, as they have severally any one for it self,
in the first epistle to the Corinthians and the twelfth chapter. The law of the
Church is, Nemo quae sua sunt quaer at, sed quisquis quae alterius, in the
first to the Corinthians the tenth chapter and the twenty fourth verse: Which
rule, as it concerns all men generally, so especially it touches those that
do dominari, as Cain, whose duty, non praeesse solum, sed prodesse. As one
private man may not renounce the care that he is to have of another private man;
so much less may a public person lay aside the care of a private man.
Jeroboam had no care of the people, though they perished in death, in the 13.
of Hosea and the 2. verse. And when Judas came to the High Priest, and
confessed his fault; They (as if they were to care for none but themselves,)
answered, What is that to us? Look thou to it, in the twenty seventh chapter
of Matthew; they were persuaded they were not bound to take any notice of his
state. These were steps of Cains sin, and grievous sins.

Thirdly we are to consider the manner of his answer, which is not a simple
denial of his duty, but an unmodest speech, Am I my Brothers keeper? as if he
shhold say, Am I bound to take care of my Brother?

In this answer we see that Cain to his former sins of lying and malice, adds
the sin of pride and presumption. Of which the Prophet says, Be not
merciful to them that offend of malicious wickedness: which sin whosoever
commits, cannot be clear from the great sin which is irremediable, as
David says, Keep thy servant from presumptuous sins, so shall I be clear
from the great sin, Psalm the nineteenth and the fourteenth verse. The
instruction that we are to gather hence is, that we avoid the ways of Cain,
if we will escape his curses, in the eleventh verse of the epistle of Jude: He
was carried with a lying spirit, in the first of Kings and the twenty second
chapter; and (...) may not seek to beguile God as he did, as if we would hide
our sins from him.

Secondly, There is spiritus malignus; in the first epistle of John, the third
chapter and the twelfth verse, the malicious spirit which persuaded Cain that
he was not bound to take care for his Brother: We must take heed of that
spirit like wise.

Thirdly, We must be ware of the haughty and proud spirit, which made him
answer God so immodestly; we must learn to be humble, for, as the Wiseman
says, pride is the forerunner of destruction. We must (...) before our selves
the example of Abraham's humility, who acknowledged him selt to be but dust and
ashes, in the eighteenth chapter of Genesis: And with Job say, I will repent in
sack cloth and ashes; for if we in humility confess our sins, God is
merciful and just to forgive us our sins, in the first epistle of John, the
first chapter and the seventh verse. We must instead of the lying spirit,
possess our selves with the spirit of truth; for the malicious spirit, we must
have the spirit of charity; and for pride, put on the spirit of humility.

Dixit vero Deus, Quid fecisti? ecce vocem sanguinum fratris tui, me ab ipsa
humo inclamantium. Genesis 4. 10.

Aug. 19. 1599.
IN which words is set down Cains conviction; for howsoever he might imagine he
was escaped, by that bold utterance of a known lie and untruth, yet he was
deceived, as all they shall be decieved, that having done amiss, do (as the
Hebrewsspake) put their trust in the strength of their face, and in deceitful
lips, saying with them, Job the twenty fourth chapter, Quis me vidit? or with
her, in the thirtieth chapter of the Proverbs, that having committed sin,
wipeth her mouth, and says, Non seci. For albeit Cain would not confess his
sault, but denied it, saying, Nescio; and not only, but excused his sin,
(...) without charity toward his Brother, so without all humility or modesty
to God, that he was not bound to take care of Abel; yet for all that God
proceeds to convict him.

The verse stands of two parts. First the question, Quid fecisti? Secondly, a
plain detection, in the words following.

For the first point, there are diverse exceptions. For the nature of this
question, some make it a new question, touching the same thing that God asked
in the former verses: Others refer it to Cains denial; as if God should say,
What have thou done? in saying thou know not. If we understand it to be a
second question, then we are to remember what the Prophet says, in the sixty
second Psalm, that God speaks not once but twice, to show that he is
merciful, and that his oath is a true oath, whereby he affirms that he
desires not the death of a sinner, in the thirty third chapter of Ezekiel, and
the eleventh verse; for if a man do but say, I have sinned, and perverted
righteousness and it did not profit me, he will deliver his soul from going
into the pit, in the thirty third chapter of Job, and the eighteenth verse; so
greatly is God pleased when men do willingly (...) their sins to him: And
that is the rea on, that God having once already asked Cain, Where is thy
brother Abel? does now ask him again the second time, What have thou done?
which is all one in effect with the first question. The other question seemed
far off from the matter, but this comes more near to the point: Wherein God
does more press Cain; as if he should say, thou have done this murder, I will
have thee confess it: Which is all one with that speech of Joshuah to Achan,
My son give glory to God, and confess, Joshuah the seventh chapter: Wherein he
wills Cain to do as they did of whom Luke records, that they came and
confessed and showed their works, Acts the nineteenth chapter; for it is Gods
will that we should call to mind our own deeds, before he come to set before
us the things which we have done, Psalm the fiftieth. But others refer this
question to Cains denial, why did thou not confess thy fault, that I might
have had mercy on thee? Wherein we see that verified that the Prophet affirms
of God, in the second chapter of Joel, That he is sorry for our afflictions;
and withal it is an admonition, teaching us our duties: For God makes two
sermons to Cain, one before he sinned, verse the seventh, the other after he
had sinned, in these words, Ubi est Abel frater? As by the first he (...) us to
say with Paul, in the ninth chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, Quid faciam?
so when we have sinned, we must smite our hearts with David, in the second of
Samuel and the twenty fourth chapter, and say as the prophet speaks, Jeremiah
the eighth chapter and the sixth verse, quid feci? Gods question to Cain does
plainly (...) to us thus much, that when we have sinned we must repent us of
the evil, and say, what have I done? for if man repent not that he has sinned
against God, God will repent that he has made man, Genesis the sixth chapter
and the sixth verse; but there is to be noted further in this question, that the
reason thereof is, that Cain by murdering his brother, did not only show
himself like the Devil, that evil one, as St. John calls him, in the first of
John the third chapter and the twelfth verse, who was a murder from the
beginning, but that he shows himself like unto him in denying the truth, as
the Devil is said to be the Father of lies, John the eighth chapter.

The detection of Cains Crime is in these words ( the voice of thy brothers
blood (...) to me from the earth) God goes forward and shows, that although
the Devil do stop Cains mouth that he will confess his fact, yet all is to no
purpose; albeit he himself will not say he has killed Abel, yet God setts
before his eyes the things which he has done, Psalm the fiftieth and the
twenty first verse.

Concerning these words there are two interpretations. First, that Gods meaning
in these words is, that howsoever man needs an Accuser, yet he needs none; for
he knows who is guilty though there be none to accuse; that man hears
nothing but vocal speech but God hears blood speak, as God does loquisurdis,
so he does audire muta; He calls those things that are not, as if they were,
Romans the fourth chapter; he makes things deaf to hear, and (...) things speak
which are dumb; as he heard Moses though he spoke not a word, Exodus the
fourteenth chapter. Man cannot see in the dark without the light, But the
darkness and the light are all one to him, Psalm the one hundred and thirty
ninth, All things are naked and bare before his eyes, Hebrews the fourth
chapter, so that he needs no Accuser. Secondly, the other sense is the fuller
and the more generally embraced, which is this; though the person guilty being
arraigned will not confess himself, and albeit there be none to accuse him, yet
he escapes not; as for the Accuser there could be none, for there were now but
three persons upon earth, Cain himself, and his Father and Mother; as for Cain
he denied the deed, as for Adam and Eve, who were his Parents, such was their
natural affection, that they could not find in their hearts to accuse their
Son, though it were for killing a Child, that was more deer to them than he
was: Of which compassion we have a like example in the Widow of Tekoah, in the
second of Samuel the fourteenth chapter; and therefore as Ambrose says, quis
potuit alter occidere Abelem; though there be neither confession nor
accusation, yet God proceeds to convince him, and grounds himself upon the
grievousness of his sin, The voice of thy Brothers blood cries to me. This
kind of proceeding in Judgment is usual, though Juda spoke not a word
himself, and there was none to accuse him, yet he was convinced by those tokens
which he left with Thamar, Genesis the thirty eigthth chapter and the twenty
sixth verse: And the Garments of Joseph which he left with his Mistress when she
enticed him, was thought evidence enough, Genesis the thirty ninth chapter; so
we see that albeit there be neither confession nor accusation, yet God proceeds
against Cain by conviction, and he does convince him not by the voice of
persons which is the more usual witness, but per vocem sanguinum.

The Lessons to be learned hence are, First matter of Faith, for the ancient
Fathers upon these words, The voice of thy brothers blood cries, compared with
the Apostles, Hebrews the eleventh chapter and the fourth verse, by the which
Abel being dead yet speaks, do ground the immortality of Abel, nam qui
loquitur vivit, of which we are to be persuaded in regard of the truth of Gods
promises made; for God in his first Sermon said, If thou do well, shall thou
not be rewarded? As for Abel albeit he did well, yet he was not rewarded in
this life; therefore it follows there is another life wherein Abel must have
his reward for his good service to God; For it is a righteous thing with God to
recompense tribulation to them that trouble the godly, and to the afflicted
rest, when the Lord shall show himself from heaven, in the second epistle to
the Thessalonians, the first chapter and the sixth verse, And God is not unjust
to forget our works and labor of love, Hebrews the sixth chapter and the tenth
verse. And for a third proof, if God be the God of Abraham, as he affirms
himself to be the God of Abraham Isaac and Jacob, then no doubt but Abel lives
no less than Abraham, because as Christ affirms, deus non est mortuorum
deus, sed viventium, Luke the twentieth chapter. Secondly, hence we have
commended to us moral doctrine, against those which doubt not without all fear
to dispatch and rid out of the way whatsoever is a stay or let to them, because
as they speak, mortui non mordent; but such are to learn from hence, that
albeit they whose blood they doubt not to spill do not bite, yet they cry out
to God for revenge even when they are dead, as Abel; for, if they cry not, the
stones in the street will cry, as Christ speaks, as albeit Abel be dead, yet
the voice of his blood cries to God for vengeance.

Concerning which, six points are to be noted.

First, It is true that the souls of them that are deceased are brought in,
crying for vengeance, Revelations the sixth chapter, How long Lord? but it is
not here affirmed of Abel, that his soul in heaven cries for vengeance: as he
kept innocence, so no doubt he kept a brotherly affect on to Cain, though he
deserved it not at his hands. As Stephen did not (...) for vengeance, but
prayed, Lord lay not this sin to their charge, Acts the seventh chapter, and
our Savior, Luke the twenty third chapter, Father forgive them, they know not
what they do, but it is his blood that cries, and his blood, not de corpore,
but de terra, that is, though the soul out of heaven complain not, yet his
blood out of the earth shall cry to God for vengeance.

Secondly, His blood though it be separated from his body, and concorporate
with the dust of the earth, shall cry and speak to God, and if the blood of
beasts offered in Sacrifice do speak to God, so as they make him answer by
fire, in the (...) of Kings the eighteenth chapter, then much more shall the
blood of man when it is shed have a voice to speak to God for revenge, and so
forcible is the vocie of that blood, that there is no expiation but by blood,
and the land cannot be clean'ed, but by the blood of him that has shed blood,
Numbers the thirty fifth chapter: If the blood of them cry the blood of
Innocents shall speak to God for vengeance; and so when the Israelites offered
their Sons and daughters and shed innocent blood, the wrath of the Lord was
kindled against them, Psalm the one hundred and sixth and thirty seventh verse;
but the blood shed by Cain was the blood of an Innocent, even of righteous
Abel, Matthew the twenty third chapter, and therefore must needs receive an
answer sooner from God than the blood of beasts, Revelations the sixteenth
chapter and the sixth verse, and the ninteenth chapter and the second verse.

The third point is, that the word blood is expressed in the plural number
sanguinum clamantium, to note that in killing Abel, he did not only shed his
blood, but the blood of all those that might have proceeded of Abel, if he had
lived and married, whereby his fact is the more grievous in that it is
committed in tanta paucitate gener is humani: Others say it is expressed
plurally, because every drop of Abels blood did cry for vengeance; so there
was blood crying with many voices for revenge.

Fourthly, This voice is not every ordinary voice, but vox clamantis, which
shows that murder is no light sin, but great and heinous; for as the
Heathen man says, leves loquuntur, ingentes clamant; peccatum cum voce is
nothing but ordinary sin, but peccatum cum clamore is (...), Romans the
seventh chapter; it is one of those sins which cry, and therefore shall have
vengeance. They are in Scripture four. First wilful murder, as Cains in this
place. Secondly, the sin of Sodom against nature, which cried to God for
vengeance, Genesis the eighteenth chapter; which by the quality of the
punishment appears how filthy it was, for it was punished with stinking
brimstone, as the sin it self above all others does most stinck before God.
Thirdly, the oppression of the poor, Exodus the second chapter and the twenty
third verse, which cries to God: Note.
for as God plagued the Egyptians for oppressing the poor Israelites, so he will
plague them that oppress the stranger and poor, Exodus the twenty second and
the twenty first verse. The fourth is Deuteronomie the twenty fourth chapter
and the fourteenth verse, that of other poor, the poor Labourer must not be
oppressed, nor his hire delayed from him when he has taken pains; for as the
Apostle says, James the fifth chapter, ecce merces operantis clamat in auribus
domini. These are the sins that speak not, but cry to God for vengeance.
Fifthly, for the nature of the cry it is in Hebrew, vox preconis or
proclamantis, of such a one as has strong sides, of which we have an example,
Genesis the forty first and the forty third verse, where Pharaoh causes one
to cry with a Trumpet before Joseph Abreck; so forcible was the cry of the
blood of Abel in the ears of God. The sixth point is that which makes it up
sure; for where there is no voice of any Crier, be he never so strong, that can
be heard up to the top of high hills or steeples, the voice of this cry is
heard higher than any hill or tower whatsoever; it is heard de terra ad me,
says God, it pierces the very heavens; ecce quousque volat vox sanguinis.

That which we are to learn from hence is, First matter of comfort to those of
Abels side that suffer wrong. Abel said never a word though his Brother slew
him, neither does his soul from heaven, it is his blood from the earth that
cries for vengeance; for as the Prophet says, Our strength is in silence and
quietness, Isaiah the thirtieth chapter, Though we possess our souls in
patience, as Christ wills, Luke the twenty first chapter, yet God will say
mihi vindicta, Deuteronomie the thirty second chapter; and as I am Judge of the
world, so I will be revenged of them that do wrong: Therefore the Apostle
wills not to seek revenge, because God challenges that as a thing proper to
himself, Romans the twelfth chapter. Hebrews the tenth chapter, taceat os,
loquitur sanguis, which is a point necessary to be urged, and teaches us that
we need not to be Gods remembrancers in this point, for the revenge of injury;
Our tears and sighs cry for vengeance.
for as he hears the voice of blood, so the voice of our weeping and tears,
Psalm the fifty sixth and the eighth verse, he hears the sighs and griefs of
the heart, Psalm the thirty eighth and the ninth verse, and the inward desire
of the heart though it be not uttered, Exodus the fourteenth chapter and the
fifteenth verse, as in Moses: Note.
Therefore Job says terra ne operiat meum sanguinem, neque clamores meos
intercipiat, Job the tenth chapter: and if he keep a vessel to put our tears
in, much more may we persuade our selves that our blood is precious in his
sight, Psalm the one hundred and sixteenth and the fifteenth verse; which point
ministers great comfort to them that suffer wrong.

Secondly, Hence we learn what is the nature of sin; before the Holy Ghost
called it (...) cubans, that is, sin fast asleep; but here is peccatum
clamans, not only sin awake, but crying out and warning; for sin (...)
gently at the first, but after it will pull a man by the throat: Even as the
Devil is tentator, Matthew the fourth chapter, he tempts men to sin, by
all the pleasant means he can, and when he has prevailed with them, then he is
accusator fratrum, Apoc. the twelfth chapter. Sin is like the wife of
Potiphar, which tempted Joseph by all fair means to folly, and as if he had
been guilty, did first accuse him, Genesis the thirty ninth chapter: And as one
answered Joab, when he would have had him smite Absalom, If I had done it, it
would have been the danger of my life, yea thou thy self which (...) me to do
it, would have been the first that should accuse me, in the second book of
Samuel, the eighteenth chapter and the thirteenth verse; so sin has no
sooner with its deceitfulness allured a man to do evil, but it will straight
way call to God for vengeance against him: Which thing ought to make it odious
in the eyes of all men. Though Abel complain not, Cain (...) not, and Adam
accuse not, yet we cannot so escape, for our own sin is as a Sergeant that
will find us out, Numbers the thirty second chapter, and the twenty third
verse; and when it has found us, as a Goalor, it will hold and bind us with
cords, Proverbs the fifth chapter, and the twenty second verse: And as the
Prophet speaks, in the second chapter of Habakkuk, and the eleventh verse,
The stone out of the wall and the beam out of the timber, shall cry to God for
vengeance upon (...) though the poor whose faces they have ground say nothing,
Esaias the third chapter and the fifteenth verse. Touching which pursuit of
sin, the Wiseman says, in the tenth chapter of Ecclesiastes Curse not the
King, no not in thy thought, neither curse the rich in thy bedchamber, for the
fowls of heaven shall disclose it: Yea a man's own spirit will make him to
confess his own sin; and if all means fail, yet the stones in the street
will cry for vengeance. And we see that there is vox non solum oris, sed
operis, as the Prophet speaks of Gods works, that the very heavens have a
voice, wherewith they do enarrare gloriam Dei, Psalm the ninteenth: And
therefore the Heathen say, Res ipsa loquitur. Which as it ministers fear to
Cain and to the wicked; so comfort to the Godly: For if as we see in Cain,
sin have a voice to plead before God against a man; Good works cry to God.
then no doubt but the good works that a man does, will speak to God for him,
and are remembrancers to put God in mind to be gracious unto him: As God
hears rears and puts them in a bottle, as he hears sighs and inward
desires of the heart which speak to him; the Alms that Cornelius gave, had a
voice to plead unto God for him; so that of a heathen he was made a Christian,
Acts the tenth chapter. For as the concupiscence of evil is sin; so the very
desire of good, is a virtue that pleases God: And if the taking away of a man's
life, do pull down the vengeance of God; then the saving of a man's life, or of
his soul, will be a forcible means to procure Gods favor.

To conclude: The last point to be observed from hence is, That if the blood of
Abel had a voice to speak unto God; then the blood of Christ Jesus must needs
have a more powerful voice, because it speaks better things than the blood
of Abel, Hebrews the twelfth chapter and the twenty fourth verse; for the blood
of Abel cried for Justice, but Christ's blood cries for Mercy: If when we do
evil it will plead to God for vengeance; then if we do any good work, much
more shall it speak to God for us. And God as he is inclined to mercy, rather
than to vengeance, will rather hear the voice of our good works, than of evil,
because our good works speak better things than our wicked actions.

Nunc itaque tu maledictus esto: exsul ab ista terra, quae aperuit os suum ad
excipiendum sanguinem fratris tui e manu tua. Quum humum ipsam colueris, ne
pergito edere vim suam tibi: vagus and infestus agitationibus esto in terra.
Genesis 4. 11.12.

Aug. 26. 1599.
IN these two verses is contained the sentence pronounced by God against Cain;
for God having performed that which the Holy Ghost tells us in the thirty
third chapter of Job and the twenty ninth verse, that God will deal twice or
thrice with a man, that he may turn back his soul from the pit: First in his
examination, Where is thy Brother Abel? Secondly, in his second question What
have thou done? Thirdly, in laying open before Cain his sin, Behold, the
voice of thy Brothers blood cries to me. Having spared him for three (...), he
will no longer bear with him, but proceeds to sentence against him, for the
fourth, in the first of Amos, and the third verse; showing that as he gave
sentence against Adam confessing, to assure us that we may proceed likewise
upon confession; so we may do in case of conviction: And that it is a good
ground to pronounce sentence; not only when Parties are convicted upon
witnesses, which is the more usual way, but when by manifest arguments and
proofs they are proved guilty: For so in Cain, The falling down of his
countenance, His going into the fields with his Brother, And he being found
slain, thereupon are manifest tokens that he slew Abel; for there was none else
to do it: Upon those grounds God proceeds to give sentence against Cain.

In which sentence we have an Ecce of Gods Severity in his Justice, and of his
Bounty in Mercy.

For first, This is a great mercy to Cain, that where God did not take this
judicial course with Korah, for resisting the Magistrate of Gods people, but
caused the earth presently to swallow him up, in the sixteenth chapter of
Numbers; and punished Ananias with sudden death, for that he lied not to men
but to God, Acts the fifth chapter, and never stayed either to see whether he
would confess, or to convince him; yet he will not proceed against Cain, till
he have proved him guilty, and condemned him accordingly.

Of Gods proceeding in justice against Cain, there are three parts. First, the
spiritual part, against his soul. Secondly, the Oeconomicall part, against his
labor bestowed in tilling the earth. Thirdly, his Political punishment, which
stands herein, That he shall be an exile and Vagabond on earth.

The first part of his punishment is in these words ( Cursed art thou from the
earth:) for Gods meaning herein (as Cain himself does apprehend it, verse the
fourteenth) is, that Cain is cast out from the earth, and from the presence of
God; that is, God does inflict upon him an Ecclesiastical severing from Gods
presence; not from the presence of his Providence, for of that, Psalm the one
hundred thirty ninth, Whither shall I go from thy presence? Presence of Gods
favor.
but from the presence of Gods favor and grace, of which the Prophet prays,
Cast me not from thy presence, Psalm the fifty first, from the fellowship of
the Saints, as in saying, Cursed art thou from the earth, he pronounces upon
him the sentence of Banishment out of the society of men. As God does separate
Cain out of the family of Adam, which was an Image of the Church, wherein he
heard Gods word; so also he does baniish him out of the company of men.

Touching the first point, we know that it is the highest punishment that can
be inflicted, to be cursed of God; for in the third of Genesis, and the
fourteenth verse, the sentence pronounced upon the Serpent was, Cursed art
thou; if there had been any punishment more grievous, doubtless God would have
laid it upon him. And in the end of the world, the last and most fearful
punishment, or sentence upon the Devil and his Angels, is, Ite maledicti,
Matthew the twenty fifth chapter: Especially, when the curse is directed to the
person, maledictus tu, as if it were shot out of purpose against him; so he
directed the curse to the Serpents person, Genesis the third chapter and the
fourteenth verse, Cursed art Thou above all cattle: But when God came to Adam,
he spared his person, and laid the curse upon the earth, Maledicta terrapropter
te, Genesis the third chapter and the seventeenth verse: But here we see the
sentence is pronounced against Cain's person, (as it was against the Serpent,)
Cursed art Thou from the earth: Wherein we may see that Cain's sin is another
manner of sin than Adam's, and therefore is more grievously punished, as it
stands with justice, (...) ad rationem peccati (...) plagarum modus,
Deuteronomie the twenty fourth chapter.

But Cain's sin is greater than Adam's, five ways.

First, Adam's sin proceeded out of concupiscence, but Cain's came of malice,
which deserves no mercy, as the Prophet shows, Psalm the fifty ninth, Be not
merciful to them that sin of malicious wickedness.

Secondly, Adam's sin was committed upon a sudden, and did not take root as
Cain's did; for his sin was a long time hatching and breeding; for all Gods
preaching to him, yet he went forward in sin, albeit he had long admonition
from God to keep him from it.

Thirdly, Adam having committed his sin, was taken with fear, and fled to
hide himself if he could; but Cain was not a whit afraid, but faced it out, and
never showed any sorrow for it.

Fourthly, when Adam was examined he confessed his sin willingly; but Cain
obstinatly denied it, and would not be brought to confess it, though God had
three times labored to make him confess: He denies his fault, non tam
audacter quam procaciter. Wherefore Adams sin and Cains are not both of one
regard or nature, and therefore must not be punished alike, but the one more
grievously than the other. So yet we see here is a great correspondencie
between the Serpents sin and Cain's; for as the Serpent of envy murdered our
first Parents; so Cain is here the instrument of the Serpent to kill Abel, for
that he envyed him: And therefore the Wiseman said, Invidia Diaboli intravit
mors.

Fifthly, As the Devils sin is pride, Ero similis altissimo, Isaiah the
fourteenth chapter and the fourteenth verse; so Cain showed his pride by his
contempt of Gods word and command, who forewarned him, not to kill his Brother;
as also by his saucy answer to God, Am I my Brothers keeper? Wherefore as
Cain's sin is equal to the Serpents sin; so he has the same punishment
that the Serpent had, Maledictus tu. In regard of which likeness of their
sin, the Apostle says, Cain is ex maligno illo, in the first of John the
third chapter and the twelfth verse; that is, rather the Son of the Devil than
of Adam: and therefore the Son is punished with the like punishment that was
laid upon the Father.

For the contents of the word Maledictus: The nature of a curse is, That the
party upon whom it is pronounced must be evil, as the Prophet says, Isaiah
the third chapter, and the eleventh verse, Dicite justo quia been, vae autem
malo quia male; especially that party is cursed that has no good in him, for
we see, in the eighteenth chapter of Genesis, if there had been any good in
Sodom, but five persons, the Lord would have spared it; but because there was
no good in it, it was plagued with fire and brimstone, which does most of all
resemble hell. But on the other side, because there was wine found in one
cluster, the Lord said destroy it not, Isaiah the sixty fifth chapter, and the
eighth verse. In the new Testament, God promises mercy to the Church of
Philadelphia, quia modicam habes virtutem in the third of the Revelations, and
the eighth verse. The goodness of a sinner.
But Cain had no goodness left in him; for whereas the goodness of a sinner is
fear, shame, compassion and repentance; Cain had none of these. Adam was afraid
when he had sinned, but Cain was (...) little afraid that he faced out his sin,
and as for shame it was with him as the Prophet speaks, Jeremiah the eighth
chapter and the twelfth verse, Were they ashamed when they had commitied sin?
Nay, they were not ashamed; and for confession he would make none, of whom that
is verified, periit confessio, Jeremiah the seventh chapter and the twenty
eighth verse. Whereas the patience and long suffering should have lead them to
repentance, Cain found nothing in himself, but had an heart that could not
repent, Romans the second chapter, in regard whereof the sentence of God
pronounced upon him is just. Secondly, it is just in that it is a severing of
Cain from Gods favor; for as Cyprian says, (...) cum Serpente, inimicitia cum
Deo sequitur, for it is just that he should be delivered to the party with whom
he was entered into league. Thus God dealt with his people, Judges the tenth
chapter and the thirteenth verse, They have forsaken me and served other Gods:
Go and cry to them, let them deliver you; and as the incestuous Corinthian
had made a league with Satan, so the Apostles will is, ut tradatur Satanae, in
the first epistle to the Corinthians, the fifth chapter, and this separation
from Gods favor is from his presence, which he shows to his people that meet
together to praise and pray to him, and to hear his Word, and be partaker of
his Sacraments; of which presence he gives this command; Seek ye my face; to
which the Prophet says, Thy face Lord will I seek, Psalm the twenty seventh
and the eighth verse, wherewith agree the Apostles words, in the second to the
Corinthians, the second chapter and the tenth verse, To whomsoever I forgive
any thing, I forgive it for your sakes (...), id est, in the face, fight, or
presence of Christ: and as he was cursed from the presence of God, so we see he
went out presently from the presence of the Lord, and dwelt in the Land of Nod,
Genesis the fourth chapter and the sixteenth verse. This is the effect and
sum of that part of the Sentence which is ecclesiastical or spiritual,
touching his soul; for all that remains, contains that part of the Sentence
which is terrestrial, where we see it was Gods will, that he which had showed
himself savage toward mankind in killing his Brother, should be banished from
the company of men. So that when it is said, Cursed art thou from the earth
which has received thy Brothers blood from thy hand: The meaning is, he shall
be cast out of his own Country, whereby God does plainly express thus much,
That wilful murder is to be punished by casting out both from Church and
Commonwealth, both from the Communion of Saints and the Society of men: For
envy is a sin of such nature, that God thinking hell not to be a sufficient
punishment for it, causes Cain to consume himself on earth with vexation of
mind; for as the Wiseman says, The effect of envy is the rotting of the
bones, Proverbs the fourteenth chapter and the thirtieth verse.

Secondly, God sets down a reason why the earth should detest and abhor such
persons as Cain was, and the reason is double. First, For that there is a wrong
done to the earth when a man is wilfully murdered; that is, she is bereaved of
one of those that should till and dress it, and of one of her Inhabitants. It
is the reason why the Crowners sit upon those that wilfully make a way
themselves, for they are no less injurious to the earth than they that kill
others. Secondly, Because the earth must needs abhor that which is contrary
to nature, and does violate the course of nature; for nature does will all men
to seek the safety and preservation of others, but Cain wickedly and unnatural
sheddeth the blood of his Brother, which God does (...) and pathetically
express thus; That blood which Cain does unnaturally shed, the earth does
kindly and lovingly receive, that it should not lie open in the sight of the
Sun: which act is like to that of Rizpah, which David commended so highly,
that she took sackcloth and covered the dead bodies of them that were hanged,
and suffered neither the birds of the air to light upon them by day, nor the
beasts of the field by night, in the second of Samuel, the twenty first chapter
and the tenth verse; wherein the earth it self, void of sense, appeared more
kind to Abel than Cain; for as the Wiseman says, God will arm his creatures
to be revenged of his enemies, in the fifth chapter of the Wisdom of Solomon
and the tenth verse; omnis creatura ingemescit, Romans the eighth chapter, they
shall all grieve and abhor that act which is unnatural. As before the blood
it self cried to God for vengeance, so here the earth it self receives the
blood into her bosom, which was so unnaturally shed; and these are two
witnesses, by whose testimony Cain is sufficiently convicted of his sin, and
howsoever they be dumb in themselves, yet they have a voice which God hears;
so that no man can keep his sin so secret but it will be revealed, as Job
confesses, Job the thirty first chapter and the thirty eighth verse; My land
will cry against me, and the furrows thereof will complain together, if I
have eaten the fruits thereof without silver.

Which detestation conceived by the earth against the fact of Cain, is further
set forth in the next verse, two ways, First negando cibum, Secondly negando
sedem; for the first it is said, when thou tillest the earth it shall not yield
her strength unto thee, to feed thee. Secondly, thou shall be in contiuall
fear, and it shall deny it self to thee, not affording thee any certain
mansion, for thou shall be an Exile and Vagabond upon earth. All that the earth
affords us is, pabulum and latibulum, that is, as the Apostle speaks, (...), in
the first to Timothy the sixth chapter, it does both alere and sustinere. Two
things we desire on earth, sufficiency of living and maintenance, and peace
and rest against trouble. Against these two are set for Cains punishment, First
want, in that the earth shall deny its strength; and unquietness or
restlesness, in that he shall be an Exile and Vagabond.

For sufficiency of feeding, albeit God before had cursed the earth, yet not
so, but that by labor it should yield to man bread; but now God says, if Cain
labor and take never so great pains in tilling the earth, his labor shall be
in vain; though he sweat and labor never so much, yet it shall withdraw that
humor and fatness, whereby it is wont to send forth corn for food; that is, her
fruit shall not make bread, and maintain the life of him that is a shedder of
blood: So whatsoever Cain enjoys upon earth, is not of right; for except the
earth be willing both to feed him and to sustain him, he has no just
possession or interest in it, and quodjure non possidetur, furto and latrocinio
usurpatur; every piece of bread that Cain and all those that walk in his way
do eat, they eat it wrongfully, and shall make and an account for it, as if
they had stolen it. So that though Cain speak never so much to the corn, and
wine, and oil, and they in his behalf call to the earth, and the earth to the
heavens, and the heavens cry unto God, yet there shall be no answer for his
relief, Hosea the second chapter and the twenty first verse, but they shall all
con pire and plague Cain for his sin. Job says, If I have eaten the fruit of
the earth without silver, or grieved the souls of the Masters thereof, Job the
thirty first chapter and the thirty ninth verse, to show us there is a right,
not only of labor, but of person; for Adam may eat of the fruits of the earth,
by right of his labor bestowed in dressing it; but Cain for that he is a
person accursed, cannot eat thereof. God gives Adam food upon condition of his
labor, but food is denied to Cain though he take never so much pains; for that
Cain is a person accursed by God, and has no part in that blessed seed, in
whom all the promises of God, touching this life and the life to come, are yea
and amen, in the second to the Corintbians, the first chapter and the twentieth
verse.

Secondly, As we desire sufficientie of living against want so we desire rest
and quietness from trouble; and this we desire rather than the other, For a
little with the fear of the Lord is better than great treasure with trouble,
Proverbs the fifteenth chapter and the sixteenth verse; but as the earth denied
him sufficiency, so it will not afford him a dwelling place to rest in.

Of these words there are two constructions, and both profitable.

First, The (...) these words ( Vagabond and Runagate) gemens and tremens, that
is in grief and fear shall thou be all the daics of thy life, without any
certain dwelling to rest in. He that is in grief is heavy and burthensom to
himself, but he that is in fear is suspicious of others, which is a great
vexation; which kind of punishment is laid upon them that keep not Gods
Commandments, that they shall be smitten with searefulness, they shall fly at
the shaking of a leaf, Leviticus the twenty sixth chapter and the sevententh
verse, They shall fly when no man pursues, Proverbs the twenty eighth
chapter. And albeit they go from place to place seeking for rest and peace,
yet non est pax impiis, Isaiah the fifty seventh chapter. Of this Fear we have
an example in Cain, who being guilty of the breach of Gods Command, confessed,
that he was now in that case, that whosoever shall find him might kill him.

Secondly, The other sense which they gather of these words, that where there
are but two places for men to rest in, either his own native Country, or some
other where he can be: Cain shall tarry neither in his own Country, nor in any
other, but shall (...) and remove from place to place, and find rest no where;
therefore he went out of his own Country, and went and built a City in the land
of Nod; and yet was not quiet there neither. And this is the case of an evil
conscience, not to rest any where; for to a good conscience Angulus sufficit,
but for him that has a bad conscience, ipse mundus angulus est: Therefore we
are to think of these things when we begin to commit any sins, namely, that
thereby we deprive our selves both of living and (...) welling; so that if we
sin against God by transgressing his Precepts, we can neither look to have
food sufficient, nor place convenient to dwell and rest in.

The qualification of this Sentence or mercy with God shows herein, is, that
(...) Cain be punished with want of food and dwelling, (...) it is but super
terram; therefore if he repent while he is on the earth, he may set himself in
a better state; for this restraint does show that God gave to Cain space to
(...), Apocalypse the second chapter and the twenty first verse; so that there
is hope for sinners so long as God suffers them to continue upon earth: for if
God would not have Cain repent, he should have been presently swallowed up of
the earth as Korah was, and have dyed suddenly as Ananias did: Therefore this
super terram is a mercy. It shows also that all Cains care was set upon
earth, We are punished with that which is our delight.
and therefore God does punish him with that which was his delight: as he had no
care at all of heaven, as appeared by the manner of his Sacrifice which he
offered to God, without any choice at all, but set his affection upon earth; so
God punishes him with an earthly punishment, that he should find no comfort
or rest on earth: and this he does both in justice and mercy, to draw him back
to repentance, and to make him sorry having a sense of his miseries, Hosea the
second chapter and the seventh verse, I will go and return to my first
husband, that the want of food on earth and of rest might make him sorry with
the prodigal Son, in the fifteenth chapter of Luke, I will go to my Father.
God suffers Cain to live in penury, that the sense thereof might enforce him to
this resolution, (...) ad Patrem: As the dove sent out of the Arc, finding no
rest, had no place to go to, but to the (...), from whence she came, Genesis
he eighth chapter; so God does punish Cain with a restless life on earth, that
he might seek for rest in heaven. And as the Angel called Agar, when she
wandered from her Mistress, to return to her and humble her self under her hands,
Genesis the sixteenth chapter, and the ninth verse; so it was Gods will that
Cain considering his restless life on earth, should return to God, from whom
he had now strayed as a lost (...), by means of his grievous sins, and (...)
himself under his mighty hand, as it is in the first epistle of (...),
confessing his sin, and craving forgiveness, That so God might have mercy on
him, and receive him into everlasting Tabernacles, Luke the sixteenth chapter,
where is rest void of trouble, and sufficiency of all good things.

Tum Kajin dixit Jehovae, Major est poena mea quam ut sustinere possim. Genesis 4.
13.

September. (...) 1599.
THE word which signifies sin here, in other places of Scripture is used for
the punishment of sin, as in the thirty second chapter of Numbers and the
twenty third verse, Ye have sinned against the Lord, and be sure your sin
shall sinde you out: Which double signification makes that there is a double
reading of this verse: The one in the Text, My punishment is greater than I can
bear. The other in the Margent, My sin is greater than can be pardoned: So in
the Text the word is translated the punishment of sin, in the Margent the
sin it self, which is the primarie signification of the word. And they that
turn it punishment for sin, do thereby express Cain's murmuring against
God: They that turn it for sin do show Cain's desparation. I rather follow
that in the Margent, (viz.) that the sense is thus; My sin is greater than
can be pardoned. First, because punishment of sin. Secondly, because the
Hebrews expound it so. Thirdly, for that all the old Fathers read it so.
Fourthly, for that there is no mention of the third person. Lastly, because the
full sense is comprehended in the next verse. So that we are to take it thus,
That Cain being examined, and hearing the sentence pronounced by God upon him,
breaks forth into this complaint, My sin is greater than can be forgiven.

In which words generally, we see a new Cain, for no man would imagine that
Cain, who a little before answered God so presumptuously, would submit himself
so gently, that he which said, I know not where my brother is, would now upon
the sudden confess his fact; that he that before was so bold, should now become
so dejected, in the sight of his sin; he that had showed himself a giant,
should so suddenly become a Peasant; but it is not Cains case only, but the
case of all his progeny; For Pharaoh that so proudly and boldly said, in the
fifth chapter of Exodus, and the second verse, Who is the Lord that I should
hear his voice? I know not the Lord; after does acknowledge the Lord, and
submit himself to him, in the ninth chapter of Exodus, and the twenty seventh
verse, I have now sinned, the Lord is righteous, but I and my people are
wicked: Pray thou to the Lord that there be no more thunders.

Saul having committed a very grievous transgression against God, does
notwithstanding very boldly say to Samuel, in the first of Samuel, the
fifteenth chapter and thirteenth verse, I have fulfilled the commandment of
the Lord; but a little after (verse the thirtieth) he submits himself, I have
sinned, but honor me. And Judas the perfect example of Cain, albeit he had
purposed to deliver his Master into the hands of the Scribes and Pharisees, is
as bold to deny that he had any such intent as any, as it is in the twenty
sixth chapter of Matthew, and the twenty fifth verse; but after the deed done,
we see he is touched with remorse for it, and said, in the twenty seventh
chapter of Matthew, and the fourth verse, I have sinned, betraying the innocent
blood: This is a strange metamorphosis, and it is expedient that we mark this
new style, That when a man sees Cain's offering, he may say with the Prophet,
in the fifth chapter of Jeremiah, and the thirty first verse, Quid fiet in
novissimo? For if our case were as Cains was, that no man should stand in our
way, but presently we might be revenged of him without danger, it were a thing
to be liked; but we see Cain himself does not escape unpunished. Who would not
desire to be in their case, of whom Job speaks, in the twenty first chapter of
Job, and the seventh verse? If their flourishing estate would hold, which live
and wax old and grow in wealth, their seed is established in his sight, and his
generation before their eyes: But that which makes their condition miserable,
is that which follows in the thirteenth verse, They spend their days in
wealth, and suddenly they go down to the grave. The Prophet confesses he was
greatly disquieted at the prosperity of the wicked, till he went to the
Sanctuary of God; for there he understood their end, that they are set in
slipperie places, Psalm the seventy third. So albeit Cain had the dominion over
his brother and slew him, thinking none would call him to account for it; yet
we see at length he acknowledges his sin, and affirms it to be so great
as that it can have no pardon.

Wherefore if we will judge rightly of Cain, whom we have heard before what he
was; we must not stay there, but read on forward, and see what he is now: For
we must judge of the wicked by their deed; and of them our Savior Christ
says, in the 12. chapter of Matthew, Their end is worse than their beginning:
Before his sin lay still, and his condemnation slept: And thus it is with the
wicked, that while they are asleep in sin, they will believe nothing, nor
give credit to any word of God. Wherefore we see a plain example in Lot's sons
in law, in the nienteenth chapter of Genesis, and the fourteenth verse, when he
told them the Lord would destroy the City, he seemed to them to be some jester:
And when sin awaketh, and damnation sleeps no longer, then it is a matter
of earnest; it makes Cain to cry out, My sin is greater than can be
pardoned. And howsoever Esau contemn his Birthright, yet, when he seeks, it
cannot be had again, it makes him weep bitterly, Genesis the twenty fifth
chapter, and Hebrews the twelfth chapter: So that albeit at the first, they see
not the inconvenience and danger of sin, yet in novissimo, Jeremiah the
thirtieth chapter, and the twenty fourth verse, at the last day they shall
understand it plainly.

Touching the words themselves, here is a confession, though it be faulty, for
true confession has prayer joined with it, as the Prophet, having made
confession of his sin, says, For this cause I prayed, Psalm the thirty
second; And Peter to Simon Magus, Pray if the thought of thine heart may be
forgiven thee, in the eighth chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, and the
twenty second verse; but this confession has no prayer, and therefore is
faulty.

But to speak so much of it as is good in his confession.

First, he confesses his sin, not every sin, but his crooked and perverse
sin, such as Job speaks of, in his thirty third chapter, and the twenty
seventh verse, I have sinned and perverted righteousness.

Again, in that he says, his sin is great, he shows that he felt the
weight of it, and does not (...) it, and make it less than it is: This
confession is well, but only for two exceptions that are easily taken against
it.

First, that which Chrysostom makes, That it was too late, for it should have
stood in the eighth verse; for as the Wiseman says, in the eighteenth chapter
of the Proverbs, and the seventeenth verse, Justus in principio sermonis
accusator sui. And as the fathers read, in the forty third chapter of Isaiah,
and the twenty sixth verse, Die tu iniquitates prior, ut justificeris; for we
may not foreslow the time, but seek the Lord while he may he found, Isaiah the
fifty fifth chapter.

Secondly, because albeit it be said of repentance, Siver a nunquam sera; yet
si sera raro vera, if it be late it is seldom true.

And this confession of Cain, as it is no true confession, for that it was long
deferred; so chiefly for that it was a confession without any petition or
prayer for pardon; and he made no prayer, because he had no hope; and no hope,
for that he wanted faith. We must therefore beware that we defer not our
confession and repentance, but speedily return to God, for that is the cause
that he bears with us; he might presently consume us after we have sinned, but
he spares us for repentance, as the Prophet speaks, in the thirtieth chapter
of Isaiah, Expectat Deus ut miseriatur, and his mercy is extended to all
sinners, upon condition of repentance. Albeit Nebuchadnezzar were a grievous
sinner, yet the Prophet tells him, in the fourth chapter of Daniel, if he
break off his sins by righteous dealing, and his iniquities by mercy to the
poor, Erit sanatio erroris. And the Prophet to them that had given themselves
to Idolatry, says, If you turn, your iniquity shall not be to your
destruction, Ezekiel the eighteenth chapter, and the thirtieth verse: Therefore
the Godly man says, We have trespassed against God, we have taken strange
ways, yet now there is hope in Israel for this, Exodus the tenth chapter, and
second verse; Which is a point very material, for if hope of mercy and
forgiveness be cut off, sinners will fall into their case that said
desperately, in the eighteenth chapter of Jeremiah, and the twelfth verse, We
will walk in the stubbornness of our hearts; or else as the Apostle speaks,
They will be swallowed up of too much heaviness, in the first epistle to the
Corinthians, the second chapter; that is, without hope of mercy, men fall into
desperate hardness of heart, or into desperate fear and sorrow, so as they
cannot be comforted: And this is it which the Devil desires, to the end he may
bring this to pass. As in the beginning he took exception against one tree, and
charged God with niggardliness and envy, albeit he could not charge God for all
the trees of the Garden, in the third chapter of Genesis, and the fifth verse;
so albeit it be impossible for the Devil to persuade Cain that God will not
forgive sins, because in as much as if God be extreme to mark what is done
(...), and enter into judgment, no man can be justified in his sight, Psalm
the one hundred and thirtieth, and Psalm the one hundred forty third,
therefore he must needs forgive sins, unless he will show that he has made
all men for naught, Psalm the eighty ninth; yet he tells him that howsoever
sins may be forgiven, yet Cain's sin cannot be pardoned; He tells Cain that
a (...) there of his Brother, and such a one as denies the deed with such
presumptuous and proud answers, cannot have pardon. But the error of Cain
stands herein, not that he is persuaded that his sin is great, for murder no
doubt is a great sin, but that he thinks it so great, as it could not be
pardoned; as if Gods mercy were not great enough for his sin were it never so
great; Cain's error then as we see, is Major iniquitas quam propitiatio.

Which error God does most of all detest:

First, for that it does prejudice his Power, as if he that is Almighty, were
not able to pardon the sins of wicked men.

Secondly, It does prejudice his truth, for God affirms of himself, That he
forgiveth iniquity, transgression and sin, Exodus the thirty fourth chapter,
and the seventh verse, which is the sin that Cain speaks of here. The
Prophet says of God, in the one hundred and thirtieth Psalm, He shall deliver
Israel from all his sins; He has shut up all under sin, that he may have
mercy over all, Romans the eleventh chapter: And as he came into the world to
save sinners, so primos peecatorum, in the first epistle to Timothy, the first
chapter, and the sixteenth verse: This Cain could not be ignorant of, having
heard of the promise which God made, That the seed of the woman should break
the Serpents head, that is, (as we have showed,) the head and chief sin that
the Devil can infect the soul of man withal.

Thirdly, This error does derogate from his goodness, which makes it more
odious to God; for Gods mercy has a preeminece above his justice; Psalm the
one hundred forty fifth, his mercy is above all his works; And as the Apostle
says, in the second chapter of James, Mercy triumphs over Justice: Therefore
the sin against Gods Mercy is more grievous.

Again, It is the more odious in Gods eyes, because it takes from him the Glory
of his Mercy, which is essential and natural in God; for his Justice grows
out of man; and he is said to be just, not so much in regard of himself, as in
respect of his dealing toward men, in that he rewards the good, and
punishes the bad; But as for Mercy, it is naturally in him, and a part of his
Essence; But his Justice comes from without; for when men provoke him by
their sins, then he says, Isaiah the twenty eighth chapter and the
seventeenth verse, Judgment will I lay to the rule, and righteousness to the
balance. Therefore if we conceive of God as a hard Lord, whereas we see he is
ready to forgive ten thousand talents to his Servants, Matthew the eighteenth
chapter, or think him to be a hard Father, whereas he is most kind to naughty
and unthrifty Sons, Luke the fifteenth chapter: We do derogate against his
mercy and goodness, who in respect of his natural inclination to mercy, is
called mercy, Psalm the fifty ninth and the seventeenth verse; wherefore as the
Apostle said to the Jews, Acts the thirteenth chapter and the forty sixth
verse; Seeing you have put the word of God from you, and judged your selves
unworthy of eternal life; so if any man by taking an (...) opinion of Gods
mercy, do put it from him, and judge himself unworthy of mercy, there is no
hope that he shall ever obtain forgiveness, but he must either fall into that
desparare hardness of heart, that is mentioned, Jeremiah the eighteenth
chapter, or else be continually tormented with a wounded spirit, Proverbs the
eighteenth chapter, and be swallowed up of heaviness, in the second to the
Corinthians, the second chapter.

Touching Cains conceit, it is certain if his sin cannot be pardoned, it is
either in regard of the sin it self, or of Gods justice; but neither of these
are any such hindrance, that they ought to draw us to that which Cain says.

Touching sin, it is not a thing impossible to obtain pardon for it.

First, Because sin is the work of a Creature which is finite, and therefore
can do nothing but that which is finite; But God is infinite, and of his
greatness there is no end, psalm the one hundred and forty sift: And therefore
look how much God is greater than man, so great is his power to thew mercy; and
consequently it is not possible that his mercy should be overcome of our sin
and misery.

Secondly, peccatum hominis est infirmitas hominis, that is, sin is a work of
infirmity, and consequently it cannot overcome Gods power; for the weakness of
God is stronger than the strength of man, in the first to the Corinthians, the
first chapter; but there is no reason to say or think that the weakness of man
is stronger than the strength of God; and therefore the Apostle says, Romans
the third chapter, Can the unbelief of man, which is an infirmite of man, make
the faith of God of none effect? It is not possible: Though we be unfaithful,
yet he abides faithful, and cannot deny himself, in the second to Timothy,
the second chapter and the thirteenth verse.

Thirdly, Whereas sins are said to be great, so the number of them how great
or many soever they be, yet we are not to doubt but there is pardon for them;
for there is mercy offered where there is multiplicitie of sin. Christ's
counsel is, Be ye merciful as your heavenly Father is merciful, Luke the
sixth chapter: and we see that man's mercy is so great, that it forgiveth those
that do offend seventy times seven times, Matthew the eighteenth chapter and
the twenty second verse; therefore Gods mercy must needs be greater: Therefore
God, to show the greatness of his mercy, says, Howsoever man will not receive
his wife when she goes from him, and becomes another man's; yet turn ye to
me, and I will receive you to favor, Jeremiah the third chapter and the first
verse: So we see that Gods mercy exceeds man's mercy. But the reason why we
despair of pardon upon the sight of our sins is, for that as the Prophet
speaks, Man's thoughts are not as Gods thoughts, Isaiah the fifty fifth
chapter: man thinks that unpossible to be numbered, which God does number.
David, to show that his finnes were innumerable, says, they are more than the
hairs on his head, Psalm fourtieth and the twelfth verse; and yet Christ says
that our heavenly Father does number all the hairs of our head, Matthew the
tenth chapter and the thirtieth verse. Manasseb cries out that his sins are
more than the sand of the Sea which cannot be told, and yet God does
comprehend and hold it in his hand, Isaiah the fourtieth chapter and the
twelfth verse: And albeit in man's judgment the Stars may seem innumerable,
yet the Prophet says, That God counts the number of the Stars and calls
them by their names, Psalm the one hundred and forty seventh; so albeit our
sins seem innumerable to us, yet he can number them; and albeit we think it
impossible they should be forgiven, yet God does not think so.

Fourthly, Against the grievousness of sin there is hope of mercy; For though
they be as red as scarlet, he will make them as white as snow, Isaiah the first
chapter and the eighteenth verse: As our sin is great, so says the Prophet,
Great is thy mercy toward men, for thou have delivered me from the nethermost
hell, Psalm the eighty sixth and the thirteenth verse; and so great that he
says, Psalm the seventy first and the fifteenth verse, I know no end thereof:
Therefore albeit the greatness of sin be grande barathrum, yet major est
abyssus misericordiae dei. And as there is in us abundance of sin, so in
Christ we find superabundant grace for the remission of sin, Romans the fifth
chapter; but as for peccatum meum, that is, such finnes as are of the same size
that Cains was, against which the Devil chiefly takes exception, that we
should not doubt of Gods mercy, but that we may find pardon: though our sin
be the shedding of blood, yet it is pardonable; for David committed murder,
and yet obtained forgiveness, and was received to be a Saint in heaven

Though a man be guilty of lying and denying the truth, yet there is mercy in
store with God for that sin; for Peter after he had denied his Master, and
swore that he knew him not, against his own conscience, was for all that
forgiven: and that we should despair of no sin to them that did shead the
blood of the Son of God that holy and just one, and killed the Lord of life;
even to those the Apostle says Amend your lives and turn, that your sins may
be done away, Acts the third chapter and the ninteenth verse; and yet this
sin is far greater than Cains sin. Jerome says that Judas did offend God
more in repelling his grace, and (...) of his mercy after his sin, than he
did in betraying the Son of God: Therefore when Cain says My sin is
greater than can be pardoned, the Fathers say mentiris Cain: and Bernard says
absit, major enim est dei pietas quam hominis iniquitas; whereupon albeit
Manasseh confesses that he has sinned above the number of the sand of the
Sea, and that his transgressions are multiplied; yet knowing that Gods mercy is
greater than the malice of men, he cease not to crave forgiveness, and for
that obtained pardon, and was received into favor.

To conclude this point, he that will hold Cains opinion, does not believe the
promises of God, that the woman's seed shall be of sufficient power to break in
pieces the Serpents head, but in saying his sin is greater than can be
forgiven; it is all one as if he said, the malice and (...) of the Serpent is
greater than the virtue and power of Christ, and contrary to that which the
Apostle says, Hebrews the twelfth chapter ( that Christ's blood speaks
better things than the blood of Abel) he holds that Abels blood (...) louder
for vengeance, than Christ's blood can do which cries for mercy and
sorgiveness: but it is absurd and blasphemous so to think, for it cannot be but
Christ's blood which is Gods blood, Acts the twentieth chapter, must have more
force to entreat for remission at Gods hand, than the blood of a man can have
to obtain vengeance; major enim est propitiatio quam iniquitas.

For the Justice of God which is the second hindrance, thus it stands: That
which God has pronounced cannot be recalled, but we are to see whether this
hold true or no: the Sentence pronounced by God upon Hezekiah was, dispone
domum tuum, morieris enim, in the second of Kings, the twentieth chapter and
the first verse, and the Sentence of God to be pronounced by Jonas was, That
within forty days Nineveh should be destroyed, Jonah the third chapter; but
yet neither did Hezekiah die at that time, neither was the City of Nineveh
destroyed, as the Prophet had said it should. The reason is, because albeit God
spoke suddenly against a Nation or Kingdom, to pluck it up and destroy it; yet
he says, If this Nation against whom I have prenounced this Sentence, do turn
from their (...), I will repent of the plague that I thought to bring upon it,
(...) the eighteenth chapter and the eighth verse; so then Gods meaning was,
that the King should die except he did repent, and that Nineveh should be
destroyed if it did not repent; but they repented, therefore God revoked his
Sentence; and therefore as Christ says, Luke the thirteenth chapter, Except
(...) repent ye shall all likewise (...), so all threathings in the Scripture
go with this condition, The soul that sins it shall die except it repent,
Ezekiel the eighteenth chapter, and he that calls his brother fool is in danger
of hell fire, except he (...), Matthew the fifth chapter and the twenty second
verse: So that the justice of God is no hndrance, but that the most grievous
sinner that is, may obtain forgiveness if he repent; and because Cain repented
not, therefore he is excluded from the remission of sins.

The point that remains is, That we consider (...), in the second to the
Corinthians, the second chapter, the devises and fetches which the enemy of
our Salvation uses to work our destruction; for when sin is to be committed,
he brings them to presumption; and albeit God has threatened plagues for such
and such sins, yet he persuades a man, as Peter did Christ, in the sixteenth
chapter of Matthew, Non fiet haec tibi that is before sin is committed; but
when finne is finished, and the Devil has that he would have, then he
labors to bring men into desperation, saying, it must needs be, and they
cannot avoid the wrath and judgments of God. In the reading of the old
Testament, he lays a vail over the hearts of men, as it was with the Jews,
that by the Law they might not see the grievousnesse of sin, and so avoid the
danger of it, in the second epistle to the Corinthians, and the third chapter;
but when he has entised men to commit sin, then he blinds their eyes, that
the light of the Gospel, whereby they are assured of the forgiveness of
sins, and of the mercy of God in Christ, should not shine into their hearts,
in the second to the Corinthians, the fourth chapter: he will neither let them
see the grievousnesse of sin, before they commit it, nor behold the mercy of
God, after it is committed: Which mercy of God is so generally offered to all
sorts, that even murderers and liars, albeit they be grievous sinners, cannot
despair of mercy, for we see both David and Peter obtained pardon, and none are
debarred, but only they that say, Quid nobis tecum Jesu Nazarene? in the first
chapter of Mark, and the twenty fourth verse; That which excluded the Devil
himself from mercy, was this desperate fear, for as Augustine says,
Obstinatione sua, and non enormitate sceleris, Demon est Demon: Even so Cain
the Child of the Devil, seems to say thus much in this his confession, I
desire no pardon at thy hands O God, because I see the greatness of my offense
is greater than thy mercy: For Cain, we see what befell him, because, as the
Prophet speaks, Noluit intelligere, ut been ageret, Psalm the thirty sixth;
because he had no care to do as God would have him, therefore God gave him up
to the lusts of his own heart; and as the Apostle speaks, in the second to
the Thessalonians, the second chapter, and the tenth verse, because when God
spoke to him, he believed not the truth, that he might be saved, God sent him
strange delusions, that he should believe the Devils lies, who preached to him
and persuaded him after he had sinned, that his sin was greater than Gods
mercy: for if Pharaoh first harden his own heart, Exodus the eighth chapter,
and the thirty second verse, it is just that God harden his heart, so as he
shall not hearken to his ministers, Exodus the ninth chapter and the twelfth
verse. But because the Prophet complains, that while he would have healed
Israel, then the iniquity of Ephraim was discovered, and the wickedness of
Samaria, Hosea the seventh chapter: Therefore we must be heedfull, that while
we seek to cure desperation, we make not a way to presumption, for that is the
great sin against which the Prophet prays, in the ninteenth Psalm, Keep
thy servant from presumptuous sins, so shall I be clear from the great sin:
This was the sin of Cain, and we must beware that we walk not in his way, as
Jude counsels, Quia e nimia spe presumptio, is the high way to desperation;
therefore when we know Gods will, as Cain did, we must seek no faither, nor
follow our own wisdom. It was Saul's sin, he would be wiser than either Samuel
or the Lord himself; for being commanded to destroy the Amalekites, with all
they had, Saul as if God knew not what he did, takes upon him to spare the best
things, in the first book of Samuel, the fifteenth chapter; this was his
presumption. We must beware, says Moses, in the twenty ninth chapter of
Deuteronomie, and the ninteenth verse, That when we hear the words of the
curses and the punishments, which God threatens against the transgressors of
his Law, That we do not bless our selves in our hearts, saying, I shall have
peace, though I walk after the stubbornness of mine own heart; thus adding
(...) to thirst. It we will not despair we must fear, for so did Job, and
therefore he says, Timor meus spes mea, in the fourth chapter of Job and
thesixth verse: The fear he had and felt, when he was about to sin, wrought
in him an assured hope and assurance of Gods favor; and that fear made him
say, Etiamsi (...), sperabo in eum, Job the thirteenth chapter. That fear is a
means of hope, the Apostle S. Peter shows; for having said, that he would
have all men to hope perfectly, in the first of Peter, the first chapter and
the thirteenth verse, he expresses the means how they shall attainto this
perfect hope, and that is, by passing their conversation in fear, verse the
seventeenth. This course did not Cain take, but contrariwise, when he heard God
tell him, that if he did evil, sin lay at the door; he for all that blesses
himself in his heart, and said I shall do well enough, though I walk after the
stubbornness of mine own heart, and kill Abel my Brother, contrary to Gods
commandments.

En expellis me hodie a superficie istius terrae, ut a facie tua abscondam me:
cumque vagus sim and infestus agitationibus in terra, si ullus fuerit qui me
inveniat, interficiet me. Genesis 4. 14.

September. 9. 1599.
CAINS speech to God (as we see) stands upon two parts; one touching his sin,
in the thirteenth verse; the other concerning his punishment, in this verse;
which also contains two parts. First, a mere repetition of the sentence given
upon him in the eleventh verse. Secondly, an addition which Cain himself makes,
That now whosoever should find him should kill him, which is his chief
complaint.

For the first part, When sentence is passed upon any person, God requires two
things.

First, Agnitionem culpae, whereunto two things belong: That (...), Promissio
poenitentiae, as Ezekiah promises, That he will walk all the days of his
life, in the bitterness of his soul, in the thirty eighth chapter of Isaiah,
and the fifteenth verse; And the Apostle says, That the true tokens of Godly
sorrow, are to be angry, to be afraid of himself afterward, and to he revenged
of himself for the sin committed, in the second epistle to the Corinthians,
the seventh chapter, and the eleventh verse. And Deprecatio poenae, that is,
petition for forgiveness, as, The Lord be merciful to my sin, and forgive
me my sin.

Secondly, God requires justificationem justitiae, that is, declare that the
sentence is past upon us justly, as David does, Psalm the fifty first and the
fourth verse, Against thee only have I sinned, that thou may be just when
thou speak, and clear when thou judge. And this likewise has two parts.

First, That we think well of God, saying with the Prophet, in the one hundred
and ninteenth Psalm; and the seventy fifth verse, I know, Lord, that thy
judgments are right, and that thou of very faithfulness have afflicted me.

Secondly, To bear quietly and meekly the punishment that he lays upon us, by
David's example, in the thirty ninth Psalm, Tacui Domine, quia tu fecisti. But
as for Cain, we see on his part, neither promise of repentance, nor petition
for forgiveness: he confesses his fault indeed, ( My sin is greater) but it
was no true confessi on.

First, That it was too late, it should have stood in the ninth verse, for A
just man will be first in his own cause to accuse himself, Proverbs the
eighteenth chapter, and the seventeenth verse; but he denied it proudly, and so
was far from making any promise of repentance.

Secondly, No true confession, because without any petition of forgiveness;
for he concieved this foolish opinion, That his sin could not be forgiven; as
if the Woman's seed had not Power to break the the Serpents head, or the blood
of Christ crying for mercy of God, did not cry louder than Abels did for
justice, which the Apostle says speaks better things than the blood of Abel,
Hebrews the twelfth chapter. But as for his opinion touching Gods justice, both
Cain and all others ought with David to acknowledge in every punishment that he
lays upon them, Psalm the one hundred and nineteenth and the one hundred and
thirty seventh verse, Righteous art thou O Lord in all thy judgments: They
ought to judge themselves worthy to be destroyed, Ezekiel the thirty sixth
chapter; for so did the better Thees, Luke the twenty third chapter and the
forty first verse, We indeed suffer righteously, for we receive things worthy
of that we have done, but this man has done nothing amiss. But as for Cain he
makes no such acknowledgment of Gods justice in punishing him; whereas he
should have confessed he was worthily cast out of the earth, because he had
bereaved the earth of one of her Children, killed a man, an innocent, and not
only so, but a Saint, that he was worthily cast out of Gods presence being
defiled with blood; even as Joab was pulled from the Altar, in the first of
Kings the second chapter, as if he would pollute the Altar: For as the Apostle
says, in the first to the Corinthians the fifth chapter, the reason why the
Corinthian was excommunicated, was because by a little leaventhe whole lump
should be leavened. The other was justly punished with a life of sorrow and
fear, because he had been a cause of sorrow and fear to many; yet Cain does
none of all these, but instead of acknowledging Gods justice in regard of his
desert, he makes it strange and wonders at it ( Behold) but we are taught to
think otherwise, that how grievous soever God punishes us, yet he deals not
with us after our deserts, Psalm the one hundred and third; We must not think
strange concerning the fiery trial, as if same strange thing were come to us,
in the first epistle of Peter, the fourth chapter and the twelfth verse: We
must not make an ecce of Gods Judgments as Cain does, for God is wise; and
albeit the party punished be innocent, yet we are to think that God will suffer
no punishment to come to him without just cause, much more ought we to justify
him when he punishes a notorious Offender. But from this word ( ecce) it
appears that Cain did not so much as conceive a right of Gods justice.

The second point in justifying Gods Justice is, to bear quietly the punishment
that he lays upon us, Levitieus the twenty sixth chapter and the forty (...)
verse, which Christ calls the taking up of the Cross, Matthew the sixteenth
chapter; for if we bear the (...) our iniquity unwillingly, superimponitur non
tollitur crux; therefore first we must acknowledge in regard of our sins,
that God deals more mercifully with us than we deserve. Secondly, We must
bear quietly the punishment laid upon us, for out of affliction the godly
gather matter of thanks. Job having all taken from him says, Job the first
chapter, benedictum sit momen domini, and David, Psalm the one hundred and
sixteenth, accipiam calicem salutis, he praises God for the cup of affliction
as well as for the cup of salvation, and is as thankful to God for the
benefits which he by means of affliction bestows upon them against their
will, as for those that come to them with their will and good liking; and this
is the perfection that we are to strive unto; but if we do not at all reckon
them as benefits, yet we must say with Eli, in the first of Samuel, the third
chapter and the eighteenth verse, Dominus est, faciat quod bonum videtur in
oculis suis; therefore the Prophet says of him that is accustomed to bear the
yoke from his youth, Lamentations the third chapter and the twenty eighth
verse, sidebit and silebit, so must we do and say with David, in the second of
Samuel, the fifteenth chapter and the twenty sixth verse, Here am I, let him do
to me as seems good in his eyes: But Cain seems not thus to be affected,
because he is altogether in the enumeration of his punishment; it is no quiet
bearing, but odiosa repetitio. If this sin were so great as he said it was,
he should have done better to enter into the consideration thereof as David
did, Psalm the fifty first, My sin is ever before me, so he should ever have
thought of the grievousness of his sin. And touching the party killed; First it
was a man; Secondly his brother; Thirdly an innocent. Again, in regard of
himself, it was of envy that he killed him, not of a sudden, but by
premeditation, after a treacherous manner, for he went with him into the fields,
and there fell upon him; his sin was the greater, for that it was an offense
to God who had preached a long Sermon to him, that it was a grief to Adam and
Eve, a scandal and offense to all ages, who from his example might take a
pattern to commit this sin; but Cain takes not this course, the (...) of his
sin is dispatched in a word ( My sin is greater) but he takes his
punishment in pieces, and thinks of it particularly; whereupon one says of
Cain and the wicked, that the repetition which they make is, eorum quae ferunt,
non quae fecerunt, they are general in their sin, but particular in their
punishment; For as of the abundanee of the heart the mouth speaks, Matthew
the twelfth chapter; so we may gather by Cains words, that he thinks more of
his punishment than of his fault, that which offends him, stood more in his
sight, and grieved him more than that which offended God; but the godly are of
another mind, for they will be content to have the punishment remain upon
them, so that the guilt may be taken away. But there is a third point in this
repetition, which is a perverting of the order which God set down in giving the
Sentence: God began with the and curse ended with casting out of the earth; but
Cain begins with his casting out of the earth, wherein he shows what is
his greatest grief; for if a man suffer many pains, he will speak of that first
which does most pinch him, and complain first of the loss of that thing which
he does most of all affect; in that he first complains he is cast out from
the face of the earth, he shows he took more care for the face of the earth,
than the face and presence of God, and it grieved him more to be deprived of
the good will of men, than of the favor of God. It is otherwise with the
Saints of God, for they cry, Psalm the seventy third and the twenty fifth
verse, Whom have I in heaven but thee, and there is none in earth whom I desire
besides thee, Psalm the (...) third, Thy kindness is better than life it self;
and when they come to make composition between heavenly things and earthly, we
see what David says, in the second of Samuel, the fifteenth chapter and the
twenty fifth verse, If I find favor in Gods sight, I will see the Ark again,
that is the presence of God, and makes choice of that as his greatest felicity,
not to enjoy his Scepter, or to be restored to his Wives and Children, which
earthly men would make most account of; so the Apostle, Philippians the third
chapter and the eighth verse, Esteeming all things as dung in respect of
Christ. Whereby we see that as Cains punishment grieved him more than his
sin, so the earthly part of his punishment offends him more than the heavenly.

One thing more is to be added, that is, Cains Commentary or interpretation of
Maledictus, for he says that to be cursed is to be cast out from Gods
presence. The presence or face of God has reference to the power of God, or to
his favor; from the presence of Gods power, knowledge, or spirit there is no
escaping, Psalm the one hundred and thirty ninth, If I climb up to heaven,
(...) art there; if I go down to hell, thou art there also, of which the
Prophet says, Jeremiah the twenty third chapter and the twenty fourth verse,
coelum and terram ego (...); but that is not his meaning, but that he is cast
out from the presence of Gods favor; so are (...) words to be taken to Moses,
Exodus the tenth chapter and the twenty eighth verse, Get thee from me, and
look thou see my face no more; Rsalm the thirty first and the twenty second
verse, I said in my half, I am cast out from thy presence; and Psalm the
eightieth, Turn again O Lord, cause thy face to shine and we shall be saved; so
that we must know, that albeit God be present every where with his power, yet
he is not present with his favor, and not only that, but it signifies the
place where the favor and grace of God is intailed, that is, his House and
Church, of which the Prophet says, Psalm the ninty fifth, Let us come before
his presence (or face) with thanksgiving, When shall I come and appear in the
presence of God? Psalm the forty second; of which presence Christ says,
Matthew the eighteenth chapter, When two or three be gathered together, I am
amongst them, and the Apostle, in the second to the Corinthians the second
chapter, In the presence of Jesus Christ forgive I them, that is, in the Church
where God speaks to us in his word, and we again speak to him by prayer; so
Cains punishment is both spiritual and ecclesiastical, for that he is not
only shut out of Gods favor, but cast out of the place where the presence of
his favor and grace is showed; and the punishment was justly inflicted upon
Cain, that durst commit so great an offense in the presence and sight of God,
and when it was committed, feared not Gods presence, but denied it as if God
knew not of it.

The second point is Cains admonition, wherein the first thing to be observed
is, how in this repetition it comes to pass, that Cain says ( whosoever shall
find him will kill him), seeing in the sentence there is no mention of death?
the reason comes from the guiltiness of his conscience, severiorum seipso
Judicem habet (...); whereupon it falls out, that though the Judge absolve,
yet the party guilty adds a sentence of condemnation upon himself, so does
Cain condemn himself as worthy of death: God indeed afterward says He (...)
shedeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, Genesis the ninth chapter;
but seeing Cain (...) God has uttered his opinion of murder, that it is a
sin mortal, it may be said to him, ex ore (...) te (...), Luke he (...)
chapter, that men may know that wisdom is justified of (...) children, (...)
the eleventh chapter, so (...) is (...) of her children.

Secondly, Where he says he shall be killed with a (...) and bloody death;
this is secundum dictamen rationis, ut (...) fecit expectes, Cain is told by
his own conscience, that (...) he (...) murdered Abel, so himself must look to
be murdered. This is that Lex (...) written naturally in the hearts of all
men, which made the brethren of Joseph to say, Genesis the forty second
chapter and the twenty first verse, We have sinned against our brother, in that
we saw the anguish of his soul when he besought us, and we would not hear him;
therefore is all this come upon us. By that Law it was just, that as Hammon had
made Gods people afraid, so he himself should fear, and be dealt with as he had
purposed to deal, Esther the seventh chapter and the sixth verse; therefore the
Prophet says, Isaiah the thirty fifth chapter and the first verse, Woe be to
them that spoil, for they shall be spoiled, and our Savior Christ says
agreeably, Matthew the seventh chapter, With what measure ye meat, the same
shall be measured to you again.

Thirdly, He says, Omnis qui inveniret, there could but one kill him, and yet
his (...) tells him, he deserves to die at the hands of every man, even of
every beast, in as much as he has first taught beasts to kill men: by his own
confession it is just, that as the Prophet speaks, Micah the seventh chapter
and the fifth verse, The Wife of his bosom and the Children of his loins shall
break the bonds of nature with him: as he before has thewed himself unnatural
to his brother. And this is a great part of Cains punishment, that albeit there
be none to kill him, yet he shall be in continual fear of death, that a man
shall not only fear Gods threatening, but his own fancy; that he shall fear not
one, but every one that meets him, as if every one knew his fault; that he
shall fear not only where there is cause of fear, as wild beasts, but tuta
timere, and this is a part of Gods curse, that God will send faintness into
their hearts, so as they shall be afraid at the shaking of a leaf, Leviticus
the twenty sixth chapter and the thirty sixth verse at every shadow as the
Midianites were of their dreams, Judges the seventh chapter, and at every noise
and rumor, in the second of the Kings, the seventh chapter and the sixth verse:
These fears are great punishments, and arguments of a guilty conscience; and
this shows that albeit wickedness be secret, yet it will not suffer a man to
be quiet: Wherein we are to observe how Cain de scribeth the state of them that
are out of Gods favor, and cast from his presence, that they fear either no
fear, as Psalm the fifty (...). If the Prince frown upon a man, there is no
hope of favor any where else; so if God be once offended so that a man despair
of his favor, he will fear every creature, the stars of heaven fought
against Sisera, Judges the fifth chapter and the twentieth verse, The stones in
the street will cease to be in league and peace with him. Job the fifth chapter;
therefore when God says quaerite faciem meam, Psalm the twenty seventh, our
soul must answer, thy face Lord will I seek; For if we seek the Lord our God we
shall find him, Deuteronomie the fourth chapter and the twenty ninth verse;
and that is so necessary that the People say, If thy presence go not with us,
carry us not hence, Exodus the thirty third chapter; and the Prophet speaks,
Cast me not from thy presence, Psalm the fifty first; for without the assurance
of Gods favor and protection, we shall fear every shadow every noise that we
hear.

Secondly, Cain in these words shows what was his chief fear, and what did
most grieve him, that was, that he should die not the death of the soul, but
the bodily death by the hand of man; he fears the shadow of death but not the
body of death, as the Apostle speaks, Romans the seventh chapter, but eternal
death is that which he should have feared most of all, for it has a body and
shall be found, though the bodily death is often sought and cannot be found,
Job the third, wherein Cain shows what he is, that is animalis homo, in the
first to the Corinthians the second chapter (...). Phillippians the third
chapter, not having the spirit; so was Saul afflicted in the first of Samuel
the fifteenth chapter, Honor me before the people; he respected worldly honor
more than Gods favor, whereupon says Augustine, quid tibi honoratio haec
proderit miser? If (...) death fall upon Cain what shall it profit him to live
on earth; but this shows plainly that the life of the body was Cains chief
felicity, and that the greatest grief he had was for the death of the body; as
if he should say, let me live though it be but in fear and sorrow: This is the
affection of flesh and blood, as the Devil says of Job, Skin for skin and all
that a man has will he give for his life, Job the second chapter; that is, so
long as life is not taken away man is well. This being Cains complaint, it is
an implied petition, and the request is Quasi pro magno beneficio ut non (...),
which request may be well uttered if it be rightly taken, for not only the
wicked fear death, but the godly say themselves, we sigh and would not be
uncloathed, but clothed upon, in the second to the Corinthians the fifth
chapter, they would pass to immortality without the dissolution of the body
and soul. That prayer for life is well if it be for a good end, as Hezekiah
prays he may live to the end he may bewail his sins in the (...) of his
soul, Isaiah the thirty eighth chapter, repentance is the end that he sets.
David says I will not die but live and praise the Lord, Psalm the one hundred
and eighteenth; and the Apostle Paul albeit in regard of himself he desires to
be dissolved; yet because it is profitable for the Church that he should still
remain in the flesh, he desires to live, Philippians the first chapter and the
twenty second verse; so life may be sought if it be for this end, to do good,
but if our end be the escaping of death for a time, the case is otherwise.

Touching the end of Cain's desire; It may be he (...) life, that he might
repent, and praise God, and do good, for charity (...) the best, in the first
epistle to the Corinthians, and the thirteenth chapter. But we see what does
continually vex Cain and all the wicked, that is, the doubt of the forgiveness
of sin, which is the worm of the spirit, and a continual fear of death,
which they know they have deserved at the hands of all Gods creatures.

Dixit vero Jehova illi, Propterea quisquis interfecerit Kajinum, septuplo
vindicator: and imposuit Jehova Kajino signum, ne eum caederet ullus qui foret
inventurus eum. Genesis 4. 15.

September. 26. 1599.
CAINS chief complaint and petition therein implied, was handled verse the
fourteenth. This verse contains Gods answer, which is a yielding or granting to
that petition of his, and that effectual; for God provideth for the safety of
Cain's life, not only by his word and command, but by a visible mark which he
set upon Cain.

Wherein we are generally to observe; First, That as the Prophet tells us, in
the one hundred and tenth Psalm, God deals not with any sinner according to
his sins and deserts; for if God did not in wrath remember mercy, (...) the
third chapter, he should not in justice have suffered Cain to open his mouth;
for it is just that he which turns away his car from hearing the law; when he
prays, should not be heard, Proverbs the twenty eighth chapter and the ninth
verse, That he which will not hear Gods Prachers, shall not be heard of God
when he prays; And the Lord in the Propher says more plainly, in the second
chapter of Zechary, and the thirteenth verse, that as he by his Prophets cried
unto the people, and they would not hear, so they cried, and he would not hear
them: Yet not withstanding we see God is content to hear Cain's petition, and
by his example, to set down a pattern unto others, that the sentence being
pronounced, and the party condemned, yet he is to be allowed to speak.

Secondly, That God having heard Cain wonder at his punishment, as if it were
not proportionable to his sin, hearing him odiously recounting and remembering
his punishment, where he should have thought upon his sin, and transposing
Gods order, in that he complains for that he is cast out of the earth, before
he speaks of his casting out of Gods favor, hearing him show plainly that he
was more grieved at the penalty inflicted upon him, than the fault committed by
him, and at the earthly part of his punishment more than the spiritual;
whereas upon his own confession God might justly have said, Luke the fourteenth
chapter, ex ore tuo judico; as thou confessest thy self unworthy to live, so
whosoever shall find (...) shall kill thee, yet he is not only content to
hear, but also to consider the voice of his prayer, Psalm the sixty sixth and
the seventeenth verse.

Thirdly, We set that God grants his suit; for whereas Cains request is, that
the sentence may not presently be executed, so that whosoever meets him shall
kill him, God says I will take order that thy life shall not presently be
taken from thee, but I will reprieve thee to further repentance. Wherein we see
as Augustine notes quod nunquam deo sine spe supplicatur, in as much as Cain,
a man condemned, has obtained to be heard of God. It is verified which David
says, Psalm the ninth and the tenth verse, Thou Lord never failest them that
seek thee; and that which our Siviour Christ says, John the sixth chapter, eum
qui ad me venit non ejiciam for as; not only here we see a reprobate has his
request granted, but wicked Abab that sold himself to work wickedness, for that
he humbled himself, escaped the evil which the Lord purposed to bring upon
him; in the first of Kings, the twenty first chapter: and whereas Cains life is
spared, it is an argument that if Cain had asked more, God would have granted
it: It was but Angustia mentis, his mind and understanding could not conceive
what to ask besides the benefit of this present life: It was not the narrowness
of Gods mercy, for had he asked more, more should have been granted him, for
God affirms of his liberality, Psalm the eighty first, Open thy mouth wide
and I will fill it. Therefore by that term of expecting, Isaiah the third
chapter, and harkening, Jeremiah the eighth chapter: The meaning of the prophet
is, that God is willing and ready to give more, if men will sue to him. In the
mean time we see in these words a mitigation of Cains fear, whereby we are
taught that God mitigateth the punishment of those that are dejected, though he
takes it not away; for that which the Prophet affirms, Psalm the sixty fifth,
That God is the hope of all the ends of the world: is no otherwise verified of
those that are out of the covenant, but in respect only of the mitigation of
their punishment. For albeit those that pertain not to the covenant, have not
their punishment taken away, yet it may be mitigated: So Christ says of Tire
and Sidon, that their estate shall be easier, and their punishment more remiss
in the day of Judgment, Matthew the eleventh chapter; and the Servant that of
ignorance commits things worthy of stripes, albeit he be not beaten with
many stripes, as he that knew his Masters will and sins; yet he shall not
escape unbeaten, Luke the twelfth chapter and the forty eighth verse.

The grant consists of two parts; The word or command of God touching him that
shall kill Cain, and the mark which he sets upon Cain, that he may be known
from all other men: For by these two God sets down an order for the
preservation of man's life.

For the first, Where God says not, whosoever kills any man, but whosoever
kills Cain; that has the form of a pardon.

Secondly, That no man should kill him wittingly, he says, he shall be
punished seven fold.

Thirdly, For that no man should ignorantly kill him, God sets a mark upon
Cain, whereby he may be known from all other men.

In the Command which God gives, we have to consider his Pardon, and the
Penalty threatened to him (...) wittingly kills Cain.

In the pardon or mitigation of the sentence the Council of God does first
respect Cain himself; for if God had presently swept away Cain, upon the
sentence pronounced, he could not have repented; but in giving Cain a long life
upon earth, that he should not presently be taken away, but live gemens and
tremens; it might at length come into Cains mind, wrestling with sorrow and
fear, to say with the Church, in the second chapter of Hosea, I will return to
my first husband; for as it is usual with the people of God, after many
afflictions, to conclude upon repentance: It was the case of the lost child,
in the fifteenth chapter of Luke; for a time he bare out the misery which he
had brought upon himself, but at the last he is faint and says redibo ad
patrem; so Gods purpose in delaying the execution of his sentence upon Cain,
was, that by a long and tedious life he might be brought to repentance: For
that is it which Ambrose says, that when long life is granted to a man, as it
was to Hezekiab, Isaiah the thirty eighth chapter; the reason is ut vita sit
mors peccati; but if instead of funus peccati, it be foenus peccati; if instead
of burying sin we put it out to increase, then life is nothing else but
thesaurisatio irae dei in diem irae, Romans the second chapter. This is the
first part to be considered in Gods council, that himself may be the better.

Secondly, in sparing Cain God has a respect of others; for there is not
simplex contritio Serpentis, but aliquando conteritur Serpens ad pernitiem,
aliquando at theriacam, that is to make treakle. Though the Serpents head be
not so bruised that he dye of it, yet so as of it wholesome medicines may be
made, for the healing of others though themselves be not healed; for the
Apostle says there is in us a spirit that lusts to envy, as well as in Cain,
James the fourth chapter and the fifth verse; and therefore we have need to have
his example before our eyes to keep us from his sin, for his shedding of
blood is to us instead of a bath to wash our footsteps in, Psalm the fifty
eighth; that is, in this sparing there is not only a use to Cain himself to
amend, but though he do not, yet his example may cause others to amend, seeing
how God does punish Cains sin with a miserable life, that contains nothing
but fear and grief.

Thirdly, In this proceeding of Gods council and wisdom, if neither of these
take place, that neither Cain himself, nor others are the better for this
mitigation; yet as the Woman said, in the second of Samuel, the fourteenth
chapter, that albeit one of her Sons had slain the other, yet she would not be
deprived of him that was alive; for that she was willing that her husbands name
and (...) should continue upon earth: so it stood with Adam, he had two Sons,
whereof the one was the bane of the other; and albeit Cain deserved to die
presently, yet God does not so consider the greatness of his sin, that he
will forget the nature of man which himself had created; and therefore as well
to preserve mankind, as to show that godly posterity is not hereditarie, he
suffers Cain yet to live. For as Adam had a Cain, so from Cain who was that
evil one, in the first epistle of John the third chapter, Gods purpose was to
derive such as should pertain to the Covenant. Of one and the same Parents,
Gods will is, one shall be born after the flesh another after the spirit; and
he that is born after the flesh shall persecute him that is born after the
spirit, Galatians the fourth chapter and the twenty ninth verse.

As we say of his wisdom, so it stands not with Gods justice, that whosoever
finds a Malefactor shall kill him; for God does plainly express his will,
that a Murderer being worthy of death in himself, for all that, shall not be
murdered of every one. Therefore God says, whosoever shall presume of himself
to kill Cain, though it be with this pretense, that he is a murderer, shall be
punished seven fold; for it is not in every man's power (...): If any man have
committed a crime, the Judge shall see whether he be worthy of death, and as
the Judge shall judge him, so shall he be punished, Deuteronomie the twenty
(...) chapter, Exodus the twenty second chapter. The Magistrate being Gods
Ordinance, Romans the thirteenth chapter, has power to put a murder to death,
for he has the Sword committed unto him for that end, But he that takes up
the Sword shall perish by the Sword, Matthew the twenty sixth chapter; For if
every one that finds a man's (...), might kill him, it would soon root out all
mankind: And that this inconvenience should not fall out, God takes order that
every man shall not do that to Cain which Cain has done to Abel: no man may
kill a Murderer unless he have authority committed unto him for that end. That
is for his sparing.

The second point is for the punishment of him that transgresses thus, that
is, he shall be punished seven fold: It is strange that be which kills a
murderer, shall have a more grievous punishment than he. The number of seven
is numerus complens hebdomidem, therefore by the (...) punishment Gods meaning
is, that he will lay a complete and consummate punishment upon such a party;
but howsoever it seem strange, yet it is justice, for that as God will not have
him spared whom he condemns to death, as Saul spared Agag in the first of
Samuel the fifteenth chapter, nor let him go whom he has appointed to die, in
the first of Kings, the twentieth chapter and the forty second verse; so it is
a grievous sin to kill him whom God will have spared; and this is it which
makes the sin of such a party grievous, besides the consideration of Gods wrath
against them that do addere afflictiones afflicto. Zechariah the first chapter
and the fifteenth verse, God says he will be (...) with (...) that help
forward the affliction of them with whom he was a little angry, and therefore
such a one shall not escape, but before plagued: and the Prophet says the Lord
will not judge and condemn a man twice for one fault, Nahum the first chapter
and the ninth verse. Such a man commits a sin more grievous than Cains
sin in two respects. First, Cain transgressed only the Law of nature written
in his heart, but the other transgresses not only the natural Law, but Gods
express Command, who gave order that no man should of himself presume to kill
Cain. Secondly, It is more grievous in that he makes Cains example a warrant
to commit murder, but God says he must not do so; for if a man seeing Cain
punished for his sin, shall notwithstanding sin as he has done; he adds
to his transgression, and must therefore have a greater punishment than Cain.

From those two parts already handled, we may gather, that to those that sit as
Judges in Gods place, there is left a power of life and death; a power to
crucify, and a power to let loose, as Pilate said to Christ, John the 19th
chapter, verse the tenth, that they have power both to mittigate and to
abrogate the punishment of Offenders: For the first David was fain of necessity
to forbear Joab, being himself weak and old, and to delay his punishment when
he had murdered Abner, and Amasa, men more righteous and better than he, till
Solomon his son was established, in the first of Kings and the second
chapter. But the reason why Cain's punishment is delayed, is not any
forbearance of necessity, but because the lengthning of his punishment is a
better means to restrain men from the like sin, than if he had at once been
punished with death. For this cause the Prophet says, Psalm the fifty ninth
and the eleventh verse,, Slay them not least my people forget it, but scatter
them abroad by thy power. It is magis ad bonum publicum, that the Offenders be
spared. If Cains life had been presently taken away, it might have been doubted
whether Cain had ever committed any such sin or no; or if they did believe
it, yet they might soon forget the punishment laid upon him; therefore God
thought it better he should be spared, that others seeing Cain live in
continual misery, might take occasion to inquire what he has done, that
understanding the cause of his misery, they may be warned to avoid his sin.

Secondly, From hence is grounded the aggravation of punishments; so that where
thest is ordinarily punished with four fold restitution, Exodus the twenty
second chapter; He that steals a poor man's sheep, that has no more, is, by
David's judgment, the child of death, in the second book of Samuel, the twelfth
chapter; he that finneth upon contempt of Gods command, and not of any
necessity, as he that gathers sticks upon the Sabbath day, Numbers the
fifteenth chapter; such a one is more grievously to be punished. When the party
offended will have a man spared, then to kill him contrary to his command, is a
sin that deserves extraordinary punishment; for mensura peccati is that which
brings us unto plagarum modus, Deuteronomie the the twenty fifth chapter, and
the second verse. Cain being warned from the law of nature, kills his Brother,
and therefore deserves punishment; but he that being warned from Gods own
mouth, kills Cain, does deserve a more great punishment.

But lest any should excuse themselves with ignorance, therefore that notice
may be taken of Cain, God sets a mark upon Cain: Signum in Cain, fecit Cain
insignum. This mark gives all men occasion to inquire who he is, that so they
may be put in mind to hold their hands from off Cain; forasmuch as God will
not have him to be killed by any man.

There are two sorts of signs: There is Signum in bonum, Psalm the eighty
sixth, sbew us some sign for good; Such a sign or mark was the letter (...)
set in the foreheads of them, that (...) and cried for the (...) that were
done, by the which God deliered them from the destruction of the City, Ezekiel
the ninth chapter, and the fourth verse. But Cain's mark is Signum in malum:
The Fathers usually distinguish them into these two: Signum annuli, such a mark
as Christ had set upon him, in the sixth chapter of John, Him has God the
Father sealed: And signum cauterii, in the first epistle to Timothy, the
fourth chapter, and the first verse, the sign of a brand: This figne or mark
set upon Cain, was outward and visible, to the end, that he might be discerned
from all other men. What was Cain's mark Basil (...) us, when he says, that it
is the redness of the eyes, Proverbs the twenty third chapter, and (...) of
the (...), such as (...) have (...) of whom he says, that they put on (...)
(...) But whatsoever it were, it is some evident token, whereby all (...) might
see, that Cain was not in such good case as he should (...) And upon whomsoever
God has set any outward mark, it is not in vain. But the fetting of marks in
the forehead, or hands of malefactors, has a ground from Gods practice: The
use of them is, to teach them, that albeit they be suffered to live, yet they
are unworthy of life: Such are marks of admonition, both to themselves and to
others: they give occasion to inquire, How come these (...) in (...) bands?
Zechary the thirteenth chapter, and the sixth verse: To the parties themselves
such marks (...) for conversion, that their (...) with shame, Psalm the eighty
third, for the remembrance of that which they have deserved, they may be
stirred up to amend their lives: and it (...) others so to live, that they
deserve not to be marked in like sort. This use the Apostle makes, in the
second to the Thessalonians, the third chapter and the fourteenth verse, If any
obey not our sayings, note him, and have no company with him, (...) he may be
ashamed, Such marks in others will make men heedfull, that they deserve not to
be marked.

To conclude we see Cain is spared, but yet so that he carries still his
sentence and mark. Two invisible things of God remain, that is, his justice and
mercy, and both that they may move him to repentance; but if they prevail not,
yet he has a visible sign to admonish him, that he repent, that so the evil
sign may be taken from him, and there may be restored to him a (...) for good,
(...) is the sign of Gods seal, in the second to the (...) the seventeenth
chapter and the twenty second verse, whereby we are (...) the day of
redemption, (...) the fourth chapter. (...) (...) to live; and so God (...)
(...) he will (...) his (...) in (...) of (...) may live, Genesis the seven
(...) and the eighteenth (...) But the promise of this (...) life, such as
(...) and (...) obtained, was not (...) but (...) the sixth chapter and the
second verse. The (...) has root in (...) it stands in the bruising of the
(...) head: If by life we procure to our selves the death of (...) and make our
selves partakers of the divine nature, then the promise of such a life is to be
desired; but if life be used as Cain spent his, it is better to die without
Cains mark, than to live with it.

Egressus itaque est Kajin a facie Jehovae: and consedit in terra Nodi, ad
Orientem Hedenem versus: Genesis 4. 16.

September. 23. 1599.
WE now come to the last part of the History of Cain, for in this verse we have
his departure from the presence of God, and in the next his purpose, never to
return again. The contents of this verse are his departure. Gods purpose as we
have heard both in Cains punishment, as also by granting him so much as he
required, in the last verse, was to give Cain space to repent; and yet not
withstanding we see plainly that is verified in Cain, which the Prophet
affirms, Isaiah the twenty sixth chapter and the tenth verse, Let mercy be
showed to the wicked, yet he will not learn righteousness; For Cain instead of
using the goodness, and patience, and long suffering of God as a means to bring
him to repentance, Hardened his heart, and heaped up wrath for himself against
the day of wrath, Romans the second chapter and the fifth verse.

This departing of Cain stands upon three parts: First, his removing; he went
out: Secondly, terminus a quo, that is, from the presence of God: Thirdly,
terminus ad quem, that is, the land of Nod.

Touching the first, there is a going out upon distrust, when a man has no
hope of favor; and another upon contempt, when a man thinks he shall have no
benefit of tarrying. Of which the better is, that going out which is upon
distrust: but so could not Cain go out; for as well by Gods merciful dealing
toward Cain before the sentence was pronounced, as also by the gracious grant
which God made him, he might gather that God was well affected toward him. For
as the wife of Manoah says, Judges the thirteenth chapter and the twenty third
verse, If the Lord would kill us, he would not receive a burnt offering at our
hands; so God would not have heard Cains request, had he not wished him well.
And therefore Austin upon the words of David, Psalm the sixty sixth and
twentieth verse, says, quamdiu dominus non amovet orationem a se, (...) non
amovet misericordiam a nobis, for that yielding to Cains request touching his
life, was an invitation to stir up Cain to desire more. Therefore Cain should
not have gone out so soon as his suit was heard, but still have continued
praying to God for more and better things, as Abraham, Genesis the eighteenth
chapter, hearing that God at his request was contented to spare Sodom for
fifties sake, prays still in the behalf of the City, adding one petition
after another: Which course the Prophet keeps in his prayer, Psalm the fifty
first, Cast me not from thy presence, neither take thy holy spirit from me.
Though he durst not pray himself, being a sinner, yet by others, as Miriam by
Moses, Numbers the tweelfth chapter, Pharaoh by Moses and Aron, Exodus the
ninth chapter and the twenty eighth verse; so should Cain have done, but in as
much as he does not, his case is like the case of Esau, Genesis the twenty fifth
chapter, he cared not for his Birthright; no more did Cain take any care for
the presence of God, but thought it a matter not worthy to be reckoned of.

Secondly, We see that Cain goes not out against his will, nor tarries till
God send him out of his presence, as he sent Adam and Eve out of Paradise,
setting a Cherubim to keep the way, Genesis the third chapter; there was no
such execution or warrant from God for Cain, but he first casts out himself;
whereby we see it was an hypocritical complaint that he made, that he was cast
out from the presence of God, verse the fourteenth, in that he goes out of
himself without any violence offered to him: A Child will not at the first
bidding go out of his Fathers presence, though in his anger he threaten him; no
more should Cain, he should have been of Jacobs mind, Genesis the thirty
second chapter, I will not let thee go till I have a blessing: But we see Cain
does of himself voluntarily leave Gods presence, which shows plainly that the
cause of Cains grief, was not Gods displeasure, but his punishment laid by God
upon him, and not the spiritual part of his punishent, but the earthly.

Thirdly, the casting out of Gods presence was threatened as a punishment, and
therefore ought to be born patiently, but to make poenam excommunicationis
crimen apostasiae, is a great aggravation of his sin; that is to take
occasion by the censure of the Church: to bring in Schism is a grievous
aggravation of the offense. But as we have seen that Cain was the first Author
of heresy; for that he thought any thing would serve Gods turn, the (...) and
meanest things were good enough to offer to him; whereas Abel offers the best
he could find; so he is the first that brings up Schism and Apostasy; for the
Sentence is not executed upon him, but through an evil heart of unbelief, as
the Apostle speaks, Hebrews the third chapter, He does depart of himself from
the living God. So we have these three things in his departure. First, It is
not upon any just (...), It is voluntary. Thirdly, He departs so as he makes
the penalty of his sin the matter of a greater sin. Secondly, Touching his
removing; to remove of it self is not evil, but in regard of the place from
whence, if with Abraham we depart from a country of Idolatry as from Ur; or as
Lot from Sodom, a City full of all sin; or with the Hebrews out of a place
of vexation and cruelty; such a departure is good, but to depart from a good
place, that makes the motion evil; but for Cain to depart out of the presence
of God, is all one as if the sick person should leave the Physician. St. Peter
indeed in great astonishment said to Christ, exi a (...) enim sum, but after
being better advised when Christ said, (...) ye also go away? his answer is,
John the sixth chapter and the sixty eighth verse, Domine ad quem ibimus? tu
habes verba (...) vitae; whereupon Augustine says, Lord if thou (...) have me
depart from thee, show me such another as thou art, otherwise I will not leave
thee till thou receive me into thy favor.

This presence of God was some certain place of Gods appearance, as the place
whither he went, was a country by Paradise, called the Land of Nod. Therefore
the place whither he went, being a local motion; the place from which he
departed, must needs be likewise local. From this place of Gods presence Cain
went out, to dwell in the land of Nod. The effect of which words, is after set
down in one word; for the place wherein God appeared to Jacob when he slept,
was called Bethel, Genesis the twenty eighth chapter; the same place also is
called Penuel, Genesis the thirty second chapter, and the thirtieth verse: so
that the place of Gods appearance, was some one piece of the earth, where the
Altar was, upon which Cain and Abel offered their sacrifices, where God did
usually appear, Even as we also have an Altar, Hebrews the thirteenth chapter,
where we have Christ's presence, as he affirms, that where two or three be
gathered together in his name, he is present among them, Matthew the eighteenth
chapter; like as they that come together to hear the word, are said to be
present before God, that is, in the presence of God, Acts the tenth chapter.

The point that we are to gather hence for our instruction, is, That we
concieve of the Church, and place of Gods presence, as we do of the place of
the Princes presence; for we reverence such places though the Prince be absent;
so ought we to reverence the places of Gods presence, though we have no visible
apparition of his presence; for such places are his rest for ever, where he
promises to dwell, Psalm the one hundred thirty second; They are also his
footstool, and therefore are to be reverenced, As, Psalm the ninty ninth, Fall
down before his footstool, for he is holy: Therefore to depart from the Church
is to depart from Gods presence, no less than Cain did: But Gods will is, we
should not depart out of the place of his presence, no more than we would out
of the presence of his favor: and we must make a conscience, how we go out of
such places, because God is not mocked. When men have no religion, it is said
of them, Psalm the fourteenth, They call not upon God; as for the preaching of
the word, they count it onus Domini, Jeremie the twenty third chapter; It is as
tedious to them to hear sermons, as to carry burdens upon their backs: And for
the spiritual food offered in the Sacraments, it is to them as Manna was to
the Israelites, A light meat, which their soul loatheth, Numbers the eleventh
chapter. And as for the Church and Congregation of the faithful, the opinion
that the world has of them, is very mean, as the Prophet says, in the
thirtieth chapter of Jeremiah, This is Sion, whom no man seeks after. But
they that are so affected toward the service of God, and the places of his
presence, are animales spiritum non habentes, as Jude calls them; they have
no favor in such things, and therefore they care not for them, but like Cain,
do go out of them; and make no reckoning: Of whom the Apostle says truly, in
the first epistler of John; the second chapter, and the ninteenth verse, They
went out from us, yet (...) de nobis, that is, they were not the members of the
(...), for then they should have selt them when they went. For those things
that are not members of the body, may easily be taken away, as the hairs of the
head and the nails; but take away any member of the boby, and it will be
painful: Therefore they that depart willingly from the Church, and place of
Gods presence, are not members but excrements of the mystical body.

The place whither he depaited was The land of Nod. As it is said of Cain, that
he went out; so so also of St. Peter, but for a diverse end; Peter went out and
wept bitierly, Matthew the twenty sixth chapter; and the last verse; but Cain
went not out to bewail his sin, as Peter did, but to settle himself in some
other place. Cain's terminus ad quem, is he land of Nod, which is situate
toward the east side of Eden.

Where in two things: First, The place it self. Secondly, The situation.

For the place it sell: There are of the Interpreters that take it to be no
certain land, from the word Nod, which signifies to wander; as if the meaning
were, that Cain according to the sentence, that he should be a (...) and exile,
went out to wander from one place to another: But that cannot be, in as much as
Nod is said to be a land on the east side of Paradise. It is further said, that
being there he built him a City, not that he stayed there, for he was always
removing and fleeting from one place to another. It was before the deluge, so
called of Cain, whose state of life was to wander up and down; but (...) was
called Babel.

And it is said to be castward toward Eden: Wherefore by the framing of his
journey to that place, which carries the name of pleasure, it appears, that
Cain did not settle himself to repentance, for then he should have gone into
the Valley of Achor, Hosea the second chapter; Or into the valley of tears,
Psalm the eighty fourth; that is as far from Eden as he could; because a place
of pleasure is unfit to repent in: He that will repent, must get him into the
wilderness alone, and there bewail his sins. He could not go to Eden, for
there was an Angel set with a shaking sword, to keep the way of the tree of
life, Genesis the third chapter; but toward the east side of Eden: So we see
Cains purpose was not Gods purpose: The purpose of God in allowing unto Cain
life was, that he might have time to repent: But Cains purpose is, that he may
plant himself on earth, and enjoy pleasures. These are the ways to the which
there belongs a woe, as the Apostle shows, Jude the eleventh verse; The
sin of pleasure, which is Cains sin, The sin of gain, which was Babylon's
sin; and the sin of ambition, which was the sin of Korah: These are the
three ways of the world, The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes and pride
of life, in the first of Saint John, the second chapter, Which are not of the
Father, but of the world. Where it is said, he went to the side of Paradise,
the Holy Ghost gives us to understand, that Cain may (...) set himself in some
kind of (...) delight but not in Paradise it self, that is, in no true and
sound delight.

Again, Whereas Cain being now fallen from hope of eternal and spiritual
things, takes his journey to the east, we see he is the first of those that are
content, even for to enjoy the warmness of the sun, to leave the presence of
God, and for to get a little pleasure for a time, will forgo that which is
incorruptible, and indures for ever. Such men are like those whom the Prophet
(...), in the eighth chapter of Ezekiel, and the sixteenth verse, having their
backs toward the temple, and their faces to the sun rising, to worship the
sun: Even so Cain by leaving Gods presence, does give over eternal things,
and seeks for temporal. And so we see what is Cains error, both in departing
from Gods presence, and in removing to this place. Adam and Eve and Seth, which
then represented the Church, were upon the west side of Eden; Cain and his crew
keeps in the east side, that is, the wicked have the better part in the things
of this life, for their portion is in this life, Psalm the seventeenth; but
the portion of the godly is not in the pleasure of this life, but in the land
of the living; where they have laid up for them, things which eye has not
seen, the ear has not heard, nor man's heart conceived, in the first epistle to
the Corinthians, the second chapter: The wicked in their life time receive
pleasure, but after endure everlasting pain; but the godly that sufer
affliction in this world, shall in the world to come be comforted, as it is in
the sixteenth chapter of Luke.

From hence we learn, That we must not depart from Gods presence, as Cain did,
without just cause: If we do, it must be to bewail our sins with bitter
tears, as St. Peter. If we go from Gods presence, we shall find the land of
Nod, that is, a place that shall afford us no contentation or rest: It shall be
with us, as it was with Agar, to whom the Angel said, in the sixteenth chapter
of Genesis, and the eighteenth verse, Whence come thou? and whither ghost
thou? So we shall be in continual motion, and never have rest.

First, Because we can never, in this wicked world, attain to any perfection of
pleasure, our desires are never satisfied; for it is true of all men as one
says, quando habent quod voluerunt, non habent quod volunt.

Secondly, Because they are all their life in fear of death, Hebrews the second
chapter. We see our state represented in Jonah when he fled from the presence
of the Lord; he thought he should have come to Tarshish, but he found himself
in the land of Nod, that is of thraldom and misery, being tossed on the Sea,
Jonah the first chapter and the third verse; for Gods presence is Seth's land,
that is, a land of foundation; it is the Country of Noah, for it gives rest;
it is the City of Salem, that is, of peace: But if we leave Gods presence, we
shall not find any land of foundation, rest or peace. If, as Jeremy wills,
We stand upon the old ways, and ask for the good ways and walk therein,
Jeremiah the sixth chapter and the sixteenth verse; if as Christ bids us, We
take up the yoke and learn of him, we shall (...) to our souls, (...) the
eleventh chapter; but if we (...) Cains Country, we shall have no rest day not
night, (...) the sixteenth chapter and the thirteenth verse: As for peace the
prophet says, non est pax impiis, dicit dominus, Isaiah the fifty seventh
chapter, that is, seeing they will depart from Gods (...), they (...) Cains
Land; for they are as the raging Sea which is (...) and as the (...) in the
water never rest, but shoot by (...); (...) wicked of the world we see this
working, they desire (...) more, For he that (...) silver shall not be
satisfied with (...) astes the fifth chapter and the (...); they never find
any (...) cause their desire can never be satisfied. Wherefore as Cains Land
was Nod, so Nimrod, Cains Successor, had (...) for his Country, that is,
confusion and disorder; but Melchisedek who stayed in the presence of God, had
Salem for his land.

The reason of this is, as Augustine says, because God made the soul of man
for himself, and inquietum est cor nostrum (...) requiescit in Deo; we may
find the skirts of Eden; and obtain some delight for a time in this life, but
we cannot (...) to any perfect pleasute; for as the Wiseman says, risus
dolor miscetur and extrema (...) occupat, Proverbs the fourteenth chapter;
therefore the Prophet says, Micah 2. 10. surgite, non est hic requies vestra,
and the Apostle (...) with him, Hebrews the thirteenth chapter, non habem^s
hic manentem civitatem; therefore let us go out with Christ.

Thus the imperfection of our happiness in this life, and the continual fear
of death, does take from us all rest; and this proceeds from the want of Gods
presence: It remains then that he which will find rest, do seek Gods face
and presence, Psalm the twenty seventh and the eighth verse; for seek God and
then your soul shall live, Psalm the sixty ninth. If our departure from the
(...) of God be not as Cains was, that is of contempt, yet it is like Judas,
which went out of distrust. The issue of Cains departure was a radious life
full of trouble and fear, and the going out of Judas was misery or death. Such
shall be the issue of those, that either of contempt or distrust fall away from
God; the pleasure that they shall have in this life is but momentary and (...),
it is (...) and inquieta voluptas, Ecclesiastes the second chapter, the desire
of that which they want, and the fear of death which is always at (...), does
not suffer them to take rest; therefore if we will have rest we must go to
Peniel and Salem, there we shall have both rest and (...) and this is done by
prayer, when we say with David, Psalm the fifty first, Cast me not from thy
presence. If of our selves we (...) our of his presence, we must go to some
valley to (...), and (...) (...) did, so we shall be received of God; for God
being (...) and majesty, is able both to give us our hearts desire, and to
deliver our souls from death.

Et cognovit Kajin uxorem suam, quae concepit and peperit Chanocum: quamobrem
studebat edificare civitatem, and vocavit nomen civitatis illius de nomine
filit sui Chanoc. Genesis 4. 17.

September. 30. 1599.
ALbeit Cain departed from the presence of God, and seated himself in a Land as
near Eden as he could, yet his departure is not altogether desperate, because
he may return again; for so both the Prophet in the old Testament, shows that
the Church of the Jews having departed from her first husband, and seeing the
invonvenience of it resolved to return again, Hosea the second chapter; and our
Savior in the New tells us, that the Son which forsook his Father, after
when he felt some affliction, was glad to come to him again, Luke the fifteenth
chapter; and so may Cain come again; for as Eden that is pleasure, is the thing
that persuades men to depart from their allegiance in the service of God, so
the place whither they go, that is the Land of Nod, being a Land of trouble
and unquietness, may persuade them to return to God again. A fair proffer
indeed is made to draw men from Gods presence, and to commit sin, in as much
as it offers pleasure; but when they have seated themselves a little, even as
near Eden as they can, they shall find themselves in the Land of Nod, that is,
they shall feel nothing within but unquietness of conscience, and without, fear
and trouble, so as they shall have inducements sufficient to make them return.
Solomon, the pearless example of all those that might have enjoyed pleasure, if
it had been to be found; who was greater than any King that ever was before
him, set himself to plant himself as near Eden as he could, he denied his Soul
nothing that it desired, and yet he confesses, that when he had built him
Houses, and planted Orchards, he found nothing but vanity and vexation of
spirit, Ecclesiastes the second chapter and the eleventh verse, that is, his
desire was never satisfied, and for the attaining of that which he had, he
endured vexation and trouble. As Cain had his arguments persuading him to make
trial of the Land of Nod, so when he was there, his trouble and unquietness
were sufficient reasons to make him return to God, but we see he had no mind
to return; for having disjoined himself from Gods presence, he built a City,
which is a plain argument of not returning, as the people in captivity, to let
them know they shall not return of a long time, are commanded to build Houses,
Jeremiah the twenty ninth chapter, and the Children of God were content to
dwell in Tents; they built not Cities on earth, but sought for a City whose
builder is God, Hebrews the eleventh chapter and the ninth verse, which was a
plain token that they did not mind to dwell on earth as Freeholders, but to
continue for a time, looking for a City that has a foundation: but Cain not
minding to return to God, built a City in the land of Nod: and this is the
complement of his sin; first in departing from Gods presence, then in
planting himself so as he purposed not to return. The parts are three; the
propagation of Children; the building of a City, and the denomination of both:
wherein we see Cain conveyeth to his Son the great Jointure of the world (to
be Henoch of Henoch.) To have Children is a matter of the flesh; to build (...)
is a matter of the world; for the flesh departing from the (...) in the world.
The naming of the City after his Sons name, is a fruit and effect of the pride
of his heart (...) like to those that said (...) nob is nomen, Genesis the
eleventh chapter.

Touching the first, we are to insist upon four things: (...) (...) wife:
Secondly his knowledge: Thirdly her conception: Fourthly the giving of the name.

Concerning the Wife of Cain, it cannot be otherwise but she was one of the
daughters of Adam, whose Son Cain himself was: and for him to take his Sister
to be his Wise, is a thing unlawful, saving that as Christ shows, that which
of it (...) is unlawful on the Sabbath, by necessity is made lawful, nam quod
in (...) non est, necessitas facit licitum; as Christ shows by the example of
David and his men, that his (...) offended not in pulling the (...) of corn on
the Sabbath, in regard of their necessity, Matthew the twelfth chapter, no more
than David offended, when being hungry, he went into the house of God, and did
eat the (...) bread which none may eat but the Priests, in the first of Samuel
the twenty first chapter. That which was David's case at Nob, is Cains case in
the land of Nod. A man may not take the sword and revenge his own quarrel; but
in case of necessity when there is none to defend, it is lawful to use the
Sword for his defense: It is not lawful originally for Cain to make his (...)
his Wife, as the Fathers prove, Genesis the 2. chapter and the 4. verse; so
where God says, therefore shall a man leave his Father and Mother and cleave
to his Wife; his meaning is, he will not have friendship kept within one
Family, but will have men so to marry, that (...) Families may be linked
together in love. Again, where, both in Genesis the second chapter and Matthew
the ninteenth chapter, it is said they two shall be one flesh, that is not true
where Brother and Sister are joined together, for they are one flesh already,
in as much as they are born of the (...): Therefore where there is unity of
blood, between such (...) is no lawful marrying; but necessity is without law,
and therefore Cain is dispensed withal, because necessity caused him.

Touching the mixture of Brother and Sister, it is (...) to the Lord and his
soul abhorrs it, Leviticus the (...) chapter and the twenty third verse: but if
this kind of copulation were originally lawful, it would not be so
abominable, that he would punish it in such sort. Besides, we see this is a
thing so unlawful, that John Baptist chooses rather to hazard his life, than
he will suffer this sin unreproved; which he would not have done, but that it
was originally unlawful for Herod to have his Brothers Wife, Matthew the
fourteenth chapter.

For the knowledge Cain had with his wife, we see that as Adam when he was cast
out of Paradise knew his Wife; so Cain being departed from Gods presence to a
Land of trouble and disquietness, having lost spiritual comforts, seeks for
rest in carnal delights. For the procreation of Children, as Sarah speaks,
Genesis the eighteenth chapter, is an act of pleasure, which albeit it be
lawful for Adam, a repentant sinner, yet not for Cain, being in that state
that he was; for in the time of repentance the Bridegroom must come forth of
his Camber, and the Bride out of her Bedchamber, Joel the second chapter and
the sixteenth verse, and they that are married may not so give themselves over
to the flesh, but that upon special cause sometime they give themselves to
prayer and fasting, in the first to the Corinthians, the seventh chapter and
the fifth verse; but Cain standing as he did at this time, transgresses the
Command of God.

And yet touching the third point, Gods goodness appears herein, that for all
that he so blesses (...) which was unlawful, that she conceives. It was in
Gods hand, and his sin deserved it, that she should have been barren; for
Jeremiah the twenty second chapter, in the second of Samuel the sixteenth
chapter, the sin of Jeconiah and Michal is the cause of their barrenness:
Therefore in Gods justice it is a due punishment to all sorts not to have
Children; but yet as he brings light out of darkness; so to show he can of
evil Parents bring forth good Children, he gives Cain issue, as he brought
good Ezekiah out of Achan, and Josia out of Ammon. For this cause he gives the
wicked Children, as also in this regard, to show that he is able to break the
Serpents head, not one way only, by killing sin in men, but by making them
examples of his justice, as in Pharaoh: Romans the ninth chapter, For this
cause have I stirred them up, even as we see the bodies of Malefactors are
given to Chyrurgeons for Anatomies, that in them men may see the state of our
bodies: and so it may be for the good of others. For as it were inconvenient
that evil Parents should only have evil Children, because by this means evil
would be infinite; so it is as inconvenient that good Parents should have none
but good Children; for so that which is of grace would be ascribed to nature:
And so we see, that albeit the act be unlawful, and the seed stolen, yet being
cast into the ground, we see God so blesses it that it is fruitful.

The fourth point is, that Cain called his Sons name Enoch; the meaning whereof
is a dedication or consecration: and this gives hope, as if there were some
goodness remaining in Cain; for those things that are built to be dedicated,
are Altars and Churches, things for Gods use, as Noah built an Altar, and
offered burnt offerings, Genesis the eighth chapter, but that which Cain built
is no Altar, but a City; and we know Cities and Towns are dedicated to the
world, and the consecration that he makes is to no God, except he make the
world his God Philippians the third chapter; his position is that gain is
godliness, in the first to Timothy the fourth chapter, and therein he bestows
his service. But after we have another Enoch, so truly called, Genesis the fifth
chapter, the Son of Seth, who did not depart from Gods presence as this Enoch
did, but consecrated himself to God, and became a Preacher of righteousness;
who as well by his preaching, as by uttering the censure of excommunication, (
behold the Lord comes with a thousand of Angels) as Jude speaks, dedicated
himself to the Church; but the first work that Cains Enoch sets himself about,
is the world. This is the difference between Cains Henoch and Seths Henoch: the
one builds a City on earth, the other seeks for a City from above whose builder
is God. So that there is no hope of Cains return, he consecrates his Son and
City, but it is to the wrong God, if to any.

Secondly, Touching the building of the City, which is a matter respecting the
world; before we come to that, we must know there was now a great distance of
years between the time that Cain knew his wife, and the time that he built
the City; for he built not the City only for himself, his wife and child,
but was now grown to be so great a number that he must have a City to place
his posterity in; for God, respecting mankind rather then the sin of man,
made the seed sown, plentiful; They that came of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
came but to twelve, and in few years, of those twelve, came seventy five, and
for the increase of mankind, He makes the barren families like a flock of
sheep, as it is in the hundred and seventh Psalm. Therefore when Cain was
grown to so great a multitude, he built him a City. It is true of Cain which
the Apostle affirms, Hebrews the third chapter, No man departs from God, but
by an evil heart of unbelief: So Cain thinks, that albeit God has cursed that
part of the earth where Adam was, yet it may be the Land toward the Sun rising
may be better; and therefore he makes trial; like the Isrealites, which being
forbidden to keep any of the Manna till morning, for all that would try
whether it would be full of worms; and being forbidden to go forth on the
Sabbath, notwithstanding they went forth to make trial, though they found
none, Exodus the sixteenth chapter the twentieth and the twenty seventh verses;
so Cain would try whether there were not a plot of ground free from the curse;
but not finding any such piece of ground, he turned himself to handycrafts,
when husbandry failed: He and his Children fall to occupations, some work in
brass, some to make Tents, and others to make Organs. That is the civil reason
of the building of the City.

The spiritual reason is, that fear is the first beginner of Cains City; for
this place though it were a place of pleasure, yet it gives him no rest, or
security: therefore he devises to himself a new means to safeguard him from
fear, that is, by building a City and walling it; that if the Sons of Seth,
or any that were privy to his fact, came against him, he might be safe from
them. As Adam hid himself from Gods presence in his bushes, so does Cain go
about to defend himself with walls: Howbeit so it is that a guilty conscience
cannot find any rest or security by any such means, but it finds the truth of
that which the Apostle says, in the second to the Corinthians, the seventh
chapter and the fifth verse, pugnae for is, intus terrores. And yet by the
taking order for the continuance of his name, it appears he had not only fear,
but a secular desire of fame in the world: he contenteth not himself with Adams
dwelling, but builds a City. Adam and his Children dwelt under Trees, or some
Tents; but the Posterity of Cain builds themselves Cities to dwell in.

For the general, as the beginning of good Laws is the evil fashions and
naughty manners of men; so the remedy against fear is Cities, that by them
people may be safe from wild beasts, and wicked and cruel men more wild than
beasts. But as first necessity invented Garments, and since pride; so it is of
Cities: A City was founded first in regard of fear, but since they are become
the only places of pride; for in the Country where men are employed in
husbandry we see no such pride, they content themselves with plain dwelling;
but in the City all things are for pride. That is for the building of the City.

Touching the Builder, we see the beginning of buildings is hominem occidere,
and urbem condere: Therefore the Prophets cry out, that the faces of the poor
are ground for the maintenance of Cities, Jeremiah the twenty second chapter
and the thirteenth verse, Habakkuk the second chapter and the thirteenth verse,
Micha the third chapter: Even as we see Cain that killed his brother is the
Builder of this City; so there are many like Cain, that kill and undo a great
company of young Occupiers, to build themselves a City: For they content not
themselves with their Fathers Houses, but build themselves Houses of Cedar,
Jeremiah the thirty second chapter.

Secondly, Out of the Builder Augustine has this note; that as the building of
this City of Enoch by the blood of Abel, was a soretelling what kind of City
this should be, namely full of cruelty; so in as much as Rome was founded by
Romulus in the blood of Remus, that was a sign that it would be a cruel and
bloody City, as we see it came to pass, that it has been the chief persecuting
City, and shed most blood

Thirdly, We are to speak of the name, wherein the itch of Cains vanity breaks
forth; for in giving this name he says as much as they do, Genesis the
eleventh chapter, paremus nobis nomen, he seeks to make his posterity famous,
for it is the course of the world, And men think their houses shall continue
for ever, and therefore call their lands by their names, Psalm the forty ninth
and the eleventh verse: when they cannot be written in the book of life, they
seek to be in remembrance of men. We see it is in Saul when God took his honor
from him, he would be honored of the people, in the first of Samuel the
fifteenth chapter; so that upon these three things in satisfying the flesh, in
building Cities for the glory of this world, and in leaving a name behind,
stands all Cains desire. But the giving of this name is in one of these two
respects.

First, If a man will see what is true dedication, let him look upon the
worldly minded man, for none do so truly dedicate themselves to the true God,
as they do consecrate themselves to the World: It is indeed sacra fames; for
as Christ says, The Children of this world are wiser in their generation, than
the Children of light, Luke the sixteenth chapter. Therefore in them we may see
the lively example of true dedication.

Secondly, If not that, yet for as much as every dedication is the first act;
for the first thing to be done when a new House is to be built, is to dedicate
it by great feastings. This shows that as all the things of this life are but
beginnings; for as Christ kept the best wine last, John the second chapter, so
the consummation of all things is in Salem, which is Gods City: But Cains Enoch
is nothing but fair shows of joy and feastings, which shall end in mournings.
Where it is said Cain was building a City, and not that he built it, it is to
teach us that he did but begin it: we see the like in the worlds course, men
are ever building and pulling down, they are never at rest, but continually in
the Land of Nod: Nunquam aedificaverunt, as the Preacher says, The soul still
desires, but is never satisfied, Ecclesiastes the fifth chapter; even so Cain
is always occupied in building the City, but never makes an end; but even
before he has done he drops into the grave; like the rich man, Luke the
twelfth chapter, that suddenly while he was consulting how to build Barns, was
taken away. These are Cains three ways; (...) Prolis, extruxio Urbis, and
propagatio Nominis; the one is the lust of the flesh, the other the lust of the
eyes, the third the pride of life, John the second chapter: And these are the
ways of the world. All the desires of worldly men stand in these three; to
have many Children, to build fair houses, and to get an honorable name among
men. Thus far goes worldly men, and no farther, as we see not only in Cain,
but in Nimrod, and Pharaoh, all whose studdy was in getting Children, in
building Cities, and seeking to make their name famous. These are the men of
this world, from whom the Prophet prays to be delivered, That have their
portion in this life, their bellies are filled with hid treasure, their
Children have enough, and leave the rest to their Children, and this is all
they seek for; but the Godly say with the Prophet, Psalm the seventeenth and
the fourteenth verse, But I will seek for thy presence in righteousness; that
is Seths Enoch, and not Cains. We have not here (says the Apostle) any abiding
City, Hebrews the thirteenth chapter and the fourteenth verse; that is true,
for albeit we have Cities, yet they continue not, therefore we seek for a City
of Gods building, Hebrews the eleventh chapter and the ninth verse, and not a
City built by Cain. This is a point of examination, for it is to be considered,
whether a man in the course of his life reach any further than these three. If
he go no farther in the practice of his life, but to get Children, to build
Cities and fair Houses, and to get a name, he is in the way of Cain: But if
with the other Enoch we continue still in Gods presence, then we do well: Cain
having life granted for repentance, mispends it in building of a City, and such
like vanities; And as there is a woe to him, so woe to them that like him
mispend their time which God gives them for repentance, Jude the eleventh
verse. Cain is in a place of torment, where he cries, woe that he misspent his
time so vainly, and therefore we must beware by his example; for this is the
use we are to make of Cain and the Reprobate, that when we see what is their
end, we beware that we walk not in their ways, that we mispend not our time in
fulfilling the lusts of the flesh, and vanity of buildings, and seeking the
glory and honor of this world, because to all such there belongs a woe no less
than to Cain, as it is in the epistle of Jude.

Deinde Chanacho natus est Hirad, and Hirad genuit Mechujaelem: Machujael vero
genuit Methuschaelem, and Methuschael genuit Lemecum. Assumpsit autem sibi
Lemec uxores duas: Genesis 4. 18.19.

(...). 9. 1599.
IN these two verses we have two points to consider, the one is a journey which
the Holy Ghost undertaketh, the other is the end of that journey. In the
journey Moses begins to set down the Pedigrees of Cain; and the end of that
journey is the story of Lameoh, wherein it may justly be inquired, First, why
any mention is made in Scripture of the Reprobate? Secondly, why it makes
mention of the generation of Cain before the generation of Seth?

For the first, It is a matter of absolute necessity, that the Scripture should
make mention of the ungodly and reprobate; for whereas God proclaimed enmity
between the Serpents seed and the seed of the Woman, Genesis the third chapter
and the eleventh verse, it was his will that it should appear in the world, how
the one was an enemy to the other; therefore it is called liber bellorum
domini, Joshua the tenth chapter: The life of man is called militia super
terram, Job the seventh chapter, and the Church is called the Church militant,
and haec est patientia Sanctorum, Revelations the fourteenth chapter and the
twelfth verse, to show that the godly have enemies in this world, whereby their
patience is tried.

Secondly, why mention is made first of the pedigree of Cain, there is
sufficient reason to be given; that is, In as much as the wicked are called the
men of this world, Psalm the seventeenth, and the Children of this generation,
Luke the (...) chapter and the eighteenth verse, it is reason they should be
first remembered in this world, for that they shall not be mentioned any where
else, they only have their interest in this life; but in the morning the
righteous have the dominion, Psalm the forty ninth and the fourteenth verse,
that is, in the life to come (...) shall be first made of the godly; and
therefore Christ, before he speaks of (...) the wicked, says first, Metthew
the twenty fifth chapter, Venite benedicti patris mei; that is in regard of the
persons, and for sin it self, as the Philosopher says, ad meminem ante venit
men's bona quim animus malus, every man is first possessed with an evil mind
before he can have a good mind: as the Apostle says, in the first to the
Corinthians, the the fifteenth chapter and the forty fifth verse, That is not
first which is spiritual, but that which is natural: We are all by nature
first the Children of wrath, Ephesians the second chapter, and belong to the
posterity of Cain, before we can be partakers of grace; and therefore it is
good reason that in Scripture our state by nature be first spoken of, before
our state by grace; that the Law should go before the Gospel; the seed of the
Serpent before the blessed feed of the Woman.

Thirdly, It may be demanded why this passage is made to the story of Lamech,
next after the story of Cain? the reason is, for that it is Gods will to bring
sin to a head: For as in Adam we saw the poison of the Serpent, and the
infection of it in Cain, so here is a new infection: For as there is a spirit
that lusts after envy, James the fourth chapter, which made Cain kill his
brother; so in Lamech we see that spirit which Jude speaks of, verse the
seventh, that is a spirit that longs after strange flesh, which he she wed in
taking two Wives: That is, there is an unclean spirit as well as an (...)
spirit; whereas there are two parts of the will (...) and (...) in Cain; the
angry part was infected with the Serpents poison, his heart was inflamed with a
desire of revenge. Now in Lamech we see this infection goes lower, even to his
reins, and stirs him up to lust. There are but two temprations, Deuteronomie
the thirty third chapter and the eighth verse, which the Hebrews call meribah
and Massah, which the Apostle terms (...) and (...), Hebrews the third
chapter; the one is the temptation unto contention and revenge, where with Cain
was infected; of which the Apostle says, James the fourth chapter and the
first verse, From (...) are wars and contentions among you; are they not from
your lusts: The other is the temptation of concupisence, which poisoned Lamech:
In the Gospel we have them both, that is spiritas (...) and (...), Luke the
eighth chapter and the second verse, Christ heals certain women possessed
with malignant and envious spirits; and Luke the eleventh chapter, The unclean
spirit departing out of a man, walks in dry places. The malicious spirit she
wed his poison in Cain by the temptation of meribah; and now Lamech is infected
with the unclean spirit, and yielding to the temptation of (...) And in these
two Reprobates, infected with these two kinds of temptations, the Holy Ghost
shows the perfection of sin: For sanctification has two parts: First, That
we possess our vessels in holiness, which is an exposition to the uncleaness
of Lamech, and in the first to the Thessalonians, the fourth chapter and the
sixth verse, that no man oppress or tread down his brother, which opposes it
self against the spirit of Cain, who trod down his brother and violently slew
him. Charity and chastity are a full comprehension of the duty of
sanctification, which God wills us to perform: And as Cains sin stands
first in the story, so it is first in nature; for a Child before he be able to
speak one word, will by his sower face show that he has a revenging spirit.
But in this story of Lamech we must observe a farther thing, for it stands
upon two parts: First in the ninteenth verse is showed not only that he was
infected with a spirit of uncleanness, but also verse the twenty third, a
contemptuous and insolent spirit, which is a degree beyond Cain; for there he
braggeth of his sin, and contemns God and his Judgments, as if he should
not be revenged of him for it. For when a sinner is not only possessed and
infected with malice and envy in his heart, and with lust in his reins, but
braggs of his sin in contempt of God and his Judgments, then he is at the
height of sin: Peccator cum in profundum venerit contemnit. Thus where there
are but three faculties of the soul, all are corrupted by the infection of the
Serpent: as for reason it was corrupted in Adam, when the Serpent persuaded him
that he should be like God: and the angry part was corrupted in Cain, when he
was stirred up to kill his Brother without all cause. Thirdly, the will and the
coveting part was corrupted in Lamech, so as neither the bond of nature, nor
the will of God, which is a spiritual bond, could keep in order; but he will
show his uncleanness. When not only Adam loses faith, and Cain charity, but
Lamech chastity, then is sin at the height. In the first verse there is a
genealogy of four discents, wherein there is no matter of great edification:
Howbeit as when men's Fields and Closes are laid out, all must not be taken up
for pasture, but a little way must be left, whereby every man may pass to his
own ground; so in the Scripture there must be a passage from one story to
another: And as in the body, for that there are a great many lymbs and parts,
they must of necessity be compacted one with another by the help of the sinews;
so both in profane Writers and in the Scripture, many things are set down to
show the dependence that one story has with another, which otherwise would not
seem so necessary. Even so the showing how Cain is joined with Lamech, which is
done in this verse, is very necessary. Secondly, There is a farther matter in
this heaping of names, besides the continuance of the story: for it would have
seemed strange that the Scripture does make mention of Lamech and his wicked
course, unless it were withal showed from whence he came: But in setting down,
that Lamech is of the posterity of wicked Cain, no man will marvel that he do
express the manners of Cains. Besides that, we may not think that this heaping
of words is vain; for as the Fathers note, there is no name in Scripture
without profitable consideration; for howsoever men that deal in woods and base
metals, care not to let chips and parings fall from them, yet as they that
work in gold and Silver, will not lose the least parings: The like is to be
done in reading the word, For it is pure as silver that has been purified
seven times, Psalm the twelfth, More to be desired than gold, Psalm the
ninteenth; therefore we must have this conceit of it, that whatsoever seems
to be superfluous in the word of God, has great value both for faith and life:
For Isidor says, est in nominibus sacris sua theologia, and as Jerome says,
in nominibus sacrae Scripturae insculpuntur mysteria: Therefore the Apostle
says, That the Son of God is more excellent than the Angels, in as much as
he has a more excellent name than they, Hebrews the first chapter and the
fourth verse; so when the blind man is sent to wash himself in Shilo, John the
ninth chapter and the seventh verse: The word signifying sent, imports that
he could not be purified by that water, unless he was sent; so in the names of
holy Scripture, we see as Jerome says, there are engraven mysteries. Now we
give names to our Children ad placitum, but in the old Testament the Fathers
gave names of set purpose, with great advise; so we see Eve gives a reason why
she called her Son Cain, Genesis the fourth chapter and the first verse, so
is there a reason of Seths name, Genesis the fourth chapter and the twenty fifth
verse, of Noah the Son of Lamech, Genesis the fifth chapter and the twenty
ninth verse, of Isaac and Jacob and all the Patriarchs.

The reason why they had this regard in giving of names, are reduced to two.
First, in those that are the Children of the godly, their names are a kind of
Prophecy, concerning the disposition of the Child: which choice of names
their Fathers made; for that being endued with the spirit of God, they foresaw
the disposition of their Children. On the other side, the wicked and the
reprobate cannot prophecy, yet their names are specula paternae affectionis,
as the names of godly Children are prophesies puerilis indolis. That it is thus
in these names, we shall observe an encounter made between the seed of Cain and
the seed of Seth, which as they were of a contrary disposition, so gave their
Children contrary names. Cain called his Son Enoch, that is, dedicated to the
pleasure of the world; but Seths Son is called Enosh, that is, sorrowful,
Genesis the fifth chapter: On the one side there was Cain, on the other Kenan:
Irad on the one side, Jerad on the other: Methushael and Methushelah, by which
names the seed and posterity of godly Sheth show a contrary affection, and such
as differs from the wicked and the seed of Cain, as appears by the
signification of their names.

Touching the opposition that appears to be between the generation of Seth,
and the posterity of Cain: Enochs name who was Cains Son signifies
dedication, and there is one of the Children of God called by the same name,
Genesis the fifth chapter and the ninteenth verse; but Seths Enoch, as Jude
says, was the seventh from Adam; verse the fourteenth, that is, one dedicated
to the seventh or Sabbath day, one that gave himself wholly to the service and
worship of God; but Cains Enoch was the first, and next to Cain, that is, one
dedicated to the first day, which is a working day, to show that he was one
that gave himself to the affairs of this life, that sought to be mighty on
earth: And this difference of affection holds to this day; for all men are
followers either of the first or second Enoch.

The next of Cain is called Irad, that is, Lord of a City, the same that Herod
signifies, wherein we see his ambitious spirit, that he was such a one as
sought to be great in the world. And as Jeroboam when he was not able to
maintain the Kingdom which he had usurped, began to meddle in Religion, and to
set up two Calves, saying, Behold your Gods, in the first of Kings the twelfth
chapter; so Irad calls his Son Mehujael, First what thing is God; such a one
as says with Pharaoh, Who is the Lord? Exodus the fifth chapter, that is, that
cared not for God: And as Abraham when he came to Gerar, said, Surely forasmuch
as the fear of God is not in this place, they will kill me, Genesis the
twentieth chapter; so Mehujael that cared not for God begets Methujhael, that
is, a desparate fellow, that cares not for death; and his Son is Lamech, that
is, a violent fellow, a persecutor and an oppressor, one that spoileth and
treads down every man. On the other side, as Cain has Irad, one that would
exalt himself to be Lord; so Seth has Jerad, one that is content to go down;
for Mehujael a contemner of God, among the Children of God there was
Mahalaleel, id est, anuncians, or laudans deum, a religious person that would
praise God: For Methushael, among the godly there was Methushelah, whose name
tells us death is triumphing, because it is the reward of sin, and has a
worm that dies not, and a fire that is never quenched: For Lamech the wicked,
he is the seventh from Adam, as Enoch the Son of Seth; but this Enoch being
the seventh, respects things that pertain to the seventh day, wherein Lamech is
given to oppression. This Enoch prophesied an excommunication against sinners
that did wickedly and spoke proudly, saying, The Lord comes with thousands of
his Saints to give judgment against them, as it is in the fourteenth verse of
the epistle of Jude, and we shall not see any in the Scripture that spoke so
proudly as this Lamech, for he not only brags of his sin, but contemns Gods
threatenings, and says he will kill any that come to him; therefore this
excommunication concerns him; for as Seths Enoch walked with God, so Lamech
that comes of Cain walked after the spirit of the world.

In the story of Lamech there are two things to be observed, First, his
overflowing lust: Secondly, his contempt of God, and the punishment which God
threatened. The excess of his lust stands in this, that he took two Wives.
Where we are to note that he is the first that durst vaunt of poligamie, he is
primus sacrilegus nuptiarum, for in so doing, first he did violate the
institution of God, which is, A man shall forsake Father and Mother and cleave
(...) his Wife, Genesis the second chapter and the twenty fourth verse, not to
his Wives, and they two shall be one flesh, not three in one flesh. Secondly,
His taking of two Wives is a violating of humane custom, for he is in the
seventh generation from Adam; Adam had but one Wife, no more had Cain, nor the
rest; but Lamech treading all custom under foot, takes two, wherein it is
plain that a breach is made of the primitive custom; for as Christ says,
Matthew the ninteenth chapter, non sic fuit abinitio. Thirdly, Marriage is a
mystery, Ephesians the fifth chapter and the thirty second verse, for God
commends unto us a sacred thing in marriage, that is the spiritual and holy
conjunction of Christ with the Church. In which regard persons in that state
should not exceed in lust, but possess their Vessels in holiness, in the first
to the Thessalonians the fourth chapter, and the fourth and fifth verses, and
not in the lust of concupiscence. As Lamech sins against the institution of
marriage in these three respects; so in regard of the ends of the same, which
are three, First, To be a remedy against fornication, in the first to the
Corinthians, the seventh chapter and the second verse, but Lamechs two Wives
were an allurement to it rather, and no remedy against it, for every man must
have (...), in the first to the Corinthians, the seventh chapter and the third
verse; therefore if he have Wives, it is an allurement to lust. Secondly, The
end of marriage is propagation of Children, that there may be not only a seed,
but semen sanctum, Malachie the second chapter: For that cause he made Adam but
one Wife, whereas he had spirit enough, and might have made him more, but he
sought a holy seed, therefore if any seek seed by more Wives, it is not a holy
seed, but semen nequam, and semen corruptem, Isaiah the first chapter. Thirdly,
The end is for mutual help, but to have more Wives at once, the one is a
hindrance and no help; so were Rachel and Leah to Jacob, Genesis the twenty
ninth, so were Annah and Peniah to Elkanah, in the first of Samuel the first
chapter.

Assumpsit autem sibi Lemec uxores duas: prioris nomen fuit Hada, and nomen
secundae Tzilla. Peperitque Hada Jabalum: hic fuit author habitantium in
tentoriis, and pecuariae. Nomenque fratris ejus fuit Jubal: hic fuit author
omnium tractantium citharam and organon. Tzilla vero ipsa quoque peperit
Thubal-Kajinum, qui erudivit omnem fabrum aerarium and ferrarium. sororemque
Thubal-Kajini, Nahamam. Genesis 4. 19.20.21.22.

December. 16. 1599.
IN which verses is set down, first the Marriage, and after the Race and
Offspring of Lamech: The former point verse the ninteenth, the latter in the
three verses following.

Concerning the Marriage of Lamech, we have already made an entrance into it,
besides that which has been already said. If we will know what to reckon of
this second Wife which Lamech took, the Holy Ghost does set it out unto us in
her name: For even in the names of holy Scripture, as we have heard, is
engraven most excellent divinitic. His second Wifes name was Zillah, which has
relation to his first, for it signifies her shadow, but truth and shadows are
opposite; and therefore the Holy Ghost by this name tells us a second Wife is
no true Wife, but a false, and that in such a marriage there is not the body
and substance of Gods Ordinance, but only a shadow of it, as our Savior Christ
said to the Woman that had five Husbands, John the fourth chapter and the
eighteenth verse, He whom thou now have is not thy Husband. And the sentence
and judgment of the Hebrew Writers is, that where Lamechs former Wifes name is
Adah, taken from a word that signifies an open assembly; and the second Zillah,
that is, a shadow or secret place; it is to teach us that Lamech had his former
Wife only for a show, but he kept Zillah in secret places, to satisfy his
unclean lust privily.

Now because we see this evil act of Lamech has not so much as a good
pretense, it is so much the worse; and that he wanted a good pretense, we shall
find if we inquire what moved him to break out so far contrary to the
Ordinance of God, in the Creation, who therefore created Adam but one Wife, to
teach him he might not have more at once. The only pretense for taking a second
Wife is the example of Abraham, Genesis the sixteenth chapter, who for that he
was without offspring, was permitted by Sarah his Wife to go in to Agar, that
of her he might raise up Children: but the case stood not so with Lamech, for
he had by his first Wife two Sons, Jabal and Jubal, and therefore it was not
for the raising up of seed that he took Zillah.

Secondly, But if he say these were not enough, we shall see that the seed
which he had by his false Wife, did not (...) to the increase of mankind, but
to the destroying of it. For if we (...) the seed that God gave him by (...),
the shadow of a true Wife, it was Tubal Cain, who was the first that gave an
edge to (...) and brass, that is, the first Warrier, and he that brought war
into the world: So we see Lamechs purpose in taking a second Wife, howsoever he
desired to increase the world, yet by Gods just judgment turned to the
destroying of mankind, for he brought forth TubalCain, one that was a destroy.

To this we add his Daughter whom he had by Zillah his unlawful Wife, whose
name was Naamah, that is, fair, which being compared with the sixth chapter, we
shall see that she was the overthrow of the world; For the sons of Seth saw the
daughters of men that they were fair and beautiful, and that (...) in them a
lust after them, so as it confounded that distinction of the holy. Family of
the godly, which caused the Lord to drown the world with a flood; so that as
well the Daughters as the Sons that Lamech had by his unlawful Wife, proved
the overthrow of mankind; and therefore it was no good pretense to marry a
Second Wife to increase it.

Thirdly, To proceed one step further in the choice of a second Wife, the
example of David may be a good pretense, who seeing a virtuous woman Abigal,
(...) good to his first Wife to add a second, in the first of Samuel the twenty
ninth chapter; so that the good quality of the second Wife may somewhat abate
the sin. But Lamech took not Zillah for any such respect of virtue: Zillah
which is a shadow, betokens lightness and (...); Adah is an open place, and
withal signifies a tireing and decking of her self, and Naamah signifies
made beautiful: So these three things were the cause hat made Lamech take his
second Wife: And as in these we see a plain description of the woman of the old
world, so we see also what manner of women they were that brought destruction
upon the whole world. Naamah, that is, beauty made, is the mark of Jezebel, in
the second of Kings, the ninth chapter and the third verse, Who for that she
was not beautiful of her self naturally, painted her face. Adah, that is
tireing and gorgeous apparel, is a mark of the Daughters of Canaan, when
Deborah describes by their apparel of diverse colors, Judges the fifth chapter
and the thirtieth verse. Zillah, that is, lightness and wantonness, sets out
unto us the strange woman, that is, an Harlots behavior, Proverbs the seventh
chapter and the tenth verse, and of a wanton pace, such as the Prophet
describes Isaiah the third chapter. On the other side Esther, when sweet odours
were offered her to purify her self, she refused, and desired nothing but that
which was natural; she did not make her self beautiful to delight the Kings
eyes, Esiher the second chapter and the fifteenth verse: As for Adah that is
glorious apparel: The holy women of old, as Sarah that trusted in God, did
not deck themselves (...) with broyded hair, and putting on of gold or
apparel, but with (...) in the first (...) of Peter, the third chapter and
the fifth verse, contrary, to the wicked generation of Cain. As for Zillah the
wanton and light woman; Rebecca covered her self with a Vail, Genesis the
twenty fourth chapter and the sixty fifth verse.

These examples of good and evil women are set down, first to correct and
reprove such as tire themselves like the women of the wicked generation, and to
exhort and instruct others to follow the modesty of godly and holy women; for
that is the use of the holy Scripture, in the second of Timothy the third
chapter, that no man should take two Wives at once, but as the Apostle tells us,
That every man have his proper wife, and every woman her proper husband, in the
first to the Corintbians, the (...) chapter and the second verse, that we
should not ensue the steps of the cursed generation of (...), or follow Cains
seed, in making choice of Wives, for glorious apparel, for beauty and
wantonness; but to choose such as are vittuous, as Boze chose Ruth. All this is
testified of Lamech by way of reproof and correction to himself, and those that
follow his example: And as there is woe threatened to them that walk in Cains
(...), so (...) bath a way that brought woe to him: and his way was, that he
taught the Daughters of Moab to entice the Children of Israel, by painting
their faces, and so made them commit whoredom with them, Numbers the 25.
chapter and the 1. verse: therefore whosoever shall cause his Daughters by
their wanton attire to allure the mind of the Sons of men, they walk in
Baalams way, and shall be partakers of his woe. Thus much for Lamechs marriage.
That which is set down rouching his Children follows in the next verses.

In which part we are to observe Gods power; First in blessing him with
Children; Secondly Gods providence in directing the matter.

First, There is set down three of Lamechs children; First Jubal that
signifies apportantem; Secondly Jubal oblectantem; Thirdly TubalCain, that is
one that terrifieth and makes afraid: Of which the bringing in is referred to
store of wealth; delight is referred to pleasure, and (...), or making afraid,
has his end in revenge. In those things stands the facility of the first
Enoch, and of all those that dedicate themselves to this world. For as we heard
Cains Enoch sets his mind on things present, nihil sperans quod sequitur; but
Seths Enoch which came on the seventh day has a course by himself, that is,
looked to things to come. Thus by their names we see their affections, and the
same we shall see by their actions and professions. Jubal is said to be a
Grasier, and not only so, but the first that backed horses, and made other
beasts fit for their uses, for which they were appointed by God; that is the
first bringer in of all riches and wealth. Secondly, to Jubal belongs the
invention of Instruments, whether they be such as are to be played on with
fingers or with the wind. Thirdly, Tubal-Cain was the first of those that gave
an (...) and point to brass and iron, and applied it to warlike use, to the
end he might have weapons to fight with, and to (...) all he world subject to
him, and his (...) Add (...) this his fair Daughter (...) and we shall see that
(...) man (...) himself to this present World, can have more (...) (...)

Secondly, For Gods hand and (...) in (...) (...) Children, this ground is to
be laid, that these (...) are from God; for Jubals invention (...) from God,
(...) butter of Kine and (...) of Sheep, with (...) of Lamb (...) in Basham, He
gives the grain of wheat, and (...) of (...) the thirty second chapter and the
four (...) and for making of (...) of (...) It is God that (...) songs in the
night, Job the thirty fist chapter and the (...) For Tubal-Cains invention of
(...) of war, It is the Lord that teachet hour hands to (...) and our (...) to
(...) the (...) and the fourth (...) These inventions are all (...) God,
whereby we see it is not with God, as (...) said to Isaas his Father, Genesis
the twenty seventh chapter, Have thou but one (...) God has for the Sons of
men (...) only heavenly blessings that (...) the life to come, but even such as
pertain to the (...) In his lest hand he has riches and worldly honor, but in
his (...) hand (...) and (...) life, Proverbs the third (...) the fix, teenth
(...) he has not only donum (...) but (...) James the first (...) and the
(...) verse, (...) in temporal things as well as spiritual, to (...) upon
(...) we fed God says, Exodus the thirty first chapter, (...) his (...) into
(...) and Aholiab, so as they were able (...) work in the (...); so all
mechanical arts are to be ascribed to (...) that was for (...) Tabernacle; So
Her (...) was (...) with the (...) to work in (...) for the Temple, in the
second book of Chronicles, the (...) chapter and the fourteenth verse. These
(...) came from the (...) of counsel and understanding.

The second thing to be observed is Gods (...) herein, that he (...) to the
wicked good (...) pertaining to this life, as Christ (...) He suffers (...) to
shine (...) the godly and (...) Matthew the fist chapter; so he bestows
temporal (...) upon the posterity of Cain, as well as upon the Children of
(...) and this they obtain of God, gratiae gratis datae, but not (...)
Secondly, His mercy appears herein, that he (...) gives (...) a supply of
those blessings which their sins (...) them of. Thirdly, His (...) in (...)
order, that the world (...) be furnished with things necessary for this present
(...) By (...) of (...) world, Psalm the seventeenth: And that they which have
(...) themselves to the things of this world, should have (...) excellency in
things (...) the same, above the Godly; as the (...) est of worldly men in this
(...) so their (...) stands in earthly things, and the godly (...) in respect
of (...) For the (...) of (...) are (...) in their (...) the Children of light,
Luke the tenth chapter: but come to things that pertain to the other life,
there they that seem to be most childish in things of this life, go far beyond
the Philosophers of whom the Apostle says, in the first to the Corinthians the
second chapter, The natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of
God; But he has hid them from the wise and prudent of this world, and revealed
them to babes, Matthew the eleventh chapter and the twenty fifth verse.
Fourthly, We are to consider the equity of Gods dealing, in recording these
things in his own book, which is the Library of the Holy Ghost. These things
are enrolled by an honorable name, that is, the name of a Father, showing
plainly that they which bring forth actions that are profitable no less are to
be counted Fathers, than they that bring forth Children, and that they ought
accordingly to be honored and reverenced as Fathers.

The ancient Fathers make a question, Whether these men were the inventors of
these things first? It is certain that Cain being an husbandman, had use of
iron works, as the Coulter and Share; and albeit he did invent iron tools fit
for his purpose, yet that which is ascribed to Tubal-Cain, was excultio and
expolitio, that is, the perfecting of that work which Cain had begun. Abel was
a shepherd, and could not but have use of tents, but yet the perfecting of
that cunning in that kind, is (...) to Jubal. Mahalallel was one that used to
praise God, as his name signifies, which he could not do without some kind
of music; and therefore, in as much as he was far ancienter than Lamech, it
follows there was music before Jubal invented Instruments and Organs. This
distinction therefore must be held in this point, which the School men make,
that the one is quoad modum simplicis, the other quoad modum singularis. And
therefore, in as much as Jabal-Jubal, and Tubal Cain are called Fathers of
these arts, which were in use long before them, it is plain, that not only the
first inventors of any art are to be honored, but even they also, that add any
excellency or perfection to any thing which they profess.

To draw to an end: Lamech being thus blessed of God, in things natural and
pertaining to this life, ought to be thankful to God. Jacob when God gave him
a son, called his name Judah, saying, I will praise the Lord, Genesis the
twenty ninth chapter; but he is so far from praising God, that he speaks
hard things against God; ( If Cain be avenged seven times, then Lamech seventy
times seven fold.) And for men, he was so cruel against them, that he said no
man should stir against him, ( He would kill a man in his rage.) Therefore he
called his third son Tubal Cain, that is, another Cain; as if he would have
the name of Cain remembered, which God would have buried. All these mercies
moved not Lamech to any amendment, but as it is in the twenty sixth chapter of
Isaiah, Let mercy be showed to the wicked, yet will he do wickedly; so did
Lamech. And albeit these things which they invented, tended to the benefit of
men, yet they were to their own destruction. Hypocrites can discern the face of
the sky, but cannot discern the sign or the times, Matthew the sixteenth
chapter. The Heathen, by the works of God, attained to a knowledge of God, but
were not the better for it, because they did not worship him as God, Romans the
first chapter; so in as much as they employ not that (...) of (...) which God
gave them, to his glory, it will be to their destruction. As we are to have a
right estimation of those things, where with God blessed them outwardly; so we
must beware, that having the like blessings, we be not as they: They desired to
be mighty men on earth, and men of renoune, Genesis the sixth chapter: that was
the end of their desire, and they were so; but as Christ says, acceperunt
mercedem suam. Lamech, as he desired, proved a mighty man, and so did his
posterity; but when all is done, when the men of this world, as Lamech, have
Children at their (...) fire, Psalm the seventeenth, yet they lie in hell like
(...), Psalm the forty ninth; so we see their earthly felicity turn (...)
misery: Therefore we must not dedicate our selves wholly to the world as
Lamech; we may not desire to be of that absolute power and force that no man
shall be able to resist; We may not only seek to delight our selves with
music, to drink wine in bolls, Amos the sixth chapter and the sixth verse: That
was it that Cains Enoch desired; we must have respect to the second Enoch, and
so desire to be well in this world, that we may also be well in the next world;
that as he is in heaven in glory, so we may be in glory with him.

The beginning of worldly men's desire is Cain, that is the getting in of
wealth; the end is Naomi, that is pleasure, and enjoying of it: that was the
course of the covetous rich man, Luke the twelfth chapter, I will pull down
Barns and set up bigger, and gather my corn thither; and then say to my soul,
thou have enough, take thy pleasure; but as Naomi was turned into Mara, so this
pleasure is turned into bitterness, Ruth the first chapter: The pleasure which
worldly men enjoy here, is turned into the dreadful torments of the world to
come.

On the other side, the generation of the godly begins with Enosh, Genesis the
fifth chapter and the sixth verse, and ends in Noah, Genesis the fifth chapter and
the twenty ninth verse, that is, their beginning is sorrow, but end in rest, as
the (...) says, Psalm the one hundred twenty sixth, They that sow in tears
shall reap in joy; the end of wicked men's pleasure is bitterness, but the godly
after sorrow are made partakers of rest in the evil day. Therefore as the
Scripture has a use for correction and instruction, so here not only they are
corrected that follow the generation of the wicked posterity of Cain, but we
are instructed to follow the generation of the godly.

Tum dixit Lemec suis uxoribus, O Hada and Tzilla audite vocem meam, uxores
Lemeci auribus percipite Sermonem meum: nam virum interfecero ad vulnus meum,
etiam adolescentem ad tumicem meum. Cum septuplo sit vindicandus Kajin, utique
Lemec septuagies septies tanto. Genesis 4. 23.24.

Januar. 20. 1599.
IN Lamech who was the seventh from Adam by the line of Cain, the Holy Ghost
propounds the example of a perfect wicked man; as in Enoch the seventh from
Adam by the line of Seth, he sets out the pattern of a man perfectly righteous.
Concerning Lamech, we heard his name is an oppressor; First of chastity, by
violating Gods institution, making three in one flesh, where God says two
shall be one flesh; and then of charity, by proclaiming to the world that no
man should hurt him, but he should die for it: So that where there are two
ways that overthrow that excellent virtue of love and charity that joins man
to God, we see that Lamech by turning love into fleshly lust, and charity into
hatred and revenge, gives the world an example of both. In both he justifies
Cain, as the Prophet, says of Juda, That she justifies Samaria and Sodom,
because she exceeds them in their abominations, Ezekiel the sixteenth chapter
and the fifty first verse; for Cain was content with one Wife, but Lamech gave
the reins to lust, so as he took two; and though Cain murdered Abel his
brother, yet he adds not murder to murder as Lamech did, who says. ( That
first he slew a man in his wound, and then a young man in his hurt,) but to
these two he adds that which the Wiseman calls profundum malitiae, that is,
contempt, Proverbs the eighteenth chapter and the third verse: For then is a
man come to the depth of wickedness, when he contemnes God and his word; and
this is it which the Son of God calls the depth of Satan, Revelations the
second chapter and the twenty fourth verse, for he scoffs at Gods words which
he spoke concerning Cain, verse the fifteenth, saying, (If Cain shall be
avenged seven fold, truly Lamech seventy times seven fold, verse the twenty
fourth.

Secondly, We do not consider this by it self which Lamech did, but we
consider him as by this sin he became the corrupter of mankind; so as it may
be said of him, that he made the whole world to sin, as Jeroboam made Israel
to sin; for he was the first that brought in the sin of uncleanness and
cruelty, which are as the Prophet speaks, Psalm the eighteenth and the fifth
verse, Torrentes Belial, that is, the floods of wickedness which brought
destruction upon the old world, Genesis the sixth chapter: For as one says,
there was prius eluvio vitiorum before there was any deluge of waters; for so
the Holy Ghost witnesses, that the wickedness of man was great upon earth,
and the earth was filled with cruelty, and all flesh had corrupted his way; and
all this proceeded from his example; for he gave the world a pattern to give
the reins to lusts, and make no conscience of bloodshed, which brought
destruction upon them.

Thirdly, When as he had contrary to Gods Ordinance taken two Wives, Adah and
Zillah, the one that set her felicity on painting of her face, like Jezabel, in
the second of the Kings the tenth chapter, the other to be to him as Herodias
was to Herod, Matthew the fourteenth chapter. When God for all this spared
Lamech, and did not punish him as he deserved, but rather blessed him with
Children and earthly prosperity; yet he is not any thing the better for Gods
mercy, but grows from one sin to another, till his sin became as the Apostle
speaks, Romans the seventh chapter, Out of measure sinful, and till the
chief sin appear in him, which is even the head of the Serpent: In whom we
find that verified which the Preacher says, Ecclesiastes the eighth chapter
and the eleventh verse, that if God presently punish any sin, he is counted
cruel, But when sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, then
the hearts of the children of men are fully set to do evil: as the Apostle
also shows, That whereas Gods patience and long-suffering should lead us to
repentance, the wicked abuse his goodness, and take occasion thereby to add
sin to sin, and so to heap up wrath for themselves against the day of
wrath, Romans the second chapter and the fourth and fist verses. The
discovering of these sins is plainly opened in this oration which Lamech
makes to his Wives; for sin discloseth it self two ways, either by Cains
way, that is, by the eye or countenance; as Cain when his heart grew malicious,
showed it presently in his countenance, verse the fifteenth, or else Lamechs
way, that is, by the some or froth of the mouth; for we see here according to
Christ's rule, Matthew the twelfth chapter, That Lamechs mouth speaks from the
abundance of his heart, for the tongue is the Trumpet of the mind; and as a
Galilean may be known by his speech, Matthew the twenty sixth chapter, so by a
man's talk it will appear how his heart is affected. His speech consists first
of a preface ( Hear my voice ye wives of Lamech, hearken to my words.)
Secondly, the body of his oration, (I have killed [or will kill] a man in my
wound, and a young man in my hurt.) Thirdly, If Cain shall be avenged seven
times, then Lamech seventy times seven times. In which words he says in
effect, that he will neither do right not suffer wrong.

His Preface we see is a solemn and grave Speech, as if Solomon himself were
delivering some great piece of wisdom, or as if some Prophet were to declare
some weighty matter in the name of the Lord. That we may see, that the wicked
are as careful in stirring up the hearers to hear their blasphemies, as the
Prophets and Saints of God are to crave attention to their heavenly doctrine.

They are like the words of Jacob to his Children, Genesis the forty ninth
chapter and the second verse, Hear ye Sons of Jacob, hearken to Israel your
Father: where, to hearken is more than to hear, and the speech is more than the
voice; whereby Lamech wills his Wives with all attention to bow their ears
to that which he says; which shows that he imagined that which he spoke was
some great matter, whereas indeed it is nothing but a vain boasting of his
power, that he can do mischief, Psalm the fifty second, for the Prophet says,
That the great men speak out the corruption of their hearts, and they wrap it
up, Micah the seventh chapter and the third verse; and so does this great Giant
Lamech: we see by his words he has this opinion, that he ought to be heard
being a man of this power. For as the Wiseman says of the practice of the
world, If the rich man speaks, all must hearken to his word, but the poor when
he speaks cannot be heard: but see what is the effect of his speech for all his
good preface; therefore we must not presently impute wisdom to every one that
begins in this solemn manner.

Of the body of his Oration be two parts, First a proclaiming to the world What
he will do if he be touched, Secondly, If Cain be avenged seven times, then
Lamech seventy times seven fold. Of the former there are two readings; the one
is, I have stain a man being but wounded, and killed a young man in my hurt.
The latter is, I would kill a man. If it be the former, it is a Commemoration;
If the latter a Commination, wherein he breaths forth threatenings, as Saul
did Acts the eighth chapter, against any that should do him wrong: The one is
a bragging of his strength, that he feels himself so strong, as if he were
wounded, yet he is able to be avenged of him that shall touch him: The other
shows his vindicative spirit, that is so far from suffering, that if he be but
touched, he will kill: he threatens pro vulnere mortem.

In the first, by that which the Apostle says, in the second to the
Corinthians the tenth chapter, That if God give strength and power to any man,
it is not to destroy, but to (...): We see it is no true boasting which Lamech
makes, he does not boast aright that says, he is of strength to do hurt: the
commendation of strength is not in killing and wounding, but in saving and
defense.

For the second interpretation we are to know it is no just dealing, to kill
him that has but inflicted a wound; for justice is, there should be talio,
wound for wound, and not death for a wound. If it be read as the Fathers read
it ( I have killed a man in my wound) then it is a confession. Now we know
confessions proceed of repentance, but that was not the cause of Lamechs
confession, for then he would not have chosen these confessions, but it is in
the spirit of arrogancy that he confesses to his wives what he has done: He
says that when he had killed one man in his wound, then he proceeded to kill a
young man, that is, he added blood to blood. It is enough for a man to sin,
though he do not brag of it, but when they do as the Sodomites did, that is,
praedicare peccata sua, Isaiah the third chapter and the ninth verse; then they
are come to the (...) of wickedness, if they brag of their sin, and are so
far from sorrowing for their finne, that they seek applause for it, as if they
had done well. This preaching of sin, and that rejoying in wickedness, which
the Wiseman speaks of, Proverbs the second chapter and the fourteenth verse,
exultat in rebus (...), falls upon none but such as are in profundo peccatorum,
that is, grievous sins, and at the pitch of all naughtiness. Naturally men are
ashamed of sin, and it is a sign of grace so to be affected; therefore the
Lord says, Jeremiah the eighth chapter and the twelfth verse, Were they
ashamed when they had committed abomination? but where instead of covering
their faces with shame for sin, Men have (...) foreheads, and will not be
ashamed, Jeremiah the third chapter and the third verse, that is a sin out of
measure sinful; for shame is a (...) of that singultus cordis, that is, of
that inward grief of heart, in the first of Samuel the twenty fifth chapter,
which they conceive that they have offended God; but when instead of sorrow and
shame, there is an exaltation, or rejoicing, of the evil they have done, and a
hardness of heart, so as they cannot be touched with any grief of their (...):
These are the tokens of one that is past grace, and these appeared in Lamech,
of whom the Apostles words are verified, That his shame is his glory,
Philippians the third chapter: In both these he justifies Cain, for he was
ashamed to confess that he had killed Abel, and therefore answered the Lord, I
know not, am I my brothers keeper? and after he is very sorry and greatly cast
down, and therefore says My sin is greater than can be pardoned. This is it
we learn in the (...) part.

The second is worse, for where there is no shame there may be fear; He that
has lost shame for (...) is like the beast, (...) the (...) ninth, for the
beast is not ashamed of any thing: but though (...) beasts be without shame,
yet they have fear, for they will (...) willingly run into the fire, it is so
terrible to them; therefore he that fears not when he (...) the danger of
sin, he is (...) than a (...), yea, than the Devils themselves, Who (...) and
(...) the second chapter: Therefore where as (...) is not (...) to kill and
murder him that should but wound him, having not (...) That if a man (...)
evil sin (...) at the door; but (...) an (...) of Gods wrath upon Cain for
murder, that is a sign that his (...) is greatly hardened. A man would think
the very (...) of (...) (...) be odious considering his horrible sin, and the
(...) which God laid upon him for it; but here we (...) (...) names Cain
himself, as before he called his Son (...), (...) that he is not (...) that
the name of Cain should (...), so that he is without all fear of the example of
Cains (...) for he treads it under foot; and this is a signs of (...), when
exemplary punishments will not make a man afraid. (...) yet we see not the
height of his sin, (...) having both cast of (...), and buried all fear, both
of God and man, he (...) Gods (...), and contemns them, ( If Cain be avenged
seven fold, then Lamech seventy times seven fold) which being the very words of
God as we see verse the fifteenth, as God himself spoke to the wicked, Psalm
the fiftieth, Why do thou preach my law, and take my covenant in thy mouth?
so it may be said, what should Lamech do with Gods words in his mouth? if he
did call them to mind to the end they might convert him, it were well, but he
perverts the words of God, and scoffs at them. ( If Cain be avenged seven
times, then Lamech seventy times seven times). Wherein first he says he will
be revenged; Secondly he argues, if Cain, then much more he; Thirdly, he goes
further, and because some might say to him, why? you may be killed your self,
you are but a man; therefore he answers, let him kill me that will, he that
kills me shall be avenged seventy times. If Cain shall be avenged seven times,
then Lamech seventy times seven times, as if he should say, now is the seventh
generation ended. Though Cains posterity be most profane, yet it does as well
as Seths, for we are Great Grasiers of Cattle, we have Instruments of music;
therefore that which God said of Cains punishment ( If thou do evil sin
lies at the door) is nothing so; Lamech does, like an Infidel, say, all that
God says is nothing.

But if we yet look more narrowly into this speech of Lamech, there is a
further thing in it; for if he argues thus, ( if Cain be avenged seven times,
then Lamech much more) What is his ground to make this conclusion? Surely this
wicked persuasion, That the more a man sins, the more he shall be respected
of God: for Lamech was the greater sinner; Cain contented himself with one
wife, but Lamech took a second; Cain killed but one, but Lamech first killed
one, after he killed another, and therein justifies Cain as an Innocent, in
respect of himself: Cains offense was sub lege occulta, he heard no more, But
that if thou do evil sin lies at the door, but Lamechs sin is sub lege
manifesta, for he sees an example of Gods punishment upon Cain for his
murder; therefore seeing Lamech is the greater Offender, and seeing pro
mensura peccati erit and plagarum modus, Deuteronomie the twenty fifth chapter;
it stands not in reason, that if Cain being a lesser sinner, be avenged seven
times, that Lamech being a greater offender, shall be avenged seventy times
seven times; therefore this is open blasphemy against the justice of God, who,
as the sin is greater, so inflicts a greater punishment. He reasons thus,
seeing God will avenge a murderer it is a sign he loves them, therefore he
will love me; for Cain was but a young murderer, he killed but one; but I am
an ancient practiser of this sin, I have killed two; therefore he will see
that I shall be much more avenged; as if he should say, the more sinner a man
is, the more he shall be favored of God. That is his reasoning.

One step further we are yet to arise in the consideration of his argument; for
thus he says, God has prophesied concerning Cain, that he that kills shall
be avenged seven times; and I will prophecy concerning my self, if any kill
me, he leaves not vengeance to God, but chooses vengeance for himself: Cains
seven times will not serve him, but he must be avenged seventy times more.

If we lay these things together, that is, his vain boasting and his
threatening, with the irreligious and most wicked consequence that he (...),
that if God respect Cain a sinner, he will much more respect him, because he is
a greater sinner: This will show that Lamech is not only past shame, but
without all fear: he is so far from shame and grieving for his sin, that he
brags of it. If this be not the Serpents head, and the chief sin that can be;
that is the breathing out of blasphemies against God, and threatenings against
man, I know not what is. It we compare Lamech, the Serpents seed, with Christ
the seed of the woman, we shall see that he being asked of Peter, how often he
should forgive his brother, Matthew the eighteenth chapter, uses the same
styles concerning mercy and forgiveness, which Lamech uses touching revenge,
that is, to forgive till seventy times seven times: whereby he teaches Peter
to multiply forgiveness, because he himself shall need to have many sins
forgiven him, to teach us that in showing mercy, we must follow the rule which
the wicked keep in revenge. We see Christ's testament for the shedding of blood,
that he will have mercy showed, but Lamech will have revenge extended to
seventy times seven times, whereas Christ will have mercy extended: The one is
the corrupter of charity, the other the restorer; therefore we must hearken to
him; we see what became of Lamech and his posterity. Job says of them, that as
the floods of wickedness went over their soul, so it brought upon them a flood
of water, whereby the whole world was drowned, and then those mighty Giants
gemebant sub aquis.

These things being before us, serve (...), to prove us, and correct us, that
we grow not past shame, past grief and (...), that we sall not into that (...),
Ephesians the fourth chapter, that is, without all feeling and fear to sin
with greediness; for then are we worse than bruit beasts. We must therefore
take (...) of Lamechs example, in using Gods word, to jest and (...) at it.
Though we cannot bur sin, yet we must keep (...) in our (...), and blush at
the consideration of our sins, and not sear our consciences, as with a hot
iron, in the first epistle to Timothy, the (...); but be sorry that we have
offended, and fear the (...) of God, which we see (...) upon others: But if
these passions of Lamech do overtake us, we are in a (...) case, and in the
(...) of sin: We must show out selves as (...) in doing good, as he boasted
he was mighty in doing evil.

Cognovit autem denuo Adam uxorem suam, quae peperit filium, and vocavit nomen
ejus Schethum: nam reposuit mihi Deus, inquit, semen alterum pro Hebelo, quum
ipsum interfecit Kajin. Genesis 4. 25.

Januar, 27. 1599.
THIS verse contains the birth of Seth; and it is as the Sun coming out of
a thick cloud, or as a fair day after a storm: For in the eight former verses,
there has not been any mention made of God or godliness, but marriage upon
marriage, murder upon murder, vaunting of finne past and to come, deriding of
God, and his holy word, as if he were a person that favored wicked men; and
not contenting himself with the punishment which God inflicted, but a devising
a new kind of revenge, as we see in Lamech, who not contented with the
punishment which God appointed for murderers, that is, seven times, would
challenge to himself seventy times seven times.

Now at last we come to a verse that has the mention and name of God, and of a
good man, of whom a succession of good men should be raised. And it was fit
that the Man of God, Moses, should keep this order, because the faith of Adam
and Eve might quail, and they might think God not true of his promise, in
regard of that which they saw: For as for the threatening which God denounced
against Cain, we see it is not performed; but Cain and his posterity, in
stead of being plagued for his wickedness, grow to be great men, rich
Grasyers, such as have all things that tend either to delight or defense: As
for Adams promise, which was, That the seed of the woman should bruise the
Serpents head, it fell out clean contrary: for we see to what a great number
the spawne of the Serpent was grown; when as there was none of the Woman's seed:
And whereas God promised the Woman's seed should bruise the head of the Serpent,
we see the spawne of the Serpent (...) the head of the Woman's seed: For Abel
who was the Woman's seed, is slain by Cain, who was of the Serpents seed; which
falls out many times in the world. The promise made to Noah was, That Cham
should be a servant, Genesis the ninth chapter; and yet we see it fell out
clean contrary; for, Genesis the tenth chapter, (...) who was of Chams race,
was the first Emperor upon earth. And in the new Testament, the people of God
when Christ was born, were in that state, that Herod an Edomite was become
their King, Matthew the seoond chapter. That we may see, that as the Prophet
speaks, in the one hundred and ninteenth Rsalm, and the hundred twenty sixth
verse, Then it is time for God to lay to his hand, when mankind looking into
his word, and seeing that it is not fulfilled which God has spoken, do decay
in faith, that he may show himself a true God, and able to accomplish that
which he does either promise or threaten; that so the faith that was yet left
upon earth, might revive and take breath again.

The verse it self consists of two parts: First, Adams knowledge of his Wife.
Secondly, The nativity of Seth.

For the first: Not to say any thing of the term which Moses uses which is
Adams knowledge; for that we have handled it heretofore, we will consider the
word iterum, which gives us plainly to know that for a great while Adam gave
over that Act, being stricken and amazed with this consideration, that one
brother should kill another; that is, in bewailing Abel that was (...), and
Cain that was cut off from the Church: Adam and Eve were in this state of
mind, that they were as it were dead, seeing their first Offspring sped so
unhappily, that the one was slain bodily, the other was under the sentence of
death both of body and soul: when I say they considered that they should either
beget children to be murdered, which was Abels case, or else to be cast into
hell in respect of Cain, it made them say with Rebecca, Genesis the twenty fifth
chapter and the twenty second verse, si mihi sic futurum est quia necesse est
parere; for these considerations they had clean given over. Out of which
example of Adam and Eve, we learn to conform ourselves to crosses and heavy
accidents as God lays upon us, that is, to forbear and give over matters of
pleasure when God calls us to mourning; for it is a thing agreeable to Gods
will: If when the Lord God of hosts shall call to weeping and mourning, there
be nothing but joy and (...), slaying of Oxen, etc. the Lord himself says,
that is a sin which shall not be pardoned, or purged with any sacrifice, till
they die, Isaiah the twenty second chapter and the twelfth verse: It is that
which Christ teaches, Matthew the ninth chapter and the fifteenth verse, When
the Bridegroom shall be taken away, then shall they mourn and fast; that is,
when either he shall be taken from us, or when men shall drive him from them by
their sins, then there is cause of mourning and sorrow: Therefore we see
albeit it was Gods will, that Aaron and his Children should eat the offerings
of the Children of Israel, yet he refused to eat them in regard of the
Judgments of God upon Nadab and Abihu his Sons, saying, Thou know such and
such things have come to me this day; and if I had eaten the sin-offering,
(...) it have been accepted in the sight of the Lord? (...) the (...) chapter
and the ninteenth verse: Therefore David mourned so for the death of Abner,
that he said, God do so to me, and more, if I eat bread, or (...) else, till
the Sun be down, in the second of Samuel, the third chapter, and the thirty
fifth verse.

But hence there appears another thing unto us, which is, that (...) and
earthly sorrow in a natural man, is a thing stronger than any worldly
pleasure, that in regard of the natural man, there is more strength in grief
than in pleasure or joy; for if a man have (...) in never so much pleasure all
(...) life, yet if he come to a little sickness, it takes away all remembrance
of his former pleasure. And this is a means to make a man think of such an
estate, Wherein he may have that pleasure and joy, which shall not be taken
from him, as Christ speaks, John the sixteenth chapter and the twenty second
verse. Now when Adam had relieved himself with this cogitation, that as the
Prophet speaks, Psalm the eighty ninth, God has not made all men for naught,
it made him to return; whereupon there followed by Gods blessing, not only a
seed, but a chosen and holy seed, that is Seth.

Concerning whom, first we will speak of his birth, wherein we have this to
observe, that those Children whom God gives to Parents upon a plentiful
contrition and repentance, do usually prove men excellent in all spiritual
graces. The first example hereof is Seth, who is not only the foundation of the
Church, but of mankind; for since the flood all the Sons of men are called the
Children of Seth. It is also showed in Joseph, whom God gave to Rachel, having
opened her womb which before was shut up, so as she was barren, Genesis the
thirtieth chapter, and the twenty second verse: It also appeared in Hannah, who
having bewailed her own case in the bitterness of her soul, received from the
Lord a blessed seed, that was Samuel, who restored religion, and settled the
state of the Kingdom, in the first of Samuel, the first chapter, and the
sixteenth verse; but it is most plain in the birth of Solomon; for after David's
great fall, and the grievous punishment that God laid upon him, upon his great
repentance, which followed, whereof, the fifty first Psalm, is a perpetual
monument, God gave him a Son, that was Solomon, the like whereof was never
before, nor has been since, in the second of Samuel, the twelfth chapter. As
on the other side, they that are born according to the flesh, and begotten in
the strength of nature, prove wild and rebellious, as Israel and Absalom, and
of a contrary disposition to them that are born to them that are in the state
of grace.

Secondly, For his name, and that little Sermon which Eve makes touching his
name, that is, she called him Seth, and renders a reason, quia posuit eum (...)
semen aliud pro Abele, quem occidit Cain.

In which Sermon there is no one word, which has not its several sense. It is
said, First, He is positus. Secondly, By God. Thirdly, As a seed. Fourthly,
Another seed. Fifthly, instead of Abel. Sixthly, Of Abel whom Cain slew.

For the term of putting or setting, we have it in the third chapter of
Genesis, and the fifteenth verse; where God says, I will put enmity; Psalm the
hundred forty eighth, He sets them a law; Proverbs the twenty second chapter
and the twenty eighth verse, Remove not the ancient bounds which thy Fathers
have set; in the first epistle of John the fifth chapter, The whole world is
set on mischief: By which setting or putting is added stedinesse and
permanency: But we shall see the nature of the word most plainly, in the twenty
eigth chapter of (...), Pono in Zion lapidem; where it is used for laying a
foundation, or for the setting of a rift, or graffe, or root, which, as we
know, is set to grow, and not to be pulled up by and by; there is the sense of
the word set or put: In which sense it is not only referred (...) to Abel, who,
as we know, was a transitory, and no permanent seed; for he was no sooner
showed to the world, but presently he (...) as taken away, as one of whom the
world was unworthy, Hebrews the eleventh chapter; But also to Cain, whose land
was the land of Nod: To teach us, That in the felicity of Gods Saints, there is
stedinesse and continuance; but as for the pleasures of the wicked, they
continue not one hour, but are uncertain. So that it is in effect as if God
should say, before indeed I gave Abel, but it was not my mind to have him
continue; but this seed, whom I will give Adam, shall stay, so as neither Cain,
nor Lamech, nor the gates of hell shall prevail against him, Matthew the
sixteenth chapter: That is the meaning of the word ( set or put) which was the
first observation.

And this seting or putting receives great strength from the setter, that is
God; whole weakness is stronger than the strength of man: And therefore look
what he sets shall continue; to teach us, that albeit the first Saint was taken
away, yet now he will have Saints to continue: They shall not only be showed to
the world, but shall have a foundation, and take root, being set by God.

Touching the wicked, Eliphaz says, Their foundation is as an overflowing of
water, for they shall be carried away, as Cains posterity was, with a flood,
Job the twenty second chapter, and the sixteenth verse: But the righteous shall
have an everlasting foundation, Proverbs the tenth chapter: For as when God
will have a thing crooked, no man can it make straight, Ecclesiastes the
seventh chapter and the fifteenth verse; so what God will (...), and have to
take root, it cannot be pulled up or removed; Positi sunt ad hoc, says the
Apostle, in the first epistle of Peter, the fourth chapter and the second
verse; and in the eighth verse, They were ordained to stumble at the word.
Therefore being appointed by God to that end, it is impossible they should be
otherwise: That is for the wicked.

On the other side, Whom Christ takes to his custody, he says of them, in the
tenth chapter of St. John, No man shall take them out of mine hand; and as the
Apostle says, in the second to (...), (...) second chapter and the nineteenth
verse, The foundation of God abides sure and steadfast, Novit (...) qui sunt
(...); near (...) this is that which the Apostle calls deposition, that is,
(...) thing (...) to trust, in the second to Timothy, the first chapter, and
the fourteenth verse, for even so God will have Saints, and the (...) of the
godly, to continue in the world, till he come to call them out of it.

Thirdly, it is said of Seth he is positus in semen, for there is a person that
is no seed, that was Abel; before God gave a man to Adam, but he gave no seed
to him; for that is called seed of which there grows something: But of Abel
there came no (...) or seed (...); but as it is said of Christ, that when he
shall lay down his life, videbit semen longaevum, Isaiah the fifty third
chapter, that is a seed, though not issuing out of his loins, yet (...) from
his spirit. So we are to understand that spiritually there came a seed of Abel,
for there is a spiritual generation as well as a carnal; so spiritually
Elisha was the Child of Elias, because the spirit of Elias was doubled upon
him, in the second of Kings, the second chapter; and John Baptist is called
Elias, Matthew the seventeenth chapter, because in these graces of the spirit
that was in Elias, he resembled him, as the Child does the Father. It is the
saying of the Prophet, Isaiah the sixth chapter, semen sanctum est substantia
mundi, and therefore Seth is appointed and set by God to be the spiritual seed
of the Church, as the seed of mankind by carnal generation.

Fourthly, But why should God need to give Adam and Eve seed, he had seed
enough already, that was Cain and his posterity, which were come to seventy
seven persons, yea, but they are not content with that seed, but would have
another. Cains seed pleases them not, therefore they are earnest Suitors to
God, for a holy seed. As God promised Abraham first a seed that should be sicut
pulvis terrae, Genesis the thirteenth chapter and the sixteenth verse, that is
such as should grow in the earth, and set their affections therein; and after
another that should be sicut stellae coeli, Genesis the eighteenth chapter,
that is such a seed as should set their minds in heaven, and seek for a
heavenly country, Hebrews the eleventh chapter; So Adams two seeds, first Cain
and his posterity, which were like the dust of the earth, such as were earthly
affected; and therefore they would have another seed like the stars of
heaven, such as should have their conversation in heaven; it is that which the
Prophet tells us, there is semen nequam, Isaiah the first chapter, that is, a
naughty and corrupt seed, such was the seed of Cain: and there is semen
sanctum, Isaiah the sixth chapter, such a seed was it that Adam desired: Cain
was a naughty seed, but they would have a holy seed; for there is not only good
seed, but tares as Christ shows, Matthew the thirteenth chapter. Such is the
difference that is in seeds: A holy seed is such as shall sin, but yet shall
not do sin, in the first epistle of John the third chapter, that is not
operarius iniquitatis, Matthew the seventh chapter, because the seed of God is
in them; but they that sell themselves to all manner of sin, are the corrupt
seed, such as power out themselves to all wickedness, because they have not the
seed of God in them, but the Serpents seed, of whom it may be said, vero ex
patre Diabilo estis, John the eighth chapter.

Fifthly, This other seed might be another seed, yet not like Abel, that is a
seed more civil and temperate in the course of this life than Cain was, and
his posterity, but they desire a seed for Abel, that is, such another seed as
Abel was: They desire a Child not simply, but pro Abele, that is, such a Child
in whom they may find the spirit of Abel, that they might say here is another
Abel, that though Abel be taken off, yet there might another like Abel be
ingraffed.

The last point is in these words, For Abel (whom Cain (...)) There were many
things that Cain could endure well enough in Abel, but the cause why he (...)
him, was, for that he had a desire to please God, and to sacrifice to him in
the best (...) could; his desire was to offer plurimam hostiam, (...) the
eleventh chapter and the fourth verse, that is a Sacrifice that should be in
(...) more, and in quality de (...), of the best of his sheep; so they would
not only have one religious as Abel, but one that should be opposite to Cain,
and as it were the Heir of Abels (...), one that might accomplish that which
was lacking on Abels part, in the first to the Thessalonians, the third
chapter, and the (...) verse (...) as then, he that was born after the flesh
persecuted him (...) was born after the spirit, Galatians the fourth chapter;
so they might have one to maintain his quarrel, and might uphold that holy seed.

Concerning which, as God has a purpose, that the patience of his Saints
should appear, Romans the ninteenth chapter, (...) patientia Sanctorum, for
which cause he suffers Abel to be (...); so he will have his providence appear
too, and therefore he sets up Seth, so as Tubal-Cain with all his armor shall
not remove him: So we see in every of these words there is a power. They would
have this other seed like Abel in all things, saving in this, that Abel was but
showed only to the world, but they would have Seth a permanent seed. So does
God make the distinction between his Saints; to some he says, as to Peter,
John the twenty first chapter, Follow me, that by thy death thou may glorify
me: Of others he says, as of John the Evangelist, I will have thee tarry
still, that is, he will have some Saints to be (...), as Peter, and others he
would have to live out all the days of their life, as John the Evangelist; and
John that dies in Domino, is no less blessed (...) Peter, that dies pro
Domino: So (...) he would have Abel (...) taken a way, and (...) to live out
the course of nature, yet the one is no less acceptable to him than the other.

Lastly, These words contain a plain (...) of Eve, not only in regard of her
style; for of Cain she said, I have obtained a man of the Lord, but of Seth,
Deus posuit: The one is (...) Evae, the other positio Del. But in regard of
that account which now she makes of Cain, Why should not Cain be still her
Jewel as before; for he lives still, and has a great and mighty seed? She
faith, the cares not (...) him, for that he is cut off from Gods Church, a
stranger from the promises of God. And as for Abel whom before she (...) now
she desires one like him, though he should be (...) Abel (...) So she condemns
her self for having so great a (...) of (...); (...) Wisdom at last is
justified of her Children: For a time (...) (...) accounted of, but at last
Abel shall be found to be (...) case.

Out of which we see that which the Prophet (...), That men must not make too
much (...) in (...), Isay (...) twenty (...) chapter; if the Lord (...), and
come not so soon as we (...), we must wait, and he that (...) will come,
Hebrews the second chapter. Give not over if Abel be lost, God will provide
another seed.

Secondly, We see here the propriety of the Church; it is a thing set, as the
Prophet speaks, in the twenty eighth chapter of Isaiah, I will lay a Stone in
Sion, a chief corner Stone, upon which Stone the Church is built, so as the
gates of hell shall not prevail against it, Matthew the sixteenth chapter:
Therefore the Apostle says, Colossians the first chapter, the faithful are
radicati and fundati in fide; whereupon it follows, that as God himself is
from everlasting, and world without end, Psalm the nintieth, so he will be with
his Church to the end of the world, Matthew the eighteenth chapter; so we see
there is a reward for the righteous: though he were killed touching the body,
yet he lives still in heaven. And now in as much as there is one like Abel, he
revives in earth, and so he has his reward in heaven and earth: Howsoever,
before Cain was preferred before Abel, yet now by the testimony of Adam and
Eve, is counted one not worthy the ground that he treads upon, but Abel is
acknowledged to be a great blessing, and therefore has his desire, one like
him.

Sed and ipsi Schetho genitus est filius, cujus nomen vocavit Enoschum: tunc
coeptum est invocari nomen Jehovae. Genesis 4. 26.

Februar. 17. 1599.
YOU see here, that albeit Moses might have deferred these two verses to the
next chapter, wherein he draws down the genealogy of the godly seed, yet he
could not contain himself, but before he concludes this chapter, he will make
some mention of some that regard the worship of God; as well to show that God
did not clean forget his promise, and his people; as also that he might
counterpoise the evil of the wicked that went before; as last of all, that he
might make a good conclusion, that as he had a good beginning in Abels
oblation, so he might end it well in the invocation of Enosh; and he does end
with Enoshes invocation with respect partly to Seth his Father, and partly to
Enoch Cains Son: As Cain and Seth matches, so do Enoch and Enosh. On the
behalf of Seth, we say that Moses having laid a foundation which was (posuit
deus,) in this verse he adds roof: for invocation is not made till the Temple
be finished: and so in these two verses he comprehends the state of the Church.
In the first, is the promise of God; in the second, the name of God. In which
two is contained the duty of the whole worship of God. On the other side, that
there might be a counterpoise and opposition between the contrary parties; as
Seth is opposed to Cain, so Enosh stands against Enoch. For as we see there was
a City built on the one side, so on the other side there must be something
built for the defense of the seed of the Godly: There must be some fence for
Seth and his seed, as Cain and Enoch had theirs: Therefore here is that which
is called turris fortissima, Proverbs the eighteenth chapter, that is nomen
domini, and it stands in opposition not only against him, but against all the
rest, to counterpoise Jabal, Jubal, and Tubal Cain. First, against the wealth
that Jabal brought in here, is the fear of the Lord, as Abraham, Genesis the
twentieth chapter, whereof the Prophet says, Isaiah the thirty third chapter
and the sixth verse, Timor Domini the saurus. Secondly, Against the pleasures
and delights of Jubals invention of music, we have another pleasure in the
Psalms, Psalm the sixty third, My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and
fatness, and my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips. Thirdly, Against the
strength and power of Tubal Cain that devises weapons for war, we have
another kind of armor, Psalm the twentieth, Illi in curribus and in equis, nos
autem in nomine domini dei nostri invocabimus: So we see that which is ascribed
to Enosh, does answer not only Enoch, but all the rest. As on the one side in
respect of Seth, when we read that God gave him a seed, we showed that it was a
holy seed, that he was the first that called on the name of the Lord: so on the
other side in respect of Enosh and Enoch; as we see a City, so a Church; as in
Enoch a state civil, so in Enosh a state ecclesiastical; as there we had a
company of men that placed their vocation in things of this life, so here we
have another company, whose vocation is an invocation, that is, to adore and
call upon the name of the Lord. As if Moses should say by way of apology, that
they were not a seed alone, but there is another seed; and as Cains posterity
boasted themselves in earthly matters, so Seths seed was employed in the
service of God, which Moses opposes against Enoch and the rest: For when, as
the Prophet speaks, there is more spent in the making of Mattocks and Swords,
that is a state civil; but when more time and pains is bestowed in the
safeguard and protection of the Church, than upon Lawyers: and that shows a
state ecclesiastical. This shall suffice for the dependence of this verse.

I come to the verse it self consisting of two parts: First, the birth and name
of Enosh, Secondly, the invocation of the name of the Lord. First, the name
Enosh signifies, a man, according to the four words in the holy tongue, and it
gives us to understand thus much, that the conceit of the Holy Ghost is, that
that party that has sense of God and his worship, and of spiritual things, as
the invocation of the name of God, is to be called a man, otherwise he is like
a beast, Psalm the forty ninth, and no man; for that the God of heaven should
receive no more honor and service from men than from bruit beasts, it is too
unreasonable, seeing God has endued man with reason; and therefore that which
offers it self here is, that Enosh from his invocation of the name of the
Lord, took his manhood, that thereby it appeared that he was a man, and not a
bruit beast: But as he signifies a man, so not every man; but as Adam is a
person taken out of the molde of the earth, so Enosh is a name pertaining to
humility, and signifies a person that is lowly: The one was manipulus terrae,
the other cumulus miseriae, so that there is a name from the molde, whereof man
is made, and into which he is cast, the consideration whereof is able to take
down our pride; or if not that of Adam: The other name Enosh, whereby we see
that this man, that is made of the molde of the earth, is subject to so many
miseries, sicknesses, sorrows, and calamities.

For the occasion of this name giving, there was a kind of emulation between
the one side and the other; as on the one side, the one called his Son Enoch,
so the other Enosh; the one Irad, the other Jerad; the one Mehujael, the other
Methushael, which was done in this respect, to show that another manner of
contemplation occupies the heads of the Children of God, then the terrestrial
dedication of the seed of the wicked: But especially this was done in respect
of the Prophecy, to show how Seth did see that the Serpent slept not, but was
hewing out a cross and calamities for the Godly, and that Enoch had built a
City and walls against the Church, and Tubal-Cain had invented weapons of war,
and prepared armor against Seth. Therefore as Genesis the tenth chapter and the
twenty fifth verse, Eber calls his Sons name Peleg, because the division of
the earth was in his days; so here Seths Son is called Enosh, in respect of
the crosses and tribulations that the Sons of men are subject unto; and that
is one mystery that the Fathers make of this place, that none should imagine
Seth to be without his Enosh, that upon the godly the surges of the Sea shall
arise, but not overwhelm them; and that the gates of hell shall not prevail
against them, Matthew the sixteenth chapter, but that he that grounds himself
upon the worship of God by true invocation, shall be immovable, and yet not
without persecutions. And that is the first point, that to Seth is born Enosh.

The reason why God sends crosses and afflictions to men, is to try them,
whether they be rooted and grounded in faith, Colossians the second chapter and
the twenty seventh verse; and as in the first to the Corinthians, the eleventh
chapter and the ninteenth verse, He suffers heresies, that they which are
approved may be known; as also, because if men were not sometime perplexed, and
pressed down with afflictions, so as neither reason can relieve them, nor the
hand of flesh able to deliver them, when they cannot help themselves, but as
past hope of remedy, they may ascribe their deliverance to God, and not to
their own counsels or force.

Secondly, That it hangs well together, that this exercise of invocation and
prayer should arise from Enosh, for, James the fifth chapter and the thirteenth
verse, If any be afflicted let him pray; and therefore such prayer is called
oration afflicti, Psalm the hundred and second and the seventeenth verse. As
Abel's oblation belongs to the days of peace and prosperity; so Enosh's
invocation belongs to the days of affliction and misery. when a man is strong
to resist, and full of vital heat and spirit, then he cannot skill of
invocation; but let God make him Enosh, and then he will begin to call upon the
name of the Lord.

Thirdly, In respect that it shows what manner of Preacher it should be, that
is, he must be one of the sons of Seth, that is, one of the Church; for the
prayer of a faithful man avails much.

Also it must be Enosh's prayer, that is, of one that is humble, as the
Publicans prayer, Luke the eighteenth chapter; so that the name of Enosh, in
respect of Seth, shows, that Christ shall not be without his Cross, nor
Christ's Church without theirs.

And in respect of himself it shows, what shall be the afflictions of those
that shall be thus called.

Touching his Invocation, It is the title that it pleases the Holy Ghost to
set out Enosh by, and it is an excellent title, (...) Chrysostom, that Enosh
should be the first that called upon the Name of the Lord: It was more
honorable to him, than to wear any gorgeous apparel, or Jewels whatsoever.

In this part are two things: The nature of Invocation, and the beginning of
it, set down in these words (...) est.

First for the nature of Invocation; Invocare (...) vocare Deum, in se, or ex
se; and it is a special point: Many would have God about them, or near them,
but not in them; for then they must look to govern their actions well.

When men lay seige to a Town, they do not think it sufficient to have them
without, but they desire to get them within: Such an affection is required of
them, say the ancient Writers, that will truly call upon God. For the manner,
we must say with the Apostle, in the first epistle of John, the fourth chapter
and the fourth verse, Major est qui intus quam qui extra. Now for the Name of
God; It is no unreasonable thing that we should call upon the name of those
which we never saw; for as we know, those that dwell in the west and northward
parts, they believe and obey the word and (...) that comes in the Princesses
name, and by that (...) they arm and disarme themselves, and are ready to
(...) death; howbeit they never saw her, nor look to see her, but only because
it comes in her name: It is therefore current they (...) such a Princess there
is, therefore they receive the word as coming out of the mouth of the
Princess her self, and obey (...) So we see what Invocation is, and that the
name of God is (...) be invocated.

Now to put a difference between these three, First, to call upon God;
Secondly, upon the name of God; Thirdly, in the name of God. We say to call
upon God is an expressing or (...) of the desire that we have of his presence,
as all the creatures (...) For the young Ravens call upon him, in the one
hundred forty (...) Psalm and the ninth verse, and in the eighth chapter of
the (...) and the twentieth verse, Omnis creatura (...), and that (...) be done
when a man says nothing, but only in his soul (...), as Hannah, in the first
of Samuel, the first chapter, and the thirteenth verse, and Moses, in the
fourteenth chapter of Exodus and the fifteenth verse, Why prayest thou to me?
when no words were uttered; that is, an internal and spiritual praying
between God and us, which all the creatures have, but the invocation upon the
name of God is a thing external, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm 77. and the 1.
verse, I will cry to God with my voice, and in the one hundred and sixteenth
Psalm, and the fourth verse, I will call upon the name of the Lord, saying,
Lord I beseech thee deliver my soul: So that Moses meaning is to show, that not
only an internal calling upon the name of God by desires, but that then there
began an external and vocal serving of God, with a profession of religion.
Now to invocate in the name, is one thing, and to invocate upon the name of
God, is another; the one is the party that is called upon, the other (...) out
the party in whose name he is called upon, which shows the persons distinct in
the deity, as our Savior expounds it, in the sixteenth chapter of John, and
the twenty third verse, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will
give it you: There is both God the Father that is called upon, and Christ the
Son, in whose name we pray. That is the difference between the two names,
that is, they put not their trust in their own names, or in the arm of flesh,
or in any other humane name, but in God; and not only invocate God, but they
invocate him in nomine, that is in the name of another, And there is no other
name given by which we shall be saved, but the name of Jesus, Acts the fourth
chapter and the twelfth verse; and as in the first to the Corinthians, the
third chapter and the eleventh verse, Other foundation then that can no man
lay. Now whereas we have in this verse, in nomine Dei, and semen aliud, in the
former he shows plainly what he means by posuit deus semen aliud, viz. that
there is a person that shall be our seed, in whose name we are to trust, and
invocate God: so that in these verses the mystery of Christ's incarnation is
plainly expressed to those that shall well look into it.

Now it is plain when he speaks of invocation, he means not prayer only, but by
a part he expresses the whole, which is by a Synechdoche, as in the second
chapter of Joel and the twenty third verse, Every one that calls upon the name
of the Lord, shall be saved, which is repeated by the Apostle, Romans the tenth
chapter and the fourteenth verse; but you must mark what he says after, How
shall they call upon him, in whom they have not believed? there is faith
required: Then he goes a step farther, How shall they believe in him of whom
they have not heard? as if he should say it is impossible; therefore hearing is
necessary: And how shall they hear without a Preacher? there is the office of
preaching: And how shall they preach unless they be sent? there is the
authority of ecclesiastical power. We see what duties the Apostle raises from
invocation, and consequently we must know, that when they began to call upon
Gods name, then also they began to believe in him: For albeit prayer is the
more general part of invocation, as a crying unto God, as the Fathers observe
from the signification of the word; the exercise of praise and thanksgiving is
more effectual to that purpose. But we add also as a special part of
invocation, the blessing of the people, which, in the sixth chapter of Numbers
and the twenty seventh verse, is called A putting of the name of God upon the
people; so say we also of Christian vows and oaths, that the due regard had
to the testifying of a truth, when a man does call on the name of God, and
deliver that which is true; that is also a service of invocation, whereby we
confess God able to punish us as a Judge if we swear not truly: Therefore
invocation is of a far larger compass than an ordinary man would imagine,
but especially when we consider it not only in general, but in particular,
when it is in the prime: For if invocation be commanded at the time of public
prayer, much more is prayer and invocation commanded at the sacrifice, whereof
we have an example in Abraham, who built an Altar and called upon the name of
the Lord, Genesis the twelfth chapter and the eighth verse, and Psalm the one
hundred and sixteenth, and the thirteenth verse, Calicem (...) accipiam, and
invocabo nomen Domini, as if he should say, then is invocation at the highest,
when a man has the cup of salvation in his hand: So that there is no part of
religion in respect of prayer and the service of God, which may not be reduced
to invocation. That is for the nature of invocation.

Touching the beginning of it, that is not without a scruple; for we may ask
this question, if invocation were not before? and whether Adam and Abel did not
call upon God? They did no doubt: But as I told you when I handled verse the
twentieth, that Jabal was the Father of such as dwell in Tents, and have (...);
and Jubal the Inventer of Music, and Tubal-Cain of Weapons; and yet that Cain
was an Husbandman, and Abel a (...) of Sheep, and consequently they had the use
of the Share and Mattock for tillage, which could not be had without some
knowledge in Tubal-Cains Trade, and yet the invention is ascribed to them; for
a man is said to begin a thing when no man has done it before; and another may
be said to be the Inventer of the same thing in respect of some singular manner
of doing it, and to bring it to better purpose: So it cannot be denied that
Abel was a Shepherd, (...) had use of Tents, and yet Jubal is said to be the
(...) of them, because they were perfected by him: So for the other (...).

In like sort no doubt there was a kind of (...) performed by Adam and Abel,
but that which is here expressed; is (...) of some special and singular manner
of invocation not used before; as thus. Before (...) time every (...) in (...),
and called upon a part, but in the (...) of (...) (...) began to come together
to serve God; then was that public meeting and congregation performed, which
Christ speaks of, (...) the eighteenth chapter and the twentieth verse, When
two or three be gathered together in my name, I will be in the midst: Then
began the ecclesiastical worship in the Church: Before every man in his own
private house; but the public invocation came in with Enosh, in whose time
there was a public place dedicated to that end, that is, there was invocatio
templi, as well as invocatie coetus.

Again we say there was an invocation before, that is, they prayed as the
spirit moved them, but a formal invocation with Rites and Ceremonies, set down
after a special manner, which we call the Lyturgie or public service that
began with Enosh: then began to appear the face of a Church. If you ask why
this was not done before? you shall see it could not; for there being but Adam
and Abel, and then Abel being slain, Adam was alone, and they that must be the
lower part of the Church, must be two or three at least. Then it must begin in
the Family of Seth, for it is impossible that this could be till there came a
third person, which was Enosh: And then it pleased God to reveal this manner of
invocation: For we know the Church consists of parties to govern, parties to
teach, and parres to receive direction. To govern and teach are two things, but
performed now by one: then they began to call upon the name of the Lord: that
was a thing agreeable to natural sense, but before this time it was not so
exquisitly done; and which is a thing memorable, they did this in the midst of
a naughty and crooked Nation, Philippians the second chapter and the fifteenth
verse; for now they durst openly profess a public service of God and
invocate his name, notwithstanding the wicked seed, and especially when they
see Abel come to an untimely end, that because he called upon God, therefore he
suffered marryrdome. Besides that, albeit Enoch built a City, and Tubal-Cain
invented armor, yet they will follow Abel, and profess themselves Seths
Children; this shows they were endued with a heroical spirit, and had this
conceit in the name of God, that it should be a strong Tower to defend them;
that howsoever the gates of hell did expose themselves against them, yet they
should not be able to prevail.

A third thing to be noted is, that they took upon them this profession, and
public aknowledgement of invocaring the name, as in the fourth chapter of
Isaiah and the first verse, Let us be called by thy name; and as it is in the
ninth chapter of Daniel and the eighteenth verse, They would be known to be a
people who called upon the name of God, they took upon them the profession of a
Church, and the title to be called Invocators on Gods name, whose name was
their treasure, whose service their delight, and whose worship was their glory;
that is, They took upon them to be called Christians and true Worshippers of
God, against all others of the wicked race; which distinction is showed after,
when the house and posterity of Cain matched with the Sons (...) Seth, and so
began there a medly to be made. (...) we see what Moses means by bringing
these two verses into this chapter, viz. that the Godly should not be
discouraged, as if he had forgot his promises: Therefore he ends the chapter
with Enosh, a godly man, to show first he will have them Worshippers, and yet
such shall not be without sorrows; and therefore Seths Son is called Enosh,
that is, sorrow.

We have heard what invocation Moses speaks of, the nature and manner of it,
that it contained all the exercises of Christian service, and how it began in
Enosh after a set manner, that this must be done, and should continue,
notwithstanding the wicked seed of Cain do set themselves so maliciously
against it: So we see Moses has brought us to the Roof of the Church, for till
that time there was no Church; but now he has brought us to a Congregation of
such as did invocate the name of the Lord.

AMEN.
LECTURES PREACHED UPON Several choice Texts, BOTH out of the Old and New
TESTAMENT.
LECTURES Preached in the Parish Church of St. GILES without Cripple-gate
LONDON.
Sed advolavit ad me unus ex istis Seraphim habens in manu sua prunam; quam
forcibus sumpserat ab altari. Admovitque ori meo dicens, etc. Isaiah 6. 6.

October. 1. 1598.
IN the Liturgy of the ancient Church, these words are found applied to the
blessed Sacrament of Christ's body and blood; for it is recorded by Basil, That
at the celebration thereof, after the Sacrament was ministered to the people,
the Priest stood up and said as the Seraphin does here, Behold this has
touched your lips, your iniquity shall (...) taken away, and your sin purged.
The whole fruit or Religion is, The taking away of sin, Isaiah the twenty
seventh Chapter and the ninth verse, and the special ways to take it away, is
the Religious use of this Sacrament; which as Christ says is nothing else, but
a seal and sign of his blood that was shed for many for the remission of
sins, Matthew the twenty sixth Chapter and the twenty eighth verse; for the
Angel tells the prophet, that his sins are not only taken away, but that it
is done sacramentally, by the touching of a Cole, even as Christ assures us,
that we obtain remission of sins by the receiving of the Cup: Now as in the
Sacrament, we consider the Element and the word; so we are to divide this
Scripture. For first, in that the Seraphin touched his mouth with a burning
Cole taken from the Altar, therein we have the element, and the word of comfort
which the Prophet received, was, that the Angel said to him, Behold this Cole
has touched thy lips, and now thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sins
purged: And there is such an Analogy and proportion between the Sereaphim and
the Priests, between the Altar and the Lords Table, between the burning Cole
and Bread and Wine, offered and received in the Lords Supper. As we cannot but
justify the wisdom of the ancient Church, in applying this Scripture to the
holy Eucharist: For as, St. John shows, this vision showed to the Prophet
Isaiah, is to be understood of our Savior Christ, John the twelfth and the
forty first verse; for says the Evangelist, These things said Esaias, when he
saw his glory, and spoke of him; and therefore by this burning Cole taken from
the Altar, is meant Christ Jesus, who by the Sacrifice of his death which he
offered up to God, his Father, has taken away our iniquities, and purged our
sins, as it is in the sixth chapter to the Hebrews, and therefore for the
confirmation of our Faith we are here taught, That our sins are no less
taken away by the element of bread and wine, in the Sacrament, then the
Prophets sin was by being touched with a Cole.

The occasion of this touching is set down in the former verses of this
Chapter, which do stand upon a vision and a confession; The vision showed to
the Prophet was, That he saw the Lord sitting upon an high Throne, as a
Judgeready to give Sentence, before whom the very Angels were forced (...)
cover their faces. The confession that he made was, Woe is me for I am
unclean, I am a man of polluted lips, mine eyes have seen the King and Lord
of Hosts: From whence we learn, that howsoever by the consideration of his
former life, and the sins that have escaped from him, a man may be brought to
some remorse of Conscience, yet then especially he is humbled when he sees
the vision of Gods glory, and therefore nothing is more (...) to bring us to
repentance, than to consider that at the last general day, We shall see
Christ Jesus the son of God come in glory, and sit down in his Throne of
glory, and give Sentence of condemnation upon the wicked. The Prophet who
otherwise was no grievous sinner, but only guilty of omission, for that he had
been silent, and did not glorify God with his (...) as he should have done,
notwithstanding in the sight of Gods glory is touched with remorse and cries
out, Woe is me; Whereby again we learn that we sin not only when we
speak of these things which we should not, but when we are silent, when we
should apply our tongues to Gods glory; so that though the excellency of our
upright and honest conversation be never so great in the world, yet the
Majesty of God is such as shall show, That even those duties that we have
omitted, shall be sufficient to confound us before his glorious presence,
unless it please him to be merciful to us; therefore when we appear before
his judgement-seate, it shall be in vain for us to allege what we have done,
forasmuch as the least duty that we have lest undone is enough to condemn us.
It shall be our duty therefore, notwithstanding all our righteousness, to
judge our selves worthy to be destroyed for our iniquities and sins of
omission, Ezechiel the thirty sixth chapter and the one and (...) verse, and to
say with this Prophet, Woe is me, for I am a man of polluted lips: We must
acknowledge that nothing belongs to us but Woe, and that God may in justice
confound us for the least duty we have omitted. Upon this confession made by
the Prophet there came an Angel flying from God, which by touching his lips
with a hot Coal assured him that his sin was taken away; wherefore, as by
the former we learn that we should repent us of our sins when we consider
the great Majesty of God, so by this we are taught what to hope for, that is,
that if we be penitent God will not be wanting unto us, but will send a
Seraphin unto us, with a word of comfort, to assure us that all our iniquities
are purged. Two parts.
First, Elementall.
The outward element appointed by God to confirm his faith, was the flying of a
Seraphin unto him to touch is mouth with the Cole; Secondly, Invisible grace.
the word or invisible grace signified by the element was, that by that touching
his sin was taken away. In the outward action we are first to consider the
element it self, that was, the burning Cole on the Altar; next the application
persormed by a Seraphin, who took the Cole from the Altar, and touched the
Prophets lips. First, The Element.
First therefore considering that none can take away sin but God only, we
must needs confess that there was in this Cole a divine force and virtue
issuing from Christ, who is the only reconciliation for our sins, without which
it had not been possible that it could have taken away sin. But what is here
said of this Cole, is to be understood of Christ, of whom Esaias speaks in
this place, When he saw the glory of Christ, John 12. 41. for he is the Cole
by which our sins are taken away; There are two natures in a Cole, that is,
the Cole it self, which is a dead thing, and the burning nature and heat that
it has; which sets out first Christ's humane nature, which is dead in it
self; And then his divine nature, containing the burning force of that is
represented in this burning Cole: So the element of bread and wine is a dead
thing in it self, but through the grace of Gods spirit infused into it has a
power to heat our Souls: for the elements in the Supper have an earthly and a
heavenly part. Secondly, that Christ is to be understood by this burning Cole
we may safely gather, because his love to his Church is presented with fire,
Cantit. the eighth chapter and the sixth verse. It is said of Christ's love, the
Coals thereof are fiery Coals, and a vehement flame, such as cannot be quenched
with any water, nor the floods drown it, even so all the calamities and
miseries that Christ suffered and endured for our sakes, which were poured upon
him as water, could not quench the love that he bare us. Thirdly, quia non
solum ardet ipse, sed alios accendit, so says John the Baptist of him, There
comes one after me that shall Baptize with the Holy Ghost and with fire, as it
is in the third chapter of Luke the sixteenth verse, therefore the graces of
the Holy Ghost are also represented by fire, Acts 3. the union whereof has a
double representation. First, it is signified by water in Baptism; for sin
that is derived (...) us from another, being as a (...) may be washed away with
water, and therefore the Propher says, there is a fountain opened to the
house of David, and to the inhabitants of (...), for sin and (...), Zach. the
thirteenth chapter and the first verse, therefore (...) said to Saul, be
Baptized and wash away thy sins, Acts the twenty second Chapter and the
sixteenth verse, that is meant of original sin and the corruption of our
nature, by which we are guilty of the wrath of God; but because through the
whole course of our life sin, by custom grows more to be strong, and to
stick fast in our nature, so as no water can take it away; therefore (...)
Grace of God is set out by fire, as having a power and force to burn (...)
sin; for by custom sin is bred and settled in our nature, and is (...),
dross that must be tried and purged by fire, so the holy Ghost speaks of
actual sins, the first of Isaiah, and the twenty fifth verse, and the sixth
ter of Jeremiah and the thirttieh verse, Ezech. the twenty second chapter and
the eighteenth verse; The house of Israel is to me as dross, that is by
custom of sin; and in regard of this kind of sin there needs not only
water to wash away the corruption of our nature and the quality thereof, but
fire to purge the actual sins that proceed from the same.

The sins of Commission came by reason of the force of concupiscence, and
from the lusts that boil out of our corrupt nature, and the grace that takes
them away is the grace of water in Baptism; but the sins of omission
proceed of the coldness and negligence of our nature to do good, such as was
in the Church of Laodicea, Rev. the third chapter and the fifteenth verse, and
therefore such sins must be taken away with the fiery Grace of God.
Secondly, for the quality of the Cole; it is not only a burning Cole, but taken
from the Altar; to teach us that our zeal must be (...) and come from the
spirit of God. The fires that are appointed by earthly Judges to terrify
malefactors from offending, may draw a skin over the spiritual wounds of
their Souls, so as (for fear) they will eschew and sorbeare to sin, but it
is the fire of the Altar, and the inward Graces of Gods spirit that takes away
the corruption and heals the wound; therefore as in the Law God took (...)
there should ever be fire on the Altar, Leviticus the sixth chapter and the
ninth verse, so for the sinner that is contrite and sorry for his sin, there
is always fire in the Church to burn up the Sacrifice of his contrition and
repentance, even that fire of Christ's Sacrifice. The love which he showed unto
us in dying for our sins is set (...) unto us most lively in the Sacrament of
his Body and Blood, unto which we must come often, that from the one we may
fetch the purging of our sins, as the Apostle speaks, and from the other
qualifying power si in luce, John the first chapter and the seventh verse;
wherefore as by the mercy of God we have a fountain of water always flowing,
to take away original sin, so there is in the Church fire always burning to
cleanse our actual transgressions; for if the Cole taken from the Altar, had a
power to take away the Prophets sin, much more the body and blood of Christ,
which is offered in the Sacrament; If the hem of Christ's garment can heal, the
ninth chapter of Matthew and the twentieth verse, much more the touching of
Christ himself shall procure health to our souls; here we have not something
that has touched the Sacrifice, but the Sacrifice it self to take away our
sins.

Secondly, the Application.
The application of this Cole is by a Seraphin, for it is an office more fit for
Angels than men, to concur with God for taking away sin; but for that it
pleases God to use the service of men in this behalf, they are in Scripture
called Angels, Job the thirty fifth chapter and the twenty third verse.
Malachi the second and the seventh verse, The Priests lips preserve knowledge,
for he is the Angel of the Lord of Hosts, and the Pastors of the seven
Churches in Asia are called Angels, Apoc. the first chapter and the first
verse; for the same office that is here executed by an Angel is committed to
the sons of men, to whom, as the Apostle speaks, He has committed the
ministry of reconciliation, 2 Cor. the fifth chapter and the eighteenth verse,
to whom he has given this power, that whose sins soever they remit on earth
shall be remitted in heaven, the twentieth chapter of Saint John and the twenty
fifth verse. So when Nathan, who was but a man, had said to David, etiam Jehova
transtulit peccatum (...), the second book of Samuel the twelfth chapter and
the thirteenth verse; it was as availeable as if an Angel had spoken to him;
And when Peter tells the Jews that if they amend their lives and turn, their
sins shall be done away, their sin was taken away no less than the
Prophets was when the Angel touched his lips, Acts the third chapter and the
ninteenth verse; for not he that holds the Cole, but it is the Cole it self
that takes away sin; and so long as the thing is the same wherewith we are
touched, it skills not who does hold it; but we have not only the Cole that
touched the Altar, but the Altar it self, even the Sacrifice of Christ's death
represented in the Supper, by partaking whereof our sins are taken away.

Secondly, the Word, or invisible grace.
The word of comfort, whereby the inward Grace is preached unto us is, that the
Angel said to the Prophet; Lo this has touched thy lips, and thine iniquity
shall be taken away, and thy sins purged: concerning which we find that
the Leper was cured of his Leprosy, not only by the word, but by the touching
of Christ; but the Centurian said only but speak the word and thy servant
shall be whole, Mat. the eighth chapter and the eighth verse; so he can do
what he will with his only word. It pleased God to take away the Prophet:
sins by touching his lips. And albeit he can take away our sins, without
touching of bread or wine, if he will; yet in the council of his will, he
commends unto us the sacramental partaking of his body and blood. It is his
will; that our sins shall be taken away by the outward act of the sacrament:
The reason is, not only in regard of our selves, which consist of body and
soul, and therefore have need both of bodily and Ghostly means; to assure us
of our Salvation; but in regard of Christ himself, who is the burning Cole.
Forever since God ordained, that Christ should take our nature, and aptare sibi
corpus, in the tenth chapter to the Hebrews, and the fifth verse; that so he
might work our Reconciliation. As Christ became himself a man, having a bodily
substance; so his actions were bodily. As in the Hypostasis of the Sun, there
is both the Humane and Divine nature; so the Sacrament is of an Heavenly and
Earthly nature. As he has taken our body to himself, so he honors bodily
things, that by them we should have our sins taken away from us. By one
bodily sacrament he takes away the affection unto sin, that is naturally
planted in us. By another bodily Sacrament he takes away the habitual sins,
and the actual transgressions, which proceed from the corruption of our
nature. And here we have matter offered us of faith; that as he used the
touching of a cole, to assure the Prophet that his sins were taken away; so in
the Sacrament he does so elevate a piece of bread, and a little wine, and make
them of such power; that they are able to take away our sins: And this makes
for Gods glory, not only to believe that God can work our Salvation, without
any outward means, by the inward Grace of his Spirit; but also, that he can so
elevate the meanest of his creatures; not only the hemme of a garment, but even
a straw, (if he see it good) shall be powerful enough, to save us from our
sins. As Christ himself is spiritual and bodily; so he takes away our
sins, by means not only spiritual but bodily; as in the Sacrament. For if
there be a cleansing power in the Word, as Christ speaks in the fifteenth
chapter of John, and the third verse: If in prayer, as Peter shows to Simon
Magus, Pray to God, that ( if it be possible) the thought of thy heart may be
forgiven thee, in the eighth chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, and the
twenty second verse: If in showing mercy, and giving alms, sins shall be
forgiven, as Solomon says in the sixteenth chapter of the Proverbs, and the
sixth verse, Per misericordiam purgantur peccata; much more in the Sacrament,
wherein both the word and prayer and the works of mercy do concur, to the
cleansing of sinners from their sins: Whereas the Seraphim did not take the
coal in his mouth, but with tongues; and applied it not to the Prophets care,
but to his tongue. We learn, that it is not the hearing of a sermon that can
cleanse us from sin; but we must (...) of the bodily element, appointed to
represent the invisible grace of God. It is true, that meditation privately
had, will kindle a fire in the hearts of many, in the thirty ninth Psalm, and
the third verse: And the word, as it is a fire, Jeremie the twenty third
chapter, and the twenty ninth verse, will also kindle a man, and heat him
inwardly: But because in the Sacrament all those do meet together, therefore
nothing is so availeable to take away sin, as the touching of bread and wine,
with our lips.

The effect.
The effect of this touching follows; wherein we are to consider, First, the
efficacy of this action. Secondly, the certainty; that as sure as this coal
has touched thy lips; so surely are thy sins taken away. Thirdly, the
speed, that so soon as the coal touched, presently sin was taken away and
purged. The efficacy stands, of the removing, or taking away of sin, and
of the purging away of sin. The taking away, and purging of sins, have two
uses: Some have their sins taken away, but not purged; for something
remains behind: Some have Adams sigge leaves to hide sin that it shall not
appear for a time; but have not Hezekiah his plaster to heal it, in the
thirty eighth chapter of Isaiah and the one and twentieth verse. But by the
touching of this Coal, that is, of the body and blood of Christ, we are assured
that our sins are not only covered, but quite taken away as with a plaster;
as the Lord speaks, I have put away thy transgressions like a cloud, and thy
sins as a mist, Isaiah the forty fourth and the twenty second verse, whereby
the Lord shows that our sins are scattered, and come to nothing, when it
pleases him to take them away. The other sense gathered from the word purging,
is, that God does no forgive our sins, as an earthly Judge (...) a (...) or,
so that he (...) away with his (...), without any (...) showed him; (...) that
he likewise becomes favorable unto (...) and (...) to do us all the good he
(...): If (...) can obtain (...) pardon at the hands of temp orall Judges, it
is all they (...) look for; but they never come to any preferment: But God
does dor only give us (...) but (...); as he does pard on out sins, so (...)
he (...) loving and kind to us: Christ does not only take us away from God,
that he should not proceed to punish us for our (...), but offers us up to God,
as an acceptable sacrafice, as Peter (...), Christ once suffered for sins,
the just for the unjust, that he might offer us up to God, in the first of
Peter the third chapter and the eighteenth verse; for as the wiseman says,
Take the dross from the silver, (...) shall proceed a vessel for the refiner,
Proverbs the twenty fifth and the fourth verse: So after sin is taken away
from us, our nature is most acceptable to God, because there remains nothing
but his own nature. Secondly, for the certainty; As thou have a perfect sense
of the touching of this coal, so certainly are thy sins taken away; which
assurance we are likewise to gather to our selves, in this (...); that as
surely as we corporally do taste of the bread and wine, so sure it is, that we
spiritually feed on the body and blood of Christ, which is communicated unto us
by these elements, as the Apostle (...), in the first to the (...), the tenth
chapter, and the fifteenth verse, that the bread broken is the communion of the
body of Christ, that the cup blessed is the communion of his blood; that by
partaking of this spiritual food we may be fed to eternal life. Thirdly, this
act was performed with speed, the Ceraphin came flying with wings, and being
(...), he has a present effectual power to take away his sin; for a little
before he that cried out, that he was in woeful case, verse the (...) Vae
mibi; by and by being touched and revived with comfort of forgiveness, says,
Ecce ego, mitte me, in the eighth verse: whereby we learn, that the touching
with the coal thus taken from the Altar, and the participating of the body and
blood of Christ, has a power not only to purge, and heal the sore of our
nature; but that it gives a (...) to serve God more cheerfully and carefully
than we did before, (...) us serventes spiritu, servent in spirit Romans the
twelfth and the (...) verse; so that we care for nothing nor count our live
(...), that (...) may finish our course with joy, Acts the twentieth and the
twenty fourth verse.

The sum of all is, that seeing it is a fearful thing to appear in the
presence of Gods Majesty, and knowing that one day we must all appear before
his tribunal seat and throne of glory, we do (...) with the Prophet, that
albeit we have lived never so upright a life, yet if we have been silent, when
we should have spoken to his glory if we have omitted never so little a duty,
which we ought to have performed, for all that, our case is miserable, until
it please God by the burning coal of his Altar, and, by the sacrifice of
Christ's body, offered up for us upon the cross, to take away our sins: And
that if we (...) humble our selves before God, and acknowledge our sins, then
our sins shall be purged by the death of Christ, and by partaking of the
sacrament of his body and blood; the rather, because in the sacrament we do
touch the sacrifice it self, whereas the Prophets sin was taken away with
that which did but touch the sacrifice.

Then after the receiving of this sacrament, we must take a view of our selves,
whether we can say, Nonne cor (...) in nobis? Did not our heart burn within us?
Luke the twenty fourth chapter and the thirty second verse, because in this
sacrament we find a fire of Christ's love toward us; And whether we find in
our selves that willingness to serve God aright, which was in the Prophet, in
the eighth verse, Behold, send me; Ecce, mitte me. As in regard of our misery
we made the confession of sinful men; so having experience of Gods mercy in
taking away our sins, we must make the confession of Angels, crying, Holy,
holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts.

Lastly, We must not only show forth the heat of our love to our needy and poor
Brethren, by doing the works of mercy; but even to our enemies, as both Solomon
and the Apostle teach, If thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst give him
drink; for so thou shall heap (...) of fire upon his head, Proverbs the twenty
fifth chapter and the twenty first verse, and Romans the twelfth chapter and the
ninteenth verse; For so as thouarta burning coal in thy self; so thou shall
kindle in him the coals of devotion to God, and of love to thy self.

Attendite ne justitiam vestram exerceatis coram hominibus, ut spectemini ab
eis: alioquin mercedem non habebitis apud Patrem vestrum qui est in Coelis.
Matthew. 6. 1.

October. 15. 1598.
THE drift of our Savior in these words is, to separate that which is vile,
from the precious, Jeremiah the fifteenth chapter, to sever the tare of vain
glory from the good corn of righteousness and mercy: But as Christ gives
charge, That while his Disciples labored to gather away the tares, they should
beware that they pluck not up the good corn, Matthew the thirteenth chapter:
So while we labor to pluck up the tares of vain glorious intentions; we must
take heed that we do not withal pluck up the good corn of good works; for
heretofore the good seed of the Doctrine of good works was not so soon taught,
but presently the Devil sowed in men's hearts the wicked opinion of merit of
works, as tares among good corn. And while men labored to take away the
opinion of merits, then he takes away out of men's hearts the care of works.

In the counsel of Christ two things are to be noted, First, the corn must be
sowed, take heed ye do good works: Secondly, the (...) must be plucked up, but
do them not to be seen. We must do righteousness both privately in our own
consciences, and publicly before men, as the Apostle shows, Provide for
things honest before all men, Romans the twelfth chapter. But the tares are to
be avoided, that is, to be seen; ut videamini; where we have a command, First,
Christ will not have us do good works to this end, to be seen: Secondly, That
we may not, we must take heed; as if he should say, My will is, ye shall not
give alms to this end, to be seen. Thirdly, That ye may avoid this fault, ye
must take heed: Whereby he signifies that to do alms to this end, to
purchase praise to our selves, is a hurtful thing. And to avoid this fault, is
a matter of great difficul y.

For the first point, Christ says, When ye give alms, do not blow a trumpet;
when ye fast or pray let not all the world know of it, neither let the end be
ut videamini. Touching which, we are to know, that our good works are not worse
in themselves for being seen, but are the better; even as the goodness of a
color stands in the lightness of it, so our good works are more commended, if
they be known: And they of themselves desire the light, as Christ shows in
John the third chapter and the twenty first verse: But such is our corruption,
that if we think our works are known, we with our pride do corrupt them. For
as pride is the way to dry up the fountain of Gods grace, as James says, God
resists the proud and gives grace to the humble, James the fourth chapter.
So the sight of good works is a means to overthrow our humility. The Pharisees
knew this full well, which purposing to tempt Christ, covered their hooks with
praise, Seeing we know that thou art a teacher come from God, and regardest no
man, tell us, is it lawful? Matthew the twenty second chapter: But Christ, to
teach us what a dangerous thing it is to be praised, would not accept their
praise, but answered them, Why tempt ye me, O ye Hypocrites? And when one said
to him, Magister bone, good Master, which was a praise of simplicity, not of
hypocrisy, as the other, he refused it, and said, Why do thou call me good?
Mark the tenth chapter. When one said, Blessed is the womb that bare thee, he
repelled that saying, Nay rather blessed are they that hear the word of God and
keep it, Luke the eleventh chapter and the twenty eighth verse. For as the
showing of the Kings treasure was the means of the betraying them, Isaiah the
thirty ninth chapter; so when we show our good works, with a desire to be
praised for them, it takes away all commendation from them.

This thing being dangerous, if notwithstanding we be desirous to have our good
deeds seen, that shall be fulfilled which Sirach says, He that loves dangers
shall perish therein, Qui amat periculum peribit in co, cap 3. 27. But to
dissuade us from this, the Apostle says, Be not desirous of vain glory,
Galatians the fifth chapter, and Philippians the second chapter and the third
verse. The Preacher says, all is vanity which men seek after in this life, and
therefore concludes, Time Deum, Ecclesiastes the twelfth chapter, to teach us,
that without God all the praise of the world is but vanity. Now as we fail in
having respect to God: First, when we make not him the fountain of our praise:
Secondly, if we make him not the end of it; so in doing good works to be seen,
we commit two vanities. First, when we content not our selves with this
persuasion, that God sees our works, and will reward them: unless man see them
and praise us for them; The trial, whether we make God the fountain of our
praise, is if we seek it by ways agreeable to his will, not by wickedness.
Secondly, not by vanity, for his delight is not in beauty, riches, or
strength; he delights not in any man's Legs, in the hundred and forty sixth
Psalm. Thirdly, not by falsehood, as the Apostle says, I will not glory of any
thing which the Lord has not wrought by me, in the second to the Corinthians
and the eleventh chapter: Hereby we shall seek the praise of God, rather than
of men, in the twelfth chapter of John: nay though they seek praise by
righteousness and doing good works, yet they make not God the fountain of
their praise: the Hypocrites when they would be praised, did those works that
were most glorious, as to offer sacrifice in the temple, but they neglected
mercy and justice, which are the chief things that God respects in the twenty
third chapter of Matthew: They washed not their hearts, in the fifteenth
chapter of Matthew, which God especially regards, but looked only to outward
things; and they that do mercy and justice, which are the chief things of the
Law, yet they will not do them, but when they may be seen: Whereby they show,
that they make not God the fountain of their praise; and so the praise they
seek for, is hateful to God.

Secondly, this desire of vain glory is injurious to God; when we make not him
the end of our praise, for we may do good works coram, in the sight of men,
but not with purpose to have them seen, that so we may receive glory: For God
has given us the joys and use of all his Creatures, but reserveth the glory
of them to himself: therefore the Apostle says, howsoever ye have the joy of
Gods Creatures in eating and drinking, yet let God have the glory: Do all to
the glory of God, in the first to the Corinthians the tenth chapter, and the
thirty first verse: For though he gives us the use of all things, yet gloriam
meam alteri non dabo, in the forty second chapter of Esaias: Therefore if we do
good works to commend our selves, and not to glorify God, we are injurious to
him; for he has testified, that he will not give his glory to any other: And
therefore Peter and John say, It is not by our own godliness that we have made
this man whole, but it is the name of Christ and faith in him, that has raised
him, in the third chapter of the Acts: Therefore not only Nabuchadnezar when he
snatched Gods glory to himself, was punished, in the fourth chapter of Daniell:
But even Herod also, because he did but suffer that glory to rest upon him,
that was attributed to him by others, when he should have ascribed all to God,
in the twelfth chapter of the Acts and the twenty second verse. Then as it is
injurious to God, so it is hurtful to our selves; for though we see many
miracles wrought by Christ, yet they are afraid to confess and believe him,
Because they love the praise of men more than the praise of God, in the twelfth
chapter of John and the forty third verse: And therefore Christ says, How can
you believe, which seek glory one of another, and seek not the honor that
comes of God alone? quomodo potestis credere, qui gloriam sibi quaeritis? in
the fifth chapter of John and the forty fourth verse: Secondly, as it is an
obstacle to grace; so it is a provocation to all wickedness: For the Jews
doubted not to crucisie the Lord of glory, to get praise of the wicked.

Secondly, that we may do this, Christ wills us to take heed; for there is a
double corruption in us: First, a rebellion against Gods precepts, which make
us say quare, as Pharaoh, in the fifth chapter of Exodus and the second verse:
Who is the Lord that I should hear his voice? And as the Scribes and Pharisees
said to Christ, By what authority do thou these things? in the twenty first
chapter of Matthew and the three and twentieth verse: Secondly, the blindness
of our understanding which makes us ask quomodo? which is the question of
ignorance; so that it is not without cause, that he bids us take heed, that we
beware of this sin, as being a hard precept, both for our rebellion to yield
unto, and also in regard of our ignorance: which is such, as we cannot see how
it should be lawful to seek praise by well doing; the hardness of avoiding
this sin, is of two causes. First, it arises from the nature of sin it
self: for as we are corporal and visible; so we are most affected with those
things that are visible, as John reasons, He that loves not his brother whom
he has seen, in the first Epistle of John and the fourth chapter: whereupon it
comes to pass, that our corruption, that though we believe the reward of God
to be great: yet because it is invisible, and the worlds reward is present,
therefore pleases us more. Secondly, from the original of vain glory; for
when the woman looked upon the fruit, albeit it greatly pleased her, yet that
which did strike the stroke, was eritis sieut dii, in the third chapter of
Genesis, the hope of present glory: And this was the first sin, that came
into the soul of the woman; and as the Philosopher says, that the heart is
primum vivens and ultimum moriens; so vain glory, as it first took possession
in the heart of man, so it is last, and with most difficulty dispossessed: So
that when a man has mortified all his lusts; and subdued all sins, yet pride
and the desire of glory revives again.

And whereas the sins of the world are three, The lust of the (...), The lust
of the eyes, and pride of life, the first Epistle of John the (...) chapter and
the sixteenth verse. The sin of pride is such a one as does not only corrupt
all virtues, but (...) all other sins, and prevails against them; for
gluttony or the lust of the (...) is come under the power of pride: So as men
take a pride in excess of meat, whereas gluttony would be contented with a
sittle; for the belly is sooner filled than the eye satisfied. Secondly, For
Covetousness, What makes men to exceed in the cares of getting riches, but
only pride and desire of glory: For knowing that the borrower is a servant to
the lender, Proverbs the tenth chapter, and all things obey money, Preacher the
tenth chapter: In respect of the excellency of wealth, they are so covetous,
that albeit they have more than enough, yet they still gather together, that
they may have all men in subjection to them; so hard it is to suppress the
desire of vain glory: And the harder, because where other sins be resting
upon a man, this sin comes creeping upon him, and flattereth him, as a thing
most agreeable to his nature. Howbeit it is to be avoided with all heedfulness,
for it comes from good things as the root. Secondly, A man is proud oftentimes
even of humility, not only when they outwardly humble themselves with fasting,
but also when they are inwardly humbled, Joel the second chapter. Secondly, it
is the harder, because it comes with a color and show of reason; for it is
Gods will that we should not only do good works, but that it should be done
openly, as Christ says, to shine and to be seen of men, sic splendeat lux,
Matthew the fifth chapter and the sixteenth verse; both that God may be
glorified by us, and that we may give good example to others: But not
withstanding we must beware that we do them not to purchase praise to our
selves.

How to avoid vain glory, pride, etc. and other fins, by meditation and prayer.
Secondly, The question of ignorance is, How we should avoid this desire of
glory, which is so bred in us? The answer to this doubt is, By medition and
prayer: For as God has laid this Curse upon the earth, That it should bring
forth thorns and thistles of it self, but if we will have any good of it, we
must bestow labor upon it; So this curse is laid upon our souls, that good
things will not come into our minds, without diligent meditation; but pride
and such sins will take place of themselves without any further trouble.
Wherefore as to avoid all temptations we must occupy our selves in godly
meditation, as Augustine says, Semper te Diabolus inveniat occupatum; so there
are special meditations for the avoiding of pride and the desire of vain
glory: First, To think of the uncertainty of worldly glory, that Christ that
to day should have been crowned King by the Jews, was the next day crucified by
them. Secondly, Of the emptiness and vacuity of it; as that all the glory that
Haman had did not content him, when he had received but one little disgrace by
Mordechai, Esther the fifth chapter. Thirdly, of the punishment of this sin;
for whereas he spares other sins, if he see withal some token of goodness,
so as he will quench the smoking flax, Isaiah the forty second chapter, he
will not defer his judgments from the Hypocrites and ambitious, but will
withdraw his graces from them here, and punish them eternally in the world to
come. Fourthly, We should think of our own hearts, if we do good without
regard of men's praise. Fifthly, Of our own inability, how little we are able to
do of our selves, except God move our hearts, and work in us both to will and
to do, Philippians the second chapter and the thirteenth verse, that so we may
ascribe the praise of all our good deeds to him, as the only author of them.

These meditations will kindle a sire in us, that we shall have a desire to
speak as Psalm the thirty ninth, as the Prophet having considered, that God did
command us to keep his testimonies, says presently, O that my ways were so
directed that I might keep them, (...) the hundred and nineteenth. But as by
those (...) desire to avoid that which we are forbidden; so unto our desire we
must add resolution, (...) the nine and (...), I said I (...) to my (...), Dixi
(...). The other means is (...); For when we have done all we can to avoid this
(...) by our (...) meditations, yet that will not serve, till we cry for Gods
(...) strengthen us and help us, for vain is the help of (...) the (...) and
eighth: So though the Apostle do will the (...) (...) put on the (...) of God,
yet he says the chief (...) fight with the Devil is prayer, Ephesians the sixth
chapter; For except the (...) keep the City, the watchmen watch in vain,
Psalm the hundred twenty seventh. We must not only say the general prayer,
which (...) all (...), Lead us not into temptation; (...) particularly against
this (...), say with David, Psalm the thirty sixth, (...) not the (...) of
pride come (...) me; And Psalm the hundred and fourteenth, Not to us, O Lord,
not to us, but to thy name give the praise.

The (...) is, For then (...) shall (...) your (...). As before to do good,
was the good corn that is to be sown; but to do (...) (...) seen, is the tares
that must be plucked up: So the persuasion is thus to be taken, Do good works
sincerely, and ye shall have a reward, though not in this world; but if ye do
them in (...) to (...), ye shall lose your reward: When the holy Ghost
implies, that our good works shall have a reward; and so persuades us to the
(...) of them. He (...) to our infirmity; for there are (...) causes to move us
to do good, As the shedding of Christ's blood, whereby he redeemed us to
himself, to be (...) of good works, Titus the second chapter and the fourteenth
verse: But because he knows whereof we be made, and that we are weak, he (...)
us with hope of reward; and herein he has regard, Non ad gloriam operis, sed
ad zelum operantis, of the reward of works done in sincerity heretofore.

Of these that are done in hypocrisy note two things. First, How true it is,
that they lose their reward. Concerning which, howsoever Hypocrites have a
reward in this world, yet they have not (...); and though they had, yet this
reward does not last for ever: Honor fugientem sequitur sequentem vitat. We see
Saul, Judas, (...), and Saphira, while in hypocrisy they made a show of good
works, to procure themselves glory, were disappointed, and they (...) of God
upon them: But though it have a (...), yet not (...) Patrem vestrum (...):
Which is (...), That if they have glory, yet it is not God, (...) gives (...)
this (...). And as the (...) of Manna was a figure that it came not (...)
blessing of God, Exodus the sixteenth chapter. And when the Manna of the wicked
(...), it is a sign that it was not Gods gift, (...) the tenth chapter. So in
that the glory of hypocrites does not (...), it is a token, that it is not a
praise given them of God. Again it (...), That though (...) have a reward in
earth, yet not in (...) for then to hypocrites that say, we have cust out
Devils and preached in thy name, he shall say, Depart from me, I know ye not,
Matthew the seventh chapter.

Secondly, Note how powerful this persuasion is, to make us avoid vain glory,
and the desire of it. Here Christ says, non habet is mercedem, ye have no
reward: In the next verse he says, you have your reward, habet is mercedem, to
show, that the worldly reward is nothing in respect of the heavenly reward that
God will give; Gods reward is by grace in this life, for to them that forsake
father and mother, he promises an hundred fold, Matthew the nineteenth chapter
and the twenty ninth verse; Then by glory in the world to come, the glory of a
Kingdom, Luke the twelfth chapter, It is my Fathers pleasure (...) give you a
kingdom: Than which glory none is greater; and therefore he will say, Come ye
(...) possess the kingdom. Secondly, such a Kingdom as shall be void of all
affl ction, that might take away the glory, I know the afflictions of this life
are not worthy of the glory to come, Romans the eighth chapter. And howsoever
no Kingdom is so glorious, but either eye has seen or care has heard, or at
least, the heart may conceive of a Kingdom of more glory; yet such is the
glory provided for them, that by well doing seek the praise of God, and not of
men, as neither eye has seen, the first epistle to the Corinthians, the second
chapter and the ninth verse. So that if we knew the gift of God, John the
fourth chapter; if it would please him to open the eyes of our mind, that we
might see the excellency of the Heavenly reward, Ephesians the first chapter
and the eighteenth verse; and the baseness and uncertainty of the worlds gift,
we would not only, not desire, but even carefully avoid and be afraid of the
worlds glory, and would abhor the desire of it, as a thing not only injurious
to God, but hurtful to our selves.

Operemini non cibo qui perit, sed cibo illi qui permanet in vitam aeternam,
quem filius hominis dabit vobis: hunc enim Pater obsignavit, id est, Deus. John
6. 27.

November. 6. 1598.
THese words are the beginning of that long Sermon which Christ made concerning
the bread that comes down from Heaven; the occasion whereof was the flocking of
the multitude to Christ, for that they had been partakers of the feeding of the
loves; and for that Christ saw them so earnest in seeking after material bread,
he takes occasion to put them in mind of a more excellent bread which they
should labor for: For whereas the names of the good things in this life, were
given to spiri ual things, As that godliness is gain, the first epistle to
Timothy, the sixth chapter, That to (...) in good works is true riches, the
first epistle to (...), the sixth chapter and the eighteenth verse; That to be
decked with virtue is the beauty that does indeed adorn both men and women, the
first epistle of Peter the third chapter and the fourth verse. It appears
that howsoever these corporal blessings do carry the names of good things, yet
they are not so truly called; but the truth thereof is comprehended in
spiritual good things, whereof the good things of this life are but shadows.
Christ by that water which the Samaritan came to draw, took occasion to speak
of the water of life; whereof whosoever drinks shall thirst no more, John the
fourth chapter and the fourteenth verse. And by the bread which the Capernaites
sought after, took occasion to stir them up to seek for the bread of life: So
should we from the outward things, which we enjoy for the maintenance of the
life present, gather spiritual meditations of true good things necessary to the
life to come.

Secondly, These words depend upon the former verse; Wherein Christ seeing them
flock unto him, said, reseek me not because ye saw the miracles, but for that
ye eat of the loves. Upon which words as he concludes with this exhortation,
Labor not for the meat, etc. So before he gives them this counsel, he sets
down the reproof. Where Booze charge his servants concerning Ruthe, that they
should let her gather and not rebuke her, the word signifies to confound or
put to shame, Ruth the second chapter and the fifteenth verse; the reason is,
because we are all ashamed of reproof. Christ, though he had no wounds by
sin, was contented to be baptized, as if he had been a sinner; but we that
have the wounds and sores of sin, cannot abide the plaster of reproof, but
think it a shame to be rebuked when we offend. But Christ before he counsels
them, does think good first by reproof to put them to shame: And it is a shame
to them in two respects. First, That in the heat of their Religion and
devotion, when they would seem most devout, Christ charge them with
hypocrisy, Ye seek me not for the miracles, that by them ye may believe, but
for the meat. Secondly, They are put to shame the more, for that he does not
lightly touch them, and glance at their hypocrisy, but does accuse them in
vehement and earnest manner, Verily, verily, I say to you, the twenty sixth
verse; but Christ does rebuke them for another end. Howsoever it be a good
effect that men be made ashamed of their sin by reproof, yet is it not the
last end: Christ does it not to confound, but rather to amend them; and
therefore exhorts them, that they should chiefly labor for the meat that
perishes not, as the Apostle in one place says, hoc loquor ad pudorem, the
first epistle to the Corinthians the sixth chapter and the fifth verse, does
elsewhere say, I write not these things to shame you, the first epistle to the
Corinthians the fourth chapter: So Christ to these men says, I speak not this
for your confusion, but for your amendment. So that albeit they were guilty of
hypocrisy, yet not desperate hypocrites; for Christ had some hope of them, and
therefore cease not to exhort them.

Again, Christ might only have exhorted them, and not used any reproof; but he
in wisdom thinks it meet, first to reprove them for their fault, and then to
show them how to amend it. Pride is the cause why many good exhortations have
no success. While men think it needless they should be rebuked, they are like
the proud Pharisees that despised the counsel of God, Luke the seventh chapter
and the thirtiech verse. But Christ to make manifest to them, that they need
counsel, does first show them their hypocrisy: We are ready to justify our
selves in all things; our corruption is such, that we are ignorant of our own
sins, which made the Prophet to say, Cleanse (...) from my secret sins,
Psalm the nineteenth: We take them to be no sins, wherein we greatly offend
God: Whereupon the Prophet says, Cor hominis (...) est, Jeremiah the
seventeenth chapter, only God, being greater than our heart, knows all
things, and is able to discover all our sins, the first epistle of John the
third chapter: Therefore we are to pray to God, to open our eyes, that we may
see the necessity of (...). The people that followed Christ showed two zeals,
One was to make him King, The other to seek him, but both proceeded from one
cause, because he fed them. Christ saw both these Zeals, The one he rejected
utterly, and would not be made King; But he corrects the other zeal; he forbids
them not to seek him, but wills them to seek him for this end, That from him
they may receive the bread that endures to life everlasting.

The reason why Christ would not be honored, was of two sorts. First, For that
is a slender honor, to honor God for temporal things; for as the Israelites did
honor God while he fed them with bread from Heaven and gave them water out of
the rocks, but so soon as they wanted either of them, then they murmured. So
when God continues his temporal blessings upon men, so long he shall be heard;
but when his benefits cease, then his honor cease. Therefore he rejects
this honor partly in regard of his own self, but chiefly for our cause: For
howsoever it be less honorable for Christ to be honored for outward
blessings; yet the chief cause why he rejects it is because it is less
profitable for us. They were desirous of temporal blessings, which he did
bestow upon them: But yet he is desirous to (...) upon them spiritual
blessings, which, as they are better for them, so desires greater honor.

The exhortation, arises out of the reproof, which is concluded in it: The
matter of it is reduced to six points, First, (...). Secondly, Et (...).
Thirdly, (...) est (...). Fourthly, Et (...) hic non (...). Fifthly, That (...)
is to be (...) which (...) for ever. Sixthly, This (...) to be (...) only in the
(...) of man for, it is he whom God the Father has sealed.

For the first point. Whereas there are two significations of life; the one
life it self, or the substance; the other the joy of life, which is the life of
life; the bread of both these lives does perish; that which keeps and
maintains the substance of life, does (...): For (...) the Israelites did eat
Manna, which was the (...) of Angels, yet of them Christ says, (...) of it,
but (...) the sixth chapter; for when God takes away the staff and strength of
bread, it has no more power to preserve life. So that man lives not by bread
of it self, for it perishes. Whereas bread has two powers, the one to
satisfy the hungry stomach, the other to restore the body being weak; we see
it loses both these powers: the power of satisfying does not continue; for
though a man satisfy himself never so much with it to day, yet to morrow he
will crave more, and his stomach will wax empty. As for the power to restore,
albeit during health, it strengthens man's heart, yet if once sickness come,
it has no power to restore strength. Secondly, Whatsoever maintains the joys
of life, that perishes also, for the world passes away and the fashion
thereof, the first epistle to the Corinthians the seventh chapter, and the
first epistle of John the second chapter, and whatsoever may make man's life
joyful. The pleasures of this life, which are the causes of our joy, are
transitory; and though they could continue with us, yet we our selves must
pass away and leave them; yea even while we may take the pleasures of this
world, yet old age will approach, and the days wherein we shall say, I have no
pleasure in them, Ecclesiastes the twelfth chapter and the first verse.

Secondly, Though this bread decay, yet our Savior tells us, that men are so
foolish, they gave themselves wholly to seek it. And that this is true, will
appear, if we look upon our actions, either civil or religious; If we consider
either the care we take for this life, or the diligence we use in Gods service.
Of the first care we have an example in Martha, against inordinate care of this
life: Our Savior rebukes Martha, who was troubled about many things, Luke the
tenth chapter; and so we do rise so early and take such pains for this life,
Psalm one hundred twenty seven, that is the service of Baal was more painful,
than the service of the true God. So we take more pains in the service of the
three Gods of this world, the first epistle of John the second chapter, than of
the true good: The same appears if we consider our care in matters of Religion:
Wherein we must confess, that our special joys are in the things of this
life, and for the bread of it. These men whom Christ here reproves, were not
about their Trades, but occupied in a matter of Religion, then to hear Christ
and to see his miracles: and yet we see that under color of sowing to the
spirit, they did but sow to the flesh, and make provision for the same,
Galatians the sixth chapter. And howbeit Mary's part be the better, and the
actions of religion more excellent than the actions of this life, yet they seek
their own things and not the things that are Gods.

Thirdly, There is a bread that does not perish. Christ commends the care of
spiritual things under them four: First negatively, Labor not for that bread
which perishes. Secondly affirmatively, Labor for that which endures; This
life does not last for ever: but after this life there is another life, which
shall be everlasting: And as it is a life, so there is a food for it, which we
must labor for: without which we shall not attain to that life, no more then
we can continue in life here, unless we have the food appointed for it, Apudte
fons vitae, Psalm the thirty sixth, and with him is fullness of joy, Psalm the
sixteenth. Now we have the one life and the joys of it, out of the
consideration of the Creature; but then we shall have life and joy from God the
Creator, who is the fountain of joy and life. Therefore howsoever we labor in
this life to lay up treasure for our outward maintenance, yet we must chiefly
take care for the life to come, and lay up for our souls a good foundation, the
first (...) to Timothy the sixth chapter; but the following of the good things
of this life does hinder us from this care. We are like the Israelites that
cared not for the promised bread, because they had the flesh pots in Egypts, so
as they could be content to have turned thither: So it was with the two tribes
and half; who for that they had convenient pasture for their Cattle on the
other side of Jordan, cared not for traveling into the land of Canaan, Numbers
the thirty fifth chapter. Another hindrance is, the labor and trouble that must
be suffered, for the purchasing of eternal life. We have a spiritual
sluggishnesse, like the sloathfull person whom Solomon speaks of, He would
fain have had bread, but was loath to labor for it; It was cold and there was a
Lion in the way, Proverbs the twenty second chapter. So the great trouble and
danger that must be born, does keep us from seeking the bread of eternal life,
as the Israelites said, The Land is a good Land, but the People are many and
strong, Numbers, the thirteenth chapter, and so had no lust to seek to enter
into the land of Canaan: So we confess that eternal life is the better, but
we have so many comforts in this life, and find it so troublesome to attain to
the other life, that we leave off all care for it, and content our selves with
our (...) state: The trouble and danger that stays us from seeking life
eternal, is that which the Scripture sets out, All that will live godly in
Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution, the second epistle to Timothy the third
chapter. By many tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of Heaven, Acts
the fourteenth chapter And the way is narrow and the gate straight that leads
to life, Luke the thirteenth chapter.

To take away the first hindrance, the holy Ghost shows, that there is a
better life and greater joys reserved in the life to come, The eye has not
seen, the ear has not heard, the first epistle to the Corinthians the second
chapter. And, that the other should not hinder us, he says, All the
afflictions in this life are not worthy of the glory that shall be revealed,
Romans the eight chapter. In both which places we see God would kindle in us a
desire of eternal life: As there is a life that endures, so there is a meat
for it. We know the body needs bread, therefore we seek for bread for it: so
must we seek for the food of the soul. The joy of the body must be a memorial
to stir us up, to provide food for the soul.

Fourthly, This food we do not seek: We are so entangled in the pleasures of
this life, that we think not of eternal life; the pleasures of this life,
while we enjoy them, do quench the care of the life to come: But being once
past, they are as nothing, and we are never the better for them; though we
desire eternal life, yet we persuade our selves we shall have it without
feeking the food for it. We think it necessary to seek bread for the body, but
not for the soul; though we do think it necessary, yet we neglect it, and deny
in our works, that we think it needful: We do not labor for it, as we are
here commanded: The sluggard would fain have bread, but shall want it, because
he labors not for it in temporal things, as riches, honor, preferment, a
great deal will not content men: But in Religion and matters spiritual, they
are of Agrippaes mind, aliquantulum persuades, Acts the twenty fourth chapter,
great store of worldly goods is nothing, but a few good works are sufficient;
If we sow to the spirit in never so little measure, we think we have done a
great deal; but if we sow never so much to the flesh upon apparel and vanity
all is too little; if we spend all the six days about our own profit, yet it
is not enough, but we will encroach upon the Sabbath; therefore the people ask,
When will the Sabbath be ended? Amos the eighth chapter; But if we spend but
one day in the week, or one hour in Gods service, it is tedious to them. We
take part with Martha; and as for Mary, that was occupied about Gods worship,
we think not so well of her, though Christ testify of her, that she chose the
better part, Luke the tenth chapter: If we vouchsafe once in seven days to
come unto Gods house, yet it shall be late before we come, and we think it long
till we be gone.

Operemini non cibo qui perit, sed cibo illi qui permanet in vitam aeternam,
quem filius hominis, etc. John 6. 27.

November. 19. 1598.
AFter the four points of accusation, before handled, now follow two more for
direction, First, That we must seek for the bread of life that endures, rather
than for that which perishes. Secondly, That we must seek for it of the son
of Man, whom God the father has therefore sealed, that he should give us the
bread of life.

In the first part we have two parts to observe.

First, That we must labor for this meat: Secondly, We must labor for it more
than for the other. When Christ says labor, he means not that they should
only desire it: It is a good thing to desire the bread of life as they desire
it, Da nobis semper panem hunc, John the sixth chapter and the thirty fourth
verse. Those sudden flashings that arise are not to be despised, for they are
the seed of greater virtues: God begins with a little seed of Godliness, and
proceeds till he have wrought men to some perfection. Zacheus at the first did
but only desire to see Christ; but from this little seed proceeded great fruit
of Justice and mercy toward the poor, so that he not only restored, but gave
to the poor, Luke the nineteenth chapter. Therefore the seed of repentance and
faith, if it be never so little, is not to be rejected, if it be but as the
grain of mustard seed; He that does not quench the smoking flax, though it do
not flame, Matthew the twelfth chapter, will not despise the least desire of
Gods grace: but that we should not content our selves only to desire the bread
of life, he wills us not only to desire, but to labor for it: It is not enough
to long and desire for the bread of life, but we must labor and take pains for
it: The desire of the sloathfull shall slay him, Proverbs the twenty fourth
chapter: The sloathfull would fain have bread to sustain life, but he says,
There is a Lion in the way, Proverbs the twenty second chapter, he is afraid of
labor and danger; but we must not refuse to take any pains, nor fear any
danger, to obtein the bread that endures for ever. In other things of this
life we do not only desire that which seems good to us, but we seek for it
till we have it. So the Prophet speaks, Cupiunt and rapiunt, Michah the second
chapter and the second verse: So we must not only desire the Kingdom of God,
but must violently seek after it; for The Kingdom of God suffers violence,
Matthew the eleventh chapter.

Secondly, this word labor is opposed to seeking: for Christ says here,
Matthew the sixth chapter, Seek the Kingdom of God, but labor for the meat that
endures, This labor is that work of God which is ascribed to faith, John the
sixth chapter, by which we labor for the bread of life, we must use an excessive
kind of labor, in this work of God, for that to labor for the bread of life,
is no bodily labor, and therefore we must work for it earnestly: for cursed is
he that does the work of the Lord negligently, Jeremiah the forty eight
chapter, Therefore when Christ pronounces them blessed that hunger and thirst
after righteousness, he commands us not only to seek and desire it in our
hearts, but to hunger for it as we do for the food of our bodies, Matthew the
fifth chapter, and as he commands us to do so, so he has left us his example,
for as it becomes him to fulfill all righteousness; so he protests, that it
was his meat and drink, to do the will of him that sent him, John the fourth
chapter; so did Mary earnestly labor for the meat that perishes not, when she
was sitting at the feet of Jesus: for though her sister called upon her to help
her, yet nothing could draw her from this spiritual labor, Luke the tenth
chapter and the forty second verse: So did the people labor that pressed to
hear Christ, Luke the eighth chapter, they laid violence to the Kingdom of
God: as also they that hearing Paul preach, would needs have him preach the
same thing again to them: and for that end came together in great companies to
hear the next Sabbath, Acts the thirteenth chapter: If we thus seek the bread
of life, striving and wrestling with God in our prayers, as Jacob did with the
Angel, then we do indeed labor for it, as Christ wills us to do.

The second sense of laboring is, that we must labor for this bread more than
for the other, and not at all for the other, in comparison of this. All grant
that we must labor for the bread of life, but not for it more than for that
which nourishes this life: we must observe, in what manner we ought to labor,
as well as that we are to labor: for the excessive desire of this life, makes
us defective in the desire of the life to come. The desire of this life is not
oppofice; but subordinate to the desires of the life to come: But we must
desire this life, so far as it may further us to the other life. Some do
make this life the end of all their desires, and do heap up wrath to
themselves, against the day of wrath, (...) the second chapter. But the care
and endeavor of the Saints of God is, that in this life, they may lay up for
themselves a good (...) for the life to come, the first epistle to (...) the
sixth chapter. Men are bound to be careful to make honest provision for this
life, and not to be idle and burdensome to the earth: For when Christ wills
us not to be careful for this life, yet from the example of birds we may
learn, that we must not be negligent, for they are made to fly, as it is in
the Provarbs: And so we are by Gods appointment to provide for our maintenance
in this life, Matthew the sixth chapter. When Christ says, We shall give
account for every idle word, he means we shall be called to account, That we
have not spoken the good words that we ought, Matthew the twelfth chapter. The
Apostle (...) him (...) stote, to steal no more, but to labor, Ephesians the
fourth chapter and the twenty eighth verse; The reason is, that for want of
laboring in some honest calling for our outward maintenance, we shall fall to
poverty, and Poverty will make us steal and use unlawful means, Proverbs the
thirty chapter. Though a man were able to live without laboring, yet
remembering Gods sentence, that we (...) eat in the sweat of our faces, we shall
say, (...) tram Domini, (...) the seventh chapter and the ninth verse; And that
made the Apostle say, That if any will not labor, let him not eat, the second
epistle to the (...) and the third chapter: And the blessed man shall (...) of
the labor of his hands, Psalm one hundred twenty eighth.

Thus we are to provide for this life. But if comparison be made, we are to
labor more for the life to come, and for the food that belongs to the
maintenance of it. It were a thing hard enough for us, if Christ should command
us to labor for the heavenly food, as we do for the earthly; but yet it is
necessary, that as the soul is more excellent than the body; so we should be
more careful to maintain the life of the soul, than of the body. The
excellency of the soul made the learned Philosophers to (...) from many bodily
pleasures, which otherwise they could not have forborne, but that they knew the
life and felicity of the soul is (...) better than all the profits and
pleasures of this life. Of the good things of this life Christ says, What
shall it profit a man to (...) the whole world and lose his own (...)? Matthew
the sixteenth chapter. So we are to seek the good of the next life, rather than
of this: Touching our defense from bodily miseries, Christ says, (...) not him
that (...) kill the body, and not the soul; but he that can kill (...), Matthew
the tenth chapter, that is, if he that (...) not a due care to provide for the
soul rather than for the body: Some use the soul is if it were to serve the
body, whereas the body ought to serve it: But seeing our body is Corpus mortis,
Romans the seventh chapter; because either it shall be destroyed by death, or
while it lives, is under the dominion of death, Romans the sixth chapter:
Therefore whatsoever care is bestowed upon the body, shall perish with it; for
they that sow to the flesh, as it is corruptible, shall reap corruption; but as
the spirit is immortal, so they that sow to it shall reap immortality and life
ever lasting, Galatians the sixth chapter: The good estate of the body will not
make the soul the better, but rather the worse; but the souls estate being
provided for, the body shall be far the better. If we seek Gods Kingdom
first, then that care will cause all other things to be added, Matthew the sixth
chapter: If our conversation be in Heaven, it shall cause our bodies that are
corruptible, to become glorious, Philippians the third chapter and the twenty
first verse. If in this life we keep our selves from the filthiness and
pollution of worldly and carnal lusts, our bodies shall be glorious after
death; therefore we are to be more careful for the soul than for the body. Of
this life Job says, It is but short, Job the fourteenth chapter; It is like a
vapor that suddenly arises, and vanishes away, James the fourth chapter. It
is as grass, the first epistle of Peter and the first chapter; And it stands
not in the abundance of riches that man has, Luke the twelfth chapter: Man
walks in a shadow, and disquiets himself in vain, Psalm the thirty ninth. He is
every moment subject to death; and howsoever death it looks a young man in the
face, as it does old men; yet it is as near to him while it stands close to the
other; Therefore the Wise man says, All the cares of this life are but vanity
and vexation of spirit. And howsoever while we are in our joys, drunk with the
pleasure of the world, as Naball, the first epistle of Samuel and the twenty
fifth chapter; So that though we be wounded we feel it not, like the drunkard,
Proverbs the twenty third chapter: Though we have not grace to say, Quid
prodest totum mundum lucrari? Matthew the sixteenth chapter; yet when it is too
late, we shall say, What has it (...) us to have enjoyed the pleasures of this
life, Sapi. 5. The life to come is void of all misery and torment, There is the
fullness of joy and pleasure for evermore, Psalm the sixteenth: But all the
pleasure and profits of this life, if it were possible to possess them all,
are not answerable to the joys of the life to come: With which present
pleasures are joined many griefs and torments; If a man be never so rich, or
humble, and diseased, or afflicted, it will mar all his joys; But all the
afflictions of this life, are not comparable to the future glory, Romans the
eighth, that shall be revealed, which swallows up all our troubles that we
suffer here, because it is hard to root out of men's hearts the cares of this
life; and Christ does not forbid them altogether to be careless, But first
seek the kingdom of God, and all things else shall be cast upon you, Matthew
the sixth chapter. If ye neglect earthly things for heavenly, you shall not only
obtain heavenly things, but earthly things withal: If we only seek bodily
things, and not heavenly, we shall want both: But if we seek for the soul, we
shall have things necessary for the body; for the Lord (...) said, I will not
for sake thee, Hebrews the thirteenth chapter: And David affureth himself, that
because the Lord is his (...) he shall want nothing, Psalm the twenty third: If
Solomon ask not riches, nor honor, but wisdom; he shall have not only
wisdom, but riches, honor, and all other things, the first book of Kings the
third chapter: the seeking of things pertaining to this life (...) the care of
the life to come; but the seeking of Gods kingdom, includes the care of all
other things.

The (...), that it is Christ, the son of man, that gives us this bread of
life: Muerial bread, is the effect of Creatures; but the (...) of (...) is the
effect of the redemption: But seeing all things were made by Christ, John the
first chapter, therefore it is Christ that gives us both eartnly and heavealy
bread: Christ made (...) material bread of nothing, but this bread he makes
of himself: the one he made (...), but the other cost him the shedding of his
(...): His flesh, simply, is not bread, but his flesh (...) for us; caro (...)
prodest, John sixth chapter, the bread that perishes, and all the works of the
Creation he performed in six days, but the bread of life was not made, but
during the whole space of his life upon earth.

The six point is, where the bread is to be found, touching which he says, say
not with thy heart, who shall go up to heaven to fetch this bread, nor (...)
down to hell, komans the tenth chapter and the sixth verse; It is the Son of
man that gives it for God the Father has sealed him for this end. In which
words we have, First a (...): Secondly, an Affirmation. The direction has a
Correction; for we think we deserve it by seeking and laboring for it: For
Christ tells us, it is not to be had, except the Son of man give (...) Christ
gives us the bread of life three ways, First, When he gives his flesh to be
crucified for us in his (...); for in death only it (...) power to quicken us
into eternal life, as the Apostle witnesses, By death he did destroy him that
had the power of death, Hebrews the second chapter: In thy favor is life,
Psalm the thirtieth: But we are brought into Gods favor no otherwise, but by
the death of his Son, Romans the fifth chapter: So that by his death we obtain
life; By the sacrifice of himself he has done away our (...), Hebrems the
ninth chapter. Secondly, he gives us the bread of life in the sacrament, his
flesh is made bread for us in his passion, when he dyed, but is given and
applied to us in the Supper: The expiation for sins was once performed upon
the Cross; By one sacrifice has he perfected for ever, Hebrews the tenth
chapter and the (...) verse: But (...) is often applied to us in the (...).
Thirdly, where as there are two (...) of giving, offert and confert, he gives
us this bread when he does not only (...) it unto us, but makes us (...) it. If
we (...) hold of the bread by faith, which is the work of God, and (...) that
he is the food of our souls, then (...) will give us it and make us partakers
of (...), as Christ says, This is the (...), That light came into the world,
and ye loved darkness rather than light, John the third chapter. So it shall
be our condemna ion, if God do only offer us the bread of life, and do not
withal give us it, and make us to receive it. All bodily meats being a power
nutritive, but profit (...), except they be a power digestive: So though the
body of Christ crucified have a power to give life and nourishment, yet except
we digest it with faith, it shall do us no good.

For our assurance hereof Christ says of the Son of man, that God the Father
has sealed him, that is, he has power and authority to be the bread of life,
and to conserve life to them that feed on him. He has sealed him, First with
his nature, being the very Son of God, He is the similitude and engraven form
of his person, Hebrews the first chapter and the third verse. We need not to
doubt of the remission of our sins; for Christ as he is God, gives power to
forgive sins. Secondly, as he is sealed with Gods nature, so with his name,
He is wonderful Counselor, the mighty God, the Prince of Peace, Isaiah the
ninth chapter. Thirdly, With his miracles, For he raises the dead, and
quickneth whom he will, no less than the Father, John the fifth chapter and the
twenty first verse. Fourthly. Because exception was taken against his miracles,
For they said that he did them by Beelzebub, Matthew the twelfth chapter,
therefore he is further sealed, with a voice from Heaven saying, This is he in
whom I am well pleased, hear ye him, Matthew the seventeenth chapter: not only
whom he commands, but where he promises, to refresh them that come to him,
Matthew the eleventh chapter. Fifthly, He has sealed him with the spirit, The
spirit of the Lord is upon me, Luke the fourth chapter; And that not only rests
( John the third chapter the three and thirtieth and four and thirtieth verses)
content with receiving the spirit for himself, but with a power to give it to
his: So that by his intercession with God the Father, He sent down the spirit
upon the Apostles, Acts the second chapter. Being thus sealed by God, he is
able to nourish us by his flesh crucified for us, unto eternal life, if he
give us grace to lay hold of it by faith.

Dixit igitur eis, Videte, and cavete ab avaritia: nec enim cujusquam vita ex
iis quae ipsi suppetunt, in eo sita est ut redundet. Luke 12. 15.

November. 26. 1598.
HERE Christ gives two commandments to covetous men; First, To discern and see
the sin of covetousness Secondly, To beware of it.

Against the latter of them, as against every other Commandment, the corrupt
nature of man makes two questions, First, of Rebellion, Why should we beware?
Secondly, of Ignorance, How shall we beware?

The former question is resolved three ways. First, We must beware of it,
because the sin of (...) is hardly avoided, the desire of having abundance
is so rooted in the hearts of all men. Secondly, Because, as it is hardly
avoided, so it is a sin very heinous in Gods fight; being committed,
howsoever we persuade our (...), that those sins are the least, that are
naturally planted in us. Thirdly, Because whereas men may repent for other
sinned, they can hardly repent of this. For other immoderate desires do cease
by two means; either (...) they are satisfied, or else when death does
approach. (...) does yield to neither of these means, for the more that riches
increase, the more does his covetous desire increase; and the (...) that death
is, the more does a covetous man embrace his riches, and still covet more.

Touching the second question; Though we be persuaded that we ought to avoid
this sin, yet we know not how; How to avoid (...).
and therefore we ask, How shall we avoid it? The word of God appoints (...)
three means, First, Trust in God: Secondly, Prayer against the sin: Thirdly,
Meditations concerning the same.

The first means, Trust in God.
First it is a good way, for the avoiding of (...), to trust in God; for that is
a thing that the heart of a covetous man will not set himself against: He will
in no wise follow the counsel of the Philosopher, which teaches, That to
avoid covetousness, a man must give himself to the actions of prodigality; he
would rather hear how he might get money, than how to spend that he has: But
if he be advised to put his trust in God, he will not be against that, as a
thing which is not so contrary to his sin as prodigality: But this means does
the Scripture inculcate, Trust not in uncertain riches, the first epistle to
Timothy and the sixth chapter: If riches increase set not your hearts upon them,
Psalm the sixty second: Riches avail not in the day of (...). (...) nam per det
in die ira, Proverbs the eleventh chapter and the fourth verse: Let not the
rich man glory in his riches, (...) the ninth chapter and the twenty third
verse. As the Scripture exhorts us, not to trust in riches; so it sets forth
examples of them that in vain put their trust therein; For this is the man that
took not God for his strength, but trusted in the multitude of his riches,
Psalm the fifty second. But of confidence in God it speaks thus, It is
better to (...) in the Lord, than to put confidence in man, Psalm one hundred
eighteen; O Lord of hosts! blessed is the man that puts his trust in (...)
the eighty fourth; Our fathers trusted in thee, and thou did deliver them,
Psalm the twenty second and the fourth verse; The (...) shall hunger, but such
(...) trust in the Lord shall want (...) good things, (...) the thirty fourth
and the tenth verse, A horse is (...) thing to (...) man, but the eye of the
Lord is upon them that fear him, and trust in (...), Psalm the thirty third
and the seventeenth verse; To deliver their souls from death, and to feed them
in the time of (...). After that a man has admitted this opinion, which is so
confirmed by Scripture, then there is cause to persuade him; for the (...)
gives two commands, in the first to Timothy the sixth chapter and the
seventeenth verse, Charge the rich of this world, not to trust in (...), but in
the living God; and to distributs. To (...) them, That the cause why men do
not distribute, is for want of trust in God. They could be content to sow good
works; but they look up and fear a cloud of poverty will come upon them, and
they shall want themselves; which would not be if they did trust in God: but
men give more trust to the uncertainty of riches, than to the certainty of Gods
promise. To help this error, our Savior says, Care (...); for your heavenly
Father knows that you need all these things, Matthew the sixth chapter and the
thirty second verse; And the Apostle says, Let your conversation be without
(...); for God (...) said, I will not leave thee, nor for sake thee, Hebrews
the thirteenth chapter and the fifth verse. If we were persuaded, that he that
seeks to obtain Gods favor by doing good works, lays up a better (...) for
the time to come, than he that heaps up riches, the first epistle to Timothy,
the sixth chapter and the nineteenth verse, it would make us use this means, for
the avoiding of (...). For be a man never so rich in this world, and never so
honorable, yet his glory shall not go with him, Psalm the forty ninth and
the seventeenth verse: But their works follow them, opera (...), Apoc, the
fourteenth chapter and the thirteenth verse. Therefore it were good for us
rather to respect and provide for the time to come. And as it is good for the
life to come, so for this life present; For a little that the righteous has,
is better than great riches of the ungodly, Psalm the thirty seventh and the
sixteenth verse; And Godliness has promise of this life and that which is to
come, the first epistle to Timothy the fourth chapter and the eight verse.
Again to trust in God, and not in riches, is a better foundation, not for our
selves only, but for our posterity; I never saw the righteous for saken, nor
(...) seed begging their bread, Psalm the thirty seventh and the twenty fifth
verse; The seed of the righteous is blessed, Psalm one hundred and twelve and
the second verse.

The second mean; Prayer.
The second means to avoid this sin is Prayer; either with a moderate desire
to pray with Solomon, Proverbs the thirtieth chapter, That God will give
neither poverty nor riches; or with David, Psalm the hundred and nineteenth,
Incline my heart is thy Laws, and not to (...). And this is a good means, such
as a covetous man will (...) admit: For howsoever the sin of covetousness be
rooted in the heart of man, yet when he considers the danger that he is in by
the same, he will pray that he were not covetous. And howsoever the Apostle
says, The prayer of a righteous man avails mush, if it be servent, Oratia
(...) pravales, James the fifth chapter and the sixteenth verse, yet God will
sometime hear the prayer of a wicked man, if it be not servent, yet if it be
offered up often, it will not be in vain; not by the violence or weight, but by
often rising up, as the water that often falls makes the stone hollow. The
prayers of wicked men are turned into sin, if they be ordained to sin,
Psalm the hundred and ninth and the seventh verse: And God does not hear them
that ask to spend upon their lusts, James the fourth chapter and the third
verse. But when wicked men pray against sinee, and seek for grace to destroy
sin in them, God does not reject these prayers, For Christ will not (...) the
smoking (...): and the (...) flashing of such destics in the (...) of coverous
men, enough they be not so vehement as the prayers of righteous men, Matthew the
twelfth chapter: Christ did not quench the small desire that was in (...) at
the first, but accepted of it; so that it grew to be a desire of showing
greater works of liberality, Luke 19.

The third, (...).
The third means is Meditation. Every covetous (...) these flashing desires in
his heart, that he were not to covetous; As (...), though he lived wickedly,
yet desired to dyethe death of the righteous. But that those desires may be
constant, they (...) wife from meditation, which will stitre them up often; For
so they will be (...) ad meridiem, Proverbs the fourth chapter and the
eighteenth verte; Whereas otherwise they are as the sudden flash of lightning,
that does no sooner appear, but is presontly gone. Therefore that he may avoid
this sin, the covetous man among all his thoughts of vanity, I will go to
the City and buy and fell, (...) the fourth chapter; I will pull down any
barus and make greater; I will act and drink, Luke the twelfth chapter, must
(...) these true thoughts, which only keeps him from it: First, he must think
of the means, whereby he obtains riches. Secondly, of riches, what it is to be
rich, and what riches are. That he may consider of the means of getting riches
as he ought, he must think first, To how many cares he is brought with the
desire of being rich; how infinite and (...) his (...) are; that they are like
(...); he has (...) sooner rid himself of one care, but another arises in his
heart; For when a man has enough, yet still he has his cares: They that want
meat and drink do but say, What shall we eat and (...) At (...) the sixth
chapter, and the rich men that have to eat and drink, are also car (...) to
(...) more, and to enlarge (...) banos to receive more, Lake the twelfth
chapter; therefore the Apostle says well, They that will be (...), pearct
themselves with many sorrows, the (...) epistle (...) (...) by the sixth
chapter. Secondly, to how many sins the (...) man does end anger his soul,
while, to gather riches, he sticks not to sin against God, by oppression,
by deceit, by peryury, swearing, and (...) Thirdly, to how many judgments and
(...) of (...) he is subject, by means of these sins, even while he is in
this life. (...), That by means of his (...), he is like no (...) forever. A
sorrow (...) to every sin.
For whereas there is a sorrow due to every sin, which (...), by repentance is
remitted and (...) at the (...) of God. The sin of the covetous man is so
(...) in him; (...) he cannot be sorry for it: the more he has, the more he
still desiteth: and the nearer he is to death, the more (...) his (...) of
covetousness. Of restitution. Without it, no remission.
If he will be truly penitent for (...), he must make restitution, as (...),
Luke the nineteenth chapter. (...) (...) nisi (...) and non (...). But this is
that which makes a (...) man's sin (...) before God, That he cannot make
restitution, which notwithstanding must be made, and other sins require no
restitution; therefore Christ (...) well, That it is as hard for a rich man to
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, as for a Camel to pass through the eye of a
needle, Matthew the nineteenth chapter. When the young man was willed to sell
all he had, and to give to the poor, he was very sore grieved; so loath are
they to restore that which they have unjustly gotten together. But howsoever
the Doctrine of restitution is durus serme, yet it is sanus sermo. The
consideration of these four things that do accompany the greedy desire of
getting riches will make a man to avoid this sin, if he think upon them
thoroughly.

Uncertainty of riches, and evils they bring.
The second observation, is touching riches, wealth it self. If thou consider
how deceitful and uncertain a thing riches is, for which thou have brought thy
self to so many inconveniences and such infinite cares, so many grievous
sins, to so many judgments of God daily hanging over our heads for the same,
and into such difficulty of (...), it will make thee avoid it; therefore our
Savior calls riches deceitful, Matthew the thirteenth chapter and the twenty
second verse: And the Apostle says they are uncertain vanity, the first
epistle to Timothy the sixth chapter: The reason is, because he that has them
to day, may lose them to morrow; and though they make man's life comfortable for
a while, yet they cannot prolong life.

The reason is, because our life does not stand in the abundance of wealth: In
which words the holy Ghost gives them leave to imagine, that if they be
covetous, they shall be wealthy and rich; howbeit it is not any means that the
covetous man can use, that will make him wealthy; for which of you by taking
thought, Proverbs the twenty second chapter, and Matthew the sixth chapter: The
blessing of the Lord makes rich, Sola (...) Domini, Proverbs the tenth chapter
and the twenty second verse: It is not early rising, nor late sitting down,
Psalm the hundred twenty seventh. But put case it be true which they imagine
with themselves, yet their life stands not in the riches so gotten. It is
indeed probable that a covetous man shall soon attain to riches; For all is
fish that comes to net with him; he will not refuse any gain, be it never so
unlawful; If it be panis fallaciae, if it be pretium sanguinis, he will put it
up. And as he has more means to get, so he spares more than other men do: He
does no good works; he distributeth not to the necessity of the poor, magnum
(...) parsimonia; and flesh and blood always persuades her self of the best,
and never doubts of any hurt: The rich Merchants say with themselves, We will
go and buy and sell, and gain, James the fourth chapter, never thinking that
they shall lose. The rich man thought with himself, I will eat and drink and
take my rest, but never thought that he should dye, Luke the twelfth chapter.
So we always dream of the best, and never fear any evil. We will drink strong
drink to day, and tomorrow shall be as this day, and better, Isaiah the fifty
seventh chapter. Again, they may pretend further cause for the sin of
covetousness. Abundance makes a man abstain from many sins, which poor men
fall into of necessity, For poverty makes a man to steat, Proverbs the
thirtieth chapter: Therefore the Apostle wills, that if any man will not
steal, he must labor with his hands, Ephesians the fourth chapter. Abundance
sets them in case, that they can do many good works, when the borrower is a
servant to the lender, as it is in the Proverbs. The rich man is free from this
inconvenience: (...) est abundat omnibus. Riches do make a man glorious. But
though all this were true, yet Christ says, that life stands not in riches, as
the Preacher speaks by way of permission, to the rich man, Go too, take thy
pleasure; but for all this know, that God will bring thee to judgment,
Ecclesiastes the eleventh chapter: So does Christ give them scope to conceive
what opinion they think good of Riches. Put case thou, through thy
covetousness have abundance, yet thy life consists not therein; that this is
true, That man is not a whit longer lived for his wealth, the Scripture shows,
Divitia non proder unt in die (...), Proverbs the eleventh chapter and the
fourth verse: Though hand be (...) in hand, yet it shall not serve the turn,
the rich man dies as well as the poor, Psalm the thirty ninth: but how
powerful this is to restrain covetousness, appears by this. We will do
nothing in vain, much less suffer in vain. The Apostle (...), (...) the fifth
chapter, Wh le we are in health of body, we know our riches do us great
service; but if death draw near, we are ready to say with (...), Genesis the
twenty fifth chapter, Behold I dye, and what will all this wealth do me good.
Christ says not, Be not covetous, for you shall not be the richer, but Be
afraid of covetousness, for your life stands not in abundance of riches; to
put thee in mind, to provide for another life rather than for this: For albeit
the covetous and miserable man has misery in this life, because he disquiets
himself in vain, Psalm the thirty ninth, and therefore is called a (...) or
manslayer; yet his future misery being (...) with the misery of this life,
makes him more miserable. While he is in his (...), it is well with him, though
he have many worldly cares; But when he is put out of his office, and shall be
called to account, How he came by his office, and how he has behaved himself
therein. How he got his worldly wealth, and how he has distributed the same
for the relief of his poor fellow Saints. Then, it he be found faulty in his
account, his misery is far greater than ever it was in this life. Luke the
sixteenth chapter, Christ takes away from covetous men the opinion of life, and
wills them not to think that they shall live the longer for their riches; And
seeing they must dye, and after death comes the Judgment, Hebrews the ninth
chapter, it is their part rather to lay up a good (...) for the time to come,
(...) lay up their treasure in Heaven, Matthew the sixth chapter; becanse as
they heap up riches unjustly, so they (...) up wrath for themselves against the
day of wrath, Romans the second chapter. Though covetous men think themselves
well while they live; yet Christ tell them, They must dye, that they should
take (...) that it may go well with them after death, That when they have laid
down these earthly tabernacles, the second epistle of Peter the first chapter,
They may be received into everlasting tabernacles, Luke the sixteenth chapter.

Nam cui haec non adsunt, is caecus est, nihil procul cernens, oblitus sese a
veteribus peccatis suis fuisse purificatum. Quapropter, fratres, etc. 2 Pet 1.
9.

December. 3. 1568.
THE Prophet David says, Psalm. the forty ninth, Man was in honor when he was
first created, but continued not in that state the space of a night, but became
like a beast that perishes. So that as God made man so honorable a creature,
that he thought he might be God: So when man in the pride of his heart, would
be like God be became a beast; a beast not only in body, for that he dies as
they do, but in soul: For if we consider the understanding part of the soul,
and the knowledge that man has in the same, He is foolish and ignorant, even
as a beast before God, Psalm the seventy third and the twenty second verse;
and the rebellion of his heart is such, that he is compared to horse and mule,
Psalm the thirty second. This is our downfall: But God of his rich mercy will
not have man continue in dishonor, though he lost that honor which God gave
him in the beginning. And as man would not continue in honor one night, so God
would not suffer him to continue in dishonor one night, but presently after
his fall gave him this precious promise, That howsoever man had made himself a
beast yet God would not only make him a man again but partaker of the divine
nature, the second of Peter the first chapter and the fourth verse: Which
promise albeit it begins to be performed, when we apprehend it by faith, yet
faith only does not make it perfect; but we must unto faith add virtue, to
virtue knowledge, to knowledge temperance, patience, godliness, brotherly
kindness, and love; And these virtues, if they concur, do make man
partaker of the heavenly nature.

At the first the Doctrine of Faith in Christ, was hardly received; or men
thought to besaved only by Works: And when they had once received it, they
excluded the doctrine of good Works. All the difficulty that St. Paul found in
the work of his Ministry, was to plant faith, and to persuade men that we are
justified before God by Faith in Christ, without the works of the Law: But St.
Peter and St. James met with them that received the doctrine of Faith fast
(...), but altogether neglected good Works: But because both (...) necessary,
therefore St. Paul, (...) all his epistles, joins the (...) of Faith with the
doctrine of Works. This is a faithful saying, and to be avouched, That they
which believe in God, be careful to show forth good works, Titus the third
chapter and the eighth verse; Therefore with the doctrine of the Grace of God,
he joins the doctrine of the careful bringing forth of good works, Titus the
second chapter and the 12. verse, The saving grace of God has appeared, and
teaches us to deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to live soberly and
righteously and godly in this world. The doctrine of Grace is not rightly
apprehended, until we admit of the Doctrine of good works. Will thou know, O
man, that Faith is dead without works? Was not Abraham our father justified by
works, when he offered his son Isaac? James the second chapter and the
twentieth verse: Therefore St. Peter says, That is no true faith, which is not
accompanied with virtue and godliness of life. It is true, that good works
have no power to work justification, because they do not contain a perfect
righteousness: And in as much as they are imperfect, there belongs the curse
of God unto them; Cursed is he that continues not in all things, Galatians the
third chapter: Good works, a token of justification.
So far are they from justifying; but yet they are tokens of justification,
Genesis the fourth chapter, Respexit Deus ad Abelem, and ad oblationem suam,
God first looked upon his person, and then upon his sacrifice; For before the
person be justified, his works are not accepted in Gods sight: The best works,
if they proceed not of Faith, are sin, Romans the fourteenth chapter: Our
Savior says, No branch can bring forth fruit of it self, except it abide in
the Vine, John the fifteenth chapter: Therefore if we do any good works, they
proceed from our incision and ingraffing into Christ; by whom they are made
acceptable to God.

Paul says, Abraham was justified by faith before works, not when he was
circumcised, but when he was uncircumcised, Romans the fourth chapter and the
tenth verse. But James says, Abraham our Father was justified by Works, James
the second chapter and the twenty first verse. To reconcile the Apostles, we
must know, that the power of Justification, which, in Paul, is effective; But
that which James speaks of is declarative: It was Abraham's Faith that made
him righteous; and his works did only declare him to be justified: Therefore
Paul says, That albeit good works have no power to justify, yet they are good
and profitable for men, Titus the third chapter; For they declare our
justification, which is by faith; and by them we make our selves sure of our
calling and election, the second epistle of Peter the first chapter and the
tenth verse.

In these two verses Peter delivers two things: First, A Rule, by which we may
examine our selves. Secondly, An application of the same. Seeing we have such a
good Rule to try whether we be elected and called, let us study by the practice
of these virtues, to assure our selves of our calling and election.

Two things commend this Rule, which the holy Ghost sets down, First, That it
is Regula negativa; For having said before affirmatively, If these things be in
you and abound, they will make you that you shall not be idle nor unfruitful
in the knowledge of Christ. Now he speaks negatively, But if you have them not,
you are blind; which is more than if he had contented himself with his
affirmative speech: For as the tree in the Garden was called Arbor scientiae
boni, Genesis the second chapter, though directly it brings us to the knowledge
of nothing but evil, because Adam knew not what a good thing it was to be
obedient, till he felt the smart of his disobedience: So we do perceive the
goodness of things by the want of them, better than by the enjoying of them.
The benefit of possessing the graces of Gods spirit, does not so much move us
as the want of them. Therefore the Apostle says, If ye care not for being
fruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, yet let this persuade you
to practice all these virtues; for that if you be without them, you are blind.
And as no man knows what a benefit it is to have sight, so well as a blind
man that wants it; so it is with them that practice not these virtues.

Secondly, That it is a universal Rule, Whosoever has not these things: For
our nature is inclined to take exception against good rules; As John Baptist,
when he willed all men to bring forth fruit worthy of repentance: Nor as the
Jews, not to say, We have Abraham to our Father, Matthew the third chapter. It
is our corruption, as the Apostle faith, to think that we shall escape the
plagues of God for these sins, which we condemn in others, Romans the second
chapter: Therefore our Savior prevented that exception, when speaking to his
Disciples, he said, Quod vobis dico omnibus dico, Mark the thirteenth chapter.
Even so Peter says, Whosoever wants these virtues, whatsoever occasion he
pretends for the want of them, he is blind, and has forgotten that he was
purged from his old sins.

But to speak more particularly of this Rule, two things make us secure in the
matter of our Salvation, which notwithstanding, We should work out with fear
and trembling, Philippians the second chapter and the twelfth verse.

The one is, our Knowledge: We are ready to say with Job, I know that my
Redeemer lives, Job the nineteenth chapter: But unless we perform something
else, it shall be in vain to make this allegation, Have not we prophesied in
thy name? Matthew the seventh chapter.

The other cause of confidence and carelessness is the opinion we have, that it
makes no matter how we live, The blood of Christ does purge me from all sin,
the epistle of John the first chapter and the seventh verse.

To these two the holy Ghost opposes two things. First, Do we think we know
God and Jesus Christ whom he has sent? Yea; but he that knows not these
virtues, is blind, and knows nothing. Secondly, Do we think, we need not to
be careful of holiness of life, because we are purged by Christ's blood? But
except we be careful to walk in newness of life, we have forgotten that we
were purged from our old sins.

For the first point, That he that has not these virtues, is blind, we are to
know, That albeit there be no opposition between knowledge and wickedness of
life, because all that know Gods will, do not practice it, yet there is a
necessary dependence between them; If ye love me, says Christ, keep my
commandments, John the fifteenth chapter. And the Preacher, Seek for the
mystery of faith, as in a pure conscience, the first epistle of Timothy and
the third chapter: For they that put away a good conscience, make shipwreck of
faith, the first epistle of Timos thie the first chapter and the nineteenth
verse. The Gentiles did know God, but did not glorify him as God: They knew the
truth, but did detinere veritatem in injustitia, Romans the first chapter. As
they held knowledge, so they should not withhold it from others, but should
have made manifest the same, that others might have known God; which because
they did not, God gave them over to be darkened in their understanding. We must
manifest our knowledge by doing some good works; for he that has knowledge,
and is not careful to be fruitful in the knowledge of Christ, is in the half
way to be blinded; for when men receive not the love of the truth, that they
may be saved, God will send them the efficacy of error, that they may believe
lies, the second epistle to the Thessalonians the second chapter and the
eleventh verse. This knowledge is but a show of knowledge, and not the power of
it, If any man think he knows any thing, he knows nothing as he ought to
know it, the second epistle to the Corintbians the eighth chapter and the
seventh verse. This knowledge is like that which John Baptist speaks of,
Matthew the third chapter, (...) Think not to say with your selves, etc. rest
not in this knowledge.

The rule of true knowledge is, when it is accompanied with holiness of life,
as he speaks, If any man love God, he is known of him, the first epistle to the
Corinthians the eighth chapter and the third verse. The virtue that opens
men's eyes, to make them see, is wisdom: So he that has no care of virtue, is
not wise; for, the fear of God is wisdom; and to depart from evil is
understanding, Job the twenty eighth chapter: And to fear God, is the beginning
of wisdom, Proverbs the first chapter. The Art of sowing is of policy, so is
buying and selling; But the Kingdom of God is likened to the traffic of a
Merchant man; and to the sowing of seed, Matthew the thirteenth chapter, To
teach us, that to our knowledge we must ad spiritual wisdom, without which we
are blind and ignorant. He that is blind, nescit quo vadit, John the twelfth
chapter; He considers not how he lives, whether he be in the way that leads
to life or to death; he knows not what shall come to him after this life;
Incedit tanquam Bos, He goes as an Ox to the slaughter, Proverbs the seventh
chapter: But he that to knowledge adds godliness and holiness of life, he
knows whither he goes, That it shall go well with him at the last,
Ecclesiastes the eighth chapter and the twelfth verse. So says the Prophet,
Mark the righteous, and thou shall see his end is peace at the last, Psalm
the thirty seventh and the thirty seventh verse.

Secondly, He is not only blind, but cannot see a far off. Two things are
said to be a far off things Spiritual and eternal; and he that has not
these Christia virtues, cannot see a far off, neither in things spiritual nor
eternal.

For the first, The favor of the world makes a man commit many sins; but the
favor of God keeps him from sin. Worldly pleasures make a man commit many
sins; but the pleasure of the life to come and the joys of the holy Ghost,
make a man forbear sin.

Secondly, For things eternal, the evil estate of the wicked is very bad, be
his temporal estate never so good: therefore they are to consider what God will
do in the end thereof, Quod fiat in fine, Jeremiah the fifth chapter and the
thirty first verse. The least pleasure that the wicked have in this life,
brings poenas inferni: And howsoever Godly men be subject to miseries in this
life, yet their eternal estate is most happy: I know that it shall go well
with them at the last, Isaiah the third chapter and the tenth verse.

He has forgotten that he was purged. Wherein we are to consider,

First, How true this is, There are so many persuasions arising from the
benefit of the purging of our sins, that it is confessed, that he has
forgotten that he was purged, that is, not careful to obtain these virtues:
First, That God passes over the time of our former ignorance, Acts the
seventeenth chapter; Admonishesh us now to repentance, That it is enough that
we have spent the time past of our life, the first epistle of Peter the fourth
chapter. The consideration of this should make us to become holy. The Prophet
says, When thou have enlarged my heart, I will run the way of thy
commandments, Psalm the hundred nineteenth. But what does enlarge our hearts
so much, as that all our former sins are washed away in the blood of Christ,
That now we shall run the way and race of holiness, not in the spirit of
fear, but of adoption, Romans the eighth chapter; Not as servants, but as
children, in obedience to God our father, we need not to fear the curse of the
Law, which Christ has delivered us from, Galatians the third chapter; Only, we
may look for temporal plagues, if we sin against God, Psalm the eighty ninth.
Secondly, If we consider how we are purged, the which would persuade us
hereunto, that is, Not by corruptible things, as silver and gold, but with the
blood of Christ the first epistle of Peter the second chapter, But with the
blood of Christ, not a profane and common blood, Hebrews the tenth chapter,
but a precious blood. Thirdly, If we consider the end of our purging, which is,
not to continue in sin, but, as Christ says, I will refresh you, that you may
take my yoke upon you, and be obedient unto me, Matthew the eleventh chapter:
The father purges the branches, that they may bring forth more fruit, John the
fifteenth chapter: And Christ gave himself for us, that he might purge us, to
be zealous of good works, Titus the second chapter and the fourteenth verse.
Whereby we see it is true, That he which has not care of holiness, has
forgotten that he was purged from his old sins.

Secondly, We are to consider how evil a thing it is, to forget the purging of
our former sins; which we shall perceive, if we consider what a benefit it is
to have them cleansed. When Gods benefits upon us are fresh, they somewhat
affect us for a time, but we presently forget them: And we are sorry for our
sins, while they are fresh and newly committed, and feel the plague of God
upon us; so that we can say with David I have sinned and done wickealy, in the
second of Samuel, and the twenty fourth chapter, but the remembrance of them
soon departs away; But howsoever we forget them, yet God will remember them,
and punish them to the third and fourth generation, Exodus the twentieth
chapter: His patience toward us, whereby he would draw us to repentance, makes
us think him like our selves, that he does forget our old sins as we do, but
he will set them before us, and (...) us for them, Psalm the fiftieth, Genesis 4 7.
If thou do evil thy sin lies at the door, and thou art to look for Gods
plagues; for evil shall haunt the wicked, Psalm 140. 11.

Our forgetfulness of sin, is Gods remembrance.
The brethren of Joseph were for a while touched with their sin committed
against their brother, but when they had forgotten it, then did God remember
it; and brought trouble upon them for it, as they themselves consessed. The
sin which Simcon and Levi committed was an old sin, the thirty fourth
chapter of Genesis, but God remembered it, and put in Jacobs heart to curse them
for it, Genesis the forty ninth chapter, so did God remember the old sin of
(...) committed against the Israelites and punished it, in the first book of
Samuel and the fifteenth chapter, so the sin of Saul in killing the (...),
which was old, was punished with a famine, the second book of Samuel and the
one and twentieth chapter; so Job says, God will plague the old man for the
sin of his youth, so that his (...) shall be full of (...) and shall ly down
with him in the dust, Job the twentieth chapter and the eleventh verse,
therefore David prays, Remember not the sins of my youth, the twenty fifth
Psalm, and the Church prays, That ancient sins might be forgiven. We have
sinned with our Fathers, Psalm the one hundred and (...). Remember not our old
sins. And because we are by nature inclined to forget them which we commit in
our youth, and have been committed in former time by our Fathers; therefore we
must beware, that we provoke not God to punish us for them. When the wicked
Servant forgot his old debt, which his Lord forgave him, and began again to
deal cruelly with his fellow, this forgetfulness made God to reverse his
purgation, (...) the eighteenth chapter; so we must remember that God forgave
our old sins; for this remembrance is profitable to us; as out of darkness
God brings light, so out of the remembrance of former sins, he can make us to
avoid sins to come. Note.
The sinful woman, when she remembered that Christ had forgiven her many sins,
was provoked thereby to love him much, Luke the seventh chapter; and when Paul
remembered, that he had been a persecuter of the Church of God, and a
blood-shedder, and that his sin was purged, it made him careful to walk in
holiness of life, so as he labored more than all the Apostles, in the first to
the Corinthians and the fifteenth chapter: wherefore seeing the remembrance of
sins past is so good, it must needs be hurtful to our our own souls, and
prejudicial to Gods glory, to forget that our former sins were purged by the
blood of Christ.

Abrahamus Pater ille vester gestivit videre diem istum meum, and vidit, etc.
Job. 8. 56.

December. 31. 1598.
THEY are the words of our Savior Christ, and therefore true, because uttered
by him that is the truth it self: Wherein affirming of Abraham, that he desired
to see his day, that is, the day of his Nativity: He shows that Abraham was a
true Christian, and solemnized the same Feast which we now celebrate, in
remembrance of Christ's birth already past, which was then to come when he
rejoiced.

And this is matter of comfort unto all men, That the service which they offer
to God is no new kind of service, but as ancient as Abraham and the rest of
the Fathers; of whom it is said, That they (...) to be saved by the Grace of
Christ as well as we, Acts the fifteenth chapter and the eleventh verse. So sai
hold Jacob, Lord I have looked for thy Jesus, Genesis the forty ninth chapter
and the eighteenth verse: And the Prophet says, Exultabo in Jesu meo, Habakkuk
the third chapter and the eighteenth verse. Of this day the Prophet says, This
is the day which the Lord has made, let us rejoice and be glad in it, Psalm
the hundred and eighteenth. In this day we are to rejoice, as in a day of
Harvest, and as in a day of Victory, Isaiah the ninth chapter and the third
verse. So that all the Prophets that were since Abraham, desired to see this
day of Christ's birth no less than he.

The occasion of these words, uttered by Christ, was, that the Jews boasted
that they were Abraham's children; But Christ tells them, they do foolishly,
considering they did degenerate from Abraham, and were not like him; for they
had neither Abraham's works, nor his faith. Abraham desired to see my day, and
longed for it, though he lived long before me, but ye despise me; you grieve to
see me, but he would have been glad to see me, as you do; he defined to see
me, and when he saw me with a lively faith, he rejoiced; to show what account
he made of me, but ye make no reckoning of me, but (...) me: Wherein we are to
consider three points. Abraham's desire to see Christ, the sight he had of him;
and the great joy he conceived when he saw him: which three may be reduced to
Abraham's faith and love. The sight which Abraham had of Christ's day, is the
vision of his faith, which faith of his is environed with two most pregnant
effects of care; that is a desire to see Christ; and joy after he had (...)
him; for, in temporal things, whatsoever men most love, that they do (not
only desire to have) but when they obtein it they rejoice, Who will show us any
good? that is, the desire whereby men testify this love to earthly blessings,
of corn, and oil, and wine; and when they have abundance of these things,
then they have joy of them, though it be not like the joy of heart, which the
light of Gods countenance brings to the faithful as it is in the fourth
Psalm: But in spiritual things Zacheus, to testify his love to Christ, did
not only desire to see him, but when Christ told him he would dine at his
house, he came down and received him joyfully, Luke the ninteenth chapter and
the fifth verse. Abraham's desire offers three things to be considered.
First, What hedesired to see, that is, Christ's day. Secondly, the desire it
self, he leaped for joy. Thirdly, the reason of this great desire. For the
first, he desired to see the day of Christ, which receives three senses,
either the day of his Deity, as Hierom expounds it; or the day of his Passion,
as Chrysostom; or the day of his Nativitie, as Ireneus interprets it; for any
of these are sufficient matter of desire, as Christ tells his disciples, Luke
the seventeenth chapter and the two and twentieth verse: But as Augustine says,
that day of Christ which we should chiefly desire to see, is that joyful day
of his birth; whereof the Angels brought word, a day of great joy to all the
people, that this day is born a Savior, Luke the second chapter.

In the desire it self, we are to consider two things; First, the Degree:
Secondly, the Manner of this Desire.

First for the Degree, It is noted in the word (...), that is leaped for joy of
that day, in regard of the great benefit which should come unto the world by
Christ's birth: Which joy the babe, John Baptist, expressed; who, before he was
borne, leaped in his Mothers womb, Luke the first chapter and the forty first
verse. The joyful desire here mentioned is, as St. Peter speaks, a joy
unspeakable and glorious, the first epistle of Peter and the eighteenth
chapter; To teach us, that the day of Christ's coming in the flesh is a day
most of all to be desired, and a matter of the greatest joy that can be.

Secondly, For the Manner of this Desire. It was a desire joined with trust and
confidence, without which our desire is in vain, be it never so hot. Abraham's
desire of seeing Christ's day, was joined with hope that he should see it, which
he so much desired. The Creatures desire to see the day of their redemption;
for they groan, Romans the eighth chapter; but this desire is without hope.
These desires are both to be seen in Jacob: For when his sons, being sent
from Joseph, told him that Joseph was alive, and was Governor in the land of
Egypt, his heart wavered: Then he had a desire to see Joseph, but it was not
joined with hope; for he believed them not: But when they told him Joseph's
words, and showed him the Chariots that were sent for to bring him, then he had
a desire with hope, and his spirit revived within him, Genesis the forty fifth
chapter and the twenty sixth verse. The hope that he conceived of seeing him
whom he desired to see, made him rejoice.

Touching the Reason of this desire, he had sufficient matter of present joy,
for he was exceeding rich in Cattle and Silver and Gold, Genesis the thirteenth
chapter and the second verse. Why then does he long after a joy to come? The
reason is, though God had blessed him with abundance of temporal blessings,
yet he considered a day would come, when his present joy should be taken from
him, John the sixteenth chapter: Therefore he desires a joy that had a
foundation, that is not earthly, but heavenly joys, Hebrews the eleventh
chapter, Such as should not be taken from him, John the sixteenth chapter and
the twenty second verse; as Job knew that his Redeemer lived, Job the
nineteenth chapter. So Abrabam desired a Redeemer, and such a one he had: For
thus says the Lord which redeemeth Abraham, Isaiah the forty ninth chapter
and the twenty second verse; That might redeem his soul from Hell, Psalm the
forty ninth; And his body out of the dust of death, Psalm the twenty second
for he confessed himself to be both dust and ashes, Genesis the eighteenth
chapter. Dust in regard of his nature, and therefore subject to corruption; but
ashes in regard of his sins, by which he is subject to everlasting
condemnation; in respect of both he desired a Redeemer, that might deliver both
his body from death and his soul from destruction, that might say revertite
silii, Psalm the ninetieth and the third verse. He considered he needed a
Redeemer for his soul and body, that he might not be dust and ashes; and
therefore exceedingly desired one that would deliver his soul from being ashes,
and his body from the dust.

Secondly, It is said of Abraham, that he saw Christ's day, the notice of Gods
eternal mercy herein was Abraham's desire; by whose example all that will see
Christ, must first desire the sight of him, as he did, Et desiderium sit eum
spectare: Though Abraham did not actually see Christ in the flesh, yet he had a
desire, which was all one as if he had seen him with bodily eyes: For if the
concupiscence only of evil be sin, though the act follow not; then desire of
that which is good is accepted, albeit it be not actually performed: therefore
Nehemiah prays, Hearken to thy servants that desire to fear thy name,
Nehemiah the first chapter and the eleventh verse: The very hungring and
thirsting after righteousness is effectual to blessedness, Matthew the fifth
chapter: When we can say with David, Coepit anima me a desider are justitias
tuas, Psalm the hundred and nineteenth. We desire to be more desirous of it, as
a thing acceptable before God; and though our soul desire not, yet the want of
it is our woe, and the fainting of our joys, while we say, When will thou
comfort us? Psalm the hundred and nineteenth: Those are as the bruised reed
and smoking flax, which he will not quench, Isaiah the forty second chapter.

That which Abraham did see was Christ's day; which is true in what sense soever
we take it, He saw the day of his Deity, Genesis the eighteenth chapter, the
second and third verses, when seeing three men he ran to meet them, and bowed
himself to the ground, saying, Lord, which was a vision of the Trinity.
Secondly, For the day of his death and passion, he saw that too, Genesis the
twenty second chapter and the fourteenth verse, when Abraham making the great
promise of his obedience, by sacrificing his son upon mount Moriah; when
after Christ was crucified said, In mane (...) provideat Dominus, though he
take not my son Isaac, yet will he take one of my seed, that shall be the
son of Abraham. Thirdly, He saw the day of Christ's nativity, when he said to
his servant, Put thy hand under my (...), and (...) by the Lord God of Heaven,
and God of the earth, (...) the (...) fourth (...) and the twenty third verse.
Quod (...) ad (...), says (...); but it was to show, that the seed in whom all
(...) should be blessed, should come out of his loins, and take flesh of him;
for he took the seed of Abraham, Hebrews the second chapter. So Abraham saw all
the days of Christ.

But secondly, We are to inquire in what (...) he saw this day: For which point
we must know he saw not Christ's day (...) Simeon, whose eyes did behold (...)
salvation, Luke the second chapter; nor as (...) to whom Christ says, (...)
are the eyes that see the things which (...) see, Luke the tenth chapter, that
is, with bodily eyes, which many (...) and Kings could not see. So Abraham's
outward man (...) not see Christ's days, but he (...) it in the (...) man,
Romans the (...) chapter; He saw it spiritually, with the eyes of (...)
Ephesians the first chapter and the eighteenth verse; And (...) the eyes of
faith, which (...) the (...) things not (...) the (...); By which things
invisible to the eyes of the body, are made visible to the eye of the mind, by
the eye of faith; by means whereof, that was made present to Abraham, which
otherwise was absent, The fathers, by faith, beheld this promise afar off,
Hebrews the (...) chapter and the seventh (...), etc. And were as sure of them
as if they were performed.

Thirdly, He rejoiced. It is said that God gave charge touching the Patriarchs
and ancient Fathers, Nolite tangere unctos (...), Psalm the hundred and fifth
and the fifteenth verse: Which (...) was Abraham, who was (...) with the oil
of gladness, Psalm the forty fifth; By which the conceived joy, when by faith
he saw the day of Christ's (...). Here we are to inquire of the matter and words
of this joy. The (...) and cause of Abraham's joy was deliverance, which is a
great cause of joy, When the Lord brought again the captivity, then was our
mouth filled with laughter, Psalm the hundred twenty sixth: So Abraham (...) to
think that he was delivered from being dust and (...), that now be might say
with David, They (...) not leave my (...) in (...), nor suffer me to see (...),
Psalm the sixteenth and the tenth (...). Secondly, He rejoiced, considering
that by means of Christ his (...), he should not only (...) the (...), which is
death of body, For dust thou art, and to dust (...), Genesis the third chapter,
And the death of the soul, which is the (...) of (...) the sixth chapter; But
should have (...), and that not temporal, but spiritual in (...) the first
chapter and the third verse: For as the (...), they (...) not earthly blessings
but heavenly; For (...) had been mindful of earthly blessings, They had (...)
to (...), and had (...) them, Hebrews the (...) chapter and the (...). But the
matter of Abraham's joy, was the hope of a (...) blessing (...) Christ. This God
(...) when he promised, That his seed should not only be as the dust of the
earth, which is an earthly (...) the thirteenth chapter, but As the stars of
Heaven, Genesis the fifteenth chapter; By which is meant the blessing of
Heaven: This blessing was, That he should enjoy those things which the eye bath
not seen, the first epistle to the Corinthians the second chapter and the ninth
verse. Thirdly, That this blessing should come to him per semen suum, not by a
strange or foraign means; this did increase Abraham's joy to think quod Servator
Abrahae, est semen Abrahae: And that he whom David called his Lord was his
son, Matthew the twenty second chapter. Fourthly, His joy was the greater,
considering that this benefit was not appropriated to the Jews only that were
of the stock of Abraham, but that in him all Nations should be blessed; not
only he and all his children, but as many as were to be blessed, should obtain
this blessedness in him. So say the Angels, that the birth of Christ is matter
of the Peoples joy, because it belongs to all People, Luke the second chapter,
That in this life all that are blessed with faithful Abraham, Galatians the
third chapter, And after this life shall be blessed, by being received into
Abraham's bosom, Luke the sixteenth chapter. For the manner of his joy, As his
desiring sight was spiritual, so his joy is not carnal, as ours, but spiritual.
We desire to see the feast of Christ's nativity, and we joy when it comes, but
in a carnal manner; but it must be spiritual as Mary says, My spirit has
rejoiced in God my Savior, Luke the second chapter. There is a joy of the
countenance, which is outward; but the true joy is of the heart and conscience.

To desire Christ's days before he come, and to joy when he is come, are the
true touchstones of our love to him. When our Parents heard God was come, they
hid themselves, Genesis the third chapter. So he that is in state of sin,
desires not Gods coming or presence, neither rejoice at it. They say, Let the
holy one of Israel cease from before us, Isaiah the thirtieth chapter and the
eleventh verse; So far are they off from desiring his coming: And for joying
when he is come, they will say with the Gergasites, Depart out of our Coasts,
Matthew the eighth chapter and the thirty fourth verse. But contrariwise the
godly, to testify their desire, say, Break the Heavens and come down, Psalm
the hundred forty fourth (...) So for joy, The hope that is deferred makes the
heart to faint; but when it comes, it is as a tree of life, Proverbs the
thirteenth chapter and the twelfth verse: Therefore we must proceed from desire
to sight, and by it, as also by our joy, we conceive at the day of Christ's
birth, we may examine whether we be the children of Abraham, and so may
conceive hope to be partakers of blessing with him. But if we rejoice as the
carnal Israelites did, of whom it is said, The People sat down to eat and
drink, and rose up to play, Exodus the thirty second chapter and the sixth
verse. If we testify our joy by eating and drinking, that is no true joy, Our
(...) day shall be (...), Malachie the second chapter: This joy is the Heathens
joy, whose hearts are filled with food and (...), Acts the fourteenth chapter;
They eat cakes and drink wine, and make themselves (...) therewith, Jeremiah
the forty fourth chapter. But that is not Abraham's joy, it is spiritual,
wherein is blessedness, For blessed are the People that can rejoice in thee,
Psalm the eighty ninth. We must learn to rejovce a right at the day of Christ's
birth. If we will rejoice as Abraham did, we must pray with David, Remember me
Lord, that I may see the (...) of thy chosen, and be glad with thy people, and
give thanks with thine inheritance, Psalm the hundred and sixth, and the fourth
and fifth verses. Abraham knew a day would come that should take away all his
earthly joy, and therefore desired the day of Christ's birth, which might make
him to rejoice in (...) the fifth chapter; And rejoice in afflictions, the first
epistle of Peter and the fourth chapter; such a joy as na man shall take away,
John the sixteenth chapter. As we must rejoice at this day of Christ, after
Abraham's example; so Christ has a second day, wherein he will give to every
man according to his works, Romans the second chapter. If we rejoice at this
day, when it comes, and desire it, If we love the glorious coming of Christ,
the second epistle to Timothy and the fourth verse, If we look for the
appearing of the just God, Titus the second chapter and the twelfth verse, then
shall we show our selves the Children of Abraham. Of that day to see it, he
says it shall be matter of joy; Lift up your heads, Luke the twenty sixth
chapter and the twenty first verse, For your redemption draws near: To others
matter of sorrow, They shall hide them in the rocks, Revelations the third
chapter; but we must say with David, I remembered thy judgments and received
comfort, Psalm the hundred and ninteenth.

Principes populorum congregantur, populus Dei Abrahami; quia Deisunt
protectiones terrae, valde excelsus est. Psalm. 47. 10.

Januar. 7. 1598.
IT is a prophecy of the manifesting of Christ to the Gentiles, and of the
gathering of them into the flock of Christ; which is the third of the three
benefits which we celebrate in the great solemnity of Christ's birth, and is
called by the Fathers, the Churches holi-day; for Christ is the head to his
Church, and the Church is his body, and the fulness of him that fills (...)
in all things, Ephesians the first chapter and the twenty third verse (...)
signify unto us, that Christ is an unperfect head, till all the body,
consisting both of Jews and Gentiles, be gathered to him. Christ had a Church
before his nativity, which was the Synagogue of the Jews; but he had not a
Church of the Gentiles, till he was come in the flesh. Presently after his
birth, some of the Gentiles which came from the East, were called to be as it
were Proctors to the rest of the Gentiles, before which time they were not
incorporated into the Church of Christ, which is his body, Ephesians the third
chapter and the sixth verse: Neither is it said only of a few of the Gentiles, or
as Christ says, A scattering of the Gentiles, John the seventh chapter and the
thirty fifth verse: But the whole company of the Gentiles, or as the Apostle
speaks, That the fullness of the Gentiles should come in, to be of Christ's
Church, Romans the eleventh chapter and the twenty fifth verse; Not a few of the
common people, but the Kings and Princes of the people. And this is Christ's
second nativity: For as he was first born at Bethlehem of his mother the
Virgin; so he has another birth foretold by the Prophet Psalm the eighty
seventh, and the third and fourth verses. I will think of (...) and Babiton,
behold Palestina, Tyrus, and Ethiopia, lo there is he borne; not at Sion only,
but among the Gentiles he shall be manifested to be the God of the Gentiles as
well as Jews.

In those words we have first a Prophecy: Secondly, A Reason rendered. In the
first we have to consider, First, The calling of the People: Secondly, Of the
Princes of the people.

First, touching the God of Abraham, it is Christ, whose day Abraham desired to
see, and in seeing whereof he did so much rejoice, John the eight chapter, that
is, not only the day of his birth, which he saw, as we learn by the oath which
he caused his servant to take, Genesis the twenty fourth chapter; but also the
day of his passion, which he saw long ago and rejoiced in seeing of it, when
he said to his son Isaac in the mount, The Lord will provide a sacrifice, Hic
providebit Dominus, Genesis the twenty second chapter and the eighth verse.

Secondly, The People of the God of Abraham, are his children and posterity;
not only they that are the seed of Abraham, coming out of his loins, and are
the children of the flesh, Romans the ninth chapter and the eighth verse, but
the children of the promise; for if they that come out of Abraham's loins were
only his children, then the Agarins, the Turks, and Ismaelites, should be the
people of God; but in Isaac shall thy seed be called. They that lay hold of the
promise by faith; They that are of the faith, are the children of Abraham,
Galatians the third chapter and the seventh verse; That have the same spirit of
faith, the second epistle to the Corinthians the fourth chapter, that Abraham
had: As the Apostle says, He is not a Jew that is one outward, but a Jew
inward is the true Jew, Romans the second chapter the twenty eighth verse. They
that worship the Messiah by believing in him with the faith of Abraham, they
are Abraham's children, and the people of (...) God; which thing John Baptist
affirms, Matthew the third chapter, God can of stones raise up children to
Abraham. So the Gentiles, which worshipped stones, and therefore were like unto
them, Psalm the hundred and fifteenth, were notwithstanding raised up to be
children to Abraham.

Concerning which joining of the Gentiles to the Church of Christ, which is the
bringing of them into one flock, John the tenth chapter and the sixteenth
verse; The ingraffing of them into the true Olive, Romans the eleventh chapter;
And the incorporating of them into his body, Ephesians the third chapter; That
we which are sinners of the Gentiles, Galatians the second chapter, might have
hope. God has from time to time left recorded in his word, that this should
come to pass: And because under two or three witnesses every matter is
established, (...) the nineteenth chapter and the fifteenth verse; therefore
before the Law we have chosen three proofs: First, Noah says, God shall
persuade? Japheth to dwell in the tents of Shem, Genesis the ninth chapter and
the twenty seventh verse: Secondly, In semine (...) omnes gentes benedicentur,
Genesis the twenty second chapter: And which (...), the people shall be
gathered to him, Genesis the forty ninth chapter and the tenth verse. Again in
the time of the Law three testimonies: First of Moses, Deateronomy the thirty
second chapter, alleged by St. Paul, Romans the fifteenth chapter and the tenth
verse, Rejoice ye Gentiles with his people. Secondly, Of (...), Numbers the
twenty fourth chapter and the seventeenth verse, There shall come a star of
Jacob, and shall bring under all the sons of (...), that is, all wicked.
Thirdly, Job, who, though he were a Gentile, yet being a member of the Church
of Christ, did, by a true faith, confess, I know that my Redeemer lives, Job
the nineteenth chapter. After the Law and before the second temple, the Prophet
says, In the name of God, Isalah the forty ninth chapter and the fixed verse:
It is a small thing, Hosea the first chapter and the sixth verse. I will call
them a people, that is no people, applied by Paul, Romans the ninth chapter:
And Joel the second chapter, I will pour my spirit upon all flesh, alleged by
the Apostle Acts the second chapter, and Romans the tenth chapter. After the
second Temple Agga veniet defideratus cunctis gentibus, Hagga the second
chapter, Great people and mighty Nations shall come to seek the Lord; they
shall take hold of the skirt of him that is a (...), and say we will go with
you, Zacherie the eighth chapter and the twenty third verse; And from the
rising of the Sonns to the going down, my name is great among the Gentiles,
(...) the first chapter and the eleventh verse. This God has from all times
revealed, That the gate of faith should be opened to the Gentiles to enter into
the flock of Christ. This was showed by Abraham's matching with Keturah a
Gentile; by Mosos matching himself with Zipporah a Midianite and Gentile, by
Solomon matching with Pharaohs daughter; as in the Genealogy of Christ's birth
Solomon is matched with Rahab, Booz with Ruth; to signify that Christ should
save both Jews and Gentiles: So the matching of Jews with Gentiles does signify
the affinity that should grow between the two Churches. The same was showed by
the stuff where of (...) Tabernacle was made, by the first Temple which was
built upon the ground of a Gentile Araunah, the second book of Samuel and the
twenty fourth chapter, with timber sent by Hiram a Gentile, the (...) book of
Kings the tenth chapter: by the second Temple which was founded by Cyrus and
(...), Heathen Princes. By which we may perceive, that God had this in mind,
and in a purpose. To gather the Gentiles into the Church of Christ, and to be of
the people of the God of Abraham; which thing was not only foreshewed, but
plainly performed: For not only there came of the (...) from the East to
Christ, Matthew the second chapter; but Grecians from the West to see Christ,
John the twelfth chapter.

The second thing in the Prophecy is, that not only the People should be
gathered to be of the Church, but the Kings and Princes: for when Peter saw the
sheet let down from heaven, Acts the tenth chapter and the eleventh verse, he
was taught, that Nations should come immediately to the Church, for then
Cornelius, and others were converted to the faith, but Princes came not till
three hundred years after that was performed; when the Prophet foretells the
poor shall eat and be satisfied, Psalm the two and twentieth and the twenty
sixth; but for Rulers it was not so performed, therefore the Pharisees object,
Do any of the Rulers believe, but this simple People that know not the Law?
John the seventh Chapter, therefore the Apostle says, you knew your calling,
that not many noble, not many mighty, but the base and weak things has God
chosen, as it is in the first of the Corinthians, a great number of the poor
people were at the first joined to the Church of Christ; and not only they, but
as it was foretold, the rich upon earth shall eat and worship, Psalm the two
and twentieth and the twenty ninth verse, so Sergius Paulus, Acts the
thirteenth, the noble man of Berea, Acts the seventeenth the Eunuch, chief
governor for the Queen of Ethiopia, Acts the eighth chapter; her Lord
Treasurer and the elect Lady, the second Epistle of Saint John and the second
chapter. So both Lords and Ladies were brought to the Church, but as yet no
Princes, for they stood up against Christ, Acts the fourth chapter; both Herod
and Paul gathered themselves against Christ, the holy son of God; Paul had
almost got one King to the Church, that is, Agrippa, Acts the twenty sixth
chapter and the twenty eighth verse; Thou almost perswadest me, etc. but there
must be a time when the kings of Arabia shall bring presents, Psalm the
seventy second; a time when Kings should be foster fathers, and Queens
nursing mothers to the Church, Isa. the forty ninth chapter, therefore under
the Law he confirmed the hope of Kings, by showing grace to the King of
Ninevey, who repented at the preaching of Jonas, and to the Queen of the South,
who came to honor Solomon, Matthew the twelfth chapter, no less than he
confirmed the hope of the poor, by calling the poor Widow of Zarepta, and of
the humble, by the example of Naaman, Luke the fourth chapter; by whose example
all sorts of people, both poor and rich, both Prince and Subject have hope be
gathered into the Church, wherein the people of this English Nation have
special cause to magnify God; for the first prince that professed the Gospel,
was Constantine the great, born in England; and ever since Christ has had a
Church of the Gentiles, not only dispersed Gentiles, John the seventh chapter, a
few only of them to worship him, but the fullness of the Gentiles, Romans the
eleventh chapter: Now not only the simple and unlearned people, but the Rulers
themselves do follow Christ, John the seventh chapter, wherein we are to exalt
and magnify the power of Christ, that he contents not himself with the
inferior people, to be worshipped of them: he will not only be the God of the
Mattocks and Staves, but of the Shields; To teach us, that he can turn the
hearts of Captains and Princes whither he will. Secondly, That when this was
performed, the Princes were not Togati, such as delighted in peace, but Armati,
men of war, and hard to be brought under, to the obedience of the Gospel,
such persons as at their pleasure will not hear when they think good, but take
away their life, Esther the 6. chap. These men were the harder to be subdued to
Christ, being without Religion for the most part, Nulla fides pietasque viris
qui Castra sequuntur, The Rulers of the people shall come to thee, as it is in
the Psalms. God would not have David build him an Altar, because he was a man
of war, and had shed blood, the first book of the Chronicles the twenty
eighth chapter and the third verse: But to gather a Church and Temple of the
Gentiles, he has no respect of that, but shows his power in bringing them to
his Church, which were most cruel. The Psalmist says, God is highly to be
exalted among the Princes of the People: At this ^ime the people of Abraham
were at a poor stay, like sheep appointed to the slaughter, Romans the tenth
verse: In which regard it was not like it would come to pass, that the Princes
and mighty men would subject themselves to them. Paul confesses that the Sect
which he followed, was every where evil spoken of, Acts the twenty sixth
chapter; That he and the rest of the Apostles, were as the filth of the world,
and the offscouring of all things, the first epistle to the Corinthians the
fourth chapter and the thirteenth verse; therefore unlikely that the great men
of the world should yield to them. Again, that they should do this of
themselves voluntarily without constraint; that where they had occupied their
shields upon Gods People, now they should use them for their defense; that they
should bring bountiful gifts to the Church: whereof we see examples in the new
Testament, Matthew the second chapter.

The Reason is to be taken four ways.

First, When God shall be exalted, then shall the Princes of the people be
gathered to the people of the God of Abraham. This is true; for this Psalm is
of Christ's ascension, of which Christ says, When he is exalted, omnes traham
ad me, John the twelfth chapter: So that it is as much as if the Prophet should
say, When Christ is exalted, then the Nations shall come to him.

Secondly, When the Princes of the people be gathered to the ^ple of Abraham,
then shall Christ be exalted; that is, when the Kings of the earth do embrace
the Christian Religion, God shall be exalted and have more glory, for every
King is worth ten thousand; and when one King follows Christ, it is a greater
glory to Christ, than if many people, the second book of Samuel and the
eighteenth chapter, The King is to go out and in before the People, the first
book of Samuel and the eighth chapter; So the people will follow the King; if
he be good they will tread in his steps. When Jothan reigned the people were
good; But when Achan came, they turned with him to Idolatry. So it fell out
with Ezechiah and the people, with Manasse and his people, with Amon and his
people, Joshuah and his people, Nobile mutatur semper cum principe vulgus: So
that God is more exalted when he inclines the hearts of Kings to follow Christ,
and to cleave to the Church. When the Kings offer bountifully to the (...), as
David did, then will his people; but if he withdraw his liberality, they will
draw away too. Hereupon Christ, when the Greeks desired to see him said The
hour is come that the son of man must be glorified, John the twelfth chapter.

The other two ways are as a reason, Because the shields of the earth are the
Lords, his name is exalted. This was the reason that moved Constantine, he saw
God had a power to protect and give victory, and therefore embraced the
Christian Religion. God says to Abraham, I am thy shield, Genesis the
fifteenth chapter: And of him David says, He is a shield to them that trust in
him, Psalm the thirty third. Constantine saw in Heaven the signs of the
Cross, on which was written, (...), in this thou shall overcome; wherein God
shows them that he (...) power to defend and give victory; therein is his name
exalted. When they fee that they will take hold with the Jews and say, God is
with them, Zachery the eight chapter. The other way is, because God is exalted,
therefore he will defend the earth as with a shield. This is a motive to make
men become religious; and when they are so, then follows defense and safety,
which is the effect of magnifying Gods name. When we take the shield of faith,
and believe in God, Ephesians the fifth chapter, Then he will compass us with
his faith, as with a shield, Psalm the fifth chapter, His faithfulness and
truth shall be with us, and in his name shall his horn be exalted, Psalm the
eighty ninth. Therefore Moses, having exalted the name of God in Horeb because
they were delivered, and built an Altar called, The Lord is my banner, Exodus
the seventeenth chapter and the fifteenth verse: The name of the Lord is a
strong Tower, Proverbs the eighteenth chapter. The Church is like the Tower of
David, which had many shields, Canticles the fourth chapter; To signify that
because the Church does exalt and magnify the name of God, therefore he does
defend it by a thousand means: And therefore the Apostle says, That godliness
has the promise of this life, as well as of the life to come, the first
epistle to Timothy the fourth chapter. So that whether way soever we take it,
it teaches us, That love is the end of the Commandment, out of a pure heart
and good conscience and faith unfeigned, the first epistle to Timothy the
first chapter. It does teach us to walk in the simpleness of the faith of our
Father Abraham, and to do his works, John the eighth chapter. It teaches us
to exalt and magnify Gods name for exaltatio nominis Domini (...).

Et inutilem servum ejicite in tenebras illas extimas: illic erit fletus and
stridor dentium. Matt. 25. 30.

Jan. 16. 1598.
THE sentence which passed upon the unprofitable servant had two branches:
First, A sentence of deprivation, Taking the talent from him. Secondly, A
sentence of translation, and giving it to him that has ten talents; Now the
talent being taken away, The servant himself is cast into utter darkness.

These two parts of his punishment are by good order joined together; not only
that the talent should be taken away, but that punishment should be laid upon
his person; that not only the tree should be cut down, and be deprived of all
power to fructify, but to be cast into the fire, Luke the thirteenth chapter;
the wastfull servant must not only lose his office, but must give an account of
his Stewardship, Luke the sixteenth chapter: It were well if he might only lose
his talent, and himself escape, utinamperiret pecunia modo ne suo periret: but
it agrees with Gods Justice, that as the talent was lost through the
negligence of the unprofitable servant; so now the servant should perish for
the honor of the talent. And it stands with Gods wisdom so to punish the
unprofitable servant; for if the salt be unsavery it is good for nothing but to
be cast out, Matthew the fifth chapter: And when the tree brings no fruit and
troubles the ground, it is fittest to be cut up, Luke the thirteenth chapter,
that others may be planted in the room of it, that will bear fruit. Wherefore
as when Saul had lost his spirit, the Kingdom tarried not long with him after;
so if our talents be once taken away, we may look that God will lay a
punishment upon our persons. If we fall from our first love, Apocalypse the
second chapter, and use not our talents to Gods glory, we may justly fear our
persons. But as God did first command Lot to go out of Sodom, before he
destroyed the City it self; so he will first take away the talent, that it
perish not; and after the person shall be punished.

The punishments inflicted upon his person, are reduced to two. Being first,
(...). Secondly, (...).

Touching the first, he says, Cast out the unprofitable servant that has done
nothing to my glory, not servum peccatore^, Luke the (...) chapter, nor the
riotous servant that wastes his Masters goods, but (...), him that does no good
with the talents committed to him, sic sic in virido, Luke the twenty third
chapter. If he show such cruelty toward him that was only unprofitable, and
did no good; how severely will he punish those that do hurt with their
talents, that are riotous and mispend their whole talents. Three things make
his punishment grievous: First, That he is punished with a separation.
Secondly, It is with a violent separation. Thirdly, This separation is with
disgrace and shame: For the place from which he is separated, as the Apostle
says, It does not appear what we shall be, the first epistle of John and the
third chapter. So it appears not to us what the place is whither we shall be
gathered, if we use Gods gifts as we ought. But as he speaks of the person, so
of the place: We know that it is an excellent place, a place of such glory as
the eye has not seen, the first epistle to the Corinthians the second chapter:
Such glory as all the afflictions of this life are not to be compared with it,
Romans the eighth chapter: and therefore to be cast out from this place, will
be a heavy sentence.

The separation from the Temple, which was but a type of that place was so
grievous to David's soul, as he had no rest in his spirit, and thought himself
in worse state than the Sparrow, till he had access to the City of God, Psalm
the eighty fourth. Much more grievous is it to be separated from heaven. If of
the Church on earth it is said, there are gloriosa dict a de te, Psalm the
eighty seventh. Much more glorious things are spoken of Heaven, whereof to be
deprived will be a great grief; for this place has all things which may
commend any place: Of light it is said, Lumen dilexit oculus; but this place
has no night, but continual light from the Lord himself, Apocalypse the twenty
first chapter. If society do commend a place, then this place is commendable,
quia janua ibi aperta. If immunity from pain, there is neither hunger, nor
thirst, nor cold. If joy, then there the elders sing continually the praises of
God, Apocalypse the twenty first chapter. Therefore to be excluded from this
place, which is so to be desired, is a great punishment.

Again, To be separated not only from so good a place, but from such company;
not only of holy Angels, where if it were a great blessing to lodge, while they
were clothed with mortality, Hebrews the thirteenth chapter; then it is a
greater blessing to dwell with them in this perfect (...). None of the saints,
who albeit on earth they be despised and called fools, Wisdom the fifth
chapter, yet shall be glorious in heaven, and not only their souls, but their
bodies made like the glorious body of Christ, Philippians the third chapter and
the twenty first verse; of whose company to be deprived, will be a grief; but
to be cast out of the company of Jesus Christ, who when he did give but a taste
of his glory, it was so glorious (...) his Disciples, Matthew the seventeenth
chapter, so as they said, (...) est nobis hic offici, will be a great grief:
for there he shall be in perfect glory at the right hand of God, where he now
(...), which shall much more rejoice us than these drops. Lastly, If the
comfort of Gods (...) in earth, where the light of it is greatly eclipsed and
darkened, do afford more comfort than (...) of corn and oil, Psalm the
fourth; then what a discomfort will it be to be separated from the light of it,
when God shall show the brightness of (...) but even then shall the
unprofitable servant be cast out from beholding the same. Secondly, That which
does aggravate his punishment is, that this separation shall be done with
violence, cast him out; not bid him go out, or lead him out. The separations
that are made from the Church militant, are not done without great difficulty;
no man would willingly be (...): But it will be a far greater grief to be
separated from the Church triumphant; but howsoever they be unwilling, yet they
shall be separated violently: no man will willingly come to judgment at the
last day, but God will bring every thing to judgment, Ecclesiastes the twelfth
chapter; He that does evil hates the light, John the third chapter: but we
shall be brought to light whether we will or no: and death, which is a
preparation to the last judgment, is fearful: So as no man willingly dies,
nay we make many pleas, becaule we would not be separated; we say, Lord, have
not we prophesied? and yet Christ tells, all will not serve the turn, Matthew
the seventh chapter; Not every one that says Lord, Matthew the twenty fifth
chapter: When did we see the hungry or naked, etc. But Christ for all that (we
are so unwilling to be cast out) tells us, In as much as you did it not, etc.
So that albeit man will not go out of himself, yet he shall be cast out with
violence, which makes his punishment more grievous. Thirdly, This separation
shall be with contumely and disgrace; to be thrown out of the company of the
Angels, is a disgraceful separation. Many times Malefactors, though they
suffer for their offenses, yet have no disgrace offered them: But the
unprofitable servant shall not only be punished with the loss of this heavenly
place, but shall be cast out to his shame; for he that dishonors God by
burying his talent bestowed upon him, God will punish him with dishonor and
disgrace; Them that hate me I will hate, the first book of Samuel the second
chapter.

Secondly, The place into which he shall be cast, is utter darkness. The
Apostle when he says, Ad quem ibimus? (...) habes verba aternae vitae, John
the sixth chapter and the sixty eighth verse, tells us, It is an excellent thing
to be in presence of them that have the words of eternal life; but it is far
more excellent to be present with eternal life it self; but not only to be
deprived of his presence, but to be cast into utter darkness is extreme misery.
If we might be choosers for our selves, as the Devils choesed to go into the
hoggs, (...), the eighth chapter and the thirty first verse: So if we might
choose some place, if it were but to return to the world again, it were some
mitigation; but when we have not only (...), but (...), that is greater cause
of misery; we are not only deprived of light, but cast into a place of
darkness. And this punishment is very just, that the unprofitable servant
should be cast into darkness, which did darken his talent and hid it; as the
Prophet speaks of cursing, Psalm the hundred and ninth He loved not blessing,
then let it be far from him; So quia non dilexit lucem, non veniat ei lux,
extinguit scintilla gratiae, ne videat lumen gloriae: Which punishment how
grievous it is, appears, for that the beholding of light, as the Preacher says
Ecclesiastes the eleventh chapter, is so comfortable to the eyes: As Paul was
out of hope of recovery, when he and the rest could see nothing but darkness,
Acts the twenty seventh chapter: And God plagued the Egyptians with darkness,
as the greatest plague he could lay upon them. And the Apostle, to show the
grievous punishment of the evil Angels, says, They are reserved under
darkness, the second epistle of Peter the second chapter; for tenebrae
formidolosae.

Again, He is punished not only with darkness, but also with weeping and
gnashing of teeth: A man may have some comfort in darkness, it is the best
time to sleep and meditate; but the unprofitable servants being cast into
darkness, shall have neither of these comforts to mitigate his punishment. For
there he shall feel the worm of conscience gnawing him, which shall never dye,
and be tormented with the fire that never goes out, Mark the ninth chapter: He
shall have all things that may continue and increase his weeping.

But in these words the Holy Ghost points out two things. The certainty, and
the measure of weeping in this place.

Touching the first, We see by experience, that in this life many unprofitable
servants, that bury their talents, do for all that enjoy light, and withal
have great joy and gladness; and therefore the Holy Ghost tells them, that
howsoever they escape here, yet in the world to come they shall be sure to be
cast into darkness, and to weep continually; they shall hear that Memento
which the rich man received from Abraham, Luke the sixteenth chapter, Thou in
thy life time receivedst pleasure, but now pain: So shall it be with the
unprofitable servants, that are not diligent to employ their talents to their
Masters glory.

Secondly, He alludes to the measure of weeping, which is found in this place;
for many unprofitable servants lose their talents in this life, and are
deprived of the comforts that should cheer them up; they weep and endure much
sorrow: But because our weeping in this life is mixed with many comforts, which
do mitigate our grief, the Holy Ghost tells us, That howsoever they may find
means to delay grief and weeping here, yet the greatest weeping is behind in
the world to come, where shall be no mitigation of grief. Rachel wept and
lamented much for her children, because they were not; but the weeping and
lamentation of these men shall be far greater; not only because they are
destitute of comfort in the midest of these miseries, but for that they shall
never find any means to mitigate their anguish and grief: Therefore as one
gives counsel, Sic legate homo histerias ne fiat historia; so, sic audite
parabolam hanc ne fiat is parabola.

Pro puero isto supplicabam; praestititque mihi Jehovah petitionem meam, quam
petebam ab eo. Quemobrem ego quoque precario datum sisto eum Jehovae omnibus
diebus quibus fuerit, ipse rogatus precario est Jehovae, etc. 1 Samuel 1. 27.28.

Febr. 2. 1598.
THey be the words of Hannah, the mother of the Prophet Samuel, uttered by her,
when she offered him unto God, being weaned in the Tabernacle; but are applied
by Prosper to the Virgin Mary, offering up Christ to God his Father in the
Temple, Luke the second chapter. It is certain, That not only that Prophecy
which Malachi uttered touching the coming of the Lord of Hosts into his Temple
in his own person, Malachi the third chapter and the first verse, must be
fulfilled: but that also of Daniel, That being come, he should also be offered
up to God, signified by that vision which the Prophet had of one like the Son
of man, who was brought to the ancient of days, that was to God his Father,
Daniel the seventh chapter and the thirteenth verse: Which thing was truly
performed on the day of the Virgins Purification. For as the day of Christ's
nativity, is a memorial of Christ given to us by God; so the Feast of
Purification is a memorial of Christ given to God by us.

Oblations were of two sorts, Numbers the twenty eighth chapter and the fourth
verse, agnus matutinus, and agnus vespertinus; the representation of Christ in
the Temple by his Parents, was the morning Lamb; and the offering up of himself
as a sacrifice in his passion, was the evening Lamb. In his oblation he was the
author and beginning of our says; in his passion, the finisher and
accomplishment of our faith, Hebrews the twelfth chapter. For the application
of this Scripture, that it may not seem strange, but lawful and warrantable,
both by Scripture and practice of Christ's Church, we are to know that it is
lawful and usual, to compare things spiritual not only with things natural, as
with seed, Matthew the thirteenth chapter; with things artificial, as husbandry
and building, the first epistle to the (...) and the third chapter; with moral
and occonomical, as when God is compared to a householder, Matthew the twentieth
chapter; but things spiritual, with spiritual Scripture, with Scripture, and
one story with another; to apply that which is spoken of one member of Christ's
Church, Zechariah the fourth chapter and the twelfth (...) to another member of
the same body, (...) the eleventh chapter and the fourth verse; and not only
so, but it is usual to apply that to Christ the head, which is affirmed of the
body; as where it is said of the Congregation of the Jews, Hosea the eleventh
chapter, I called my son out of Egypt, the same is applied to Christ the head
of that body, Matthew the second chapter, Out of Egypt have I called my son;
because as Christ the head, was truly the son of God, so he makes all the
members of his mystical body to be sons. So that which God spoke to a part of
the body, the second book of Samuel the seventh chapter, I will be his Father,
is by the Apostle applied to Christ, the head of that body, Hebrews the first
chapter and the fifth verse. And so is this speech of Hanna, in offering her
son to God, applied by the ancient Church to the oblation of Christ in the
Temple, as those were of the Prophet, Lamentations the first chapter and the
twelfth verse, to the sacrifice of his passion. So this application is
warrantable. For if Hannah did offer to God Samuel her son, much more ought
the Virgin to offer up Christ in token of thankfulness, who is a greater than
Samuel, as he was greater than Solomon, Matthew the twelfth chapter. This
composition is fit, and has congruity both in respect of the mothers, their
songs being compared together, 1 Samuel 2. Luke 1. which in effect are all one,
and for the persons of the children, for they were both Nazarites, verse
eleven, Luke the second chapter, He shall be called a Nazarite. Secondly,
Though there have been some that were both Prophet and Priest, or King and
Prophet; yet all three, Priest, Prophet, and Prince, did not concur in any
but in Samuel, who therefore was a representation of Christ, anointed by God,
Prophet, Priest, and King. Thirdly, Samuels love to his enemies, for whom he
ceased not to pray, the first book of Samuel and the twelfth chapter,
expresses Christ's love, who prayed for his persecutors, Luke the twenty third
chapter, father forgive them; which love Christ also showed, in that when we
were enemies he reconciled us to God, Romans the fifth chapter. In respect of
which resemblance, Bernard says, Fortior est compositio quam positio.

In those words we have to consider two donations; First, Gods giving to
Hannah, verse. the twenty seventh. Secondly, Hannahs giving back again to God,
verse the twenty eighth. As the first donation begins with prayer, and ends
with gift; so the latter begins gift, and ends with prayer. And it is agreeable
to reason, that the child which came by intercession, should end with
intercession.

Concerning which donations we are to note jointly, First, That we can give
nothing to God, but we must first receive it from him; As Hannah could not
offer her child to the Lord, unless she first had received him from the Lord:
For so says King David, the first book of the Chronicles the twenty ninth
chapter and the fourteenth verse, Quae de manu tua accepimus, damus tibi.
Secondly, When we have received any blessing from God, then we must give to him
as we are exhorted, Psalm the seventy sixth and the eleventh verse, and Psalm
the ninety sixth and the eighth verse, Bring present; and joy into his Courts.

Of those things that are to be given, some are laid upon us of necessity, As
the tenth of the fruits of the ground, which the Lord challenges to himself,
Leviticus the twenty seventh chapter and the thirtieth verse, and has set over
to the Levites, that it should be given to them, Numbers the eighteenth
chapter. Then there are (...), or free will offerings, such voluntary gifts as
the people gave of their own accord; for howsoever they were bound to offer
their first born, yet they might redeem the life of them, Exodus the thirtieth
chapter.

To speak (...) of them, Gods donation has two parts, Hannahs Prayer, and Gods
Gift. In Prayer we are to observe two things, The sense of Want, And the desire
of the Heart: For it is the supply of want which makes her break forth into
prayer; for (...) indigentiae. Wherefore howsoever the want of so great a (...)
as is the bearing of a child, did move Hannab to break forth into this desire
of Prayer: Yet it is most certain, that the Virgin (...) more needed a Savior,
for which she confessed her spirit (...), than Hannah needed a son: And as
her need was greater, so her prayer was stronger than Hannahs prayer: for
Hannah prayed alone; but as for Mary's prayer, it was accompanied with the
desire and prayer of all Creatures, as both the Prophets and Apostles do show;
Heaven and earth was reconciled to be God, Ephesians the first chapter, and
Colossians the first chapter and the third verse: Therefore they did greatly
desire Christ's coming: And therefore when there was hope of his coming, they
are exhorted to be glad; Rejoice ye heavens, shout ye lower parts of the earth,
Isaiah the forty fourth chapter and the twenty third verse: and the Apostle
says, that the Creatures (...) groan, waiting for the redemption, Romans the
eighth chapter, much more shall (...) desire his coming; and therefore the
Prophet says, desideratus est (...) is gentibus, Haggai the second chapter. As
all Nations did ignorantly worship the unknown God, Acts the seventeenth
chapter, so they all had an ignorant desire of his coming; but especially the
Saints of God have not only desired in heart, but prayed for this gift, as
Jacob, Genesis the forty ninth chapter, I have waited for thy salvation: Psalm
the fourteenth and the seventh verse: O that salvation were given to Israel out
of Sion: Isaiah the sixty fourth chapter and the first verse, Utinam dirumpat
caelos and descendat; such a desire had this Virgin for the coming of her
Savior, as she expressed in her song, when she confesses, he has filled the
hungry. Simeon waited for the consolation of Israel, so did Hannah the
Prophetisse, Luke the second chapter. So that whether we respect the Prayer or
Desire of Prayer, we see that Marys prayer is greater than (...). If we respect
the effect of the Virgins prayer, we shall see it more fully persomed in her
than in the other.

Prayer is compared to a Key, wherewith, as Elias opened the Heavens, when they
were shut up, Luke the fourth chapter and the twenty fifth verse. So when God
shuts up the wombs of women, Genesis the twentieth chapter and the eighteenth
verse, that they become barren, then prayer is the key that opens them: By this
key was the (...) of Hannah opened, and she brought forth Samuel. But if we
consider that by this key God opened the womb of a Virgin, that she conceived
and bear a son, that is a greater wonder, and a matter more highly to be
extolled; but so did he open the womb of the blessed Virgin. Elias opened the
Heavens when they were shut, and obtained rain for the earth: But the Virgins
key of Prayer, accompanied with the prayers of all Gods People in all ages,
opened the Heaven of Heavens, so as they dropped down righteousness, Isaiah
the forty fifth chapter and the eighth verse; Even the Son of Man that came
down from Heaven, John the third chapter; that is Jesus Christ, who is our
righteousness our sanctification, the first epistle to the Corinthians, the
first chapter and the thirtieth verse. The effect of Hannahs Prayer is, Dominus
dedit, which is the inscription of all the things we possess, as King David
confesses, O Lord, all this abundance is of thine hand, the first book of the
Chronicles and the twenty ninth chapter. But this inscription is peculiarly
given to children and the fruit of the womb, Psalm the hundred twenty seventh,
which indeed are an inheritance and gift that comes of the Lord; for he
says, Scribe virum istum sterilem, Jeremiah the twenty second chapter and the
thirtieth verse: So he punished Michal which despised David, so that she had no
child to the day of her death, the second book of Samuel, the sixth chapter and
the twenty third verse: But if he bless this working, and so make them
fruitful, then is it a blessing and gift to be acknowledged with all
thankfulness; especially when the children are as arrows and darts in the hand
of a Giant, that is spiritual, in Church or Commonwealth, Psalm the hundred
twenty seventh; for such a child was Samuel, therefore Hannah confesses it
thankfully. But if we come to the composition, we shall find that Christ's gift
to us by God, is a far greater gift, if we consider that Salus data est
(...), Isaiah the ninth chapter; that God has manifcsted his love to the
world, by giving a son to us, John the third chapter and the sixteenth verse:
He is Donum Dei, John the fourth chapter; which if we could receive, we should
perceive how far he exceeds Samuel: but he is (...), the second epistle to
the Corinthians the ninth chapter and the fifteenth verse, Gods unspeakable
gift. We must not talk of any other gifts; for he is the great gift of God to
us: and that gift which we must offer to God for our sins; without whom it is
in vain to bring burnt offerings and sacrifices; for he only puts away
iniquity Isaiah the forty third chapter: And God having given us such a gift,
how will he not with him give us all other things, Romans the eighth chapter.
Samuel was a great gift to Hannah, for he proved spiritual in the People of
God, as a dart in the hand of a mighty man; but yet he was but a type of
Christ, who is the greatest gift that ever God bestowed upon mankind.

The second Donation is on our part to God. In man's judgment, if God gives us
such a gift, we are best to keep it: but this gift is given us not to be kept,
but to be laid out and bestowed for our use; Datus est nobis, ut detur a
nobis: And this is done in the latter verse.

In which we have to consider, First, the Gift: Secondly, Limitations. First,
for the time, As long as he lived: Secondly, the end, To serve God. If we ask,
why Hannah and the Virgin do give to God? the reason is, because God being
offended, must be appeased; and nothing does more serve to appease wrath than a
gift, Proverbs the twenty first chapter and the fourteenth verse; therefore
Jacob (...) a present to Esau, Genesis the thirty third chapter; Ut cum (...)
placeret muneribus: As this kind of satisfaction has place in all offenses;
so chiefly when offense is made per ablationem; we have taken away and robbed
God, Philippians the second chapter, of the faith and obedience we owe to him.
Therefore, as we have offended per ablationem; so must we satisfy per
oblationem; as Jacob, having robbed Esau of his birthrigh, by taking his
blessing from him, does satisfy and appease his wrath by offering to him; that
is the ground and reason of our gift. But if we will appease by a gift there
must be an equality; we may not offer a thing under the value of the thing
which wastaken away; that is the reason why all the sacrifices of the Law could
not appease God, as the Apostle shows, It is impossible that the blood of
Bulls and Goats should take away sins, Hebrews the tenth chapter, and Psalm
the fourtieth; therefore the Prophet says, Wherewith shall I come and appear
before God? shall I bring Rams and Sheep, or Rivers of Oil? shall I give my
first borne? Michah the sixth chapter. But all that will not satisfy God, for
that we have taken from him. The value of our obedience to God is such as
cannot appease and satisfy his Majesty, being offended, The soul is more
precious than all the world; and no sufficient ransom can be given by man for
it, Matthew the sixteenth chapter: But if we can offer to God a thing of equal
price to the obedience which we owe to God, then no doubt but he will be
appeased, especially if we offer a thing of a higher rate: But Christ is of
greater value than all that we can take from God; for howsoever the sin be
great, in that we that are but men, should sin against God who is infinite:
yet if we look to Christ's person, who has satisfied for us, it is of such
dignity as does worthily serve for a ransom for the sins of all the world.
And for our concupiscence, the love of Christ has made a sufficient
satisfaction for it; which love is such as the Apostle calls it, (...), So
that now we may sing both Mercy and Judgment, Psalm the hundred and first, of
our selves we are to rely upon Gods mercy in Christ: But in as much as Christ
in our persons has so fully satisfied for us, we may be bold to tell his
Justice now, That his righteousness is made ours, and we are made the
righteousness of God in him, the second epistle to the Corinthians the fifth
chapter.

The limitation for the time is, all the days of his life. To make him a
Nazarite was not enough, for that continues but for certain days, Numbers the
sixth chapter: But Hannah gives her son to the Lord, (...) his life, that is
for ever. Such a Nazarite was Sampson, not for a few days, but from the day of
his birth to the day of his death, Judges the thirteenth chapter and the
seventh verse: And besides these (...) find none that continued Nazarites so
long. But if we come to (...) composition, we shall find, that whereas before
Christ many were made Nazarites and Priests to serve the Lord, because they
were not suffered to endure by reason of death. For Samuel, though he lived
fourscore years, which age no man scarce exceeds, Psalm the nintieth. He
whom the blessed Virgin offered to be a Nazarite, was such a one as endures
for ever, and whose office cannot be intercepted by death, Hebrews the seventh
chapter and the twenty third verse. As he is such a King, as of whose Kingdom
there is no end, Luke the first chapter and the thirty fifth verse; so he has
an everlasting Priesthood, The Lord has appointed him to be a Priest for ever,
Psalm the hundred and tenth, to make reconciliation between God and men; so
has he obtained for us eternal redemption, Hebrews the ninth chapter and the
twelfth verse; And is become the author of eternal salvation, Hebrews the fifth
chapter and the ninth verse. So that the limitation which Hannah speaks of,
stands more firm in Christ than in Samuel.

The second limitation is for the end, signified in these words, And he shall
serve, or worship, the Lord: For it stands with good reason, that as (...) was
the beginning, so it should be the end; for as the Priest (...) said, in the
first book of Samuel and the second chapter, If man offend against God, who
will be his days man, and come between God and him: There is none to undertake
this matter, but he that is appointed to be the only mediation between God and
man, the first epistle to Timothy the second chapter and the fifth verse, that
is, Jesus Christ, who, as he is God and man, so is God blessed for ever, Romans
the ninth chapter; For a Mediator is not of one, Galatians the third chapter,
but of two parties that are at variance, and the mediator is to stand between
them both. Now there is great disagreement between God and man, by reason of
sin, which has made a separation. And therefore we are to inquire, who shall
be the mediator. It is certain, Samuel, while he lived, stood between God and
the people, as a Mediator, to appease him by sacrifice: But his mediatorship is
come to an end; Therefore we must look for a more perfect Mediator, such a one
as Samuel himself needed. Now the Mediator that stands between God and us, is
not Samuel the Priest, but Christ, the Son of the Virgin, Who to appease the
wrath of God his Father, offered up himself as a lamb, Isaiah the fifty third
chapter, to be a sacrifice for us. Secondly, Because we need a mediator to
stand between us and Satan, he also does perform this, and deliver us out of
the jaws of that roaring Lion. Wherefore as before he was a lamb, as (...)
God, as Samuel did; so here, like Sampson, he delivers us, like that Lion of
the tribe of Judah, which Jacob foretold, Genesis the forty ninth chapter, and
has showed himself, in the fifth chapter of the Revelations, as before he was
a Priest, so here he shows himself (...), in the twelfth chapter to the
Hebrews. Thirdly, he was to be our Intercessor, in respect of judgment. It is
with us, as it (...) out between the Judges and the Clyent; and therefore
Christ is called an Advocate, in the first epistle of John, the second chapter
and second verse. The law has two parts, Punishment and Reward: We by our
sins, have made our selves guilty of the punishment and of the curse that is
threatened against them that continue not in all things, (...) the third
chapter; But he stands as a Mediator between the punishment and us, and (...)
shed his bload as a ransom for our sins, the first epistle to Timothy, the
second chapter; and so has cancelled the handwriting (...) against us, and
taken away the malediction that was (...) us, Collossians the second chapter;
and for the reward which we should have deserved, fac hoc and vives; howsoever
we have debarred our selves of it, yet he is (...), Ephesians the first
chapter; and has bought and purchased life for us: He is a Mediator, and
Intercessor on our parts to God propter (...) peccati, and defectum meriti; by
his innocence and righteousness he has purchased that for us, which we could
not deserve for our sins.

This is to be an Intercessor, which intercession is performed in all
Religions, by Prayer and Oblation. By prayer, Christ is our Intercessor; For he
sits at the right hand of God, and makes intercession for us, Romans the eight
chapter; not for the godly only, but for his enemics, Father forgive them, Luke
the twenty third chapter, as it was foretold of him, He shall pray for the
transgressors, Isaiah the fifty third chapter; And he prayed not only for
forgiveness of sins, but for the turning away of punishments due to sin;
which was the cause, that he offered up supplications to God with strong cries,
Hebrews the fifth chapter and the ^eventh verse: He prayed that the holy Ghost
might be given to his Disciples, John the fourteenth chapter: (...) of the
Father that the holy Ghost being given, Satan might not (...) them from the
faith, Luke the twenty second chapter. Lastly, That we may be partakers of
glory with him, John the sevententh chapter, and be where he is. As he prays
for us, so he makes (...) supplyeth the impersections of of our prayers, and
makes them acceptable to God; Canticles the eighth chapter, (...) me audire
vocem tuam, that is, I will take upon me to obtain for you, that which you
cannot.

Secondly for Oblation, As Samuel did (...) only pray to God for the People,
but did himself take a (...), and after (...) for the People, the first book of
Samuel the seventh chapter; So Christ as our Intercessor to God, not only by
prayer, but by oblation, he was an oblation offered in the morning, (...) was
presented to God his Father, that he would for us yield obedience to the Law
(...) his death was an evening oblation; he was not only the (...) first fruit
of the corn, but became the vine in his death, by (...) his blood: And as he
not only prays, but gives (...) so he does not only offer for us, but give
(...) the Prophet foretold, That whom he should (...) offerings of the people
should be acceptable, (...) the (...) and the fourth verse. Our prayers and
oblations (...) ^ctions: And whereas God appointed that the (...) be purified,
should offer to God a young (...) Leviticus the twelfth chapter, to (...) up
himself to God tanquam agnum immaculatum, yet (...) columbam gementem; if not
innocence of life, yet repentance and sorrow for sins. But because we cannot
present either a Lamb or a Dove, neither innocence of life, nor true sorrow
for sins; therefore Christ's oblation does supply the defect of our
imperfections: We cannot offer up such tears for sin as we ought; therefore
the strong cries and tears, which he offered, Hebrews the fifth chapter the
seventh verse, stand between God and us: Because the agony and grief of our
heart is cold and dead; therefore the agony that he endured, when he sweat
water and blood, is a suppliant, Luke the twenty second chapter. So he is both
an oblation for us, and supplyeth the imperfections of our oblations. He having
offered up himself to God, as a Lamb (...) and without spot, the first epistle
of Peter the first chapter and the nineteenth verse, has appeased the wrath of
God his Father, and procured his favor for us, and keeps away the malice and
rage of Satan from us.

Victori dabo edere ex arbore illa vitae quae est in medio Paradisi Dei. Revel.
2. 7.

Febr. 4. 1598.
A PLACE of Scipture purposely chosen, that we might not depart from the
consideration of those things wherein we have been occupied heretofore, and yet
such as may fitly be applied for our instruction in the Sacrament of the body
and blood of Christ: for though we be now in the Revelations, yet are we not
gone from the third chapter of Genesis; wherein we learned, that Adam was sent
out of the Garden and kept from the tree of life. Affinity of the Tree of life,
and of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
And for the business we intend, there is a great affinity between the tree of
life which God set in Paradise, as a quickening means for the coutinuance of
life in Adam, if he had continued in his first state, and the Sacrament of
Christ's body and blood; for, as I told you, the causes of that Scripture gives
man a hope of restitution to Paradise and (...) tree of life, which is
acquifitis novi juris: And that restitution is performed in this place.

There was an Angel set to forbid Adam access to the tree of life; which was a
sight dreadful, for that he was armed with a fiery sword: But here we have
comfort, that he that makes this promise of restitution, is an Angel as well
armed, viz. with a two edged sword, Apocalypse the first chapter and the
sixteenth verse, Whose eyes were as a flame of fire, Apocalypse the second
chapter and the eighteenth verse. So there is a resemblance between the party
that here gives license to come to the tree of life, and the other that forbid
to come to it. The one threatened with a sword; the other promises to the
persons that keep the condition here expressed, That they shall out of the tree
of life.

The point is next, how these shall prevail: But if we consider how the Angels
or Seraphins, (...) the sixth chapter and the second verse, (in that they hid
their faces before the Lord of (...); which was Christ, whose glory was (...)
showed, John the twelfth chapter,) and Cherubins, (...) the tenth chapter, do
(...) this Angel and cast their crowns down before him, as the blessed spirits
do, (...) the fifth chapter, it is like he shall prevail; for the one is the
sword but of a ministering spirit, Hebrews the first chapter, but this is the
promise of the Lord of life and glory. Acts the third chapter, and the first
(...) to the (...) the second chapter.

But the chief point to be inquired is, How the holy Ghost agrees with
himself, that man being debarred of the tree of life, is restored to it: The
answer is, Genesis the third chapter and the twenty second verse, the
punishment laid upon him was, (...) forth his hand and (...) of the (...) of
life: But if there be a power given to man, to eat of the tree, John the
nineteenth chapter and the eleventh verse, then he may take of it. Man of
himself may not (...) into Paradise; but if that power of returning be given
him, which Christ gave to the (...), Luke the twenty third chapter, (...) thou
be with me in Paradise, then he may enter. Now Christ (...) purchased to us a
new right of returning, and by virtue thereof, we have power to eat of the tree
of life, and he gives us license to enter into Paradise.

Applicat^
But to apply this Scripture to our present purpose, (...) thing in the
Sacrament that disposes us to life, and (...) of life, no less than the tree
of life. For herein we are (...) of that bread of life which our Savior speaks
of, (...) I am the bread of life that (...) of (...) bread shall live for ever,
(...) Father, so he that (...) me, (...) the fifty seventh verse. So that
whether it be the (...) of the (...) Paradise, or the bread of life in the
Sacrament, we see there is a (...) affinity, as appears if we compare this
(...) the second chapter and the (...) which, as the Apostle (...), in the
(...) tenth chapter and the third verse, (...) whereof we are partakers in this
(...) of (...) blood.

This scripture (...) of two parts, The (...) and the Promise, (...), and (...).

Touching the conjunction of these two, (...) when Christ promises to him that
(...) tree of life, which (...) God and no matter of (...), and that he will
not (...) that do nothing; for it is not the bread of (...) is bestowed on
them that do (...) sixth chapter.

In the Promise we are to know, That the Paradise and tree of life which Christ
promises, is not that earthly Paradise planted at the beginning for Adam, nor
that tree of life appointed for the prolonging of his natural life, but a
better Paradise; the other was Adams Paracise, but this is called Gods
Paradise; the other was a Paradise on earth, but this a celestial Paradise,
that into which the Apostle was caught up, in the second epistle to the
Corinthians the twelfth chapter, which he himself says, was the third Heaven:
the Paradise which Christ here promises is that wherein he himself is a
Paradise of all joys and happiness; of which he says, Father I will that
they be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory, John the seventeenth
chapter and the twenty fourth verse: For as God himself is a spirit, so his joy
and happiness is spiritual; and the place wherein he is, is a spiritual
Paradise: Such joy was that he speaks of, Matthew the twenty fifth chapter,
Intra in gaudium Domini. So are we to think the throne of God the Father where
Christ sits, Apocalypse the third chapter and the twenty first verse, that it
is the heavenly joy and glory which he enjoys in heaven: So says the Wise
man, Proverbs the thirteenth chapter, that there is ordained this tree of life,
wherein we have the accomplishment of all our desires, which is no where but in
Heaven, where God is all in all.

For the tree of life, which Christ promises to him that overcommeth, It is
another manner of tree than that in the garden of Eden: That was a natural tree
appointed to preserve Adams natural life, but this a is spiritual tree, and
preserves supernatnral life: And albeit Man being debarred of this natural
tree in the Garden, dies a bodily death; yet this tree in the Paradise of God
keeps us, from being hurt of the second death, Apocalypse the second chapter and
the eleventh verse. Christ himself says of himself, I am alive, but I was
dead, and behold I live for evermore, Apocalypse the first chapter and the
eighteenth verse; that is, he lost the natural life, but now he lives a
supernatural life: and so shall all his members that eat of the tree of life
which he promises.

Well is the state of our death and rising again, shadowed out by a tree; for
as Job speaks, Job the fourteenth chapter, There is hope of a tree, that though
it be cut down, yet it will sprout out and the branches thereof will shoot
forth; So though we dye a bodily death, yet there is hope that we shall rise
again, and live a supernatural life, which we obtain by eating of this tree of
life: The center of our desire is the tree of life, the circumference is
Paradise wherein we have promised us, not only coronam vitae, Apocalypse the
second chapter 10. But the crown of glory, the first of Peter and the fifth
chapter; And the crown of joy and happiness, the first of the Thessalonians
the second chapter, and the nineteenth verse, We shall have our saciety of
pleasure, and whatsoever man's heart can desire; for we shall be in the presence
of God, whose right hand is pleasure for ever, Psalm 16.

Dabo
From the condition we are taught, that this promise is not to be cast upon us
but given, and it is not a general promise, but made particularly to him only
that overcomes: Which condition carries us to the promises of virtues made by
God, Genesis the third chapter, where God proclaims war between the woman and
the serpent; between the woman's seed and the serpents seed. Vincentis
And Christ rels us hoar, that he which is conqueror in this war, shall enjoy
Paradise and be restored to the tree of life; for no man is crowned except he
both strive and strive lawfully, the second of Timothy the second chapter.

Cum Serpente and (...) suo.
The battle that we are to fight, is either with the Serpent himself or with
his seed. With the Serpent we are at war as the Apostle shows, Ephesians
the sixth chapter and the twelfth verse; We fight not with flesh and blood but
with principalities and power: Such a fight did the Apostle feel, when the
Angel of Satan was sent to buffet him, the second epistle to the Corinthians
the twelfth chapter: And of the victory against this enemy the Apostle says
Young men I write to you, because you are strong and have overcome that wicked
one, the first epistle of John the second chapter and the fourteenth verse.

The war which we have with the Serpents seed is, 1. Intra.
First, within us; for his poison infecteth our inward parts, not only the
Reins, by stirring in us fleshly lusts, which fight against the soul, the first
epistle of Peter the second chapter, which must be overcome as the Apostle
exhorts, Colossians the third chapter, Mortify your earthly members; but the
heart also, by that boiling lust of revenge which made Cain one of the Serpents
seed to kill his brother, the first epistle of John the third chapter and the
twelfth verse: which inward desire of revenge must likewise be overcome, as the
Apostle wills, Romans the twelfth chapter, Avenge not your selves, sed vince
malum bono; we must overcome the evil of our fleshly lusts and desires of
revenge, with the grace of mortification and patience.

2. Extra.
Secondly, The seed of the Serpent is without us; for there are filii Belial, of
whom were those to whom Christ said, John the eight chapter, You are of your
Father the Devil: Such as will do mischief for doing well, such enemies are
men of corrupt minds and understandings that are destitute of the truth, and
are bold to say that gain is godliness, from which we must separate our
selves, the first epistle to Timothy the sixth chapter and the fifth verse. And
if we overcome in this war, then we shall be partakers of this promise. But
who overcommeth in this war? and who can say, he is a conqueror in this
battall? The Apostle says, That he that sins is overcome of sin, and
brought into bondage of the sin, the second epistle of Peter the second
chapter and the nineteenth verse: Therefore where the promise is here made only
to him that overcommeth, we must see if the Scripture offers more graces,
James the fourth chapter and the sixth verse: And if we look into Apocalypse the
second chapter and the fifth verse, we shall find there he that makes this
promise offers more graces, that is, Remember from whence thou art fallen and
repent, and do thy first works. D^ victoria.
So there are two victories, the first is continere a peccato; the other is
paenitere de peccato. If we cannot get this victory over the Serpent, that he
do not cause us to sin at all, yet if we so far overcome him, that sin
reign not in our mortal bodies, Romans the sixth chapter and the twelfth verse,
if we wound his head, which was promised, Genesis the third chapter and the
fifteenth verse; so as though he cause us to sin, yet he get not the head or
set up his throne in our hearts, then we are to hope that we shall be (...) of
this promise, if we return from whence we are fallen, and repent us of the
sins we have committed, and do the first works, then no doubt we shall be
restored to our first estate, and Christ shall give us a new right in the tree
of life. But he that either fights not at all, but is at a league with Hell,
and has made a Covenant with death Isaiah the twenty eighth chapter; he that
will deny sin nothing, but will fulfill the lusts of the flesh; or if he
fight yet he fight not lawfully, nor strive to overcome, but is content to
follow every temptation, as an ox led to the slaughter, Proverbs the seventh
chapter; and not only so, but put stumbling blocks before himself, which may
make him fall, Ezekiel the fourteenth chapter, and use all means that he may be
overcome: And if, having fallen, they labor not to get the victory after, by
repenting of his former sins, and doing the first works, then they have no
part in this first promise. Men may draw near to the holy mystery of Christ's
body and blood, and snatch at the tree of life; but Christ gives it not, except
they be such as overcome, either by the grace of abstinencie from sin, or of
repentance and sorrow for sin: They may be partakers of the tree of life de
(...), but not de jure: The bread of life is to them as the bread of wrong,
Proverbs the fourth chapter and the seventeenth verse, and the bread of deceit,
which shall in the end fill their mouths with gravel, Proverbs the twentieth
chapter.

So both the promise and condition are touched: But the question is, How we
shall overcome? that we learn, Apocalypse the twelfth chapter; where the Saints
are said to overcome the great dragon, the old Serpent, with the blood of the
Lamb: Which blood has two uses. First, that which the Apostle calls the
sprinkling of the blood of (...) Christ, the first epistle of Peter the first
chapter and the second verse. Secondly, That by receiving the cup of blessing
we are partakers of the blood of Christ, the first epistle to the Corinthians
the tenth chapter and the sixteenth verse. So that in these words is a
reciprocation, vincenti ut comedat, and comedenti ut vincat, dabo edere; the
body and blood of Christ is the fruit of that tree of life which the Apostle
speaks of, the first epistle of Peter the second chapter and the twenty fourth
verse, That he bare our sins in his body upon the tree; Of which fruit
whosoever are partakers in the Sacrament, when it is ministered to them, do
receive power to overcome, that so they may eat of the tree of eternal life:
For in this Sacrament we have both a means of victory and a pledge of our
reward, that is, the life of grace begun in us here, to assure us of a glorious
life in the world to come. Every tree must have a root, and the root of that
tree which Christ speaks of is here in this Sacrament; for in it is sown in the
hearts of the receivers, as it were, a kernel, which in time shoots forth and
becomes a tree; for as there was a death of the soul by sin, before God
inflicted a death of the body; so answerable to that first death of sin,
there must be in us a life of grace, which is the root of that tree from whence
we shall, in due time, receive the life of glory.

In this sacrament the tree of the life of Grace is town in us, that is, a
measure of grace wrought in our hearts by the power of Gods spirit, by which we
shall at length attain to eat of that tree which shall convey unto us the life
of glory. As there are two trees of life; so we must have a double Paradise: We
must have liberty to be of the Paradise on earth, that is, the Church Militant,
which is called hortus conclusus, Canticles the second chapter, before we can
be received into the heavenly Paradise, that is, the Church Triumphant. So
there is a plain analogy between those. As when we are dead in sins and in
the uncircumcision of the flesh, Colossians the second chapter and the
thirteenth verse, we receive the life of grace by the sprinkling of the blood
of Christ in baptism; so when we are fallen from the life of grace and are
restrained from the life of God, Ephesians the fourth chapter and eighteenth
verse, and dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians the second chapter, then we
obtain victory against sin and death by the blood of the Lamb, being drunk in
the Sacrament, Apocalypse the twelfth chapter and the eleventh verse. For if the
material tree of life in Paradise received such influence from God, Genesis the
third chapter, that being dead in it felse, it had power to convey the natural
life of our Parents, while they eat of the fruit thereof, then is God able as
well to give such a power to the Creatures of Bread and Wine in the Sacrament,
that albeit they are dead of themselves, to convey into us the life of grace,
even as the tree of life did prolong natural life; for so says Christ, John
the sixth chapter and the fifty third verse, Except ye eat the flesh of the
son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no lifein you. Whosoever eats my flesh
and drinks my blood has eternal life; he that eats me shall live by me;
And he that (...) of his body shall live for ever. There is no life but in God
first, (...) the thirtieth chapter, ipse enim est vita mea, and he commits
life to the son: Therefore it is said, There is a River of water of life
proceeding out of the throne of God, and of the Lamb, Apocalypse the (...)
second chapter and the first verse: And as the Father has life in himself, so
he has given to the Son to have life in himself, John the fifth chapter and
the twenty sixth verse: And as the Father raises up the dead and quickneth
them, so the son quickneth whom he will, John the fifth chapter and the twenty
first verse. God being the fountain of life, draws life to his son, as into a
Cistern, from whence we draw life; therefore it is said of the wisdom of God,
that is Christ, that he is a tree of life, Proverbs the third chapter and the
eighteenth verse; of whom it is now said, in ipso er at vita, John the
fourteenth chapter; and therefore he calls himself this life, John the
fourteenth chapter. This is the Cistern of life, to give life to them that are
dead in original sin, by the sprinkling of his blood in (...): And when they
are dead in actual sins, he gives new life to them that are (...) of his body
and blood in the Sacrament of the Supper. In this Sacrament Christ has
provided a tree of life of graces against the death of sin, whereof they must
be partakers that will eat of the tree of life, which Christ here promises: So
that whereas the Wiseman says, Fructus justi est lignum vitae, Proverbs the
eleventh chapter and the thirtieth verse. The seed of this tree is here sown,
and brings forth the root of a better tree; for as grace is the root of
glory, so glory is the fruit of grace. Here in this life the root of grace is
planted in us, and brings forth the fruits of righteousness, that in the life
to come it may make us partakers of the tree of glory; and to assure us of this
life, we are sealed with the holy spirit of promise, as the earnest of our
inheritance, Ephesians the first chapter and the thirteenth verse, and the
second epistle to the Corinthians the first chapter and the twenty second
verse: That albeit we are fallen and can be overcome of finne, yet if we fight
better and do the first works, we shall be partakers of the life of glory: The
kernel of grace is planted in us by the participation of the body and blood of
Christ; of which kernel comes a tree, which brings forth the fruits of
holiness and righteousness in our whole life: Which God will in due time reward
with the Crown of life and glory in the world to come.

Cupimus autem ut unusquisque vestrum idem studium ad finem usque ostendat, ad
certam spei persuasionem. Hebr. 6. 11.

August. 24. 1599.
AS in the old testament the Prophetisse Deborah, in the service of the Children
of Isha against Jabin, does specially praise God for the willingness of the
people, Judges the fifth chapter; so here the Apostle commends the Hebrews for
the work and labor of their love, in that they spared no cost in showing
themselves good Christians. Now the crown of our rejoicing is the sum of our
desire: and therefore as there Deborah desires to have the promptness and
readiness continued in the people; so the Apostle wishes that all the
Hebrews, as they have been careful to practice the fruits of faith, so should
they still show further diligence in that behalf. The special drift of the
Apostle is to show, that the Christians comfort stands in the perfection of
their hope.

The Apostle, Hebrews the eleventh chapter and the first verse, makes their
hope for to be the definition of faith: For though matters Historical and
Dogmatical pertain to faith, yet chiefly faith has hope for its object; for as
Augustine, Credimus non ut credamus, sed (...), speremus; therefore the Apostle
says, the end of all Scripture is, that we may have hope, Romans the fifteenth
chapter and the fourth verse; and that which he affirms, in the first epistle
to the Corinthians the ninth chapter, That he which planteth, planteth in hope,
is as much true in all actions: the ground whereof is the hope we conceive of
some benefit; for he that sows, sows in hope, he that saileth, saileth in
hope and he that marries, does it in hope that his estate will be bettered
thereby: For sure it is, that it is but a comfortless thing to believe that
there is everlasting joy and glory laid up in Heaven, except a man be persuaded
that he shall be partaker of it; Exanguis res fides sine spe, quia spes fidei
exanguis est, Amb. And as hope is the blood of faith, as the Prophet says,
Isaiah the thirtieth chapter and the fifteenth verse, In quietness and in
confidence shall be your strength; so hope is that which whets diligence: and
therefore the Prophet says, in the second book of the Chronicles the fifteenth
chapter and the seventeenth verse, Be strong and let not your hands be weak,
for your work shall have an end: And in the new Testament the Apostle says, Be
steadfast and immovable, knowing that your labor is not in vain in the Lord,
Quod labor vester non erit inanis in Domino, the first epistle to the
Corinthians the fifteenth chapter and the fifty eighth verse. So nothing is
more to be desired than to have hope in the evil day; and the means of this
hope is to show forth diligence.

But for the easier entreaty of the contents of this verse, the points which
the Apostle holds are, first, That we are not only to believe, but also to
hope: Secondly, Not with a feeble or faint hope, but with the fullness of hope:
Thirdly, This hope must not be for an hour, as Christ speaks of St. John,
John the fifth chapter, but continuing to the end.

Then for the means of this hope his request is, First, That Diligence be used:
Secondly, This Diligence must be showed forth.

For the first point, the Apostles desire is, That they should hope for that
which they believe; wherein stands the real difference that is between the
faith of the Devils and men reprobate, and the faith of the Children of God;
for even to the Devils the Apostle ascribes faith, but this faith ends in fear,
James the second chapter, Damones credunt and contremiscunt; but a Christian
man's faith and belees ends in hope. A Christian man believes that he may have
hope, for hope comes by faith, as the Apostle shows, Galatians the fifth
chapter and the fifth verse, We by the spirit wait for the hope of
righteousness through faith; and that faith which is the cause of hope, does
work by love; as the same Apostle (...), And love causes diligence, Credendo
speramus, sperando diligimus, qui diligit diligendus est, Amb For there is no
love without diligence. And so necessary is hope that the Apostle makes it a
part of our salvation: For as, Ephesians the second chapter, ye are saved by
faith; so he says, Romans the eighth chapter and the twenty fourth verse, we
are saved by hope: For howsoever it is certain, that God is the hope of all men
in general, as the Prophet calls him, the hope of all the ends of the earth,
and of them that are in the broad sea, Psalm the sixty fifth; so it is as
certain, there is another hope, besides that general, which the faithful
conceive; for that general hope concerns this present life. The Apostle says,
if we had no other hope but that, we are of all men most miserable, the first
to the Corinthians the fifteenth chapter. The hope of all men is, spes Dei,
that he does save both man and beast, Psalm 36. that they shall be delivered
from outward danger, and shall be both kept by God under the shadow of his
wings; and when none can minister help, then they, flying to God, shall be
safe: But he is more specially called the hope of Israel, Joel the third
chapter and the sixteenth verse; that is, there is a further hope, and this is
a Christians hope. It is true that Christians have a hope in God for defense
from trouble in this life, as others have: and in that sense, this their hope
is like a breast plate against the troubles of this life, the first epistle to
the Thessalonians the fifth chapter and the eighth verse; and the same hope of
theirs, for that the troubles of this life are compared to the surges and waves
of the Sea, is called an Anchor, Hebrews the sixth chapter. But the Christian
man's hope goes further than that general hope; for the Heathen does say, spero
dum spiro; but when breath is gone, the just man has hope in his death, Justus
etiam in morte sperat, Proverbs the fourteenth chapter and the twenty third
verse: therefore the Apostle calls a Christian man's hope spem vivam, a lively
hope; as if the other were spes mortua, the first epistle of Peter the first
chapter and the third verse: For whereas the faith of all men does fail in
death, the Christians faith does even then flourish, because they are begotten
again to a lively hope, through the resurrection of Christ from the dead. It
was David's speech, That when he was laid in the grave, his flesh should rest in
hope, Psalm the sixteenth. In this life our hope has a waiting, as St. Paul
calls it, wherein it does hope for the hope of righteousness by Christ,
Galatians the fifth chapter and the fifth verse; and after this life it hopes for
the fruition of the riches of glory, that is, for Christ himself, who is the
hope of glory, Colossians the first chapter and the twenty seventh verse: His
hope is not in the shadow of Gods wings only, but spes in lumine virtutis, as
the Prophet speaks, Psalm the eighty ninth and the fifteenth verse.

There is yet one point more, and that is a necessary admonition not to
confound, but keep several these two virtues theological; for they be two
dis-joyned virtues, as the Apostle shows, the first epistle to the
Corinthians the thirteenth chapter: Now these three are Faith, Hope, and Love;
and whereas we put Hope under Faith, all the ancient Fathers have put
difference between them; of whom Augustine makes four differences: First, Faith
has for its object the word and promise of God, but Hope looks not for a
promise, but rem promissam, we believed the promise, but hope for the thing
promised. Secondly, of Faith, as well evil things as good things, are the
object; for we believe the pains of Hell no less than the joys of Heaven, but
the object of our hope is only for good things, as that in this life we shall
be partakers of the righteousness of Christ, and afterward of his glory.
Thirdly, We do not only believe things to come, but such as are present and
past; for things past by faith we apprehend, Hebrexs the eleventh chapter and
third verse; and for things to come, we believe there shall be a day of
Judgment, when the Shepherd shall separate the sheep from the goats, Matthew
the twenty fifth chapter; but Hope does only apprehend things to come, and not
things past. Fourthly, as Bernard notes, the applying virtue is Hope; for this
is Vox sidei, magna and invisibilia reposita sunt (...) Deum; but Hopes voice
is, mihi ipsi reperiuntur, that is, I my self have a part in them: Quod sides
futurum credit, id spes sibi futurum expect at; but Charities voice is, I am
diligent, and spem apprehends.

For the use of this virtue, whereas in the Scripture there are many sayings
which force far, As that, as the ground that drinks in rain and brings not
forth grass, is cursed; so the Christian that drinks the water of Gods word,
and yet brings forth no fruits of faith is in a cursed state, Hebrews the sixth
chapter: Yet to conceive hope, because in the same chapter is matter of comfort
also, so the Apostle says, That by two immutable things, whereby it is
impossible for God to lie, that is his word and oath, we have strong
consolation, Hebrews the sixth chapter and the eighteenth verse: As he has made
us great and precious promises, the second epistle of Peter the second chapter;
so he is a faithful Creator, the first epistle of Peter the fourth chapter:
And as Sarah confessed, He is faithful that has promised, Hebrews the
eleventh chapter and the eleventh verse: And as Sarah said, so Abraham says,
He is able to do what he promises, Romans the fourth chapter and the twenty
first verse. And therefore we are to conceive hope, and say with the Apostle,
in the second epistle to Timothy the first chapter, I know whom I have
believed, Scio cuicredidi; and not only able, but willing, For of them that
come to him he casts away none, John the sixth chapter.

Secondly, Our hope must not be faint, but we must have a perfect assurance of
hope; not a hope half full, but the full measure of hope, as the Apostle
shows, (...): We must not sail with one sail, but with the whole gale of
wind, that is, with a full assurance of hope; for to this belongs that which
the Apostle requires, That we be carried forward to that perfection, Hebrews
the sixth chapter and the first verse; That as we may not (...) be babes in
knowledge, that must be taught line upon line, Esaias the twenty ninth chapter,
but labor to come to a fullness of knowledge, which the Apostle calls A
treasure of wesdome, (...), Colossians the second chapter and the third verse:
So for being faithful men, we must not content our selves with a weak and
feeble faith, but must strive to attain to an assurance of faith, (...),
Hebrews the tenth chapter and the twenty second verse; not to say as Agrippa,
Acts the twenty sixth chapter, I am somewhat persuaded to be a Christian, that is
but a beginning of faith; but when we have this beginning, we are to go
forward, and so in hope we must not content our selves with a good persuasion
at the first, and so to rest in a mammering; but proceed till we be fully
assured: And this St. Peter tells plainly, we must perfect sperare, the
first epistle of Peter the first chapter and the thirteenth verse, trust
perfectly. This is Peter's desire, as it is the Apostles here. Which full
assurance, that it is a different thing from faith, the Apostle shows,
Ephesians the third chapter and the twelfth verse, In whom we have boldness
and access with confidence by faith in Christ, (...). That confidence (or
fiducia) as the Apostle calls it, is the perfection of our hope; and we attain
to it, as he faith, per fidem: This fiducia is the effect of faith, as (...)
and (...), access and boldness of speech are the effects of hope, the second
epistle to the Corinthians the third chapter and the twelfth verse. Those
beginnings of hope and faith are not to be disliked, Mark the ninth chapter and
the twenty fourth verse, I believe, Lord help my unbelief; but he that has
such a faith, must strive to come to Abraham's faith, Qui contra spem sub spe
credidit, Romans the fourth chapter: So he has that small meature of hope
which the Prophet speaks of Joel the second chapter and the fourteenth verse,
Who knows if the Lord will return and repent, and leave a blessing hehinde
him? Jon. the third chapter and the ninth verse. These (...) beginnings not to
be disallowed, so that he strive further to the perfection of hope which was in
Job, Job the thirteenth chapter and the fifteenth verse, Etenim si occiderit,
sperabo in eum; Which made Paul say Romans the eighth chapter and the thirty
eighth verse, I am sure that neither life nor death, things present, nor to
come etc.

Thirdly, This fullness of hope must continue to the end, and not abide for a
time: As Christ blames, Luke the eighth chapter, (...), so the Apostle finds
fault with temporary hope: It is that which we see in Demas, he believed and
had hope, and gave great hope for a time, so that Paul acknowledged him his
fellow laborer; but his faith and hope had soon an end, for he for look Paul,
and fell to embracing the present world, the second epistle to Timothy the
fourth chapter. Therefore it is not enough to hope for a time, but our hope
must continue to the end; for as the Apostle says, thou may see the
goodness of God in breaking off the natural branches to graff thee in, if thou
continue; for else he will show like severity to thee, Romans the eleventh
chapter and the seventeenth verse; but thou must permanere. The same Apostle
says, Galatians the fifth chapter and the seventh verse, You did run well as if
he should say, nay you fate still, and therefore all is to no purpose:
Therefore the Apostle exhorts, So to run that they may obtain, the first to the
Corinthians the ninth chapter; as he himself does in chastising his body and
subduing it, least while he preach to them, he should be rejected. His meaning
is, albeit he be assured, That nothing shall separate him from the love of God,
Romans the eighth chapter and the thirty eighth verse, yet he will run still,
and keep his hope. For the state (...) is like the fanctifying of the Nazarite,
If at the end of six days he did touch any unclean thing, he was to begin
again, Numbers the sixth chapter and the twelfth verse. So it is in the matter
of hope and other virtues: And therefore the Prophet prays not only for the
spirit and an ingenious spirit, but a constant spirit that may continue, Psalm
the fifty first.

The means are set down in these words, First, he would have them use
Diligence: Secondly, it must be demonstrative and expert Diligence: Thridly, it
must be the same Diligence that is showed in the works of Love and Charity, and
in the distribution to the poor.

Of these three points the first is, The Apostle (...) we may deceive our
selves in our hope: He that said, I shall never be moved, Psalm the thirtieth
and and the sixth verse, had hope enough and too much; and he that said, Though
all men for sake thee, yet not I, Matthew the twenty sixth chapter, hoped enough
and too much: and therefore hope does well in injoyning the means; for as in
the beginning of the chapter, verse the sixth, is matter of fear, and in the
end, verse the eighteenth, matter of hope; so here he wills them to show
diligence, that this hope may appear, and that it be not a negligent and
sluggish hope, as he speaks, ut ne fit is semper sperantes: For as fear, if it
be not mixed with hope, does degenerate into desperation; so hope, if it be not
tempered with fear, will turn to presumption. And it was the case of these two
Saints, David and Peter, and we see what came of it: And therefore of Job, who
had such an assured hope in God, even in death, it is said, Nonne timor tuus
spes (...)? Job the fourteenth chapter: he felt in himself a fear to commit
sin; and that fear, say the ancient Fathers, was his hope: And the Apostle
that wills them perfect sperare, to trust perfectly, the first epistle of
Peter, the first chapter and the thirteenth verse, says after, verse the
seventeenth, Pass your time in fear: He that before called for a perfection of
hope, does here require fear; for so our hope may not fall asleep or wax
negligent. And as Basil says, Vide spem number sit ver a spes; The true hope is
that which has (...), that is, coact and moved to diligence: Such a hope is
not his that persuades himself his Master (...) his coming, and so falls to
be negligent; that is a confounding hope: But the diligent hope is that which
confounds not, Romans the fifth chapter and the fifth verse; For as faith
teaches that it is impossible to attain to Heaven; so withal it tells us, it
is (...), a matter of difficulty: Wherefore Christ says, Vigilate, Mark the
eighth chapter. If we will come (...), we must not be (...), but diligent and
watchful: We must use both attention, Luke the twenty first chapter, Take
(...) to your (...), and contention, Luke the thirteenth chapter, Strive to
enter; Therefore the Prophet says, Psalm the thirty seventh, Hope in the Lord,
and (...) doing good: there is both hope and diligence. The Apostle says, We
have great and (...) made us, the second epistle of Peter the first chapter and
the (...) verse, That is our hope; but we must be diligent, adding to our hope
virtue, to virtue knowledge; and these if we be without, we (...) of the
promises; which (...) with (...) the fifth chapter. That faith works by (...);
And he that has this (...) himself, the first epistle of John the third
chapter and the third (...) Job, (...) did perfectly hope, was not negligent,
as he (...) (...) in eum, Job the thirteenth chapter and the (...) verse; so he
shows his carfulness, Veritas omnia opera (...) Job the ninth chapter. Paul
that said, He was sure of the love of God, Romans the eighth chapter does not,
cease to be diligent, lest he should be vexed, first epistle to the Corinthians
the ninth chapter: The same Paul says, Philippians the third chapter and the
tenth verse, I forget that which is behind, and endeavor toward that which is
before. This is that which concludes this point, i. seeing faith shows it is
possible to attain to Heaven, though it be hard, we must use diligence which
may make it a thing possible: Not that we are sufficient of our selves, as from
our selves to think any good, or to use any diligence to bring this to pass,
for all our sufficiency is of God, the second epistle to the Corintbians the
third chapter: And therefore the Apostle, when he had said, I labored more than
they all, corrects himself, yet not I, but the grace of God within me, the
first epistle to the Corinthians the fifteenth chapter and the tenth verse: He
did not say before, It was I that persecuted the Church, but the sin that
dwells within me, but ascribes that wholly to himself. But if we do any good
thing, we must wholly ascribe that to God, who, by his spirit, does give us
grace and ability to do it. And therefore, whosoever feel themselves to
receive grace, the second epistle to the Corinthians and the sixth chapter, and
be endued with virtue from above, Luke the twenty fourth chapter, they must
take heed they be not wanting to that grace and hear it in vain; but having
grace from God, we must labor to make that possible which faith shows to be
possible.

Secondly, They must (...), make it apparent there is a secret diligence; but
that which the Apostle requires is an ostensive diligence; For as James says,
Ostende mihi fidem ex operibus, James the second chapter and eighth verse: So
the Apostles meaning is, I care not for the concealed diligence, let me see it
appear by your outward conversation. For if the Heathen being endued with the
light of Nature only, did show the work of the Law written in their hearts, by
doing moral virtues, Romans the second chapter, much more ought Christians,
that are endued with grace from above, to show forth this diligence, that it
may be visible to the world. The Apostle shows there are two hopes, Spes
internae dulcedinis, and extremae operationis; the one is concealed and inward,
the other is apparent and to be seen. The inward hope brings this to pass,
That the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, Romans 5. 5. and therefore is
to be likened: This hope does likewise effect this, That we have the spirit of
God bearing witness to our spirits that we are the Chrildren of God, Romans 8.
It is as it were absconditum Manna, Apoc. the second chapter, which does
inwardly feed our souls. But howsoever this be good, yet not without danger;
for as the Apostle shows, there are that have been lightened with knowledge,
and have tasted of the Heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the holy
Ghost, and have tasted of the good word of God, and the powers of the world to
come, and yet fall away Hebrews the sixth chapter and the fourth verse:
Therefore he calls not for this diligence, but will have them make it evident;
which he expresses in these words, that it be the same diligence; which is the
third point:

Wherein he teaches in what this demonstrative diligence stands; that is, as
the former verse shows in the work and labor of love, and in ministering to
the Saints; that is, the doing of works of charity; makes the oftensive
diligence: Whereby he teaches that this oftensive or demonstrative diligence,
is the touch stone of our hope, as the Apostle says, The works of love are the
touchstone of faith, for true faith works by love, Galatians the fifth
chapter. This diligence cannot deceive us, of which our Savior Christ says,
John the fifth chapter, They that have done good, shall come forth into (...)
life, and the comfortable sentence pronounced by the Judge at the (...) day,
upon all those that have showed forth this diligence, in doing the works of
mercy shall be: Come ye blessed possess the kingdom prepared for (...)
Matthew the twenty fifth chapter. It (...) not to say to a brother or sister
that is naked and destitute of daily food, Depart in peace; warm, your selves,
fill your bellies; but the inward compassion must show it self outwardly, by
giving them those things which are needful to the body, James the second
chapter and the fifteenth verse: Therefore the Apostle Peter wills them that
are persuaded of the great and precious promises that are made them, not to
stay there, but make their election sure to them by this oftensive diligence,
that to their faith they add virtue, to virtue knowledge, which if they do,
they shall never fail, the second epistle of Peter the first chapter. And the
Apostle St. John says, Hereby we know that we are translated from death unto
life, because we love the brethren, and that not in word and tongue only, but
in deed and truth, the first epistle of John the third chapter and the
fourteenth verse. God to assure us of his merciful promises in Christ, is
said, not only to have sealed us, but also to have given us the earnest of the
spirit into our hearts, the second epistle to the Corinthians the first chapter
and the twenty second verse. The concealed diligence is as the earnest which a
man puts in his purse; but the oftensive diligence is like to a seal, which may
be showed to all men: for, as Christ witnesses, Our lights must so shine
before all men, that the wicked and ungodly, by seeing our good works, may take
occasion to glorify God and be converted, Matthew the fifth chapter. If we use
diligence, and show forth our diligence in doing those works of love, we shall
attain to hope, and that not faint or feeble, but of full measure, even the
full assurance of hope; which shall not be for a time, or an hour, and so fail,
but it shall continue even to the end.

Et factum est praelium in Coelo: Michael and Angeli ejus praeliati sunt cum
Dracone, and Draco pugnabat and Angeli ejus: Sed hi non praevaluerunt, neque
locus eorum amplius inventus est in Coelo. Apoc. 12. 7.8.

September. 29. 1599.
AS the Christian Religion is not a Religion of Angels; for we do not adore
them with divine honor, Colossians the second chapter and the eighteenth
verse; and though we offer to worship them, yet they will not admit of it,
Apocalypse the twenty second chapter and the ninth verse; so on the other side,
it is not a Religion of Saduces, that hold there is no Angels nor spirit, Acts
the twenty third chapter and the eighth verse; but it does acknowledge that
such blessed spirits there be, and that God has erected a ladder that reaches
up to Heaven, by which the Angels of God go up and down to convey Gods
blessings to men, Genesis the twenty eighth chapter: And therefore by all means
it opposes it self against the opinion of those that seek to remove this
ladder, as if there were no duty to be performed by them toward us: For, in
thankfulness to God for this benefit, that the Angels have a care of us, the
Church have thought it good, weighing both the one extremity of superstition,
which Moses compares to drunkenness, and the other extremity of
profaneness, which he likeneth to thirst, Deuteronomie the twenty ninth
chapter and the nineteenth verse, to keep this Feast.

And indeed if we consider, that those glorious spirits who have the continual
fruition of Gods presence, Matthew the eighteenth chapter and the tenth verse,
In whose presence is the fullness of all jay, Psalm the sixteenth, can be
content to abandon that place of this felicity, to come down and perform duties
to the sons of men, namely, to take charge of us and keep us from danger,
Psalm the ninety first and the eleventh verse, to be as ministering spirits,
for their sakes that shall be heirs of salvation, Hebrews the first chapter:
This cannot but be reckoned a special favor.

Secondly, Especially if we go a degree further, and consider that they leave
their assistance in Gods presence, where is all glory and happiness, to
Minister to us that dwell in houses of clay, Job the fourth chapter, and that
for our nobility, must derive our selves into corruption and worms, Job the
seventeenth chapter and the fourteenth verse, that such holy spirits should
come down upon such sinful spirits, such glorious spirits should Minister to
such vile bodies, this gives us further cause to remember this benefit.

Thirdly, The manner of this Ministry may be a special motive to stir us up to
thankfulness: This ministry and service done to us is as far as any can
reach, that is, usque ad consilium fideli and auxilium. For (...) and (...), we
see Jacob (...), an Angel of God gave him direction what to do, Genesis the
thirty first chapter and the eleventh verse: So an Angel came forth to teach
Daniel, to give him knowledge and understanding, Daniel the ninth chapter and
the twenty second verse. And this very book contains nothing else but that
which Christ revealed to his servant John by an Angel, Apocalypse the first
chapter and the first verse: that is for matter of counsel. And for matter of
help there is between Angels and Men (...) sociale, a holy league indeed;
whereby they bind themselves, that for our (...) they may wage war, not only
with men, but with wicked (...). That they do continually defend us the
Prophet teaches, (...) the thirty fourth, The Angels of the Lord pitch their
tents (...) this fear him; whereof we have a plain example, in the second of
the Kings the sixth chapter and the seventeenth verse. For the offensive part of
help, which they perform to men, it is plain, that as they defend us from
danger, so they show themselves enemies not only to men that seek our hurt, but
to evil Angels. That the Angels are enemies to men, that are an enemy to the
Elect and Church of God, we see it plainly affirmed, Psalm the thirty fifth and
the sixth verse, The Angel of the Lord persecuteth them; whereof an example in
the Egyptians that were enemies to Gods people, among whom God sent an Angel to
destroy the first born in every house, (...) the twelfth chapter; and Isaiah
the thirty seventh chapter, where an Angel is sent in the behalf of Ezekiah to
destroy the host of Senacherib, who was an enemy to Gods people. And in this
place we see offensive (...) in the behalf of Angels, against the wicked
Angels, (...) David had relation in those words, Psalm the ninty first and the
thirteenth verse, Thou shall walk upon the Lion and Adder, the young Lion and
the Dragon thou shall tread under foot. Wherefore that spirits of such
excellency, shall defend us against both wicked men and Angels, this is a
benefit to be remembered with all thankfulness to God and likewise we are to
congratulate them that are made by God of such power; as Melchizadeck did
gratulate Abraham after he had (...) the five Kings, Genesis the fourteenth
chapter, and blessed God (...) his enemies into his hands; and as the servants
of (...) did congratulate David, when he saw that the Army (...) before (...),
the second book of Samuel the eighth chapter and the (...).

So that these congratulations of these blessed (...), above all our
thankfulness to God that has appointed us such helps, is the ground and cause
of this solemnity.

The words divide themselves into two (...), First, the (...) Secondly, the
Victory or Conquest.

Concerning the former, we are first to consider the (...) Combatent, and then
the fight. In the Conquest we are also to (...) two degrees: For it is said not
only That he had not the (...); for then he had been of an even hand, and might
have (...) but that the Dragon and his Angels were so far from (...) and
getting the Victory of Michael and his Angels, that they (...) the foyl so that
their place was not found any more in Heaven

Touching the persons that waged this battle, they are on the one side Michael
and his Angels: On the other side the Dragon and his Angels.

Wherein the first thing is, what we must conceive concerning Michael. It is
sure the Church of God, upon many and weighty reasons, does not favor the
opinion of those that make Christ to be Michael: Michael, Daniel the tenth
chapter and the thirteenth verse, is said to be one of the first Princes or
Rulers, which is to be understood of some principal Angel, and not of Christ,
who is set up above all Princes, and is not to be reckoned among them, being
the Prince of Princes, and Lord of Lords: And the Annotation of those that hold
this opinion shows that there is an Angel under Christ, which takes charge
for the defense of the Church on earth, which is Michael your Prince, Dan. 10.
21.

Secondly, Out of Judes epistle verse the ninth, the ancient Fathers prove,
that by Michael we are not to understand Christ; for that which he affirms,
that Michael durst not check the Devil with cursed speaking, cannot be
ascribed to Christ, which not only dare, but has trodden down Satan under his
feet; much more dare he check him: which unless he could do, it were a plain
sign that he is not Omnipotent. Therefore by Michael here we are to understand
some other and not Christ.

Thirdly, Out of this place, Apocalypse the twelfth chapter and the fifth verse,
In as much as the Child that was born was Christ, it is not like that this
Child should suddenly be translated into an Archangel and fight with the
Dragon. And therefore both Theodoret and others say, that Michael is a chief
spirit among the created spirits that then took care of the Church in Jury, and
still is careful of Christ's Church unto the end of the world. And to this we
may add the judgment of the Church, which on this holy day does thank God for
the service of the Angels, but makes no mention of Christ, that it is he that
in this place warreth with the Dragon and his Angels. For the Dragon there is a
far more easy passage; so as we may soon guess what is meant by him; for in
this chapter he is called the Devil and Satan, whereof their name signifies a
slanderer; and he is justly so called, for that he both slandereth God to man,
as if God did envy man's prosperity, Genesis the third chapter, and slanders man
to God, as he did Job, whom albeit he were a blessed Saint, yet he accuses
before God as an Hypocrite, Job the first chapter. The other name Satan
signifies a great enemy, not only to the good, whom he has most cause to
hate, as being contrary to him, but also to the bad. That he is an enemy to the
good, it appears by this, That he persecuted not only the child that was new
born, but the woman also, and because he cannot show his malice upon him, he
makes war with her seed, Apocalypse the twelfth chapter the thirteenth and
seventeenth verses. That he persecuted also an enemy to the bad, appears verse
the ninth, where he is called, The seducer of of the whole world, and the
accuser of the brethren, for that he first brings them to commit grievous
sins, and then pleads against them, that the plague of God may come upon them.

These are the Leaders: The Bands and Soldiers under their conduct are Angels
on both sides.

The Angels that serve under Michael are they that excel in strength and do
the command of God in obeying the voice of his word, Psalm the hundred and
third and the twentieth verse, they that the Apostle calls elect Angels, the
first epistle to Timothy the fifth chapter and the twenty first verse.

The Angels that war on the Dragons side, are the evil Angels, Psalm the
seventy eighth and the forty ninth verse; The Angels that sinned, the second
epistle of Peter the second chapter, And they that kept not their original, as
Jude says: these fight for the Dragon, and he is their Captain; as Christ
says, The Prince of the Devils is (...), Matthew the twelfth chapter. For as
among the good Angels there is principatus, and primus principatus; so it is
among the wicked Angels, for there must be order in all companies.

Touching the Battle it self, we are first to remove some things of offense,
not to think it strange that the Angels are here said to move battle. For
albeit they be called Angeli pacis, Isaiah the thirty third chapter and the
seventh verse, because they bring peace; yet in many places they are called
Gods Hosts; as Jacob seeing the Angels of God, called the place where they were
Nahanaim, Genesis the thirty second chapter and the second verse; and they
magnisie God by that title, Isaiah the sixth chapter, Lord God of Hosts: Luke
the second chapter, the Angels are called Heavenly Soldiers: And where Christ
says, If I pray to the Father, he will give me more than twelve (...) of
Angels, Matthew the twenty sixth chapter. He compares them to Troops and Bands
of Soldiers, for that they are not only Angels to Gods friends and servants,
but soldiers fighting against them that oppose themselves against God.
Further, where their state is in a continual motion, that must not offend us;
for the Angels themselves are not yet in the perfection of their felicity; for
we see they are employed in doing service for us; they continually aseend and
descend from Heaven to Earth, and from Earth to Heaven; for the good of the
godly; for God saw it good, that as well they, as the Saints departed out of
this life, should not be made (...), Hebrews the eleventh chapter and the
fourtieth verse; which is illistrated Matthew the thirteenth chapter, where the
Angels are called Reapers, giving us to understand thereby, that as the (...)
is not at rest till the Harvest be all in; so it is with the Angels, they must
continually be employed in doing service for them that shall inherit Salvation,
till the number of the Elect be accomplished.

So neither needs that to offend any, that the Dragon is (...) to have fought
in Heaven; for so he is said to have appeared before God among the sons of
God: And when Ahab was to be deceived, a lying spirit stood before God, the
first book of the Kings the twenty second chapter. All this was only by Gods
permission. For all this does no make the Devil blessed, no more than Adam was
blessed being in paradise: For having sinned, and being thereby out of Gods
favor, he no more enjoyed that comfort of Paradise which he took before his
fall, but quaked and hid himself from the presence of God for tear, Genesis the
third chapter. The Dragon is no more blessed for being in Heaven, or appearing
before God, than a prisoner, that for a time is brought out of prison into the
Court to be arraigned; for he takes no delight of the pomp and glory of the
Court, knowing it is not for him, but he must return to the (...), from whence
he was taken: So it is with the Devil.

These offenses being removed, we come now to the Fight it self, which was not
in any bodily manner, for they are spirits, (...) the hundred and fourth; and
therefore their fight is a spiritual fight, Ephesians the sixth chapter; And
their (...) not carnal, but spiritaul, the second epistle to the Corinthians
the tenth chapter. That as the Angels fight by temptations on the one side and
by resistances, on the other they fight by agonies and inward conflicts, which
is more truly called conflicts than any combat. The other fight with bodily
enemies; for, as some note, Abraham would rather fight which five Kings than
abide that conflict between faith and natural affection, which he felt when he
was commanded to offer up his (...) (...); and those agonies which David selt
in his own heart, Psalm the forty second, Why art thou so heavy O my soul,
Psalm the seventy seventh and the eighty ninth verse. These Combats and
spiritual Battails were more grievous to David, than those which he fought with
the Philistims, with Saul, or any other outward enemies whatsoever.

The Battails fought between these two parties are in Scripture four.

The first is that which in the beginning was fought between them, that when
the one said, Isaiah the fourteenth chapter and the thirteenth verse, ascendam,
the other went down; when the one said, I will sit, they said he should stand,
Daniel the seventh chapter; when the Dragon said I will be like the most high,
the other said Michael who is like God.

The second is that which Jude speaks of, that there was a conflict between
Michael the Archangel and the Devil, about the doad body of Moses, verse 9.

The third is mentioned in Daniel the tenth chapter the thirteenth verse, where
when the Church was in thraldom and captivity under the Persians and Chaldeans,
the Dragon would have kept them still in bondage, but Michael fought for their
(...).

The fourth Batrail is that which is here fought by Michael for a full
deliverance of the Church; for we see the Dragon stood before the woman that
was ready to be delivered, that he might devour the child, verse the seventh:
And because he was taken up unto God, the Dragon persecuted the woman; And for
that he could not prevail against her, he made war with her seed, Apocalypse
the twelfth chapter and the thirteenth verse, that is, with them that keep the
commandments of God. For if the Devil fought with Michael for Moses body,
being dead, de (...), Jude the ninth verse, much more will he fight for Christ
being borne If he war against the Synagogue of the Jews, much more against
the Church of Christ, consisting both of Jews and Gentiles. And as the Angels
offer fight for the one, so will they for the other: For it is plain, that the
Angels are first in arms when any injury is offered either to the Child, or the
Woman, or to her seed.

What this Battle was between the Dragon and the Child the opinion of the
Church is, That albeit the Devils by their creation were glorious Angels, yet
they might be content not to presume so far as to be like the most high, but
after the manifold wisdom of God was made known by the Church unto
principalities and powers, Ephesians the third chapter and the tenth verse;
that is, when they saw it was Gods will, that the Child born of our flesh and
taken out of the earth, was taken up into Heaven, to the throne of God: This
was it that stirred them up to battle. For howsoever they be constrained to
submit themselves to God, yet they cannot abide to honor a piece of clay: And
albeit they could not be equal with God, yet they would retain a superiority
above men: which thing being not granted them, they are incensed against
Christ: They think it a great indignity, howsoever they have done service to
men tanquam Domini, as things pertaining to the Lord, that now they should do
service to men tanquam Domino. But this they are enforced to perform to Christ
who is exalted in his Humanity; and in as much as Christ has taken our nature,
they must adore our nature. This is that which the Dragon and his Angels would
not yield unto: But they prevail not in this fight. Again, the consideration of
this which the Apostle (...), That God spared not the Angels that sinned, the
second epistle of Peter the second chapter, Angelis peccantibus non pepercit,
may greatly provoke the Angels to battle: That albeit he spared not the Angels
that sinned, yet he will spare men when they sin: this is a great assault.
But that is more Nusquam Angelos assumpsit, sed semen (...), Hebrews the second
chapter and the sixteenth verse. That he will not grace the names of Angels, as
to assume their nature, but prefers the nature of man; and that they must adore
that person that is be come man, this might be a (...) remptation. As also that
which the Apostle affirms, the first epistle to the Corinthians the sixth
chapter and the third vorse, That the nature of man shall judge Angels: this
might greatly offend them. And the Dragon and his Angels will no doubt suggest
these thoughts into Michael and his Angels; but yet they (...). The more high
and honorable any spirit is, the less can it (...) any indignity. And seeing
the Angels are such honorable spirits, they must needs take it very ill, that
not only man's nature is exalted above theirs, but that they mult do service
unto men; not as things pertaining to the Lord, but as to the Lord himself.
This must needs offend them, That when they sin, they find no favor; but if
man sin, he is spared: That when the Son of God does manifest himself to
the world, he does not vouchsafe the Angels so much honor as to assume their
nature, but takes the seed of Abraham; and that he will in the last time make
men judges of Angels. In this manner did the Dragon and his Angels oppose
themselves against Michael and his Angels; but we see how he does resist all
these temptations and assaults: and therefore this battle is worthy to be kept
in remembrance.

The Conquest follows. Wherein we see, that in steed of persuading Michael
and his Angels, that they should not look at the mystery of Christ's
Incarnation, we see the Angels are content (...), the first epistle of Peter
the first chapter, the eleventh and twelfth verses, to stoop down to look into
those things that concern Christ. Whereas they were persuaded to turn their
backs on Christ, we see they all fall down and worship him, Hebrews the first
chapter and sixth verse: They all acknowledge Worthy is the Lamb to receive
power, riches, honor, and glory, and majesty: praise, and honor, and glory to
him that sits on the throne, and to the Lamb for evermore, Apocalypse the
fifth chapter, the twelfth and thirteenth verses: And instead of exalting
themselves, they are ready to offer battle to them that persuade them
hereunto; as David's heart was more inclined to Joab, than his wicked son
Absalom; which made him make Joab a means for his restoring into his fathers
favor: So God is more inclined to be merciful to men that sin, than to
Angels; and that is it that makes the Angels submit themselves to the nature of
men. So that they see Christ vouchsafes to call us Brethren, Matthew the
twenty fifth chapter and the fourtieth verse; so they are glad to claim
brotherhood of us, Apocalypse the twenty second chapter; as the Angel said to
John, I am one of thy brethren. In as much as God exalts the male child and the
woman to be in his Throne, the Angels are ready to fight for them.

In that it is said, The Dragon prevailed not, it may be gathered, that for all
that he might begin again; but where it is added, And their place could no more
be found in Heaven, thereby we learn that Michael and his Angels set upon the
Dragon and his Angels, and drove them out of Heaven.

That which arises from hence on our parts, is of two sorts:

First, The thankfulness we are bound continually to render to God, that we
are of such regard in his sight, that in Heaven they fight for us, the elect
angels with the evil angels, Michael with the Dragon and his company. It is
that which Christ tells us, Luke the eleventh chapter, When the strong men keep
the Palace, all things are in peace; but then comes a stronger, etc. Man is
even in the estimation of the Devil a Palace, howsoever we by our sins make
our selves a Hogstie: therefore both Christ and the Devil esteeming so highly
of us, we may not esteem basely of our selves. The angels have charge, not only
to keep us, Psalm the ninty first, but to wage battle about us: and therefore
it is plain, the soul of man is no mean thing. The Angels as we see, are ready
to enter field with the Dragon and his Angels: Neither does Heaven only take
this care of us, but the Earth also is ready to help us, and opens her mouth
and swalloweth up the flood which the Dragon casts out of his mouth, Apocalypse
the twelfth chapter and the sixteenth verse. Therefore if they have such care
of us, it is reason we should have care of our selves; if they take such care
for man, that is but earth, then ought we for Heaven to be careful: If no man
be crowned, no not the Angels themselves, except they strive aright, the second
epistle to Timothy the second chapter; no more shall we be crowned unless we
be as careful of our selves as the Angels. If the Angels were so busy to
defend the earth, we must be more diligent to fight for Heaven. Again, here we
see, that to come to Heaven is a matter of fight and wrestling, Ephesians the
sixth chapter: If we look upon Christ and the Apostles, we will say it is Lucta,
a wrestling; but if upon common Christians it is but Ludus, a pastime and
sport. And he that stirrs up this war and conflict is not dead, howsoever he
was put to the worst, but only driven out of Heaven. That battle which was in
Heaven among the Angels, is come down to men on earth, and now the Dragon
fights with the woman's seed; and therefore it imports the woman's seed to fight
with him: For the war we have, is not only with flesh and blood, that is,
with our own passions and affections, which is the philosophical war; though
we must fight with them also, because fleshly lusts fight against the spirit,
the first epistle of Peter the second chapter and the eleventh verse: But our
wrestling is chiefly with the spirits, with spiritual wickedness in heavenly
places, Ephesians the sixth chapter. And what, is this enemy the Dragon foolish
and weak after his conquest had over finne? No, he is the old Serpent,
therefore full of experience. These enemies or (...), Ephesians the sixth
chapter; therefore they want no power. But are they discouraged upon this
overthrow? No, but he is the more fierce and his wrath kindled, knowing his
time is but short, Apocalypse the twelfth chapter and the twelfth verse. Then
seeing we have such an enemy, we must strive rightly if we will be crowned, si
place at Corona, place at studium we must take the more heed to our selves,
because, as Gregory says, Magis est fortis nostra negligentia, quam (...)
potentia.

Secondly, As we give God thanks, that he makes this account of us; so are we
to thank him, that he has created and commanded such excellent spirits to
fight for us; and to pray that they which have thus fought for us in Heaven,
may in earth fight with us to help us; that as they have cast him out of
Heaven, so (...) come him in earth: We are to thank God that we which by our
sins have made our selves like the beasts that perish, (...) the (...) shall
be (...), Luke the twentieth chapter, and to (...) that we may drive the Dragon
into the bottomless (...). Thirdly, we are to take heed that we provoke not
the Angels with our misdeeds, Exodus the twenty third chapter and twenty first
verse; nor alienate them from us with the wicked words of our mouths,
Ecclesiastes the fifth chapter and the fifth verse. If we suffer our selves to
sin by filthy words and speeches, we make them turn their favor from us.
When we come into the Church, we must come with a due regard and reverence,
propter Angelos, the first epistle to the Corinthians the eleventh chapter: for
by rude and uncomely behavior in the Congregation, and by suffering our mouths
to utter offensive speeches, we offend the Angels and deprive our selves of
their favor, so as they will not care for our safeguard: But if as the Angel
tells Danil, Daniel the tenth chapter and the twelfth verse, We set our hearts
to understand and to humble our selves by fasting before God, that may draw
their affection toward us; for repentance is that which does minister joy to
the Angels in Heaven, Luke the fifteenth chapter.

Lastly, By this means, though we obtain not such a perfect conquest over the
Dragon as the Angels did; yet we shall attain to the first degree: though we
cannot drive him out of earth, as they did out of Heaven, yet we shall obtain
thus much, That he shall not prevail against us, no more than he did against
them. We see it in Paul, though he fought never so much, yet he could not avoid
it, but sin would dwell in him, Romans the seventh chapter: but this victory
he obtained, that it did not reign in his natural body, Romans the sixth
chapter. Though, till our corruption be dissolved, we shall not drive him out,
we shall so be armed, That he shall not prevail against us. We must endeavor
our selves, that by thankfulness to him for vouchsafing to us this help, and
by intercession to continue the same, we may still resist the Dragon, not
suffering our selves to take the soil, howsoever we cannot utterly drive him
out. And in this respect, when we shall be like the Angels, then shall we tread
Satan under our feet, then shall the Dragon be bound in chains and cast into
the bottomless pit; so shall we have a final conquest over him. Now we must
labor to (...) to the first degree of the Angels victory and so shall we be
crowned.

Quicquid dat mihi Pater, ad me veniet: and eum qui venit ad me, nequaquam
ejecerim for as. John 6. 37.

October 7. 1559.
THE words are Christ's, and are both agreeable to the action we have in hand,
and also a good dependence upon that wherein we have been heretofore
conversant. But that these words are to be applied to the holy (...) and
Sacrament of the Lords Supper appears, for that before he calls himself the
bread of life, verse the thirty fifth; The bread from Heaven, verse the forty
first; The living bread, verse the fifty first; and all along this chapter
there is nothing spoken of Christ, but as he is the matter of this Sacrament:
and therefore these words are to be understood of the holy Eucharist.

And so these words as they yield comfort to the comers, persuading them that
they are of those, whom God the Father has given to Christ; so no less
comfort is reached to them here; for that they understand from Christ's own
mouth, That if they come to him, they shall not be cast out, but received of
him, so as none shall be able to take them out of his hands, John the tenth
chapter and the twenty eighth verse.

On the other side, They that come not, may know from hence, that as they are
not in the number of the Fathers Donatives, that is, such as are given to
Christ, but are the portion of Satan, For they shall be cast out into the lake
that burns with fire and brimstone, Apocalypse the twenty first chapter and
the eighth verse; And into utter darkness, where is weeping and gnashing of
teeth, Matthew the eighth chapter and the twelfth verse.

Touching the dependence his words have with that part of Scripture which we
usually have held, when we spoke of Cains departure from Gods presence, we
heard that he did set himself as near Eden as he could be; that he was content
for a little trifling pleasure, that shortly fades, to forgo Gods presence,
where is pleasure for evermore; that for a little worldly gain with Balaam, he
gives over all godliness, which is the true gain; and that not he, but the
whole world through ambition, as Lords, do seek the worlds honor with the
loss of the honor and favor of God. Being thus departed from God, we heard he
came to a Land called Nod, that is, a Land of unquietness and troubles, both
in respect of the inward disquietness of his soul by continual fear and the
outward vanities of the whole world; where he found that having forsaken God,
with whom is fullness of joy, he could not have his desire satisfied by any
pleasure that the world could afford. But we left not Cain there, but heard,
that the end of that journey was woe, as it shall be the end of all those that
walk in Cains way, Jude the eleventh verse.

And for that there is none but may fall into the same way, it concerns every
man to think how, being departed from the presence of God, he may come back to
Christ, and especially that he watch his opportunity, to come at such a time as
Christ will not cast him out; And that is taught us here, in these words, where
Christ says, That whosoever comes to him, as he is the bread of life, he
shall not be cast forth.

But we must watch this opportunity; for there are two wenite's, Come to me all
ye, Matthew the eleventh chapter, that have departed from me, to receive
worldly pleasures and gain; The other, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit
the Kingdom, Matthew the twenty fifth chapter and the thirty fourth verse. But
he that will have his part in this latter venite, must have his part also in
the first: He must come again to Christ by repentance, else he cannot come to
be partaker of the heavenly Kingdom.

In these words of Christ we have three persons: First, Pater dans. Secondly,
Homo veniens. Thirdly, Christus non ejiciens. Whereof the two former parts be
the Condition, the third person belongs to the Promise. The Condition stands
in The Fathers giving, and our coming; The Promise is Christ's not casting out.

Touching which parts jointly, we are to observe these, That every one by
experience sindes that the state of sinners, live they never so pleasantly, is
but as Cain called his son, Chanoch, that is, a good beginning; For the
midst of that state is unquietness, and the end everlasting death. Which
being considered, it will make every man willing to come again to God if there
be any hope, they shall be received: In regard of our selves, as St Paul
speaks of her that departed from her husband, the first cpistle to the
Corinthians the seventh chapter and the eleventh verse, so it were just, that
in as much as we have willingly forsaken God, and departed from him, preserring
transitory and earthly delights before his favor, he should say, Qui discedit,
discedat, that being once gone from him, he should not receive usagain.

But here we are to admire the goodness and mercy of God and Christ, that
instead of a revenger and punisher, he is a merciful receiver; that where in
Justice Christ might be a rock of offense, to such as depart from him, he will
be a rock of refuge to them; that he is so far from casting out, if they
come, that he is content to seek such as are lost, Luke the nineteenth chapter
and the tenth verse, That he sends and sends again, that they should come back,
Matthew the twenty second chapter, That he stands at the door knocking,
Apocalypse the third chapter, And says, Come to us all ye, Matthew the eleventh
chapter: So there is no doubt but Christ will receive them that come to him.
For, as the ancient Fathers note, If when he comes to us, we cast not him out,
neither will he cast us out when we come to him: And that no unworthiness by
means of any filth, either of body or soul, does keep him from us, we see for
bodily uncleanness, he was content to be received by Simon the leper, Mark the
fourteenth chapter and the third verse: And in regard of spiritual pollution,
howsoever a man know himself to be a sinner, that is, to have an unclean soul,
yet not to despair, because Christ, by the confession of his enemies, is such a
one as does not only receive sinners, but eats with them, Luke the fifteenth
chapter and the third verse; yea, he not only (...) them that deserve to be
cast out, as unworthy to inher its he Kingdom, the first epistle to the
Corinthians the sixth chapter and the ninth verse; but does also wash,
sanctify, and justify them in his (...) name, and by the spirit of God.

The Condition on our part was, That we come; the meaning where of, if we look
into the ancient Fathers upon the thirty fifth verse, He that comes to me, is
some external part of Gods worship; for so they expound it by the Apostles
words, Romans the tenth chapter; If thou believe in thy heart, and confess
with thy mouth; for (...) eving is the affection of the heart, but confession
is outward in the conversation of life, as some are said to deny God in their
works, (...) the first chapter and the sixteenth verse.

There are diverse sorts of coming: First, We are said to come to Christ in
Baptism, Mark the tenth chapter Sinete parvalos venire ad me. Secondly, In
Prayer; for as Augustine says, Preeibus, non passibus, iter ad Deum Thirdly,
In the hearing of the word: so many reforced and came to Christ, Luke the
fifteenth chapter and the first verse: And we likewise come to Christ, when we
come to hear his Ministers; for he that hears him hears us, Luke the tenth
chapter. Fourthly, By Repentance, as Luke the fifteenth chapter, I will go to
my Father. But Christ receives none of these, but that we come to him as he is
panis vitae; when we come to Christ, as he offers himself in the Sacrament, to
be the lively food of our souls; when we come to the same, and do it in the
remembrance of his death. And there is reason why both we should come to
Christ, and he should receive us coming.

First, There is reason we should come to Christ, in regard of our sins
already past: For we have need of a Sacrifice, both in respect of the grinding
and upbraiding of our consciences for the sins we have committed and by
reason of the punishment we have deserved by them. This sacrifice we are put in
mind of in this Sacrament, That Christ has offered himself to God an (...)
and sacrifice of a sweet smelling favor, wherein we have planted in our hearts
the passive grace of God, for the (...) of our consciences against sin past,
by the taking of the cup of Salvation, which makes us say, (...) into thy rest
O my soul, Psalm the hundred and sixteenth, and for the turning away of
deserved punishment, as the blood of the Paschal Lamb, sprinkled upon the
doors, saved the (...) from destroying, Exodus the the twelfth chapter. So in
this true passover we receive the blood of the immaculate Lamb Christ, to
assure us of peace with God, and to deliver us from the destroying Angel. As
the Heathen had their Altar, whereon they offered to their gods; so we have an
Altar, that is, the Lords Table, where we celebiate the remembrance of that
obiation once made by Christ, Hebrews the thirteenth chapter and the twelfth
verse.

In respect of sin to come likewise, we have need to come to Christ; for
thereby there is wrought in us active grace, whereby we are enabled to resist
sin: For the endowing of our (...) with much strength, Psalm the hundred
thirty eighth, and with much power from above, is here performed unto us that
come aright, Luke the twenty fourth chapter: And therefore the (...) would have
us to (...) our hearts with grace, the spiritual food, and not with meat, (...)
the thirteenth chapter: For by this means we shall be made (...) both to endure
the (...) of sin, and to be (...) over (...) and our own corruptions.
Thirdly, For that the eating of the (...) of (...) and the drinking of the
blood, is a pledge of our (...) up at the (...) day, verse the fifty fourth;
and that after this (...) we which come to the Lords Supper shall be invited to
the supper of the Lamb, of which it is said, Apocalypse the nineteenth chapter
and the ninth verse, blessed are they which are called to the Lambs supper.

Again, it is reason Christ should receive us in two sorts.

First, In respect of the communicants or comers; for there is no man ever in
better state and more disposed to be received than at the celebration of this
Sacrament. If a contrite spirit for sin can set a man in state to be received
of Christ, man is most contrite and broken in heart at this time: If Christ
will then receive us, when he may dwell in our hearts by faith, Ephesians the
third chapter, at this time is our faith at the highest; for when we have the
body and blood of Christ in our hands, then it makes us say with Thomas, John
the twentieth chapter, Domine mi, and Deus mi: If prayer, made with (...) and
confidence, may move Christ at any time to receive, we never have more
confidence in prayer than at that time; then is the love of God most of all
shed in our hearts, by the holy Ghost, Romans the fifth chapter and the fifth
verse, by which we are received not only to give, for no man is to appear
empty, but also to forgive, as Christ wills, That remembering our brethren
has ought against us, we leave our gift and be reconciled, Matthew the fifth
chapter: If at any one time more than other Christ be more ready to receive,
then is he maxim receptivus.

Secondly, In respect of the action it self, which is a memorial of that
sacrifice, which he offered at his death to God for sins: Then he received the
thief that said, Lord, remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom, Luke the
twenty third chapter: Then he prayed for his (...), Father forgive them.
Therefore there is a great congruity, that now much more he must be careful to
us and receive us, when we celebrate the remembrance of his goodness and
mercy. But the chief point is, that in the Sacrament Christ himself is
received; and therefore it is very fit, that he which is to be received, be
ready to receive them that come to him.

The second Condition is touching the Fathers gift, All that my Father gives.
Which is a limitation: For, as many pressed upon Christ, but there was but one
that tou head, that was the woman healed of her issue of blood, Luke the eight
chapter and the forty fifth verse; so many come to the Lords Table, but to the
end they may be received they must be known by this mark, he must be datus a
Patre, tractus, and doctus, John the sixth chapter, the forty fourth and forty
fifth verses. There are that are dati ab hominibus, or, as the Apostle speaks,
the first epistle of Peter the second chapter and the thirteenth verse, ab
human a ordinatione, that is, the most part come not, being given or drawn of
the Father, but compelled by man: Their fear is taught by men's precepts,
Matthew the fifteenth chapter, and Isaiah the twenty ninth chapter. Again,
there are that have a show of Godliness, the first epistle to Timothy the
third chapter: Such come not upon any motion of Gods spirit, that they feel in
themselves, but for fashions sake: They will not be seen to refuse the order of
the Church, but do as others do; but they that are given to Christ of God,
are such as come of conscience, knowing they ought to perform this duty of
thankfulness to God; such as hunger and thirst after the right cousnesse of
Christ, the spiritual food of their souls, in conscience of their own
unworthiness and ill deservings; and therefore seek for righteousness in him,
with as great desire as for bodily food; they that come with such an earnest
inclination, as given and drawn of the Father. This does distinguish true
Christians from Counterfeits, which say I know not whether the Father do give
me to Christ, and therefore I will not come: but to such Christ answers,
Matthew the eighteenth chapter and the fourteenth verse, Non est volunt as
patris, (...) de pusillis illis pereat; De pusillis, dixit, says Augustine,
non de (...). Christ means not such as are little in respect of the world,
but but little in their own eyes, that are not possessed with a spiritual pride
of their own righteousness, as though they need not now to come, another time
will serve. It was the opinion of (...), Acts the twenty fourth chapter, When I
have convenient leisure, I will (...) for thee; So they think another time will
be more fit than the (...) oceasion; and so Christ must wait upon them, they
may not wait upon Christ. But as the Pharisees despised the counsel of God and
would not be baptized by John, Luke the seventh chapter and the thirtieth
verse; so do these despise the counsel of Christ against themselves, whose
purpose happily was even at this time to have received them: But because they
despised his counsel, that happens to them which besell Saul, whom Samuel
tells, That if he had kept the Lords commandment, he had now established his
kingdom for ever upon Israel, the first book of Samuel the thirteenth chapter
and the thirteenth verse: but for that he despised the opportunity now, it is
removed to another. And of them that come, it may be they will come, but with
Cains spirit, not caring how or what (...) they give to God: But they must come
as given of the Father, and not tanquam ab hominibus (...); they may not come
like him that sat down at the Marriage, without awedding (...) the twenty
second chapter. Who so comes in that (...), as he, shall not be received, for
that he is not given of the Father; so he shall be (...) out into utter
darkness.

Thirdly, The promise is, They that come after this manner, shall not be cast
out; Which is set out earnestly by Christ with a (...) negation, (...); that
is, never, at no hand. This (...); for Christ does perform it and (...) when
the (...) says, (...) for sakest not them that seek (...) the (...); the
meaning is, they not only (...) God; but with him (...) joys and glory (...):
So he that comes to Christ is (...), (...) out, but received to be a member of
(...) my (...) body, (...) partaker of the divine nature, the second (...) of
(...) (...) chapter and the fourth verse.

What is meant by being (...), appears by the (...) out of the dry branch, that
brings forth no (...), John the (...) chapter, which is to be cast (...) the
fire; by the (...) that (...) and is cast out, Matthew the fifth chapter; by the
bad fish caught in the net, which is cast away, Matthew the thirteenth chapter
and the forty eight verse. This casting out, is a degree to that casting into
utter darkness, which Christ speaks of.

There is a second for as, that is, out of the Church, as John the ninth
chapter and the thirty fourth verse, of whom Christ says, Mark the fourth
chapter and the eleventh verse, but to them which are without, the first
epistle to the Corinthians the fifth chapter and the twelfth verse, What have ye
to do with them that are without? that is, the Heathen: And this is nothing
but a disposition to the second for as, that is, to be cast out of the Kingdom
of Heaven; of which, Apocalypse the twenty second chapter and the fifteenth
verse, for as autem er ant canes, and to be cast into the lake that burns with
fire and brimstone, where their smoke shall ascend for ever, where the worm
never dies, and the fire is never quenched, where they shall wish for death,
and death shall fly from them. This is the state of them that are cast out.

But Christ promises, That who so comes to him, being given, shall not be
cast out, but shall be quit from death and damnation: He does not only receive
them, and eat with them; but receives them into that union that is inter alitum
and alimentum, that is, to be one with him; which is a greater union than is
either between brother and brother, or between man and wife; for herein is that
verified, That we are received to be partakers of the Divine nature, by
partaking whereof, he is in us and we in him; we and Christ are made one; we
receive him, and he receives us: So that as God cannot hate Christ, so he
cannot but love us, being ingraffed into him. Thus it comes to pass that we
are not cast out, but are made partakers of all the good things of Christ, who
says to him that comes to him, Luke the fifteenth chapter, Omnia nostra tua
sunt, and Matthew the fifteenth chapter, Intra in gaudium Domini, that is the
chief point in this promise.

As for them that come not to Christ, howsoever they deserve to be cast out,
yet Christ does not cast them out, but they cast out themselves, in as much as
they sever themselves from this Sacrament, which is the holy of holiest; and
from the memorial of his loving kindness: He that comes not to the Lords
Supper, sets himself in the state of the Heathen; which albeit they have a
kind of prayer, and a knowledge, no less than we, yet come not so far as to
celebrate this Sacrament: He is in no better state than the Jews and Turks,
which albeit they believe the creation of the world, and the last Judgment, yet
acknowledge not Christ, nor come to him tanquam panis vitae. But they must come
to the Lords Supper, if they will be bidden to the Lambs Supper: Neither may
they defer to come at their own pleasure; for it may be now is the time that
Christ will receive them, and if they neglect the opportunity, they shall be
cast out, as Saul was, in the first book of Samuel the thirteenth chapter.

It remains that we stir up in ourselves a willingness to come: For to come
is a voluntary action, as Christ tells us, John the fifth chapter, Vos non
vultis venire adme, nam qui venit, ideo venit, quia voluit venire, unless we
be as willing to come, as Christ is to receive, all is nothing, Matthew the
twenty third chapter and thirty seventh verse, Quoties volui, and noluistis?
How often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a Hen gathers
her chickens under her wings, and ye would not? Therefore we must beware of
removing this willingness from our selves. To this end we must continually
pray that Christ will work in us this willingness; that the Father will draw
us by his spirit; and say with Peter, Matthew the fourteenth chapter and the
twenty eight verse, Domine, mitte me ad te venire; let me be in numero
pusillorum, non timentium; one of those little ones that willingly will come as
often as they may, and not like those that swell with pride, and say another
time will serve as well as now, as David's servants said to Naball, in the first
book of Samuel the twenty fifth chapter, We come now in a good time, for thou
make a feast, and art in case to relieve us, another time peradventure thou will not be so prepared: So men ought to take the opportunity, and to say in
their selves, Now is the time of the celebration of Gods mercy and loving
kindness: Now we receive Christ; and therefore there is great hope, that if we
come, he will receive us: Now we celebrate the memory of his death, when he was
content to receive the thief that came unto him; and therefore it is most
likely that he will receive us, if we come to him. But if we come not now,
happily we shall not be received when we would. It is Christ's will, That they
which are given him of the Father, be with him where he is, and may behold his
glory, John the seventeenth chapter and the twenty fourth verse. Therefore it
stands us upon to come to Christ, that he may receive us to be one with him in
the life of grace, and partakers with him in his Kingdom of glory.

Qui vero haec audierunt compuncti sunt cord, and dixerunt ad Petrum ac
reliquos Apostolos, Quid faciemus viri fratres? Petrus autem ait ad eos,
Resipiscite, etc. Act. 2. 37.

April. 12. 1600.
OUR Savior Christ promised Peter Acts the fifth chapter, to make him a fisher
of men; and (...) the thirteenth chapter, That the (...) of Heaven is like a
(...), which catches fish of all (...) The first casting forth of this act,
and (...) draught that Peter had, is by (...) these verses, And the draught
which he made was (...) souls, verse the forty first. If we (...), of what
(...). They were (...) souls of them that killed the Son of God, and (...)
the spirit of God, whom they (...); (...) the (...) holy Ghost to (...), verse
the (...) These men are full of new (...).

Which when we advisedly consider, it cannot but be matter, First, Of great
comfort, Teaching us, that albeit we be great sinners as the Jews that put the
son of God to death, yet there is a quid faciemus? what to do, that is, a
hope of remission of sins. Secondly, Of instruction touching the means, That
if we repent and be pricked in heart with the consideration of our sins as
they were, we shall attain this mercy which they received. First, St. Luke
sets down the Sermon of Peter. Secondly, The sruit and effect of it. As the
Sermon it self propounds the death and Resurrection of Christ; so in the effect
that followed of it, we see the means how we are made partakers of his death
and Resurrection; and that is set down in these two verses; which contain a
question and an answer. In the question is to be observed, First, the cause of
it, that is, the compunction of their hearts: Secondly, the cause of that
compunction, and that was the hearing of Peter's Sermon.

Touching this effect, which Peter's Sermon wrought in the hearts of his
hearers, it is compuncti sunt cord. Wherein note two things, First, the work
it self. Secondly, the part wherein (of the work it self) it is said, they were
pricked.

Wherein first we are to observe, That the first work of the spirit and
operation of the word, is compunction of heart; howbeit the word being the word
of glad tidings and comfort, it is strange it should have any such operation,
but that Christ has foretold the same, John the sixteenth chapter, When the
comforter comes, he shall reprove the world of sin. Now reproof is a thing
that enters into the heart; as Proverbs the twelfth chapter and the eighteenth
verse, There is that speaks words like the prickings of a sword; and as
Christ gave warning before hand; so now when the holy Ghost was given, we see
that Peter's hearers are reproved and pricked in their consciences, that they
dealt so cruelly with Christ. As this (...) the Elect of God; so there is
another spirit called by the same name of pricking, (...), Romans the eleventh
chapter and the eighth verse, that is, the spirit of slumber, which shows it
self upon those that shall not be saved.

Touching the manner of this operation, we see it is not a tickling or itching,
but a pricking, and that no light one, but such as pierced deeply into their
hearts, and caused them to cry: Whereby we see it is not the speaking of fair
words, saying with the false Prophets, Jeremiah the twenty third chapter, The
Lord has said ye shall have peace; it is not that (...), Romans the sixteenth
chapter and the eighteenth verse, that makes this effect, but this speaking.
The part wherein this work was wrought, was the heart, as Luke the twenty
fourth chapter, they burned in their hearts; and (...) the second chapter and
the fourteenth verse, I will speak to their hearts. So it was (...) of the
ears, in the second (...) to Timot hie the (...) chapter or of the brain that
they felt, but a (...) of the very (...) and so should we be affected at the
hearing of the word. As (...) is pricked in the flesh, is disquieted, till he
have remedy; so should the consideration of our sins disquiet us, and make us
seek for cure. This is our duty from their example, and it is a good sign of
distinction, to show us whether we be of the number of those that shall be
saved; whether of the good fish that shall be gathered together, or the bad
fish that shall be cast out, Matthew the thirteenth chapter and the forty
eighth verse: So if we pertain to God, we shall feel this pricking at our
hearts, after we have heard the word.

The cause of this compunction is his auditis, that is, they had heard a speech
of St. Peter, which did disquiet them, till they asked counsel of Peter and the
rest. The word of God of its own nature, has no such operation, for the
Patriarch Job says, Job the twenty third chapter, It was agreeable to him as
his appointedfood: And David, Psalm the nineteenth, says, The Commanaements of
the Lordrejoyceth the heart, and is sweeter than the honey and the honey-combe:
But yet it has this effect in regard that it meets with that which is an
enemy to our Salvation, that is sin, the deputy of (...), as the word is Gods
(...). Without the Law sin is dead; but when the Commandment came sin
revived, Romans the seventh chapter and the eighth verse; for sin is a sting,
the first epistle to the Corinthians the fifteenth chapter, which lies dead so
long as it is not reproved: But when it is reproved by the commandment of God,
then it reviveth and stings the heart; it makes men have a conscience of sin,
Hebrews the tenth chapter, and when sin is disquieted, the heart also wherein
it rests is disquieted; For the words of the wise are as goads and pricks,
Ecclesiastes the twelfth chapter; and Matthew the fifth chapter, as salt and
mustard seed; Matthew the thirteenth chapter, as wine; To a putrified sore,
Luke the tenth chapter. So that whether we respect the old or new Testament, we
see the words have this (...) to disquiet sin, especially such words as Peter
spoke to his Auditors out of the Prophet Joel; where he shows, that as Christ
has a day of resurrection, which is past; whereby he gave his Apostles those
gifts of the spirit; so he has another day, which is the featfull and great
day of Judgment; when the word of the Rulers shall not be enough, for them
that have killed the Lord of life, (though they promised to serve them
harmless, Matthew the twenty eighth chapter:) For here they shall give an
account of their cruelty to Christ.

And thirdly whereas he moves them to repentance, First, In this consideration
of the day of Judgment: Secondly, of the sin they committed, that they slew
and crucified Christ: Thirdl, of the grievousnesse of their sin, that he was
the son of God whom they dealt thus with; and every sin has a sting, but
especially (...): For the remembrance of it stings the conscience so as it
cannot be quiet. Now in that they not only committed murder but murdered such
a one as was both a holy and just one, Acts the third (...) and the blessed
son of God, this could not but (...) their hearts; as we see the remembrance
of the day of Judgment is such a thing as made Felix tremble, Acts the twenty
fourth chapter. And when we hear of the Judgment to come, it should bring out
of us these questions Jeremiah the eighth chapter and the sixth verse, Quid
feci? and Isaiah the fifty seventh chapter and the fourth verse, Cui (...)?
upon whom have you gaped. To consider not only the sin we have committed, but
the person against whom; that it is God of all (...) stie and power: And
Matthew the twenty first chapter, Quid faciam? that is, he considers of the
Judgments of God which belong to us: For these so grievous sins, these are
means to prick our hearts at the hearing of the word. But yet we say, though
the word of God has this nature, yet except the work of the spirit do concur
with the word, the conscience is seared, the first epistle to Timothy and the
fourth chapter, and cannot be touched with any thing: The soul is possessed
with the gangrene, that is, without life and feeling, so that it has no sense,
be it pricked never so deeply, the second (...) to Timothy the first chapter;
but he that feels himself pricked in heart for his sins may assure himself
his conscience is not feared, but both a heart of flesh easily to be touched
with sorrow for sin; and that his soul is not dead in sin, but lives
spiritually.

In the Question we have to observe, First, that this compunction made him
speak; for, as the Wiseman says, Qui pungit cor educit sermonem. So here when
they were pricked, they said Men and Brethren; as if the holy (...) should say,
if a man say nothing after he is pricked, it is nature compunction: For if when
men are moved inwardly with a feeling of their sins, for all that, they say
nothing, nor seek direction of them that are skillful, they do smother and
detein the truth, Romans the first chapter.

Secondly, We must observe what they said, and that was Quid faciemus? what
shall we do? A first the People, then the (...), and after the Publicans, said
to S John the (...), Luke the third chapter; which is the second thing to be
noted; that as true compunction is not dumb, so not (...), but would be doing
something: they say not What shall we say? but What shall we do? Quid faciemus?
as if the same spirit which pricked their hearts had also taught them, that
something must be done. The like question did St. Paul make, being pricked,
Domine, quid vis me facere? Acts the ninth chapter and the sixth verse; So the
Angel said to Cornelius, Go to Joppa, and Simon shall tell thee what thou
ought to do, Acts the tenth chapter; So said the Jayler to the Apostles.
Acts the sixteenth chapter, What shall I do that I may be saved, I and my
household, and that I may be rid of the pricking of my conscience? For as
compunction must not be silant; so neither must it be idle or unfruitful in
the knowledge of the Lord, the second epistle of Peter the first chapter.

Thirdly, Observe after what manner they said, What shall we do? and that was
not as Cain and Judas said, Genesis the fourth chapter, and Matthew the twenty
seventh chapter; Their what to do, Quid faciemus? was a note of desparation:
Nor as the P arisees said desparately in their sury and rage, What shall we
do? John the eleventh chapter. If such have their sins laid before them,
their hearts will not be pricked, but cleave asunder, as they to whom St.
Stephen (...) Acts the eighth chapter. The heart may be cast down with too much
grief, so as a man shall say with Cain, My sin is greater than can be
forgiven; or else moved with malice and be pricked, so as they will prick
again: as they that being pricked with the reproof of the Prophet, (...), Let
us sting him with our tongues, as he has stung our hearts, Jeremiah the
eighteenth chapter and the eighteenth verse; for this is the effect which the
word of God has in many that are wicked. But that which Peter's Auditors say,
is spoken in heaviness, and a desire to have sin that does disquiet them
(that which the Apostle calls the sin that does so easily beset us, (...),
Hebrews the twelfth and the first verse) taken from them: This their heaviness
makes them conformable to Christ, and therefore is commendable in them: For it
is Gods will, that such as shall be saved, be made (...) to the Image of his
son, Romans the eighth chapter and the twenty ninth verse; for Christ was
pierced not only with a bodily spear in his side, but with grief of soul; And
as he suffered of compassion over us; so we must suffer in compassion with him.

Out of that which the ancient Fathers observe in Sorrow, we have five things
to note: First, That something may be done as a remedy against sin. For
albeit we have sinned never (...), yet there is hope, tamen adhuc spes est,
Esdras the tenth chapter and the second verse; there is hope of some means to
be used; which if it be done, as Ezechiel the eighteenth chapter, privata
vestra non (...) Domine scandalum. Secondly, By that which they say is to be
gathered, that as something may be done, so it ought to be done, that the
terror of mind being removed, we may be assured of the favor and grace of
God. Thirdly, They show they are ready to do it, not like those of whom the
Prophet says, I know when I have showed you what you should do, you will not
do it, Jeremiah the forty third. But these are ready to do whatsoever shall
be appointed as a remedy for them. Fourthly, As they are ready, (...) they
confess their ignorance, that of themselves they know not how to rid
themselves from sin: As the (...) said, Acts the (...) chapter, How can I
understand without an Interpreter? Fifthly, They seek to Peter and the other
(...), because God had lately (...) them with the grace of his spirit, and
consequently were skillful, and could tell them what to do; and therefore they
are bound (...) commit themselves to them, as to their Physician, to do
whatsoever they shall (...) be for the cure of their souls. So that if there be
any, that being in (...) of (...), do for all that either think that nothing
can, or that nothing ought to be done, but shall say desparately, Jeremiah the
eighteenth chapter: or, as if it were not needful to be done, shall (...) to
(...) if; or think they know well enough what to do without (...), contrary to
the Apostles opinion, in the first epistle to the (...) the twelfth chapter,
Are all Apostles? For though first we say (...), We (...) we all have
knowledge, the first epistle to the (...) the eighth chapter and the first
verse; yet after he says, every one has not knowledge, and therefore must ask
counsel of those that can give it; or else shall refuse to be directed by such
as do know, therefore are not like to be eased of the sting of conscience, but
shall for ever have the worm of conscience gnawing them, and ever be disquieted.

The Apostles answer to this question is, in the fifty eighth verse,
Resipiscite, etc. that is, there is something to be done, which is an argument
of the great Mercy of God, and the virtue and power of the Sacrifice of Christ,
notwithstanding the greatness of their sins. Here are two things set down,
First, By way of precept, Repent and be baptized. Secondly, Things by Christ's
promises, Ye shall have your sins forgiven, and receive the gift of the Holy
Ghost.

First, Peter prescribes them what to do, and so shows that their (...) are
remitted, which is a sign of Gods great mercy, though their sins were
grievous: For he that shall offend his better, a man of some credit, can hardly
hope for pardon; much loss if he offend the Prince or some noble Person; But
these offend the Majesty of God himself, which does far exceed the Majesty of
earthly Princes: For of Christ the elect Son of God they said, in the twenty
sixth chapter of Matthew, His blood be upon us; and they wrought despite to
the Spirit of Grace, Hebrews the tenth chapter; when they blaspheme the Holy
Ghost, accusing them of drunkenness, which were inspired with the Holy Spirit,
Acts the second chapter and the thirteenth verse: Yet the Apostle tells these
grievous sinners, there is hope of forgiveness, that to them which are yet
scarce cold from the slaughter of the Son of God, there is a remedy to help
them. Wherein the Apostle follows the rule which Christ had before given the
Apostles, in the twenty fourth chapter of Luke, To preach repentance and
remission of sins to mankind, beginning at Jerusalem: If the doctrine of
remission of sins be first to be preached to them, among whom Christ was
crucified, much more to the ends of the world: and that likes us well:

But secondly, He tells us what we must do; he says not, you shall live to
do nothing, but repent and be baptized. It is not enough to be pricked in the
heart for sin past, but we must do something. And he speaks first by way of
precept, Repent, and that is, rest not in that passive part, but know that when
you are pricked in your hearts, repentance must be showed in your life:
Wherewithal he shows, that compunction is not repentance; for here to these
that were already pricked, he says, Repent; and (...) the thirty first
chapter, After I converted, I repented; so in the third chapter of the Acts of
the Apostles, Repent and turn, that your sins may be done away: so it was
given in charge to St. Paul, Acts the twenty sixth chapter, Repent and turn,
and do works worthy of eternal life: So these men showed forth these works;
for, as follows, they were devout and liberal, distributing to all as they
had need; the principal actions, either removing of the ill, that is, sin,
which did disquiet their consciences, or the positive benefit, that is, the
gift of the Holy Ghost, which should work in them the fruits of the spirit,
meekness, patience, Galatians 5. and be unto them an earnest and pledge of
their Redemption and Salvation, in the second epistle to the Corinthians, the
first chapter, and the fifth verse, Ephesians the first chapter and the
thirteenth verse.

Tum alter ad alterum dixerunt, Nonne cor nostrum ardebat in nobis, dum
loqueretur nobis in via, and dum adaperiret nobis Stripturas? Luke 24. 32.

April. 20. 1600.
WHICH is another, or second passion that comes unto men at the preaching of
the word; for as Acts the second chapter and the thirty seventh verse, there
were some that suffered a pricking at the heart upon the hearing of the word;
so here are others that suffer an inflaming or burding in the heart: For if we
look in verse the twenty first, these two disciples with whom Christ traveled
were dead in spirit and cold in faith before the word was spoken, for they
confessed nos autem (...); But after our Savior Christ had spoken with them
and opened the Scriptures, their hope revived, and their hearts waxed warm:
Which, as it is a fruit and effect of the word in the hearts of the hearers; so
is it a (...) sign and argument of the efficacy and operation of Christ, which
he (...) in the ministry of the word, as the (...) speaks, in the second (...)
to the (...), and the thirteenth chapter, (...) in me (...); so when we feel
this burning in our hearts, it is a great comfort to us, and a sign that
Christ speaks in (...); and we must in such a case pray to God, that he will
establish in (...) things (...) he bath begun, Psalm the sixty eighth; if it
work (...) effect in us, we must suspect our selves, and pray that we may have
a (...) of the word when we hear (...); that whereas (...) (...) (...) the
second chapter of the Acts of the (...), had a pricking at (...) hearts, and
those of Christ fels a (...); we may be in the number of those hearers; and not
of those, of whom the (...), in the sixth chapter of (...), and the (...)
verse, (...) eyes, but see not, ears, but such as are heavy and (...) heart,
so as though they (...), yet they (...), (...) (...) not converi and be (...)
Which is a (...) pronounced and executed upon the (...) as Christ shows, in
the thirteenth chapter of (...), (...) eighth chapter of Lake: And the (...)
both (...) the twelfth chapter of John, and (...), in (...) of the Acts of the
(...), to conclude (...) this as a reason whyther (...) not (...) had blinded
their eyes and hardened their hearts, Lest they should see (...) their eyes, and
understand with their hearts, and convert and be healed.

The other effect of the word was said to be a pricking; this is a beginning:
For as the Preacher ascribes a prick or point to the word when he says, The
words of the wise are tanquam acuta and stimuli, Ecclesiastes the twelfth
chapter. So here we see there are certain sparks of fire in the word, which
will soon kindle a fire in the hearts of the hearers. The pricking is referred
to fear, as Psalm the hundred and nineteenth, Confringe cor (...) timore tuo:
the warming is an effect of hope and love, as Canticles the eighth chapter and
the sixth verse, where love is compared to fire, that has ardent coals, that
burn so, as much water cannot quench them; that is, As there are some
Scriptures that entreat of the wrath of God, that lay men's sins before their
eyes, and tells them of the terrible and great day of the Lord, when they shall
be rewarded all according to their works; and so breeds a fear in the hearts of
the hearers, as Acts the fifth chapter and the eleventh verse; and prick them,
verse the thirty seventh, unless their hearts be stony and their flesh a dead
flesh: So on the other side some Scriptures set forth the goodness of God and
his gracious promises, as when Christ (...) the two (...), Ought not Christ to
suffer these things, and to enter into glory? verse the twenty sixth; which
shows the love of God the Father, in giving his son to suffer for us; and the
love of the son, in being given for us; for no man has greater love than
this, to dye for his friend, John the fifteenth chapter; and the great reward
that God has for his children, which is the hope of glory, assuring them that
as Christ is entered into glory, so we shall be with him. And such Scripture
will stir up in the (...) both affection of love and hope; wherewith, as with
coals or sparks of fire, their hearts are wounded. And those several parts of
Scripture are tempered according to the nature of the hearers or auditors; for
there are some that scoff and deride and blaspheme the holy spirit of God,
Acts the second chapter and the thirteenth verse: And to such the threatenings
and judgments of God must be laid before them, as Peter does. But here we have
Auditors of such nature, that (...), such as did not mock and sit in the Chair
of Scorners, but were (...) in spirit and were of a faint heart; which
confess, we were in hope that this was he that should have delivered Israel,
but now our hope is faint and we quake; and to such the opening of Gods love
and of his great and (...) promises, is expedient.

In this verse we have to consider, First, The manner of uttering of these
words; for they say not, Our hearts (...), but ask the question, Did not our
hearts? Secondly, The (...) of the verse, which consists of three parts, First,
the part wherein this effect was wrought, Cor nostrum. Secondly, A passion or
work, a burning. Thirdly, The time, when he talked with us.

First, For the manner, Did not our hearts burn? Of which kind of negative
speaking, there are two examples in Scripture; First, it is a more vehement
affirmation, than if a man should only affirm a truth; as where Christ says
before, Ought not Christ to suffer these things, and to enter into glory? as if
he should say, he ought without doubt: for when the matter is questionable, we
use to speak affirmatively; but in a plain case that is evident and out of
doubt, then we ask a question negatively, as, Does not the Sun shine? as if
one should say, It is clear, We see it does. So here they knew well before
Christ spoke to them, their hearts were cold, and their hope was saint and
dead; but now remembering that while Christ spoke to them, they selt their
hearts warm within them; they ask, Did not our hearts burn? as if they should
say, doubtless we felt a heat and burning within us.

Another use of this negative question is asked out of Christ's deed, Luke the
seventeenth chapter, Were there not ten cleansed? he marvelled what was become
of the other nine. This admiration serves to tax and to reprehend the
unthankfulness of those nine which returned not to praise God: And seeing the
Disciples ask the Question, Did not our hearts burn? as if they should say,
seeing we felt our hearts burn within us, why did we not know that it was
Christ the Son of God, that spoke to us? Surely it is not the work of a man
to touch the heart, but God only; and seeing our hearts were touched thus,
doubtless it was Christ that spoke to us: Which shows that at the present
time that Christ spoke to them, they felt him not; but when Christ was gone out
of their sight, then they remembered that their hearts felt this heat within
them; for by Jacob's experience we learn, that God may be in a place, and we
not know of it; for so he confesses, in the twenty eighth chapter of Genesis,
and the sixth verse, God was here, and I was not aware; and in the ninth
chapter of Job, and the eleventh verse, He will be by me, and I shall not see
him; and in the thirteenth chapter of John, Quid ego faciam tu nescis nunc,
scies autem posthac; that is, hereafter ye shall feel your hearts moved: So
the attention of these two Disciples was so great, and they were in such an
ecstasy, that they observed no such thing, for the present, while he spoke;
they perceived it not till Christ had made an end, and was taken from them.
For, as there are things that appear and are not, as visards and maskes which
make a show of that which is not; so there are things that appear not and yet
are, as the spirits and souls of men, which are invisible. There was one that
boasted of that he had not, that was the false Prophet that said to Michaiah,
in the first book of Kings the twenty second chapter, It is impossible that the
spirit of the Lord shauld go from me to thee: And in the first epistle to the
Corinthians, the seventh chapter, there is one that with more modesty and
coldness says, I think I have the spirit of God, and he had it indeed: The
wisest that ever was of men says, There is not in me the understanding of a
man, Proverbs the thirtieth chapter and the second verse: And Caiaphas that
understood as little as any, as if he only understood all, said, Vos plane
nihil intelligitis, John the eleventh chapter, and the forty ninth verse.

Touching the substance of the question, and the first part: First, The part
wherein that which Christ spoke did work, is the heart, which is the commander
of man; for as the word comes our of the heart, bonus homo ex bono thesauro
cordis sui, Luke the sixth chapter, so if it have its right course, it goes to
the heart; for there be three wards and locks to be opened, that the sound of
Gods word may enter; that is, the ear, Psalm the fourtieth, Mine ear have
thou opened, which is the gate of wisdom. Secondly, the understanding to
conceive what is heard; of which it is said here, Their eyes were opened, Luke
the twenty fourth chapter and the thirty first verse, that is, oculi mentis,
Ephesians the first chapter and the eighteenth verse. Thirdly, the heart, as
Lydia's heart was opened by the Lord, Acts the sixteenth chapter: Many are
present, but hear not attentively what is said; others hear, but understand
not; and some have both these degrees, and yet have not their hearts opened,
and so it is to no purpose that is spoken: Though we hear and understand, yet
if the heart be not touched with it, it is but verbum aerium, it is man's word,
and not Gods; for the property of Gods word is, to pierce to the heart and
marrow, And to the dividing of the soul, Hebrews the fourth chapter and the
twelfth verse: Therefore by the ear man may examine his own heart; for unless
he feel himself touched inwardly with the word, his hearing is in vain: And
this is the service which God rejects, Isaiah the twenty ninth chapter and the
thirteenth verse, Matthew the fifteench chapter and the eighth verse, populus
labiis me honerat; so if either we bring our ears alone, or both ears and
eyes, both hearken and conceive; yet so long as this is true of us, that our
heart is departed from God: If the heart be not affected with the preaching of
the word, it is in vain; For the profitable hearer is he that with an honest
and good heart receives the word of God, Which is the immortal seed, that
brings forth much fruit, Luke the eighth chapter.

Secondly, the work wrought in the heart, is a burning or kindling, as we
showed. There is a double compunction; First, when a man being pricked in
heart, falls into a rage, as they that heard Stephen, Acts the seventh chapter:
Secondly, when being pricked they seek for ease and comfort, as in the second
chapter of the Acts, and the thirty seventh verse: So there is a double fire:
For as there is a fire from the Altar which touched the prophets mouth, Esaias
the sixth chapter, so fire from Topheth, Isaiah the thirtieth chapter, there are
fiery tongues, that fell upon the Apostes; But they came from heaven, Acts the
second chapter; but there are fiery tongues, that are set on fire of hell,
James the third chapter; it is the fire from the Altar, and the fiery tongues
from heaven, that causes the burning in the heart of such as hear aright, and
not the fire of Topheth. For as the Devil with his hot Iron does cauterise and
sear the consciences of some, so the fire of Gods spirit does warm the hearts
of others, so as they hear the word of God with profit. As there are wicked,
whose tongues and words are like pricks and swords, Proverbs the twelfth
chapter; so there are others, whose tongues are like hot Juniper coals, Psalm
the one hundred and twentieth, which slanders others: For the Devil, that
(...) of man, Matthew the thirteenth chapter, (...) up this fire in the hearts
of men; but this fire must be distinguished from that fire which Christ came to
bring upon earth, (...) the twelfth chapter. As this compunction was of says,
and the other of fear; so here the good fire proceeds from love, and hope, the
effect of the other, is desperate raging and hatred. The true fire is from the
spirit, as it is in the sixth chapter of John, Verba mea spiritus sunt and vita,
for where there is spirit, there is a heat; and Christ's words being spiritual,
do warm the hearts of the hearers, and the Scriptures being inspired by the
spirit of God, cannot but work this heat in men's hearts, besides, God says of
his word, Jeremiah the twenty third chapter, and the twenty ninth verse, meum
verbum ignis est, it is fire, no man can deny it, for whether we respect the
Law, it is ignta lex, Deuteronomie the thirty third chapter and the second
verse, the word of prophecy is fiery, for the Prophet could not prophecy till
the coal taken from the Altar had touched his lips, Isaiah the sixth chapter,
and of the Gospel which Christ preached, he says, (...) mittere in terram, and
quod volo misi ut ardeat, Luke the twelfth chapter and the forty ninth verse,
and after his ascension he gave order that the fiery tongues should come upon
the Apostles, that their word might be a fiery word, that might kindle in the
hearts of the hearers. Now the word of God is therefore called fire, because
the quality of fire is most actual; for as some note, that albeit many things
be hid from the Sun, Yet there is nothing hid from the heat thereof; for it
pierces into all parts of the world, Psalm the ninteenth; so the word of God
is such, and mighty in operation, and sharper than any two edged sword, and
enters through, Hebrews the fourth chapter: For as the fire consumes all
things, and turns it into fire; so does the word of God turn the affections
of man into word, and not the word into affection: As the word it self is fire,
so the motions which it stirs up in the heart are fiery and servent, as the
Apostle shows, in the twelfth chapter to the Romans, and the eleventh verse,
Ferventes spiritu: Fervencie proceeds of two affections: The one is hope, in
the twelfth verse; that where before their hope was cold, now it rejoices and
revives, verse the twenty first; the other is of love, which makes them compel
him, Luke the twenty fourth chapter, to tarry with them, verse the twenty
ninth; thus the word inflames their hearts with love, and revives their
spirits, so as their hope is revived, and by working these two affections in
them, he changes them, that there is not only fire, but constancy in the word,
verba ignea faciunt igneos characteres; so as where ink may be blotted out, the
stamp of the fiery word of God continues for ever, and is durable. But the word
has a double operation against sin; First, like water, because with it the
spot which comes from without is taken away. Secondly, as fire, because, (...)
rust must be burnt out, so the inward corruption of our nature must be eaten
out, and consumed with the word; therefore the Prophet compares his preaching
to melting and founding, Jeremiah the sixth chapter, where he complains, the
bellows are burnt, the lead is consumed in the fire, the Founder melts in
vain, for the wicked are not taken away; as if he should say we have done all
we can, and yet the rust of sin does not depart from them, for we have the
wicked heart of lust and concupiscence burning in us, and in that regard the
word is as water to quench it: And again we are slow and cold in affliction,
and have need to be quickened; in which regard the word is fire: So men are
frozen in their dregs, Zephaniah the first chapter and the twelfth verse, that
cold must be dissolved by the heat of Gods word: Such a passion was in these,
to whom Christ said, You slow of heart, Luke the twenty fourth chapter and the
twenty fifth verse. This coldness is driven away by the fire of Gods word: But
although the word be never so sharp, yet it pricks not, unless the heart be
fleshie; so the fault may be in the word sometime if it be not fiery. The
preaching of the word is like the striking of fire, for unless there be tinder
to receive the sparks, it is to no purpose, how (...) soever ye strike fire; so
the preaching of the word works not except the heart be prepared: Oil is
combustible, and we must pray that our hearts may be anointed with the oil of
Gods spirit, in the first epistle of St. John, the second chapter: When the
word which is fire, and the grace of Gods spirit, as tinder, do concur, then
the heart is warmed: As there must be preparation before hand, to the end it
may have this effect; so meditation after; My heart was hot within me, and
while I thus mused, the fire kindled, Psalm the thirty ninth and the third
verse: If there be devotion before, and meditation after, upon that which we
have heard, then the fire is kindled: This heat, how small soever it be, though
it be but as smoking flax, God will not quench it, Isaiah the forty second
chapter; for it will serve to kindle a fire in the heart.

Thirdly, The time, when this was wrought in their hearts was, cum loqueretur
and aperuit ipsis Scriptur as. Whereby we see Christ had this power to touch
the hearts of his hearers not only in the Synagogues, but now when they
conferred privately together in the way. This was ordinary not only in Christ's
preaching, but to his Apostles; for while Peter spoke unto them, the holy Ghost
fell on them all, Acts the tenth chapter and the forty fourth verse: But we
must practice private conference, and instruct one another by the way, as
Christ did; for that was given by commandment Deuteronomie the sixth chapter:
And a promise is made by God, I will instruct thee in the way, Psalm the thirty
second: But Christ did not only speak, but also open the Scriptures, that is,
the words which he spoke, were not vain words, or the words of the east wind,
Job the fifteenth chapter. The Scriptures must be opened and the key to open
them, is the key of knowledge, Luke the eleventh chapter; without which key
they cannot be opened. There are unlearned and unskilful men that go about to
open the Scriptures, but they do but pick the lock; they take not the right
course; for it cannot be opened without the key of knowledge: He that will open
the Scriptures must be like Apollo, who spoke fervently, and taught exactly,
diligently, the things which pertained to the Lord, Acts the eighteenth chapter
and the twenty fifth verse: The Prophet asks not only whom he shall teach,
but whom he shall teach to understand? not only quem (...), but quem (...)
scientiam? Isaiah the twenty eighth chapter and the ninth verse: He must be a
man of knowledge that must teach; he must not only be a Doctor, but a fit
Teacher: Therefore Christ promises to his Apostles not only a mouth, but
wisdom, Dabo vobis (...) and saplentiam, Luke the twenty first chapter and
the fifteenth verse; And therefore it is recorded of them, that when they had
received the Holy Ghost, they did not only (...), but also (...), that is,
speak great and weighty sentences, Acts the second chapter and the fourth
verse. And again, unto these is committed the key of (...), which (...) and no
man opens, and opens and no man (...) the third chapter and the seventh
verse: Then the force of Gods word must needs pierce very far, when both the
Preacher speaks, and opens the Scriptures with the key of knowledge, and of
David; and the hearer prepares himself, by receiving direction of Gods Spirit,
to enlighten his understanding, and open his heart, then does the word show
forth its efficacy. Therefore when we have heard the word, we must examine our
selves, and ask, Did not our hearts burn?

There are three degrees of operation in Gods word: Contrition, when the heart
is broken, Psalm the fifty first. Comfort, when it is rent in two pieces, Joel
the second chapter. Compunction, when it is pricked only, Acts the second
chapter. The first is the perfection. The second is a degree under it. And the
last and lowest degree is Compunction, which we see was not rejected in Peter;
hearers: So for this second effect named in this text. That which is recorded
of Josiah, at the hearing of the Law, in the second of Chronicles, the 34.
chapter and the 27. verse, Liquefactum est cor Josia; this melting is the
highest degree. The next to that, is that which is reported of these two
Disciples, ardebat cor nostrum: But though it neither melt nor burn, yet if it
smoke, the promise that we have from God, is, in the forty second chapter of
Isaiah, and the third verse, and in the twelfth chapter of Matthew, and the
twentieth verse, Linum (...) non extinguet Deus, The smoking flax God will not
quench; (...) igne salietur, Every man must be salted with fire, Mark the ninth
chapter and the forty ninth verse: If we will have God to accept of us, we
must be sacrifices, and sacrifices must be seasoned with fire: Therefore when
we hear the word, we must endeavor to have a Censer of fire in us, so as we
feel the word, if not to melt our hearts, neither to burn, yet to smoke. As
without (...) we shall all (...), Luke the fifteenth chapter; so this burning
of heart is so necessary; as except we suffer the fire from Heaven to work in
our hearts, we shall suffer the fire of Hell, that is, of (...), which (...)
for ever.

Etenim per unum Spiritum nos omnes in unum corpus baptizati sumus, and Judaei,
and Graeci, and servi, and liberi: and omnes potati sumus in unum Spiritum. 1
Cor. 12. 13.

November. 2. 1600.
WHICH words (And have all been made to drink of one spirit) cannot have any
other reference but to the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ, which he
calls the Cup of blessing, the 1. to the Corinthians the 10. chapter. The end
of the Apostle in taking arguments from the Sacrament, is double; First to
persuade Christians to cleanness of life, which he does, in the first to the
Corinthians the tenth chapter, Ye cannot be partakers of the Lords table, and
the table of Devils. Secondly, bending him self here against Schisms and
contentions that were amongst the Corinthians, he takes another argument from
the nature of this Sacrament, to exhort them to the unity of the spirit; that
for as much as they all are partakers of one Sacrament, and drank all of one
spirit, therefore they should seek to be at unity and concord with themselves:
The Apostle shows this to be a good consequence from the beginning of the
chapter; and we see an example of this kind of argument, in the ninth chapter
of Luke, where the Disciples say, Master, we saw one cast out Devils in thy
name, and we forbade him, because he follows not us: And this Apostle says,
in the first epistle to the Corinthians, the first chapter, that because they
were divided, so that some were Paul's, some of Apollo, therefore they were no
true Christians: Thus we see, that as from the Sacrament of cleanness, he
exhorts them to cleanness of life; so from the Sacrament of unity, he moves
them to love and concord, and tells them they ought to avoid dissension. To
persuade unto unity and love, nothing is more effectual than the consideration
of the natural body, which although it have many members, diverse in quality,
situation, and use; so as the one is more noble than the other, yet they grudge
not one at another, For the foot does not say, because I am not the hand, I am
not of the body, nor the ear, because I am not the eye, I am not of the body,
in the first to the Corinthians, the twelfth chapter and the fifteenth verse,
neither do they contemn one another, For the eye which is the most excellent
member, does not say to the hand, I have no need of thee; nor the head to the
foot, I have no need of you, in the first to the Corinthians, the twelfth
chapter, and the twenty first verse; but contrariwise there is a sympathy and
fellow feeling; So as if one member be grieved, all the rest are grieved; and
if one be honored, all the rest rejoice with it, verse the twenty sixth; so if
men could be persuaded that they are one body, there would not be such
divisions and dissentions in the World as there are; for howsoever they be
diverse in respect of nature; Some Jews, some Grecians, as also in respect of
estate, some bond, some free, as the Apostle here speaks, yet their diversities
are not greater than those which we see between the members of the body
natural: And now the Apostle goes about to persuade them they are one body,
and therefore ought to be at unity, which he does thus: That body which has
one beginning, and one nourishment, is one body; But all the faithful have one
beginning in the fountain of regeneration, that is, in baptism, and are all
nourished with one nourishment; for they are all baptized into one body by one
spirit, and all made to drink of one spirit; therefore they are all one body,
and consequently should live in unity one with another. In regard of which
unity, which the body has not only with Christ her head, but with the members
among themselves, the Apostle calls the body Christ, in the first to the
Corinthians, the twelfth chapter and the twelfth verse.

Now to come to the consideration of these things, our way is, First, to set
down the necessity of being of this body: Secondly, the means how we come to be
of this body; that is, by the spirit: Thirdly, that the spirit is the means; so
as withal baptism and drinking is required, that is, our incorporation into
the body of Christ, which is his Church, is both by the spirit and by baptism.

For the obtaining of the spirit two things are to be practiced, First, that we
have a thirsting desire after the spirit; Secondly, that we ask it of God by
prayer.

First, For the necessity of our incorporation, whereas the Psalmist says,
Psalm the eighty ninth, God has not made all men for naught, we must first set
down this, that there is a necessity that some should be faved; for it falls
not into a man that is wise to do any thing in vain, much less may we think
that God, the fountain of wisdom, will suffer all men to perish; and
therefore that there are some elected and chosen out to be saved. Secondly, and
therefore our special aim should be to be of that number, but scattering,
renting, and dividing, is an enemy to safty, and they that will be safe, must
be recollected and gathered together under some head: It that which made Moses
pray to God to set a rule over his people, and that the congregation of the
Lord should not be as sheep which have no Shepherd, Numbers the twenty seventh
chapter and the sixteenth verse: When Christ saw the multitude, he had
compassion on them, because they were dispersed and scattered abroad as sheep
having no Shepherd, Matthew the ninth chapter and the thirty sixth verse; and
not only so, but Christ did that, that he might gather together in one, the
Children of God which were scattered, John the eleventh chapter and the fifty
second verse. Thirdly, before Christ had a body and before he was manifested in
the flesh, the Congregation was called a Synagogue, because it was then
sufficient for them to be gathered together sub uno pastore, though they were
not ruled by one spirit: But now they must be not only under one Shepherd, but
must all be one body, and that not a dead Carcass, but a living body, such a
body that lives not by a soul, but by a spirit; for that is the difference
that the Apostle makes between Adam and Christ, in the first to the Corinthians
the fifteenth chapter, The first man, Adam, was made a living soul, but the
second Adam was made a quickening spirit. This quickening spirit is it, by which
the mystical body of Christ lives, which goes through the body, and gives
life to every member. This is a mystical incorporation, and is spiritually to
be conceived, and the union between Christ and his mystically body is so
straight, that speaking of it, he says, Acts the ninth chapter, Why
persecutest thou me? and the Apostle understanding the Church, calls it
Christ, in the first to the Corinthians, the twelfth chapter and the twelfth
verse; then he that will be saved, must not be a part, but be gathered, and
that into the body of Christ, because Christ is only the Savior of his body,
Salvator corporis, Ephesians the fifth chapter and the twenty third verse. So
that if a man be out of the body, and be not a member of Christ's body, he
cannot be saved; and so Christ himself tells us, John the fifteenth chapter, If
the branch abide not in the vine, it cannot bear fruit; so unless a man abide
in me, he cannot bear fruit, but he is sarmentum, a dry branch, and is cast
forth into the fire: Whereby we see that all shall not be saved, but only they
that are gathered into the mystical body of Christ, and as members of his
body, do live by his spirit working in them.

Secondly, This incorporation stands of two points, First, of generation:
Secondly, of nourishment. For there can be no body except it be begotten; and
the body being begotten, dissolves again, and turns to nothing, unless it be
nourished. Such a thing we are to conceive of our incorporation, both parts
whereof are expressed by ingraffing and watering: For in all things he that
will be preserved in any estate, must first enter into it, and then he must
remain in it.

The Analogy of these two we shall find to be in the mystical body of
Christ. First, he that will be of the body, must come in by regeneration, Titus
the third chapter and the fifth verse; He must be ingraffed into Christ's body,
Romans the sixth chapter and the fifth verse; He must put on Christ, as the
Apostle says, Galatians the third chapter, as all they do that are baptized
into Christ Jesus: Then being, as it were, begotten and ingraffed into the
body, he must be nourished and fed, that so he may continue in that estate, he
must as a newborn babe, desire the sincere milk of the word, whereby he may
grow up, the first epistle of Peter the second chapter and the second verse; He
must be watered, the first epistle to the Corinthians the third chapter; He
must eat the flesh of Christ and drink his blood, that so he may abide in
Christ, and Christ in him, John the sixth chapter and the fifty sixth verse. By
these a man is made partaker of the body of Christ, by the other of the spirit:
By baptism we have our incorporation, by drinking the blood of Christ we
receive the spirit.

Thirdly, Why does not the blood of Christ immediately incorporate us into the
Church, without the mediation of water in baptism, and drinking of Christ's
blood in the Lords Supper?

The ancient Fathers hold two reasons hereof.

First, Taken from the love of Christ, that ever since Corpus assumit sibi,
Hebrews the tenth chapter and the fifth verse; since he took part with the
Children of flesh and blood, Hebrews the second chapter and the fourteenth
verse, as he consists of a spirit and a body; so he delights to work, not
only by a spirit, but by a body also: and this is an honor that he imparteth to
bodily things.

Secondly, He uses this course to show his power; which appears hereby to be
great, in that albeit these elements of water, and bread and wine be weak and
beggarly elements, Galatians the fourth chapter and the ninth verse; yet by his
power he (...) them and makes them effectual means, to incorporate us into his
body, and to set us in that estate wherein we may be saved. So the one reason
is a testimony of Christ's humane love; the other a token of his divine power.

Secondly, If we demand, Why he makes choice of water, bread and wine, rather
than of any other elements. It is in regard of the proportion and analogy that
they have with the things signified.

The seed Where with we are begotten, is a waterish substance, and as the
Scripture shows, water is the seed of the world, for the spirit of God moved
upon the waters, Genesis the first chapter. Therefore is water used in the
Sacrament of our regeneration; and because it is (...), it does nutrire. The
juice and nourishment that we suck out of the (...) digested, is that which
nourishes our life; and therefore the element of wine is used in the Sacrament
of our nutrition, that is after we are born a new and washed with water in
baptism, to signify our new birth: then we must receive bread and wine in the
Lords Supper, to confirm our says in the body and blood of Christ, whereby we
are sealed unto eternal life. There is another reason why God works our
incorporation by the means of these elements, and that is, that as out of
darkness he commanded light to shine, the second epistle to the Corinthians
the fourth chapter, so he might work our salvation by that which was our
destruction. Therefore because the destruction of the world was by water,
wherein, as Peter says, All the world perished, except a few even eight
persons: So it is his pleasure, by the water of baptism as an outward means to
save us, the first epistle of Peter the 3. chapter: That as by water was the
deluge of the world; so by it might be the deluge of sin. It was the eating of
the forbidden meat that destroyed the world; therefore he has thought it good,
by eating to save men: that as then it was said, If ye eat, ye dye, Genesis the
second chapter; so now it is said, except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man,
ye have no life in you, John the sixth chapter and the fifty third verse.

Now the mediation of these elements are no less necessary to preserve and
keep us as lively members of the mystical body of Christ, than bread and wine
are to maintain natural life. The People whom Saul commanded to (...) no bread,
were so (...) with fasting, that their soul was ready to go out of them, the
first book of Samuel the nineteenth chapter: Therefore when David and his men
were hungry and (...) and thirsty in the wilderness, Barzillai and others came
and brough provision, the second book of Samuel the seventeenth chapter, and
the twenty ninth verse: When Abraham returned from the (...) of five kings,
Melchisedeck met him with bread and wine, Genesis the fourteenth chapter. So it
is with the faithful, unless this spiritual life be sustained with these
outward helps: Therefore the Apostle faith, We are all made to drink of the
same spirit.

Our of which words for matter of Doctrine, where Christ says, Drink ye all of
it, the Adversary says, that it was spoken to the (...); and therefore it is
lawful for none but Priests to receive the Cup in the Supper. But Paul
speaks more generally, Nos omnes potati sumus, not only the Clergy but Lay
men: And that both parts of the Sacrament was administered to all sorts, appears
by D. Aropagita, and as the Apostle faith, We are all partakers of one bread,
the first epistle to the Corinthians the tenth chapter and the seventeenth
verse, he does not excluse the other part: So here by drinking he understands
both parts of the Sacrament.

Secondly, We see there is a necessity of eating, in as much as God appoints
that the means where by he will communicate his spirit, Acts the fifth chapter.
He gives the spirit to none but such as obey him; Therefore we must obey him
when he commands us to use this means, especially seeing he commands them with
a nisi, John the third chapter, Except a man be born again of water; (...) John
the sixth chapter, unless ye eat the flesh and drink the blood of Christ, ye
have no life in you: (...) these conditions and for these uses are we commanded
to drink of the same spirit. If we drink the blood of Christ, we shall drink
the spirit of life, which it gives, and so shall we live by him, John the sixth
chapter and the fifty seventh verse; Christ shall live in us, (...) the second
chapter.

There are that do not potare in eundem spiritum. Water of it self is not able
to purge from original corruption without the spirit; and Potus vappa sine
spiritu, The flesh (...) nothing, it is the spirit that gives life, John the
sixth chapter; The word it self preached (...) not, unless God gives increase,
the first epistle to the (...) the third chapter: nay, this spiritual food
kills some; for they eat and drink their own damnation, the first epistle to
the Corinthians the eleventh chapter. Therefore, if we will drink the spirit,
it is required First, That he thirst after spiritual things no less than after
worldly things; John the seventh chapter, Si quis sitit ad me veniat and bibat,
verse the thirty seventh. Secondly, He must pray for the spirit; (...) God
gives his spirit to them that ask it, Lake the eleventh chapter: So while
Jesus was baptized and prayed, the Heavens opened and the holy Ghost came down
upon him, Luke the third chapter and the (...) verse. We must both (...) after
the spirit, and pray for it, else we cannot have it. But if we come non
sitientes omnino without any sense of our own want, or come only with a form of
Godliness, the second epistle to Timothy the third chapter and the fifth verse;
we may drink the outward object, but not the spirit; for they that come thus
pray not to God to be made partakers of the spirit, as of the object. And to
this we may add, as a reason of our unprofitable drinking, how can we (...) the
spirit, seeing we sow only to the flesh, Galatians the (...) chapter. In as
much as we sow no spiritual works, we cannot be partakers of the spirit. These
are the means to obtain the spirit. Then when we have drunk, we must examine
our selves, whether we have drunk the spirit; which we shall know thus: A drink
and potion is either for recovery of health, or for comfort or refreshing. If
we find that the blood of Christ has purged our consciences from dead works,
Hebrews the ninth chapter; and that we mortify the deeds of the flesh by the
spirit, Romans the eighth chapter, then have we drunk of the same spirit. If we
(...) the power of sin abated in (...), and the will of sin by this
Sacrament, then have we drunk the spirit. Secondly, For refreshing, which is
the other use of drinking, as Psalm the seventy eighth and the sixty fifth
verse, The Lord arose out of sleep, as a (...) refreshed with wine: there comes
courage to a man by drinking of the spirit; so as he has a desire to spiritual
drink: Ephesians the fifth chapter, Be not drunk with wine, but be filled with
the spirit. Now they call the holy Ghost new wine, Acts the second chapter,
these men are filled with new wine: For indeed as the one, so the other gives
greater alacrity and cheerfulness.

In respect of these two effects, it is termed the holy spirit of God and
therefore, First, He that having drunk finds in his soul a comfortable
anointment, the first epistle of John the second chapter, the seal of the
spirit, Ephesians the first chapter and the thirteenth verse, and the earnest,
the second epistle to the Corinthians the first chapter and the twentieth
verse, he has a sign that he has drunk the spirit. But these sensualiter,
are not enough; they may deceive us; there were that eat and drank in Christ's
presence, but he told them, I know you not, Luke the thirteenth chapter.
Therefore to the comfort of the spirit we must add the holy spirit, and see
what operation he has; we must see if we can find sanctificationis spiritum,
the second epistle to the Thessalonians the second chapter and the fruits of
the spirit wrought in us after we have drunk, Galatians the fifth chapter and
the twenty second verse, whether we be transformed by the same spirit, the
second to the Corinthians the third chapter. Thus we see the Apostle in this
place, against the spirit that lusts after envy and contention, James the
fourth chapter, uses the Sacrament of unity, to persuade men to unity and
love; and against the unclean spirit, he uses the Sacrament of cleanness, as,
in the first epistle to the Corinthians the sixth chapter, Shall I take the
members of Christ and make them the members of an Harlot?

By the effects that the spirit works in us, we may know whether we have the
spirit; for we are not only made partakers of Christ's body in Baptism, but of
the spirit in the Lords Supper; If we cleave to the Lord Christ, we are made
one spirit, the first epistle to the (...) the sixth chapter: Whereupon this
ensues, That as he and his Father are one, so are we one with Christ; and
consequently, being one with him, we can want no happiness; for his will is,
That we should be with him where he is, and behold his glory, John the
seventeenth chapter and the twenty fourth verse.

Ex eo quod maxima illa nobis ac pretiosa promissa donavit, etc. 2 Pet. 1. 4.

A Scripture applied to this time wherein we solemnize the memory of his taking
of our nature, as we have here a promise of being partakers of his; and it
conteins as all other Scriptures of comfort, a Covenant between God and us.

That which is performed on Gods part is, That he has made us most great and
precious promises: The condition on our party is, That we eschew the
corruption that is in the world through lust.

In the former part there is a thing freely bestowed on us. Secondly, That is a
promise. Thirdly, The promise is, That we shall be partakers of the divine
nature.

Concerning which, A promise being once past, is no more a free thing, but
becomes a debt, and in justice is to be performed; in which respect the Apostle
says, in the second epistle to Timothy the fourth chapter, There is laid up
for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the just judge, shall render
to me; and hence the Prophet is bold to challenge God with his promise, Psalm
the hundred and nineteenth, Perform thy promise, wherein thou have caused me to
put my trust, and therefore Augustine says; Read quod non accepisti, sed quod
premisisti.

Promises do affect two ways, because they stand upon two points; First, The
party promising: Secondly, The thing promised.

If it were the promise of a man, it were to be doubred of, for all men are
liars, Psalm the hundred and sixteenth; They either promise that which they
cannot perform, as being weak, as Psalm the twenty first and the tenth verse;
or which they will not perform, as Naball in the first book of Samuel and the
twenty fist chapter. But if we can find one that is both able and willing to
keep his promise, that is a great kindness, not to be distrusted. And such a
one is God; who, of his own goodness, is become indebted to us, by making us
most great and precious promises: he is true of his word; for he is Deus
mentiri nesciens, Titus the first chapter, he cannot lie: And for his power and
ability, Apud eum non erit impossible omne verbum, Luke the first chapter: And
for his willingness the Angels testify of it, that there is in God good milk
toward men; even the same which he hears to Christ his own Son, of whom he
(...) from heaven, in the third chapter of Luke, This is my (...) Son, (...)

Secondly, For the thing promised: Though it be God that (...) yet if the thing
promised be a matter of no great value, we respect it the less, but this is a
great and most (...) promise. Now that is precious, for which a man will give
any thing; as for a pearl, a man will sell all that he has to composse it,
Matthew the thirteenth chapter; and what will (...) a man give for the ransom
of his soul? the whole world, nay a thousand of worlds, is little enough to
give for it, Matthew the sixteenth chapter, and the sixteenth verse: So then,
this promise is precious, in respect of the thing promised.

Secondly, It is precious in regard that it cost dearly; For we are bought,
not with corruptible things, as silver and gold, (...) with the (...) blood of
Christ, in the first epistle of Peter, the first chapter and the eighteenth
verse.

Thirdly, It is a precious promise in this respect, because our blessedness
here promised, stands, not only in having our sins forgiven, or in being made
righteous; that is not the thing we are (...) with; or to be with God, which
was the desire of our first Parents, Genesis the third chapter; and of Lucifer,
Isaiah the fourteenth chapter, ero similis (...); but it stands herein, that we
shall be made partakers of the Divine nature, and enjoy those things (...) eye
bath not seen, etc. in the first epistle to the (...), the second chapter and
the third verse; he does not promise that we shall be partakers of Gods glory,
joy, and felicity, as (...) sons would have been, Matthew the twenty first
chapter; but (...) of his nature: That as we are subject to sickness, death,
and all crosses, by being partakers of the nature of the first Adam; so we
shall be partakers of glory, joy and (...): And being partakers of the second
Adam, as the branches receive life from the vine, John the fifteenth chapter;
so it shall be between Christ and us, he will derive his benefits to us: As the
(...) is holy, so we that are branches, (...) shall be (...) Romans the
eleventh chapter and the sixteenth verse: As we partake of the miseries of the
first Adam; so of the joy and (...) of the second Adam: As we have been
partakers of the (...), so of (...), in the first epistle to the (...), and the
fifteenth chapter.

Fourthly, If we consider from how base estate we, to whom this promise is
made, are (...); not only from the nature of (...), Psalm the forty ninth; Of
worms and (...) 17. and, which is more base, from being the Children of wrath,
(...) the second chapter, and Children of the Devil, Acts the thirteenth
chapter, to be partakers of the divine nature; that will (...) to be a (...)
promise, containing matter of so great comfort; whereby, that is, by the
knowledge of God, that has called us to glory and (...), or by whom, that is,
by Christ taking knowledge of him, as in the fifty third chapter of Isaiah, My
(...), by his knowledge, shall (...) many; and in the seventeenth chapter of
John, and the third verse, This is eternal life, to know thee and Jesus
Christ. The Heathen and Turks are not capable of this precious promise,
because they take no notice of Christ: It is a promise made to Christians, for,
because they are partakers of flesh and blood, He also took part with them,
Hebrews the second chapter: As Christ took part of our nature, so he makes us
partakers of his. It is the Christian only that believes this; and therefore he
is capable of this so precious promise; for albeit Christ were man, yet it
pleased God, that the fullness of the God head should dwell in him bodily,
Colossians the second chapter and the ninth verse; and as he is in us by his
humanity, so are we in him in respect of his Divinity. God partakes with Christ
because of his Divine nature, and man partakes with Christ in as much as he
has assumed our humane nature: He is partaker of our humane nature, for he is
flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bone, Ephesians the fifth chapter; and we,
by his Spirit, are partakers of his Divine nature; for in the first epistle to
the Corinthians the sixth chapter, He that cleaves to the Lord is one spirit:
Hereby we know, that we dwell in him, and he in us, by the spirit which he has
given us, in the first epistle of St. John, the fourth chapter and the
thirieenth verse.

Christ imputes his nature two ways; First, by regeneration in Baptisin; for
except ye be born again of water and the holy Ghost, John the third chapter:
Secondly, by eating and drinking in the Sacrament: In which respect the Apostle
says, that we must bibere spiritum, the first epistle to the Corinthians the
twelfth chapter and the thirteenth verse. In this life we must seek for Gods
grace and glory; and he has promised to give both, Psalm the eighty fourth;
and then we shall Intrare in gaudium Domini, Matthew the twenty fifth chapter;
and so we shall be always with him, the first epistle to the Thessalonians the
fourth chapter; and see him as he is, the first epistle of John the third
chapter and the first verse; that is, be partakers of his divine nature: and
which goes beyond all, he shall not be glory in one and joy in another, and
immortality in a third, but he shall be omnia in omnibus, the first epistle to
the Corinthians, the fifteenth chapter and the twenty eighth verse. Now the
promise is with a restraint, nobis qui, that is, to us which eschew the
corruption: The like we have in John the third chapter and the sixteenth verse,
ut omnes qui credant; and Matthew the eleventh chapter, Come to me omnes qui:
And great reason it is, that if we will have God to perform his promise to us,
we keep the condition on our part toward him; so the Apostle disputes, in the
second epistle to the Corinthians, the seventh chapter and the first verse,
seeing me have so great promises, let us cleanse our selves; for the Divine
effence is incorruptible, and it is impossible that corruption should inherit
incorruption, the first epistle to the Corinthians the fifteenth chapter:
therefore albeit our outward man corrupts daily, yet we must labor to be
renewed in the inner man, the second epistle to the Corinthians the fourth
chapter. But whence is this corruption? From lust: So says the Apostle here,
agreeing with St. James in his first chapter and the fourt^ verse, Every man is
tempted, when he is (...) drawn (...) own lust.

The place where this corruption is, is the world; So St. Peter says, and the
first epistle of John and the second chapter, There is nothing in the world but
concupiscentia oculorum and carnis; and St. Paul says, They that will be rich
in this world, fall into many foolish and noysom lusts, the first epistle to
Timothy, the sixth chapter. Filthiness of the flesh and spirit; and lust of
uncleanness.
There are (...), the second epistle to the Corinthians the seventh chapter and
the first verse, and the second epistle of Peter the second chapter and the
tenth verse; but we must keep our selves unspotted of the world, as in the
first chapter of St. James epistle; and hate the garment spotted of the flesh,
Jude the twenty fifth verse. For avoiding (...) corruption we must know, That
temptations, which come by fair and flattering speeches, are not to be
resisted, but a man must fly from them, Heb. 12. 1. There is (...), an
embracing sin; and James the 1. 13. there is a line or bait, or angle which
you must fly from; so shall you be safe: If you resist not you will be taken;
and James the fourth chapter and the seventh verse, Resist the Devil; but in
the first epistle to the Corinthians the sixth chapter, Fugite fornicationem;
for it is an embracing sin; the second epistle to Timothy the second chapter,
Fly lusts of youth: There is no other way; for by talking and arguing the
point, is the way to be catched, that is, seeing the world from without does
corrupt; as in the first epistle to the Corinthians the fifth chapter, A little
levan makes sower the whole lump, they that will not avoid it, are servants of
corruption, the second epistle of Peter the second chapter; and Jude calls them
spots and blots; they that will be partakers of these promises, must avoid the
evil company of such: As, when Jacobs rods lay before the Ewes, they brought
forth party colored Lambs, Genesis the thirtieth chapter: So that is the
effect of evil company. And for ill speeches, that corrupts good manners, in
the first epistle to the Corinthians the fifteenth chapter; for as Michah the
seventh chapter and the third verse, there are some, that speak out of the
corruption of their soul, it spreads like a canker and corrupts many, the
second epistle to Timothy and the second chapter. Evil example and bad
company, lewd speeches and vain songs, are to be avoided, if we will avoid
corruption: For, lest that we may know from whence it proceeds, he that flies
not allurements and provocations, cannot avoid them: Therefore, in Psalm the
hundred and nineteenth, the Prophet prays, Turn away mine eyes: So for
occasions, Proverbs the fifth chapter, Come not near the harlots house. And for
the time and opportunity, that is carefully to be respected, Proverbs the
seventh chapter. In the twilight the young man was found going to the harlots
house, and so was corrupted. So though neither object nor opportunity be
offered, yet a man being idle and without exercise may be corrupted; for that
was the sin of Sodom; Ezekiel the sixteenth chapter and the forty ninth
verse, Pride, abundance of bread, and idleness. Then a man must never purpose
to sin; for so he corrupts the spirit of his mind; nor to let his desire
be corrupted; He must (...) evil company, Ephesians the (...) chapter, have no
fellowship with the (...) works of darkness, and that is a sign of grace.
Grace is the motion of the spirit, the end of grace is glory. He whose
reasonable soul does not purpose to do evil, and his will does not desire it,
but shunnes all occasions and opportunity of evil, such a one has a beginning
of grace, which will not forsake him till it have brought him to glory, and
made him partaker of the Divine nature.

Ad hoc ipsum vero vos, omni praeterea collato studio, adjicite fidei vestrae
virtutem, etc. 2 Pet. 1. 5.

THERE is no promise made by God, but is with a condition, either by way of a
restraint, with si qui, as Romans the eighth chapter and the first verse; or of
affirmative illi vero, or conclusion, the second epistle to the Corinthians the
seventh chapter: Therefore secing we have such promises, in this place we have
both. Before promise is made us, to be partakers of the divine nature, so that
we fly the corruption; And the Apostle, not contenting himself with that, does
join a second, as an affirmative condition: Therefore give all diligence to
this.

The first observation from hence is, To know how to draw a conclusion from the
promise of God: For some, from the promise of Gods grace, did conclude, that
they might now freely sin, Romans the sixth chapter: But the Apostle here
dislikes that, as also Paul in the second epistle to the Corinthians the
seventh chapter, seeing we have such promises, let us consummate our holiness
in the fear of God, The cause of so many dissentions in the world is, because
we are of diverse spirits, and gather contrary conclusions, as in the first
epistle to the Corinthians the seventh chapter, the Apostle, from the
shortness of life, draws this conclusion, that men should use the world as
if they used it not; So from the same, there are another sort that conclude
thus, Seeing we must dye to morrow, let us eat and drink, the first epistle to
the Corinthians and the fifteenth chapter; as Romans the sixth chapter, because
where sin abounds, grace super abounds; they conclude, let us sin that
grace may abound. From the promise of God we may not draw any other conclusion,
but as here he exhorts, therefore let us give all diligence.

Secondly, He shows wherein this diligence is to be showed, join to your
faith virtue.

First of Diligence; and then of the thing wherein it is to be employed.

Care, or Diligence, the Apostle makes the first part of repentance from ill,
the second epistle to the Corinthians the seventh chapter: And it is the same
word in both places; It is here the God of repentance; and the Apostle he makes
it the gates of affirmative virtues, and a good life; the one for taking away
sin, the other for bringing in of godliness. There are many kinds of
diligence; but this is that a man uses, when he makes it tempestiva
diligentia; when a man having day before him, he does not put off till the end,
(...), as Psalm the hundred and nineteenth, I made haste and prolonged not to
keep thy commandments; and in the third chapter, looking for and hasting to
the coming of the day of the Lord. As we must look for it, so make haste to
meet him joyfully.

Now we know the nature of it, we will consider the degree of it in the word
all, not some kind of care or endeavor, but all diligence. Seeing we have
great and precious promises, in the higiest degree, let our diligence be in the
highest degree. Men must not persuade themselves it is an easy matter to be a
good Christian; but a thing wherein all care and diligence is to be showed, and
he had the spirit of God to direct him, He lays upon us no other burdens,
then necessary commandments, Acts the fifteenth chapter and the eighteenth
verse. Our Savior Christ, by crying often Watch and pray, Mark the thirteenth
chapter, Take heed, Luke the thirteenth chapter, Strive to enter into the
straight gate, Matthew the seventh chapter, Labor not for the meat that
perishes, John the sixth chapter, calling entrance into life, as hard as for a
camel to pass through the eye of a needle, Luke the sixteenth chapter, shows,
men may not think but it requires all diligence and contention. If the
preservation of man's body cannot be without caring for apparel and meat; And if
humane nature be decayed, and will not be repaired without cost, there must be
care and diligence to keep a good diet; then our union and incorporation into
the Deity is no matter of ease. We must use diligence both in ceasing from
evil and following good, and that in as good degree as we can; for when we have
done what we can, yet it is true, in the first epistle of Peter the fourth
chapter, justus vix servabitur. Unto which we add thirdly, that the word give,
here used, is very effectual: It is used two ways, It is to bring in a thing
with an opposition; as if the Apostle said, Heretofore ye have showed great
diligence in vanities; ye can watch, spend your time and money: Show the like
diligence in following good. The other is a sense used in the sixth chapter to
the Galatians and in Judes epistle, that if Heretics cannot get in, they will
creep in craftily: in the next chapter he says, Privily bringing in heresies;
and the same Jude verse the fourth: So here it is brought in by imitation. We
must be as careful to possess our selves with good, as the wicked are to join
vice to vice. It is Christ's advise, Luke the sixteenth chapter, The children of
light to be as wise as they of the world. This joining is (...), It has a
plain expression in the 68. Psalm, The singers went before, the players went
after: This procession in order of a Quier, is the true motion signified by
this word. It is used by the Apostle, speaking of the body in the fourth
chapter to the Ephesians and the second to the Colossians and the nineteenth
verse: This coupling of one bone with another, thus orderly marching or
training, he calls by the same name: Such a thing the Apostle exhorts unto
here. From hence we learn, that Christianity or Religion is as a Quier,
consisting of many veins; or a body, of many parts. It is not a thing stancing
of one virtue; they that have learned Christ truly, Ephesians the fourth
chapter, have learned first to put off the old man, and then to put on the new.
And so the Apostle reckoning up, as a great train of virtues, as Peter does
here; and St. Peter says, verse the ninth, They that conceive not so of
Christianity, are blind, and cannot see afar off: When in the Scripture, we
find any main matter of weight said upon one virtue, we must take a part for
the whole, it is but one virtue of the train. As there are many parts of
repentance, the second epistle to the Corinthians the seventh chapter; so the
Apostle gives a complete harness, standing of seven several parts, Ephesians
the sixth chapter.

As they that are partakers of the Divine nature, are a body compact of many
joints and sinnews; so the divine spirit is not one alone, but as the ancient
Fathers define the eleventh verse of the seventh chapter of Isaiah, and the
fourth chapter of the Apocalypse.

Secondly, This is not promiscue, confusedly; but orderly as in a Quier, one
begins, another follows: This multitude of virtues is Acies ordinata, Canticles
the sixth chapter, like the marching of Soldiers; for it comes from God, who is
the God of order and not of confusion.

Thirdly, All at once do not break out, but there is a successive bringing in
one of the other. In that order there are degrees, First, Faith: Secondly,
Virtue: Thirdly, Knowledge. The number of virtues be eight, as eight parts of
repentance, in the second epistle to the Corinth ans the seventh chapter. Those
contain our separation from the Devils nature: As the other are our union with
Gods nature, which are usually compared to those eight steps, in Ezekiel the
fourtieth chapter, from the thirty first to the forty first verse, they are
our assents, whereby we approach to the Altar; so the promises of blessedness
which our Savior speaks of, are eight, Matthew the fifth chapter.

Another thing to be observed is, That of these eight there are four pair; for
to a theological virtue is added ever more a moral: Faith, knowledge,
godliness, and charity, are theological; to evey one of these there is a
moral virtue.

To come to the particulars, we shall observe that faith begins and charity
ends, as Galatians the fifth chapter, fides per charitatem operatur: So in Peter
faith works till it come to love; He that will come to God must believe,
Hebrews the eleventh chapter; but that is nothing without love, 1 Cor. 13.

Love is the bond of perfection, Colossians the third chapter, Above all have
love, which is the chain of perfection. Faith is a most pretibus thing; so he
says verse 1. And it has this honor, to be the root and foundation of all, as
Colossians 2. grounded in faith; it is the ground of all virtue, it is
Choragus, the first that leads the dance. Men hope to receive the end of
faith, and that is the salvation of souls, the first epistle of Peter the first
chapter; then faith is the beginning of it. To this truth we must add another
truth; that as it is the first, so but a part; and not as the world would have
it, to be all. Because faith comes by hearing, Romans the tenth chapter, the
world is all set on hearing; but in the first epistle to the Corinthians and
the twelfth chap. the body is not all an ear: Faith is but a part, and that an
eighth part. As here we have warrant from St. Peter, it is the first, ergo we
must begin at it, but not to stand there, but go further. As it is choragi, so
epicorigia, that is, not so complete of it self, but something is to be joined
to it. For faith, St. Peter, the fittest to take instruction from, who showed
the failing and wavering of his faith, when Christ asked him, Love thou me?
he answered Thou know that I love thee, John the twenty first chapter. But
how knew he it, when he denied him before a poor Damosel; Matthew the twenty
sixth chapter. And in respect of Christ, Luke the twenty second chapter and the
thirty second verse, I have prayed for thy faith: Christ's promise and his own
experince may persuade us, he knew the nature of faith: And this is an
infallible mark of time faith, that it has joined virtue, and is taught of the
Law of God; and true faith does not abrogate the Law; nay, Romans the third
chapter, the Law is established by faith. Faith must bring in virtue by the
hand: So in that great chapter of faith, having gone through all, he faith,
They chused rather to suffer, than to enjoy pleasures of sin, Hebrews the
eleventh chapter. Paul says true faith operatur (...) and per charitatem: So
Peter here, and James the second chapter and the twenty second verse, it does
cooperari; that is the figne James gives of faith: In the first epistle of John
the fifth chapter, the figne of true faith is, it overcomes not only the Devil,
but the world, and the pleasures, riches, honors of the world, as in Hebrews
the eleventh chapter: It is the same sign that, Hebrews eleventh chapter and
the fourth verse, showed it self in Moses, when he refused to be the son of
Pharaohs daughter: And Jude, in the twentieth verse, says, If it be true
faith, it is fides sanctificans. So they all agree, Paul says, Faith must work
rightcousnesse; Peter, It must bring virtue in by the hand; John, It must
overcome the world; and Jude says, It is a sanctifying faith, not locked up in
a man's conscience. So that it is no true faith, which virtue follows not.

Adjicite fidei vestrae virtutem, virtuti vero notitiam. 2 Pet. 1. 5.

THE Apostles mind is to show, That the life of a Christian is no single
thing, but a Quire or Dance, and the beginning of the train is faith: For, if
we must be elevated to be partakers of the Divine nature, as verse the first,
it must be a divine thing that must effect this; and the first divine thing is
divina veritas, the same which the Prophets in all ages have described to us.
Which divine truth we apprehend by faith.

Now because there may be deceit in our faith, we must take heed that it be
not a rotten faith. There is fides ficta, the first epistle to Timothy, the
first chapter and the fifth verse, Faith feigned; and a dead faith, James the
second chapter. There is a vile faith as well as a like precious faith: And
that we may separate the precious from the vile, Jeremiah the fifteenth
chapter. And if we will know which is the precious faith, for which Christ
prayed, in Luke the twenty second chapter, it is not that which is alone, but
which is accompanied with other virtues. It must not be totum integrale, or
Alpha and Omega, but like a Quire, wherein are diverse parts, faith is but a
part, and the eighth part of Christianity. This company is not added ad
ornatum, but for necessity; therefore he exhorts, Give all diligence, and he
that has not these is blind.

To proceed, If faith be not all, what is that company he speaks of?

The first is Virtue, A word which the Scripture has taken from Philosophers,
whereof all their books are full; and albeit we must beware that no man spoil
us through Philosophy, Colossians the second chapter, yet we may not contemn
it. We are called to glory and virtue, verse the third; and Philippians the
fourth chapter and the eighth verse, If any virtue. It is not to be taken
generally; for so it contains all: It comprehends not moral virtues more than
theological, but a more special thing. By Virtue is not meant an honest life,
nor faith; but virtue is used either for an active power, as in the first
epistle to the Corinthians, the first chapter and the twenty fourth verse; or
some notable effect, as Galatians the third chapter and the fifth verse: It is
used either in opposition to weakness, as in the first epistle to the
Corinthians, the fifteenth chapter and the forty third verse, and the second
epistle to the Corinthians the twelfth chapter and the ninth verse, Virtus mea
perficitur in infirmitate; or in opposition to fear, as in the second epistle
to Timothy, the first chapter and the seventh verse, Not the spirit of fear,
but of power. By Virtue is meant that acrimena sinapis, as Christ speaks, If
you had faith but as a grain of mustard seed: this is that must be added to
faith; then shall that (...) and (...), in the first epistle of John, the third
chapter and second verse, be accomplished in us; then we shall say with Christ,
in the fifth chapter of St. John's Gospel, My Father works and so do I; and in
the first epistle to the Corinthians the twelfth chapter, The Holy Ghost
works all in all. Faith has no act but the act of assent; but the true faith
is operative: Which power of working is called by Peter (...), by Paul, in the
first epistle to the Corinthians the fourth chapter, The spirit of faith: The
life and work of faith with power, (...) fidei in virtute, the second epistle
to the Thessalonians the first chapter and the eleventh verse: St. Paul says,
in the first epistle to the Corinthians, the fourth chapter and the twentieth
verse, You shall perceive, non sermon, sed virtute; not only a power to talk
well, but to work; they have a form of faith, but do (...) virtutem, the
second epistle to Timothy, the third chapter and the fifth verse. As it betokens
a power of doing well; so an ability of enduring adversity depends on this
virtue. For want of this Peter foll asleep, Matthew the twenty sixth chapter; He
came afar off when Christ was apprehended, and was afraid of a poor Maid. So it
was with Peter, having nothing but faith; but when he joined with his faith
virtue, then that was fulfilled, Luke the twenty fourth chapter and the forty
ninth verse, He is endued with power from above, Induemini virtute ex alto:
When he received the power of the holy Ghost, Acts the first chapter and the
eighth verse, then he was bold, Acts the fifth chapter and the twenty ninth
verse: The Apostle calls it, strength in the inner man, Ephesians the third
chapter and the sixteenth verse. If a man fear death his strength is small,
Proverbs the twenty fourth chapter and the tenth verse. By this virtue Moses
feared not, (...) the eleventh chapter and the twenty third verse. As there is
modica sides, Matthew the fourteenth chapter and the thirty first verse; so
Modica virtus, Apocalypse the third chapter and the eighth verse. Where there is
great faith, there is great virtue; where no faith, no virtue. As it is no true
faith, which virtue does not follow; so no true virtue, which faith does not
go before.

It is called Grace in respect of God, from whom it comes; and virtue in regard
of the effects, The Philosopher called them habitus, because they had them from
themselves; but virtus est (...), and Domino virtutis, to salve the error of
the Philosophers. The Apostle calls it Grace, in the second epistle of Peter,
the third chapter and the eighteenth verse, grow in grace; so he calls it
virtus, He has called us to glory and virtue, in the second epistle of Peter,
the first chapter and the third verse, and Philippians the fourth chapter and
the eighth verse. It is by good consequence, that it is so called, because it
is wrought by the Gospel, which is the power of God, Romans the first chapter
and the sixteenth verse: His words are spirit and life, John the sixth chapter:
Virtue must bring forth virtus. The Philosophers Virtue had no divine thing in
it; they enured themselves to it, and so ascribed it to themselves. Our virtue
proceeds from faith, which is a divine thing, Whatsoever is not of faith is
sin, Romans the fourteenth chapter: But the Heathen called their virtues
habits, as from themselves, not from the grace of God.

To Virtue Knowledge. He began with Faith, a theological virtue; then he added
Virtue, which is moral; now he comes to Knowledge, another theological virtue.

By this successive coupling we are taught, not to stay at virtue, but to
proceed de virtute in virtute, Psalm the eighty fourth and the seventh verse,
from strength to strength. As before against infirmity and weakness of our
nature, he added virtue; So for our error and ignorance, he joyneth knowledge:
for there may be an active power to work, and yet not aright, as Romans the
tenth chapter and the second verse, They have zeal, but not according to
knowledge: But there must be, not only power, but wisdom; not only homines
improbi, shall be cast out, but foolish vigins Matthew the twenty fifth chapter.
As virtue is required, so is knowledge, to direct us in that we do. We must
seek for Non tam virtutem quam aurigam virtutis scientiam, sine qua ipsa virtus
est vitium; therefore Proverbs the twenty third chapter and the fourth verse,
Cease from thy wisdom; And in Ecclefiastes the seventh chapter, Be not nimium
just us: Knowledge is a key, Luke the eleventh chapter and the fifty second
verse: And a Quire must have a key to set the song, that is, the key of
knowledge. In the Law nothing was to be offered without salt, that is, the
grace of knowledge. It is that which the Apostle calls, the inward
anointing, in the first epistle of John the second chapter and the twentieth
verse, which gives a sweet savor and sent to God: So says the Apostle, in the
second epistle to the Corinthians the second chapter, We are a sweet savor to
God. But is not faith knowledge? It is: But yet where the object of faith is
verum and falsum. Science has for its object good and evil; as Genesis the
second chapter and the ninth verse, the passions of Christ, and the torments of
Hell, are indifferently the objects of faith, but the affections are stirred by
good and ill: And it is knowledge that must discern between good and ill; evil
things may go under the show of good; and therefore we must have knowledge to
unmask them. So the doctrine of repentance, being a good thing, has a show of
ill; and, without the grace of knowledge, men are hardly brought to believe it.
As there is prudentia carnis, Romans the eighth chapter and the sixth verse,
and prudentia seculi, in the (...) epistle to the Corinthians, the third
chapter and the nineteenth verse; so there must be a spiritual knowledge and
wisdom, to discern them, and to measure what is good. That all which we do
teach may be (...), the first epistle of Peter the second chapter, and all you
do may be (...), Romans the twelfth chapter, we must add this knowledge.
Knowledge is lame without power, and power is blind without knowledge; for
knowledge is the lightning of the eyes of the mind, the second epistle to the
Corinthians the fourth chapter. There is a knowledge, falsely so called, the
first epistle of Timothy, the sixth chapter and the twentieth verse. The
knowledge, truly so called, is not speculative, but practique; It is the
knowledge from on high, that directs our feet in the way of peace, as Luke the
first chapter and the seventy ninth verse: And not only that which lightens our
eyes. Physicians of longest practice, and Soldiers that have been trained, are
most respected; so it is in worldly things, and so it should be in divine
things: A man must animare praxin, that was the advice of the Civilian, give a
soul to it, as in the thirty third chapter of Deuteronomie and the eighth
verse, first Thummim, and then Urim. Jesus began to do and teach, Acts the
first chapter and the first verse, that is the touchstone of knowledge, as
Christ says, If any man will do his will, he shall know of his doctrine, qui
fecerit voluntatem Patris, sciet de doctrina, utrum sit ex Dec, John the
seventh chapter and the seventeenth verse; for there are some that are always
learning, but never come to the knowledge of the truth, especially that
knowledge that may be truly so called, in the second to Timothy and the third
chapter.

Scientiae vero continentiam, continentiae vero tolerentiam, 2 Pet. 1. 6.

THE Apostle proceeds now to the fourth voice of this quire, having laid
faith for the first, and to it added, that which the Apostle calls the work of
faith in virtue, in the second to the Thessalonians, the first chapter and the
eleventh verse, and thirdly, To virtue knowledge; now in the fourth place he
joyneth to it temperance: It is the common course of the world, so soon as they
have a little taste of knowledge to ascend up to heaven, but he tells us,
knowledge must go down to our fouls, and then proceed to godliness, which we
are taught in our conformity to our Saviors example, of whom the Apostle
says, Ephesians the fourth chapter and the ninth verse, He that ascended, the
same is he that descended first.

The chief point of our duty is, first to temper our affections, and then to
come to godliness after: For the justifying of (...) order in respect of the
consequence this has with the former, there are three causes why he brings
in temperance next after knowledge.

The first is, because whereas corruption is in the world through (...) verse
the first; and Ephesians the fourth chapter, The old man is corrupt through
lust; and the abandoning of that corruption, must bring us to the participation
of the divine nature; and it is comparance that makes us avoid this corruption:
For unless we temper our affections we shall never be partakers of the divine
nature.

Secondly, It follows the natural power of (...): Having placed Knowledge,
which is a virtue of the reasonable part, he comes next to the affectioned
part, that is, Desire, (...) temperance answers, he would not have sensuality
grow (...), nor the body to govern the soul: The upper part (...) already
perfected, the lower part must next in order be made perfect, as in the first
epistle to the Corinthians the fifteenth chapter, That which is natural is
first, and then that which is spiritual. So moral virtues are the perfections
of men in this life, and theological virtues are the perfections in the life to
come.

Thirdly, Knowledge being the virtue that teaches what is good or evil,
Temperance follows it very well, in as much as it is a helper forward, and a
preserver of good, It keeps us from the graves of lust, Numbers the eleventh
chapter: It preserves reason which is the power of the mind: For by worldly
cares we do gravare cor, overcome the heart, Luke the twenty first chapter and
the thirty fourth verse; but this temperance makes it, and therefore is called
(...), of keeping the mind and understanding safe. And for the body we see the
effect of this virtue, in Daniel the first chapter and the fifteenth verse:
therefore the Apostles counsel to young men is, in the second epistle of
Timothy the second chapter and the twenty second verse, Fly the lusts of
youth; and Titus the second chapter and the third verse, To be temperate and
sober minded. It preserves knowledge, not only by keeping the body in order,
but, Proverbs the twenty third chapter, the fourth verse, and Romans the
twelfth chapter and the third verse, (...), not to deal in genealogies and
curious questions, which are unprofitable, but to be wise with sobriety, Titus
the third chapter and the ninth verse, and the first epistle to Timothy, the
first chapter and the fourth verse. So it follows by good order, in as much as
it preserves the virtue going before.

Secondly, Touching temperance what it is, and wherein it stands. When
knowledge has taught what to choose, the next thing is, nullis inde illecebris
avocari; and that is it which Temperance performs: For in the beginning this
corrupter of the world sought to draw our Parents away from their duty, by a
bait he showed them, bonum delectabile, that was the goodly fruit, so fair to
behold: the allurement being offered, concupiscence flies to it, as a bird to
the snare, Proverbs the seventh chapter and the twenty third verse. Every man
is (...), James the first chapter and the fourteenth verse, There is a bait
offered to lust to catch at; therefore it is called (...), Hebrews the twelfth
chapter, sin is so pleasant, that if concupiscence be not weaned, there is no
child desires the mothers breast more than it desires sin, Psalm the hundred
thirty first and the second verse, men being in this case, and add drunkenness
to thirst, Deuteronomie the twenty ninth chapter and the nineteenth verse, and
seek baits to allure concupiscence: therefore our concupiscence needs a bridle
to wean and restrain this soul. Lust is two fold, the first Epistle of John the
second chapter and the sixteenth verse, carnis and occulorum: The corruption of
the (...) is either for the belly, as it is in the sixth chapter of St. Luke,
or that carnal pleasure that Felix and Drusilla were over come with, Acts the
twenty fourth chapter, so that he could not abide to hear Paul dispute of
temperance; the eye lusts for fair apparel, as Luke the sixteenth chapter,
to be clothed in purple, for that is a hait of (...) as Achan, when he saw
the Babylonish garment, desired it, Joshuah the seventh chapter; So also the
eye delights in bedding and furniture for houses, as Jer the twenty second
chapter and the fourteenth verse, to have it shine with Cedar, to lie on beds
of Ivory, Amos the sixth chapter and the fourth verse; Temperance is the
refrainer of all these. For the desire of the belly, the first of the
Corinthians and the ninth chapter, They that run a race absteyne from all meat
that may hurt: For carnal pleasure, If they cannot contein let them marry, the
first epistle to the Corinthians and the seventh chapter: And for apparel,
that must be done in temperance, the first epistle to (...) and the second
verse; thus we see what is the object of temperance, which virtue performs
two things; First, to be able to want those things, as Philipians the fourth
chapter, possum deficere; then, having them, to use them moderatly; as the
Apostle counsels in Timothy, 1 Timothy 5. modico vino utere; for many, coming
to have the possession of these things, exceed in Riot. For the first, it is a
dangerous lust, how pleasant soever it be; not to be able to want them, if
we make necessary lusts of them, so as we must have our lusts satisfied
though it cannot be without sin, we bring our selves under the power, as it
is in the second epistle to the Corinthians and the eight chapter, if we make
our selves debtors to the flesh so far, Romans the eighth chapter, A man that
cannot refrain his appetite, he is like a City broken down and without
walls, Pro. 25. 28.

Thirdly, for the end, why the Apostle exhorts to this virtue, It is first to
eschew corruption, and so to bring us to the divine nature; and Temperance is
the virtue by which we eschew corruption both of soul and body; for, as those
things that are sweet do stop and putrisy the body, so do those corrupt
desires of the mind, and the corruption of mankind desires to corrupt man
with these allurements. If we love, we are not the servants of sin, we are
servi corruptionis, as it is in the second epistle of Peter and the second
chapter. For the body, it corrupts it also; for so he sins against his own
body, the first epistle to the (...) and the sixth chapter; and such do corrupt
the Temple of God, the first epistle to the Corinthians and the third chapter;
The flesh spotteth the garment, as it is in the epistle of Saint Jude the bed
desiled, Hebrews the thirteenth chapter; so that we cannot possess our
vessels in holiness.

Fourthly that it be not so, Temperance must effect this; so it disposes us
to the participation of the divine nature; who is a spirit John the fourth
chapter, as they that are spiritual minded are; for they that take care to
fulfill the lusts of the flesh, Romans the thirteenth chapter, do make their
bellies their God, the thirteenth chapter of the epistle to the Philippians,
and mind earthly things, such are carnal and are not spiritual: Temperance
will make, men depart from the flesh and grow spiritual, and so be like the
(...) nature.

To Temperance he exhorts to add Patience, the first voice of this quire,
which the Apostle reckons among the fruits of the Spirit, Galathians the fifth
chapter and the twenty third verse, for three reasons, as the Philosophers
observe, to (...) there is next adjoined (...), to the effective part is joined
courage: For as is observed from John the first chapter and the thirteenth
verse, not of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man. There are in man
two wills, the will of the flesh, and the manly will; for God having planted in
the Soul, desire to follow good, there follows courage to remove whatsoever
shall hinder our desire, and as we have a virtue to moderate our
concupiscence, or sensuality, so here is Patience, against our courage.
Secondly, what makes a man intemperate but (...) as Genesis the twenty fifth
chapter, Esau must needs die, except he have the meat he desires; therefore
(...) is a virtue necessarily required in the faithful, the sixteenth chapter
of the Proverbs, and the ninteenth chapter of the Revelations; Haec est sides
and patientia Sanctorum. The third reason of the dependence is, (...) vincit
qui patitur. Intemperance and Impatience are the great Conquerors of the world;
the one being the Nurse of Physicians, the other of Lawyers: And as we have had
a virtue to conquer intemperance; so it follows by good order next, that we
have the virtue against impatience. As the one sort are said to be clothed in
white, that is, the innocence of the Godly, Apocalypse the seventh chapter and
the ninteenth verse; so others (by Patience have made their garments purple, in
the blood of the Lamb, Apocalypse the ninteenth chapter.

Secondly, when we know what to do, we must not be drawn from it by any
terror; For as the devil, to alure us to sin, joins dulce and malum; so to
keep us from good he joins bitter with that which is good: He joins to
(...) labor and disgrace, that by them he may keep us from it. Labor is a
thing our nature cannot away with, durum pati; the object of this virtue is
tribulation, as Romans the twelfth chapter, be patient in tribulation, a
virtue that becomes Saints, Apocalys the ninteenth chapter, haec est fides
and patientia Sanctorum. For the original of tribulation, men do not fear
the evils of the life to come; and therefore God is feign to send them crosses
while they live, which must be borne patiently, as Micah the seventh chapter,
portabo iram Domini, quia peccavi. Secondly, they are sent for trial of our
faith, ut tollet ferro rubiginem, and addat (...) puritatem. That was the cause
of Jobs trouble, to try his faith. The use of this virtue, in respect of men
is, as Matthew the fifth chapter, If they smite thee on the one cheek, to turn
the other; If they take way thy coat, let them have thy cloak also; If men
reproach ye, as David was, to bear it as he did, the second of Samuel and the
sixteenth chapter, to endure the spoiling of our goods, as Hebrews the twelfth
chapter. In such cases it is the perfection of the Saints while they live here,
to possess their Souls with Patienee, as it is in Saint Luke the one and
twentieth chapter.

For the use the Apostle makes of this virtue, patience is needful, for the
avoiding of corruption, Give not place to the Devil, by suffering the Sun to
go down upon thy wrath, Ephesians the fourth chapter; For men in their
impatience utter the corruption of their hearts, Michah the seventh chapter.
Secondly, It makes them like God, as John the third chapter and the first
verse; for there is nothing in God more divine than patience; this virtue he
showed to the old world, which he endured so long, the first epistle of Peter
the third chapter; and to the new world, the second epistle of Peter and the
third chapter, He is not slack, but patient to all, and would have all repent.
The same is the affection of the Son of God toward his Church. What did
Moses admire, Exodus the third chapter, to see the bush a fire, and not burn,
but videt rubum ardentem: Even so now the faithful shall drink deadly poison,
and it shall not hurt them, as Christ promises, Mark the sixteenth chapter,
that is, the evil tongues of the wicked, which are as the poison of Asps, as
Psalm the hundred and fourtieth. The Apostles exhortation is, James the first
chapter and the fourth verse, Be patient, that ye may be entire and perfect;
and as the first epistle of Peter, the fifth chapter, If ye suffer but a little,
God shall make you perfect: And Christ's advise is, To bring forth fruit in
patience, Luke 8.

Tolerantiae pietatem, pietati vero fraternum amorem, fraterno vero amori
charitatem. 2 Pet. 1. 7.

IN the first of these three verses, the Apostle makes his first conjunction of
Faith; Teaching, that as we must be of a sound belief, so of a virtuous life:
The second of Knowledge, not to be drawn from a virtuous life by any deceits:
Of Temperance, against allurements: And Patience, against terrors and troubles;
all these are moral virtues: And to these he joins in the third verse, the
threefold train of Godliness, Brotherly love, and Charity; all which are
theological virtues. For as Christ exhorts, not only to do good to them,
from whom we receive good, Luke the sixth chapter and the thirty third verse;
which be the virtues of kindness, that the Heathen practiced; but to add
Christian virtues, Doing good to them that hurt us; and as Matthew the sixth
chapter, Our righteousness must exceed the righteousness of Scribes and
Pharisees: So theological virtues do not exclude moral; but, as the Apostle
shows, we (...) beside moral virtues (...) these theological: Faith does not
abolish, but establish the Law; so, Romans the third chapter, the Gospel
requires of a Christian, both will virtues and theological.

In the course of the world we find it otherwise, the civil man will show
himself temperate and patient, but makes little account of religious virtues.
Others, as Jude the first verse, will seem to be religious, by hearing and
discoursing of the word, and by certain religious terms, but neglect those
moral duties. According to the first table they are religious, but neglect the
duty of the second.

Therefore for the Civil man, albeit moral virtues are the perfection of this
life; yet if he look higher to the great and precious promises, of being
partaker of the divine nature, his moral virtues cannot raise him up so high as
those virtues of Christianity, that must do that. And for them that stop at
the moral duties of the second Table, and content themselves with a showing
religion by theological virtues, If any man seem to be religious in such sort,
his religion is vain, except he add moral, James the first chapter and the
twenty sixth verse, That he refrain his tongue and keep himself unspotted.

Secondly, For the order or method of the Apostle.

There is an order, not only of things productive one of another, but that are
adductive. And having already gone through the powers of the soul, that is,
Reason, Affection, and Corruption; and prescribed internal virtues, Knowledge,
Temperance, and Patience: Now he comes to the outward man, and shows, That to
God, who is above us, is due Godliness; to them that are near us, that is,
Christians and spiritual brethren, that have one Father, Brotherly love; and to
them that are far off, that is, all men, Charity. Godliness is required in
respect of the divine nature; Brotherly love, in respect of the familiarity, or
Church, which are the household of Faith, that is kindness, to be showed to
Christians; Thirdly, Charity is a duty to be extended to all, both Jews and
(...), as well as to Christians. For as John the first chapter and the
thirteenth verse, there is the will of the flesh, and the will of man,
whereunto Temperance and Patience have respect: So there is the will of God
too, and that is it that Godliness takes hold of: The want of Patience to
bear, made Peter to deny Christ: And therefore first he must be patient, and
next after will follow Godliness; All that will live godly must suffer
affliction, the second epistle to Timothy, the third chapter. So when we are
armed with patience, we are fit to hear of Godliness. So it was with Peter and
the rest; of whom it is reported, that having this virtue, ibant gaudentes,
Acts the fifth chapter; having first planted patience, godliness follows by
good consequence. Thirdly, Godliness is that virtue, whereby we are affected
toward God, as the worldly man's is to wordlinesse, or the fleshly man to
carnal pleasure. Cornelius is called (...), Acts the tenth chapter; and Acts
the seventeenth chapter and the twenty third verse, it is used for the worship
of God, (...). If we ask, as Elias, to whom God is God; One has his belly for
his God, Philippians the third chapter; such a one was Esau, therefore called,
a profane person, Hebrews the twelfth chapter: Others have no other godliness
but gain, as the first epistle to Timothy, the sixth chapter and the fifth verse;
such were they that were content to retain Diana's religion for their gain,
Acts the nineteenth chapter. When we are as carefully affected to God, as
worldly men are to the world, and carnal men to the flesh, then we have
Godliness.

But to consider of this, how deeply Godliness is joined, we carry up our
thoughts to God, as to the chief truth; to him that is the fountain of all
goodness and joys. We are (...) that he is the highest wisdom, that knows
all our actions, and the highest power that can minister deliverance to their
troubles: that he is a regarder of them that seek him; and a severe punisher of
such as contemn him. This inward affection is Godliness; and this inward
affection and perswafion of God, is the mystery of Godliness, the first
epistle to Timothy the third chapter; and the truth that is according to
godliness, Titus the first chapter and the first verse. But as we must have
this inward conceit; so we must profess godliness, the first epistle to
Timothy, the second chapter and the tenth verse. For as in the first
Commandment of the Law, we must serve God in the truth of the spirit; so in
the second Commandment, in the service of the body; in the third with the
blessing of the mouth, we must bless and praise God, that is, we must profess
our (...) at all times and all occasions; not only privately, (...) publicly,
in the fourth Commandment, that is, entirely, by all the parts of the body,
even with the tongue, which is our (...), especially on the day of our public
profession; not only to (...) opinion of God, but as the Church calls us, Come,
Les (...) fall down before the Lord, Psalm the ninety fifth; not only to say
with the Apostle, Romans the seventh chapter, I serve God in my spirit, but
Ephesians the third chapter, I bow my knees to God the Eather. And (...), to
worship God by vocal prayer, I will praise him with my mouth, Psalm the
sixtieth; Have thou faith? babe (...) te, Romans the fourteenth chapter and the
twenty second verse: So if thou have an inward conceit of God, have it with thy
self; but withal, thou must profess it (...). The visard of Godliness must
be plucked off, and the power showed: We must exercise and (...) godliness,
the first epistle to Timothy, the fifth chapter and the sixth verse: There must
be godliness of life, the second epistle to Timothy, the third chapter, All
that will live godly. Cornelius was godly; for he (...) his godliness, by
giving alms and praying to God, Acts the tenth chaptor: By his exercise of
godliness, he showed the power of godliness working in him, and that is the
chiefest thing: For (...) are spiritual sacrifices, the first epistle of Peter
the second chapter; and to them we must add that which the Prophet calls (...),
Hosea the fourteenth chapter; without which we are not truly godly. And to both
these there was added a sacrifice of the (...), this spiritual (...) is a
broken and contrite heart, Psalm the (...) first, to that is to be added, Psalm
the thirty second, I (...) my (...), that (...) an outward profession and vocal
confession, an (...) of the body. And lastly, the (...) of (...), (...) sixth
chapter I will have mercy, and not sacrifice, Not to give good words, as James
the second chapter, God be merciful, but the real mercy, Hebrews the thirteenth
chapter, to distribute and to do good forget not; for with such sacrifice God
is well pleased. Thus shall we approve our selves to be godly; as also if we
say with David, Psalm the twenty sixth, I have loved the habitation of the just.
If we account the Sabbaths our delight, Isaiah the fifty eighth chapter; If we
esteem of places and times of godliness aright, and cleave to the persons that
(...) godliness, as Acts the seventeenth chapter and the thirty fourth verse,
Dionysius and Damar is; they that do so, show Godliness.

The second Virtue is, love of brethren: For as in the Law he goes from the
first Table to the second; so here having noted what is due to God, he
prescribes us duties to be performed unto men. So the Gospel, as well as the
Law, commands both purity and charity; and we must take the ground of our love,
ex font puritatis; God makes his Sun to rise upon the just and unjust,
Matthew the fist chapter; So must we show, not only brotherly love to
Christians, but charity to all men. Which brotherly love, is not to be extended
to natural brethren, as Matthew the twelfth chapter, My brothers and sisters
are they which hear the word, and keep it: this is to be showed to the Church,
and for such which have one father and one elder brother. Some forsake the
fellowship, Hebrews 10. they are filii hipostoles, they withdraw themselves
from the fraternity; but toward such as continue in the faith, let brotherly
love continue, Hebrews the thirteenth chapter, and the first epistle of Peter,
the first chapter and the twenty second verse, They that are faithful, are
called a brotherhood, the second epistle of Peter, the fist chapter; and
therefore to them must this brotherly love be extended. This love must be
without hypocrisy; not to say, as James the second chapter, If thy brother
starve, and thou say depart and be warm, but minister not to him, what faith
and godliness is that? So for Charity, the first epistle of John the third
chapter, Love must not be in word and tongue, but in deed and truth. That is
true charity, when we do good to the fraternity; not that of the world, or
after the flesh but of the Church.

Concerning which, you need not that I write; for you are taught of God, who
said, By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if you love one
another, John the eleventh chapter. From hence he proceeds to Charity,
exhorting us to show love, not only quia sunt, but ut sunt; As to the
faithful, because they are brethren; but to all men generally, that they may
be won to be of the Church. We must love, Inimicum in Deo, and inimicum
propter Deum. (...) that is true love. As he begun with Faith, so he ends
with love, which is the bond of perfection, Colossians the third chapter, and
keeps in all the other virtues. Jerusalem is an heap of stones; but love is
that makes it a compact building, Ephesians the (...) chapter. As the Apostle
here exhorts to love; so in the (...) epistle of Peter, the fourth chapter,
Above all things have love, Colossians the third chapter; and, the first
epistle of Peter, the fourth chapter and the eighth verse, which covers the
multitude of sins. Of all graces it is the more excellent, the first epistle
to the Corinthians, the twelfth chapter: It is greater than faith or hope, the
first epistle to the (...), the third chapter and the thirteenth verse.

Touching the end, fuga corruptionis, and the partaking of the Divine nature,
are the two things we have looked unto in all the other virtues. The cause of
our corruption is amor corruptionis in the judgment and valuation; but it is
refined by charity. Love is Charitas, of dearness, we set a great price of
that which is most dear: And so if we make greatest account of God, we will
love him above all things. If we set our love on that which is most dear, we
shall eschew corruption. Secondly, The partaking of the Divine nature, is to be
like to him, the first epistle of John, the third chapter; and love is the
greatest representation of the divine nature. In the other virtues we do but
dispose our souls to be partakers of it. The Apostle says, Deus est Charitas,
the first epistle of John, the fourth chapter. If then we be possessed of love,
we shall be possessed of the Divine nature. Love is it that makes us adherere
Deum, Psalm the seventy third: Fides videt, spes tendit, but charity
possesses. Love is called an (...), the first epistle of John and the second
chapter; because, as Kings were anointed, so it makes us have a right unto
Gods kingdom: Fides per charitatem (...), is that which must do us good,
Galatians the fifth chapter: There it is the midst, but here the end of all,
without the which, all the other will do no good: It is as oil to the Lamp
Matthew the 25, without which the lamp gives no light. The precious faith is
that which has all these virtues, and charity at the end. Then is Christianity
well taught, when it is taught as a building, standing on many parts, Ephesians
the second chapter; or Armor, Ephesians the sixth chapter; as a tree, Galatians
the fifth chapter; as a body, Ephesians the fourth chapter; as a choiser harmony
of music, as the Apostle here (...) it out, in the second epistle of Peter,
the first chapter and the fourth verse.

Nihil ad vos, o viatores omnes; intuemini and videte an sit dolor par dolori
meo, qui factus est mihi: quam afficit Jehova moerore die aestus irae suae.
Lament. 1. 12.

THE words of a party in great (...), and that two ways. First, That he is in
sorrow and pain, such as none other ever felt. Secondly, That being in this
extremity, he is not regarded of any. It is well known that it is a (...) thing
to (...) and blood to be afflicted; but so to be afflicted as no other, that is
a high degree of misery; but that in this case there is none to have
compassion, that is as much as can be said. Against the crosses that befall us
in this life, the ordinary comfort is, the first epistle to the Corinthians the
tenth chapter, Nothing befalls us, but is such as pertains to man; but this
was not any other man's case. And whereas there is none so hard-hearted, but
will show some relief, at least pity a man in distress, here was none touched
with any compassion.

For the verse it self, it is the Prophets speech in the person of the City of
Jerusalem, lamenting the miseries that happened at the death of Josiah; but by
the rule of reciprocation, whereby that which is said of the members, may be
applied to the head; as was said to Saul by Christ, why persecutest thou me?
where it was the Church that was persecuted, Acts the ninth chapter, it is
otherwise to be expounded. If any member, then especially of them under the
Law, Quibus ad contingebunt in figuris, the first epistle to the Corinthians,
the tenth chapter: therefore Isaacs sacrifice, Joseph's selling by his brethren,
and David's betraying, who were particular members of the Church, were types and
figures of Christ's being slain, sold, and betrayed. If the eyes, or hand, or
footsuffer, the head also suffers with it; much more may the sufferings of the
whole body together be applied to the head, as Out of Egypt have I called my
son, that being a place of the deliverance of Israel, Gods first borne,
Colossians the eleventh chapter, is applied to Christ, Matthew the second
chapter. And according to this rule, this verse is by the ancient Fathers
applied to the (...) and sufferings of our Savior Christ.

Whether it be the Cities speech, or any other whosoever, it may well be the
speech of Christ on the Cross, that he was then in that great extremity, which
none ever endured the like; and yet being without cause, none vouchsafed to
look at him. That is the drift of the words, and is set down first by way of
complaint, Have ye no regard? Secondly, by way of petition, Mark and regard.

In the Passion two things are to be considered, first the grievousnesse of his
sufferings, noted in these words, If ever there were the like sorrow; Secondly,
the cause of it in these, Where with the Lord has afflicted me. Upon which
follow these three actions: First, to see: Secondly, to consider: Thirdly, to
regard and esteem of it, as a thing which concerns us.

As is employed in the first words, which are thus read, Nonne ad vos pertinet,
for the first point, here is some spectacle to behold, in as much as he
directs his speech to them that pass by the way, Omnes qui transitis viam.
When a stay is made, not of one, but of all, there is some great matter: and
the holy Ghost tells us, that there is no journey so important, nor haste so
great, that should hinder us from considering of the sufferings of Christ. The
motives that he uses to quicken our weakness, are two, the one taken from the
thing it self; the other from the beholders. For the thing it self, we know
those things that are rare, draw our eyes to behold them; therefore he says,
If ever there were sorrow like my sorrow: And this reason he takes from the
beholders; as, Does it not concern or pertain to you? For the things that were
showed, chiefly are such as concern us: as for other things that appertain unto
us, we respect them not. The sufferings consist as all other do, either in
sensu or damno, that is, either privatively or positively. That which is
translated sorrow or prayer, is a blow or wound, which is a matter of sense;
and it signifies such a blow as strikes off both root and leaves: that is it we
are to consider in this spectacle. That which he felt, was either in body or
soul.

Touching his bodily sufferings, our own eyes are witnesses: For there was no
part of him, neither skin, nor bone, nor sense, nor any part, wherein he was
not stricken: His blessed body was an Anvile to receive all the strokes that
were laid on him. And we have no better argument hereof than Pilates Ecce homo,
John the nineteenth chapter; for he thought they had brought him to that (...)
already that even the hard-hearted Jews would have pitied him. But that which
is said here, si fuerit dolor sicut, is not so verified of his bodily
sufferings, as in that which he suffered in his soul: For in bodily sufferings
many have been equal to him; but the suffering of the soul is most grievous,
as the greatest heaviness is the heaviness of the heart: the afflictions of
the body may be sustained, but a wounded spirit who can bear? Proverbs the
eighteenth chapter. Therefore St. Paul calls that suffering which he felt in
his soul, corpus mortis, Romans the seventh chapter: Upon these sufferings it
is that he cries out, Ecce, si fuerit dolor sicut: The grievousnesse of whose
suffering we argue not so much from that which is recorded of him, that he did
(...), Mark the fourteenth chapter and the thirty third verse; that he was
(...), Luke the twenty second chapter and the twenty fourth verse; that his
soul was (...), Matthew the twenty sixth chapter; as from the bloody sweat,
Ecce, si fuerat sudor; that is verified when no uncleanness is offered; when a
man lying on the cold earth (for then it was cold, so as they were fain to make
fire) then to sweat, not tenues sudores, but granos sanguinis: He that
considers this, may make a cause of it, that there was never any such sorrow or
sweat. The cause of this sweat was bought, as indeed the word imports; where
with the Lord has boiled me, as in a furnace; as after in the next verse,
Ignem misit Dominus, he was in a furnace of Gods fierce wrath: therefore the
Greek Church prays, By thy unknown sufferings, good Lord deliver us. For that
which was taken from him, that was (...) Domini: he was spoiled both of earthly
comforts and heavenly graces. For the first, He that had gone up and down
feeding, healing and preaching among the Jews, receives no comfort from the
earth; their words were not his but Barabas. Again, His blood be upon us and
our children. Lastly, When he was on the Cross they scorned him, He trusted in
God, let him save (...) and, Thou that savest others, come down and save thy
self. As for his Disciples, from whom he might have looked for most comfort,
one of them betrayed him, another denied him, and all forsook him, and he is
stripped of all earthly comfort.

And as for his soul, that was bereaved of all heavenly graces or influence,
there was a traverse or drawbridge drawn, as appears by his words, My God,
why have thou for saken me? It is not so with the (...); for they in the (...)
of their pains and sorrows, feel drops of heavenly consolation, which make them
cheerful. But it was not so with our Savior; there was a sequestration,
whereby the influence of his divinity was restrained from his humanity,
whereupon ensued that cry, My God, why have thou for saken me? there was never
the like cry. Thirdly, From the party that complains, we may argue, there was
never the like sorrow: A little thing done to a person of great excellency,
does aggravate the matter; but never the like person suffered, and never the
like sorrow, Exodus 23. 3. God takes order, men shall not handle the poor beast
barbarously, but be ready to relieve and help him; but more respect is to be
had of a man, although a Malefactor, and much more an Innocent, as he that fell
among thieves and was hurt, Luke the tenth chapter: But if it be not only an
Innocent, but an exalted person, as Josiah, then great respect is to be had;
but ecce, major Josiah hic, Matthew the twelfth chapter; it is Christ that
suffers: of whom not only Pilate says Ecce, John the nineteenth chapter, but
the Centurion (...) Vere hic salis est Deus; this makes it a cause not to be
matched. The cause of those his sufferings is imputed not to the bloody
Soldiers, or hard-hearted Jews, or highPriests and Scribes, but afflixit Deus.
When God does as well chasten in wrath, as christen in his displeasure, this is
not don in his merciful chastisement, but in his wrathful displeasure, in die
furoris ejus, nay his color was red. When God is angry, or punishes
grievously, it is for some grievous sin, and is for some notable sin, of
which it may be said non sicut, had our Savior deserved the wrath of God in
such manner. Pilate confesses, He found nothing in him, John the fourteenth
chapter and the (...) verse, Why then did he suffer? It was foretold, The
Messiah should be stain, Daniel the ninth chapter and the twenty fist verse,
not for himself, but for others. He that took not a penny was made to pay for
all: That is the nature of surety ship; he undertaking to be our surety, our
debt became his. It is a pityfull thing to see a Lamb have his throat cut; but
if he will be a Sacrifice, it must be so. Christ undertook to be our Surety, to
be a Sacrifice to God for our sins; therefore he was wounded for our sins,
By his stripes we are healed; Posuit Deus super eum iniquitates omnes nostras,
Isaiah the fifty third chapter. That stroke that brought forth that bloody
sweat, and the forsaking that brought forth that cry, should have light upon us.

The parts to us. Have we no regard? Had it not concerned us, as a thing for
our benefit, yet we ought to have had compassion, and not only as unsensible
Creatures; for at the time of Christ's sufferings, the rocks and stones clave,
and the veil of the Temple was rent, Matthew the twenty seventh chapter: Thus
were the insensible Creatures moved at his sufferings, and men not moved a
whit. Our Savior shows, that albeit he felt such a great blow; yet neither
the sense of his sufferings, nor his being bereft of all comfort, did grieve
him so much as this, That we have no regard of it; therefore follows this
petition, Mark now; though heretofore ye have had no regard, yet now behold it.

It consists of three points: First, to see, He was as the brazen Serpent, let
up, that all men should cast up their eyes; so he says, John the twelfth
chapter, If I were lift up I will draw all men to me. Secondly, To see, and not
to consider, is a folly: to see and look with gazing, is that which the Angels
found fault with, Acts the first chapter: We must not only look to Jesus, the
Author and finisher of our faith, Hebrews the twelfth chapter; but, as it
follows, recogitate: think on him again and again, what great things he
suffered, what comfort he was bereft of, He that had suffered was the son of
God, Hebrews the second chapter, and he suffered for us. Consider the love
wherewith Christ was moved to suffer this for us; and the benefit that comes to
us from his passion: he being an innocent, there was no necessity for him to
dye; and having guards of Angels, as Matthew the twenty sixth chapter, he could
not be compelled to suffer; but he did it willingly: He first made him a body
fit to suffer, and then (...) that body for us; and that was love, and never
the like love, whether we respect God or Christ. God gave his only Son; no
greater benefit could be given us, then that. Christ's love appears to us, by
his obedience to his Father: His love to us is showed, that for us, he that was
the greatest person that ever was, became obedient to death, even of the
Cross; that he suffered not only a shameful, but cursed death, Factus est
maledictum, Galatians the third chapter; for cursed is every one that hangs
on tree: Never was there the like love; his very death had been sufficient for
our redemption: For it is God himself that offered this (...); and this he did
to make us consider his love, Si fuerit amor sicut. But in regard of the
benefit that comes to us, his death is our restament, whereby we come to an
inheritance; the day of wrath to him, is our day of reconciliation and jubilee;
his stripes, our medicine; his for saking, our receiving to favor. Thus are we
to consider his sufferings, in respect of the fruit that comes to us by it: We
are to have a sympathy, as also to conceive an antipathie against sin.

The cause of his grievous passion, we must show it, pertains to us, not only
by looking and thinking on it, but by doing something, as Luke the twenty third
chapter, Hoc facite in commemor (...): the thing to be done, is the celebrating
of his Sacraments; and that is a mean, to be partaker of his sufferings, and we
shall be united to him, and all that he has deserved. By these his sufferings
shall be ours, omnia ejus nostra: As God has given us his son to dye for us,
so cum filio dabit omnia, Romans 8. 32.

Nam eratis velut oves errantes: sed nunc convertistis vos ad Pastorem and
Curatorem animarum vestrarum. 1 Pet. 2. 25.

WHICH words present to us, First, the Christians, to whom the Apostle wrote
this Epistle, and consequently our selves under the term of Sheep. Secondly,
our Savior Christ, who is the pastor and Shepherd, as he affirms of himself,
John the tenth chapter, I am the true Shepherd.

That which concerns us, does set out a double state: First, That we were as
sheep going a stray: Secondly, As sheep converted. The one is our estare,
wherein we were before our conversion; the other our estate after conversion.
The one is a state of misery endless; the other of felicity without end.

In the treaty whereof, three things are offered, First, the term of Sheep,
applied to our selves. Secondly, Shepherd, with the application of it to
Christ. Thirdly, our error and conversion.

First, For the term of Sheep, there is no name so often borrowed to express
the state of Mankind; whereof, besides the application which the Apostle makes
of it here, we have a plain exposition, in Ezekiel the thirty fourth chapter,
and hae omnes homines sant. Of these terms that are found in the Scripture
applied to Christian men, there are two especially: The first of Plants,
Thereby Christ chooses the Vine: The second of Living Creatures, sheep. They
are both, Psalm the eightieth, Thou have brought a Vine out of Egypt; and for
the other, Thou that leadest Joseph like a Sheep. And so in the new Testament,
the state of the Church compared to a Sheepfold, John the tenth chapter; and
John the fifteenth chapter, to a Vine. The congruities between the Church and
these terms are many, but that which is specially here to be observed, is the
need of having a Shepherd. The Vine is the weakest of all other Plants, and
must be raised up against the house side, or else it will not prosper, Ezekiel
the fifteenth chapter: So for Sheep, they are weak and of small strength. For
their wisdom, there is no Creature so easily (...) and carried astray; for
they of themselves delight to go astray: and so they are not of any reach or
wisdom: Secondly for power, they are unable to resist, but are a pray to every
wild beast. To these we add a third point, that is, no Creature has so many
enemies. So it is with the Church; As they are Sheep, they have Thieves and
Robbers, John the tenth chapter: As they are like the Vine, there is the wild
Boar out of the (...), Psalm the eightieth. Whatsoever is weak of it self, and
bath many enemies, has need of help from another: So that if there be a Thief
and Wolf quem (...), there must be some body ad quem confugere debent. If the
Wolf do disgregare and (...), there must be one that will congregare Oves. If
to be scattered be a misery, the remedy against that is, to be in the unity of
a flock; and the way to be delivered from being a pray, is to be under the
defense of a Shepherd. The one is the wisdom, the other is the strength of
this poor Creature. Then to err from the Fold and Shepherd, is the only evil
that can be fall them; so the Prophet (...), Ezekiel the thirty fourth chapter,
They stragled on every Hill; and (...) the ninth chapter, our Savior describes
the misery of the people, to show them, that they were as Sheep without a
Shepherd. If to err be a misery, then our felicity stands, either in staying
in the Fold, or, if we be gone astray, to return to the Shepherd, that is, to
Christ, who promises life, and abundance of life, to him that converteth unto
him, the tenth chapter of St. John's Gospel, and the tenth verse.

Secondly, For the term of Shepherd and Bishop, it is applied to Christ by
Congregation, being a flock. Every Governor is a Shepherd, not only in regard
of the state of the Church, but in respect of the Commonwealth: For it is
first applied to Joseph, who was a politic Magistrate, Genesis the forty
ninth chapter; so to Joshuah, when Moses prays for a civil Governor to be
(...) over the People, Numbers the twenty seventh chapter; so, Psalm the
seventy seventh, Thou leadest thy People like sheep, by the hand of Moses and
Adron: Psalm the seventy eighth, He took me from the Sheepfold to feed Israel:
And in the first book of Kings, the twenty second chapter, Ahab being slain,
the People of Israel, are amazed, (...) Sheep wandering on the waters without a
Shepherd: So Isaiah 44. (...) est. This was the opinion of the Heathen; and
therefore such temporal Governors are called (...), and not only so, but as it
follows, they are Pastores animarum: For seeing men are reasonable Creatures,
God forbid but a Magistrate should have a greater regard of men, than rural
Shepherds of Sheep that are pecora (...) the the fifth chapter, the mount of
God, from whence came the Law: But here is Gods own hill from whence came the
Gospel. As the term Shepherd, so is Pastor, Ezekiel the thirty fourth chapter
and the eighteenth verse, to tread on the good pastures; and drink of the deep
waters. These are applied to the state Civil, as Psalm the twenty third and the
second verse, The Lord is my Shepherd, he makes me to rest on green (...),
and (...) to the still waters. But as these terms are applied to the
Commonwealth; so also the Church is a flock, and the Shepherd is Christ. All
that came before him were but thieves, as he says, I am the true Shepherd;
and therefore it is more excellently applied to him (...) to any other: For no
Shepherd can say of his (...), he made them; but we are the Sheep of his
Church, Psalm the hundred and tenth. No shepherd bought his sheep with his
blood; but Christ (...) purchased his Church with his blood, Acts the (...)
chapter. No shepherd feeds his flock with himself, as Christ (...) feed us
with the preaching of his word, being in his divine nature (...) and with his
flesh, in his humane nature. But the Apostle (...) not himself to call him
Shepherd, but Bishop. There was in the Church Pastores and Doctores, Ephesians
the fourth chapter and the eleventh verse, and the first epistle to the
Corinthians, the twelfth chapter, Both Teachers and Governors
They fed men by teaching, and so made them more able in the inward man; but
there were other Pastors by oversight called Bishops: Both titles have their
ground, in John the twenty first chapter and the sixteenth verse, where Christ
says to Peter, (...) the one word signifies to feed, the other to govern: So
there are pastores, (...) and (...). The (...) of their gifts, makes the
difference of titles. Many have the gift of feeding, by teaching, that have not
the gift of oversight and Government. St. Paul gave Titus power to order, Titus
the first chapter; to Timothy, to receive accusations, the first epistle to
Timothy the fifth chapter; to put to silence, to correct, to visit; Acts the
fifteenth chapter, every one has not such power, neither is it fit they should
have.

Out of which words, for our moral instruction, seeing it has pleased Christ,
to the office of Pastors to add Bishops, he left us exemples, as the first
epistle of Peter the second chapter, to teach us that have or that must have a
regard of others, must be free from sleep: Therefore it is said of such,
Hebrews the thirteenth chapter Vigilant pro animabus vestris; unlike those of
whom, Isaiah the fifty six chapter, Their shepherds lie a sleep, and delight
in sleeping, Nebemiah the second chapter and the first verse, neither must they
be negligent. Some have a care, but it is to feed themselves with the milk, and
cloth themselves with the fleece, (...) the thirty fourth chapter. They are
Episcopi uberum and vellerum; but it is of the souls that they must be
careful. That is the end of their Government: as also of civil Magistrates,
and Masters of Families: And that Governor that has not this end, is no (...),
but (...), he aims at a wrong mark.

Thirdly, For the erring, and turning again, he says, Ye went astray, and so
hazarded your souls. We know it is one thing to be lost, and another to err;
Luke the fifteenth chapter, The groat was lost, the Sheep was not lost, but
strayed away of it self, and that is a voluntary thing: but this is not to be
applied to matter of opinion, but to error of life, as Proverbs the fourteenth
chapter, Nonne oves errant, quia operant (...)? That straying is set forth in
the riotous young man, Luke the fifteenth chapter; who, by mispending his goods
on Harlots, was brought to misery. They that stray are such as commit sin
with greediness, Ephesians the fourth chapter, that is, not by the negligence
of such as are set over us, but by our own corruption. As we go astray by
errors of life; so by errors of opinion, as James the second chapter, That wait
upon lying vanities, and for sake their own mercy, by crrors of life and
opinion; They for sake their fathers house, as John says, in the first epistle
of John and the second chapter, Those things I write, ne peccetis: So we preach
ne erretis. We say as the Angel did to Sarai her maid Agar, Remember whence
thou come and whither thou go, Genesis the sixteenth chapter: Therefore
the Disciples, when others went astray, said to Christ, John the sixth chapter,
Whether should we go away? that is, we say not to forsake the fellowship of
the Church, nor to withdraw themselves, For in such my soul has no delight,
(...) the tenth chapter. But Peter confesses here, you have sinned and gone
astray: what then? If we say we have no sin, we are not only proud, but
liars, the first epistle of John and the first chapter. The Prophet says, All
we, like sheep, have gane astray, and turned every one to his own way, Isaiah
the fifty third chapter. The direction of the Law is, Not to sin; But the
comfort of the Gospel is, that albeit we have sinned, yet we are turned, as the
Apostle says here, Ye were as sheep going astray, but now ye are turned: So in
the first epistle to the Corinthians the sixth chapter, ye were sinners, of all
forts; haec (...), but now you are justified and sanctified. So then if men
err, the next point is, to confess (...), not to continue in sin. If a man
persevere in sin, he is out of his right way; but if he will go no further in
it, he will redire ad cor, as Luke the fifteenth chapter, we must return to our
selves; that is it, where unto the Apostle exhorts them, Acts the third chapter
and the nineteenth verse, Repent and turn, as Joel (...), Return to the Lord
with your whole heart, Joel the second chapter. Of which repentance we must
conceive as of a tree that must bring forth fruit; as Acts the twenty sixth
chapter, To bring forth works worthy of repentance.

The works worthy of repentance, are first, To judge our selves, the first
epistle to the Corinthians, the eleventh chapter; then to punish and take
revenge of our selves, the second epistle to the Corinthians, the seventh
chapter and the eleventh verse. Secondly, these are turned ad (...), which give
over an evil course of life; but after they turn to another, hat is worse; that
is not repentance. As a man having been an Idolater, to become a sacrilegious
person, that is worse, Romans the second chapter, such a one is not turned to
the Bishop of our souls. So when a civil man becomes worldly, or a profane
person proves a Schifmatrick. The last point is, That when a man is turned,
God does not only speak peace to him, but he will speak to his Saints that they
return not again to folly, Psalm the eighty fifth and the ninth verse: When we
are turned to Christ, he will say, Luke the twenty fourth chapter, Mane
nobiscum, that was said to Christ after his resurrection. So at the feast of
(...) we come to the Pastor and Bishop of our souls, and confess we were
turned: therefore being now risen again, we must tarry with him; we (...) not
turn again to folly: We must consider how it was with us, when we trampled his
pasture under our feet, and (...) the waters, yea, we wandered on the mountains,
and upon every hill, (...) the thirty fourth chapter. We must (...) if it were
better with us before, as Hosea the second chapter: And being turned, we must
make this conclusion, Ephesians the fifth chapter, Ye were (...) now are light;
therefore walk as children of light. So we were as sheep going astray, but now
being turned to Christ, the (...) and Bishop of our souls, we must continue
under the protection of our Pastors, and when the chief Shepherd comes, we
shall receive the crown of life, which he has purchased, the first epistle of
Peter, the fist chapter, an incorruptible Crown of glory.

Paulisper, and non conspicietis me: and rursum paulisper, and videbitis me,
quia ego vado ad Patrem. Job. 16 16.

THEY be the words of Christ, spoken to his Disciples to comfort them, being in
heaviness, because Christ was to be taken from them, verse the sixth; for here
is matter of double sorrow. For first That they should not see him: Secondly,
That he was to go such a journey from them. But there is a double comfort
answerable. The comfort of not seeing him is, after a while ye shall see me:
The comfort against his departure is, that he goes to his Father. The words in
effect are as much as if he said, within a while I shall suffer death upon the
Cross, and be buried; and within a while after, I shall arise again, and
ascend up to my Father, which is a special matter of comfort and rejoicing, as
John the fourteenth chapter and the twenty eighth verse, If ye loved me, ye
would rejoice, because I said, I go to my Father: They knew not what he meant
by those words, verse the eighteenth; therefore our Savior makes a commentary
on them, verse the twentieth, ye shall not see me, that is, ye shall weep and
lament, but the world shall rejoice: And again, ye shall see me, that is, your
sorrow shall be turned into laughter and joys. Again, he makes it more plain
with a comparison, verse the twenty first, non videbitis; that shall be to you
as the pangs of a woman laboring with child; and ye shall see me, that is
like the joy she conceives after her deliverance. For the first point he
says, verse the fourth, he did not tell them of his departure from the
beginning, nor yet a great while before his passion, but only now; that is some
diminishing of their grief. But in the second point there is much more comfort;
that is, albeit he must be taken from them, yet they shall not only see him
again, but very shortly after. The vision that is for many days, (...) us to
long and thirst after the accomplishment of it; but Christ cells them, they
shall see him again, and that very shortly. The same course he keeps in the
reason; for he says, quia vado, not to the cross and passion, that was not a
matter so pleasing, but ad Patrem, that is it that does increase their joy.
Wherein we are to observe Christ's method of comfort, not to minister comfort
before the time.

To see is a good and comfortable thing, Ecclesiastes the eleventh chapter; the
want of which benefit, made Tohias that he had no joy. And as God gives sight,
so has he made many excellent Creatures for us to (...); whereof the Wiseman
says, non satiatur oculus. And there are not only real, but personal objects.
Adam opened his eyes and saw the light, but saw nothing, till God made one like
himself. The personal object is the more comfortable. But in the person many
things make it more desirous: As to see a person whom we love, and who loves
us, that is a sight of comfort: So was it a great joy to Jacob, to see Joseph,
Genesis the forty sixth chapter; such is the joy of the Spouse to see Christ,
Canticles the sixth chapter. Touching Christ's love, himself says, John the
fifteenth chapter, Majorem hac charitatem habet nemo; he loved us being his
enemies. If then the view of a man be comfortable, what shall we say of the
fight of God, that must needs be Visio beatifica? In him is fulness of joy,
Psalm the sixteenth; The pure in heart shall be blessed, quia videbit Deum,
Matthew the fifth chapter: That was it that made Philip say, John the fourteenth
chapter, Ostende nobis Patrem, and sufficit. But he that sees Christ, sees
God the Father, as he says, He that sees me, sees the Father. When Moses
desired God to show him his glory, Exodus the thirty third chapter: though he
showed but his back parts, yet it was so glorious a sight, that they that
beheld Moses face, saw the skin shine, Exocus the thirty fourth chapter, so
that he was fain to cover it. And, as in the second epistle to the Corinthians
the third chapter, we are transformed into his image: Christ in his corruptible
nature being transfigured in the presence of his Disciples, was so glorious,
that they desired they might go no more home, Matthew the seventeenth chapter:
Therefore if the fight of Gods presence be a matter of so great joy, non
videbitis must needs be occasion of great sorrow: Which is exemplified in Adam;
who having sinned, though he were in Paradise, a place of all comfort; yet he
had no joy, because he could not see God, as he was wont: Therefore Cain
complains, I am cast out of thy presence, Genesis the fourth chapter: And not
only the Reprobate, but David says, Psalm the thirty first and the twenry
second verse, I said in my haste, I am cast out of thy presence, or fight:
which showed, that as videbitis must be the persection of all felicity; so non
videbitis is the sum of all misery; especially if it be not qualified with
modicum, Psalm the thirteenth, How long will thou forget me, O Lord, for ever?
Psalm the seventy seventh: Will the Lord absent himself for ever? Psalm the
eighty ninth: And that which he faith, John the fourteenth chapter and the
nineteenth verse, The world shall see me no more; if modicum be not added,
there is no (...) like this.

Out of this we learn to seek Gods favor, as Psalm the twenty first, and he
says, Seek my face, to answer, My heart never leaves thinking on this. And if
we have lost the comfort of it, to complain as David, Psalm the thirty first, I
am cast out of thy presence: For albeit men in the time of their youth, delight
in other fights; yet the days will come, when they shall say, Show us the
lights of thy countenance, Psalm the fourth; Turn us again, O Lord, show us the
light of thy countenance, and we shall be whole, Psalm the eightieth; We shall
desire to see one of Christ's days, Luke the seventeenth chapter and the twenty
second verse: All flesh shall see him at his appearing, even they that pierced
him, Apoc. 6.

Secondly, We are to inquire, what manner of sight he speaks of, for as much
as men see not only with bodily eyes, but with the eyes of understanding. They
that with their bodily eyes beheld Christ before his Passion, and after his
Resurrection, did not understand it, Luke the twenty fourth chapter and the
eleventh verse. As there is an outward light, so an inward light of the mind,
into which the doctrine of the Gospel does shine, the second epistle to the
Corinthians the fourth chapter, as the light of the Sun (...) to our outward
sense. There are things that cannot be seen of the bodily eyes, which we do
yet behold and look on with the eye of faith, the second epistle to the
Corinthians the fourth chapter: and Moses is said to have loved God invisible,
Hebrews the eleventh chapter. So the bad qualities of men, as (...), are
invisible to the outward eye; but yet we see it by the light of our
understanding. Such a sight is that which he promises, John the fourteenth
chapter, I will make my self manifest to him. He showed himself to Judas as
well as to Peter bodily: But as it was a special touch, wherewith (...) now
touched the hem of his garment and was healed, Matthew the ninth chapter; so
the view that Peter had of Christ, had another manner of effect then Judas
beholding, Luke the twenty second chapter. But even this spiritual sight has
also a deceit, as, in the first epistle to the Corinthians, the thirteenth
chapter, Now we see through a glass, but then face to face: So there are two
words to that purpose, (...) is (...), to see in a glass; but (...) is to see
a thing as it is. The Angels do continually behold Gods face; we have but an
enigmaticall sight of him in this life, and it is soon lost; as Christ being
risen from death, was seen of Mary Magdalen and others, in the habit of a
Gardener: To them that traveled to Emaus, at one time they did see him, and at
another time they could not see him.

Touching which, he that shall consider the desire which the Saints of God have
of this benefit, shall easily perceive what matter of sorrow it was; for Psalm
the ninety second, My soul is a thirst for the living God; Psalm the eighty
fourth it says. For the City of my God; again, How long will thou forget me,
for ever? but modicum, and videbitis, that gives comfort again. Heaviness may
endure for a night, that is modicum, and non videbitis; but joy comes in the
morning, that is modicum, and videbitis, Psalm the thirtieth. The delaying of
hope is the fainting of the heart, Proverbs the eighteenth chapter, but the
desire accomplished is the tree of life. Modicum, and videbitis, is as the tree
of life, that quickens the sool, Isaiah the sixty fourth chapter, For a moment
in my anger I forsake them, but with great compassion will I gather them.

As he gives the matter of grief in non videbitis, and comfort in videbitis, ye
shall see me within a while; so in the reason, quia vado, that is the grief,
but ad Patrem, that is matter of comfort: He goes; but woe to him by whom she
Son of man goes, Matthew the twenty sixth chapter, that is matter of sorrow;
but when he says ad Patrem, that is, not to an enemy that keeps me long from
you, but to my father; the same that sent me at my birth, and will send me
again, by my Resurrection. Secondly, As he went to (...) a cruel Judge on
earth, so to as severe a Judge in Heaven: But yet when you hear me say, Why
have thou for saken me? yet still he is my Father; as if he should say, this is
a hard way, but yet I must go this way. Thirdly, (...), not quia, but quod
vado, that is the contrary, I shall be carried up in a cloud. Secondly, From
the consideration of Christ's words, verse the fifth, I go my way, and none
(...) me whither I go, that is to be understood, as of the place whither; but
to what purpose? for of the place Peter asked, in the thirteenth chapter and
the thirty sixth verse; Domine, quo vadis? So here the placing of ad Patrem, is
to show that he went to reconcile God; not only that he be no enemy, but
propitiou and favorable; not as a friend to a friend, but as a father to his
children; to make us the children of God his Father, and so joint heirs with
himself; Romans the eighth chapter; So Christ says, Ascendo ad Patrem meum and
Patrem vestrum, ad Deum meum and Deum vestrum, John the twentieth chapter and
the seventeenth verse: By my death God is made your Father. Therefore as a
woman travaileth in sorrow, but being delivered, is glad, quia natus est homo.
So by my death there is a new nativity, and you are to be glad, that by me you
are made the children of God, that is, by my going away to the Father.

For the Use, as Christ says of himself, non videbitis, and again, modicum,
and videbitis; that is, verse the twentieth, re shall weep and lament, and the
world shall rejoice. We are to reckon of the things and persons of this life,
that is truly said of the modicum, and videbitis: and again modicum, and non
videbitis; their continuance is uncertain. We have had much peace by the space
of forty one years, during which time we saw her which now we see not: it was
a great time indeed, but it was but modicum; for a thousand years in Gods sight
is but as yesterday, Psalm the nintieth. As all worldly things are seen for a
little time, and shortly after are not to be seen. So for vado, all things in
the world are passing, they vade and pass away, as in the first epistle of
John and the second chapter, The world passes away. The use which we have is,
the inverting of non (...) me, and videbitis.

The world says, ye shall see me for a while, and within a while ye shall not
see me; that is the state of the world, as in (...) the fourteenth chapter,
Externa gaudia luctus occipit: But in Christ the not seeing goes before, and
the seeing goes after, that is, Psalm the (...), Heaviness goes before, and
endures for a night, but joy comes after in the morning. But the world
sets on the best wine (...), and the worst after; but Christ keeps the
best wine till last. He that will follow the world, shall see some happiness
here, and not see after: but follow Christ, and thou shall not see here, that
thou may see after. Whether of these sights is better, the Apostle shows
in the second epistle to the Corinthians the fourth chapter, the things that
are seen here are temporal, the things that are not seen, eternal. So that we
may have our choice, either to see, and not to see; or not to see here that we
may see hereafter, which is better: therefore the Psalmists prayer is, Let me
not see here a little while, that I may see eternally. So for Vado, as we see
worldly things a little here, and then see them not any more; so all worldly
things pass and go, but whither, the world knows not. He that sees not
Christ here by the sight of the glass, shall never see him; for he goes to
utter dar knesse; Vadit ad Judicem, non ad Patrem, and the smoke of his torment
shall ascend continually. The godly that have seen Christ, shall go to his
Father, though through many afflictions, seeing Christ says, After a while ye
shall not see me, to show that he was mindful of death. We must study and
labor that our end be like his, that so we may be partakers of his promises. I
will show my self to him, which was matter of comfort, as in the
transfiguration: That albeit to go away be a hard way; yet we be assured, as
Christ was, that we go to the Father, Whither I go thou can not follow me
now, but thou shall follow me after, John the thirteenth chapter, that is, to
God the Father, and to his comfortable presence, where we shall have that joy,
which no man shall take from us, John the sixteenth chapter and the twenty
second verse. Whatsoever joy a man can have here, it shall be taken from him,
but the joy of Gods sight shall never be taken from him. We go to that Father,
which shall give us an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades
not, the first epistle of Peter, the first chapter.

Adeo provocantes Deum ad indignationem factis suis, ut irrumperet in eos
plaga; donec consistente Pinchaso and judicium exercente, coercita esset plaga
illa. Psalm. 106. 29.30.

THERE is in these two verses mention of the plague. And as it is here said,
the plague was great among them, so great, as there dyed of it four and twenty
thousand, Numbers the twenty fifth chapter. And now God has laid the same axe
to the root of our trees, and the same rasor to cut off some of our number,
Isaiah the seventh chapter and the twenty eighth verse: Therefore our state
being like theirs, while they wandered in the wilderness, Every thing in the
Scriptures be written for our instruction, Romans the fifteenth chapter. We
must take direction from this principle, what to do in this case.

That which is set down touching them, is of two sorts: First, The cause of
this plague, They provoked God with their inventions: Secondly, the Cure,
Phinehas stood up and prayed, and it ceased.

The Cause is double, First, Their inventions: Secondly, Gods Anger, provoked
by them. And from these two come both, The wrath of God is the (...) Cause, per
quod; and their inventions, the Cause propter quod. So a double Cure: Against
Gods Anger, is opposed, as a remedy, Prayer; and against Inventions, the
executing of judgment upon these sinners.

The Prayer is qualified in two sorts: First, that is Phinehas prayer:
Secondly, He stood up in the cause.

The first thing to be set down is, That sickness and mortality of people is
causall, and not casual; for nothing is more contrary than Chance or Fortune,
and Judgment. For seeing a sparrow cannot light on the ground, without Gods
providence, such is Gods care for them, though two of them be sold for a
farthing, Matthew the tenth chapter, it is a senseless thing to think that
ficknesse can befall a man by chance. Therefore the Philistims, being plagued
by God would try whether that disease came of Gods hand, or by chance, the
first book of Samuel, the sixth chapter and the ninth verse. But the very name
of plague signifying originally judgment, shows it is no casual thing, as in
the first epistle to the Corinthians, the eleventh chapter, where he says,
They did eat and drink their own judgment, that is, that many were sick among
them, and many (...). So the mortality at Corinth, was Gods judgment: and so
the Latin word plaga, being a stripe, shows the same. If a stripe, there is a
striker: so then, they are not casual. If a Surgeon, Physician, or Philosopher,
were to give a reason hereof, he will impute the cause to the infection of the
air, the putrefaction of the bodies by humors, and to conversing one with
another; and they are good causes of it: For so says God, Exodus the ninth
chapter and the tenth verse, Mases took the ashes of the furnace, and cast them
up in the (...), and they caused a stink: And David in his sickness says,
Psalm the thirty second, His moisture was like the draught in Summer. Therefore
in the plague of Leprosy, Leviticus the thirteenth chapter and the forty fifth
verse, the Leper was to have his mouth shut up. David, in that great (...),
spoken of in the first book of Chronicles, the twenty first chapter and the
thirtieth verse, would have gone to (...), but be found he should not, feared
with the Angel: Therefore the servant of God says, Proverbs the fourteenth
chapter, A wise man (...) the plague, and shunneth it, but the foolish goes on
still.

But these are not the only causes: For besides (...), there is some divine
thing to be considered; for there is no (...), but a spirit belongs to it, as
Luke the thirteenth chapter and the eleventh verse, a spirit of infirmity. So
are we to conceive, that besides natural causes, there is some spiritual, of
the sickness, as (...) twelfth chapter, a destroying Angel. So in David's
plague in the second book of Samuel, the twenty fourth chapter: And (...) the
thirty seventh chapter and the thirty sixth verse, the Angel went forth and
slew: And, Apocalypse the sixteenth chapter and the (...) verse, The Angels
poured out the Vials of the wrath of God, and there fell a noisome sore: So it
is Gods hand that brings in these plagues.

The cause stands on two parts, First, Gods wrath, (...) which all evil things
proceed; For affliction comes not from the earth, Job the fifth chapter and
the sixth verse: They are sparks of his anger. And he is not angry with the
waters, that they should drown, (...) the third chapter; nor with the air,
that it should corrupt; but for these things comes the wrath of God, that is,
for our sins, (...) the fifth chapter. He does but make a way to his wrath,
and then the earth (...) up, the (...), Psalm the seventy eighth. The sins of
the people are the cause of Gods wrath. Peccata morum go before peccata
humorum. There is first corruption of the soul, Michah (...) first chapter and
the third verse: All flesh had corrupted their (...), Genesis the sixth chapter:
So there is infection in men's ways, before the streets be infected. There is
plaga animae, the plague in the soul, before it appear in the body. It is sin
that brings sickness and death, Romans the sixth chapter: So they are both
joined, Psalm the thirty eighth and the third verse, There is no rest in my
bones, because of my sin: Therefore it is our sin and infection of the
soul, that must be looked into. If it were some outward cause only, it could
not be but the plague should stay, (...) there is so great store of means,
Jeremiah the eighth chapter, Is there no balm in Gilead: But he says,
Jeremiah the forty sixth chapter and the eleventh verse, Frustra multiplicas
medicanda; sin being not taken away, physic will do (...) good. First, the
corruption of manners must be helped, and then bodily help will follow; Psalm
the forty first, Heal my soul, for I have sinned against thee. And that course
our Savior keeps, Matthew the ninth chapter, first he says, Thy sin is
forgiven; and then, Take up thy bed and walk.

These sins he calls inventions. Inventions please us greatly, and all new
things; our new omnia, better than old Manna, Numbers the eleventh chapter: But
if it be our own inventions, then we go a whoring after it. Such is the
delight we take in it, verse the thirty ninth. Our first Parents were of this
mind so proud they would not take a rule of life from God, but would sicut
Dii, Genesis the third chapter; They set up to themselves graven Images, Exodus
the (...) chapter: They have Dii alieni, such as their Fathers had. Not when
men living otherwise then God (...), I shall have peace, Deuteromie the twenty
ninth chapter and the (...) verse, These webbs that we weave our selves, and
these eggs that we hatch, Isaiah the fifty ninth chapter, are our confusion,
and (...) God; and great reason: For, Exodus the fifteenth chapter and the
twenty sixth verse, he says, If thou (...) to my (...) I will lay no disease,
Ego Dominus (...): But if we follow our own inventions, we can look for nothing
but diseases, quid tibi praecipio, haec (...) Deuteronomie the twelfth chapter,
(...) men will be (...) than (...) that was Saul's rebellion; he would not
destroy all, as God commanded, he was wiser than so. But what were these
inventions? It is said, verse the twenty eighth, They joined themselves to Baal
(...), Numbers the twenty fifth chapter, that is, the sin of whoring and
fornication; and that impudently before the congregation, committed by Zimry
and Cosby. It was the adoring of an abominable Idol; a sin so grievous, as
it is said many years after, (...) not enough of the sin of Peor? Joshuah the
twenty second chapter; it is a sin that will not be cleansed at the first.
And we see daily the sin of uncleanness ends with a plague that is
infectious.

For the Cure, It is certain, As there are natural causes, so natural cures of
this Diseise. (...), as some Writers do hold, had this Disease, and used not
only prayer, but a plaster, by the Prophets direction, Isaiah the fifty eighth
chapter. But as the cause of the plague is not only natural, so here is used a
spiritual remedy; that is, in as much as contrary, curantur contrariis viis. If
the provoking of Gods anger be the Cause of the plague, the appeasing of it by
prayer must be the Remedy. The two remedies are out of the double sense of the
word, which signifies prayer and punishing. Prayer is an appeaser of Gods
wrath, not only in other points, but in this, Numbers the twenty fifth chapter,
They all wept and prayed: And David, in the second book of Samuel, the twenty
fourth chapter and the seventeenth verse, fled to this remedy, I have sinned,
but these sheep what have they done? And Hezekiah being infected with the
plague, turned himself to the wall, Isaiah the thirty eighth chapter: And in
Salomons prayer, the first of the Kings and the eighth chapter, where plagues,
or corrupt agues shall hop, here then in heaven. And there is a good proportion
between this remedy and the disease: For if there be a corrupt smell, the way
to take it away is by the good smell of incense or perfume. So, as our sin
does give an evil savor, and stink in Gods nostrils; so the spiritual incense
will remove it, and that incense is prayer, Psalm the forty first: Therefore
the prayers of the Saints are called odours, Apocalypse the fifth chapter. But it
must be prayer qualified in two sorts.

First, Phinehas prayer, that is, the prayer of the Priest. So David had Gad to
pray for him; Hezekiah had Isaiah, Lift thou up thy prayer, Isaiah the thirty
eighth chapter: The Corinthians had Gad to pray for them, the first epistle to
the Corinthians the eleventh chapter. The prayers of all the just are
available, but specially of the elders, therefore send for them, James the fifth
chapter. A Sergeant, Constable, or Scrivener, by virtue of his office, may do
that which a greater man cannot do; so the prayer of a person called to that
holy function, may prevail more: The Priests are appointed to offer up prayers,
and the calves of the lips, Hosea the fourteenth chapter. So, Genesis the
twentieth chapter, Abraham is a Prophet, and shall pray for thee, Leviticus the
sixth chapter and the seventh verse: he shall pray for thee, Orabit pro eo
Sacerdos: Therefore Hezekiah says, Lift up thou thy prayers, Isaiah the thirty
eighth chapter. And Saint James says in his fifth chapter, The prayer of faith
made by the Elders shall save the sick. The prayer of the just avails much, but
especially of the elders and Priests; for to such a grace is given, as in the
first epistle to the Corinthians and the fifteenth chapter, Gratia data est
(...); and this grace is not in vain.

Secondly, But it must be oration cum statione, Phinehas stood up and prayed.
For, as in the first epistle to the Corinthians and the eleventh chapter, of a
woman uncovered, judge whether it be a comely thing to sit still in prayer. All
things in the Church must be done (...), the first epistle to the Corinthians,
the fourteenth chapter. We must please and serve God, etiam habitu corporis.
The Angels of God stood before God, Job the first chapter; The Cherubims stood
and hid their faces, Isaiah the sixth chapter: And millions of Angels stood
before the seat, Daniel the seventh chapter. Therefore we must conclude our
sitting is not pleasing to God: Sedentes orare extra Discipulum est. The other
sense is, the execution or judgment: And it has a good relation to sins,
They prayed and wept, Numbers the twenty fifth chapter; but that prevailed not,
till Phinehas executed vengeance upon the sin: but the vengeance being
performed, by Phinehas, the plague ceased, verse the eighth. So then the wrath
of God will cease, if people cease to sin; or if Phinehas, the Magistrate,
begin to punish sin in the people. For punishment is of two sorts: First,
Every man in himself, is to punish sin, as David smit his heart, in the
second book of Samuel, the twenty fifth chapter and the twenty fourth verse; and
the first epistle to the Corinthians the eleventh chapter, judge your selves.
But if not Moses, the Magistrate must take vengeance of sin; for if he will
not, God himself will set his face against that Magistrate, Leviticus the
twentieth chapter. When the people look not at him that strikes them, but to
natural causes, then shall the hand of God be stretched out still, Isaiah the
ninth chapter and the thirteenth verse. The wrath of God for our sins being
the cause of this plague, we must appease him with prayer and repentance. If we
fail to do this, the devotion of the Priest, and the zeal of the Magistrate,
must look to it, else the plague cannot but still increase.

Amen. Amen.
Addenda.
Vae vobis Legis interpretibus, quoniam sustulistis Clavem cognitionis: ipsi
non introstis, and eos qui introibant prohibuistis. Luke 11. 52.

October. 13. 1590.
Place this in the beginning of the book next before the Sermon upon Genesis 1. 1.
For this was the Bishops first. Lecture in Saint Paul's, preached as an
Introduction to his following discourse upon the four first chapters of Genesis.
KNOWLEDGE of (...) things is compared by our Savior Christ to a Key (...) the
eleventh chapter of Luke and the (...) second (...), as being a thing necessary
both to (...) in this life the way we should walk in, (...) the second chapter,
the tenth and (...); as also for the entrance into the (...) of (...) the life
to come. For which cause holy men, in (...) have (...) to this kind of
knowledge, Jeremiah the (...) chapter (...) the thirty fourth verse; and these
have made it (...) delight, (...) the fifty eighth chapter and the thirteenth
verse; and prefer it before their daily food, Job the twenty third chapter; and
esteem it above all treasures, Proverbs the second chapter and the fourth
verse. But such as are ignorant, and know not these thing (...) bids to go
out and dwell among beasts, Cant, the first chapter and the seventh verse, as
if they were not worthy the company of men: and therefore Christ weepeth for
them, Luke the (...) chapter, as if their case were most (...), which knew not
that they ought. Wherefore God has given (...) means and ways, by which we
may come to knowledge. The one is the (...) of the World, by the view of his
Creatures (...) hearing of his word, by the Ministry of Men. These two, are the
two great leaves of this gate and way to Heaven, which that (...) of knowledge
must unlock and set wide open, that so we may (...) enter therein. Which two
means are spoken of, and (...) unto us, in Psalm the nineteenth, the first and
the (...). And St. Paul begins his epistle to the Romans with the (...)
(...) the first chapter, the sixteenth and twentieth verses, and it was his
order in preaching, and teaching men the knowledge of God, (...) at (...), Acts
the seventeenth chapter and the twenty third verse. These are, as it were, the
two great books of God, which he would have known and read of all men: For as
his written word is called a scroll, Ezekiel the third chapter and the second
verse, so is the frame of the world (...), a book or scroll, Isaiah the thirty
fourth chapter and the fourth verse. God spoke once and twice says David,
Psalm the sixty second and the eleventh verse. Once he (...) Job by the view of
his Creatures, Job the thirty eighth chapter; and again he spoke to Moses on
Mount Sinai, showing his will, Exodus 20. 1.

These then being the two effectual means to attain to knowledge, there is no
place in the Scripture, nor any book therein, that does more lively express
them both than this book of Genesis, which we have in hand: For it sets out
to us the word of God, by which all things were made, fiet; and the Word by
which all things are increased, (...) and multiplicamini; and the word by which
all men were corrupted, non moriemini, and the word whereby all are restored,
conteret caput Serpentis, which is the word of Promise and of Faith.

We are willed to enquire for the old and good (...) (...) sixth chapter and
sixteenth verse: Christ warranteth that (...) shows us both, Matthew the
sixteenth chapter, the seventh and eighth verses. It is the ancientest in time;
for it begins with the very beginning: It is first in order and in place, in
the (...) of Gods book; and therefore I have thought it good to enquire of this
way. Some do give this reason, why John, of all other, is called the Divine,
because he, of all others, began with the beginning of all, John the first
chapter. This order we see he took of Moses, who first tells of things past,
from the Creation till his death, and foretells of things which were to come
to pass in the latter end, and which the new Testament does say is fulfilled.

The knowledge of both these things, past, and to come, God promised to show to
his Church, and after it must we seek, Isaiah the forty first chapter and the
twenty second verse: and these secrets are no where so fully showed as by Moses
in this book.

If then we intend to get knowledge, and with that key to open Heaven doors,
and to see the glorious Majesty of God, let us take this book in hand, which
has in it both leaves at large, both the knowledge of the Creation of all Gods
works, and the knowledge of the wisdom and the true word of God.

But some may demand, What will become of Christ and of his Gospel, all this
while that we are meditating of Moses and Gods works? I answer, That if Moses
did not testify and teach us of Christ, we would account the time lost which
we spend in reading him, Philippians the third chapter and the eighth verse;
and we would leave Moses learning, that we might only find Christ. But St.
Paul does assure us, Acts the third chapter and the eighteenth verse, that all
the Prophets, from the beginning of the world, did speak of him; and among all
the Prophets it is said, We have found him of whom Moses spoke, John the first
chapter and the forty fifth verse, even Jesus the son of Joseph: And more
plainly Christ says, John the fifth chapter and the forty sixth verse, Moses
does write and testify of me. And this we shall see plainly in all his books
to be true, both in evident and direct Prophesies, and also in dark and
mystical types and figures.

The second question is touching Moses himself, How he being but a man, could
come to the knowledge of such secret things, which were hidden from other
natural men besides, being supernatural, and beyond men's reach? I answer, As we
cannot have knowledge of a strange Country where we never were, but by report or
by Letter, or relation sent from some which dwell therein; so we can have no
notice or certain knowledge of God and his kingdom, unless God first by his
letter written make relation thereof to us: Has quidem literas dedit Deus,
Moses attulit, God was the writer, Moses the Messenger of these holy Writts;
many things, no doubt, were taught by instruction, and received by tradition
from the Patriarchs before, as we see in the fifth chapter of Genesis and the
twenty ninth verse; for so Lamech knew from his fathers, that the Earth was
accursed by God, as it is in the eighteenth chapter of Genesis and the twenty
seventh verse: Abraham knew from his Ancestors, that he was made of dust and
ashes, Adam leaving it to his posterity; as Abraham did teach his family, that
God revealed to him, Genesis the eighteenth chapter and the ninteenth verse:
But though many things came to knowledge by this means, yet de eo tempore
scribere de quo non erat, is a strange matter, some may say; but we answer,
that this was done either knowing it by that pattern which he saw in the
Mount, or else by the voice and spirit of God speaking and talking with him to
teach him the so things, that is, he must needs come by it by the Eye, that
is, by vision, or else by the Ear, that is, by Revelation: For as all
Scriptures came by inspiration, the first of Peter and the first chapter, so
(...) this book of Moses, who writ it not of his own private motion, but by the
heavenly direction of the spirit of God: And therefore Moses might say as
Daniel did. Daniel the second chapter and the twenty eighth verse, It is not I
that can reveal secrets, but there is a God of Heaven which declares them,
Moses was but the pen of that God did speak. If any then shall move that
question, Matthew the twenty first chapter and the twenty fifth verse, The
Doctrine of Moses, whether it is from Heaven or of men? We answer, That it is
of God and from Heaven (...) hereby appear, because he was so publicly and
manifestly (...) with God, and had often and long company and conference with
him, all Israel seeing him to go up to the Lord. If any object that Heathens
have pretended as much of their Laws and (...), they have delivered. Moses is
able to (...) him self from (...), because this thing was not done in a (...),
but in the view and before the face of all Israel; and that not in a Cave or
Den, as they, but in the top of Mount (...), which made that (...) of all
Israel, (...) his time, ever made any doubt or question (...), but still (...)
him the servant of God, (...) he called them (...) and rebellious men,
Deuteronomie the ninth chapter and the ninth verse. And as none durst call his
truth in question; so they which resisted, as Korah and Dathan did, were
grievously punished by the hand of God. And so were Appian and Julian plagued
for their blasphemy, which scoff and deride these holy Books. For so says
Moses to his accusers, Numbers the sixteenth chapter, the twenty eigth and
twenty ninth verses, Hereby ye shall know that the Lord has sent me to speak
these words, if these dye not the death of all men, etc. Another reason to
prove that his writings came from Heaven, is his Rod, and the miracles which
God caused him to do, to confirm these things which he spoke and wrote; which
miracles, even the Heathen Chronicles do confess to this day. Last of all,
Men's writings and books savor of passions and imperfections incident to men.
Moses is not, of self-love, partial to himself, nor vainglorious, seeking any
praise; For, in his writing, he spares not his own Father: Exodus the thirty
second chapter and the twenty seventh verse, he spares not Idolatry in his
brother, nor his sister Cozbies fault, no nor his own fault of unbelief; for
which he confesses, that he could not enter into the promised Land,
Deuteronomie the thirty second chapter. Seeing then all that is of the flesh
and earth is flesh, and savoureth earthly things; this shows that Moses
writing came from Gods spirit. For Moses in all the wars he waged, and in all
the Laws he wrote, he never ascribes any thing but to the glory of God, which
gave them by his means, exhorting to nothing but this, That by holy obedience
we should seek his praise.

The conclusion therefore must be this, That seeing it is the infallible word
of God sent from Heaven, and not invented by men, Why do we not then, with all
reverence hear him, and with all diligence believe him, as a Prophet sent from
God? especially seeing it is threatened concerning him by name, That whosoever
does not hear him, but despise him, He shall be cut off from the people of God.

Sic fuit vespera and fuit mane diei primi. Genesis 1. 5.

November. 5. 1590.
Place this in page 36. at the end of the Sermon upon Genesis 1. 5.
THis is the conclusion of the first days work. After God, in the beginning,
had made the World of nothing, the which was a gross mass, after he gave it a
capacity; and because, as the Philosophers say, Frustra est potentia, quae non
reducitur in actum, he gave it an actual being, which being was good. It is
better for a man not to be born, than to be wicked, Matthew the twenty sixth
chapter and the twenty fourth verse. And then it had a perfection of goodness
from order; having in the natures and the names a distinction, the one for
knowledge, the other for practice, he closes up the first day with this, So
the evening and the morning were the first day; which is the whole sum and
effect of the first day, and of all where of has been spoken heretofore. This
is the providence of God for man, who visits the earth and waters it, who
prepares (...) and things needful for man, Psalm the sixty fifth and the ninth
verse: He turned the wheel of the great clock, that so there might be Evening
and Morning. As the light is the abstract of life everlasting, for the fire
wrapped about the cloud, and brightness wrapped about the fire, Ezekiel the
first chapter and the fourth verse; so is time the abstract of eternity. In
that day began motion, time, and number and order: If there had been no motion,
if the Heaven had stood still, it would have been continual day and no evening.
The day is the time of the day, motion is in time, the day is time, the first
day is the numbering of time. This first day was the true New-years-day, and
the light was the great New-years-gift of the world, the like whereof no Prince
no Potentate shall for ever give. In the fourth day there was a publishing of
this light, by the two great lights. Herein is a perpetual alternation, which
may be perceived by a division, then by the parts, lastly by the whole. First,
it (...) a division; before, the time of light is called the day, and here day
and night, evening and morning are but one day. Dies naturalli and artificalis.
Whereupon some distinguish the natural and civil day.

The day in the first acceptance, is called dies (...), for those that labor
so long as it is light, so long is their day. Which day is delivered in the
fourth chapter of Nehemiah and the twenty first verse, We labored in the work,
and half of them held the (...), from the appearing of the morning, till the
(...) came forth, that is, till it was night.

The other is called dies astronomicus by the Heathen, and dies sanctus by the
Scripture, including the time of light and darkness. The Law given to the Jews
was, That the ninth day of the month, at Even, from Even to Even, they should
celebrate their Sabbath, or rest, Leviticus the twenty third chapter and the
thirty second verse.

Secondly, The partition, by Evening and Morning, whereinto this day is parted.
Light and Darkness, Evening and Morning are both coupled, and yet separated;
the end of the night parts the beginning of the day, and the end of the day
parts the beginning of the night: And these two, Evening and Morning, are the
two excellent Mark-stones of Time. He flasheth not the (...) light (...) after
darkness, but the light appears by degrees: the ascending of light is the
morning, the descending is the evening; from Sun to Sun is counted a day;
but in the Hebrew names the natures are expressed. The Evening in Hebrew (...)
a binding up, a mixture of all colors; the night rolls all up, and then all
colors seem as one black color. (...) in Hebrew is the morning, and does
signify to discern colors, and to unbinde the knot knit by darkness. God
has caused the morning to know his place, and it is turned as clay to fashion,
Job the thirty eighth chapter and the fourteenth verse. As the evening leads us
to confusion, so does the morning to discerning.

The order of Evening and Morning.
Now as touching their order, The Evening is first, then the Morning. Diverse
commentations of time.
This computation is according to the Hebrews, who reckoned from Even to Even;
so did the Athenians, or the Grecians: the (...) and Assyrians reckoned from
Sun rising to the Sun set; the Romans and Egyptians from midnight; the
Astronomians and people called (...), from noon or midday. To each Nation
their own computation may be allowed. Too curious therefore are they, which
will not call the days of the weeks, nor call the names of the months
according as the custom of the Country has received, because Heathen men have
given those names. Zenas gave one day to Jupiter, Hermes to Mercury, Phoebus to
Phebe; another to AEsculapius, (...) Venus, to Saturnus, which names we do
use. Apish is their imitation, who will follow the naming of days according to
their own fantasies: yet is there no necessity we should reckon as the Hebrews
or Chaldeans, but the order of months, of hours, of days, may be according to
the custom of the Country.

Some say he begins from the Evening, to insinuate our beginning from
nothing, from darkness and confusion: and it shows the proceeding of the
Creation, from nothing to darkness, so to light, and so the perfection of the
same; from the night to the morning it is light, it goes from the morning to
broad day. God ordained the night to guard the day: He made the night for the
day, not the day for the night, says Basil: and Job calls the night (...)
mundi. The matter of weight is the day, the evening is but a parenthesis. The
Heathen say, that motion is from the evening. Touching the Stars, the evening
is the beginning of the day and the end of the night. Quest. Whether the day or
night first.
It is a question, doubted by many, Whether the day or night were first? Paul,
in the thirteenth chapter to the Romans and the twelfth verse, says, The night
is past, the day is at hand; so that nox rather processit than (...) lucem. The
Poets have their beginning, ab Erebo, from the night. But St. Austins opinion
is, That the day was first, counting it to the morning of the next day,
alleging the thirty eighth chapter of Isaiah and the twelfth verse, From day
to night thou will make an end of me. All Gods things end in light, then he
begins in the morning in the light. The end of the morning is the distinction
from the beginning of the evening.

Morning and Evening jointly.
Now of the whole. These two make one day, he says not one night, yet is there
as much time, sometime more, in the night than in the day, but noctes non
veniunt in numerum; therefore we say a day has twenty four hours, a week has
seven days, a month thirty days; a week likewise has seven nights, a month
thirty nights, but evening and morning are all one day. And the first day as
the first day of the week, of months, of time; this was a day by it self, as
the other six were days by themselves. God says at the institution of the
(...), Exodus the twelfth chapter and the second verse, This month shall be
unto you the beginning of months, it shall be to you the first month of the
year. But by Basil this (...) had a meaning for our natural use, that we
should esteem twenty four hours one day, though some count the day no longer
than the light is seen. The first day is (...) example to the days after; in
this first day we behold all the other (...); and (...) them all things
created. In this first day of years (...) Creation, the (...), the Birth, (...)
B was the (...) letter, the Redemption; the (...), the (...), the (...) of
(...), was upon the first day of the week, year, (...).

The spiritual use.
The spiritual (...), (...), (...) of this place, says, We are not in (...),
(...) may be applied to (...) morning and evening (...), A (...) morning, and
(...) at even, the one a (...), the (...), Numbers the twenty eighth chapter,
the fourth and (...). David (...) the beginning of the hundred forty first
(...), (...) God, (...) my prayer be (...) in thy sight (...), and the listing
up of (...) evening sacrifice. Let (...) a Father, open the morning (...) the
(...) of prayer, and (...) the evening with the bolt (...) prayer. In these two
there is (...) and alternation: (...) the day (...); (...) now long, how (...)
in them we see joy (...) in the night (...) is alternation of (...), then
(...). Now (...) Babylon (...) and (...), and did (...) in the day (...); (...)
for the (...), (...) in (...) and the first verse. (...) it, Sit in the (...),
sit on the ground, set still, and get thee into darkness; evil shall come
(...) the, and thou shall not know the morning there os. (...) there is a use
(...) order in things (...); so is there in things spiritual: the evening and
the morning. The very Heathen do say, that to a man (...) disposed, (...) a
good mind after. Matthew, in his fourth chapter and the sixteenth verse,
says, The people which (...) in darkness, saw great light; and to them which
(...) in the region (...) of death, light is risen up. knowledge is a light,
and Ignorance (...). (...) (...), saying, Estprimo vespertina (...), which
grows from light to a lighter knowledge. If a man (...) not according to Gods
word, it is because there (...) no (...) in him, (...) the eighth chapter and
the twentieth (...) for it is the (...) of God that is (...), that lightneth
our very (...).

This has also an use for our affections; for temptation of any sin is ever
before the issue: First we are (...), then we yield to the temptation, but
after the yielding, the godly have repentance; but to yield to the temptation,
and (...) to (...) the (...), is the continual evening of the wicked. The godly
has here in this world, in this life, his evening, sorrow, (...), death; but
his joy comes in the morning, that is, (...) life to (...). His vespere is
luctus, his mane, gaudium: His weeping may abide at the evening, but joy
comes in the morning, Psalm the (...) and the (...) verse. A man has secret
sins, which be hid, and presumptuous, which be apparent, Psalm the nineteenth
and the (...) verse; God (...) them both. The wicked have their morning in this
life, they live in posperity, and have what they can desire; but in the long
evening, in the world to come, they shall find endless adversity.
Notwithstanding the godly, in this life, be tossed as a ship, and though they
suffer shipwreck of their life, yet this is their hope, that post tenebras
spero lucem. Though Jacob wrestled in the evening, yet had he a blessing in the
morning, Genesis the thirty second chapter, and twenty fourth verse. The Godly
and the wicked do both dye, and both are buried in the grave; the righteous
shall have domination over them in the morning, but God shall save the soul of
the righteous from the grave, Psalm the forty ninth and the fifteenth verse.
God says, that in the day of the desolation of Jerusalem, there shall be no
clear light, but dark: That day is known to the Lord, which shall be neither
day nor night, but about the evening time it shall be light. Tertullian in his
book de resurrectione, makes a resemblance of the evening and the morning, to
the grave and the resurrection. We are in the grave in silence and
solitariness, but the morning of our resurrection appears cum gaudio, cultu,
dote and gloria: sepulti vespere mane revivescite. What though here we suffer
some crosses? hereafter we shall have endless joy: better is it to have our
evening here and our morning hereafter, than contrariwise: Though the Gluttons
morning were his delights, his dainty ^ir, his costly apparel, when it was
Lazarus evening, who was hungry naked, and diseased; but afterward the rich man
was tormented, and Lazarus for ever comforted, Luke the sixteenth chapter. So
there is a resemblance of the resurrection in Gods works, before the same was
expressed in his words. Now is the light mixed with darkness, and darkness
with light: the darkness of the night has the light of the stars, and
sometime the shining of the Moon; the light of the day is often overcast with
the mist, or with clouds, but the morning of the resurrection shall be without
end. The evening of condemnation to the wicked, shall never have morning; and
the morning of glorification to the blessed shall never have evening. Until
that day of resurrection there shall be a mixture, but then, and not before,
there shall be light without darkness to the blessed, and endless darkness,
without light, to the damned. And thus much shall suffice concerning the first
day, and the work of the first day.

Sic fuit vespera, and fuit mane diei secundi. Genesis 1. 8.

November. 12. 1590.
Place this in page 56. at the end of the Sermon upon Genesis 1. 8.
IT is the second day in relation to the first day, in the matter an Incubation
and hatching: there were five things the first day: the incubation and hatching
were in the first day: In this second day, as well as in the first, there is a
being: and order of distinction of nature, and a giving of a name. Bonum
lacks here, and why.
Here lacks bonum, the goodness: And he saw it was good, is not put down in
the second day. Some, of the Hebrew, say and give this reason why bonum lacks
here, the Angels fell; the creating of hell was in the second day; Tophet is
prepared of old, as it is in the thirtith chapter of Esa^ and the twenty
seventh verse; they say Angels were created yesterday, as it were, the next
day before; after, David says, in the hundred forty eighth Psalm and the
second verse, Praise ye him in the high places, he says first Praise him all
his Angels. In six days the Lord made the Heaven and the Earth, and all that
in them are; in making Heaven he made all things, as Angels in the Heaven,
Exodus the twentieth chapter. As Hell has been prepared of old, so the Devil
has been a murderer from the beginning, John the eighth chapter and the
forty fourth verse. It has been questioned, whether the fall of Angels was
the first or second day. Secondly, They say there is no mention made of
goodness, because division was in the second day, and therefore no goodness:
but notwithstanding the division, there is a union. In the days of Peleg the
earth was divided, the tenth chapter and the twenty fifth verse: At the building
of Babel was the division of tongues, which was confusion, the eleventh chapter
and the ninth verse. This division of the second day, is of things of diverse
natures, therefore good. Likewise they say, there is no mention of good,
because that was made that day, namely, the divided waters, the upper and
nether waters were the deluge and destruction of the world afterward: But by
them he punished man's wickedness, and the worlds sinfulness; but to give to
give to each his reward and desert, to the godly glory, to the wicked
punishment, this his Justice is full of Goodness. Number (...) is Inf^stis, say
the Papists, yet Matrimonium eft binorum. So litarinesse is not good, which God
perceiving, he made to man an helper, the twenty eighth verse of the next
chapter. We say in a Proverb, Sec^ omnia sunt prospera, yet it was said dies
secund^ was inf^stus: But it was Jeroms blemish, who is not to be excused, for
who is blameless; for he that first devised that opinion, did first strangle
it. Division signifies as well conformity as confusion, and where reward is
for desert, that is good: All that God made was very good, the thirty first
verse of this chapter. The action of goodness is suspended, the number is
suspended, till both be perfected, which is after in the third day, in the
which day you shall find goodness twice; when the second day as the Se^ was
perfected, the day was p^ed, but the work was ended. This I do take in the
course of (...) reason.

Et fuit ita. Nam produxit terra herbulas, herbas sementantes semen in species
suas, and arbores edentes fructum in quibus semen suum est in species suas: and
vidit Deus id esse bonum. Sic fuit vespera, and fuit mane diei tertii. Genesis 1.
11.12.13.

Place this in page 72 after the Sermon upon Genesis 1. 11
WE have heard of Gods Decree commanding, and the return executing it, and his
censure approving that is made, which, in every days work, is set down in
these three phrases, fiat, erat sic, and bonum erat. Of this third days work,
we have handled before, we have heard the first part, namely, Gods word
commanding the Earth to bud forth herbs, and seeds, and trees, etc. now it
remains to speak of the other two: And first of the return and execution, And
it was so. For the Earth, according to every (...) and title of Gods word,
fulfilled Gods will and brought forth all sorts of herbs, and trees, and buds,
and fruits, and seeds, leaving nothing undone which was commanded.

Touching which (besides the obedience of this Element, in executing Gods
Decree, we note a special Certificate under Gods hand as it were, for the
discharge of this Creature, in the dispatch of his work, and that without
delay, with all haste and speed: Which reproves not only our disobedience to
God, but also our dullness and slownesse in doing any thing which God commands.
For with us it is one thing to do a thing, and another to do it willingly and
quickly, with expedition and speed: For when God does command any thing, we put
it off with this delay, erit sic, it shall be so hereafter, when we can find
leisure and fit time. It can seldom be said in the present tense, erat sic, it
was performed without delay: For we are as Salomons debtors, which bid God stay
till tomorrow or the next day, Proverbs the third chapter, before he can find
leisure to pay this debt and duty of obedience.

Secondly, In that the return, in the end of the eleventh verse, was erat sic,
it was so, two things are to be noted out of the nature of the word: First, a
congruity of the performance answerable to the commandment in every point; for
here is specified just so much done as was required, nothing too much or too
little, to teach us that our obedience must be such: We must not deficere in
necessariis, nec abundare in superfluis. The other point is for continuance or
perpetuity; for the word signifies, that it was so surely and firmly done, as
if it had a sure basis or foundation for continuance, that it might never fail:
we see it holds and endures ad hunc usque diem, our eyes and experience
seeing that it is (...).

The last thing we gather by opposition, That Gods word was the cause, and is,
that herbs and trees do bear fruits and trees: So, e contra, it is the same
word of God, saying, Let not the Earth nor the trees bear, which is the cause
of (...) and want. If for our sin they fail any year ab ejus (...) interdicto
(...). If therefore we disobey Gods. (...) be our punishment, That his word
shall (...) the Earth to (...) increase, and to deny us his fruits.

The second part is the censure and approbation of God, saying; that it was
good. I said before, there are (...) sorts of good; (...) honestum, secondly
utile, thirdly (...): each of which we shall see in the earth and the fruits
thereof. For honesty and moral good, we see it is grateful to the owner or
(...) which labors therein, faithfully and gratefully repaying and requiting
his (...) and labor thereon. For profit, it veeldeth (...) and (...) both for
man and beast; and so necessarily good is it in this (...), that without it the
King cannot live, Ecclesiastes the fifth chapter and the eighth verse. For
pleasure and delight, either of the eye to behold it, or of the taste to
relieve it, it is most delicious and delightful, Milk, Wine, and Oil, Wheat,
and all other grain, which are both for variety and necessity, we receive by
Gods (...) from the fruit and increase of the earth and trees: And therefore is
every way good.

Postea dixit Deus, Abunde progignunto aquae reptilia animantia; and volucres
volanto supra terram, superficiem versus expansi Coelorum. Gen 1. 20.

Place this in the beginning of page 84.
THIS verse, and the three following, (...) contain in them the first days
work, by which, both the waters are stored with (...), and the air and
firmament was replenished with Fowl: For yet hitherto they were like to wide
and great storehouses, which were empty and void. In which days work are four
branches; (...), the Edict or Precept: Secondly, the Execution or performance
of (...) Thirdly, the allowance and commendation of it, in the end of the
twenty first verse: Lastly, another special Precept for the preserving of these
things so made, in 22. verse.

Touching the Commandment we may note, That to say or to command in word may
seem to be but a weak thing; for words we hold to be but wind; yet such words
as God speaks, do receive such and so great power and authority from the
Speaker or Commander, that of necessity that which is said must needs be done.

If a King do command, the power of his authority being joined with the
weakness of his word, does cause it to be very powerful and effectual. If a
Princes authority can make his word so great, how much more can Gods
omnipotency give strength to his word, and cause that which he says, to be
most certainly done? This the reason, that by the virtue and force only of his
word, what (...) faith is done and comes to pass.

The second thing to be noted, is to whom God spoke, namely, to the Waters: For
as Moses was willed to speak to the stony rock, Numbers the twentieth chapter
and the eighth verse; so does God here speak to the waters; neither is it a
fond thing thus for God to speak to deas and senseless creatures; for though
they have no cares and cannot hear, yet they can understand when God does call
and speak to them, and have power to do his will when he commands. If then
the waters and rocks can hear, and understand, and do what God does say and
bid them; how much more should we, which have ears, and understanding hearts,
and active hands, take heed we do the like?

Now touching the Tenor of Gods precept, we see it concerns the producing and
bringing forth of living things in abundance and great multitude. And though
God says, Let the waters bring forth fowls, it argues not (as Symplicius the
Atheist absurdly gathers) that here the water is said to be the matter of
which the (...) were made; for in the second chapter of Genesis, and the
ninteenth verse, this is explained, that they were made of the earth, though
they were brought forth of the waters.

Touching the creatures moving in the waters, the word here used does, in a
general term, signify such things as are quick, and live, and move,
comprehending therein all the particular creatures besides fish or foul, which
either creep or crawle or move in either of these elements, as Froggs, Snakes,
Flies, etc.

Man by practice can attain to the Fishes motion, that is, to swim and move
upon, and in the waters; but he cannot by any devise attain to fly, and move
as Birds, or mount in the air. It is a wonder to hear that iron could swim,
in the second of Kings the sixth chapter and the sixth verse; but it is by the
same power of God, by which a feather can fly aloft.

By the firmament or Air is meant the nether and grosser part of the air,
which region is full of foggy fumes and vapors which come from the earth; and
so high and far the sowls can abide and endure to fly: But the farther and
higher part and region of the air, which is more pure and clear, are called
penetralia (...), which is so free from gross vapors and earthly mists, that
no earthly thing can breath or abide therein: As therefore Water is a (...)
element for Fishes, which breath not; so this lower region of the air is for
all Fowls.

But let us come to that which is common both to fish and fowls, and makes
both of them live and move, the one by swimming, the other by flying, and that
is the soul of life. Concerning which generally, It signifies a breath or
(...) it of life: For seeing we can understand and conceive best things
sensible, therefore spiritual things for our capacity, are termed by things
sensible. The breath therefore, being of (...) things the most pure and (...)
is called by (...) these things are in their (...) distinct, breath, life, and
soul; (...) life is the (...) and (...) of a soul; so breath is the effect and
(...) of life. Neither is it (...), that here is added to the soul life,
because it (...) needful instruction and distinction between the soul of man
hereafter (...) be handled, which is a soul of more than (...) life, of a
double life, and therefore (...); whereas these (...) have a soul of a single
life; and therefore are mortal.

Deinde dixit Deus, Producat terra animantia in species ipsorum, Pecudes and
Reptilia, bestiasque terrenas in species suas: et fuit ita. Genesis 1. 24.

Place this Sermon and the next betwixt page 92. and 93.
THIS verse, and all the rest to the end of the chapter, do contain the
furnishing and (...) of the earth with living Creatures; and so (...) to pass
the finishing and (...) of the whole work of Creation. For this sixth (...) work
(...) the bringing forth of Beasts and Cattle of all (...) and the bringing in
of Mankind into the world, to be Lord and (...) of them and all the rest.

In which we observe the three usual parts: Gods Decree commanding, the
Execution performing it, and Gods (...) of it being done.

For the Decree we may note, as before, That God is the Commander, the Earth is
that which is commanded, and the effect of the commandment is that it should
bring forth Cattle and (...) things. Having showed before, how God speaks and
(...) his will to dumb, deaf, and senseless Creatures, as here he does to the
Earth, we will come to the tenor and meaning of the Decree and Commandment to
it. For that phrase here used of bringing forth, is taken from the manner of
women great with (...), which when their time is come to bring forth their
young: therefore the Fathers do call this Parerperam terre, as it were by
resemblance, the children of the earth, or her travail; not that (...) before
made and hid in the bowels and (...) of the (...) For as the waters were not in
the rock before, Numbers (...) chapter and the eighth verse, but even at that
(...) God commanded, it gushed out waters only by the power (...) God: (...)
the virtue of Gods word and the power of the Commander, caused the Earth to
bring forth all these things, (...) of it (...) it (...) power to do it.

Now the several kinds of Creatures, which here the Earth is willed to bring
forth, are reduced to three heads, Beasts, Cattle, and creeping things. Cattle
are called Jumenta, a (...); because they are made to be our servants, to help
us in our labors and affairs. And they are such as do need us as much as we
need them; for Sheep, Oxen, Horses, etc. must first be served and (...) and
tendded by us before they can attend to serve our turns.

The second sort are Worms or creeping things, called Reptilia, because they
crawl upon the ground; and therefore they are said natare super terram, as it
were to swim or glide upon the ground; and so they are distinguished by their
motion. And these are of two sorts, either they have no feet or legs at all,
crawling on their belly, or else very short feet, creeping low by ground.

The third kind are wild beasts, which do live alone in terra inculta (as
the word signifies) in the waste wilderness, and in the unprofitable and
barren Land, which is desert and (...) of men. In which they live, for the most
part, by blood, preying on the spoil one of another; and therefore to some of
them is given strength, to some swiftness, to some (...) and craft, by which
they know how to get their prey. And lest these savage, wild, and cruel
beasts, should annoy, hurt, or destroy Mankind, we see the Lord has provided
for us diverse ways, allotting to them only the barren Wilderness; giving to
us the profitable ground: appointing the night for them to go abroad, whereas
the day is specially granted to us, Psalm the hundred and fourth and the twenty
second verse: Besides God has not made them so fruitful; they do not
multiply as other profitable and meek Cattle do, which will not hurt us. And
thus much for the special kind of things which the Earth brings forth.

Now for the performance of Gods Precept, it is generally set down in the end
of the twenty fourth verse, as in other places, that it was so, even as God had
commanded; which general, is more particularly set down in the twenty fifth
verse ensuing.

Fecit enim Deus bestias terrenas in species suas, and pecudes in species suas,
omniaque reptilia terrae in species suas: and vidit Deus id esse bonum. Genesis 1.
25.

THE first part of this verse is the performance of his word and Decree in
every point; the end of it is the approbation thereof. For the execution of all
that God said, because as he said, so it came to pass, and was truly and fully
performed and done, we note how true and certain and undoubted Gods word is:
Shall he speak the word, and shall it not come to pass? Surely Heaven and
Earth may pass away, but not one jot or title of his word shall fail: Which,
as we see in the word of Creation, so shall we find it in the Gospel, the word
of Salvation. And here we may observe; that God will be made known, not only to
be the maker of the Lion and the Elephant, those great and goodly beasts, but
also of the poor creeping Creature, and the Ant; Qui fecit Angelos, fecit and
vermiculos, says Augustine: Neither is it any disgrace or dishonor to God,
because there is no less power and wisdom showed and seen in these, than is
in the greatest and hugest beasts that be; (...), for the most part, the
excellency of Gods handy work is more admirably (...) in the least and
smallest living things that are: As strange things are known of the poor Shrimp
as of the Whale: More virtue is to be found in the silly Be, than in the
Eagle? So as great art may be seen in the Ant as in the Elephant: Which may be
known, if we observe the great providence and forecast of the little Ant, his
great industry and diligence, in laboring without (...) while the Summer does
last, and the great strength this little Creature has, which is able to carry
a corn far greater than himself. Wherefore these small creeping Creatures
which God has made are not to be passed over without regard, but to be
considered to his glory and praise which made them.

The last part of this verse, is the liking and (...) of this work; for this
censure is given of this, as of the rest, that it was right good, and therefore
very well done.

Which must teach us this lesson, That if we will have the like praise and
commendation of all works, they must be (...) so answerable to Gods will and
word in every point, so diligently and speedily and perfectly done as these
things were.

But here God does not purpose so much to commend the manner of doing his will;
as the works themselves, and the things that were done, that is, the goodness
of these natures which are made and brought forth: And if we enquire of the
goodness of these things particularly, the Wiseman will tell us, (...) the
thirty ninth chapter and the thirty fourth verse, Every thing in his time,
place, and kind, is profitable and good.

For touching the Cattle, which are servants and helpers to us, Who knows not
how good and beneficial the Ox, the Cow, the Sheep, and such things are, both
for work, and food, and cloth? But you may ask, Wherefore are wild beasts,
which (...) devour one another, and oftentimes kill men? For answer whereto, we
must consider, That God made these before sin was in the world; and therefore
in that estate and time of (...) God did commend them, we must not doubt but
(...) were good, without any evil or hurt at all: Quamdiu (...) in Deum, nihil
peccabat in eum; while we were good servants to God, they were good servants to
us. It is our (...) and sin therefore, which causes them to be evil and
hurtful to us. And as in our first holy estate they were good; so if we be
converted to God, (...) his Image again, they will be good and do us (...),
Job the fifth chapter, the twenty second and twenty third verses, for then the
beasts of the forest shall be in league with thee, as they were with Daniel in
the Lions den, Daniel the sixth chapter and the sixteenth verse.

Super ventrem tuum ito, and pulverum comedito omnibus diebus vitae tuae. Genesis
3. 14.

Jun. 25. 1598.
Place this and the two following Sermons betwixt page (...)
THESE words with those that went before, contain that Sentence that was given
by God upon the Serpent, whom the Devil, the invisible Serpent, used as an
instrument to deceive Adam and Eve; and, as we have heard, it has three
branches.

That which we are to consider in this Sentence, is first, That he is condemned
to be under the curse of God: Secondly, To creep upon his belly: Thirdly, To
eat the dust all the days of his life. Which three punishments are (...) to
that three fold fault which the Serpent committed, and whereunto he persuaded
our Parents, that was the sin first of Malice; Secondly, of Pride; Thirdly,
of intemperate desire, to eat of that which was forbidden. The Curse of God
has relation to the Serpents malice; the creeping upon his belly, was
inflicted as a punishment for his pride, and the feeding upon the dust, has a
correspondencie with his inordinate desire. These three sins are necessarily
to be considered, that considering how God has plagued them in the Devil, we
should beware that we fall not into the like sins.

Touching the Curse of God, As it is the first, so the greatest part of this
Sentence; And is a punishment most fearful; for all men do abhor to be
cursed, and to incur the displeasure of a man, much more of God, whose word
is his deed; so that he no sooner speaks, but it is done. Jacob was loath to do
any thing to deceive his Father, because so, says he, I shall bring a curse
upon me, and not a blessing, Genesis the twenty seventh chapter. Indeed, as the
Wiseman speaks, the curse that is causeless and proceeds from foolish people
shall not light upon a man, Proverbs the twenty sixth chapter and the second
verse. But if a godly man, such as Jacob and Isaac were, do curse, it shall
not fail but come to pass: Much more shall the curse of God take effect; for
it shall come into a man's bowels like water, and like oil into his bones,
Psalm the hundred and ninth, the seventeenth verse. For the meaning of this
Curse, the Holy Gohst has set down a large commentary, in (...) the twenty
eighth chapter, and in Leviticus the twenty sixth chapter; and the Prophet says
Gods curse is a flying book, twenty cubits long, and ten cubits braad,
containing the curse that gotth over the whole earth, (...) the fifth chapter
and the third verse: It is a book written within and without, with
lamentations, mournings and woes, Ezekiel the second chapter. By these places
it appears how large Gods Curse is, in respect of this life: But if with this
we join that which Christ adds concerning the life to come, that is,
everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Matthew the twenty
fifth chapter, his curse will appear to be far more large.

Secondly, There is no malediction but in regard of some evil: The evil that
procured this curse unto the Devil, was the evil of his malice which he
showed, not only in speaking evil of God, but in seeking to destroy man both
in body and soul: And his malice appears herein, because he did those things,
being not provoked thereunto, and for that he did it without any (...) to
himself.

As the Devil is malicious, so are all they that are of that evil one: Cain
had no other cause to hate his Brother, and to slay him, but because his works
were righteous and his own evil, in the first epistle of John, the third
chapter and the twelfth verse. The (...) persecuted Christ, not for any evil
that they found in him worthy of death, but only of envy, Mark the fifteenth
chapter, and the tenth verse. Thus to sin of malice, is a thing so
displeasing unto God, as, albeit he did in mercy forgive men, when they sinned
through frailty, yet he will punish their own inventions, Psalm the ninty
ninth, and the eighth verse; and therefore against such the Prophet prays, Be
not merciful to those that offend of malicious wickedness, Psalm the fifty
ninth and the fifth verse, But consume them utterly in thy wrath, that they may
perish, verse the thirteenth. Where the Lord says, Cursed art thou [and not be
thou] he shows, that the curse comes not from God, but from the Devils
malice; and so whatsoever misery betideth us, it is nothing else but the
sparkles of our own sins, Job the fifth chapter and the ninth verse; and as
the Psalmist says, They are the dreggs of Gods wrath, Psalm the seventy fifth;
for as the Prophet speaks, We our (...) batch the (...) egg, that is, sin,
and the Serpent that is bred of this egg, is the curse of God inflicted upon
us, both in this life, and the life to come: We do first by sin, as it were,
cast the seed, and the crop that we (...) is all manner of misery and calamity,
Isaiah the fifty ninth chapter: and in Justice God does reward us thus; for the
wages of sin is not only punishment with sickness, poverty, and such like,
in this world, but hereafter with eternal death and destruction both of body
and soul, Romans the sixth chapter and the twenty third verse.

In that God speaks by way of comparison, ( Cursed art thou (...) all beasts)
he does not drop a curse upon the Serpent, but, as Daniel speaks, the curse is
(...) upon him, Daniel the ninth chapter and the eleventh verse. And that this
curse was verified in the visible Serpent, appears hereby, that not only Men,
but even all beasts, do shun the Serpent, as a Creature principally accursed
of God; much more it is true in the invisible Serpent the (...), for not only
the godly, but even the wicked that are of their Father the Devil (...) stick
to curse him. The visible Serpent, being an unreasonable creature, could not be
so malicious: But the invisible Serpent, the more policy he has, the more
pernicious and hurtful he is; (...), he is so malicious, that as he himself is
fallen from his first estate, and has plunged himself in the bottom of Hell,
so he labors to bring all men into the same estate: therefore thus was his
malice rewarded.

Now to the two other branches of this Sentence, where we shall find two (...)
punishments for two sorts of sins; for pride must have a (...), and lust must
loath; and we shall see that they are both rewarded accordingly, as Solomon
says That Pride goes before dejection, Proverbs the sixteenth chapter and the
eighth verse: So the Devil, having (...) himself, must be thrown down to creep
upon the ground; for it is great equity, that he that would fly, should creep:
And, as it was meet, that glory should end in shame, Philippians the third
chapter; so is it as meet, that God should punish inordinate last with
loathsomeness. And this is the course of Gods Justice, as the Wiseman says in
Proverbs the twentieth chapter and the seventeenth verse, The bread that is
gotten by deceit is sweet, but at the last it will fill the mouth with gravel.
All the sins of the world may he reduced to these two, that is, The desire of
greater glory than God has appointed to us, And, of greater pleasure than is
lawful for us.

First, we are to inquire, How the first of these two punishments is verified
in the visible Serpent? for we know that all Creatures, saving Man, are
dejected, and creep as it were, upon their belly, and, as one says, (...)
their breast between their feet; only man, being lift up with his countenance,
is taught not to set his mind upon earth, but to meditate upon heavenly
things. But as Jonathan went of all four, when he climbed up to the rock upon
his hands and feet, the first book of Samuel, the fourteenth chapter and the
thirteenth verse; so does man sometime grovel and creep upon earth, when he is
earthly minded. But the difference that is between the Serpent and other beasts
is this, The Serpent, having no legs, lies flat upon his belly, and is
therefore called a Serpent of creeping; but other beasts, though they have
their breasts between their legs, yet they do not creep, as the Serpent does.

Another question is, How this creeping can be a punishment to the Serpent,
seeing from the beginning they were created without feet? The solution is, That
that which was natural before the fall, after the fall became a punishment.
Nakedness before the fall, was no matter of shame; for, The man and his wife
were naked, and were not ashamed, Genesis the second chapter and the twenty
fifth verse; but since the fall, it is a disgrace to be naked: So now the
creeping of Serpents is a sign of Gods (...) inflicted upon visible Serpents,
because of the sins of him that is invisible, whereas in the beginning it was
no punishment.

Another question is, How the third part of this Sentence is verified of the
visible Serpent, That he eats dust? For one Prophet says of him, To the
Serpent dust shall be his meat, Isaiah the sixty fifth chapter and the twenty
fifth verse: And another says, The Serpent lick; the dust, Michah the seventh
chapter and the seventeenth verse; and yet in the Creation Moses records,
that the Serpent has the like food that other Creatures have, of whom God
says, To every beast of the earth, fowl of the air, and to every creeping
thing upon earth, I have given every green herb for meat, Genesis the first
chapter and the tenth verse. The answer is, That whereas at the first the
Serpent had food in common with other beasts, now he is excommunicated, and is
appointed only to feed upon the dust, not upon the earth, for that has a
moisture, and so is apt to nourish; but God did not allot unto him so much, but
only to feed upon the dust, which is dry and altogether without moisture: So
that all men may evidently see, both by the motion and feeding of the Serpent,
that the Curse of God is upon him, because the Devil, that old Serpent, did use
him as a means to persuade man to sin against God.

As for the invisible Serpent, these punishments pronounced by God are verified
in him also, but not literally; for he has no (...) of body, and therefore
cannot creep: but as he is a spirit, so we must judge and discern spiritual
things spiritually, the first epistle to the Corinthians the second chapter;
for he has a spiritual breast and belly, he has a spiritual creeping and
feeding. For his moving, we are first to consider the motion as it offers it
self: First, It is the basest and vilest motion that is; to signify unto us,
that the dejection of the Devil is a more (...) dejection and overthrow than
any can be: For where at the first, he was an Angel of light, appointed to be a
Minister in Heaven, now he is cast down into the deepest Hell, and is there
occupied in all base and vile service. Now he does busy himself in nothing so
much as how to work wickedness, and to destroy the souls of men. Of this
dejection our Savior speaks, I saw Satan, as it were lightning, fall down from
Heaven, Luke the tenth chapter and the eighteenth verse: And of him, to his
shame, it is said, How art thou fallen from Heaven, that said, I will ascend
into Heaven, and exalt my throne above the stars of God, Isaiah the
fourteenth chapter and the twelfth verse: For it is a great shame for a Prince
and noble person, that has been occupied in matters of State, to be thrust
into the Kitchen, to be a drudge. So is it with the Devil, the invisible
Serpent, who, having been, before, a Minister in Heaven, does now creep upon
earth and compass it, Job the first chapter: And, as Christ says, He walks
through dry places, Luke the eleventh chapter and the twenty fourth verse, that
is, he delights to be in souls that are defiled with all manner of sin, and
if he cannot be received there, he will enter into the Swine, Matthew the
eighth chapter.

And then does he creep, when he makes men to mind earthly things, Philippians
the third chapter and the second verse: As this word shows, that the reward
of pride is and shall be baseness; so from his creeping, we are taught what is
his fraud and deceitfulness. These things that have feet and go, cannot move
without some noise, but the way of the (...) does pass man's understanding, for
that it leaves no impression, Proverbs the thirtieth chapter: In this sense
the Apostle says, Some false brethren have crept in, Galatians the second
chapter and the fourth verse; and, these creep into widows houses, the second
epistle to Timothy and the third chapter. This kind of creeping is nothing
else but a privy kind of beguiling and deceiving such as we find to have been
used by the Devil, the second epistle to the Corinthians, the twelfth chapter.
Therefore we must have a special regard of the Devil when he comes to us in
this manner, for then is he more to be feared, than when he seeks about like a
roaring Lion, whom to devour, the first epistle of Peter the fifth chapter and
the third verse. The Devil is said to creep, to signify thus much, That as
creeping things do not fly about our heads, nor keep even pase with us, so the
old Serpent is always aiming at our lowest part, as it were at the heel,
tempting us by sensuality, to the sin of uncleanness and intemperance.
Secondly, We are to consider the manner of this motion, which is expressed by
the original word, to be upon the breast and belly; whereby we have showed to us
two main (...): For when he creeps upon his breast, by the listing up of himself
he brings the temptation of the breast, that is, he would have us (...) up with
pride, and exalt our selves. When he creeps upon his belly, he tempts us to
desire the forbidden fruit and apple that was so goodly and pleasant to look
upon; and under this is comprehended both the sins of (...) and lust. In this
manner we are to observe the means whereby he persuades men to these sins. In
the breast is the heart; and when he labors to take the possession of the
heart, by corrupting our inward thoughts, then he creeps upon his breast. And
his creeping upon his (...) betokens the actual accomplishment of sin. So we
see that albeit the Devil be a spirit, yet by a spiritual analogy he creeps
upon his breast and belly no less than the visile Serpent.

Thirdly, After the casting down of Pride, we come to consider the sin of
Lust, and the punishment laid upon it, which is, To eat the dust. The
invisible Serpent does not eat only corporally, but spiritually he may be said
to eat; for in spiritual matters there is a thing answerable to eating: We
say, in regard of the delight we take in something this is meat and drink to us:
And so the Holy Ghost also speaks, I esteem of thy word above my appointed
food, Job the twenty third chapter; And Christ says, My meat is to do the
will of him that sent me, John the fourth chapter; by which is signified the
delight and contentment of the mind: So whatsoever the Serpent delights in,
that he may be said to eat and seed upon. Secondly, this word implies not only
a delight, but a devouring and a destroying; as in the Prophets it is said, The
sword and famine shall devour, the second book of Samuel, the third chapter and
the twenty sixth verse, not that it can devour, but is a means to consume and
destroy. This eating the Apple ascribes to the Devil, when he says of him,
That he goes about seeking whom he may devour, the first epistle of Peter, the
fifth chapter; and therefore he is said, to stand by, ready to devour the child
so soon as it should be brought forth, Apocalypse the twelfth chapter; that is,
there is none so soon born anew in the Church of spirit and water, but the
Devil seeks presently to kill it: And in (...) two points stands the
spiritual eating of the invisible Serpent.

For the dust which is appointed for his food, there is a spiritual thing
correspondent also to it; for where God promises unto Abraham, Thy seed shall
be as the dust, Genesis the thirteenth chapter; and, as the stars of Heaven,
Genesis the twenty second chapter; upon these places the Fathers gather, That
of Abraham should come both a dusty and earthly generation, not expressing the
faith and obedience of Abraham; and also a heavenly generation, that should
shine and give light to the world, as it were stars, with the pureness of
their life. And David says plainly, That the ungodly art as dust, Psalm the
first; for whatsoever lies along upon the earth will (...) dust: the earth it
self, being without moisture, turns to dust, so that the least wind that
comes, blows it away: So the idle person that lies along, and has no
vocation to follow, does gather dust, and is subject to be scattered with the
wind. And they that sometime had some moisture and dew from Heaven, if they lose
it, so as their soul wax dry, Numbers the eleventh chapter, the Devil will
send them a wind that shall carry them away; for his delight is to be in dry
places, Matthew the twelfth chapter; and, in places without moisture, Luke the
eleventh chapter. The wind wherewith they shall be carried away is, every
wind of doctrine, Ephesians the fourth chapter: Therefore we must beware, that
we be not clouds without water, as Jude calls the wicked, verse the twelfth;
and, that we fall not from our own steadfastness, the second epistle of Peter,
the third chapter and the first verse, which we cannot choose but do, if we
loath prayer and other spiritual exercises, whereby the dew of Heaven does
descend upon us. And as it is in Religion, so also in matter of the
Commonwealth, wherein we shall find that this dryness is a cause of much
evil; for those light and idle persons which Jerohoam took unto himself, turned
to his destruction, the second book of Chronicles and the thirteenth chapter.
Seeing the Devil delights in these dry souls and loose parts of the earth, how
is it a punishment laid upon him to feed on them: It is indeed a punishment, he
would have other meat; for so soon as (...) is borne anew by regeneration, the
Devil is ready to devout the child, Apocalypse the twelfth chapter: So he would
have devoured Christ himself, Matthew the fourth chapter: So he desired to have
sed on Job and all other godly men, which are the stars of Heaven. But he is
excluded from that food, and is to feed only upon the wicked, who being dry and
destitute of the grace of God, are fitly compared to the dust. And as the Devil
himself is accursed; so they that are allotted to him for food, are cursed
Children, the second epistle of Peter, the second chapter.

Thirdly, It is said ( all the days of thy life.) This punishment is laid upon
him, as God speaks here, ( because thou have done this:) upon him not as he is
the red Lion; but the Tempter, as he is a spirit, he is immortal and has no
end of life, but the days of his temptation shall have an end at the coming
of Christ to judgment; as he is the red Dragon condemned in Hell, he has no
end, but shall go into everlasting fire, where he shall have no end of
torment. The Dragon, the old Serpent, is loose but for a little season, but
after he shall be bound and cast into the bottomless pit, Apocalypse the
twentieth chapter the second and third verses.

Here is matter of admonition, That we avoid those sins which we see so
severely punished by God in the invisible Serpent, especially Malice, in
speaking evil of God and hurting our neighbors; Then to beware of Pride, which
God does punish with baseness: Lastly, to detest the prosecuting of our own
inordinate lust, because that will deprive us of the blessed food, so as we
shall have nothing to feed upon but the dust. We must not putrify in
idleness, but get up and take our strength unto us, and cherish the moisture
and dew of Heaven which we have received, Isaiah the fifty second chapter.

So here is matter of faith and comfort; for this Curse pronounced by God upon
the Devil, turns to a blessing to us: For Adam and Eve had cause of comfort,
seeing that God took their fall, wrought by the Devil, so grievously. God here
professes himself an enemy to the (...), that was and is our enemy; and so
gives us hope, that howsoever we, by his persuasion, are fallen from our first
estate, yet he will be merciful to us.

Praeterea, inimicitiam pono inter te and mulierem hanc, similiter que inter
semen tuum and semen hujus. Genesis 3. 15.

Jul. 2. 1598.
IN this verse we have the second part of the Sentence given by God upon the
Serpent: The former part concerned the Serpent himself, but this part has
respect also to us, and is much more grievous unto him, than the other three
branches: And it is that which he does most hardly digest. Concerning which, as
it directly contains a Commination and Curse, so as we must acknowledge it to
be Gods doing, and to be mavelous in our eyes, Psalm the hundred and
eighteenth. In this Curse is (...) a singular Blessing, and in this (...) we
have a great and precious promise, the second epistle of Peter, the first
chapter and the fourth verse.

Touching this verse, nothing can be spoken good enough, seeing upon it the new
Testament has his foundation, and that all the rest or the Scripture is
nothing else but a Commentary upon it, for there begins a new creation of
all things, and the new (...) which the Apostle speaks of in the second epistle
to the (...) the fifth chapter and the sevententh verse: For seeing the world,
which was lately created by God, was presently corrupted by the malice of the
Serpent, it has pleased God to create the world (...) in Jesus Christ.

By the seed of the woman, is meant our Savior Christ, who (...) of time was
made of a woman, Galatians the fourth chapter. So that when God says, I will
put enmity between thy seed and the (...) feed, we have in these words a
manifest promise of Christ; and it is as much in effect, as if the Lord, after
he had by his word created all things, should at length say, as he did of all
things else, (...) the first chapter, Fiat Christus, Let there be a Christ;
that is, seeing Man is fallen, and has degenerated from his first estate
wherein he was created, Let there be a creation of a Messiah and Savior by
whom he may be restored. By this seed we are shadowed from she fiery two edged
sword that was set to keep the way of the tree of life, Genesis the third
chapter and the twenty fourth verse: and if by faith, which is our victory, the
first epistle of Joha, the fifth chapter and the fourth verse, we can overcome
the Serpent, we shall eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the
Paradise of God, Apoculyps the second chapter and the seventh verse. And unto
this promise of God (...) the Apostle speaks, Hebrews the second chapter and
the first verse, (...) are bound to give the more earnest heed because this
Gospel was not preached by man in this world, which is a vail of misery; but by
God himself in Paradise: Wherein, before we consider the words themselves,
these things are generally to be observed: That howsoever the old Serpent, that
is, the Devil, did with grief (...) the first part of the Sentence pronunced
upon him, yet (...) was content, in that he, in the malice of his heart,
thought that he had now swallowed up man in destruction with himself, and that
he had so taken all the generation of Mankind captive, as that it was
impossible for them to get out of his shares the second epistle to Timothy, the
second chapter and the twenty sixth verse. Secondly, That our Parents knowing
the they had transgressed Gods commandment, did now wait every hoot when he
would give them over into the hands of the (...) to be destroyed with eternal
death, both of body and soul, as God had threatened ( thou shall dye the death,
(...) the second chapter.) Thirdly, That albeit the Devil (...) his (...)
imagination, that he had fully wrought out (...) God (...) this malice, by
means of this (...) And (...) our Parents, in conscience of their own (...) and
disobedience, were out of all hope of recovery, yet God (...) them not to
despair, but comforts them with this promise, That the (...) of the woman shall
bruise the Serpents head; that is, shall both destroy him that had the power of
death, and set at liberty those that were subject to the bondage of sin,
Hebrews the second chapter and the fourteenth verse. For thus does God speak,
in effect, to the Serpent, Thou supposest that thou have deceived them already,
and taken them captive, so as they shall never escape thee; but know that I
will take them out of thy Jaws, and set them at liberty; thou did boast in
thy malice, Psalm the fifty second, but I will not only take away this thy
boasting, by delivering them from that destruction whereunto thou have brought
them, but they shall have a hand over thee; for where thou shall but bruise his
heel, he shall break thy head. On the other side, of our Parents, he says on
this manner, That howsoever they, by sinning against his express Commandment,
had destroyed themselves, yet God, instead of delivering them to their enemy
the Devil, will make them to wage war with him, and to get the victory of
him: And so this was a blessed disappointing both of the Serpents malice, and
also of man's desparation.

This course God took in two respects.

First, That the Devil should not wax proud against God, if his devise touching
man's destruction had prospered. God had said at the first. Let us make man
after our own Image, and he created him according to the same, Genesis the
first chapter; which, although it was decayed by the malice of the Devil, yet
God (to show that neither man's unfaithfulness, nor the Devils malice can make
Gods faith of none effect, Romans the third chapter and the fourth verse) has
taken order, That his Image in man should be renewed, Ephesians the fourth
chapter.

Another respect that God had herein, was to show Adam and all his Posterity,
That whereas the Devil would make them believe that God did malign and envy
their good estate, this was but a false suspicion; for, as he does not delight
in the destruction of any, Ezekiel the eighteenth chapter and the thirty second
verse, so when men, by sin, had wrought their own destruction, yet he is so
merciful, that he forgives their misdeeds and destroys them not, Psalm the
seventy eighth and the thirty eighth verse: So when it was in his hands to have
destroyed our Parents for their disobedience, yet he did not destroy them, but
provided a means of salvation for them. And as the father, seeing his son
afar off, ran and met him and embraced him, Luke the fifteenth chapter; so
God, that our Parents should not despair of mercy, prevents them by telling the
Serpent, that he has a way to deliver them out of his bondage, before he
pronounces any Sentence upon them; for the Sentence given upon the Man and his
Wife, was after this promise: And those two, that is, the Malice and Pride of
the enemy, at our destruction and Gods mercy, are the two motives whereby the
Church persuades God to be gracious unto her, Lamentations the first chapter
and the ninth verse.

Touching this objection, Why God does utter this promise by way of commination
to the Serpent, whom it concerns not, and does not rather direct his speech
to Adam and Eve? it may be thus answered: That beside Gods custom, which is in
wrath to vememher mercy, Habakkuk the third chapter and the second verse; in
the valley of Achor to open a door of hope, Hosea the second chapter and the
fifteenth verse; and, to cause light to shine cut of darkness, and so to make
the light of his favorable countenance to shine in the face of Jesus Christ,
the second epistle to the Corinthians, the fourth chapter and the sixth verse;
when men can look for nothing but warth and disoleasure, we may see it to be
reasonable, that because they had deserved nothing, therefore he does not make
his speech to them, but to the Serpent by way of a Curse, that we may know,
that it is not for man's deserts that God is fayourable, but, as the Prophet
speaks, It is for his own sake that he does put away our iniquities, Isaiah 43.
52.

The parts of this verse are two: First, a proclaiming of hostility between the
Serpent and the Woman, and between his seed and hers. Secondly, a promise of
victory to the woman and her seed.

Here the wisdom of God does observe a wonderful proportion between the Devils
fault and the punishment: Before, his evil speaking was rewarded with curse,
his Pride with creeping, his Lust with loathsome feeding on the dust; and here
that visor and show of friendship, whereby he tempted our first Parents to
transgress Gods Commandment, is taken away by open hostility. He made a great
show of love and good will to Adam and Eve; and, as one says, howsoever he
were indeed a cruel adversary, yet he pretended himself, in outward show, to be
a faithful Counselor: But this preposterous agreement of theirs, with Hell
and death, Isaiah the twenty ninth chapter, is broken off by God himself; who,
instead of the Devils love fained, says, I will put open enmity between thee
and the woman.

By the success which our Parents had of the Devils fained good will, it is
easy to be seen, that no temptation is so dangerous as that which is offered
by way of compassion and friendship; and therefore when Peter said to Christ,
in Matthew the sixteenth chapter and the twenty second verse, Master, pity thy
self, Christ's answer was, Get thee behind me Satan; and therefore God uses
to plague such preposterous loves and wicked agreements with deadly hatred: So
God punished the (...) of Abimlech and the men of Sichem with bitter hatred;
for he sent an evil spirit between them, which made them break their promise
made to Abimelech, Judges the ninth chapter and the twenty third verse. The end
of the preposterous love which Ammon bare to Thamar was such, as his hatred
wherewith he hated her after, was greater than ever his love was, the second
book of Samuel, the thirteenth chapter and the fifteenth verse. So Judas,
having made a wicked compact with the Highpriests and Scribes, to betray
Christ into their hands, was rejected of them after, What is that to us? Look
thou to that, Matthew the twenty seventh chapter.

Touching the enmity between the Serpent and the woman, three things are here
set down by God: First, that it shall be personal, between thee and the woman.
Secondly, it shall be mortal enmity, such as shall never be forgotten, but the
Posterity shall continue it, between thy seed and hers. Thirdly, it shall be a
mortal and deadly hatred, the woman and her seed shall break the Serpents head.

Further, when God says not only, that thus it shall be, but that he himself
will be the Author of this enmity, as he says ( I will put) we are to consider
two things.

First, That God himself is the ruler and stirrer up of our inward affections,
that he is not only the searcher of our hearts, Acts the first chapter, but the
turner of men's hearts, Proverbs the twenty first chapter; for so he turned the
Kings heart toward Esther, and gave her favor with him, Esther the fifth
chapter: When a man's ways please the Lord, he will turn the hearts of his
enemies, so that they shall be his friends; Proverbs the sixteenth chapter and
the seventh verse: Thus he turns men's minds both in good and evil things.
When the Serpent and our Parents conspired together in that which was evil, God
turned their hearts, and made them hate one another. So when all People and
Nations that were escaped our of the flood conspired to build a Tower, God
himself counfounded and scattered them, Genesis the eleventh chapter. So, as he
is the God of peace in good things, so in evil things he will be the God of
discord; and therefore he says, I came to send a sword on earth, Matthew 10.

Secondly, As by these words he shows, that all our affections are in his
hand; so he teaches us, that where he proclaims enmity, we ought not to
compound or make any peace: Because God says, I will put enmity between the
Serpent and the seed of the woman, therefore we must not make any league with
the Devil, sin, the world, or our own lusts, but wrestle or be at war with
them continually.

The persons between whom this enmity is proclaimed, is the Serpent and the
Woman, which must first be literally understood of the visible Serpent; for
that Creature, of all other, does strike a terror into man when he sees him,
so that presently man is inflamed with hatred against the Serpent.

Here this question arises, Whether this antipathy that is naturally between
Man and the Serpent were before the Curse, or only after?

The answer is, That there was a hatred between them from the beginning, as of
the Wolf with the Lamb and the Lion, Isaiah the eleventh chapter and Isaiah the
sixty seventh chapter; but this hatred did not show it self between them, but
was stayed with the same grace, by which man should have been preserved from
death, if he had not sinned.

There is an antipathy between the body of man and fire, so as the one is apt
to destroy the other, as by grace this was stayed in the three Children that
were call into the furnace, Daniel the ninth chapter. Water would naturally
drown the body of man, being heavy, but by grace nature is stayed, as when
Peter walked upon the water, Matthew the fourteenth chapter. And the Lion is a
beast given to devour, being naturally hateful, but when Daniel was cast into
the Lions den, God by his grace preserved the Prophet, so as the Lions had no
power of him, Daniel the sixth chapter. So the hatred that is in man toward the
Serpent naturally did not show it self in the Creation as it does now, that man
is fallen from his Innocence.

The same is also verified in the invisible Serpent, if we compare spiritual
things with spiritual, in the first epistle to the Corinthians, the second
chapter: For though Adams wife were, in regard of sin, rather the mother of the
dead than of the living, as she is called, in the third chapter of Genesis, and
the twentieth verse, yet for the hope of life, which God does offer unto us in
this feed, Adam calls her not amiss, The mother of the living, for that she
was a resemblance of the Church within: All that will be pertakers of Salvation
must be born anew, to lead a spiritual life: For, in the twelfth chapter of
the Apocalypse, the Church is compared to a woman with Child, and the Devil to a
Dragon persecuting the woman, to show the spiritual enmity that is between the
Devil and the faithful, between whom, God does here forerell, there shall be
perpetual hostility.

The seed of the woman, principally, and by way of eminency, is Christ, as St.
Paul expounds it, in the third chapter to the Galatians; and the Church which
is called Christ, in the first epistle to the Corinthians, the twelfth chapter
and the twelfth verse, does, by the preaching of the word, conceive a
spiritual seed, and travail till she have brought forth, Galatians the fourth
chapter; and the old Serpent, of whom Christ faith, in the eighth chapter of
St. John, You are of your father the Devil, has no doubt a seed, that is, the
wicked, which are his Children, which are always at war with the seed of the
Church. As the seed of Serpents does prove to be Serpents; so, for that wicked
men are the seed of the old Serpent, Christ calls them Serpents, Matthew the
twenty third chapter: and because Judas was the child of the Devil, therefore
Christ calls him a Devil, John the sixth chapter and the seventieth verse.
The reason why the wicked are called Serpents, is because they stop their cares
like Serpents, and will not hear the voice of the (...) salm the fifty eighth;
because they sharpen their tongues like Serpents, and hide Adders poison under
their lips, Psalm the hundred and fourtieth; that is, blaspheme God and speak
evil of men. So (...) as the Elect are the seed of the woman spiritual; so the
wicked and (...) are the cursed seed of the spiritual Serpent: And God
pronounces, that there shall be perpetual hostility between them; There is a
corrupt seed, Isaiah the first chapter and the fourth verse; The other, a holy
seed, Isaiah the sixth chapter and the thirteenth verse. Our Savior expounds
the good seed to be the children of the kingdom, and the cockle to be the
children of the world, Matthew the thirteenth chapter and the thirty eighth
verse. The Apostle compares the children of God and the children of the Devil
together, the first epistle of John the third chapter and the tenth verse:
between these is that perpetual enmity that is here spoken of. The same is
between the Church of God, Acts the twentieth chapter, and the Synagoue of
Satan, Apocalypse the twenty ninth chapter: between the two Cities, the City
of God, whose foundation is upon the holy hill, Psalm the eighty seventh, and
great Babylon, Psalm the hundred thirty seventh, and Apocalypse the eighteenth
chapter: between the two Camps or Tents, whereof the Prophet speaks, that is,
the Tabernacles of the Lord God of Hosts, and the Tents of the ungodly, Psalm
the eighty fourth. This enmity is within every one of us, as Peter speaks,
Abstain from fleshly lusts, which wage war against the soul, the first
epistle of Peter, the second chapter and the eleventh verse; We wrestle not
with flesh and blood, but with spiritual wickedness, Ephesians the sixth
chapter; therefore he says, The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but
spiritual and mighty through God to overthrow strong holds, the second epistle
to the Corinthians, the tenth chapter and the fourth verse. And the thing that
God aims at is, that there be not only an enmity between these two Cities and
Camps, but that this enmity be perpetual, and send at the least to the killing
of sin, and to the vanquishing of Satan. So soon as this Sentence was given,
there was enmity between Cain, the seed of the Serpent, who was of the evil
one, the first epistle of John, the third chapter and the twelfth verse, and
Abel, who was spiritually be gotten by the Church, of the seed of the world,
Genesis the fourth chapter. Ismael and Isaac, the one being born after the
flesh, the other after the spirit, persecuted one another, Galatians the fourth
chapter. He that was of the Serpents seed mocked and derided the seed of the
woman, Genesis the twenty first chapter and the ninth verse. Jacob and Esau,
being diverse seeds, the one hated the other, and vowed to kill the other,
Genesis the twenty seventh chapter and the forty first verse. Lastly, This
enmity was practiced between the Church of God, ( Apocalypse the twelfth
chapter,) and the Synagogue of Satan ( Apocalypse the nineteenth chapter.)

Of these spiritual Combats the Scripture has many examples; and therefore it
is called, The book of the wars of the Lord, Numbers the twenty first chapter
and the fourteenth verse. The Serpent deserved to have been utterly destroyed;
and God, who calls things that were not as if they were, Romans the fourth
chapter and the seventeenth verse, was able to have destroyed him, at least to
have chained him up, that he might not trouble his servants as he will at the
last day, Apocalypse the twentieth chapter and the tenth verse: but the Council
of God, in suffering him still to practice his malice against us, is for our
good, that we should be still exercised and kept in a war; for, as Christ
says, What thanks is it, Luke the sixth chapter and thirty second verse, and
what praise is it to obtain eternal life, the first epistle of Peter the second
chapter and the twentieth verse, unless in this life we do something toward
it? The Apostle says, No man is crowned except he strive aright, the second
epistle to Timothy, the second chapter and the fifth verse: Therefore God has
appointed us an enemy, that is, the Devil, whom we must continually fight with.
If we resist his allurements by pleasure, and his terrors in oppressing us with
crosses, we shall, at the length, be crowned with the crown of life; and then
he will, according to his promise, tread down Satan under our foot, so that he
shall not trouble us any more, Romans the sixteenth chapter and the twentieth
verse. But in the mean time, he is opposed against us by the wise Council of
God, as an enemy, that we should continually strive against him.

As this is a threatening to the Devil, so it is a promise in respect of us, and
that a promise of grace, to be showed us that are of the seed or the woman,
without which grace we cannot strive with the Serpent, nor once conceive any
desire to resist him. And therefore if we have any desire to resist the Devil
and his temptations, it is not of any natural power of our selves, but the
grace of Gods spirit working in us, who says, I will put enmity between thy
seed and the woman: Whereupon, whereas the Apostle says, that by reason of the
continual rebellion that is between the flesh and the spirit, we cannot do
that we would, Galatians the fifth chapter and the seventeenth verse. Augustine
says, that yet we are bound to thank God that he gives us his spirit to stir
us up to the resisting of the flesh and the corrupt lusts thereof; for hereby
he perform his promise which he makes in this place: And except we had the
grace of his spirit, it were impossible for us, but that we should be at
agreement with the flesh, and like well of the temptations thereof; for
naturally we are given to make league with bell and death, Isaiah the twenty
ninth chapter and the fifteenth verse; to be friends with our (...) and worldly
lusts, which do still solicit and persuade us to break Gods Commandment and
Law. And if by the special grace of God, he work in us some dislike of our
flesh and the corruption thereof, for a time, yet this is not perpetual; and
though it did continue perpetually, yet it is not (...) mortal and to the
death; for we never labor to kill sin, and to (...) the old man utterly, but
all that we can do, is to bruise his head: And many are so (...) from that,
that they fetch balmes and ointments to heal his head so soon as it is wounded.
Instead of treading him under our (...) many do tread under their feet the Law
and word of God, as Samuel speaks, in the first book of Samuel, the fifteenth
chapter and the twenty third verse; and tread under feet the blood of the
Covenant, Hebrews the tenth chapter and the twenty ninth verse, which God
appoints as a means to (...) us in this fight. By nature we are enemies to God
and to the cross of Christ, Philippians the third chapter and the eighteenth
verse, except God vouchasafe us the benefit of this promise, and make this
enmity between the Devil and us. We see this enmity was fulfilled between the
Devil and Christ, that was the seed of the woman, for they say, What have we to
do with thee, Jesus? Matthew the eighth chapter and the twenty ninth verse;
and between him and the wicked Jews, which were of the Serpents seed, which
said to Christ, Behold, a glutton and a wine drinker, a friend to Publicans and
sinners, Matthew the eleventh chapter and the nineteenth verse. And thus still
the Devil and his generation do oppose themselves against Christ and the
faithful, that are born anew of the immortal seed of the word, the first
epistle of Peter, the first chapter and the twenty third verse. But as for the
ungodly, the Devil does never disturb them; for in them the strong armed man
bath (...) full possession, so as all that he has is in peace, Luke the
eleventh chapter and the twenty second verse. And the Devil does no sooner hold
up his hand to them, but they are ready to do whatsoever he will. But he that
has not his part in this hostility and spiritual conflict with the Serpent,
shall have no part in the promise of victory which is made to the godly.

Hoc conteret tibi caput, tu autem conteres buic calcaneum. Genesis 3. 15.

Aug 10. 1598.
IN this last part of the Curse pronounced by God upon the Serpent, there are
two points, First, a proclaiming of war: Secondly, a promise of Victory; the
sum whereof is, the breaking of the Serpents head, as the holy Ghost speaks
here; or, as the Apostle says, in the first epistle of John and the third
chapter, the loosing of the works of the Devil.

In the proclaiming of enmity we have to consider, First, the enmity it self:
Secondly, the persons between whom it shall be.

Touching the enmity, we showed first, That it is kindly, that preposterous
love and amity should end in hatred and mortal enmity, as it fell out between
the Serpent and the woman: Secondly, That God is the author of this enmity, who
says of himself, I will put enmity: Whereupon we gather, That as God is the
stirrer up of all affections, so especially of that hatred which is between
good and evil, (...) and error, between Babel and Sion, the Tents of the godly
and the wicked, as they are opposed in the eighty fourt Psalm: And therefore,
as it is Christ's rule, That no man should separate that which God has joined,
Matthew the nineteenth chapter; so where God promises, that he will (...) the
wicked and the godly, let no man seek to conjoyn them, nor make peace, when his
will is, there should be mortal hatred and war.

The persons are the Woman and the Serpent. By the Woman is meant not Eve, as
she is the mother of them that dye, but the Church which is signified by her,
in regard whereof, she is called The mother of the living, Genesis the third
chapter and the twentieth verse. As allo the bodily Serpent is not meant, but
the Devil, that old Serpent.

The first thing then, to be noted in the persons, is, That as there is
naturally a hatred between the Woman and the visible Serpent; so God threatens
this as a punishment to be laid upon the Devil, That there shall be continual
war and harred between him and the Church.

Secondly, This enmity shall not be for a time; for he contents not himself to
say, I will put enmity between thee and the Woman, but that it shall continue
between their seed; that is, it shall be hereditary, to abide till the worlds
end, so long as God has a Church. By the seed of the Woman is understood the
faithful, that are born and begotten in the Church, which is the mother of us
all, Galatians the fourth chapter. By the Serpents seed is meant the wicked,
whom Christ calls Serpents, and a generation of Vipers, Matthew the twenty
third chapter and the thirty third verse.

Thirdly, It shall be no light harred, but deadly and mortal; for it shall
proceed to grind one another to powder. The hatred which the Church bears
toward the Devil, is such as shall break his head in pieces, as an earthen
vessel is broken, so that it shall not be fit for any use, not so much as to
fetch fire in any piece of it, Isaiah the thirtieth chapter and the fourteenth
verse. Wherefore touching this former part, As it is a great punishment for a
proud man to have them set before him, whom he thinks to be far under him;
so, for as much as the Devil hold us captive at his will, the second epistle to
Timothy and the second chapter, it is a grievous curse which God lays upon
him, that we shall not only be set at libetry from him, but have the mastery
over him, and trample him under our feet. Secondly, for our selves, As it is a
blessing for a man, not to be deceived of him whom he thinks to be his friend;
so God vouchsafes us a great blessing, in that he promiseh to ftirre up in us
a hatred against sin and the Devil, so that we shall not make a league with
hell, nor an agreement with death, Isaiah the twenty eighth chapter, but shall
still be at enmity with him. Contrari wise, if we make truce with the Devil,
and please our selves in our sins, then are we accursed, and like the fool
that laugheth when he is lead to the Stocks to receive correction, Proverbs the
seventh chapter. Thirdly, It is a general Prophecy, That if God (...) not
enmity between us and the Serpent in this life, he will set enmity between us
and himself in the life to come; so that we shall say, How have we hated
instruction, and our hearts despised correction? proverbs the fifth chapter and
the twelfth verse: Sin goes down sweetly, but in the end it will bite like a
Serpent, Proverbs the twenty third chapter and the thirty second verse.

Thus we see, that because we did abuse that general peace that was between us
and the Creatures, God has thought it necessary to stir up war between us; so
that we shall have the Devil an adversary to us: And as he tempted us to evil,
so we shall still be enemies to him. God indeed might easily have destroyed the
Devil, for causing us to sin, as well as he could make him of nothing: But
because it is no praise for man not to yield to sin, when they have none to
tempt them thereunto; nor to be obedient to Gods will, when they have none to
persuade them to rebellion, as in the beginning the Serpent did; therefore he
thought good that the Devil should still be their enemy, as he was at the
first; for the promise of reward is made to them that strive and overcome, To
him that overcommeth will I give, Apocalypse 12. and they must not only fight,
but fight lawfully, or else they cannot be crowned, the second epistle to
Timothy, the second chapter. As for this cause God thought it good, that this
war and hostility should continue; so, because he knew men do make war in
vain, where there is no hope of victory, therefore he proclaims, that the
woman's seed shall not only be at continual war with the Serpent, but shall
overcome him and grince his head in pieces, the more to encourage them in this
spiritual battle. There shall be hurt done on both parts, but not like hurt;
they shall both bruise, but the same thing shall not be bruised; the head,
which is the chief part, is bruised by the Woman, and therefore she has the
greater victory; the heel or tail, which is the lowest part, is only bruised by
the Serpent; and consequenly doing less hurt, he is put to the worse. The seed
of the Woman does so fight with the Devil, that they break his head, but the
Devil fights so as he does no great hurt. Wherein two things are to be
considered: First, What this Victory is, namely, the bruising and grinding in
pieces of the Serpents head. Secondly, The condition of this Victory, to wit,
that it shall not be with ease, for it shall cost both sweat of brows and
shedding of blood, for we must resist sin unto blood, Hebrews the twelfth
chapter. And the holy Ghost says here, that howsoever the woman's seed do
bruise the head of the Serpent, yet the Serpent shall bruise his heel.

In the Victory we are to observe, First the person that shall overcome, that
is, the woman's seed. Secondly, the manner how, and that is by bruising his head.

The person receives two considerations; for by the seed of the Woman we must
understand not only Christ, but the whole Church, which is his body. This
Scripture concerns Christ, as he is the wheat corn, which being caft into the
ground and dying, brings forth much fruit, John the twelfth chapter and
twenty fourth verse: It respects the faithful as they are the ear of corn, or
the crop that comes of that grain of wheat: And as he was the seed of the
Woman so are the faithful to the end of the world. Therefore of the Church the
Propher says, That when he shall offer up his soul as an offering for sin,
he shall see a long seed, Isaiah the fifty third chapter. And where the holy
Ghost reports, that the Dragon makes war with the rest of the Woman's seed,
Apocalypse the twelfth chapter and the seventeenth verse, by that is meant the
congregation of the faithful to the worlds end; who, for that they are a body
politic, as Christ is a body natural, are therefore called Christ, the first
epistle to the Corinthians, the thirteenth chapter and the twelfth verse; And
this victory is verified in them no less than in Christ. So that in this
promise we see not a Fiat lux, that is, Let there be light, as in the Creation,
but Fiat Christus, Let there be a Christ, that is, a deliverer, to restore
mankind, being now fallen from the estate wherein they were created: For where
God promises, That there shall be war between the Serpent and the Woman's
seed, and that the one shall conquer the other: As if Adam should object, How
shall our seed be able to strive with Satan, seeing they themselves being in
state of perfection, could not tread upon his head, but were tempted and
overcome? God answers, That he will raise them up a Captain. As of the Judges,
whom God appointed to (...) the People of Israel, it is said, The Lord raised
them up a Captain, Judges the eleventh chapter; so here God promises to Adam
and Eve, that he will raise up the Captain or Prince Messiah, Daniel the ninth
chapter and the twenty fifth verse, that shall fight and get the conquest for
them, and that he shall come of their seed.

Secondly, If God will raise up this Captain of the Woman's seed, then he shall
not be an Angel or Archangel that shall deliver us; for as the Apostle says,
He in no sort took the nature of Angels, Hebrews 12. 15. but he took the seed
of Abraham; that is, he shall be man, compassed with the same flesh that we
carry about with us; he shall be bone of our bones; and, as the Prophet speaks,
The Captain shall be of themselves, and the Prince shall spring out from among
them, Jeremiah the thirtieth chapter; so Christ, who is appointed by God his
Father, to be the Savior of the world, is of your selves, and took our flesh
upon him.

Thirdly, God says not your seed, but the Woman's seed; which is a plain
manifestation of the ordinary work of God; As if God should say to the Devil,
Thou beginnest with the Woman, which is the weaker vessel, the first epistle of
Peter, the third chapter, thinking to prevail the sooner; But how weak soever
she be, thou shall find, that out of her will I bring a seed that shall bruise
thy head, and thou shall thereby see that my power is made perfect in
weakness, the second epistle to the (...), the twelfth chapter; for God, in
his council, does make the weak things of the world to counfound the strong,
the first epistle to the Corinthians, the first chapter. Secondly, This shall
be performed by the seed of the Woman; because, as she was the cause of (...),
For Adam was not deceived, but the Woman, the first epistle to Timothy, the
second chapter and the fourteenth verse; so God would have the cause of remedy
to come from her, to show, That he does bring light out of darkness, the
second epistle to the Corinthians, the fourth chapter. Thirdly, For that Eve,
knowing that her credulity, in harkening to the Serpents voice, was the cause
of all his misery, might, as that sex is most inclined thereunto, conceive
great grief of heart to comfort her, the promise of victory is by God himself
in great mercy appropriated to her, whereas Christ came of Adam no less than
of the Woman.

Fourthly, That it might be the gate to all Prophecies, For, as one says of
Christ, He is so the Woman's seed, as he is not the Man's, therefore Isaiah
says, Behold, a Virgin shall conceive, Isaiah the seventh chapter; and in the
Prophet Jeremiah God speaks thus, Behold, I create a new thing in earth, a
Woman shall compass a Man, Jeremiah the thirty first chapter and the twenty
second verse: Which seed, of whom he came, the Scripture does particularly set
down: For among the sons of Noah, he came of Shem; among those that came of
Abraham he was of the Tribe of Juda; in that Tribe he came of the house of
David, and so is called, The Son of David, Matthew the first chapter; and,
made of the seed of David according to the flesh, Romans the first chapter: He
is that seed in whom God promised Abraham, That all the Nations of the earth
should be blessed, as the Apostle expounds it, in the third chapter of the
epistle to the Galatians.

Secondly, For the manner how that Victory is gotten, It is by bruising the
Serpents head. Wherein, for the bruising, we learn that Christ goes not to
work by subtilty, as the Serpent did; he pretends not love, as Satan did; but
he professes deadly hatred; he deals not creepingly and deceiptfully, but
goes to it with open force and violence: He that hurts the heel comes by
stealth behind, as the Devil dealt here; but if a man will break another man's
head, he will come before him, and so does Christ. And therefore he is not like
the subtle Serpent, but as the brazen Serpent, that was set up upon a pole,
John the third chapter and the fourteenth verse, to show, that his dealing is
open and manifest. The Serpent having a purpose to destroy our Parents, seduced
and beguiled Eve, the second epistle to the Corinthians, the eleventh chapter;
but Christ, having a purpose to destroy the Devil, and so save man, says
plainly, in the thirteenth chapter of Hosea, O death, I will be thy death, O
Hell, I will be thy destruction; and so he speaks in the twelfth chapter of
John, I, when I am lift up, will draw all men, that is, he will not entice them
by fraud and subtilty, as the Serpent does.

Secondly, The part to be bruised is the Head of the Serpent: Christ would not
go to the weaker part, as the tail or heel, as the Serpent does; but to the
head of the Serpent, where both his strength and poison lies: so he is not
minded as the Serpent was. The strength and poison of Satan, as it is called in
the twenty sixth verse of the eighteenth chapter of the Acts of the Apostles,
is the poison that he hides in his head, which has the same name in the holy
tongue; but Christ bruiseth the head. Secondly, He has poison in his tongue,
as it is in the third verse of the hundred and fourtieth Psalm; but Christ
destroyed that poison, as it is in the fourth chapter of Matthew and the fourth
verse, with alleging, it is written. Thirdly, he has poison in his teeth, of
which Christ says, Now is the power of darkness, Luke the twenty second
chapter: But the chief poison that he (...) to destroy us with, is the curse of
the Law, which the Apostle calls, the strength of sin, in the first epistle to
the Corinthians, the fifteenth chapter: That Curse is of twelve forts,
Deuteronomie the twenty seventh chapter, but Christ has taken them away, When
he became a curse for us, Galatians the third chapter. So has he broken his
head and drawn forth this poison of it, First, by resistance: Secondly, by
patience: Thirdly, by receiving the poison of it into his own body. Having done
this, to show, that he has obtained a full conquest, he went up on high and
lead captivity captive, Psalm the sixty eighth and the eighteenth verse. Though
he were dead, that by death he might destroy him that had the power of death,
Hebrews the second chapter and the fourteenth verse, yet now he says, I am
alive, and have the keys of Hell and death, Apocalypse the first chapter and
the eighteenth verse; He fast ned to the Cross the hand writing, Colossians
the second chapter; and (...) over Hell and Death, as it is said, O Hell, where
is thy sting? O death where is thy victory? the first epistle to the
Corinthians, the fifteenth chapter. And thus is the victory fulfilled in
Christ: But for the condition, This Victory did not cost him nothing, so great
a matter it is to redeem a soul, Psalm the forty ninth; he bought his conquest
at a deer rate, even with the price of his own blood; for Christ's enemies did
not only stander the footsteps of our anointed, Psalm the eighty ninth, but
left in his humanity those impressions of cruelty, that made him cry, My God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me? Matthew the twenty seventh chapter; and to
send forth strong cries with tears, Hebrews the fifth chapter; but still they
did but bruise his heel: And so he did set all this at his heel, as we speak,
that he might set us at his heart.

Thus much concerning the Victory, as it was fulfilled in Christ, as he was the
wheat Corn; (...) it is also fulfilled in the Church: For whatsoever he did,
he did (...) not for himself, but for the members of his body; and he does
infuse such virtue into his body, that as Christ said to his Disciples, Behold,
I give you power to tread on Serpents and Scorpions, and over all the power of
the enemy, Luke the tenth chapter and the nineteenth verse; so shall the
faithful be able to trample the Devil under their feet, to whom this promise
is made, That God shall tread down Satan under their feet, Romans the sixteenth
chapter; which is a plain exposition of this promise set down by Moses. Christ,
as he is the wisdom of God, shall communicate this power to his Church, That
they shall tread under their feet that poison of temptation which the Serpent
speweth out of his mouth by resisting it, as he himself did, Matthew the fourth
chapter: They shall be able to sustain the poison of his teeth, by not giving
place to it. Though he hurt them in the heel, that is, in their earthly parts,
as substance, wealth, good name, yet they shall be able to suffer it, so long
as he touch not the head. But if a man refuse to suffer detriment by Satan in
these outward things, he shall have no part in the victory, because it is not
gotten without bruising of the heel and some blood shed; for it is Gods will,
That all shall be conformable to the Image of his son, Romans 8. 29. for of
those things which Christ in his natural body suffered, there remains
something which must be accomplished in his mystical body, Col. 1. 24. until
the number of the Elect be fulfilled.

Here is matter of special direction for us. It is plain the promise is made to
no man, but to him that is at enmity with the Serpent, with whom we must make
continual war; because, although Christ have already wounded him in his head,
yet he is not dead; and though his courage be much abated, yet he still does
much mischief.

In this warfare we are to learn two things, First, what we must do to him, to
practice it: Secondly, what he will do to us, that we may avoid it.

That which we are to do to him, is to bruise his head in pieces, which we
shall be able to do, in him that strengthens us, Phil. 4. That which he will
do to us (...), that he will bruise our heel; therefore we are to take heed of
him.

By the Serpents head is meant the first suggestion whereby he stirs us up
to sin; which, albeit in the beginning it were strong, when he tempted Eve,
yet since the promise Christ has weakened it, nothwithstanding, as Christ
resisted the first suggestion, Matthew. 4. so must we, after his example, begin
at the weakest part, even at the first suggestions and provocations, which seem
to us to be nothing, which the Prophet signified by the children of Babel,
which he would have dashed to the stones, Psalm. 137. In that respect it is that
the Church would have the little Foxes destroyed that hurt the Vines, Cant. 2.
12. And the Prophets counsel is, That we (...) upon the Cockatrice egg, lest
it (...) a Serpent, Isaiah 59. The Fathers, out of Adams temptation, (...) four
degrees of our spiritual (...), The Man, the Woman, the Serpent, the Tree: By
Man they understood reason; by the Woman, the sensuality and carnal affections
of our minds; by the Serpent, the Devil; by the Tree, the occasion. Concerning
which, as it is good counsel to hear this spoken, Command Eve; so it is better
counsel, Take heed of the Serpent, and thou shall be safe; but if thou do not
look upon the tree, thou shall be safer: For if we avoid the occasion of sin,
then shall not our concupiscence be stirred up; but he that makes no
conscience to (...) the occasion he loves danger, and, as the Wise man says,
he shall perish therein.

The (...), if it be lightly touched, will sting and prick, but if it be
crushed hard in a man's hand, it loses the power: So if we dally with sin,
it will sting us, but if we bruise the very head of it, that is, the first
motions, then it shall not hurt us: Thus did Christ, Matthew. 4. and thus he
would have us do likewise. Jacob being stirred up by his mother to seek the
blessing of his father, and to counterfeit the person of his brother, answered,
That he durst not, last instead of a blessing he should procure acurse, Genesis
27. 12. Joseph, being solicited to uncleanness by his Mistress, answered, How
can I (...)? Genesis 39. Thus with the consideration of Gods curse and of his
benefits toward us, must we tread the head of the Serpent. But if we be ready
to make league with hell and death, Isaiah 28. that is, to (...) to the
suggestions of Satan: If instead of treading him under feet, we tread under
foot the blood of Christ, by which we are sanctified, Hebrews 10. if where we
should labor to wound the Devil, we do heal his wounds with sweet words, Jer.
6. then are we fair from that spiritual enmity that God requires, and do
deprive our selves of the promise of victory.

This not bruising of the Serpents head will cause another contrition: For that
man, that for lack of grace does not tread down concupiscence, and make it
subject to the spirit of God, shall be fain to grind his own heart, and to
break it as he should have broken the Serpents head; for one of them must of
necessity be performed, either the Serpents head must be bruised and broken, or
else our own heart must be broken with sorrow and grief for sin, which is
that acceptable sacrifice which God does not despise, Psalm. 51.

Secondly, Touching that which the Devil does to us, we are taught here, That
though he be grievously wounded, yet he will not give over, but make war with
the Woman's seed forever. If he could, he would be at the head, but because he
cannot, he begins at the heel, and, by little and little, lays men down all
along upon the ground, that so he may poison the head: Thus he circumventeth
men to make them fall, 2 Cor. 1. We must therefore chiefly look to that part
which he aims at most, and that is the heel; and in that regard it behooves
us to have our feet shod with the (...) of the Gospel, Ephesians. 6. 15.

The heel has three considerations, First, Calcem (...): Secondly, actionis:
Thirdly, vitae.

The heel of our soul is the lowest part thereof, which touches the earth;
that is, as the Apostle terms them, our fleshly lusts, 1 Pet. 2. 11. and, our
worldly lusts, Titus 2. 12. These affections are, as it were, the feet
whereupon our souls do walk; for the affections are the feet of the soul and
mind, which, if they be corrupt, they cause the soul to sin: therefore the
Prophet complains, That the wickedness of his heels compasses him, Psalm.
49. 5. meaning the corrupt lusts and affections of his heart: For as the cold
wherewith we are troubled in our head, is first taken in our feet; so the
corruption of our opinion and understanding proceeds from our corrupt
affections.

Secondly, The heel of our actions, is the end for which we do them; wherein
we must be careful, that all we do be done for Gods glory, and not for our
own praise; this is it which our Savior reproves in the Scribes and (...),
They did good works, they fasted, prayed, and gave alms, but the end of all
that they did was not good, for they did it to be praised of men, Matthew. 6. For
it is the Devils policy, if he cannot hinder good actions, yet to corrupt men's
minds, so as they shall not refer that which they do to Gods glory, which is
the right end and only thing we should aim at, but to their own praise and
commendation among men. Therefore we must beware for what end we do any thing,
be it never so good, namely, that it be reserred to Gods glory, according to
the Apostles rule, 1 Cor. 10. otherwise it not only loses commendation, but
becomes sinful, how goodly a show soever it carry outwardly; for whatsoever
is not of faith is sin, Romans 14.

Thirdly, By the heel in the tird and last sense, we understand the end of our
life: For at that time when all action is past, the Devil knowing that he has
but a little time to practice his malice against us, does then most of all rage
against us, Apoc. 12. Therefore even then especially we must oppose our selves
against him, that he do not venom and poison our heel; that is, when we are
ready to depart this life, to give us the overthrow, to drive us to
desperation, and make us to despair of Gods favor. Thus we see his desire is
and will be either to corrupt our affections, that we shall desire that which
is evil: Or if we do good, he will poison the end of our actions, so as we
shall not seek Gods glory but our own praise. Lastly, When we come to the end
of our life, then he will be busy to weaken our faith, and to overcome us, by
taking from us all other spiritual graces: And not only in these, but he will
hurt us in our goods and good name. And we must be content to suffer these
things at his hands, that he may not hurt our souls, Exodus 4. 3. We must not
think it strange if we suffer detriment in temporal things, so that he do us
no hurt spiritually to the overthrow of our souls.

FINIS.

