THE ANATOMY OF SIMON MAGUS, Or, the Sin of SIMONY Laid OPEN.

Make not my Father's House an House of Merchandise, John 2.16. LONDON, Printed
by W. Bowyer, for Charles Brom at the Gun, at the West End of St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1700.

THE CONTENTS.
Chap. I. OF the Nature of Simony, what it is. Page 1 Chap. II. Of the several
Ways whereby the Guilt of Simony may be incurred in the Entrance upon a
Spiritual Office. p. 35. Chap. III. How Simony is practiced in the
Administration of a Spiritual Office. p. 73 Chap. IV. Of the Heinousness of the
Sin of Simony. p. 98 Chap. V. Whether they are to be reputed the Ministers of
Christ, who enter by Simony? p. 122 Chap. VI. A Warning to Young Men, in
reference to their Entry upon Spiritual Offices in the Church. p. 158 Chap.
VII. A Word of Warning to Patrons. p. 182 Chap. VIII. An humble Advice to
Bishops and Governors of the Church. p. 197
THE ANATOMY OF Simon Magus, etc.
CHAP. I. Of the Nature of Simony, what it is.
AS the great Design of the Son of God's coming into the World, and and giving
himself to Death, was to purchase and purify to himself a glorious Church,
which might be holy without blemish, spot, or wrinkle; so it was no less his
Design, to intimate, how zealous he would be to have a glorious Purity
maintained in his Church under the Gospel, than it was to reprove the Jews
Profaneness, that he took the Scourge in his Hand, and with such Authority
drove out of the Temple the Buyers and Sellers, and overthrew the Tables of the
Money Changers, and the Seats of them that sold Doves, sharply thus rebuking
them, Matthew. 21.13.
It is written, My House shall be called the House of Prayer, but ye have made
it a Den of Thieves; and charging them, saying, Joh. 2.16.
Make not my Father's House an House of Merchandise. This was not done nor
spoken merely in behalf of the old Temple, whose Glory was now tending to its
Period, and whereof shortly the Abomination of Desolation was to take
possession; but in behalf of the Christian Church, and with intuition to that
Purity and Holiness which the Lord was to require in his Spiritual Temple,
which was immediately to be set up, and to continue to the end of the World.
Wherefore, Origin expounding these Words, says, Mystice autem Templum Dei est
Ecclesia Christi, etc. By the Temple of God is mystically meant the Church of
Christ; and that by these three sorts driven out thence by Christ, are designed
three kinds of covetous Persons, who are to be accounted unworthy to be in the
Church, and Communion of the Saints. By the Buyers and Sellers are understood,
such as amongst Christians, are taken up about nothing but the Cares of Trading
for Worldly Gain: By the Money Changers, those who having the Charge of the
Poor's Alms, do not acquit themselves faithfully, but mis-employ the fame, or
enrich themselves thereby: And by those that sold Doves, are signified the
Bishops and Priests, who sell the Gifts of the Holy Ghost, and make Merchandise
of Churches. And, than this last, there is no Corruption more dangerous; nor is
there more need of watching against any Evil, than to preserve the Church from
the Impurity of this Simoniacal Malady; which, when suffered to creep in,
consumes her very Vitals, by filling her Bowels with a corrupt Priesthood: For,
as says Chrysostom, Super Matthew. Hom. 37.
Si Sacerdotium integrum fuerit, tota Ecclesia floret; si autem corruptum
fuerit, tota fides marcida est. If the Priesthood be found, the whole Church
flourishes; but, if it be corrupt, then all Faith and Religion withers and
decays. Wherefore, how long that Spirit of Christ, which made the zeal of
God's House to eat him up, possessed the Governors of the Church, it moved
them to make very strict and cautious Laws and Canons for stopping all those
Conduits whereby this Corruption might be feared to enter, and to inflict
severe Censures upon such as they found guilty of this sin. But when that
Primitive Fervor began to decay, and the Spirit of the World to take hold of
the lukewarm Clergy, then began Simon Magus again to set up the Head, being
animated by the secret Favor of a strong Party in the Church, of whom (though
he knew they would not avowedly own his Interest,) he was confident, they would
prove clandestine Abettors of his Designs. And this indeed is the lamentable
Policy of this degenerate Age; wherein, though Men be ashamed to espouse his
odious Name, yet do they secretly caress and nourish him, and cover his
Deformities with such artificial Dresses, as may best serve, not only to
deceive others, whose Simplicity is easily abused, but also, to impose upon
themselves, and make them yield up their own Consciences to those voluntary
Deceptions, which may prove advantageous to their Interest. Wherefore, (out of
a single Principle of Zeal for the Purity of the Church, and Glory of God,) I
have resolved, not only to Unmask, but to Anatomize, and rip up the very
corners of the Heart and Bowels of this Monster; that, his Nakedness being
discovered, and his loathsome Deformities laid open before the World; those who
have never fully known what the sin of Simony is, may learn to understand it;
others may be ashamed to give it any countenance: And such as have any way
polluted their Consciences with the guilt thereof, may repent of this their
Wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps it may be forgiven them.

My first Work then must be to show what Simony is. I trust it is known to most
who talk thereof, that this sin of Simony deriveth its Name from Simon Magus;
yet must we not therefore suppose, that it had its first beginning from him;
but that we read him to have been the first Author thereof in the Christian
Church, and was guilty of this sin in an eminent degree; and upon this account
it is, that it derives its Denomination from him.

Wherefore, by considering what the Fact of Simon Magus was, we shall the more
easily define what the sin of Simony is.

We read in the 8th. Chapter of the Acts, that this Man was a Sorcerer, or
Magician, and therefore is called Simon Magus; but when the People of Samaria
were Converted to the Christian Faith, and Baptized by Philip, he embraced also
the Faith, and was Baptized: And when, upon the report of the Conversion of the
Samaritans, the Apostles Peter and John, came down from Jerusalem to Confirm
them, whilst he saw that by the Imposition of the Apostle's Hands, the the Gift
of the Holy Ghost was given; he thereupon offered them Money, Act. 8.19, 20,
21, 22, 23,
saying; Give me also this Power, that on whomsoever I lay Hands, he may
receive the Holy Ghost. But Peter said unto him, Thy Money perish With the
(...) accuse thou have thought that the Gift of God may be purchased with
Money. Thou have neither part nor lot in this Matter; for thy Heart is not
right in the sight of God. Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray
God, if perhaps the thought of thine Heart may be forgiven thee. For I
perceive, that thou art in the Gall of Bitterness, and in the Bond of Iniquity.

Many who have read these Words, think it an easy matter to wipe off the Guilt
of Simony from themselves, supposing that there is no Simony, but the offering
to buy the extraordinary Gift of the Holy Ghost, which they deem to have been
the peculiar Fact of Simon Magus, which none, or few else, can ever stumble
upon. But how superficially they pass over the Text, and that they either do
not, or are not willing to understand the same, may easily appear to any who
looks more narrowly into, and more seriously considers the Matter contained
therein. For it may be evidently concluded from the Words, That not only
Buying, or a Desire, or offer to Buy; but also Selling, or a Desire, or offer
to Sell: And not only the Buying or Selling of the Gift of the Holy Ghost, but
also of other Spiritual and Sacred Things which have affinity therewith, is
here condemned, and comes within the Predicament of Simon's sin.

That, not only Buying, but Selling, or a Desire, or offer to Sell, as well as
to Buy, is here condemned, is evident: First, In regard that Peter here
condemns Simon Magus, that he thought the Gift of God could be bought with
Money; now if he condemns him for desiring and offering to buy, should it not
have been as sinful in Simon Peter, if he should have struck in with Simon
Magus in the bargain, and should have offered to sell what could not be bought?
And had Simon Peter made the offer, might it not have been as justly said to
him, Thy Money perish with thee, because thou have thought, that the Gift of
God could be sold for Money? 2dly, Because it appears to have been the Design
of Simon Magus to buy this Gift, that by selling the same again, and making
Merchandise thereof, he might make his own Gain: For seeing the hope of his
Gain by his Sorceries, wherewith he had bewitched the Samaritans of a long
time, was now gone; he no doubt, intended to make the giving of the Holy Ghost,
a gainful Trade for himself; and therefore offered Money for this Power; Homil.
4. in Evang.
Vt deterius venderet quod male comparasset; as says Gregory, That what he had
wickedly bought, he might more wickedly sell. Volebat enim emere potestatem,
etc. says Nicolaus de Lyra: In Act. 8.
For he would buy the Power of giving the Holy Ghost, with an intention of
purchasing Gain thereby: Wherefore the Vice of Simony, whereby any Man sells or
buys things Spiritual, derives its Name from him. For seeing he thought it
could be bought, consequently he thought also, it could be sold; and so the
Thought of Selling comes as well to be condemned in him, as of Buying; and the
one is no less the sin of Simony than the other. So that, howsoever some have
accounted Selling of the Gifts of God to be Gehazi's sin, and have called the
Sellers, Gehazites; yet it belongs, no less than the Buying, to the sin of
Simon Magus; and so they may as well be called Simoniacks.

And that not only the buying or selling of the Gift of the Holy Ghost, but
also of other Sacred and Spiritual things which have affinity therewith, is
here condemned, and comes within the predicament of Simon's sin, may
sufficiently appear from the Text; and that two ways.

First, It may appear from the ground and reason whereupon the Apostle condemns
this purpose of Simon Magus, and that was, because he thought that the Gift of
God could be purchased with Money. So that whilst he condemns him for offering
to buy the Gift of the Holy Ghost upon this account, that it is the Gift of
God, he excludes what is the Gift of God from being the subject of Merchandise,
or Matter that can come under buying or selling: And so it appears, there are
other things besides this particular extraordinary Gift of the Holy Chost,
which Simon would have bought; which, because they are the Gifts of God, cannot
be bought or sold.

Yet, are not the Words so generally to be extended, as that they should be
understood to comprehend under this Sentence, all Gifts which come from the
Hand of God; but it is to be considered; that things Temporal and Secular,
which God is pleased to bestow in common, upon the Infidel, as well as upon the
Believer; upon those without, as well as upon those within the Church as
Houses, Riches, Food, Raiment, etc. are the Gifts of God; and yet, that these
things may be sold, and bought, and purchased with Money, there is no doubt;
because, though they come principally from the Hand of God, as the Author and
Giver of every good thing; yet, in regard they are commonly attained by
ordinary Means, and are the Fruits of Humane Industry, as God is pleased to
bless the same; therefore he allows them to be made the subject of Commerce,
giving unto Men a Right and Power to dispose thereof as their own proper Goods.
Wherefore the Gifts here meant, must be things of another nature, which none
can lay claim to as their Propriety; but God alone, whose peculiar Gifts they
are, reserved to be bestowed upon his Church, or special Persons unto whom he
is pleased to dispense them; and are such as have affinity with, or relation to
that Gift which gives the ground and occasion of the Apostles Words, to wit,
of the Holy Ghost; and such are only Spiritual, or Sacred Things. And that it
may appear, that these, in regard of this Relation, are more peculiarly the
Gifts of God, and so not subject to buying or selling; it is to be considered,
That Sacred and Spiritual Things are such, either ex sua natura, of their own
nature; or, ex institutione Divina, by God's Ordinance and Appointment.

Some things are Spiritual of their own nature; such are, all the Graces and
Gifts of the Holy Ghost, whether ordinary or extraordinary: And these are
called the Gifts of God; because, as his peculiar Gifts, they are given and
bestowed by the Spirit of God, according as in his Wisdom he is pleased to
dispense the same for the good of his Church. And thus the Apostle Paul calls
all these Charismata, mentioned by him, 1 Cor. 12. the Gifts of God; saying,
Now there are diversities of Gifts, 1 Cor. 12.4, 8, 9, 10, 11.
but the same Spirit. For to one is given by the Spirit, the Word of Wisdom; to
another, the Word of Knowledge by the same Spirit; to another, Faith by the
same Spirit; to another, the Gifts of Healing by the same Spirit; to another,
the Working of Miracles; to another, Prophecy; to another, discerning of
Spirits; to another, diverse Kinds of Tongues; to another, the Interpretation of
Tongues. But all these works, that one and the self same Spirit, dividing to
every Man severally as he will.

Some things again are reckoned Spiritual, because they are such by the
Ordinance and Appointment of God; and that two ways: Some things are such, as
being Instruments and Means appointed by God for working spiritual Effects:
Thus the Word, and the Sacraments, and the Offices in the Church, and the
Vocation, Ordination, and Authority to dispense the same, and to exercise these
Sacred and Spiritual Offices, are set apart as things Sacred and Spiritual; and
these are called the Gifts of God, because they are given of God and his
Spirit, as Instruments whereby he works; as our Savior said to his Father,
of his Disciples, I have given them thy Word: It is his Gift. And as the
Apostle says of him, Joh. 17.14.
When he ascended up on high, he led Captivity captive, and gave Gifts unto
Men. Ephesians. 4.8, 11, 12.
-- And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and
some Pastors and Teachers; for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of
the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ. Some things again, are by
God's Appointment reckoned Spiritual, as being conjoined and annexed to Sacred
and Spiritual Things, as Ministeries and Helps thereto. Thus things set apart
and dedicated to Holy and Spiritual Uses, and for the support and maintenance
of Spiritual Offices, with the Rights and Titles thereto, though in their own
nature they be things Temporal, yet, in regard of this connection to Spiritual
Things, they become Sacred and Spiritual. And these things God lays claim to,
and seals them as his peculiar Gifts: Thus the Lord calls the Oblations,
Tithes, First Fruits, and Devoted Things, set apart for the Priests and
Levites, his Gifts; saying expressly more than once, I have given them unto you.
Numb. 18.


Now all these Spiritual Things, whether they be such of their own nature, or
such by the Ordinance and Institution of God, are (as the Canonists say,)
Indebitae materia emptionis and venditionis; an improper Matter for buying and
selling, being the peculiar Gifts of God, which cannot be subjected to
Merchandise; and the buying or selling whereof, has such affinity with, and
comes so within the predicament of the Sin of Simon Magus, that whosoever is
guilty thereof, may be said to be guilty of buying or selling the Holy Ghost,
in regard he buys or sells these Gifts which are of so near a relation to the
Holy Ghost; and wherein whosoever offers to bargain, offers to put an Affront
upon God and his blessed Spirit, whose peculiar Gifts they are, and whose
Privilege it is to give them; so, as Bonaventure says rightly, In Sent. Lib. 4.
Did. 25. Art. 1. q. 4.
Donum Dei impretiabile sub pretio ponens, facit contumeliam Spiritui Sancto:
He that subjects the invaluable Gift of God to a Price, does put a Reproach
upon the Holy Ghost.

2dly, It is a known Rule, That in expounding the Law of God, under the
prohibition of any one Sin, it is to be understood, that all Sins of the same
kind, whether more or less heinous; and also, all things which are the proper
Ministries, Helps, Occasions, Accessaries, and Inducements thereto, are
prohibited and condemned. As in the seventh Commandment, under the Prohibition
of Adultery, Fornication and all kind of Whoredoms are forbidden; and moreover,
the company of Whores, unclean Communication, Surfeiting, Drunkenness, making
provision for the Flesh, and all things whatsoever may occasion, or directly
minister to such a sin, are prohibited and condemned. So then, whilst Simon
Magus is condemned by the Apostle, for offering Money for the Gift of the Holy
Ghost, not only under this, is to be understood the buying or felling of that
extraordinary Gift of the Holy Ghost, for which he intended to bargain; but
also, all bargaining for other Sacred and Spiritual Things, and for what are
the Instruments and Ministeries thereto, (as being upon that account
Spiritual,) is here condemned, as being in the same Predicament with the sin of
Simon, in subjecting these Spiritual Things to buying and selling, which are
the improper Matter of Merchandise.

Thus having seen what the sin of Simon Magus was; and having considered and
cleared from the Words of the Apostle, what is comprehended under the same, we
may the more easily come to define what Simony is.

The common Definition thereof, given by the Schoolmen and Canonists, is, That
it is, Thom. 22ae. qu. 100. Art. 1.
Studiosa voluntas, seu cupiditas, emendi vel vendendi Spiritualia, vel
Spiritualibus annexa: Bonavent. in lib. 4. Sent. Did. 25. Art. 1. qu. 3.
A studious or earnest Will, or Desire of buying or selling Spiritual Things,
or Things annexed to Spiritual Things. But, Bernard. Compost. in Decret.
Gregor. 9. De Simonia. cap. 1.
because this defines Simony only as it is in the Affection; though it may
indeed by consequence reach it in the external Action and Effect; yet in regard
it expresses not the same; I find the Canonists therefore give also another
Definition thereof, calling it, Decret. Greg. 9. De rerum permut. cap. 5.
Pactio circa Spiritualia, aut Spiritualibus annexa: A Paction, or Bargain
about Spiritual Things, or Things annexed to Spiritual Things. But this again,
reaches only the Effect, whilst the Guilt of Simony may be incurred in the
Affection and Endeavor, though it never come in Effect to a Paction or
Bargain; as it was in the case of Simon Magus himself, who was guilty in the
Thought of his Heart, and in the Offer of his Money, but did effectuate
nothing. Wherefore, it may more fully be defined thus: Simonia est peccatum
circa Spiritualia, quo impretiabile Dei Donum sub pretio ponitur; Simony is a
Sin about Spiritual Things, whereby the unvaluable Gift of God is put under a
Price, or subjected to Merchandise. And this Definition does include both the
former; because, whether it be by a real Paction, that one buys or sells
Spiritual Things; or, whether it be in Affection; or, that by Endeavor, he
expresses his Affection to do so; whether it be by Deed, or whether it be by
Desire, he prostitutes to Merchandise the Gifts of God, which cannot be prized.
As likewise, under the name of Spiritual Things, this comprehends these which
the former Descriptions call Things annexed to Spiritual Things; because, by
Virtue of that Annexation or Connection, (as I have showed) they become, through
God's Appointment, Sacred and Spiritual. And this Definition may be well
gathered from the Text; which holds out, that the Sin of Simon was about a
thing Spiritual, The Gift of the Holy Ghost: And, that his Trespass thereabout
was, That that Gift of God which could not be valued, nor purchased with Sums
of Money, he would have subjected to a Price, and offered Money for it. And all
Simony being but the transcript of his Sin, it may then rightly be thus defined.

And hence it is evident, That all buying, or selling, or bargaining about
Spiritual Things, whether they be such in their own Nature, (as all the Gifts
and Graces of the Holy Ghost, whether ordinary or extraordinary,) or whether
they be such by Divine Institution; and that either as Instruments and Means
for working Spiritual Effects, (as the Word, the Sacraments, the Spiritual
Offices in the Church, Vocation, Ordination, Authority to exercise these
Offices, and the Exercise or Administration of Spiritual Things thereby;) or as
Ministeries and Helps to Spiritual Things; (as Things Consecrated and Devoted,
and Benefices and Maintainances set apart for the utility and support of
Spiritual Offices, with the Presentations, Rights and Titles thereto, etc.) All
buying, or selling, or bargaining (I say,) about any of these things, is
Simony, and a grievous Sin in the sight of God, in that it does put to a Price
these Gifts of God, which are not the subject of Merchandise.

That buying or selling of any of these things, (save of the last kind) falls
under the Sin of Simony, is scarce doubted by any. But, as for the Matters of
Benefices, and Church-maintainances, and things set apart to serve Spiritual
Offices, there be many whose Interest prompts them to cavil upon that Subject:
And, because these things are in their own Nature things Temporal, therefore
they are bold to argue, That all such things, with their Rights and
Presentations, and Titles thereto, may be bought and sold; at least, the buying
or selling thereof, falls not under the Guilt of Simony. But, hereunto I Answer:

First, If we consider these things in their own Nature, as separate from the
Spiritual Office and Use to which they are appointed, they be things Temporal
indeed, and so are vendible; yet, by Virtue of the Annexation and Dedication to
the Ministry of such an Office, they become things Spiritual, and so not
Vendible: For this alters the Nature thereof. Even as the Bread and Wine in
the Eucharist, are in their own Nature, and whilst separate from the Sacrament,
things Temporal, and may be bought and sold; but, when by Consecration, they
are set apart for that spiritual and sacred Use of the Sacrament, they change
the Nature of Temporal Things, and are no more Vendible. Thus things Devoted,
before they were Devoted, were but Temporal; and so Vendible: But, being once
Devoted, they could not so much as be altered, or changed; the Lord himself
has said, Levit. 27.10, 28.
Every Devoted Thing is most holy unto the Lord.

2dly, Whatsoever Benefices, or such things as minister to Spiritual Offices
and Uses, may be, as to the Matter; yet, in regard of their Connection (as I
have said,) they become Spiritual, as being Consecrated and Devoted to God; so
as no Merchandise can be made thereof, without Usurpation upon God's Right, and
Violation done to his Divine Majesty, in regard he has avouched these things
as Sacred and Holy to himself; as is evident in the 27th Chapter of Leviticus,
where the Lord asserteth his Propriety in the things Devoted, and in the Tithes
set apart, for the Maintenance of the Priests and Levites, saying, of every
such thing, It is most holy unto the Lord. Levit. 27.28, 30.
So that, whosoever transacts by way of buying or selling, for Benefices, or
any part of the Church Livings, or Stipends dedicated for the Ministry of
Spiritual Offices, cannot shun to incur the Guilt, either of Simony or
Sacrilege. If it be done merely in contemplation of the Benefice, without
intuition to the Office, but only that the Buyer may enjoy the Church-Revenue,
without any purpose to exercise or discharge the Office to which it is annexed;
he who either buyeth or sells a Benefice so, becomes guilty of gross
Sacrilege, in that he disjoineth and separateth what God has joined together,
and comes under that Increpation and Curse, uttered from the Mouth of the Lord
by Malachy, against those that rob God, saying, Will a Man rob God? Mal. 3.8, 9.
yet ye have robbed me. But ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee? In Tithes and
Offerings. Ye are cursed with a Curse: for ye have robbed me; even this whole
Nation: And is liable to that Woe, which is denounced against those that eat
the Fat, Ezekiel. 34.2, 3.
and clothe themselves with the Wool, but feed not the Flock. But if a Man make
any such Bargain in order to the Office, intending, that in regard of the
Connection that the Benefice has with the Office, by a Title to the one, the
Buyer may come to the other, he is guilty of Simony: As when one buyeth a
Presentation or Title to a Benefice, whereby he may come to be invested with a
Spiritual Office, and so having the Office may enjoy the Benefice; whosoever
does so, incurs this Guilt; because, he not only buys a Benefice, which (being
annexed to a Spiritual Office) is Spiritual and Sacred, as being a thing
whereunto God lays a Claim of Propriety; but also, by that Bargain, he comes to
be invested with a Spiritual Office. And therefore,

3dly, With good Reason I may say, That whosoever buys or sells a Benefice, or
Presentation thereto, buys and sells the Office also: For it is a known Maxim,
Causa causae, est causa causati: That which is the Cause of the Cause, is the
Cause also of the Effect. Now the Money which the Buyer pays to the Seller, is
the Cause which procures the Presentation; the Presentation procures
Ordination, and Ordination the Office; and so the Money answers all; and
being the Cause of the Presentation, is the Cause also of the Office, which
without the Presentation is not attained. Wherefore Lombard says well, Quisquis
horum alterum vendit, Lib. 4. Senten. Did. 25.
sine quo alterum non habetur, neutrum invenditum derelinquit: Whosoever sells
the one of these things, without which the other is not enjoyed, leaves neither
of them unsold. And what is said, I suppose, may be sufficient to make any
Person who pretends to Religion, blush, to plead in behalf of such Simoniacal
Transactions.

CHAP. II. Of the several Ways whereby the Guilt of Simony may be incurred in
the Entrance upon a Spiritual Office.
THAT the buying and selling, or the making Merchandise of Sacred and Spiritual
Things, is the sin of Simony, I have showed; and how heinous a sin it is, I
shall afterward (God willing,) more fully show. Only, before I proceed, I
cannot tell, if I shall need to warn, That howsoever, it was Money that Simon
Magus offered, and that it was for this that the Apostle condemned him, that he
thought the Gift of God could be purchased with Money; that none therefore
suppose, (for I think none so ignorant as to suppose so,) that the Guilt of
Simony cannot be incurred, unless Money be told in the bargain: But, whereas
many other things may be commensurate by Money; and there be much
Merchandising, and many sorts of Transactions in buying and selling, where
things of other Species come in the room of Money, and become the Price of what
is bought and sold: Therefore every gainful Transaction, and every Compact or
Bargain, whereby any thing is yielded, given, or received, as a Price intended
for the purchase of Spiritual Things, is a Sinful and Simoniacal buying and
selling thereof, no less than if Money were paid for the same. And whereas,
there be many ways whereby the guilt of this Sin may be incurred; that every
one who fears God, and has zeal for his Church, may keep their Hands undefiled
therewith, I shall here lay before their Eyes, the several ways whereby Men may
chance to split thereupon; at least, I shall set down so many ways thereof, as
unto which all others may be easily reduced; and within the compass whereof, he
who is any way guilty, shall find himself either explicitly or implicitly
included.

It is then to be considered, That the guilt of Simony may be incurred, either
by a mercenary Entrance into a Spiritual Office, or by a mercenary Exercise or
Administration of Spiritual Things in that Office. As to the Entrance upon a
Sacred or Spiritual Office, Men may incur this Guilt, either as Principal
Agents, or as Abettors and Instruments therein, and participant with them.

Those who come first under our View, are the Principal Agents: And a Man as
such, may incur this Guilt three ways; to wit, either in affectu, in the inward
Affection; or in conatu, in the Endeavor; or in effectu, in the external
Effect or Deed.

First, There is a Guilt of Simony, in affectu, in the Affection or Will; when
a Man has an inward Desire or Purpose of Heart, and Intention, either to buy
or sell any Sacred Office, or Spiritual Thing, by any Compact or Condition for
Money, or any thing answerable thereto. And therefore (as I have told before)
it is defined by the Schoolmen and Canonists, to be Studiosa voluntas, vel
cupiditas, etc. An earnest Will and Desire of buying or selling Spiritual
Things. And this very Desire and Purpose in the Heart of Simon Magus, did the
Apostle Peter look upon as such a sin, that he uttered against it this very
Increpation, Thy Money perish with thee, because thou have thought, that the
Gift of God may be purchased with Money. -- And, Thy Heart is not right in the
sight of God. And therefore, it is rightly observed by the Canonists, Bernard.
Compost in Decret Greg. 9. de Sim. cap. 34.
That Intentio facit hominem Simoniacum: The Intention renders a Man guilty of
Simony. I do not say, That the Desire or Purpose of the Heart to have a
Spiritual Office, is either Simony or Sin: For, the Apostle Paul says, 1 Timothy
1.3.
If a Man desire the Office of a Bishop, he desires a good Work: But, to
desire to come thereto in the way of Bargaining, or by Bribery, that is the
Sin; that by a preposterous way, he will buy from the Hand of Man what he
should wait for from the Hand of God. And a Desire to enter thus, before God
open the Door, is, no doubt, for an evil end, and with an Eye more to
Preferment or Gain, than to God's Glory.

2dly, The Guilt of Simony may be incurred in Conatu exprimente affectum, in
the Endeavor, whereby the Affection or Desire is expressed or manifested. And
thus, whosoever use any Endeavors to purchase by Money, Bribes, or such
unlawful Means, a Place, or Office in the Church; or to procure a Presentation,
Title, or Order thereto, (whether these Endeavors produce the effect of their
Desire, or not,) they are guilty of Simony, whether they be the Buyers or the
Sellers. It was but a frustraneous Endeavor that Simon used, when he offered
the Apostles Money; it was neither accepted, nor did he thereby attain his end;
yet was he therefore condemned by Simon Peter. And it was but in vain, Numb.
16.9, 10, 32.
that Korah conspired with Dathan and Abiram by Force and Tumult, to be
possessed of the Priest's Office; and yet, not only did Moses rebuke him for
it, but the Lord also by a visible Judgment condemned the Attempt. And
whosoever use such Endeavors, their Heart is not right in the sight of God.
Hence it is, that all Offers, Promises, Conditions, Compacts, Insinuations,
Force or Fraud, and all subdolous Arts and Machinations, whereby Men aspire to
Sacred Offices, or go about to obtain the same, being such Endeavors as do
express their inward Simoniacal Affection and Desire, are justly condemned as
Simony. As by the 4th Council of Toledo, They are condemned as unworthy of the
Priestly Office, Council. Tolet. 4. Can. 8.
Qui Honorem illum muneribus obtinere moliuntur: Who do but endeavor to obtain
that Honor by Gifts. And the Canonists determine, That Sola promissio est
Simonia; Bernard. Compost. in Decret. Greg. 9. De Simonia. cap. 12, 34.
The Promise alone is Simony: and that no Offer, or Paction, or Condition in
Spiritual Things, is free from this Vice. And therefore Athalaricus, that
Gothic King of Italy, about the Year 531. having by that Edict of the Marble
Table, condemned Simony: He does also, by his confirmation of the Decree of the
Senate against it, Epist. ad Johan. 22. in Council. Tom. 2. Part. 1.
condemn those as Simoniacal Persons, who should be found rei ambitus, guilty
of going about, or ambitiously compassing, or by fraudulent Machinations
studying to enter upon Places in the Church, and denounces them Infamous. So
then, whosoever should go about to invade an Office in the Church, by such ways
as Vigilius did the Papal Chair, who, by Calumny and Force, extruded his
Predecessor Silverius, and by dishonest Promises made to Theodora Augusta, of
Favor to an Heretic, got himself Promoted; or by such an Artifice, as
Benedictus Cajetanus (called afterward Boniface the Eighth,) went about to
mount to the same Place, whilst by a counterfeit Voice transmitted through a
Wall, by an hollow Engine, (as if it had been an Angel, or some Divine Warning
from Heaven,) he so abused the Simplicity of Caelestinus, his Predecessor, as
he made him betake himself to an Hermitage, to make room for him; whosoever (I
say) should go about by any such kind of ways, either of Force or Fraud to
enter, whether they should prove successful or not, even upon the account of
these dishonest Endeavors, they were justly to be reputed Simoniacal Persons.

3dly, The Guilt of Simony may be incurred in effectu, in the Effect or Deed;
and that is, when Persons by any real Bargain, Compact, or Condition, do buy
and sell, or make Merchandise of any Spiritual Benefices and Offices in the
Church: Whosoever does so, whether it be he that is to receive the same, or the
Patron that gives Title, or he that Ordains and Consecrates, or he that has
any kind of Right, or Suffrage in Election, he is guilty of Simony. And
whereas, this may be done either by real Money, or other things commensurate by
Money, or by what may stand one in as good use as Money; therefore does Gregory
the Seventh and the Schoolmen observe, Greg. 7. Lib. 6. Epist. 34. Thom. 22ae.
qu. 100. Art. 5. Durand. Lib. 4. Did. 25. qu. 4.
That the Sin of Simony may be committed in the Effect or Deed, these three
ways, (which are comprehensive of all others,) to wit, Aut munere a manu, aut a
Lingua, aut ab Obsequio: By a Gift, either by the Hand, or by the Tongue, or by
Homage or Service.

First, This Sin may be committed by a Gift or Bribe, a Manu, by the Hand; that
is, by Transaction for Money, or for any thing Moveable or Immovable, which
comes in the room of Money, as a Price laid out of the Hand for the thing
transacted. Thus, when any Person does purchase a Presentation and Title to a
Spiritual Office, or Ecclesiastic Charge; or procures Ordination thereto; or
obtains Suffrages for his Election, by Money, or any Gift or Bribe whatsoever,
given by himself, or others in his behalf; or, when any Patron bestows a
Presentation, or any Bishop, or Ordinary gives Ordination, or any Man gives his
Voice for Election to such an Office, upon the condition of receiving any
Money, Gift or Bribe; such are in effect guilty of palpable Simony. For, if it
was sin in Simon Magus to offer the like, much more is it in effect to give, or
receive it: For, this is not the way that God will have his Priests made; but
the way after which, by the contrivance of Jeroboam, (as Abijah upbraids him,)
the Priests of the High Places were made, 2 Chronicles. 13.9.
that whosoever came to Consecrate himself (or as it is according to the
Original, (...), ad Implendum, to fill his Hand,) with a Young Bullock, and
seven Rams, the same might be a Priest of them who are no Gods: And therefore,
all such Transactions for such Offices, by Money, Gifts, or Bribery, are justly
condemned as gross Simony: So concludes the Canon Law of him who by Paction
obtains a Right from a Patron; Decretal. Greg. 9. De Simonia. cap. 20.
Si Ordinandus praesentatori suo, etc. If he who is to be Ordained give unto
him who Presents him, any thing by way of Paction, it is a Simoniacal Bargain.
So likewise, De Simonia. cap. 11.
when one practices by a Paction with any of the Clergy, for the bestowing of
Offices in the Church; or with any Prince or Laick Person, by Money, to give
consent, or to further his Election to a Bishopric, or any High Place in the
Church, he falls under the Sentence of a Simoniacal Person. And upon this
Account likewise, the bestowing of a Presentation, with a Reservation of any
Portion of the Benefice, or with a Paction of yielding some yearly Benefit
thence, is justly concluded to be Simony: So says the Third Lateran Council,
Append. Council. Lateran. 3. Part. 49. Cap. 7.
Res Sacraut possideatur, etc. Whilst for the obtaining of the Enjoyment of a
thing Sacred, any thing is given, or promised, or somewhat upon that account is
retained, it appears to be Simony. And so says Aquinas, Thom. 22ae. qu. 100.
Art. 4.
Si Episcopus ab eo cui Beneficium confert, etc. If a Bishop from him upon whom
he bestows a Benefice, require any thing of the Fruits of that Benefice, it is
all one as if he should exact from him a Bribe, and is not free of Simony: For,
as say the Canonists, Bernar. Compostel. in Decret. Gregor. 9. De Simon. Cap.
45.
Remissio juris, etc. A passing from that Right which should befall one by
Virtue of a Presentation, is as much as to give something. And who knows not,
that in such cases, Remissio juris proprii, cadit sub rationem pretii: A Man's
yielding up of his own Right, is of the same nature with a Price paid for what
he Transacts about. And the Council of Turon condemns the Advancing of any to
the Government of Churches, Sub annuo pretio, Can. 5.
for a Yearly Rate, as a making of the Priesthood Vendible. And upon the same
account, the bestowing of a Presentation, or the giving of Ordination with a
Condition, whereby the Hands of the Person Presented, or Ordained, are bound up
from Suing his Patron, or Ordinary, for any farther just Provision, is justly
judged, and condemned as Simony. Decretal. Gregor. 9. De Sim. cap. 45.
Si quis Ordinaverit, etc. If any Man Ordain, or Present to Ordination, any
Person, taking of him a Promise, or Oath, that he shall not trouble him for his
Provision, they are by the Law, made liable to severe Censures. And by the
Second Aurelian Council, Can. 3. Lib. 1. cap. 11.
and by the Council of Paris under Gregory the Fourth, the exacting of Money,
or any thing else, for Elections, or Ordinations, is condemned as Simony, and
as ungodly Corruption and execrable Impiety. And thus it appears, how Simony is
incurred by a Gift of the Hand.

2dly, Persons may fall under the Guilt of this Sin, munere a Lingua, by a
bribing Tongue. For, Bribery may be practiced as well with the Tongue, as with
the Hand; and by the one, as well as by the other, a Man may be brought in a
Snare. Thus Absalom by his fair Tongue, 2 Samuel 15.
bribed the Affections of the Men of Israel, and by stealing away their Hearts
thereby, ensnared them in a course of Rebellion and Treason against his Father.
And thus, by the Peoples Tongues, was Saul bribed to spare Agag, and the fat
Cattle of the Amalekites, and so was ensnared in the sin of Rebellion against
God; fearing, lest if he should not have hearkened to their Voice, he should
have lost their Favor, and incurred their Hatred: Therefore said he to Samuel,
I feared the People, 1 Samuel 15.24.
and obeyed their Voice. And so, when by Complement or Flatteries, or by
Minaces or Threats, or to gratify the Entreaties, or Solicitations, or
Importunities of carnal Friends, or great Persons, for conciliating their
Favor, or for fear of incurring their Displeasure, one is moved to Present,
Ordain, or Advance any Person to a Spiritual Office, without consideration of
his Worth; or, to prefer any by Partiality, he falls under this Guilt of Simony
by the Tongue: For, as the Canonists rightly conclude, Favor, vel gratia, vel
odium, Bernard. Compost. in Decret. Gregor. 9. De Sim. cap. 14.
succedit loco pretii: Favor or good Will, or Hatred, (in such cases,) falls
in place of a Price. And I am sure, to promote one upon such carnal Respects,
agrees not well with that Apostolical Canon which the Apostle Paul wrote to
Timothy, and charged him before God and his Angels, 1 Timothy 5.21, 22.
to observe, without preferring one before another, doing nothing by
Partiality; and saying, Lay Hands suddenly on no Man, neither be partaker of
other Men's Sins: From which, how he keeps his Hands pure, who, to gratify the
Solicitations and Importunities of carnal Friends, inconsiderately advances a
Man to a Spiritual Office, I see not.

Yet this is not so to be understood, as if all Intercessions in Affairs of
this nature, were either Simoniacal or Sinful; but it must be considered,
whether the Person in whose behalf Friends do interceed and entreat for, be a
Person worthy; that is, Holy, and well Qualified for such a Sacred Function; or
unworthy, and unsuitable for it. If he be unworthy, then certainly he sins
hainously who interposeth in his behalf: For he sacrifices the Glory of God,
and the Blood of poor Souls, to the interest of his unworthy carnal Friend or
Favorite; and so does he, who, to gratify Man, is moved by Entreaties, to
invest him with such an Office. But if the Person be worthy then he who
interceeds for him, must consider, upon what Principle he does so: If it be out
of a pious Affection to the good of the Church, and a wellgrounded Hope of his
being a good Instrument for the Glory of God; upon such a ground one may not
only without sin, but very commendably recommend such a Person, and even use
Entreaties and Solicitations for his Advancement to such an holy Function; nay,
and so much the rather, if he be a Person in whom he has an Interest of
natural Relation: (For Religion does no way weaken, but rather corroborates the
Bonds of natural Affection.) Neither does such Dealing want Precedents which
may sufficiently warrant it: Acts 18.27.
The Brethren at Ephesus did recommend Apollo by Letters to the Brethren in
Achaia, entreating them to receive him: The Apostle Paul recommended
Epaphroditus to the Philippians; as likewise Marcus, Philipp. 2.29, 30.
the Sister's Son of Barnabas, Colos. 4.10.
did he recommend to the Colossians: Nay, and though carnal Affection was no
ingredient in our Savior's Choice of his Disciples; yet it is manifest, that
John, his Cousin according to the Flesh, was taken into the number, and is more
than once called, Joh. 13.23. and 19.26. and 20.2. and 21.20.
The Disciple whom Jesus loved. But though the Person for whom one interceeds,
be never so worthy; yet if his Intercessions for him, proceed not from a
Religious, but only from a carnal Principle, to promote a worldly Design; then
is the Intercessour guilty of this Simony by the Tongue, whilst his End therein
is not to serve the Lord Jesus Christ, but only a carnal Interest.

Moreover, Some Parents, it may be, may have in their pious Intentions,
designed a Child to the Ministry of God's House, (as Hannah did her Samuel; 1 Samuel 1.11, 28.
) choosing rather to have him serve God at the Sacred Altar, than in any
Secular Employment; and, upon this Account, have studied to have him qualified
for that work. Now, for such a Parent, when occasion offers, to interpose for
a Child whom he finds competently endowed with Gifts and Graces for the same,
to have him placed in the Sacred Function, (not designing it merely as a Trade
of Lucre, and Livelihood,) is not only lawful, but laudable; as it was in
Hannah, 1 Samuel 2.20, 21.
whom Eli praised for this Devotion, and for which the Lord rewarded her with
the Blessing of more Children. Nay, he who out of zeal to the Glory of God, in
the simplicity of his Heart, (not with a covetous Eye to Gain, nor with an
ambitious Eye to Preferment;) has made it his study to furnish himself for the
holy Ministry of the Church, may even lawfully offer himself, and express his
Desires to those who have Right and Title to advance him thereto, so he do it
modestly, and without a preposterous thrusting himself upon the Sacred
Function: For to this, he has the approbation of the Apostle, saying, 1 Timothy
3.^.
If a Man desire the Office of a Bishop, he desires a good Work. And, so his
Desire is good, Pastor. Part. 1. Cap. 8.
if it proceed (as Gregory says,) A zelo Charitatis Divinitus excitato; from a
zeal of Charity stirred up by God. And for any to comply with the desire of
such a Person, upon the consideration of his Worth, is neither Simoniacal, nor
Sinful.

3dly, The third way of Bribery, whereby the Guilt of Simony may be incurred in
Deed, is, Ab obsequio, by Homage or Service. Thus, he who either for the
present, or by any Obligation for the future, does Service or Homage; or by any
good Offices, ministers to the Interests of Man, upon design to procure his own
Advancement to a Spiritual Office, is guilty of Simony, as the Buyer; and so is
he, as the Seller, who, upon the account thereof, promotes him thereto: For,
whilst by such Service, the one bribeth, and the other is bribed, it is all one
as if the Merchandise were made by Money. When Jacob did purchase his Wives by
his Service from Laban, they accounted themselves as sold for Money. Genesis 31.15.
And so, the Homage or Service which one pays for Spiritual Things, is
nothing else but the Money of Simon Magus, transmitted with another Impression,
from a different kind of Mint. Therefore says the Canon Law, Simoniacum est,
Decret. Gregor. 9. De Sim. Cap. 12.
pro temporali obsequio Beneficium clesiasticum promittere: To promise an
Ecclesiastical Benefice for Temporal Service, is Simony. And again, Cap. 17.
Pro habendis Spiritualibus homagium facere, Simoniacum est: To do Homage for
enjoying of Spiritual Things, is Simony. And therefore, how they can wash their
Hands from the loathsome Stain of this Sin, who pay their Servants Salaries by a
Spiritual Benefice; or, who serve any Man with a design to earn a Church as
their Wages, I cannot see. Nor are they less guilty, who make their Matches an
Engine to promote them to a Charge; or, who make the Donation of a Church a
Mean, much more a Condition for the Marriage of an Handmaid, or to procure a
Fortune unto, or to supply the place of a Dotal Provision, for an indigent
Neice or Cousin; which is, not unfitly, termed by our Countrymen,
Smock-Simony; because, by serving of such Interests, the Church is sold. And
they may well be brought within the same Predicament, who make a Spiritual
Benefice a Patrimony unto, or a Rescue for the Penury of an useful Friend or
Kinsman: Upon which account, the Canon Law decrees thus; Decret. Gregor. 9. De
Jure Patronat. cap. 6.
Qui emit jus Patronatus, etc. He who buys the Right of Patronage, that he may
Present a Son, or a Nephew, or any whom he pleases, ought to be deprived
thereof. And this is an Evil that Jerome much complains of, Advers. Jovin. Lib.
1.
That Affinity, or Consanguinity, or Service, should be the ground of
preferring Men to Spiritual Offices, or Degrees, as if they were to be
bestowed, as Men are Advanced to Military Offices in the World. Yet I do not
say, but that any Man may lawfully prefer to an Ecclesiastic Charge, a Friend,
or Relative, who is well qualified for the Office: For (as I have said
already,) Religion does not weaken, but rather strengthens the Bonds of natural
Affection; so that it were Injustice to deal worse with Relatives, than with
Strangers; or, caeteris paribus, not to prefer them to others. But to do so,
merely upon a carnal Account, because they may serve better our Temporal Ends
and Designs; or to prefer a Person unfit, because he is a Friend, bewrays an
Eye more to carnal Interest than to God's Glory. Neither do I say, but Durandus
is in the right, in saying, That one may lawfully confer an Ecclesiastic
Office or Benefice upon him, Lib. 4. Did. 25. qu. 4.
who has served him, through a sense of that Worth he has learned to be in
him, by Experience and daily Converse; if so be he do it in contemplation of
his Worth, and not of his Service: But, if respect to this be the Principle
that sways him, he is guilty of Simony. Wherefore, I cannot but judge them
exceeding guilty in the sight of God, who promote Men to any degree of the
Sacred Hierarchy, not upon a consideration of their Sanctimony, or Abilities to
serve God therein, but out of a Design to serve secular ends; and therefore do
make choice of such, from whose Inclinations they can expect, and promise to
themselves, that they will prove fittest Instruments for abetting their public
or private Interests; the expectation of which Service, (much more, if it be
made a Condition in the Bargain,) is no less the Price of such a Promotion,
than if it were sold for Service already done: And not without reason may it be
said, That those Merchants do trade for such Creatures, not to be Ministers to
God, but Slaves to themselves. But much more does he incur this Guilt, who, for
the purchase of such a Preferment, mancipates his Conscience implicitly to
follow the Dictates of his Promoter; by whom, whilst he is advanced upon the
Condition, or Expectation of such a blind Obedience, I Am sure God has no hand
in the Bargain. But, I think I need say no more for the discovery of these
Rocks, whereupon the Principal Agents in such Spiritual Traffic may chance to
split, in the way of Entrance upon Sacred Offices.

I proceed next, to show how the guilt of Simony may be incurred by others, as
being Instruments and Abettors thereof: For who are thus partakers therein, by
walking contrary to the Rule of the Apostle, who has said, Ephesians. 5.11.
Have no fellowship with the unfruitful Works of Darkness, but rather reprove
them; they become Socii Criminis, Companions in the Crime and Guilt. And thus
Men may be guilty several ways.

First, A Man may incur this Guilt by promoting of a Simonical Design, in
becoming a Mediator, or secret Agent; either by Advice and Counsel, or by
transacting betwixt the Parties, or in behalf of either of them, in any
Condition, Compact, or payment of Money; or by using any sinister Devices for
that effect. And, that he who does so, becomes in the sight of God guilty of
this Sin, he may be easily convinced, if he consider, That a Fellowship in any
Sin, by Advice and Counsel, does stir up the Wrath of the Almighty, as well
against the evil Counselor, as against the Perpetrator thereof; which is
evident from that Command which the Lord gave to Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 11.2, 3, 4.
to Prophecy against those that did devise Mischief, and give wicked Counsel
in Jerusalem; and that the Transactors for others in wicked Purposes, are
liable to the same Punishment with them; whereof God's Judgment denounced
against Jezebel, 1 King. 21.23.
for her secret Transactions to possess Ahab of that bloody Purchase of the
Vineyard of Naboth, is a pregnant Testimony. And so do those, who by secret
Transactions and Conveyances, meddle as Instruments, to promote Simoniacal
Designs, involve themselves in the same Guilt with those, in behalf of whom
they deal; and sometimes into more, when they do it without the Party's privity
or consent. And therefore, were the Fathers of the Council of Chalcedon, so
severe against such, as to decree, Can. 2.
That si quis mediator in tam turpibus and nefandis datis vel acceptis
extiterit, etc. If any Man should be found to be a Mediator in such filthy and
nefarious Bargains, of giving and receiving any thing for Spiritual Offices;
being a Clergyman, he should lofe his Degree; or, if a Laick, or Monk, he
should be Anathematized. And, lest by this means any should be entered into the
Church, the Sentence of the Canon Law is somewhat more severe, Decret. Greg. 9.
De Simon. Cap. 27.
which says, Electio Simoniaca est cassanda, facta, etc. A Simoniacal Election
is to be made void, if it have been made by other Men's Promises of Money,
although he who is Elected be ignorant thereof; unless it have been done of a
fraudulent Purpose against him. And the ground hereof is, because, though he
have no hand therein himself, yet it is by a Simoniacal Paction that he is
introduced into the Church.

2dly, A Man incurs this Guilt, when he complies therewith by Consent or
Approbation. That Consent or Approbation renders a Man guilty of the Sin to
which he consents, and wherein he allows the Sinner, I trust none will
question, who has ever read these Words, whereby God declares a Man unworthy
upon this account, to take his Covenant in his mouth, saying, Psalm. 50.18.
When thou saw a Thief, then thou consentedst with him: Or, the Words of
Paul confessing it as his Sin, that he was consenting to the shedding of the
Blood of that Proto-Martyr Steven. Act. 22.20.
And, is not he then guilty before God, who, seeing one as a Thief and a
Robber, climbing up into the Sheepfold of Christ by Simonical means, yields
his consent thereto? Whosoever then, being conscious to a Simonical Transaction
made by any person, for procuring of a Title or Right to a Spiritual Office, or
Benefice, does consent to give him Ordination, or Collation thereto, by this
sinful compliance becomes guilty of Simony. And whosoever, having notice of
such a Transaction, concurs with his consent to the Election, Ordination, or
Collation of such a Person, involves himself in the same Guilt.

3dly, A Man may incur this Guilt by Connivance; when, being privy thereto, he
winks thereat, or forbeareth, according to his Place and Calling, either to
oppose himself thereto, or to censure the same. How guilty Connivance, or
Forbearance of Sin, rendereth a Man, may appear by the Lord's Comminations
against those who would Hide their Eyes from the Man who gives of his Seed to
Molech; Levit. 20.4.
and against Eli, 1 Samuel 2. and 3.13, 14.
for conniving at the Wickedness of his Sons; and against the Church of
Thyatyra, Rev. 2.20.
for suffering jezebel. Wherefore, for any Man to be privy to a Person's
Simoniacal ways, whereby he studies as a Thief, to creep into a Charge of the
Church, and not to represent it to those who should by their Authority obstruct
him; by his Connivance, he becomes guilty of Fellowship with him in his sin.
But so much the more, if he be silent at his taking of that Oath which is
usually tendered to those that take Institution for purging themselves of that
Crime: For which Guilt, I leave him to consider what Solomon says, Prove. 29.24.
Whosoever is Partner with a Thief, hates his own Soul: he hears Cursing, and
bewrays it not. And much more then do they render themselves guilty of a
Fellowship with such in their Sin, who by their Authority should punish the
same, and yet wink thereat; and therefore says Gregory, Apud Gratian. Cause. 1.
Quest. 1. Can. Quisquis per pecuniam.
Participem se reddit alienae Simoniae, quisquis contra Simoniacam Haeresin,
pro officii sui loco, vehementer non exarserit, etc. He rendereth himself
partaker of another Man's Simony, whosoever, according to his Place and
Calling, is not vehemently zealous against that Heresy of Simony; and let not
that Man doubt, but he shall have his Portion with him who first committed that
heinous Crime.

4thly, A Man may incur the Guilt of Simony by Patronizing; to wit, when he
takes part with Simoniacal Persons, and bears them out, either by countenancing
them in their sin, or by pleading for them, or by setting himself out to
justify and defend them therein. And this indeed is such an high Degree of
Fellowship in this Sin, as he who does so, espouseth the Interest of Satan, as
well as of Simon, and stands upon his side against God. But to him who takes
such a Plea in hand, I may use the like Words, as the Father of Jerubbaal did
to the Men of his City, who rose up against him, for his Son's throwing down of
Baal's Altar, saying, Will ye plead for Baal? Judge. 6.31.
will ye save him? So I may say, Will ye plead for Simon Magus? will ye defend
him? And as John the Seer said to Jehoshaphat, for assisting Ahab, 2 Chronicles.
19.2.
Should thou help the Ungodly? And what he who does so, will answer to him
who has said, Exodus 23.3.
Thou shall not countenance a poor Man in his Cause, I know not: For, even
though his Poverty might plead for our Charity, yet our Charity must not make
us yield our Patronage to an evil Cause. And he may think with himself, what he
can expect from the Hand of the Almighty, who has threatend severe Wrath
against those that strengthen the Hands of evil doers. Jer. 23.14, 15.


Thus have I showed the several ways whereby Men may be guilty of Simony,
either as the Principal Agents, or as Instruments and Accomplices with them in
their Sin. By which ways, whosoever enters into the Sacred Offices of the
Church, is intruded by the Artifices of Man; but they may hear God saying of
them, Jer. 23.21.
I have not sent these Prophets, yet they ran.

CHAP. III. How Simony is practiced in the Administration of a Spiritual Office.
THE Sin of Simony does not consine it self within the compass of their
Transactions, who practice the same for making way for their Entrance upon the
Holy Calling in the Church; but extends it self also, to the Exercises of
that Calling in the hands of many who bear Charge: So that, as there may be
Guilt by a mercenary Entrance into a Spiritual Office, so there may be much
Guilt also, by the mercenary Administration of Spiritual Things in that Office;
as, when Merchandise is made of the Word and Sacraments, of the Sentences of
the Church, and of the Exercise of any Acts and Duties which belong to the holy
Ministry: For these Spiritual Things being the free Gifts of God, and so
improper Matter of Merchandise; whosoever, either in the internal Affection, or
external Practice, makes them the subject of Buying and Selling, is a Disciple
of Simon Magus, who (as I have told before, in the Words of Gregory and
Nicolaus de Lyra,) would have bought the Power of Giving the Holy Ghost, that
afterward by Exercising that Power, he might purchase Gain to himself. For, as
he who does but design, or desire by the Ministry of the Gospel, to gratify
his Covetousness, is guilty of Simony in the Will, and Affections of his Heart;
so he, who in the Exercise of that Sacred Office, sets the Ministry of
Spiritual Things to Sale, and makes the same a Matter of Merchandise, and
subservient to his Gain, incurs the Guilt of Simony, in Effect and Deed. And,
how dreadful a Guilt this is, may appear by that grievous Increpation uttered
by the Prophet Micah, against the House of Israel, saying, Mic. 3.11, 12.
The Heads thereof judge for Reward, and the Priests thereof teach for Hire,
and the Prophets thereof divine for Money; -- Therefore shall Zion for your
sake, be plowed as a Field, and Jerusalem shall become Heaps, and the Mountain
of the House as the high Places of the Forest.

Now the Ministers and Pastors of the Church, may incur the guilt of this Sin
two ways; to wit, whilst, either for their Advantage and Gain, they obtrude
Falsehood and Error for Truth, and minister to People corrupt, instead of
wholesome, Food; so selling for Upright, what is but Sophisticate and
Counterfeit; or, whilst they in their Administration, make the true and holy
Ordinances of Jesus Christ vendible, by setting these Spiritual Things to Sale.

First, The Guilt of Simony is incurred in the Administration of the Spiritual
Calling, and that in an high measure; when those who exercise that Calling, do,
for some Temporal Advantage, corrupt the Spiritual Ordinances of the Gospel,
setting forth things Counterfeit for Upright, and Falsehood and Error for Truth
and sound Doctrine. And this Men do, either whilst by present Profit, or
expectation of some future Gain, or by fear of Displeasure, or for conciliating
of Favor, or by hope of Preferment, their Tongues are bribed to teach
Complacencies, to sooth and flatter Men in their Sins, to forbear Reproofs and
Censures, to smother the Truth and Counsel of God, to adapt their Doctrine to
humane Humors and Inclinations, and to comply with Men in their Errors or
sinful Courses; or, whilst out of a secret Desire of Vainglory, or an
ambitious Design of setting themselves up as the Heads of Sects, and drawing
Disciples after them, they forge new and false Doctrines, broach and vent
Errors and Heresies, and disseminate their own wild Fancies, filling the Heads
of People with corrupt Principles, which when they have made them to drink in,
by imposing upon their weak and unwary Understandings, they easily betray their
Affections, and Proselyte them to their Party. All which Practices are nothing
else but gross Simony, whilst they sell the Truth, and make Merchandise of
Souls; whether the Price be the present Profit, or the hope of future Gain, or
humane Favor, or Fear, or Ambitious Designs, or Vainglory; for all these are
the current Money of Simon Magus. And of such cheating Merchants in the Church,
the Apostles have sufficiently warned us, giving them their proper Characters.
The Apostle Paul speaking of such, calls them unruly and vain Talkers, Tit.
1.10, 11.
and Deceivers, -- teaching things which they ought not, for filthy Lucre's
sake. And he warns the Overseers of the Church to watch against such, Act.
20.30, 31.
saying, Of your own selves, shall Men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw
away Disciples after them: therefore watch. And he gives a Caveat to all, to
avoid such, as Men that serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own Belly;
Romans 16.17, 18.
and by good Words, and fair Speeches, deceive the Hearts of the Simple. And so
does also the Apostle Peter, warn against such, saying, 2 Pet. 2.1, 3.
There shall be false Teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable
Heresies, etc. And through covetousness, shall they with feigned Words make
Merchandise of you; whose Judgment of a long time lingereth not, and their
Damnation slumbereth not. And what Character the Apostle Jude gives of such,
may be read in his Epistle at length. And such Pastors under the Gospel, may be
well ranked in the Predicament with those Prophets under the Law, of whom the
Lord complains, that they did pollute him amongst his People, Ezekiel. 13.19, 22.
for handfuls of Barley, and for pieces of Bread, -- by Lying, and strengthening
the Hands of the Wicked; and they made his People to Err, pleasing the Wicked,
Mic. 3.5.
in crying Peace to them, and preparing War against those that put not into
their Mouths; and with those Priests that corrupted the Covenant of Levi, Mal.
2.8, 9.
-- and were partial in the Law. They may well (I say) be ranked in the
Predicament with these, since the likeness of their ways declare them to be
Animalia ejusdem speciei, Creatures of the same kind. But it becomes all who
would wish to approve themselves the faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ, to
entertain an abhorrency of all such corrupt Dealing, which either humane
Favor, or Gain, or Glory, bribes Men to; that so, with the Testimony of a good
Conscience, they may be able to say, both in the sight of God and Man, with the
Blessed Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 2.17.
We are not as many, which corrupt the Word of God; but as of Sincerity, but as
of God, in the sight of God speak we in Christ. 1 Thessalonians. 2.3, 4, 5, 6.
And our Exhortation was not of Deceit, nor of Uncleanness, nor in Guile; But
as we were allowed of God to be put in trust with the Gospel, even so we speak;
not as pleasing Men; but God, which tries our Hearts: For neither at any time
used we flattering Words, as ye know, nor a Cloak of Covetousness, God is
witness: Nor of Men sought we Glory.

2dly, Not only are those guilty of Simony in their Administration, who cheat
People with corrupt and counterfeit Ware; but those also, who, pretending to be
the Pastors of Christ's Flock, set to Sale upright and true Spiritual Things,
and Ordinances of the Lord Jesus, committed unto their Dispensation, making the
free Gifts of God vendible. And thus are they guilty, who make use of the Word
of God, of the Sacraments, of their Preaching, Exhortations, Admonitions,
Consolations, Prayers, Benedictions, and of the Acts of Discipline Censures of
the Church, or any Matter of the Pastoral Office, as the gainful Commodities of
their Shop; setting them forth, or shutting them up, according as they may best
contribute, either for their Prosit, or for their Praise: For not only does he
play the Simoniack, who sells the Gospel for Money or real Bribes; but he also,
who preaches to purchase to himself Applause, and the praise of Men: For thus,
his Praise is the price of his Preaching; at which, whilst he aims, he
preaches not Christ, but himself; and it may be, he has his Reward; but he
shall come short of that Reward which he now enjoys, who said, We preach not
our selves, 2 Cor. 4.5.
but Christ Jesus the Lord: Nor can those Pastors, who for their Gain, basely
make Merchandise of those Spiritual Things committed to their Dispensation,
expect that Reward of the Crown of Glory, from the Hands of the chief Shepherd,
whilst, in order to the obtaining thereof, they discharge not their Duty upon
the right Principle, nor according to that Rule prescribed by the holy Apostle
Peter, saying, 1 Pet. 5.^
Feed the Flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof, not by
constraint, but willingly; not for filthy Lucre, but of a ready mind.
Wherefore, whosoever have their Lucre in their Eye, in the Administration of
the Ministerial Office, and limit their Labors to the expectation of their
worldly Gain, are justly to be reputed Mercenary, and Simoniacal Persons. And
therefore, many Councils have strictly inhibited and condemned such
Merchandise: That Council holden in Trullus of Constantinople, called
Quini-sextum, has a particular Canon to this purpose; wherein (besides other
Words,) it is said, Can. 23.
Si quis eorum, etc. If any of the Clergy be found to exact any kind of Price
from him to whom he imparts the Holy Communion, let him be Deposed, as an
imitator of the Error and Wickedness of Simon. And that Council of Rhemes,
under Leo the Ninth, forbids, under the pain of an Anathema, Can. 5.
Ne quis pro Sepultura vel, etc. That none should exact any thing for Burial,
or for Baptism, or for the Eucharist, or for visiting of the Sick. And not only
by these, but by several other Councils, and Sentences of the Canon Law, the
same is condemned, which likewise decrees it as Simony, Pretio, Decretal. Greg.
9. De Sim. Cap. 14.
vel Favore, etc. For Price or Favor, to conceal what should be brought to
public Penance; or, to reconcile to the Church (or Absolve) an impenitent
Person; or, to remove from Reconciliation (or Absolution) a Person truly
penitent. And, against such Merchandise in the Administration of Spiritual
Things, (besides Canonists and Schoolmen,) the whole Stream of all the
Ancients, which ever I did read, where they fall upon this Subject, do clearly
run; condemning such Pastors, and comparing them to Gehazi and Simon Magus;
because, for these free Spiritual Gifts of God, they surreptitiously take a
Price, as Gehazi did, and account them Matters which may be bought and sold for
Money, as did Simon; and therefore against such, have commonly made use of
those Words of our Savior to his Disciples, when he sent them forth upon the
Work of the Ministry, Gratis accepistis, gratis date; Matthew. 10.8.
Freely ye have received, freely give.

Which Words are notwithstanding cautiously and rightly to be understood, and
not as some Sacrilegious Tongues and Pens of perverse Men (to whom, what is
allotted for the Maintenance of the Gospel, is an eyesore;) have perverted
the sense thereof, to the prejudice of all Ecclesiastical Benefices, and with a
design (so far as in them lies,) to rob the Church and Pastors of what the
Charity of devout Persons has mortified, or what the Munificence of pious
Princes has by their Laws allowed, or what in justice is due, for the
accommodation and livelihood of the Laborers in the Vineyard of the Lord.
Which, whilst their covetous Hearts are panting after, that they may flatter
their own Consciences into a liberty to invade the same, and cast some cloak
upon their Sin, they impudently cry out against the Pastors, reproaching them
as mercenary Priests and Hirelings, who preach the Gospel for Money, and sell
the Gifts of God, which they should freely give, according as Christ gave
Command to his Disciples. So do they reproach every one who enjoys any Stipend
for his Service in the Ministry.

For the stopping of the Mouths of these croking Vultures, (who would
rapaciously devour the Food of the Altar, and strip the Church of her
Patrimony;) I shall not say with some, That these Words of our Savior do
relate, not to the preaching of the Gospel, but to those Gifts of working
Miracles, wherewith he sent forth his Disciples endued, for the Confirmation of
their Preaching; nor that these Words were intended only for the Apostles, and
not for the ordinary Ministers of the Church. (Although indeed, the difference
be considerable betwixt extraordinary Persons, who have by an immediate Act of
Divine Inspiration, received a supernatural Faculty of dispensing the Spiritual
Things of the Holy Calling, and those ordinary Persons, who by Study and
Industry, have acquired Abilities to fit them, and must be at assiduous pains
to furnish themselves for the Dispensation thereof.) But, that our Savior
never intended by these Words, to strip either the extraordinary or ordinary
Pastors of his Church, of the expectation of due Maintenance for their
Labors, is evident to any Eye, in which there is not some Beam of Prejudice:
For, as at the giving of their Commission for the Dispensation of these Divine
Gifts, he said, Freely ye have received, freely give; so immediately
(dissuading them from care to provide for themselves,) he says, Matthew. 10.10.
The Workman is worthy of his Meat. And so said he to the seventy Disciples
also, Luke 10.7.
The Labourer is worthy of his Hire. So that the Lord Jesus would not have them
suppose, that he had spoken to debar them from due Maintenance at their hands,
to whom they were to Preach the Gospel, but rather allowed them to expect the
same. And so affirms the Apostle Paul, (who much better understood his
meaning, than all these prejudicate Glossers:) For, 1 Cor. 9. pleading in
behalf of the Ministers of the Gospel, after he has showed, that they have as
good a right to their Maintenance, as a Soldier in the War has to his Wages,
as the Planter of a Vineyard has to the Fruits thereof, and as he that feeds a
Flock, to eat of the Milk; declaring it to be no great matter, to reap carnal
Things at their hands, to whom they sow spiritual Things; and having urged,
that by as good right the Ministers of the Gospel should have their
Maintenance thereby, as those under the Law, who ministered about Holy Things,
did live by the Things of the Temple and Altar; (and how liberal a Maintenance
that was, he understands little of the Jewish Law, who knows not:) He then
pleads our Savior's Authority, for confirmation thereof, saying, 1 Cor. 9.14.
Even so has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live
of the Gospel. And therefore also does the same Apostle say, Gal. 6.6.
Let him that is taught in the Word, communicate unto him that teaches him, in
all good things. And again, 1 Timothy 5.17, 18.
Let the Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double Honor, especially,
they who labor in the Word and Doctrine: For the Scripture says, Thou shall
not muzzle the Ox that treads out the Corn; and, The Labourer is worthy of
his Reward. So that, when our Savior said, Freely ye have received, freely
give; it was nothing of his Intention to debar the Laborers in the Gospel, to
whom he had committed the Dispensation of Spiritual Things, from their
Maintenance; but, that they should not make Merchandise of these Spiritual
Things, nor set them to Sale, as Matters that might be bought or sold; but
should dispense them as the free Gifts of God, to which no Money nor Temporal
Thing can be a Price proportionable; which is nothing inconsistent with their
receiving, and enjoying a sufficient Maintenance and Livelihood by their
Labors; and which to require, is neither Simony nor Sin. For it is received,
(as it is said in the Schools,) Non tanquam merces operis, sed ut stipendium
laborantis; non tanquam pretium Spiritualium, sed ut sustentationis stipendium
necessarium: Not as the Reward of the Work, but as the wages of the Worker; not
as the Price of Spiritual Things, but as the necessary Stipend for his
Sustentation that dispenses them. And therefore says Augustine, Lib. De past.
cap. 2.
Accipient sustentationem necessitatis a populo, mercedem Dispensationis a
Domino: They shall receive their necessary Sustentation from the People, but
the Reward of their Dispensation from the Lord.

Thus it is evident, that the Pastors of the Church are not to be reputed
Hirelings, or Simoniacal Merchants of Spiritual Things, upon the account of the
requiring and exacting of their Stipends, and the Fruits of their Benefices due
from the People for their Maintenance; if so be the Benefice be not the end
they aim at, and their Temporal Commodity the design of their Labors; but that
they feed the Flock for love to Christ, and not for filthy Lucre, not making
the Matters of their Calling, the subject of Transactions for worldly Gain;
which, whosoever does, deals as an Hireling indeed: For the Pastoral Office, is
called, A Warfare; and as it is in the secular Warfare, so is it in the case of
the Church Militant: There be many Soldiers in the War; all have their Wages:
But, in some, the design of their Service is, the Safety of their Country; in
others, the design is, only their own Gain; and upon this account, they list
themselves in the War: They both require, they both exact, they both receive
their Wages; yet, he who designs his Service for the preservation of his
Country, is not to be reputed a mercenary Soldier, because he hazards himself,
not for his Wages, but for his Country, howsoever he do require his Wages as
well as the other, that thereby he may be sustained to attend his Duty: But the
other is to be accounted Mercenary, because the design of his Service, is not
the Countrey's good, but his own gain; and he hazards his Life only for his
Money: So in the Church, the Ministers of the Gospel do all require, and
receive Wages and Maintenance; but it may be, all design not the same thing:
He, whose design is the Glory of God, and the feeding of the Flock, may
lawfully require his Stipend, and the due Fruits of his Benefice; nay, (as
Aquinas says rightly,) he may exact the same, Thom. 22ae. qu. 100. Art. 3.
A nolentibus, and valentibus solvere; from those who are able to pay, even
though they be unwilling: For he exacts but what is his own, and what others
have neither just Title to, nor can lawfully possess; yet is he not to be
reputed mercenary for all that, because the end of his Labors is not these
things, but the Edification of the Church; and only he requires his Wages, or
Stipend, as the matter of his Maintenance, that he may attend without
Distraction, to the Duties of his Calling. But he, whose design is Gain, and
not the Glory of God, nor Edification of Souls; but only exercises the Office,
that he may have the Benefice, is the mercenary Man that makes Merchandise of
his Office. Homil. 14. in Evang.
Mercenarius quippe est (says Gregory,) qui locum quidem Pastoris tenet, lucra
autem animarum non quaerit, sed terrenis commodis inhiat: He truly is the
mercenary Man, who holds indeed the place of a Pastor, yet seeks not the
benefit of Souls, but gapes after earthly Commodities. And so much the more
mercenary is he, if, besides the Allowance of that Maintenance, which is set
apart for him, as a Steward in God's House, he make also his Advantage of those
Spiritual Things which are committed to his Dispensation, and gives not to
every one their Portion in due season, but limits it to the seasons and measure
of his Gain; nor does dispense the Bread and Water of Life indifferently to
all, but keeps back, or lays out, impairs, or augments the Portion of the
Children, according to the expectation of either the Benefit or Favor he may
reap thereby: Such a one, is indeed but a base Simoniacal Peddler, making
Merchandise of the Gifts of God. But such is not he, who requires but his
Allowance of these due Accommodations which the diligent Attendance to his
Duties call for, wherein he exercises himself without any base design, giving
unto every one their portion in due season; nay, this is the faithful and wise
Steward; Luke 12.42, 43.
and blessed shall he be, when at the coming of his Lord, he shall be found so
doing.

CHAP. IV. Of the hainousness of the Sin of Simony.
IF the hainousness and impiety of this Sin of Simony were seriously
considered, it could not but beget a perfect detestation and abhorrency
thereof, in the Heart of any true Christian. Wherefore, having showed what
Simony is, and the several ways whereby the Guilt thereof may be incurred; I
proceed now to set it forth in its own Colors, and to show, how great and
heinous a Crime it is. And this I hope to make appear, by Arguments of good and
solid Reason; from the grievous Characters put upon it, and Evidences of God's
Wrath against it, set down by the Holy Ghost in the Scriptures; and from the
Sentiments the Holy Fathers and Church of Christ have had thereof, and Censures
they have judged it liable to.

First, How great and heinous a sin Simony is, may appear by these Reasons
following.

1st, Because Simony is a kind of Theft, and that of an high nature. We justly
account him a Thief, who, being a Steward, and put in trust with his Lord's
Substance, giving charge to dispense the same for the Provision and
Maintenance of his Household, and Authority freely to fill all the places of
Office in the Family with worthy and faithful Fellow Servants; if he should so
abuse this Power and Trust, as either to embezzle his Master's Goods, or
convert them to his own use, by selling of Offices, and putting Men in charge
for Bribes, without consideration of their Worth and Fidelity, and by making
Merchandise of his Master's Wealth for his own private Gain; we justly (I say,)
account such a one a Thief, and guilty of a Theft of the highest nature, as
being Fur in Officio, A Thief in his Office and Calling, betraying his Trust,
and selling away, as his own, that whereof he is not the Lord, or Owner, but
the Steward; and as ensnaring others also into the guilt of his Crime, by
making as many Thieves as he has Receivers of his Theft. Now such Thieves are
Simoniacal Persons, who sell and make Merchandise of Spiritual Things, which
are not the proper subjects of Buying or Selling, but the free Gifts of God,
whereof they are not Lords, but Stewards, to whom the free Dispensation of
these things is committed, and of whom it is required, 1 Cor. 4.1, 2.
that they be found faithful. And, if that flying Roll of the Curse (as the
Lord of Hosts has said by the Prophet,) Zech. 5.4.
shall enter into the House of the Thief, -- and shall consum it, with the
Timber thereof, and the Stones thereof. Their Houses, I Am sure, are in a
tottering state, who are guilty of this Simoniacal Theft, of making Merchandise
of the Offices of God's House, and converting the Spiritual Things committed to
their Trust, to their own private Gain; whereby, they are not only Thieves, but
murdering Thieves, whilst by such Merchandise they make Merchandise also of
the Blood of Souls. And so much the greater is their Danger, as the Matters are
Sacred which they thus embezzle; and in so much as that Lord to whom they
betray their Trust, is not Man, but that God who is a consuming Fire. Heb.
12.29.


2dly, By Simony Men incur the heinous guilt of great Ingratitude, and contempt
of God, in setting his Spiritual Gifts at a low rate. If some great Prince or
Royal Person, should fall in love with the Daughter of a Beggar, and should
bestow upon her some rich Jewels, as the Pledges and Tokens of his love, and
such Gifts as might raise her to, and support her, and such Servants as were
requisite for her Attendance, in a grandeur suitable for a Person of such high
Pretensions, as the Mistress, or future Spouse of a King; and then this Woman
should esteem so light of all those Jewels and Gifts, as out of a base
covetousness to sell them; or, out of some carnal Respect, to throw them away
upon some base Relatives, or lewd Paramours, or Favorites of her own; might
she not justly bear the Character of a Person of monstrous Ingratitude, and
foolishly to have contemned such a Royal Lover, in prizing so lightly all his
Presents? And did she not deserve to be cast off with disgrace, as one unworthy
ever for the future, to pretend to any Interest in him? Now, such is the
Dealing of these Simoniacal Persons with Jesus Christ: This great King of
Glory, out of his transcendent Love, has come down from the Throne of Heaven,
to purchase us, an Offspring of Beggars, and Mushrooms of the Dunghill, to be
his Royal Spouse; and for preparing and fitting us for our eternal Marriage
with him, has bestowed upon us (as Pledges of his Love,) the Celestial Jewels
of these free Spiritual Gifts, wherewith he has endowed his Church, Ephesians. 4.12.
for the perfecting of the Saints, for the Work of the Ministry, for the
edifying of the Body of Christ. Wherefore, those who sell away these
inestimable Gifts, or any way prostitute them to Merchandise for any Temporal
Thing in exchange, are guilty of most high Ingratitude, and of heinous contempt
of Jesus Christ, as undervaluing the Pledges of his Love, and setting them at a
more disproportionable rate, than is betwixt the smallest Farthing and the most
precious Jewel that the richest Mines of this World can yield; and therefore,
deserve to forfeit his Love, whose Gifts they have set so light by.

3dly, Is it not an heinous Offense, and fearful sin, to give occasion of
Blasphemy against God, and of bringing up an evil Report upon his Church? That
it is so, we may easily conclude from the severe Anger of God against David
upon this account, 2 Samuel 12. 2 Samuel 12.14.
Because he had given great occasion to the Enemies of the Lord to blaspheme.
And so indeed do they who practice Simony, and make Merchandise of Spiritual
Things, give occasion of blaspheming God, and of reproaching him of Partiality,
as if he had more respect to the Rich, as more capable of his Gifts and Graces,
than the poor; and, as if his Church were a Shop, or Warehouse, where they
speed best, who have most Money. And how, alas! does it open the Mouths of
many, when they see these Sacred Things dispensed to the rich, whereof the poor
are deprived because of their Penury; and Bribes making an easy Passage for
some into the Church, whilst the doors are shut against those that want Money;
and Wealth, and not worth the Argument of Promotion to Spiritual Offices? How
does it (I say) open the Mouths of many, to cry out in the Words of that old
Satyr:

-- Cuncta vaenalia nobis, Templa, Sacerdotes, Altaria, Sacra, etc.

All things are to be sold amongst us, Churches, Priests, Altars, Holy Things,
etc. and what not!

And whether it be a light thing to give such occasion of Reproach against God
and his Church, those who do so, will find in the day of their Reckoning.

4thly, It is no small sin to expose Sacred and Spiritual Things to contempt,
and to give occasion to have them vilified and despised as Matters of little
worth. It was upon this account that it was said of Hophni and Phinehas, 1 Samuel
2.17.
that the Sin of the Young Men was very great before the Lord; because they
gave occasion for Men to abhor, and set light by the Offering of the Lord. And
so do they, who by their Simoniacal Bargains, make Merchandise of Spiritual
Things: For they give such Scandal by setting these things to Sale, as makes
the multitude have them in the less esteem, and to account them no more worth
than the Price that is laid out for them, or the visible Benefit that is reaped
by them, and less worth than these Temporal Things which stand them at a dearer
rate; nay, and in end, altogether to contemn and despise them, reckoning them
as Matters of no moment, but only as Artifices of Gain and Advantage to
Spiritual Pedlers. And whilst they give such Scandal and occasion of Offense,
how they shall escape that Woe, which the Lord Jesus has denounced against
those by whom Offenses come, Luke 17.1.
I see not.

Secondly, The hainousness of this Sin may appear from the grievous Characters
and Evidences of God's Indignation against it, which he gives in the
Scriptures. Let us but again reflect upon the Words of the Apostle Peter unto
Simon Magus, that first Parent of this Sin in the Christian Church; and upon
the account thereof, we find he gives such a Character of him, as might
affright any Christian from following his footsteps therein, Act. 8. 21.
whilst he tells him, Thy, Heart is not right in the sight of God: Ver. 23.
And, Thou art in the Gall of Bitterness, and in the Bond of Iniquity: And that
his Sin was such, as that he could but doubtfully promise to himself pardon
thereof, in that he says, Repent therefore of this thy Wickedness, and pray
God, Ver. 22.
if perhaps the Thought of thine Heart may be forgiven thee. And in all our
Savior's Life, we read not that ever he took the Rod in his hand, but when he
was to express his Indignation against this Sin, and his zeal for the Purity of
his Church; and then we find in the Gospel, that he made a Scourge of small
Cords, Matthew. 21.12.
and drove therewith the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple, and overthrew
the Tables of the Money Changers, and the Seats of them that bought and sold
Doves: Joh. 2.15.
Thereby intimating, with what Wrath he would set his Face against those who
would in his Church make Merchandise of Spiritual Things. And what Character he
gives of such, we may read in his Words, saying, It is written, Matthew. 21.13.
My House shall be called, The House of Prayer, but ye have made it a Den of
Thieves. And whosoever lists to read the Ancients, who have Commented upon these
Words, or written upon this Subject, shall find them applying these Words of
the Gospel to this purpose, and expounding it to have been the design of our
Savior, by that Act, to intimate, with what displeasure he would have the
Buyers and Sellers of Spiritual Things driven out of his Church.

But let us also look back, and see under the Old Testament, what Evidences of
his Wrath God has given against such Persons. Numb. 22.
And there we find, That when Balaam would have made Merchandise of his
Prophetical Gift, and would have sold, the Exercise thereof for Money and
Promotion, God was so incensed against him, that he sent an Angel with a drawn
Sword against him in the way, and made the Ass he rode upon reprove his Folly.
We find also, 2 Kings 5.
how God's Anger was expressed against Gehazi, upon this account, who would
needs take Money and Rewards from Naaman, for the miraculous Cure wrought upon
him, which his Master Elisha had refused to receive for the Dispensation of
that Gift of God, who therefore made the Leprosy of Naaman the Syrian cleave
unto Gehazi, and from him to be propagate to his Seed, whom the Lord would set
up as Monuments of his Displeasure, to warn others of the danger of making
Merchandise of the free Gifts of God, or of using them as means of dishonest
Gain. I might bring also diverse Passages from the Prophets to this purpose; but
I think, these already mentioned may be sufficient to show, how heinous a sin
Simony is in the sight of God, who will not have Men to serve themselves and
their worldly Ends of him and his Blessed Spirit.

Thirdly, The hainousness of this sin may appear also from this, That the Holy
Men of God and Church of Christ, have always entertained grievous Sentiments
thereof, and have judged it a Crime liable to the severest Censures and
Punishments. It were an infinite Work, to bring the manifold Testimonies of the
several Fathers and Churchmen, whereby they have expressed their abhorrency of
this Sin, and given such black Characters thereof, as they have not only called
the Practisers and Transactors in this execrable Merchandise, the Disciples of
Balaam, Gehazi, and Simon Magus: But some have set it forth as more heinous
than the Heresy of Macedonius, in regard that the Macedonians supposing the
Holy Ghost a Creature, made him only a Servant to God. But the Simoniacks,
acknowledging the Holy Ghost to be God, yet make him a Servant to themselves,
and to their own covetous or ambitious Designs; nay, as their very Slave, they
buy, and sell, and make Merchandise of him. And some again have paralleled it
with the Treachery of Judas; in regard, that as he sold and made Merchandise of
Jesus Christ the Son of God, so do they of the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of God.
But I desire neither to be at the pains to set down in writing, nor to put
others to the pains to read the several Passages in their Works, Commentaries,
Epistles and Homilies, wherein they paint it forth as a Sin of the deepest Dye:
The multiplicity whereof would make this Treatise swell to a greater Bulk than
I design. But having given this short hint, I shall proceed rather to show,
how, by the Judgment of the Catholic Church, and joint Suffrages of many
Fathers together, Simony has been accounted a Crime deserving, and Laws and
Canons have been made for inflicting the highest Censures upon Persons guilty
thereof; who, according to their different Qualities, (whether Ecclesiastics
or Laics,) have been decreed liable to Deposition, or Excommunication, and to
be stigmatized and branded with a mark of Infamy.

Let us then look first upon these, commonly called, The Canons of the
Apostles; (which, of how small Authority soever they may seem to be, in regard
of their supposititious Title; yet may, in regard of their Antiquity, claim
some Veneration.) And thus against Simony do they decree; Si quis Episcopus,
Can. 30.
aut Presbyter, aut Diaconus, etc. If any Bishop, or Presbyter, or Deacon,
obtain this Dignity by the help of Money, let him be Deposed; as likewise, he
who gave him Ordination, and be separated from the Communion, as Simon Magus
was by Peter. More also I might thence cite, but I proceed to what is of more
certain Authority.

Let us look upon the Sentence of that famous General Council of Chalcedon,
pronounced by the joint consent of Six hundred and thirty Bishops; and there we
find, Can. 2^.
Si quis Episcopus per pecunias, etc. If any Bishop for Money, or for the
filthy benefit of Lucre, Ordain either Bishop, or Presbyter, or Deacon, or any
of these who are numbered amongst the Clergy, he shall undergo the danger, (or
punishment,) of the loss of his own Degree. And he who is Ordained, shall reap
no benefit by his Ordination, but let him be driven from that Dignity which he
has acquired by Money. And if any Man interpose, as a Mediator, in such vile
and wicked Bargains; if he be a Clergyman, let him be turned off from that
Degree which he holds; but if he be a Laick Person, or Monk, Anathematizetur,
let him be Excommunicate.

Behold also, what the Second Council of Bracar says; Ne aliquo pretio gratia
Dei, etc. Let not the Grace of God and Imposition of Hands be sold for any
Price, because the Ancient Sentence of the Fathers have defined, saying,
Anathema Danti, Anathema Accipienti: Cursed be the Giver, Cursed be the
Receiver.

Behold also the Sentence of the Eighth Council of Toledo; Decernentes omnino,
etc. Art. 3.
We altogether decree, That if any henceforth be discovered to have offered any
Gift for attaining the Dignity of the Priesthood, from thenceforth let him know
himself to be condemned with the Reproach of Anathema, (or a Curse,) and to be
separated from the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ, etc. And these,
who upon this account have received Bribes, if they be Clergymen, let them be
punished with the loss of that Honor; but if Laics, let them be condemned
into a perpetual Curse, or Excommunication.

I coud cite more Acts and Canons of later Times, whereby it is evident, That
notwithstanding of the growing Corruptions in the Church, yet against Simony
She has still in Her Doctrine, kept an Harmony with the more ancient and purer
Times: But for these, the Decrees and Sentences of the Canon Law may
sufficiently serve, wherein we find these Determinations: Decret. Gregor. 9. De
Simon. Cap. 6.
Sicut Simonia pestis, etc. As the Plague of Simony is greater than other
Diseases; therefore how soon the Signs thereof are made to appear by any
Person, it is without delay to be banished and driven out of the Church. And
aagain, De Simon. Cap. 10.
Convictus de Simonia, etc. He that is convict of Simony, is to be Deposed. The
same is to be said of him who is under the Scandal or Defamation thereof, and
cannot purge himself. And again, Cap. 23.
Si contradicens, etc. If he who opposes in an Election, be made to forbear by
Money, given with the Will or Consent of him who is Elected; he who is thus
Elected or Chosen, is holden to Renounce. And again, Cap. 38.
Tam ementes quam vendentes, etc. Both the Buyers and Sellers of Offices, and
of the Administration of Spiritual Things, are to be condemned as Simoniacks,
and thrust out of the Church. Thus it may apappear, That Simony in all Ages of
the Church, has been judged a most heinous Sin, and to deserve no less
punishment than Deposition and Excommunication.

Moreover, as if these were scarce sufficient Censures for such a Crime, they
who should be found guilty thereof, have been also judged to deserve to be
stigmatized with an indelible Character of Infamy. And therefore King
Athalaricus, by his Confirmation of the Edict of the Marble Table, (contained
in that Letter which I have mentioned before,) decrees Simoniacal Persons to be
branded with a Note of Infamy. And it is Enacted in the Second Aurelian
Council, Can. 4.
Si quis Sacerdotium per pecuniae nundinum, etc. If any Man should aspire to
the Priesthood by the Merchandise of Money, that he be thrust away as a
Reprobate. And what greater Infamy and Disgrace can be put upon any Man, than
to pass under the Character of a Reprobate? And it was decreed by that Lateran
Council, under Innocent the Second, Five hundred and forty Years ago; (which
yet is, by near half the time, later than any I have formerly mentioned.) Vt
emptor, venditor, etc. That the Buyer, the Seller, and the Medler in these
Simoniacal Transactions, should be dashed with a Mark of Infamy.

Now let any serious Man say, Whether what has been here said from Reason,
Scripture, and Authority of the Church, be not sufficient to make Simony to be
abhorred as a most heinous and execrable Crime? And whether it be not a most
dangerous Thing, to meddle with that which is hateful to all good Men, and
whereupon God has put such Marks of his Displeasure.

CHAP. V. Whether they are to be reputed the Ministers of Christ, who enter by
Simony?
WHAT is here proposed is a Case upon the Resolution, whereof depends the
Satisfaction and Tranquillity of the Conscience, both of the Priest and People,
of the Pastor and of his Flock, in reference to their respective Concerns in
the Administration of the Ministerial Duties. For, when he who by Simony has
procured an Entrance into the Sacred and Spiritual Office, receives Ordination,
Collation, Institution, and is invested with the Charge of a Flock, he
Preaches the Word, he Administrateth the Sacraments, he Exercises the Power
of the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, he binds, he loses, and in a word,
dispenses all things that belong to the Ministry. The People see him clothed
with Orders and Authority from the Church; and set over them as their Pastor,
from whose Hands they are invited, to expect those Spiritual Benefits which God
has promised to convey to Souls by the Ministry of the Gospel, in those
Divine Ordinances. Now, if he be the lawful Minister of Jesus Christ, all is
secure enough on both hands; he may confidently Exercise the Acts of the
Evangelical Priesthood, and by a good Title Administer the Sacred Things
belonging thereto; and they may confidently promise to themselves, the gracious
Effects of his Ministration. But if he be not, then does he but boldly usurp,
and intrude himself, and has no right to Dispense these Mysteries; and may
expect as little Thanks from God for his meddling, 1 Samuel 13.12, 13.
as Saul had for presuming upon a Burnt-Offering; and as Vzziah, 2 Chronicles.
26.18, 19.
for attempting to offer Incense in the Temple. Nor can the People derive any
Spiritual Benefit from his Ministry, who never received what he pretends to
give, and whose Administrations can have no more Virtue, than the Exorcisms of
the Sons of Sceva. Acts 19.14, 15, 16.


For the Resolution of this Doubt, it is seriously to be considered, What it is
that constitutes a Man in the Ministerial Office. And I lay it down as a sure
Hypothesis, uncontroverted amongst the Orthodox, That Ordination (according to
the Divine Rule of Ecclesiastical Economy,) is the ordinary Way and Means
appointed by God, for Constituting of Men in any Degree of the Sacred
Hierarchy, and for Consecrating them to the Priestly Office in the Church, and
making them the Ministers of Christ; and that thereby, Authority and Power is
conveyed upon the Person thus Consecrated, of Dipensing the Mysteries of the
Gospel, and Administering the Ordinances of God. Wherefore, we must consider,
That in Ordination there is a Divine Spiritual Power and Authority, and there
is a Ministerial Ecclesiastical Seal. And, howsoever this Power and Authority
be conveyed by the hands of Man, as the external Agent and Instrument in
conferring the Ecclesiastical Seal, yet these external Rites of Ordination
performed by Man, do not give the Power, but are only Declarative of that
Spiritual Power and Grace which is derived from God alone, and flows from the
influence of his Blessed Spirit, as the Internal and Principal Author and
Efficient, upon the Person called by him thereto. And therefore, Dionysius
Areopagita (or whosoever else is the Author of The Ecclesiastical Hierarchy,)
says of the Person that confers Orders, That he is but (...), The Proclaimer,
or, Declarer of the Divine Election; De Eccles. Hier. Cap. 9.
Who (says he,) by his own Gift, does not advance those who are Consecrated
unto the Honor or Power of Ecclesiastical Order: This he ascribes only to God,
whom he calls there (...), The Prince of Consecration, or, chief Ordainer; and
pleads the Authority of Jesus Christ, for ascribing this Power to God alone,
and his Holy Spirit. Nor can it be rationally supposed to be otherwise; for, if
a Spiritual Power be necessary, (as is undeniable,) to the Ministration of
Spiritual and Sacred Things, then this Power can be derived from no other
Fountain than the Divine Spirit: And therefore did our Lord and Savior, both
by his Words and Actions, intimate the same, to flow from him upon the Persons
of his Apostles, whilst at the giving of their Commission, he told them, That
the Authority and Power which he transmitted unto them, was but an emanation of
that Power which he had received from above, saying, Matthew. 28.18, 19.
All Power is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth; go ye therefore, and teach
all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost. And, Joh. 20.21, 22, 23.
As my Father has sent me, so send I you: And when he had said this, he
breathed on them, and says unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost: Whosesoever's
Sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whosesoever's Sins ye retain,
they are retained. And telling them, Acts 1.8.
Ye shall receive Power, after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you: And ye
shall be Witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in
Samaria, and unto the uttermost Parts of the Earth: Whereby he means, That
they have both the (...), and the (...), both the Authority and the Power of
their Ministry from the Holy Ghost. And not only did our Savior ascribe this
unto him, in the Persons of these extraordinary Ministers, whom he immediately
Ordained, and sent forth; but the Apostle Paul ascribes it also to him in the
Persons of the ordinary Pastors of the Church, who were Called and Ordained
mediately by the Hands of Men, saying unto them, Acts 20.28.
Take heed unto your selves, and unto all the Flock, over which the Holy Ghost
has made you Overseers.

Wherefore, from so clear Premises, we cannot but conclude, That to a right
and sufficient Ordination, to constitute a Man a true Minister of Jesus Christ,
and to endow him with a lawful Ministerial Power, there must be with the
external Instrument a concurrence of the internal Principal Efficient; as it
was in the Out-sending of Barnabas and Saul, who received their Power and
Authority from God, and the external Seal thereof from the Church; the Holy
Ghost gives the Command, and calls them, Acts 13.2, 3.
and their Brethren gave them Imposition of Hands. And therefore, Ambrose
proposes the Question, Lib. De Dignit. Sacerdot. Cap. 5.
Who gives the Gift or Grace of Ordination? And he answered, Sine dubio, Deus;
without doubt, God; Sed tamen (says he,) per hominem dat Deus; but
notwithstanding, God gives it by Man: Homo imponit manus, Deus largitur
gratiam: Sacerdos imponit supplicem dextram; and Deus benedicit potenti dextra:
Man lays on the Hands, God bestows the Grace: The Priest lays on the right Hand
of Prayer, and God blesses with the right Hand of Power. And without this, the
external Seal Administered by the Hands of Men, signifies, nothing.

Hence then the Collection is easy, and the Conclusion evident, That he who
enters by by Simony upon the Sacred Office, is not to be reputed a true and
lawful Minister of Jesus Christ; because, though he have the external Seal from
the Hands of Man, it is but insignificant, in regard he has not received the
internal Grace from the Hands of God: For, whilst he comes not thereto by any
Divine Call or Warrant, but inintrudes by Money and Bribes, the Holy Ghost
gives not his concurrence to confer the Spiritual Power and Authority: And
therefore of such one, says Ambrose, Ibid.
Per pecuniam acquisivit indebitum Ordinem, and Deum perdidit in interiori
homine: By Money he has acquired Orders he had no right to, and he has lost
God in the inward Man. And he shows at length, how no Grace nor Good is
conferred by such an Ordination. But, to put the Matter quite out of doubt, we
have the Testimony of the Holy Ghost himself, witnessing, That Simoniacal
Persons are not to be reckoned amongst the Ministers of Christ; for behold,
what upon this account he says by Simon Peter to Simon Magus, Thou have
neither part nor lot in this matter: Acts 8.21.
And so, neither can his Disciples have any share in the Ministry. And from
out of the number of his Ministers, does our Savior himself plainly exclude
those who come in by Windows, or Posterns, or oblique Passages; and that under
a very bad Character, saying, Verily, Joh. 10.1.
verily, I say unto you, he that enters not in by the door, into the
Sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a Thief, and a Robber.
And I Am sure, none dare say, That they who climb up by the Ladder of Simony, do
enter in by the Door. And what are they to be reputed then? Not the true
Pastors or Ministers of Christ, but Thieves and Robbers; and that justly so,
since they imitate such in their way of Entrance. And therefore have the Canons
of the Church been very strict, in debarring such from the Ministry of Holy
Things; because they cannot say with the Apostle, 1 Timothy 1.12.
I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, -- that he has counted me faithful, putting me
into the Ministry: For Christ has not put them in, but they have thrust in
themselves, and so are no Ministers of his.

The Case standing thus, it may give just occasion to enquire, What Effect then
can such a one's Ministry have upon People? For, seeing God, who is the
Fountain of Grace, has made his Ordinances the Channels and Conduits, whereby
the Graces of his Spirit are conveyed; if these Ordinances in the hand of such
an Instrustrument, (who is not the lawful Minister of Jesus Christ, to whose
Ordination the Holy Ghost has not concurred, nor given any Power, Authority,
or Warrant to Administer the same;) shall produce these Spiritual Effects for
which they are designed; then is there no great necessity of a distinct Order
of such Persons, as Priests or Ministers in the Church, upon whom People are to
depend, or wait for the Dispensation of these Sacred Mysteries, since they may
reap the same Fruits and Effects thereof from his Ministration who is no
Minister of Christ: And so, they may as well wait for these Blessings from the
Performance of every rude Artificer and bold Mechanic, who lists to step up
into the Pulpit, and dip his hand in the Sacred Font, and approach to the Holy
Altar, and to assume the Power of Administering all the Holy Ordinances of the
Gospel, as well as from his Ministry who is Consecrated, and set apart
thereto, by the Rites of Ordination and Power of the Holy Ghost. And, upon the
other hand, If the Simoniacal Entrance of such a one, render his Ordination
ineffectual, so as his Administrations shall have no Efficacy for the
production of those Graces and Blessings for which God has designed the
Ministry of the Gospel; to what pitiful Condition and hard Straits are the
People, over whom he is set, reduced unto upon his account! And what Scruples
it may breed in them, in reference to his Administrations; and what Doubts it
may make them wrestle under, in reference to their own Spiritual State and
Condition; and what woeful Consequences may follow thereupon, what considering
Man may not easily apprehend!

If, for determining the Matter of this Enquiry, we will take the Opinion of
Gregory the Great; he is very confident in concluding the absolute
ineffectiveness and invalidity of such a one's Ministry, saying, Quicunque
Sacros Ordines vendunt and emunt, Apud Gratian, Cause. 1. Qu. 1. Can. Quicunque
Sacros.
Sacerdotes esse non possunt, Vnde Scriptum est, Anathema Danti, Anathema
Accipienti, etc. Whosoever sell and buy Holy Orders, cannot be Priests; hence
it is that it is written, Cursed be the Giver, Cursed be the Receiver: This is
Simoniacal Heresy. How then, if they be a Curse, and not Saints themselves,
can they sanctify others? And, seeing they are not in the Body of Christ, how
can they either deliver or receive his Body? He who is Cursed, how can he
Bless? But how far soever we may go along with him, as to the ineffectiveness
of such a one's Ministration; yet, in so far as he builds the same upon
Arguments, whereby it would follow, That the Efficacy of the Ministry should
depend upon the Grace or Sanctity of the Instrument, we cannot comply with him
therein; the Consequence being dangerous, and such as may seem to savor too
much of the Leaven of the Donatists, Luciferians, and Apostolici, etc. contrary
to the received Doctrine of the Catholic Church, and refuted by several of the
Ancients, as Augustine, Optatus Milevitanus, Jerome, and many others; showing,
That it does not prejudice the Increase, whether he that sows, do it with
polluted or with pure hands, if so be the Seed be good, and the Soil be
fertile, and the Influence of the Clouds and Heavens not restrained: And the
House may receive Light by the Taper which shines from an earthen as well as
from a golden Candlestick. And if there were no good to be reaped by the
Ministry of wicked Men, but that the Ministrations of unsanctified Persons
were altogether ineffectual, Christ would never have commanded People to hear
the Scribes and Pharisees; Matthew. 23.2, 3.
nor would he have sent forth Judas amongst the Twelve, Matthew. 10.5, 6.
to gather in the lost Sheep of the House of Israel; of whose Ministry we hear
no less Effects than of the rest. Nay, he tells plainly, that many Reprobates
in the Great Day, shall plead the Effects of their Ministry, Matthew. 7.22, 23.
saying, Lord, Lord, have we not Prophesied in thy Name, and in thy Name cast
out Devils, and in thy Name done many wonderful Works? To whom he will say,
Depart from me ye that work Iniquity. And if the pravity of the Instrument
should render the Work ineffectual, Philip. 1.15, 18.
it should have been no matter of rejoicing to Paul, that Christ was Preached
by such, who Preached him out of Envy and Contention, and not sincerely. But
whilst he says, 2 Cor. 4.7.
We have this Treasure in earthen Vessels, that the excellency of the Power may
be of God, and not of us; he will have us to understand, That the Efficacy of
the Gospel depends not upon the Instrument, but upon the Author, who can render
a Blessing effectual as well from the Mouth of Balaam, as from the Mouth of
Aaron; and can wash a Soul from Sin, as well by the Baptism of Judas, as of
John: For he may have gratiam gratis datam, who has not gratiam gratum
facientem; he may be endowed with the grace of Edification to save others, who
has not the grace of Sanctification to save himself. But all this while, we
speak of those whom we suppose to have Authority by a lawful Minister to
dispense the Mysteries of the Gospel.

But the matter of our present Enquiry, concerning the Efficacy of his
Ministrations who enters by Simony, proceeds upon another Hypothesis; to wit,
That such a one is not the Minister of Jesus Christ; and this being already
proved, we cannot but approve of Gregory's Position, That Quicunque Sacros
Ordines vendunt and emunt, Sacerdotes esse non possunt: Whosoever sell and buy
Holy Orders, cannot be Priests. And upon this ground we must proceed to
Determine in this Matter.

Now, upon this account, it has not only been much questioned by some, Whether
any Spiritual Blessing or Benefit can be derived from the Ministry of such;
but it has been confidently asserted, not only by Gregory, but by many others,
That the Ministrations of such are altogether ineffectual, and can confer no
good, nor transmit any Spiritual Grace or Blessing. Whereupon, Gratian has
adopted it amongst the Decrees of the Canon Law, Gratia, si non gratis datur,
Cause. 1. Qu. 1. Can. Gratia, etc.
vel accipitur, gratia non est: Simoniaci autem, etc. Grace, if it be not
freely given or received, is not Grace; but Simoniacal Persons receive it not
freely; therefore, they receive not that Grace which principally has its
Operation in Ecclesiastical Orders: (That is, The Ministerial Grace, or Power;)
And if they do not receive it, they have it not; and if they have it not,
neither freely, nor not freely, can they give it unto any Man. And it seems
indeed to be asserted upon good grounds: For,

First, If such Persons (as is showed before,) be not the lawful Ministers of
Jesus Christ, then have they no Title, nor Right to dispense the Ordinances of
the Gospel, which Christ has entrusted only to his Ministers, Matthew. 19.16.
Joh. 20.23. 2 Cor. 5.18, 20.
to whom alone he has consigned the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and
committed the Ministry of Reconciliation, as his Ambassadors, as says the
Apostle: So that when they presume to meddle with these Holy Mysteries, they do
but sacrilegiously usurp, without Authority from God, and so do dispense them
in vain, and with an ineffective Hand; the bare external Seal of Ordination by
the hands of Man, without the concurrence of the Divine Power, being of no
force to work these Effects, which are the proper Emanations of the Holy Ghost;
so that their Administrations can be no more valid, than a Remission to a
guilty Person from his Hand, who had surreptitiously affixed the King's Seal
thereto, and without his Royal Consent or Authority, had usurped the Office of
an Herald to proclaim it. And therefore, it was not a groundless Debate
wherewith the Church of Rome was troubled for several Years, in the time of Leo
IX. Whether Ordinations conferred by such Simoniacal Usurpers, were effectual?
Or, Whether they should be Re-Ordain'd who had been Ordained by them? And
howsoever, Petrus Damiani wrote his Book, called Gratissimus, against those who
pleaded for Reordination: And Leo in two several Councils at Rome, Council.
Tom. 3. p. 2.
allowed those who had been Ordained by such, to continue in their Office,
after the doing of Forty days Penance; yet, this seems to have been but of
Indulgence, and to have proceeded rather from Necessity than Choice; in respect
of the Tumult that was raised thereabout, and in regard that a more strict
Course would have occasioned the Silencing of an infinite number of the Clergy,
and the laying waste such a multitude of Churches, as many Territories should
have been without the sound of the Gospel, to the great prejudice of the
Christian Religion; as may appear by the same Petrus Damiani's Epistle to Henry
Archbishop of Ravenna. And yet, I think Leo did right, not to Reordain them;
but rather, upon their Repentance, to re-invest them with better Authority in
the Exercise of their Office, since they had once received Orders, how
ineffective soever, through the want of the Divine Concurrence with a
Simoniacal Ordainer; yet, the Church having by the external Seal of Ordination,
once invested such a one with an Ecclesiastical Authority, to transmit the same
unto others; it had not been convenient, that the Church should have called the
Character of her own Ordination in question: Neither needed they who had
received the same from the hand of such, but the Church's Approbation, for
their Administration; and devout Addresses to God, for the Power of the Holy
Ghost to render it effectual. And therefore says the Canon Law, Apud Great.
Cause. 1. Qu. 1. Can. Statuimus Decret.
Simoniacos non Simoniace a Simoniacis Ordinatos, misericorditer per Manus
Impositionem, pro temporis necessitate, in officio concedimus permanere: Those
whom we account Simoniacks, because of their Ordination by Simoniacal Persons,
but have not practiced Simony themselves; we do, by the Imposition of Hands,
graciously give them leave to continue in their Office, through the necessity
of Time. Whereby it appears, That it was not thought fit to Re-ordain such, but
only confirm their former Ordination by Imposition of Hands, without more Rites
of Consecration of new again.

Secondly, It being undeniable, that the whole Efficacy of the Ministry
depends upon God, and that the Spiritual Effects thereof flow wholly from that
Power wherewith he does indow and enable Men to Administer in the Mysteries of
the Gospel, and from the Concourse of his Holy Spirit with them therein: (For,
2 Cor. 4.7.
The excellency of the Power is of God, and not of Man; 1 Cor. 3.7.
Neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that waters any thing, but
God that gives the Increase:) It will then undoubtedly follow, That the
external Rites of Ordination can transmit no Virtue or Efficacy into his
Ministry who receives the same without the Call, and concurrence of the Holy
Ghost, and without any promise of Divine Influence upon his Administrations.
Now, that he who enters by Simony upon the Pastoral Office, is destitute of
these, may be evident without much arguing: For, who can suppose that he is
Called of God, or that the Holy Ghost has given Authority to his Ordination,
who has procured the same by sinister means, since our Savior has told us,
that such are but Thieves and Robbers, Joh. 10.
who have not entered in by him who is the Door? Or, upon what Warrant or
Promise can he step out to Officiate in that Function, in hope of any gracious
Success, of whom the Holy Ghost does witness, That he has neither part, Acts 8.
nor lot in this matter; and whom for his execrable Merchandise, the Lord would
have scourged out of his Temple? And whereas, God has said of such as do
unwarrantably usurp, and thrust themselves upon such an Employment, without his
Commission or Command, I sent them not, Jer. 23.32.
nor commanded them; therefore they shall not profit this People at all, says
the Lord: What Fruit or Effect then, what Blessing or Benefit, can be expected
from his hands, to whom God has given no Commission, upon whom the Spirit of
God has not descended in Ordination, and over whom he hovers not in his
Administrations, to render them productive of these Graces which he has
designed his Ordinances to work by the Ministry of the Gospel?

But what then shall become of the Flock, over which he is set?

To this I say, That truly I look upon it as one of the saddest Dispensations
that can befall a People, to be given over to the Charge of a Simoniacal
Person: For, since the Priest's Ministry is the Instrument of conveying all
the Blessings which are annexed to the Administration of the Evangelical
Ordinances, What can be thought, but that God has a Controversy with that
People, whom he gives up to the Conduct of those from whom they can derive none
of these Blessings? But in this Case, as diverse Persons may in the same Flock,
have different Persuasions about it; so must we cautiously distinguish and
difference them, according to their various Sentiments thereof. There may be
some, to whom the Simony of such a Pastor is notorious and and known, but
reflected upon by them with Grief and Regret: There may be others who know it,
and yet do willingly comply with him: And there may also be many, who are
altogether ignorant thereof.

First, To those who know a Pastor to have conveyed himself in upon them by
Simoniacal Means, and are grieved that they should be given over to such a
hopeless Ministry, I say; it highly concerns them, to search into the Cause of
God's Controversy with them; and it is like, they shall find it to be such as
provoked God of old, to give over his People to the like Judgment, to the
seduction of false and treacherous Prophets, and of covetous and careless,
cruel and foolish Shepherds and Watchmen; to wit, because they despised his
Word, and were disobedient and rebellious to the Voice of his faithful
Messengers; Mic. 2.6, 11. and 3.6, 7, 11. Zeph. 3.4. Zech. 11.16.
as may appear from Micah, Zephaniah, Zechariah, and others of the Prophets.
And it is no doubt, People's contempt of the Gospel, and unfruitfulness under
the Labors of faithful Pastors, that provokes God to remove such from them,
and to give them over to such Thieves, and Robbers, and Hirelings, whose
Ministry can do them no good. And therefore, the only counsel I can give to
those in such a condition, is, seriously to reflect upon, and with Sorrow to be
humbled in the sight of God for this Sin, and by strict Bonds to devote
themselves for the future, to a greater love and regard of the Gospel, to a
more reverend esteem of, and obedience unto faithful Ministers, and to a better
improvement of the Means of Grace. This is the most hopeful Means and Method I
know, for a speedy removal of this Judgment, and for rescuing them from that
Snare whereinto their Sins have entangled them.

Secondly, As for those to whom this Simoniacal Entrance of such a one into the
Ministerial Charge is known, and yet by them a ready compliance yielded unto
him; not only shall his Administrations prove to such ineffectual; but by their
consent and compliance therein, they involve themselves in the guilt of his
sinful Practices, whilst thus they have fellowship with the unfruitful work of
Darkness, and seeing his Spiritual Theft, do consent unto him; a Sin evidently
condemned, Psalm. 50.18. Ephesians. 5.11.
both by the Psalmist of Israel, and the Apostle of the Gentiles. And upon this
account, Aquinas concludes, That none should Communicate with him in the
execution of his Orders, nor accept of Ordination from his hand who is known to
be promoted by Simony; whilst he says, Quod ille qui Simoniace recipit Sacrum
Ordinem, Thom. 22ae. Qu. 100. Art. 6.
etc. That he who Simoniacally receives Holy Orders, he receives indeed the
Character of Order, in regard of the Efficacy of that Sacrament; yet
notwithstanding, he receives neither the Grace, nor the Execution of that
Order: And that, because he has surreptitiously, or by theft, taken the
Character, or Seal, contrary to the Will of the Principal Lord; and therefore,
he stands justly Suspended, both as to himself, to wit, That he do not meddle
with the Execution of his Order; and as to others, to wit, That none
Communicate with him in the Execution thereof. Nay farther, he says, Loco sup.
cit.
That Nec propter praeceptum ejus, nec propter Excommunicationem, etc. Neither
for his Command, nor for the Thunderbolts of his Excommunication, should any
Man be moved to receive Ordination from his hands whom he knows to have been
Advanced in a Simoniacal Way. And all this he asserts, both upon the account of
the want of Efficacy in such a one's Administrations, and in regard of the
unlawfulness to Communicate with him in Sin.

But, Thirdly, To those who are altogether ignorant of, and unacquainted with
the Simoniacal Practices, whereby he who bears the Name of their Pastor has
entered into that Function; my Charity leads me to judge, That, though such a
one be not the lawful Minister of Jesus Christ, yet the Ordinances of the
Gospel Administered by him, may prove effectual unto them; whilst, attending
thereto with an innocent and religious Devotion, out of a pious Obedience unto
God's Command, and an holy Reverence to these Sacred Mysteries, they do in the
simplicity of their Hearts communicate therein, as supposing them Administered
by a lawful Authority. But, what Benefit they derive thence, is not by Virtue
of his Ministry, but out of a paternal Indulgence, and respect to their pious.
Intentions; whereby it comes to pass, That, as God often times gives Rem
Sacramenti, sine Sacramento, the Matter of the Sacrament, without the
Sacrament; so he may be pleased to convey Effectum Ministerii sine Ministro,
the Effect of the Ministry, and the Bleffing of his Ordinance, though he be no
true Minister that dispenses it; without regard to whom, God does often times
concur with his own Ordinances, and makes them produce blessed Effects, as the
Reward of a private Piety, and as the Returns of the Prayers of the Saints of
such a Congregation offered up with pure Hands and Hearts, and of the
Intercessions of the Catholic Church, which She daily puts up in the behalf
of all Her Members. For, He who has said, Matthew. 18.20.
Where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the midst
of them: And, James 5.16.
that the effectual fervent Prayer of a righteous Man avails much: And, Psalm.
112.4.
that to the Upright, there arises Light in Darkness: He who has said so, and
made these, and many other gracious Promises to his Church, and to the Prayers
of his Saints, and to the Devotion of the Upright, will not frustrate them of
the Fruits of their Religious Performances, upon the account of his
Administration, whose Guilt in intruding upon the same, is none of theirs,
whilst they do not Communicate with him therein, either by Knowledge,
Connivance, or Consent.

And this is all I can warrantably say to this purpose.

CHAP. VI. A Warning to Young Men, in reference to their Entry upon Spiritual
Offices in the Church.
SUCH is commonly the heat of Youth in posting toward Preferment, that it
out-runs the consideration, not only of the proper Ends, but also of the
disproportion of its own Abilities, for the discharge of the great and weighty
Duties of the high Office and Employment to which it aspires: For, as Calvin
says truly, Contigit omnes fere juvenes turgidos esse, and fastuosos, tanquam
nubes transvolare possent: It is incident almost to all Youths, to be big of
Self-conceit, and proudly to raise their Feathers, as if they could Mount above
the Clouds. So that, like Phaeton, they must needs be set in their Father's
Chariot, though the Event of their preposterous Undertaking should be, to
precipitate themselves to their own Ruin, and to hazard to set the World on
fire. And through such preposterous Indiscretion, does it come to pass, that
many Young Men aspiring to the Holy Calling of the Ministry, do both in their
Entry thereto, and afterward in the Exercise thereof, stumble into those
Errors, which bewray misplaced and disordered Affections; and are suitable
neither to the Dignity, nor Divine Ends of that Sacred Function.

Mistake me not, Dear Brethren, as if it were my design to reproach Young Men,
or by reflecting upon others, to purchase an Opinion of the innocence of mine
own past Youth, from those Infirmities and Errors which are incident to
others; (nay, I desire rather to be humbled in the sight of God, for the least
Error or Irregularity, whereunto I am sensible that the Folly of my Youthful
Affections have betrayed me.) But what I speak is out of compassion, and for
precaution, that you may the more attentively watch against those Dangers into
which the temerarious Fervor of that imprudent Age, may drive you headlong:
For thus it is, I fear, that many are led into the Snare of Simony. And
therefore I desire to warn all who are aiming at this Holy Calling, that they
would take heed how they enter thereupon.

Wherefore, as I have sufficiently showed before, how great and heinous a Crime
this sin of Simony is; so now I adjure thee in the fear of God, whosoever thou
art, that designest to undertake the Sacred Office of the Ministry in the
Church of Christ, as thou would wish to avoid the formidable Guilt of that
Sin, and to enter upon that Holy Function, and serve him with a good Conscience
therein, who fees in secret, and searches the Hearts and Reins, and will render
unto every one according to their ways; that thou seriously consider what thou
art doing; and before thou presume to meddle therewith, strictly examine
whether thou be Called of God thereto. For the Lord will have none to serve him
in his House, but those who are called by himself: And therefore the Apostle
Paul has told us, Heb. 5.4.
That no Man takes this Honor to himself, but he that is called of God, as
was Aaron: And it is this, that he so often pleads for the Authority of his own
Ministry, Romans 1.1. 1 Cor. 1.1. Gal. 1.15.
That he was called, and set apart of God thereto: Whereupon Chrysostom says,
In Romans 1.
Vbique se vocatum commemorat; ostendens, quod non ambiendo adeptus sit, sed
vocatus accesserit: He all ways mentions him-himself to be called, showing,
That he had not courted that Office by indirect Means, but that being called,
he came thereto. And without this Call, and Commission from God, none has
right to Administer the same: For, Romans 10.15.
How shall they Preach (says the same Apostle,) except they be sent? And
therefore, although God has been pleased, for preventing that confusion, which
vain pretensions to a Divine Call might introduce into his Church, to appoint
an Ordinary way for the confirmation of his own Call, by the Seal of
Ecclesiastical Ordination; yet, when that Seal is procured from the hands of
Men, where the Call is wanting from the hands of God, it is of small
significancy; it is but the setting up of a Man in an Office in the House,
without the Master's consent. Therefore again, I warn thee, strictly to
examine, before thou presume to enter upon this Office, Whether thou be Called
thereunto by God: For, if without his Call, by indirect means, thou thrust thy
self into it, what will thou Answer in the Day when the Master of the House
shall call his Servants to an account, and finding thee amongst them, shall put
home this Question to thee, Amice, quomodo huc intrasti? Friend, how came
thou in hither? Whatsoever thou may devise to say now for thy self before
Men, I fear, then thou shall be speechless; and what the end thereof shall be,
thou may easily presage.

Now, when I warn thee to examine thy Call from God, I do not bid thee search
after it by any extraordinary Signs, or wait upon any immediate Revelation from
Heaven, to assure thee thereof; but I would have thee seriously to consider,
Whether thou find a concurrence of these things upon thine own Heart, which
God works by his Spirit, as things which he necessarily requires in those
whom he calls; and thereby thou may come to know, whether thou be Called of
him, or not.

First, Consider then the End thou proposest unto thy self in this Holy
Function: For, whom God calls, he sets their Eye upon the right End. Now, the
great End of the Ministry of the Gospel, is, The Glory of God, and the
Salvation of Man. That this was the End of God's sending forth Ministers to
preach the Gospel, that for his Glory they should make manifest the
transcendent Riches of his Grace in Christ; and be Instruments, by dispensing
the Means of Grace, for the Conversion of Souls, and for advancing them by
Faith in the Lord Jesus, to the participation of eternal Life and Happiness, is
clear from the Words of the Apostle Paul, who speaking to the Ephesians of his
Ministry, in the Mystery of the Gospel, says, whereof I was made a Minister,
Ephesians. 3.7, 8.
-- that I should Preach among the Gentiles, the unsearchable Riches of Christ.
And to the Corinthians, showing forth the end of his Ministry, 2 Cor. 4.6.
says, God who commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined in our
Hearts, to give the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God, in the Face of
Jesus Christ. And, in his Speech before King Agrippa, he declares, That the End
for which Jesus Christ had appeared unto him, to make him a Minister of the
Gentiles, was, To open their Eyes, Acts. 26.18.
and to turn them from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan to God,
that they might receive Forgiveness of Sins, and Inheritance among them which
are sanctified by Faith that is in him. Nay, that this is the great design of
God in the Ministry of the Gospel, who is so ignorant as not to know? And
therefore, he will have the same to be the design of all who undertake the
Ministry thereof: For, if he will have this to be the principal End of all our
Actions, saying, 1 Cor. 10.31.
Whether ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the Glory of God.
Much more will he have it to be the principal End in that work, wherein his
Glory, and the Salvation of Souls are more immediately concerned. So that, if
thou be Called of God, thine Eye will be upon this, as the principal End and
Scope that thou aimest at. But he who designs not this, but intends his own
Preferment, or Profit, to which he resolves to make the Ministry subservient,
as a Mean to raise him from the Dunghill; or, it it may be, as a rescue from
Poverty, or from the contempt of a broken Fortune, I Am sure, is not Called of
God. And it is no wonder to see such a one fall into the Suare of Simony, since
base Designs find hardly Abettors, but such as are procured by Bribes. But,
what he will Answer, when the Lord shall put home to him both these Questions
together, Amice, quomodo huc intrasti? Friend, how came thou in hither? And
again, Amice, quorsum huc intrasti? Friend, for what End came thou in hither?
I know not.

Secondly, Consider whether thou be sensible of the weight of such a Charge.
Whom God calls to the Work of the Ministry, he works in their Hearts a deep
sense of the weight and burden thereof; and to this effect, he shows them what
Labor, and Trouble, and Pains they must be at; what Tentations, and
Tribulations, and Affronts, they will meet with; and how they will have many
Enemies, and must grapple with much Opposition and Contradiction; and what a
weighty Charge, the Charge of Souls is; what account they must give thereof to
him; and how the Blood thereof will be required at their Hands, if through
their default they perish. Of these things our Savior warned his Apostles,
Matthew. 10.16, 17, etc.
when he sent them forth upon the Work of the Ministry: And this the Lord
warned Ezekiel of, Ezekiel. 33.^.
when he set him to be a Watchman unto the House of Israel. Nay, and in
hundreds of Texts, the Lord in the Scripture sets this before their Eyes, whom
he Calls, and sends forth; thereby to engrave upon their Hearts the sense of
the Charge whereof they are to undertake the Burden, that so they may count
the cost before they begin the Work: And therefore, when the Lord told Ananias
that had he called Saul, as a chosen Vessel, to bear his Name before the
Gentiles, Acts 9.17.
he said withal, I will show him how great things he must suffer for my Name's
sake. So that, if thou be Called of God, thou will have a deep sense of the
weight and burden of the Ministry, upon thy Spirit; and wilt look upon it, as
a Work that requires much Watching, and Fasting, and Prayer. And sure,
whosoever is touched with this sense, and seriously considers what a weighty
Charge it is, will never make use of the Silverkeys of Simon Magus, to open a
Passuge for himself thereto; nay, save upon the account of the Obligation of a
Call from God, he would not stoop to to take it up. It is only a delusory Fancy
of carnal Minds, that, looking upon it as an Office destined for Ease, and
Pleasure, and Profit, makes Men run to purchase it with Money.

Thirdly, Consider whether thou be sensible of thine own Insufficiency, and
disproportion of thy Abilities for the Work: For, whom God calls, he imprints
upon their Hearts the humble sense thereof; that they may go forth, not in
confidence of their own Strength, but of the Strength of him who calls them.
So as the consideration thereof made the Apostle Paul cry out, 2 Cor. 2.16.
Who is sufficient for these things? And again, Not that we are sufficient of
our selves to think any thing, 2 Cor. 3.5, 6.
as of our selves: but our sufficiency is of God; who also has made us able
Ministers of the New Testament. The deep sense of which Insufficiency, has
made many able Men of humble Minds, either to decline, or with a great
reluctance to embark upon an Employment to which they perceived their Strength
so unequal. Thus Moses, when God was sending him upon his Message, Exodus 3.11.
and 4.10.
said, Lord, who am I? and, O my Lord, I am not eloquent. And thus Jeremiah
cried out, Jer. 1.6.
Ah Lord God, behold I cannot speak, for I am a Child. And this made many in
the Primitive Church deaf to all Entreaties and Arguments, till they were
forced thereupon by Violence; which excessive Aversion, though I dare not
altogether commend, yet it gives me ground to say, that if thou be Called of
God, thou will have in thine Heart such an humble sense of thine own
Insufficiency and Weakness for the Work, as will put thee, if not in fear to
undertake, at least often to thy knees to beg Strength from above. So that there
is just ground to doubt their Call, where this is wanting; as may be perceived
in some, who, as soon as they have commenced Masters of Arts, before they have
well studied the common Principles of the Doctrine of Divinity, (much less the
true practice of Christianity, in the mortification of their Youthful
Affections;) begin immediately to court Churches with such confidence, as if
the superficial Knowledge of some few speculative Points of Theology, and the
reading over of some Pamphlets, had rendered them sufficiently qualified for the
Ministerial Office, never considering the great Endowments of Learning,
Prudence, Holiness, and Gravity, that are required for the discharge of the
Duties thereof, and for making them shine as Ensamples to the Flock. And hence
it comes to pass, that with a preposterous speed they run, to have themselves
possessed of some Charge; and if any thing intervene, to forestall their
Desires, or to hinder the success of their Endeavors, then all imaginable Arts
shall be made use of, which the Spirit of Simony can devise, to render their
Purpose effectual.

Fourthly, Consider by what Instinct thou art moved, to design thy self for
this Holy Office. Whom God calls, he stirs them up by the secret Instinct of
his Blessed Spirit, whereby he works in them such Divine Motions of fervent
Charity, and Zeal for his Glory, and the Salvation of Souls, as they are driven
thereby to cast themselves upon greatest Hardships, and to resolve to facrifice
their own Ease, Quiet, and carnal Interests, in a Calling wherein they may
serve God to these Ends. As the Apostle Paul was, when he went bound in the
Spirit unto Jerusalem, where, he knew Bonds and Afflictions were abiding him;
the Motions of Charity and Zeal so drove him, that he said, Acts 20.24.
None of these things move me, neither count I my Life dear unto my self, so
that I might sinish my Course with Joy, and the Ministry which I have received
of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the grace of God. Acts 21.13.
And again, I am ready not to be bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem for
the Name of the Lord Jesus. And as he was moved by the like Instinct, to lay
himself out for the Salvation of the Corinthians, to whom being about to come,
he said, 2 Cor. 12.15.
I will very gladly spend and be spent for you; though the more abundantly I
love you, the less I be loved. And so, if thou be Called of God, by such
Motions of Charity and Zeal, kindled by the Spirit of God in thy Heart, will it
be that thou art carried to a desire for the Ministry of the Gospel. But, when
the carnal Motions of Ambition, or Covetousness, work a panting after this
Office; as these Motions are not from the Instinct of the Spirit of God, but of
the Spirit of the World; so neither has he a Call from God, who is driven
thereby. And it is no wonder to see such a one seek to make a Passage for his
own Entrance, by the counsel of that same Spirit which was the principal Mover
in his Design, and has the chief hand in Simoniacal Bargains.

And now Finally, I would advise thee, That after thou have examined thine own
Heart, though thou even find in thy self a concurrence of these things, in such
a considerable measure as may beget in thee a confidence, that God approves of
thy purpose, and calls thee to serve him in the Ministry of his Church, yet
thou would not make too much haste, nor run to thrust thy self thereinto,
before God open a fair Door of Entrance for thee. I cannot but look upon it as
an Error, and an act of too preposterous speed, for any to intrude where the
Door is but half open; or to secure himself with an Anti-date of a Succession
to the Charge of a Living Incumbent: Of which, besides that, through the
uncertainty of his own Life, he is uncertain of his future Enjoyment; he also
throws himself upon the tentation of that heinous Sin, which with little sense,
is too commonly lodged in the unnatural Breasts of young rich Heirs, amongst
whom we find it too often verified:

Filius ante diem Patrios inquirit in Annos. That the Son lives with murdering
Desires, in a continual longing for his Old Father's Death, whereby he may come
to be possessed of his Fortune. And whosoever runs upon suchlike Danger, is too
little privy to the corruption of his own Heart; which should be a principal
part of his Study, both to understand, and to watch against, who desires to
enter upon the Holy Ministry: And which, whosoever studies well, will wait,
till God by making a clear and pure Passage for him, evidence that he has
Called him thereto, and that he has not run before God sent him.

Yet would I not have any Man suppose, that I intend, that he who has been
sincerely designing himself for the Service of God in the Ministry, and finds
a proper Occasion, should forbear to do any thing, or follow the lawful. Means
for attaining thereto. For, though the deep sense of the weightiness of the
Work, and of a Man's own Insufficiency, should make him fear, and beware to
thrust himself upon it; yet it bewrays too little of charitable Zeal to God's
Service, and the good of Souls, when he sees an open Door to lie like a Block
without any Motion, or stand idly gazing, till Men come and hale him violently
to the Work. Nor see I how he can avoid the blame of a slothful Servant, who
uses no lawful Endeavors to put his Talent to exchange, when a convenient
Season calls for it. Nay, it gives too much occasion for suspicion of
Hypocrisy, and affected Nicety in any, who after he has for a considerable
space, been fitting himself for the Ministry, should pretend an Aversion
thereto, till it were forced upon him against his Will. The Apostle Peter has
exhorted otherwise, bidding take the oversight of the Flock, not by constraint,
((...), 1 Pet. 5.2.
not by being forced, or compelled thereto,) but willingly. And if it was
spoken to the commendation of Amaziah the Son of Zichri, a Captain in the Wars
of Judah, 2 Chronicles. 17.16.
that he willingly offered himself unto the Lord: It can be no Reproach for
him, who finds his Lips touched with a Live-coal from the Altar, when he hears
the Lord, by opening a Door, saying, Who will go for us? willingly to offer
himself in this Spiritual War, and to go to those who stand in the Lord's
stead, and say with the Prophet, Here am I, send me. Isa. 6.8.
For whatsoever Discouragement the sense of his own Insufficiency may breed in
him, yet the Sincerity of his Intentions, and the Evidences of a Call from God,
may give him confidence to rely upon his Grace, as sufficient for him, whose
Strength is made perfect in Weakness.

CHAP. VII. A Word of Warning to Patrons.
IT is much to be regretted, that the Patrons of Churches should be generally
so obnoxious to that odious Reproach of the Sin of Simony, wherein it is the
Lot of the Innocent to suffer with the Guilty. But that which has given
occasion thereto, is, That the most of Patrons have never seriously considered
the nature or end of their Power; and some have never looked upon it as a
Matter wherein their Conscience is much concerned, but rather as an occasion,
whereby they may either gratify others, or serve their own Interests: Whereby
it comes to pass, that Presentations are often times disposed of by them, without
due consideration of the Qualities of the Persons, or Weight of the Charge; but
that he speeds better at their Hands, whose importunity by Favor, or Bribes,
commends him unto them, than he who for his Worth, might justly be Preferred.
Now, I am such a Friend both to the Conscience and Honor of all herein
concerned, that I wish from my heart, I could give such an effectual Warning,
as might make them all study to preserve their Souls free from the Guilt, and
their Honor from the Stain of such an odious Crime.

I am not to debate with you who have this Power, how you have come by it, or
by what Title or Right you hold it. But seeing you are in Possession thereof, I
would warn you to look upon it as a Matter of great Trust, for which you must
be accountable to the great God of Heaven and Earth: For, thereby the Vineyard
of God comes under your Charge, to look out for faithful Laborers to put into
it; thereby you are entrusted with the Souls of People, to look out for
faithful Pastors to commit them to. And if, for the least Talent that Men
receive, the Lord has told, Matthew. 25.19.
That he will reckon with them how they have employed it; and that, for
whatsoever Trust is committed unto any Man, the upshot at last must be, Luke
16.2.
Give account of thy Stewardship: How much more will he call for a Reckoning at
your hands, who have so great a Talent, and to whom is committed such an high
Trust, as that wherein the welfare of his Vineyard, and the Salvation of the
Souls of his People is so much concerned! If then, when the Vineyard is grown
over with Thorns, and Nettles have covered the face thereof, through your
placing of slothful or careless Laborers therein, the Ground thereof complain,
and the Barren-trees cry out, when their Lord comes to call for Fruits, what
will you Answer unto him? And, if the Souls of People perish, through your
placing ignorant and unfaithful Pastors over them, when the cry of their Blood
ascends to Heaven against you, what Vengeance may ye expect shall it draw down
upon your Heads?

Therefore I would warn you, as ye would wish to avoid the Vengeance of the
Almighty, and be free from the Blood of Souls, to beware of making use of, or
rather of abusing your Power in a Simonical way. I have showed before, how
heinous a Crime Simony is; and I tell you truly, it will prove a cursed
Merchandise unto you, to sell away a Spiritual Charge for humane Favor, or
Bribes, or Money, or any matter of worldly Interest. Consider, alas! What do
you sell? Even the Gift of God which he has put into your hands, not to
purchase worldly Benefit to your selves, but Glory to him: And how will he take
it at your hands, if you thus abuse your Trust, and serve your selves of him?
Nay, again consider, What do you sell? Even the Souls of God's People, which
you betray, into whose hands you care not, so you get your Price. And what
better are you than judas? He sold the innocent Blood of Jesus Christ, and you
sell the Blood of these Souls for which it was shed; he sold a Savior, to
gratify the Rulers; and you sell Souls, to gratify, it may be, some Friend,
or great Person; he sold a Savior for Thirty pieces of Silver, and you sell
hundreds of Souls for, it may be, a little greater Sum. But whatsoever the
Price be, alas, how unhappy Merchants are you! And, what a poor Purchase make
you! If you do it to gratify Man, your Gain can in no wise countervail your
Damage, whilst you lose the Favor of the Creator, to conciliate the Favor of
the Creature, who, it is like, at last will requite you as the Elders of the
Jews did Judas; and when your Conscience, distracted with the Horror of your
Guilt, makes you cry out, Matthew. 27.4.
We have sinned in betraying innocent Blood, will tell you, What is that to us?
see you to that. Or, if by your Bargain, you have perhaps gained some Money,
Matthew. 16.26.
yet, What is a Man profited, if he shall gain the whole World, and lose his
own Soul? And shall not the Lord smite his Hands at this dishonest Gain? Shall
not this price of Soul-Blood bring in a Curse with it? Shall it not make the
House where it comes, an Aceldama? And shall not the Curse of God hover over
that Tent where this accursed thing is hid, as it did over Achan's, with his
Sacrilegious Treasure? Oh, let the Blessing of God be upon your Houses; and let
never such a cursed Wedge come within them. Wherefore I beseech you, if ever
any Man shall henceforth come to tempt you to such a Simoniacal Bargain, by the
offer of Money, or any Bribe, let your Indignation evidence your abhorrency of
such a Sin, and your detestation of such a Person; and say to him as Simon
Peter said to Simon Magus, Thy Money perish with thee. And I Am sure, the Reward
of such honest Zeal shall meet you in Heaven.

Moreover, I warn you, as you would wish to avoid the Guilt of the Blood of
Souls, to consider well whom you Present to have Charge over them. Do not
imagine to wash your hands from this Guilt, by that frivolous Excuse wherewith
some flatter their own Consciences, whilst they would shift off the whole
Burden from themselves, upon the Bishops and Governors of the Church, saying,
They are the only competent Judges of the Qualifications of the Persons, whilst
the Patrons are no more concerned but to Present them. But pray, Is not the
Investing of a Person with a Charge over Souls, the Work of the Lord? Do not
you give him a Title to the Charge? And, if you do it without probable grounds
of his Ability for the Work, you do all your part to entrust Souls to an
insufficient Person; and is not this to do the Work of the Lord negligently, or
deceitfully? (call it as you will.) And what the certification thereof is, Jer.
48.10.
you know. But again, Suppose the Person unfit whom you Present, and that you
either know so much, or were indifferent whether he were so or not; and suppose
the Bishop to whom you transmit him, either careless, or corrupt, and apt to
comply with your Motions, or easy to be swayed by Solicitations, to Ordain and
Collate him to the Charge; tell me freely, whether you think you were not in
the wrong to those Souls over whom you Present such a Person, in committing
them to such a Steward as would starve them? Or, whether you think the Bishop's
Sin could excuse yours? Sure I am, you cannot imagine so: For, if you will have
none of the Guilt, why will you needs have an hand in the Work? Or tell me,
What is the End for which you have this Power? Is it not, that you may improve
the same for God's Glory, and the good of Souls? For which, if you have any
tenderness or zeal, you will judge your Conscience more concerned, than to be
so indifferent in your Choice. Nay, would God there were not some, who, having
once Presented a Person, how Insufficient soever, do look upon it as a
Reflection upon themselves to have him rejected; and therefore, making all
considerations of Conscience stoop to the fancy of their Reputation, which they
think engaged to espouse and promote by all means imaginable, the design of
their Presentation, and account it their Honor, in spite of Opposition, to
set up their own insignificant Creature in a Charge over Souls. But how such
Men will answer for a Talent thus employed, the Day of their Reckoning will
tell.

Wherefore, I say, I would warn you to consider well whom you Present to the
Charge of Souls; and whenever any occasion thereof falls into your hands, I
would advise you, first to have your recourse to God, and falling down before
the Throne of Grace, pray him who is the Lord of the Vineyard, to direct you
aright for choosing a faithful Labourer to put in the vacant place thereof; and
as the effect of such Devotion performed in Sincerity, you may confidently
expect Divine Counsel and Concurrence.

And next, it is requisite you make use of such means, as whereby you may have
sufficient Information, and best Advice for fixing upon a Person most suitable
for the Charge. Fame may do somewhat herein; your own Acquaintance, and
Knowledge of the Gifts and Qualifications of Men, may do much; but if you
scruple, or dare not, or cannot rely upon your own Judgment, then have recourse
to the Counsel and Advice of others. No doubt, you will not want abundance who
will be ready to obtrude their Advice and Recommendations, and perhaps vex you
with their Importunities; but in a Matter of such weight, I wish you to be
cautious whose Advice you make use of.

Those who serve you, may happily be ready to take the first Advantage to be
Interposers in this Affair, and specially such who have a Preference in your
Favor above their Fellows, will be very confident in their Recommendations, as
presuming they have the sway of your Ears. But, be wary in taking the Advice of
Servants herein, who, for the most part, are mercenary, and ready to make
secret Simoniacal Bargains for a Presentation, and then move you to give what
they have sold, whilst without your privity they gather up the Price.

Beware also, to consult herein any covetous Persons: For their Eyes are
commonly more toward Earth, than toward Heaven; and are wiser for this World,
than for the World to come; and you shall be sure to find their Counsel tend
more for your Gain, than for the good of your Soul. And it is much, if there be
not at the bottom some design for their own Advantage.

Beware likewise, to advise with those who are of profane and dissolute Lives;
these will prove no good Counselors, for choice of one to the Holy Calling:
Such a one will be preferable in their Eyes, whose Conversation differs least
from their own; and from whom, they expect least Severity against their Vices.

Likewise, beware herein to consult proud Persons: They will never recommend to
you for a Pastor, but such a one whom they presume, they may easily tread upon;
or who they expect will yield his Ministry to truckle to their supercilious
Humors.

Nay, in a word, I would wish you to beware of taking herein, the Advice of any
in whom the World, or carnal Affections, or Interests, or ungodly Lusts, have a
visible Dominion. But herein, call for the Counsel of such, whose known
Sincerity, Piety and Prudence, do commend them as Men fit to be consulted in
Affairs that concern the Conscience, whether they be Churchmen, or others.
(Specially, if there be any such within that Congregation whereof he to be
Presented is to have the Charge.) For, from such, you may expect the soundest
and most religious Advice. And by following this Method both with God and Man,
I am sure you shall discharge your selves so, as may probably most conduce for
the Advantage of the People's Souls, and certainly most for the Exoneration of
your own Conscience.

CHAP. VIII. An humble Advice to Bishops and Governors of the Church.
I May perchance, incur the Censure of Presumption, for obtruding my Advice
upon the Fathers and Governors of the Church; but, it may be, I have had
occasion to see more of the Danger of that Malady which I am to represent unto
them, and to hear more of the Reproach they suffer upon that account, than is
obvious to their Notice; and therefore, if zeal excite me to offer what in my
humble Opinion is convenient for their curing the one, and wiping off the
other, I trust I shall thereby incur no imputation of Arrogance at their Hands;
at least, they will look upon it but as a defect of good Manners.

Right Reverend Fathers, The very Title of your Office, proclaims the Church to
be under your oversight; and if you should not take care to stop the Conduits
of Corruption whereby she may be infected, it were an oversight in the worst
sense. And there is no corruption whereof the Conduit has more need to be
strictly blocked up, than that of Simony; which, if suffered to spread,
produces most deplorable Effects, in drawing upon the Church the reproach of
her Enemies, the contempt of her Children, and many inward Diseases, to the
hazard of many Souls. Ah! How has the climbing up of some, by pecuniary
Passages into the Church, opened the mouths of Adversaries, to reproach us as
Thieves and Robbers, who enter not in by the Door, nor have any Call from God;
and as Hirelings, who serve for bought Benefices? Ah! What a Scandal does it
breed to many Christians? And, how does it render the Holy Calling contemptible
generally amongst the Vulgar, and even amongst those who otherwise have
thoughts of Veneration for it, when they see it prostitute to Merchandise, and
made a Matter of buying and selling? I am sure, amongst all the Causes of the
contempt of the Clergy, there is nothing that exposes them more to contempt,
than this, to see them turn so ignominious Pedlers, as to make Merchandise of
Spiritual Commodities. And what evil Consequences may their Ministry produce,
who enter upon it by such means, may be easily conjectured, if it be
considered, that it holds no less true in the Church than in the Commonwealth,
that Imperium qui malis artibus acquisivit, vix unquam bonis artibus exercuit:
He that comes to Power by evil means, scarce does he ever exercise the same
Honestly; but makes as small Conscience in his Administration, as he made in
his Acquisition. So that the Souls of People are in no small danger of being
obnoxious to all these Evils which may befall them, by the corrupt Ministry of
those whose Disposition leads them, when they are in, to serve the same Master
by whose help they entered. Now you, Dear Fathers, are they, to whose care it
belongs to remedy these Evils: It is your Pastoral Rod that must drive Simon
Magus to the Doors, and shut them against him; that so the Church may enjoy a
pure Ministry, the Flock may be delivered from Danger, the Pastors from
Reproach and Contempt, and you your selves from those Scandals which the
Adversaries of your Government are ready to cast upon you, as Connivers at all
Corruption. And, what to this effect is requisite to be done, in confidence of
your charitable Indulgence, I humbly give my Opinion and Thoughts.

First, Much deliberation and circumspection is requisite, in the granting of
License to Young Men to step out to Preach the Gospel. For, since the Apostle
has given warning, 1 Timothy 5.22.
to lay hands suddenly on no Man; this being the first step in order to
Imposition of Hands, and an Act which puts them in some capacity for
Ordination, is not to be done suddenly either: For, we find by experience, that
as soon as Youths are Licensed to step up in a Pulpit, it is, for the most part,
their next work, immediately to lay themselves out for a Charge in the
Ministry: And, if they be either of covetous, or ambitious Inclinations, they
cannot have patience to wait upon the occasion of a fair Call, but being
sparr'd forward by the hot Desires either of Lucre, or Preferment; if they find
out a covetous Patron, they presently join with him in a Simoniacal Bargain.
And there being such a multitude of these Young Preachers, they so throng one
another, that commonly the more modest, and more worthy, are thrust beside the
Door, by those, who, resolving to make up what is wanting in their Worth, by
the diligence of their Endeavors, do more actively bestir themselves, and fet
their Friends awork, by all imaginable means of Money and Bribery, to attain
their end. For preventing whereof, it may with good reason be supposed, that
License for Preaching should be granted to none, but upon serious and mature
deliberation, and after a circumspect and diligent Search and Enquiry into
their Qualifications, not only of Literature, but of their Inclinations and
Dispositions, of their Humility, Sobriety, Prudence, and Piety in their
Conversation. And then, there would be no such multitude, nor such justling for
Places.

Secondly, Another Mean for the remedying of this Evil, is, to revive somewhat
of the ancient Discipline of the Church against it, and to inflict upon those
whom you shall find guilty of this Sin of Simony, either in cenatu, aut
effectu, in Endeavor, or in Deed, Censures proportionable to their Guilt. This
Rod of Ecclesiastical Censure, is that Scourge which your Lord and Master has
put into your hands, whose Example should stir up your Zeal, therewith to drive
the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple. Your Severity against the Guilty,
will not only prove an awful curb to restrain others from venturing upon that
Sin; but will also create an abhorrency of it, in those who before harbored
lighter Sentiments thereof; and will proclaim your own Innocence, and holy
Fervor, for purging of the Church, to the Silencing of those who reproach you.
But, if you prove lukewarm in this Affair, then consider what Gregory the
Great says, (as I have told before,) A pud Gratian. Cause. 1 Qu. 1. Can.
Quisquis per pecuniam.
Participem se reddit alienae Simoniae, quisquis contra Simoniacam Haeresin,
pro officii sui loco, vehementer non exarserit: He renders himself partaker of
another Man's Simony, whosoever, according to his Place and Calling, is not
vehemently zealous against it. Or, if you do not inflict a Censure
proportionable to the Crime, you not only thereby draw upon your selves a
suspicion, that you have not a just sense of the hainousness thereof, but you
also encourage others to adventure upon it with the greater confidence: For,
ubi leves poenae, ibi gravia scelera; great Vices spread the more when they are
lightly punished. I shall not say, how the Church of old would have censured
those whom they had found, though but by their Endeavors, guilty of this Sin,
in declaring them altogether incapable of the Priesthood; but I Am sure, for
such Transgressors, there should be appointed some considerable time of
Penance, for their own Humiliation, and for Terror to others, ever ever again
they be rendered capable of that Sacred Office.

Thirdly, When any Man addresseth himself to you clothed with a Presentation,
it were fit you should seek to be informed, by what means he came by it; and if
you find any probable ground for suspicion of Simony, that you suspend your
procedure till it be cleared: And so much the rather, if he be a Person betwixt
whose Parts and the Charge to which he is Presented, there is a great
Disproportion: For, that may give just ground of jealousy, that all is not
sound. For, though it be the Patron's Right to give him a Title, yet it is
yours to look to the Purity of his Entry, and to be judges of his fitness for
the Charge; wherein, if you find not satisfaction, you should be lother to lay
your Hands upon his Head, than to lay them upon Thorns.

I know, that in such Cases, you may readily have in your prospect many
Inconveniences, and dangerous Consequences, which this may draw upon you,
flowing from the displeasure of Patrons, or of such great Persons as may be
interessed; at whose Hands you may fear much trouble which they may breed you,
together with the loss of their Favor, and the worst Effects which their
passionate Resentments can threaten. But, may I not beseech you to turn away
your Eyes from what may follow upon your Doing, and to fix them upon what is
your Duty to do? For, he who reckons the Sequels before his Duty, will make
his Conscience truckle to his Fears. And as Cyprian says, Epist. 55. Ad Cornel.
Actum est de Episcopatus vigore, and de Ecclesiae gubernandae sublimi ac
Divina potestate, -- si ad hoc ventum est, ut perditerum minas, atque insidias
pertimiscamus: There Is an end of Episcopal Authority, and the Sublime and
Divine Power of Governing the Church, if it be come to this pass, that we fear
the Threats of evil Men, and the Snares they may lay for us. But, I hope, the
fears of these things from Men, will neither move you, to shrink from your
Duty, nor to comply with them in Sin; since you know, that your Lord and Master
has so often warned you, Jer. 1.8. Ezekiel. 2.6. Matthew. 10.28, etc.
not to fear Men; and, that you will find much more comfort and quiet in your
Conscience, when to please God, you displease Man; than, when by gratifying of
Man, you displease God. And, there is nothing will discourage Simoniacal
Designs more, than when Men see you careful to countermine them, and boldly to
oppose them.

Fourthly, It were most necessary, that you should revive somewhat of the
ancient Discipline, against Simoniacal Patrons. You know, the ancient Canons
did smite with Anathema, Lay-Persons, who transacted in such execrable
Bargains. And truly, there is nothing could give Simony a more mortal Wound,
than to bring under your Censures the Sellers, as well as the Buyers of
Spiritual Offices, and to exercise the Spiritual Weapons of the Church equally
against both.

But Finally, I should wish, That your zeal, and care to strengthen your own
Hands, for the purging of this Sin out of the Church, would move you by an
unanimous and joint Address to our Sovereign, to Petition his Majesty, to give
Strength to your Endeavors by his Authority, in making such Laws, as might not
only oblige Patrons, as well as the Persons presented, to purge themselves of
Simony before their Presentations be accepted; but as might also make them
liable to such civil Sanctions (if found guilty,) as have sometimes been
imposed by the Laws of other Religious and Pious Princes. And I am confident,
such an Address would not only be acceptable, But would have a good effect.

But now I shall say no more; and if any will condemn me for having said too
much, I hope he will justify me, for whom I can never say enough; and who
knows, that all I have said, has been from a sincere Heart, and zealous Design
for the Purity of his Church, and Glory of his Blessed Name; whose Glory I
desire my be the end of all my Labors.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and sold by Charles Brom at the Gun, at the West End of
St. Paul's Churchyard.
COmpanion to the Temple, or a Help to Devotion in the use of the Common
Prayer. By Thomas Comber, D. D. in Folio and Octavo.

The Alliance of Divine Offices, exhibiting all the Liturgies of the Church of
England, since the Reformation; as also the late Scotch Service Book, with all
their respective Variations; and upon them all Annotations, vindicating the
Book of Common Prayer from the main Objections of its Adversaries, explicating
many Parcels thereof, hitherto not clearly understood; showing the Conformity
it bears with the Primitive Practice, and giving a fair Prospect into Usages
of the Ancient Church. To these is added, The Order of the Communion, set forth
2 Edward VI. By Hamon L'Estrange, Esquire; The Third Edition. To which is added in
this Edition, The Form of Ordination, Additions and Alterations in the Liturgy.
Prayers in the Convocation. Form of Prayer used in K. Charles Second's Chapel
at the Hague. Prayers in the time of an Invasion. Prayers at the Healing. Folio.

THgSIAST'PION, Vel Scintilla Altaris: Primitive Devotion in the Feasts and
Fasts of the Church of England. By Edward Spark, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to
His Majesty. The Eighth Edition. With all New Cutts at large; with Additions
upon the Three Grand. Solemnities, last annexed to the Liturgy: Consisting of
Prose, Poems, Prayers and Sculptures. Octavo.

The Snake in the Grass, and Desence of it.

Five Discourses by the Author of the Snake in the Grass, with a new Preface.
And all the Pieces of that Author.

The First and Fourth Parts of Virgil's Aeneads, in English Burlesque. By
Charles Cotton, Esquire.

Liturgies vindicated by the Dissenters. Price Bound 1 s.

Advice to the Roman Catholics of England, especially those under Age, by the
late Act of Parliament. Price 1 s.

The History of the Bible in Quarte, with 264 Cutts, besides Three Mapps.

Le Grand's Philosophy, Folio, English, Cutts.

Mr. Keith's Farewell Sermon at Turners-Hall.

-- Two Sermons after Ordination.

A Full Account of Presbytery, as established in Scotland. Octavo.

Sermons on several Occasions. By Dr. Sprat, Lord Bishop of Rochester. Octavo.

Principles and Duties of Natural Religion. By Bishop Wilkins. Oct.

The Case of the Duchess of Mazarine.

The Conquest of India by the Portuguese, in 3 Vol. Octavo.

The City and Republic of Venice. Octavo.

Religious Conferences about Godfathers and Godmothers.

Horace Translated by Alex Brom. etc.

Erasmus's Colloquies, Translated by Sir R. L'Estrange and Mr. Brown. Octavo.

The Complete Gamester. By Charles Cotton, Esquire.

The Guide of a Christian. Price Bound 6 d.

A Guide to Heaven, in two Parts.

Reformed Monastery, or the Love of Jesus.

A Manual of Prayers for Winchester College.

Exposition on the Church Catechism, or the Practice of Divine Love. By Bishop
Ken.

All the Pieces by the same Author.

A Treatise of Humane Reason. Twelves.

Method with the Deists and Jews.

Arithmetical Recreations. By Leybourn.

The Godly man's Companion. 24o.

Essay of Love and Marriage, with the Characters of a Whore, a Bawd, etc. Price
stitched 6 d.

Plain-dealing Poulterer.


