THE ANATOMY OF POPERY: OR A Catalogue of Popish Errors in Doctrine, and
Corruptions in Worship: Together with The AGREEMENT between Paganism,
Pharisaism, and Popery.

Nostrae Regulae noster sunt Decalogus, imo Decalogo praestantiores: quoniam
illic mandata, hic consilia; Jac. Crusius Jesuita in Hossem. ca 5.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Milbou^^ for Tho. Passenger, at the T^^ee Bibles on
London Bridge 1673.

To the much honored Sir FRANCIS POPHAM, of Littlecott, in the County of
Wilts, Knight of the Honorable Order of the Bath: To Sr. Thomas Dolman, of
Shaw, in the County of Berks, Knight; and and to William Ash of Heitesbury, in
the County of Wilts, Esquire; the Author wishes an increase of all Heavenly
blessings.
Honored Sirs,
GRreat was the goodness of God after our Saviors Resurrection and Ascension,
that he sent down cloven Tongues from Heaven, like as fire upon his Apostles;
which was a visible sign of those invisible ^ifts of the Spirit, poured down
abundantly upon them for the service of the Church, and the enlightening of the
World with the knowledge of Salvation by Jesus Christ; and that, even after the
Nations of the Earth had so many Ages sat in darkness, and in the shadow of
death, a dark Cloud of Barbarous and Heathenish errors and superstitions
having overspread the face of the whole Earth, insomuch, that wicked Men and
Women, Adulterers and Adulteresses, Stocks, Stones, and other Creatures were
mistaken for Gods and Goddesses.

The times of this Ignorance (as the Apostle calls them, Act. 17.30.) were
woeful; but then let us see the goodness of the Lord, who restored the light in
so plentiful a manner, that, as that Cloud which Elijah's Servant saw at the
first rise up like a man's hand, had in short time overspread the Heavens; so
that little Lamp, which at first being put into the hand of Adam, gave light to
his House and Family, became now like the Sun in the Firmament, and shined to
all Nations; the knowledge of God being plentifully dispersed all abroad, as the
Sunbeams diffused through the whole body of the air.

But then again; that evil Angel of the bottomless pit, sent out a smoke in the
Ages following, which darkened the face of the Heavens, and the light of the
Church. The Devil raised up diverse Instruments, not only open and notorious
Heretics, but those (of all others most dangerous) who closely promoted the
mystery of Iniquity, never ceasing their secret workings, until they had lifted
up Antichrist into his Chair of Pestilence, and by degrees corrupted the
simplicity of the Truth, darkning the knowledge of Christ with corrupt
traditions, errors, contrary to the Faith, defaceing the glory of Christ, his
full satisfaction and perfect merit, with their own merit and works of
supererogation, and pretended Treasury of the Church, joining with Christ other
Mediators, and finding other ways to Heaven, which the Holy Ghost never taught,
the Gospel of Christ never mentioned. So that we may as truly say of them, as
of the Heathens, Professing themselves Wise, they became Fools: Foolishly
bragging of an infallibility nailed to their Popes Chair, that it was
impossible for him to err, or be deceived; they fell into gross and monstrous
errors, and led many thousands away by their strong delusions to destruction,
who had pleasure in Unrighteousness, and received not the love of the truth,
that they might be saved.

The Romanists have used abundance of lies, and cunningly devised fables for
the maintenance of their Tenets, and the defense of their supposed truths, as
also for the defacing and blemishing of the undoubted truth of God. They used
not only fabulous specches, but also fabulous actions too, viz. lying wonders.
How many false miracles have they hatched for the defense of their Religion,
their Purgatory, Praying for the Dead, Invocation of Saints,
Transubstantiation, Worshipping of Images, etc? Would not these much trouble
many weak minds, had not the spirit of God expressly foretold, that this should
be the practice of Antichrist, that man of sin, whose coming should be with
signs and lying wonders, and all deceiveableness of unrighteousness in them
that perish, 2 These. 2. So that that which they make use of to prove their
Religion by, when they want proofs in the Word of God, we are taught by the
word to make use of as a proof, that their Pope is the very Antichrist, and
they the followers of the Beast. What shameful lies do they bring also to prove
their Tenets that are in Controversy? How do they abuse Scripture, and as much
as in them lies, put lies into the mouth of the holy spirit of truth for the
maintenance of their false doctrine? for what is it else, when men will
wickedly go about to make the Scripture speak that, which the Spirit, who
endited it, never meant, wilfully perverting plain Texts of the Word to serve
their base ends, and to confirm those falsehoods which they have learned from
the Father of lies: On the other side, how many wicked Tales have they devised
to suppress and deface the Truth? That edious lie concerning Luthers death, and
that of Beza's death, and falling from the Truth to Popery, cast abroad in his
lifetime, which himself lived to confute to their shame; what does it but show
by what Spirit they are led? what shameful lies have they devised against many
other special Instruments of God's Glory? They hope (it seems) that some will
be found so foolish, as to believe their loudest lies; yea, do not many of them
maintain lying as lawful for defense of Religion? that Faith is not to be kept
with those whom they call Heretics? and that Equivocation (a more cleanly kind
of lying) is lawful? insomuch, that when Tresham; one of the Powder-Traitors,
in articulo mortis, lying on his Deathbed in the Tower, denied by solemn Oath
what he knew to be most true, to save the life and credit of Garnet the
Superior of the English Jesuits, and a man of great account among them; and
when the thing was proved manifestly, and Garnet was asked what he thought of
his case, he said, he knew not, unless Equivocation might excuse him. But if
their doctrine be true, it cannot want truth to defend it: if, false (as it is)
all the lies in Hell will not hold it up against the power of Truth, no more
than the darkness which silleth the air at night can resist the Sunbeams at
his rising; for as darkness is but a shadow, and so cannot withstand the light,
so lies are but shadows and fancies, there is nothing selid in them, and they
are not able to resist the power of truth, which is divine, and comes down
from the Father of Lights, and God of Truth.

Worthy Sirs,P

It is lamentable to consider what the Pope of Rome, and his Clergy in this
Land, did heretofore practice upon the Nobility and Gentry of this Nation,
suffering them to live in Ignorance, whereby they might not boggle at any
looseness or wickedness of life, that so the Clergy might afterward confess and
fleece them to purpose. Lamentable was the woeful blindness that was in those
times reigning in the World, when no man might buy or sell; no man might live
without danger of the Popes Curse, but such as received the mark of the Beast
in his hand, or in his forehead. It was death to profess the Truth of Christ,
and once to mutter against their Errors. It was thought worthy to be punished
with Fire and Faggot, when any did but seek the saving knowledge of God, though
in a secret way; to have a few leaves or Chapters of the New Testament in their
own tongue, which they could understand, was held even a Capital offense
against the Roman Catholic Church. For, whiles the Shepherds, who had the
charge of Souls, became dumb-dogs, not preaching; or blind Watchmen, not
discovering danger to the souls of the people, or preaching perverse things to
lead men from the knowledge of Salvation, lest any should (against their wills)
get light from the Word by reading the Scriptures in private, and be able to
epsy their false dealings, they took a most devilish course to take away the
Key of Knowledge, as the Scribes and Pharisees did. But they (worse than these
Forefathers of theirs) did shut up the Word in an unknown tongue, that the
knowledge of Christ might be hidden from the people; yea, and they taught them
their very Prayers in a strange Language. Oh the impudence of Sin and
Wick^dness, when it has gotten head, and is some to the height.

Now here again, we are to acknowledge the Lord's unspeakable goodness in
restoring unto us the knowledge of his Truth, and in a clear and admirable
manner in despite of all the power and policy of the man of sin, and his many
Instruments, who with fire and sword, as well as with pen and paper, labored
to maintain his Kingdom. When Antichrist set his foul feet, and laid his
iron-yoke upon the tender neck of the Spouse of Christ, enthralling the people
of God to his Traditions; enthroning himself in their Consciences; it was not
now the Sword of any Emperor, nor the policy of any deep-headed Statist, that
restored her, or ruined him; but it was the breath of the Lords mouth in the
Ministry of his Word, which gave life to the Church again, and blasted the
glory of that Whore of Babylon, according to that Epigram applied to Luther:
Lutherus decimum confecit strage leonem;
De clava noli quaerere; penna fuit.


Insomuch, that if the Popish Priests be not worse than the Egyptian Sorcerers,
how can they deny, but this was the finger of God, that in so short a time so
great a light should shine throughout so many Nations, and that so many men and
women of all sorts and degrees, rich, poor, noble, mean, learned, unlearned,
should see so much into the mysteries of Salvation, to which the world for a
long time had been a stranger; should rely wholly and only upon Christ for
Salvation, and renounce all Considence in themselves, or any other Creature, or
any device of man's brain; should acknowledge the sufficiency of the holy
Scriptures for a full doctrine of Salvation and Godliness, and despise all
traditions of men which are not grounded upon it; defying the Pope as
Antichrist, who for a long time had been honored above God, and whom none
almost durst gainsay, or once mutter against, renouncing Will Worship,
Image Worship, Invocation of Saints, and the like Idolatrics and Spiritual
Whoredoms, wherewith the Whore of Babylon has defiled the world. This was the
Lords doing, and it is wonderful in our eyes.

Yea, and in this Visitation, the Lord did bestow greater means upon our
Nation, than upon many other. There was no Nation in these, parts of the world,
but they had some means, even those that now cleave most close to the Pope, as
Spain and Italy. But unto us especially the light of the Word has been clearly
manifested, to teach us the knowledge of God in Christ, and we have had the
Martyrs fires burning clearly to confirm us in the same. And this light have we
now enjoyed for above an hundred years together, without interruption.

Much honored in the Lord!

I humbly Dedicate to you this ensuing Treatise, Entitled The Anatomy of
Popery. The Roman Synagogue is not only spelunca latronum, but lerna malorum, a
sink of Sin, of Heresy, of Idolatry, Impiety, Treachery, Villainy, mare mortuum,
a dead Sea, wherein spiritual Sodom and Gomorrha are not sunk, but swim and
flourish. Yea, how many Popish Emissaries are come from the Sea of Rome into
this Nation, like the Salmon into fresh Rivers, to beget a new spawn and fry
of Catholics among us? Now if we fasten the Anchor of our judgment upon the
firm ground of Truth, it will stand sure and steady against all contrary winds
of doctrine. When a certain Jester (set on by others, as it was thought) in the
presence of the King of Hungary, spoke to a noble man of Prague, touching his
Religion, because he fancied not the Romish service, but was addicted to
Rochezana, a follower of John Husse, the Noble man gave him this answer: If
thou speak of thy self, thou art not the man thou Counterfeitest, and so I
will answer thee, as I would a Wise man, if by others setting on, it is meet I
satisfy them. Hear me therefore; Every man uses Church-Ceremonies agreeable
to his Faith, and offers such sacrifices as he believes are acceptable with
God. It is not in our own power to believe what we will, The mind of man
conquered with powerful reasons, willing, or nilling, is taken Captive. I am
sufficiently resolved of the Religion I follow; if I follow thine, I may
deceive men, but God that searches the heart I cannot deceive; nor yet is it
fit I should be like to thee; one thing becomes a Jester, and another thing a
Noble man. This you may take to your self (says he) or report, if you please
to them that set you on work. It is good to be zealously affected always in a
good thing, as St. Paul says.

Honored Sirs,

The Lord establish you in the truth, which is animi pabulum, and sponsa
intellectus, as Lactantius calls it. Truth is a Kings Guard, Prove. 20.
Hezekiah's Cordial in Sickness; yea, the blessed life is nothing else but
gaudium de veritate, as St. Augustine says.

The Contents of this Treatise.
CHAP. I.
OF their Errors in Doctrine. page 1 XIX Errors concerning the Scriptures.
page 2 XXI Errors concerning God and Christ. page 6 XXXIV Errors concerning
Man; etc. page 10 VIII Errors concerning the Sacraments in General. page 23 XI
Errors concerning Baptism. page 26 XXX Errors concerning the Lords Supper, or
Eucharist. page 30 XIII Errors concerning the Mass. Of many Ceremonies which
go before the celebration of the Mass. Of the Ceremonies which they use in the
very action it self. page 37 Of many Errors and Blasphemies in the Canon of
the Mass, as touching the Matter. page 45 Of other Errors in the manner of
celebrating Mass. page 51 Of their manifold Errors concerning the Church. How
the Papists devise many notes whereby their Church is described. page 53 Of
Antiquity. page 71 Of Universality. page 76 Of Succession. page 79 Of Unity.
page 80 Of the Power of working Miracles. page 82 Of the Gift of Prophecy. page
87 Of Prosperity. page 89 XX Errors concerning the Members of the Church; the
Clergy and Laity. page 97 XI Errors concerning justifying Faith. page 102 XXX
Errors concerning Repentance, which they call Penance. page 104 Five kinds of
Indulgences, a sixfold profit of them. page 113 Of the Disposition required to
be in those that receive Indulgences, showed in Six things. page 116 How the
Papists hold that Indulgences are profitable for the Dead, showed in Seven
things. page 117 XI Errors concerning Fasting. page 119 Of their dispensing
with Fasts. page 123 XVII Errors concerning Oaths and Vows. page 127 XII
Errors concerning Marriage. Of their diverse Rites and Ceremonies in Marriage.
page 131 VII Errors touching Extreme Unction. Of the Rite and Ceremony used by
the Priest therein. page 135 VI Errors concerning their Sacrament of Order.
page 137 VII Errors concerning Confirmation. Their manner of administering the
Sacrament. page 139 Of their Corruptions in Worship. page 144 Of their Latin
Service. page 145 Of praying for the Dead. page 148 Of the Canonizing of
Saints, and the manner of Canonization. page 149 Of Invocation of Saints: of
the several persons that are invocated in their Litany. page 152 Of their
Distinction of the two kinds of Worship, Latria and Dulia. 155 Of
Image Worship: of the manner of Worship they give to Images. Of the manner of
making, and way of Consecration of Images. 157 Of the Image of the Cross. 160
Of Relics: XII errors and abuses noted in the Papists by Chemnitius, with
diverse other things. 163 Of the Vigils annexed to Festival-days. 172 Of their
Wax-Candles and Tapers. 173 Of their Holy Water. 175 Of their Pilgrimages. 177
Of the Agreement between Paganism and Popery, showed in Three and Twenty
particulars. 181 Of the Papists imitating the Jews and Pharisees, showed in Ten
particulars. 205 How the Church of Rome now varieth from the old Church of
Rome, showed in Twenty particulars, and how the Doctrine of Saint Peter and
Saint Paul is contrary to the Doctrine of the present Church of Rome.
THE ANATOMY OF POPERY.
CHAP. I.
THat all men may take a full view of the Papacy, and see how it has
encroached upon Heaven and Earth: let us consider the Fraud that has been used
by the Sea of Rome, by bringing in Corruptions in matter of Doctrine and
Worship. Popery is not a single Heresy, like that of ^uty^hes, Arius or
Nestorius, but a System of Heresies, and a common sink of abominable Errors;
and therefore called pstasa, a general revolt.

Their Errors about the Scripture are,
1. Vid. Turnb. Tetrag. c. 2.
That the Church does regulate the Scripture, and is not regulated by it, so
making the Church the Rule of Faith. That the holy Scriptures are not the only
and whole Rule of our Faith, and Life, in all matters necessary to Salvation.

2. That the Church has Authority to alter as well the things contained in
holy Scripture, as those that are delivered in the Church by Apostolical
Tradition: yea the Papists affirm, that it is in the power of the Church, to
alter that which God commands in Scripture, that is, to make Commandments
contrary to Gods Commandments. And they are divided in the main, viz. what
this Church is, which is the infallible Judge, B^xters Sat Religion.
whether it be the present Church or the former Church; whether it be the Pope
only (at least, in case of difference between him and his Council) or whether
it be a general Council, although the Pope agree not, as the French and
Venetians say; yea whether it be the Clergy only, or the Laity also that are
this Church.

3. Bellarm. l. 3. c. 3.
They also assert, that it is lawful to allegorize Scripture, both in the Old
and New Testament.

4. Ecchii Enchirid. loc de authorit. Eccles. Pigg. l 1. de Hierarch. ^ccl s.
That the Pope is the supreme Judge of all Controversies, and that the Scripture
has no authority in respect of us, but what is granted to it by the Church.
For adding some Books to the Scripture which were not from the beginning: The
Papists being bold upon the Decree of the Council of Trent, will, that among
these the Books of Tobit, Judeth, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, the first and second
of Macchabees should be Canonical: likewise the Additions to Esther, Baruch,
with the Epistle of Jeremiah, and the Additions to Daniel, these they call
deuterokanoniko, Canonical in a second degree.

5. Stapl. t^n l. 3 c. 36
That the Canon of Scripture is imperfect, wanting many Divine Revelations:
therefore some Books have been received as Canonical at one time, and not at
another: some some have been received as Canonical in some Churches not in
other. Vid. Downham


6. They prefer the Faith and Judgment of the Church of Rome, which they say is
the internal Scripture written by the hand of God in the heart of the Church,
before the holy Scripture.

7. Bellarm. de verb. Dei. l. 1. c. 2.
That unwritten Traditions are to be equally believed, and to have as great
authority as the Scripture: that Traditions (which they call the unwritten
Word) are the Rule of Faith.

8. They contend, that the Customs and unwritten Opinions of the Church of
Rome, are most certain Apostolical Traditions.

9. Blondel Dalaeus.
They number the Popes Decretal Epistles with the holy Scriptures: when yet it
is most clearly proved by Blondel in a just Volume, that abundance of them are
forgeries: and Dalaeus proves it particularly of the Clementines.

10. Wide Downham Catal.
They say it is Heresy for any to say, that it is not altogether in the power
of the Church or Pope to appoint Articles of Faith.

11. That the Scripture is not sufficient for the refuting of all Heresies (as
if there were any Heresiebut what is against Scripture.)

12. Id ibid.
That the Church is ancienter than the Scripture (that is, than the Word of God
which is now written;) because it is ancienter than the writing of it: as if it
were not the same Word of God, which was first delivered by voice, that is now
in writing.

13. That it is not necessary nor convenient for the common People to read the
Scriptures, but rather dangerous and hurtful.

14. That the translating of the Scriptures into vulgar Languages is the
fountain of Heresies: and they that do it deserve ill of Christian Religion.

15. That the Hebrew Copy of the Old Testament, the Greek of the New Testament
is not authentical.

16. B^lla^me de verbo Dei. l. 3.
That the Scriptures are very obscure, and hard to be understood, even in
things necessary.

17. That it belongs not to all the faithful to search into the meaning of
the Scripture.

18. That the certain Interpretation of the Scripture is not to be gathered out
of the Scripture.

19. They make seven Principles of the Christian Doctrine, which are all
grounded in the Authority of the Sea and Pope of Rome.

Their Errors concerning God and Christ.
1. SOme hold, that the Son and Spirit are not God of them selves.

2. Ex Chamie^.
They deny the infallible certainty of Divine Providence.

3. Of this see the Writings between Doctor Hammond and Mr. Jeanes.
They deny that the Soul of Christ did increase in Wisdom.

4. They deny that the Soul of Christ did suffer torments for mankind, any
otherwise than by way of sympathy with his Body.

5. They deny him to be the only Head of the Church.

6. They say, that he is Mediator only according to his humane Nature.

7. Tho. part. 3. quaest. 83.
That the Blood of Christ is not necessary to wash away Sins, but that they may
be done away by holy Water, knocking the Breast, and other ridiculous means.

8. They seem to give unto Christ a santastical Body, that neither consists
of dimensions nor occupies a place, which when he was born, did not open the
Womb of his Mother; and when he arose did penetrate the Stone of the Sepulcher;
and when he instituted his Supper, lay hid under the species of Bread and Wine.

9 They deny Christ to be the only Mediator of Intercession, but join with him
Angels and Saints.

10. They deny Christ to be the only Prophet, whose voice only must be heard;
spiritual King and Priest of the New Testament. But they make the Pope the
chief Prophet and Pastor, King and Monarch, and Priest: whence it follows,
that the Pope is not only opposed to Christ, as his Adversary, but as his Rival.

11. That the (unchangeable) Priesthood of Christ, the Eternal Priest, is made
Eternal by the Succession of other sacrificing Priests, which they make.

12. That Christ, who is God over all, blessed for ever, did merit for himself;
though he was both Viator and Comprehensor, in Termino and extra Terminum, and
in the days of his flesh did possess all desired happiness, and saw God face to
face while he lived here.

13, The Jesuits say, that Jesus Christ might have sinned, might have been
subject to vices, might have fallen into error and folly.

14. That Christ's Merits are not the only meritorious cause of Salvation.

15. Fevard. p. 430.
That the Fear and Agony of Christ proceeded not from any feeling of Gods wrath
or indignation, but he only showed the affection of humane sense fearing Death!

16. They are so bold, as to appoint the place where Christ shall appear in the
day of Judgment, namely in the East.

17. That the Son of Man shall appear with the sign of the Cross born before
him. Then shall the sign of the Son of Man appear in Heaven. Matthew. 24.30. that
is (say they) the Sign of the Cross.

18. They deny that God alone is to be worshipped, and do communicate Divine
Worship to certain Creatures.

19, That God necessarily gives Grace to him that does his best.

20. Some Jesuits assert, that we satisfy the Love we owe to God, by loving
him three or four times in our life. And others, that we may pass over our
whole life without any thought of loving him, and yet be saved after all this.

21. That God might give Grace and Glory to men, because of the honest actions
of natural Virtues, though they had not of themselves any relation to Grace or
Glory, which are of a supernatural order. That is to say, that God could save
men by actions purely natural: and so that man could deliver himself from sin
and misery, without having need of. Jesus Christ, and that by consequence his
active and passive obedience were superfluous, and exacted from him without any
necessity.

Their Errors concerning Man.
1. Ecc. Chamier.
THat every thing against the Law is not sin.

2. That Concupiscence, and the first motions thereof be no sins, nor have the
nature of sin.

3. That all Sins are not in their own nature mortal; Menric, S^m. M^^^ lib. 4.
cap. 20.
that Sin is called mortal, because it brings Death upon the Soul, that is, say
they, it depriveth it of Gods Grace: That some Sins are in their own nature
venial, and do not deserve eternal punishment.

4. That by every mortal sin Grace is lost.

5. The Divinity of the Jesuits maintains Aversions against our Neighbor, it
allows us to wish and do him hurt, and even to kill him, though it be for
temporal concerns, and also when we are assured, that by killing him we damn
him.

6. They cherish Pride and Vainglory in all sorts of persons, even in the most
holy actions: and according to their Divinity it is almost impossible to sin
mortally by Pride or Vainglory.

7. Their Doctrine gives all sorts of liberty to the Senses, and justifies in a
manner all sorts of Pleasure which it can taste.

8. That Discourses even of filthy things, though they proceed from curiosity
and levity, do not go beyond a venial sin: and that to speak of filthy things
for the pleasure that is taken in those Discourses without having a design to
pass on to dishonest actions, is but a venial sin.

9. Escohar, Filliut (...) Lessius, Layman, Zanch (...).
The Jesuits authorize all sorts of ways to get Wealth, and dispense with
restitution of what is procured by the most unjust and infamous ways. They
teach that Christians may take Usury of the Turk. Cornel. a laipde. in Deuteronomy.
23.19.

10. They teach, that if a man be drunk, or doing any thing with a formal
design to provide for his health, all the the evils that happen in consequence
thereof are to be esteemed as coming by accident: that it is no sin to eat and
drink ones fill without necessity for pleasure, only, provided that it do not
prejudice ones health.

11. The Jesuits allow of Magic and Witchcraft; and say, that they are not
superstitious who heal the sick by Charms, composed of Psalms and other
Prayers, and who by stroking and Prayers heal them of incurable Diseases.

12. The Jesuits teach-several ways of mocking God and men without punishment,
Jesuits Morals.
and without sin, in promising that which they never intend to do, and not
doing that which they have promised, although they are obliged thereunto by Vow
and by Oath. They have found out an expedient to deceive the world, to take a
salfe Oath even before a Judge without perjury.

13. Equivocation and mental reservation, Mason of (...).
that mystery of iniquity, and Quintessence of impudence is maintained at this
day both in Press and Pulpit by the Popish Doctors; though it be far from
Christian simplicity, and the Doctrine of God, which requires that men speak
the truth from the heart.

14. According to these Jesuits, there is scarcely any habitual sin; and that
custom of sinning may make a man incapable of sinning.

15. That Ignorance excuses sins committed without knowing them, and even
those which are committed afterward; and that there are properly no sins of
ignorance, according to the Jesuits.

16. The Papists teach, that the whole Law of God may in this life be fulfilled
by the Regenerate, and and that some do keep it perfectly.

17. That we may fulfill the Commandments of God, and of the Church, not only
without intention, but with an intent contrary, and altogether criminal.

18. The Jesuits enhaunse and debase (as they please) the Goods of this world
which are the usual object or matter of sin, and so nourish vice, and dispense
with the Law of God.

19. They have found out a kind of necessity, which dispenses with the Law of
God, that necessity makes that lawful which is not lawful by the Law.

20. That though God as a Sovereign and absolute Lord might make him suffer an
eternal pain, who did disobey him in a slight matter, yet he could not do it as
a Judge, because in this quality he is obliged to proportion the punishment to
the fault, which is not greater than the matter of the disobedience.

21. Bellar. de Justif. l. 4. c. 10. Greg. Valen. Tom. 1.
They teach, that it is not only possible for men to keep the Law of God in
this life, but to do more than is prescribed or commanded; and that these works
do make men perfect; and that men of their abundance may allot unto others such
works of supererogation.

22. That good works are not only necessary to Salvation, necessitate
praesentiae, because they must necessarily be present, and we cannot be without
thems: but necessitate efficientiae, they are necessary as efficient causes
together with Faith of our Salvation.

23. Vid. Cepa^in vit. Gonzagae^ l. 3. c. 2.
That a just man in his good works does not sin; but that their works are truly
just, without any spot or blemish of sin.

24. Andrad. Orth. Expl. l. 6.
They hold that eternal life is bestowed for the merit of Works; that Christ
did merit for His, not only Pardon of all faults and Grace to do all good
Works, but also that their Works should be meritorious of life everlasting.
Bayus merit. operum. l: 3. c. 9.
They make two kinds of merit; meritum de congruo, merit of congruity; such are
the preparative Works before Justification, as were the Prayers and Almsdeeds
of Cornelius, Act. 10. which (though they be not simply meritorious ex debito
Justitiae, by the due debt of Justice) yet, say they, of Congruity they deserve
at Gods hands, because he does graciously accept them. The other kind they call
meritum de condigno, merit of Condignity, when the reward is justly due by debt.

25. That there is a first and second Justification.

26. That the Virgin Mary was without sin, that she was conceived and born
without original sin, and lived and died without actual sin.

27. Bernardini de Busti Mariale Par. 3 Sermon. 3
That the Virgin Mary, during the time of Christ's Passion, and from his
Ascension into Heaven, was the sole Queen, Mistress, and Instructor of his
Church on Earth. That he assumed her into Heaven, Soul and Body, Baronius,
Spondanus. Fabrit. Destruct. Vitior.
fourteen years after his own Ascension, as Baronius, Spondanus and others
testify; though they contradict each other therein, both in the manner, time,
circumstances, and reality of her assumption: of which there is little or no
mention in any old Ecclesiastical Historians or Fathers of the Church.

28. Bernard, Sermon. de Assumpt. beatae Mariae. Mich. Lochi. main. Sermon. 6.
Suraez. Tom. 2. Disp. 54. Sect. 6.
They assert, that Christ has assumed her Soul and Body into Heaven, and
placed her therein, far above all Orders of Saints or Angels, even at his own
right hand, in the very Throne of the Trinity; and they vow obedience to her.

29. They assert, that Mary vowed Virginity before the Angel Gabriel came to
her with his Message: They also say, that the Church was in her alone, when
Christ died.

30. That there is a place, Rhem Annot. in Matt. 12. Sect. 6.
commonly called Purgatory, into which some of the Redeemed go after this Life,
as in a Prisonhouse, where the Souls which were not fully purged in this life,
are there purged and cleansed by fire, before they can be received into Heaven.
Vid John Verons Hunting of Purgatory.


31. They have devised and imagined, in their wandering conceit, four infernal
and subterrestrial places, Hell, Purgatory, Limbus Infantium, where Children
remain dying without Baptism; and Limbus Patrum, where, they say, the Fathers
were before Christ's coming. These places they distinguish three ways. 1. By the
situation, Hell is lowest, Purgatory is next, Limbus Infantium in the third
place, Limbus Patrum uppermost. 2. They differ (say they) in measure of
punishment: some of them have poenam damni and poenam sensus, a double
punishment, both of loss, in that they are excluded Heaven; and of pain also,
as Hell and Purgatory. The other two Limbi are but dungeons of darkness only,
where they suffer no other smart or pain, but are only absent from God. 3. They
differ in time and continuance, say they, Hell and the Dungeon of Children
shall remain for ever; but Purgatory and the Dungeon of the Fathers are
temporal. The one, that is, Limbus Patrum, is many years ago dissolved; and
Purgatory also shall cease, say they, at the coming of Christ. This then is
their opinion, that the Patriarchs and Prophets before Christ's coming were not
in Heaven, but were kept in an infernal place of darkness, yet without pain,
and were delivered by Christ's descending into Hell.

32. Bellarm. l 4. de Pontif. c. 13.
That the Pope is Christ's Deputy, Vicegerent, and Vicar General upon earth, to
whom, and to whose Successors we should all give place, and yield obedience.

33. That the Pope cannot err.] Here see their shifting distinctions. The Pope
may err in Manners (say they) not in Faith: alone by himself, not in a Council:
in his Chamber, not in his Consistory: by way of Conference, not of Conclusion:
in a private Letter, not in a Decretal Epistle: in his Palace, not in the
Pulpit: which last is truest; for he never comes there. But he that erreth in
Judgment, must of necessity err in his Determinations. Many of the Popes have
erred greatly: Pope Marcellinus was an Idolater, and offered Sacrifice to
Jupiter, and was forced by the Council of Sessa to recant it, where there were
three hundred Bishops assembled. Liberius fell into Arrianism, as Athanasius
testifies. The like did Pope Foelix, as Saint Hierom writes. Vide Willet.
Controv. 4.
Pope Honorius was a Monothelite, holding Christ had but one Will, and so but
one Nature, for the which he was condemned in three General Councils. Innocent
the first made both Baptism and the Eucharist necessary for the Salvation of
Infants: the latter of these was condemned by the Council of Trent. Pope
Stephen the sixth abolished all the Acts of Foronosus, his Predecessor. John
the ninth disannulled all the Acts of Stephen, and Sergius the third all the
Acts that Formosus had done, and so that which John had done, and approved the
Acts of Stephen: some of these must err. In the 1408. in the Council of Pisa,
consisting of 1000 Divines and Lawyers, two Popes were deposed at once, viz.
Gregory the eleventh and Benedict the thirteenth: the Tenor of whose
Deprivation calls them Schismatics, Heretics departed from the Faith,
scandalizing the whole Church, unworthy the Papacy, cut off from the Church.
And whereas Benedict continued Pope still for all this, a second Council holden
at Constance deposed him again, commanding all men to esteem him as an Heretic
and Schismatic. John Gerson testifies of Pope John the two and twentieth,
that he held, that the Souls of just men, separated from their Bodies, do not
see God, nor rejoice with him till the day of Judgment. This was a public
Error of his, for he taught it publicly, and commanded it to be held by all
men. But for this Error of his he was condemned before the French King, by the
Divines of the University of Paris, and made to recant it with Sound of
Trumpet. And Alphonsus a Castro says, that he saw a Decretal Epistle of Pope
Celestine, wherein he publicly erred in matter of Marriage. Pope Pius the
fourth decreed, that it should be lawful for him to allow degrees of Marriage
forbidden in Leviticus, and to forbid what God allowed.

Eastern Bishops and ancient Fathers have sharply reproved the Bishop of Rome,
as namely, Polycrates, the Bishop of Ephesus; and as Irenaeus, the Bishop of
Lions, did Victor, for his rash proceeding against the Eastern Churches.
Ancient Councils have withstood the Pope, as that of Chalcedon, wherein were
six hundred and thirty Bishops withstanding Leo in the Question of Supremacy.
The sixth Council of Carthage, of two hundred seventeen Bishops, resisted three
Popes one after another, in that they would do contrary to the Council of Nice.
These judged that Popes may err.

Such have been made Popes, that any wise man may think might err. Some have
been unlettered Idiots, no Grammarians, that could hardly write their Names in
Latin: some Laymen, as Constantius the second, and Bennet the eighth: and very
Boys for age; Bennet the ninth, a Child of ten years old, John the twelfth, a
Bastard, a mad Lad about eighteen years old: and one Woman, as Pope Joan, of
whom Mantuan, that elegant Poet, writes thus, Hic pendebat adhuc sexum mentita
virilem
Faemina cui triplici Phrygiam diademate Mitram
Extollebat apex, etc. lib. 3. Here did as yet, in show a Man, a Woman sit,
Whose Head a costly Crown did fit.
Some Popes have been Blasphemers, Dishonorers of Parents, Sorcerers,
Adulterers, Covetous, breakers of Promises. Pope Alexander the sixth upon
Festival days gave himself to hear Plautus his Comedies, and to be present at
other P^ays. Pope Paul the third poisoned his Mother and his Nephew, that the
whole Inheritance of the Farnesians might come unto him.

34. That Saint Peter was Prince of the Apostles, and had a Primacy of power
and authority above all the Apostles. They assert, that Saint Peter was Head of
the Church; that Saint Peter was the only Vicar of Christ here on earth.

Their Errors concerning the Sacraments in general.
1. Rhem. Act. 22. Sect. 1.
THat much is to be attributed to the bare outward Work, that the Sacraments do
confer Grace ex opere operato.

2. That the Sacraments are not Seals of the Promises or Covenant of God, nor
instituted to confirm the Promise.

3. That Circumcision was a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith only to Abraham.

4. Vide Bp. Downham Catal.
That Grace is contained in the Sacraments as in a vessel, nay that the
Sacraments are Physical instrumental causes of Grace, and that they do work
holiness by the power put into them by God, as the heat of the fire is the
cause of the burning of the Wood.

5. Bellarm. cap. 27.
That there is necessarily required the intention of the Administrator to the
truth of the Sacrament, at least, of doing what the Church does.

6. Vide Rhem. A^mot. in 2 Cor. 1
That in the Sacraments of Baptism, Confirmation and Order, there is imprinted
in the Soul by God a character, or certain spiritual and indelible sign or
mark, so that they cannot be reiterated. In the other Sacraments, viz.
(according to the Popish account) there is only an ornament or dress imprinted
instead of a mark or character.

7. That the Observation of the Ceremonies which they use in the Administration
of Sacraments (though invented by themselves) through will worship, is
meritorious, and part of Divine Worship.

8. They add five Sacraments to the other two instituted by Christ, Council.
Trid. S^ss. 7. Can. 1.
viz. Confirmation, Penance, Orders, Extreme Unction. And, say they, if any of
these are not truly and properly Sacraments, Rhem. Annot. Apoc. 1. Sect. 3.
or that they are not of Christ's Institution, let him be anathema, or accursed.
Their Arguments are. 1. The number of seven is mystical, prophetical, perfect.
The Prophet commanded Naaman to wash himself seven times. The Altar must be
cleansed seven days, Exodus 29.37. So in the Apocalypse, seven Churches, seven
Angels, seven Stars, seven Candlesticks, seven Thunders, etc. And why not also
seven Sacraments, says Bellarmine? 2. Man has seven Wounds to be healed: ergo
there ought to be seven Sacraments, as Remedies against the same. Baptism (say
they) is a remedy against Original sin, Penance against Actual sin, Bellarm. l.
2. c. 26.
Extreme Unction against the Relics of sin, Confirmation against infirmity of
Faith: the Eucharist against Malice: Orders against Ignorance.

Their Errors concerning Baptism.
1. Bellarm. lib. 1. de Baptism.
THey define Baptism to be a Sacrament of Regeneration by Water in the Word:
that is, not which signifies and seals unto us our Regeneration, and
assures us of Remission of sins, but actually justifies and regenerateth us.

2. Bellar. de Baptism^. lib. 1. c. 3.
They affirm, that this form of Baptism, to baptize in the name of the Father,
Son and Holy Ghost, is not fully concluded out of Scripture, but delivered by
Tradition: for (say they) the Command of Christ to baptize in the name of the
Trinity, may be understood thus; to baptize them into the Faith of the Trinity,
or by the authority of the Trinity.

3. They affirm, that Baptism, is simply necessary to Salvation by Gods
appointment: Council. Trid. S^ss. 7. can. 7.
so that all which die unbaptized, unless the want of Baptism be recompensed
either by Martyrdom or Penance, must needs perish, and be deprived of eternal
Life.

4. They grant power to baptize, Bellarm. c. 7.
not only to any rank of men, but even to Women in case of necessity: they
grant this also to Lay men and Pagans in like case.

5. They affirm, that the Baptism of Infants is grounded upon Tradition, and
not upon Scripture.

6. That the efficacy of Baptism does not extend it self to the future, but
only to that which is past.

7. That there is in Baptism a silent and implicit Oath of Obedience to the
Pope.

8. That the laver of Regeneration is not profitable to those that fall after
Baptism.

9. The Baptism of John (say they) was of another kind than Christ's Baptism
was, Council Trid. Sess. 8. c^n. 1.
neither was it sufficient without Christ's Baptism, nor had the like force or
efficacy, as his Baptism had: and therefore such as had been baptized of John
(say they) were admitted afterward to Christ's Baptism.

10. They clog Baptism with many trifling Ceremonies: and by mixing therewith
their own inventions, they have greatly polluted the Holy Sacrament of Baptism:
For,

I. Vid. Dr. Willet. Controv. de Bapt. Quaest. 8.
Before Baptism they have devised these toys to be used: 1. They do exorcise,
conjure, and exuflate the evil spirit from the party baptized. 2. They touch
the Ears and Nostrils with Spittle, that his Ears may be opened to hear the
Word, and his Nostrils to discern between the smell of good and evil. 3. The
Priest signeth his Mouth, Eyes, Ears, Nostrils, Breast, Forehead with the sign
of the Crovs, that all thereby may be defended. 4. Then hallowed Salt is put
into his mouth, that he may be seasoned with Wisdom, and be kept from
putrefying in sin. 5. The party is then anointed with Oil in his breast, that
he may be safe from evil suggestions: they anoint him also between the
shoulders, that he may receive strength to bear the Lords burden.

II. These Ceremonies do accompany Baptism it self. 1. The Font and Water
therein is consecrated and hallowed in the name of the Father, of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost. 2. He is thrice dipped in the Water to signify the being of
Christ three days in the Grave.

III. After Baptism they have this use. 1. They anoint the top of the head of
him who is newly baptized with holy Chrism or Oil, and thereby he is become a
Christian: 2. Gabr. Biel. l 4. did 6 quaest 3.
Then a white Garment is put upon him, to betoken his Regeneration. 3. A Vail
is put upon his head, in token that he is crowned with a Royal Diadem. 4. A
burning Taper is put into his hand, to fulfill that saying in the Gospel, Let
your Light so shine before men, etc.

11. They teach, that Baptism leaves nothing in the baptized that has the
nature of sin.

Their Errors concerning the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, or Eucharist.
1. THey take away the Name of the Lords Supper, and call it the Sacrament of
the Altar.

2. Vid. Fox Acts and Monum.
In this Sacrament they teach and urge the corporal presence of the Flesh of
Christ, as if that Sacrament were instituted to nourish Bodies, and not Souls.

3. They affirm the Body of Christ to be really in diverse places, that it is
in Heaven, and in the Eucharist all at once.

4. They take away the substance in the Sacrament and leave the accidents, as
if the accidents, viz. length, breadth, figure, color, taste, were without
subject.

5. That the Priest by the force of these five words [Hoc est enim corpus meum]
out of the Bread in the Sacrament creates the Body of Christ. Bellarm. l 4. de
Sacra. c. 13
The whispering of those five words the Papists call the Consecration of the
Elements; and being whispered, they presuppose such a secret virtue in the
syllables, as is able to chase away the substance of the Bread: and so (say
they) the Bread and Wine is turned into the substance of the Body and Blood of
Christ.

6. That these words [This is my Body] are to be taken literally, Bellarm. cap.
9.
without any Figure.

7. That the Body of Christ is made of the Bread in the Eucharist, as Wine was
made of Water.

8. That the substance of the Bread is consumed, and cease to be, and yet is
not annihilated.

9. That the Body of Christ does remain in the host, as long as the accidents
of Bread remain uncorrupted.

10. Bishop Downham Catal.
That as long as the Body of Christ is in the Host, it is accompanied with
Angels.

11. That in the corruption of the Species there is matter substituted by God,
in that very instant in which those species cease to be, and in which something
else is generated.

12. That the Elements of the Sacrament of the Eucharist do not nourish, if
taken in a great quantity, without a divine miracle.

13. But as they take away the substance of Bread and Wine, and so with that
the substance of the Sacrament; so they rob the Body of Christ of almost all
the essential properties of a true Body by this fiction of Transubstantiation.

14. And as they feign the Accidents of Bread in the Sacrament, without the
substance of it, so they must needs feign the substance of Christ's Body without
the Accidents of it.

15. Many do teach, that one and the same Body of Christ undivided does exist
upon innumerable Altars, and is every where whole.

16. That the Body of Christ being in many places at once, and yet not in the
space between, is not discontinued or divided from it self in respect of its
proper substance or quantity; but only is divided from it self in respect of
place.

17. That one and the same Body of Christ being in Heaven and on Earth, yea in
innumerable places on Earth at once; is indeed visible and palpable in Heaven,
but on Earth invisible, and beyond all our senses: there it is limited and
circumscribed, here it is unlimited; there it has dimensions, here it is free
from all dimensions.

18. They teach, Vide Council. Trid. Sess. 21. cap. 2.
that the Sacrament is not to be taken in both kinds. Some of them confess, it
is Christ's institution, that we should take the Sacrament in the two kinds; but
that the Church has dispensed from that Commandment: for (say they) it
belongs to the Church to judge what Mysteries of Christ are dispensable, and
the Church has the power to use both dispensation and alteration herein.
Hereby they declare the Church of Rome to be above God, since she can change
his Laws, and correct his Institutions.

19. They take away the Communion it self in the Supper, the Priest alone
devouring all, the rest looking on.

20. The Priest does adore the consecrated Host, and does offer it to others by
lifting it up to be adored; and for the same end they keep it, and carry it in
solemn procession, that it may be publicly adored.

21. That the Eucharist, when it is carried to the sick, is to be adored by all
those that meet it; those that do adore it are to have Indulgences, those that
do not adore it are to be counted Heretics, and are to be persecuted with Fire
and Sword.

22. Trid. C^n^il. S. s^. (...). 6.
By this Bread-worship they commit great Idolatry, while that they adore a
piece of Bread with the worship of Latria, which is only due to God. It was
decreed in the Council of Trent, that the Eucharist should be adored with the
highest degree of worship, which is proper to God.

23. In honor of this breaden. God they celebrate the Feast of Corpus Christi,
of the Body of Christ.

24. Vide B^yne Vind. at.
Frequent corporal apparitions of Christ in their Hostia's in form of a little
Infant, Lamb, raw Flesh, Blood, are asserted in Popish Legends, to evidence the
truth of their Transubstantiation, though mere Fables, diabolical delusions, or
impious frauds of Popish Priests.

25. The taking away the Cup was decreed in the Council of Constance; yet after
that, the Council of Basil granted the use of the Cup to the Bohemians Bellarm.
lib. 3. de Euchar. cap. 2.
This taking away the Cup from the People may seem a small matter; for it is
done but once every year, at which time the Sacrament is given to the People:
for in all the rest of the Masses, which are continual and daily, they deprive
both the People and the Clergy, that do not consecrate it, of both kinds: For
in private Masses it is held forth to be seen by the People and Clergy, and to
be adored, not to be received but only by the Priest that makes it, who is (as
themselves speak) the Maker of his Maker.

26. They assert, that the Body of the Lord cannot be rightly taken, but of
those that fast; and that Christians ought to eat nothing before they
communicate, unless in a case of great necessity.

27. They bind the people only once in a year to receive the Communion, viz. at
Easter-time, and take it to be fully sufficient for them so to do. Council.
Trident. Sess. 13. Can. 9.

27. Rhem. Annot. 1 Cor. 11 Sect. 16.
The wicked (say they) do in the Sacrament eat the true Flesh of Christ, and
drink his Blood, though they be infidels and ill livers.

28. The Papists teach an Oral and Capernaitical Manducation of the Flesh of
Christ; for they say, that the Body of Christ, in the Eucharist is really and
sensually touched, broken and eaten.

29. The Elements in the Sacrament being once consecrated, whether they be
received or not at that instant, T^ident, ^^oncil. ^^ss. 13. ^^n. 47.
but be reserved and kept in Boxes and Pixes, and other vessels of the Church,
for days, weeks, months, to be carried solemnly to those that are sick and to
be applied to other uses, are still, they say, the very Body and Blood of
Christ.

30. They give the Eucharist to Infants presently after Baptism.

Their Errors concerning the Mass.
1. THere are diverse opinions among them concerning the Original of this Name.
Some say, Hugo de S. Vict.
it is called Missa, the Mass, quia oblatio and preces ad Deum mittantur,
because Oblation and Prayers are sent to God: others because an Angel is sent
of God to be assistant at the Mass: some of the Hebrew word Missath, Deuteronomy. 16.
Dr. Willet Cont. 13.
which signifies an Oblation or Gift: some ex missis donariis and symbolis, of
the Gifts and offerings sent or put in before the Communion. But what beginning
soever it had, they do now generally take the Mass for that solemn action,
whereby the Sacrament is made a Sacrifice, and offered up to God: for they have
converted the Sacrament of the Eucharist, by which God communicates Christ to
us, into a real Sacrifice, in which they do offer up Christ to God.

2. The Table they do convert into an Altar, and the Administrator of the
Sacrament into a Priest after the order of Melchisedeck: whose Office it is to
sacrifice Christ again, and offer him to his Father.

3. They say, that this new sacrificing is required, that Christ's Body may
begin to be an Oblation.

4. That Christ did once offer up himself for us upon the Cross, in the Mass
often by the hands of the Priests.

5. Christ (say they) at his last Supper did offer up his own Body and Blood in
Sacrifice under the forms of Bread and Wine to God his Father; and at the same
instant made his Apostles and their Successors, Priests, to offer up his Body
in the Sacrament. In the Eucharist (say they) there is a true Sacrifice of the
very Body and Blood of Christ, offered up to God by the hands of the Priest, in
the forms of Bread and Wine.

6. Every Mass-Priest offering Christ to God the Father, prays God to accept of
that Sacrifice, and to command that it may be carried by the hands of an Angel
unto the high Altar of God: and therefore they make the Priest Mediator between
God and Christ.

7. The Priest in offering the Sacrifice to God for others, is a Mediator
between God and the Men for whom he celebrates the Mass.

8. They have wrested the Mass from the end of a Communion to infinite other
affairs, and altogether from the purpose; hence have arisen many kinds of
Masses; as, 1. The Mass of the Crown of Thorns. 2. The Mass of the three Nails.
Enchirid. Controv. by L. O.
3. The Mass of the Foreskin of Christ. 4. The Mass for Seafaring men. 5. The
Mass for Travelers on horseback or on foot. 6. The Mass for Women great with
child. 7. The Mass for Women in travel of Childbirth. 8. The Mass for Women
that be barren. 9. The Mass for those that be sick of a quartan or tertian
Ague, and others of the like sort.


9. They assert that the Sacrifice of the Mass, which, they say, is without
Blood, is truly propitiatory for the living and for the dead.

10. They blasphemously affirm, that it is a Sacrifice propitiatory; that is,
available to obtain, ex opere operato, by the very work wrought, remission and
pardon of all their sins.

11. They affirm, that Mass may be said and offered for all the living, yea for
Pagans and Infidels, for men absent as well as present; that the Sacrifice of
the Mass is available for the dead, which are in Purgatory; and that Mass may
be rightly said in the remembrance, and for the honor of Saints, with
Invocation of them also in the Prayers of the Church.

12. They say, it is not necessary that the Mass should be said or done in the
vulgar or familiar speech; but for the greater reverence to be kept in the
Latin tongue, they say, it is more convenient: and that the words of
Consecration should not be uttered in a loud and audible, but in a soft and
low, voice.

13. Rhem. 1 Cor. 11 Sect. 18
Some ceremonies go before the celebration of the Mass, and they are of such
things as they have always in a readiness for that impious service. Such are
the Vestments and apparel of the Priest, the Albe, Chesil, Stole, Dalmatick,
with such other: Altar, Altar-Clothes, Corporasses, Pixes, Paxes, Dishes,
Platters, Candlesticks, Censers, Water-pots: all these and the like trumpery
(say they) ought to be used in the Sacrifice of the Mass, the better to discern
the Body of Christ.

There are other Ceremonies, B^ll^m. l. 2 de Missa, c. 14, 15.
which they observe and use in the very action it self, and celebration of the
Mass; as the diverse Gestures of the Priest, to lift up his Eyes and cast them
down again, and so lift them up the second and the third time; sometimes to
cast abroad his hands, to close them again, to warble with his fingers, to bow,
to bend, to duck, to turn on this side, Council. Trid. Sess. 22 Can. 7
and on that, now on the right hand, again on the left; to sigh, to smite upon
his breast, to lift up the Chalice, and show it to the people, and set it down
again: as also the dividing of the Host into three parts, which signifies three
parts of the Church, in Heaven, in Earth, in Purgatory; the rinsing of part
thereof in Wine, and eating of part dry; the washing of his fingers before
Consecration; kissing of the Altar, the Patten, the Book, the Paxe; sprinkling
of holy Water, censing of Odours, crossing the Chalice, the Bread, their Mouth,
Breast and Face, which sign of the Cross they make above twenty times during
one Mass. Add also unto these, their tedious and irksom Songs, the rude noise
and unedifying sound of strange Instruments, and the whole course of their
Mass-Musick, set forth in a strange Language, and endited to the honor of
Saints.

Sledian does briefly describe this fink of Ceremonies, speaking of the tumult
that was raised at Strasburg, Sleidan. H^st. lib, 21
because of the Mass. There was, says he, a great concourse of men, especially
of the youth: for in his time it was to them a rare spectacle, and there not
heard of before; that many with shaven Crowns, clothed after a new fashion,
should sing together such things as no man understood; that Candies and Torches
should burn (as the saying is) at noonday: that smoke and perfumes should be
raised up with frankincense; that the Priest with his attendants should stand
at the Altar, pronounce words in an uncouth Language, use diverse bowings and
gestures, bend downward with his hands close shut, one while fling abroad,
another while pull back his arms, ever and anon turn himself, one while cry
aloud, another while mutter over some things with great silence, cast his eyes
on high, look grovelling to the ground, stand in no one place, turn himself now
to the right part, now to the left part of the Altar, wagg with the fingers,
breath upon the Chalice, and lift it up on high, and after set down; in certain
places name, sometimes the living, sometimes the dead; break unleavened Bread,
and dip it in the Chalice; strike his breast with his first, sigh, make as
though he slept with his eyes shut; awake again, eat one part of the Bread, and
drink up the other whole with the Wine, lest any drop should be left, wash his
hands, show to the people with his back toward them, and his hand stretched
out, the gilded Patten, move the same to his forehead and breast, kiss one
while the Altar, another while an Image enclosed in some matter or metal. Thus
He.

14. They say, they have the form of their Mass by Tradition from the Apostles:
and that by Masses Souls are delivered out of Purgatory.

Many Errors and Blasphemies that are to be found in the Canon of the Mass, as
touching the Matter, collected by Doctor Andrew Willet.
1. THe Priest says, We pray thee accept these gifts, these holy and unspotted
sacrifices. Thus he makes Bread and Wine the Sacrifices of the Gospel.

2. The Priest speaking of the Bread and Wine, thus says, [Which we offer unto
thee for thy holy Catholic Church,] and again afterward, [Which we offer for
the Redemption of our Souls.] What great blasphemy is this, to offer Bread and
Wine for the Redemption of the Church, for the which Christ in great love
offered himself up? and so make his death of no force.

3. The Rubric of the Mass wills, that the Priest should pray for his own
Bishop only, and for himself, and his special friends: but Charity would, that
he should pray for all Bishops, Pastors and Ministers: and Christ bids us,
not only pray for our friends, but also for our enemies.

4. The Priest prays first for the Pope, then for his own Bishop, lastly for
the King: but Saint Paul would have Prayers made first of all for all men, but
especially for Kings, 1 Timothy 2.2. The Papists in their Mass and other Prayers
prefer the Pope before their Prince, and acknowledge him to be their Pope and
Bishop.

5. The Priest says, worshipping the memorial of the Virgin: but Christ
instituted the Sacrament to be kept in remembrance of himself, and not of her.

6. By whose merits and prayers (namely the Saints) grant we may be defended:]
but Saint John says, if any man sin we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the Righteous.

7. In the second Prajer of the Canon, they pray by virtue of the Oblation of
Bread and Wine to be delivered from eternal damnation: for as yet the elements
are not consecrated.

8. We beseech thee (says the Priest) to receive this Oblation, which we
beseech thee in all things to make blessed. Here the Priest is made a Mediator
between Christ and his Father, desiring God to sanctify the Body and Blood of
his Son. Thus begins the third Prayer of the Canon.

9. Who, the next day before he suffered:] but the Scripture says, the same
night; For this is my Body.] Here they have put in [enim] of their own, and
left out [Quod pro vobis datur] which is given for you. Such is their boldness,
that they are not ashamed to change the words of our Savior Christ.

10. Take ye, etc.] Why then does the Priest take it alone, seeing Christ
appointed it to be taken of many?

11. Eat ye, etc.] Why then do they hang it up in a Pixe, seeing Christ would
have it eaten?

12. Drink ye all of this.] Why then does the Priest drink it alone, seeing by
Christ's institution all are to drink of it?

13. He says further in the fourth Prayer, The holy Bread of eternal life,
which vouchsafe thou with a pleasant countenance to behold.] Whereas the Bread
of eternal life is Christ himself: if this be He, how dare they presume to
offer him up to his Father? Diverse other things there are of like sort.

14. Afterward the Priest prays, Command thou this to be brought by the hands
of thy holy Angel unto the high Altar in Heaven.] What an absurd thing is this,
that he should desire that to be carried into Heaven, which he eateh and
devoureth. And if this be the Body of Christ, what need the help of an Angel to
carry it up to Heaven? Is not Christ able to lift up his own Body?

15. As many of us as shall receive thy Sons Body and Blood.] And yet for the
most part none receive, but the Priest: and when the people do communicate, the
Wine they have not.

21. Remember, O Lord, the Souls of thy Servants, which rest in the sleep of
peace, and grant them a place of refreshing and rest.] Here they pray for the
dead, and the Prayer also is contrary to it self; for first, he says, they
rest in peace, and yet afterward prays for their refreshing. Thus begins
the fifth Prayer of the Canon.

22. Deliver us by the blessed intercession of the Virgin.] What then is become
of Christ's Mediation and Intercession, who ever lives to make Intercession for
us? Hebr. 7.25.

23. Let this mingling together of the Body and Blood of the Lord Jesus Christ,
be unto me salvation of Mind and Body.] Then is not Christ's Blood shed upon the
Cross the full, sufficient and perfect Salvation of Mankind, if there be
another Salvation beside. And if it be the very Body and Blood of Christ, how
can they be mingled together, seeing the very Body and Blood of Christ cannot
be divided.

24. Grant me so worthily to take this Body and Blood, that I may merit to
receive forgiveness of sins.] O sinful man! how can thou merit to receive
that which is Christ's only gift?

27. Let the Priest bow himself to the Host, saying, I worship thee, I glorify
thee, I praise thee.] What monstrous Idolatry is this, thus to worship a piece
of Bread.

28. Let us worship the sign of the Cross.] What, I pray you, will not these
Idolaters worship?

29. Respect not my sins, but the Faith of the Church.] By this reason one may
be profited by another Faith, which is contrary to the Scripture, The just
shall live by his Faith, by his own, and not another, Romans 1.17. I shall pass
by diverse other Errors, and come to the last.

30. In the end of the Mass, according to the use of Sarum, there is annexed
the from of blessing, or consecrating the Paschal Lamb, with this Prayer,
Vouchsafe to sanctify this Paschal Lamb, that as many of thy people as do cat
thereof, may be replenished with all heavenly Benediction, etc.] What gross
Superstition is this, that they should still retain the use of the Paschal
Lamb, which cannot be but to the great derogation of the true Paschal Lamb
Christ Jesus, that the Body being come, the shadow should be still retained.

Other Errors in the manner of celebrating Mass.
1. ALl is done and said in the Latin tongue, not understood of the people; and
often not of the Priest himself: which is not to edification.

2. They use many irksome, tedious and frivolous repetitions of the same words,
as Benedicamus Domino, is sung ten several times together: and Ite, missa est,
is sung thirteen several times, with long and tedious notes.

3. The Priest is charged in the Rubric to say diverse Prayers, privatim,
secretly to himself: as that Prayer, Deliver us from all evil, past, present
and to come, etc. (...) Lamb of God that take away ^he sins of the world.]
These and many other words must be pronounced secretly to himself, contrary to
Saint Paul, who would have Prayers so said, that they may be understood, and
thereunto Amen answered by the people, 1 Cor. 14.16.

4. The Priest is taught by the Rubeick to make thirty several Crosses, at the
least, upon the Bread, the Cup, the Altar, his Forehead: but no such crossing
is to be found in Christ's Institution which they profess to follow.

5. Their Gesture in saying of Mass is so changeable, so ridiculous, so
affected, that a man would think a Plaier were coming forth upon the Stage,
when the Priest addresseth himself to the Mass: nay, Rossius was not so full of
action, as the Massing-Priest is of gesture, varying and changing it, at least,
forty or fifty times during the celebration of the Mass.

Their Errors concerning the Church.
5. THey assert that the Catholic Church is always visible, Canis. c. de fide
and symb art, 18.
and not seen only unto the members of the Church, but notoriously known to the
whole world: neither do they mean any particular Church so to have been
visible, but the universal Catholic Church, which they define to be a visible
Congregation of all faithful men.

2. Bellarm. lib. 3. de Eccles.
That the Catholic Church is no other than the Roman, or that which the Roman
Pope is over: Bellarmine defining the Church, makes this one part of the
definition, to be subject unto the Bishop of Romes Jurisdiction: and therefore
they conclude, that they are out of the Church, and no better than Heretics,
that do not acknowledge the Pope to be their chief Pastor. So they make the
Roman Faith, and Catholic to be all one.

3. That the Catholic Church cannot possibly err, not only in matters
absolutely necessary to Salvation, but not in any thing which it imposes or
commands, whether it be contained in the Word of God or not: yea, that it
cannot err in those things which beside the Word of God are commanded.

But because the Papists endeavor to invest the Popes and the Roman Church
with an infallible Perfection, Dr. Du Moulins Auswer to Card. Perron for King
James.
it will be expedient to show, by invincible proofs, that the Roman Church has
erred, and does err. I shall therefore only produce the Errors approved by
their Popes and Councils, as the learned Doctor Du Moulin in his answer to
Cardinal Du Perron has set them down.

In the year of our Lord 787, a Council was assembled which the Roman Church
approves, and reckons among the universal Councils: there sat the Legates
of Pope Adrian, who wrote a Book purposely for the defense of that Council. 1.
In the seventh action that Council commands the Adoration of Images upon pain
of Anathema, in these words; We hold, that the Images of the glorious Angels,
and of all Saints must be adored and saluted: but as for him that has not the
will so to do, but staggereth, and is doubtful about the adoration of the
venerable Images, this holy and venerable Synod does anathematize him. In the
fourth Action of the same Synod these words are found, Images are of equal
worth with the Gospels and the venerable Cross. And in the same place, the
Image is greater than the Word and the Prayer. In the fifth Action the Council
declares, that Angels are corporal, that there may be a ground for making
Images of Angels. The same Council, to prove the Adoration of Images,
corrupts the Scripture in diverse places.

In the year 869. a Council was held at Constantinople, which our Adversaries
call the eighth General Council. The third Canon of that Council is in these
words, We decree, that the sacred Image of Jesus Christ be adored with the same
honor as the Book of the holy Gospels, and the Figure of the precious Cross.

In the year of our Lord 1059. Pope Nicholas the second assembled a Council
against Berengarius, where it was declared; that the Bread and Wine which is
put upon the Altar after Consecration, is not only the Sacrament, but also the
true Body of our Lord Jesus Christ: And that not only the Sacrament, but the
Body of the Lord is sensually, and in truth, handled by the hands of the
Priest, broken and bruised by the teeth of the faithful.

In the year 1076. Pope Gregory the seventh called a Council to Rome, where,
among many Articles, these three Points were resolved and determined.

That there is no other name under Heaven, but that of the Pope.
That no Book is Canonical without the Popes Authority.
That all Kings must kiss the Popes Feet.
The first point attributes unto the Pope, that which is attributed unto Jesus
Christ alone, exclusively to all others, Act. 4.12.

The second declares, that the Gospels, and the Books of the Prophets and
Apostles, are not to be received, unless the Pope approve them by his
authority. The third attributes unto the Pope an honor which Jesus Christ and
his Apostles never asked or looked for: but they have been subject to
Emperors, have paid them tribute, and have appeared before their Judicial
Seat: neither did they ever give their Feet to any man to kiss.

In the year 1215. Pope Innocent the third assembled a Council at Rome in the
Lateran Church, where it was thus resolved. If the Temporal Lord care not to
satisfy within the year, let it be made known to the Sovereign Prelate; that
from that time he declare his Subjects absolved from his subjection, and expose
his Country to be seized upon by Catholics, that they may extermine Heretics.
In that decision of the Council there are sour pernicious errors, as my Author
observ^th.

1. The first is an usurpation of the Pope approved by the Council, whereby he
disposes of the Temporals of Princes, as if the disposition of them belonged
to him, and divesteth them of their Lands and Dominions, without the authority
of Gods Word, and without any example of the ancient Church.

2. The second Error is, that it makes ecclesiastical censures, which are
spiritual corrections, to become temporal punishments: as if a Priest, to lay a
penance upon a sinner, would cut his Purse, or rob him of his Cloak, or put him
out of his house.

3. The third Error is, that this Canon absolveth Subjects from the Oath of
Allegiance, which they have sworn to their natural Prince; and teaches them to
be perfidious and dissoyal with a good Conscience, though against the Word of
God, which says, Thou shall perform unto the Lord thine Oaths, Matt. 5.33.
though it were to thine hurt, Psalm. 15.4. And against the Rules and Examples of
the Apostles, who have commanded Christians to pay tribute, and to be subject
to Princes and higher Powers, although Princes were Pagans and persecutors in
those days, Romans 13.1, 2. 1 Pet. 2.13.14.

4. The fourth Error is, that in the same Council, they preach murder and
massacre, and set on the people to extermine those whom they call Heretics:
which is not only against the Law of God, but against that of Nations: for even
Pagan Princes never permitted their Subjects to fall upon their
fellow-citizens, and massacre them.

As for recovering the holy Land, at the end of that Council there is a Papal
Bull, but with approbation of the Council. There a Commandment is made to all
that belonged to the Croisado, to meet in Sicily, to begin that journey in
July: to persuade the people to undertake that voyage, the Pope by the Councils
authority speaks thus. To all that will bear that labor in their own persons,
and at their charges, we grant full remission of their sins, of which they
shall have contrition and repentance: and in the Retribution of the Righteous
we promise them in Paradise an Augmentation of eternal Salvation. What was that
Pope? and what that Council, that could promise to Soldiers a degree in
Paradise above the common sort? especially seeing the Pope and his Prelates
were not themselves sure that they should never go into Hell? But let us hear
the rest, But to them that will not go in that voyage in their own persons, but
only shall send fit men according to their means, we give full remission of
their sins. Finally, the same Bull, with approbation of the Council, denounces
to all that will refuse, and not care for this Commandment, that they shall
answer him in the last day of Judgment before the terrible Judge. As if the Pope
must then be an Assessour of the Judge; or as if he must condemn sinners in the
day of Judgment.

In the year of our Lord 1300. Pope Boniface the eighth instituted the Jubilee
every hundredth year, in which they that come to Rome, for their great pardons,
should get full, more full, and most full remission of sins. That liberality is
fetched from the Churches Treasury, wherein the Pope lays up the overplus of
the satisfactions of Jesus Christ and the Saints, of which Treasure the Pope is
the Keeper and the Steward, converting them into a payment (says the
forementioned Author) for those that visit the Roman Stations.

The following Popes, being moved with a fatherly compassion to the people,
have brought the Jubilee first to every fiftieth year, and then to every
twentieth year. It cannot be said, what a Mass of Wealth that Jubilee brings to
the Pope, and to the Inhabitants of Rome by the Offerings and the Sojournings
of Strangers that then flock to Rome from all parts.

The Satisfaction of Jesus Christ being suffici^nt for the sins of the whole
world, it is an outrage offered to him, when to his sufferings other
satisfactions are added; as that of Saints and Monks to satisfy the Justice of
God for the pain due to our sins. By this means they will have God to take two
payments for one debt. But their second payment is sufficient, seeing no man
can satisfy for the sins of another; and we learn of the Apostle, that every
man shall bear his own burden. Besides, those Saints and Monks, whose
satisfactions the Pope will apply unto others, were sinners, and had need that
Christ should satisfy for them; so far they were from satisfying for others,
and for those for whom Christ has fully satisfied.

I pass by the palpable Error, whereby it is pretended, that the Saints have
suffered more pains than their sins deserved; since there is no man be he never
so holy, but stands in need that God forgive him his sins. No man but deserves
eternal death, if God deal with him according to the rigor of his Justice.

The same Pope Boniface the eighth attributes to himself the Power over the
Temporal and Spiritual of all the world, which he proves by Texts of Scripture
rarely applied: We are taught (says he) by the words of the Gospel, that unto
the Power of the Church two Swords are belonging, the Spiritual and the
Temporal: for the Apostles having said, here be two Swords, that is, here in
the Church, the Lord did not answer the Apostles, it is too much, but it is
enough. Certainly he that denies the temporal Sword to be in Saint Peter's
power, does not regard well the Word of the Lord, who said, Put up thy Sword
into thy Scabbard. And to prove that the Temporal of Princes is subject unto
the Pope, he alleges Jer. 1.10. See I have this day set thee over thee
Nations, and over Kingdoms. And he will have that meant of the Ecclesiastical,
that is, the Papal Power, which, he says, cannot be judged of by any, because
Saint Paul said, The spiritual man judges of all things, yet he himself is
judged of no man. Finally, he concludes thus, Whosoever then resists that
Power ordained by God, resists the Ordinance of God, etc. whereforewe
declare, say, define, and pronounce, that it is of necessity to salvation to be
subject to the Roman Prelate. That venerable Pope has found a proof of his
Primacy in the first words of the Bible, God in the beginning made heaven and
earth. These are Laws and Papal Ordinances, pronounced with all the forms, and
inserted into the body of the Pontifical Decrees; which to excuse from Error,
one must want both conscience and common sense.

Anno 14.14. a Council was held at Constance, to reform the Church; in that
Council three contending Popes were deposed, of whom John the XXII. was one,
for 71 Crimes; among others, for publicly denying the immortality of the Soul,
and maintaining that there was neither Paradise nor Hell. To that Council J.
Husse and Jerome of Prague were invited to defend their cause: a safe conduct
of the Emperor Sigismond was given them, and Faith was sworn unto them, that
no harm should be done unto them: But after some form of Disputation they were
seized on and burnt alive. And because the Emperor made a scruple to break his
Faith, the Council declared unto him, that he was not bound to keep Faith with
Heretics: for which purpose a Canon was made in this form; This holy Council
declares, that the safe conduct given to Heretics, or defamed for Heresy by
the Emperor Kings and other secular Princes, thinking thereby to turn them
from their Errors, with what Bond soever they be bound, brings no prejudice to
the Catholic Faith, or to the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; Neither can put any
hindrance, but that it may be lawful for a competent and Ecclesiastical Judge,
notwithstanding the foresaid safe conduct, to make inquisition of the Errors
of such persons, and duly to proceed against them, as much as Justice shall
require, if they obstinately refuse to renounce their Errors, although they be
come to the place of Judgment, trusting to that safe conduct: declaring, that
he that made that promise, remains not obliged by it, after he has done that
which lies in him. The same Council, in the fifteenth Session, makes an
enumeration of the Errors of John Husse. The nineteenth Error, for which he
is condemned, is, for saying, that the Popes and the Bishops Pardons avail
nothing. That Council declares, that the Popes Pardons serve a sinner,
although God has not pardoned him, which is putting the Pope above God, since
he pardons those that have offended God, without Gods pardon, and since the
Popes pardons are in force, though God approve them not. The same Council takes
away from the people the Communion of the Cup. They add, that although Jesus
Christ did, after Supper, institute the Sacrament under the two kinds, yet the
custom of giving to the people one kind only, which is the Bread, must be held
for a Law; and those that say the contrary, must be driven away as Heretics,
and grievously punished by the Inquisitors of heretical perversity.

In the year 1423. Martin the fifth held a Council at Siena, where the same
Indulgence was granted to them that would fall upon the Heretics, as to them
that go to defend the holy Land. Thus Remission of sins and Salvation is
proposed as a reward of cruelty and popular fury: as if the Pope had said,
because thou art a murderer, and a wicked man, thou shall have eternal life.

In the year 1440. the Council of Florence, assembled by the authority of Pope
Eugenius the fourth, defines and declares in the last Session, that the Roman
Church can add to the Symbol, and that the Pope has the primacy over the whole
world.

In the end of the last Lateran Council you have a thundering Bull against
Luther, who then began to preach: there thirty nine Heresies are reckoned, the
seventh whereof is, that the best penitence of all is a new life; which yet is
a choice sentence of the spirit of God. Rev. 2.4. The twenty sixth Heresy of
Luther mentioned in that Bull, is this assertion, It is certain, that it is not
at all in the power of the Church and Pope, to make Articles of Faith. If this
be an Heresy, we may expect other Articles of Faith from the Pope, and
Christian Religion is not yet perfected; since other Articles of the Christian
Faith may be added, such as we know not, and such as the Apostles have never
taught either by Word or Writing.

At last the Council of Trent came, which, having begun in the year of our Lord
1545, lasted 18 years. In the fourth Session it was decreed, that unwritten
Traditions must be received with the same affection of piety and reverence as
the holy Scripture: That is, that the Invocation of Saints, the Distinction of
Meats, the Adoration of Relics, the Honor yielded unto Images, the
Consecration of Agnus Dei's, and of blessed Beads, together with many other
things, must be received with the like Piety, Faith and Reverence as the Law of
God, and the Doctrine of our Redemption in Christ Jesus, contained in the holy
Scriptures. The same Council cannot be excused of Error, for pronouncing in
Session the fifth, that the Concupiscence forbidden in the Law is no sin. The
same Council cannot be excused of Error, for decreeing, that the Latin vulgar
Version of the Bible should be the only authentical, thereby authorizing a
thousand depravations of the true original Text, which are Hebrew and Greek:
yet since the time of the Council of Trent, several Popes have caused that
vulgar Version to be revised, and have altered many things in it. Salmeron the
Jesuit endeavoreth to excuse that Decree of the Council, speaking thus; The
holy Synod would oblige us to embrace that Latin Edition, and follow it in all
things, yet not absolutely, but upon condition, that it be cleansed and
re-purged from the Vices and Errors which are crept into it. The same Council
of Trent has devised a crafty by-way to prohibit the reading of Scripture unto
the people: and many Prelates and Doctors in that Council were named and
appointed to make an Index, or List of Books, the reading whereof must be
prohibited. Now the very first of these prohibited Books is the holy Scripture,
of which they say, in the fourth of those Rules they have set before that
Index; that the reading of the Bible in the Language of the Country being
indifferently permitted, brings more harm than benefit. These few Proofs, drawn
out of the most authentic Rules of the Roman Church, will be a pattern more
than sufficient, to show to any man that is not resolved to lose himself, and
that seeks instruction, that the Roman Church can err.

4. Our Adversaries do devise many Notes, whereby their Church is descried.
Driedo and P. a Soto would have three, Hosius four, Sanders six, Michael Medina
ten, Cunerus twelve, Bellarmine fifteen, Socolovius twenty, Doctor Favor (
chap. 4.) one, the true and oldest Antiquity. But there are seven principal,
which they do most stand upon, Antiquity, Universality, Succession, Unity, the
Power of Miracles, the Gift of Prophecy, Prosperity.

Of Antiquity.
THe Papists make great brags of the long continuance of their Church; yea,
that they can show the descent of their Church from Adam: but they must come
short of our Savior Christ and the Apostles times, by five or six hundred
years, for the most of the Opinions which they now hold.

The Romanists adulterate Antiquity, because it is a Pearl of greatest price:
but a skilful Lapidary can soon espy the Alchymy: it seems Gold, yet is but
brandished Brass: it seems a Ruby, one of the Stones in Aarons rich array, or a
Foundation of New Jerusalem, where is no counterfeit, but it is only a polished
Garnet: it bears resemblance of a Diamond, but it is dug out of Saint
Vincents Rock, as good as a Saint Martins Chain. So many things are offered by
the Papists for Antiquity, which, upon trial, prove mere Novelty, worse Vanity,
a plain Nullity. The Roman Church in this point is intolerable, for she
boasts of Antiquity, but will not suffer the truth of her Doctrine to be
examined: she will have us to judge of the Truth by Antiquity, whereas we ought
to judge of Antiquity by the Truth, and by Conformity to the Word of God, which
is the first Antiquity. Anno 420. Zosimus Bishop of Rome challenged a
prerogative above other Churches, that it might be lawful to make appeals from
other Churches to that See; and, to set the better color upon it, he falsely
alleged a Decree of the Nicene Council, but there was no such thing found
there: wherefore it was decreed in the Council of Carthage at that time, that
none should appeal to Rome. Boniface the third purchased of the wicked Emperor
Phocas, the Title of Universal Bishop. Transubstantiation was first concluded
against Berengarius, anno 1062. under Pope Leo the ninth, but not publicly
enacted before anno 1216. under Innocentius the third. The Dominick Friars were
brought in at the same time: Auricular Confession was brought in the year
before under the same Pope. Telesphorus brought in their Lenton Fast. Calixtus
instituted the four Ember Fasts: Hyginus brought in Chrism. It is easy to show
by whom every piece of their blasphemous Mass has been patched together.
Marriage was first prohibited by Pope Nicholas the second, Alexander the
second, Gregory the seventh. The Communion in one kind forged, urged, and
decreed in the Council of Constance not much above two hundred years agone. The
Church of Rome boasts of Antiquity, and yet (as one says) brings new things
every day: she makes a show of some old patched Clothes, to make the world
believe that she comes from far, as the Gibeonites did: but let a man examine
her Doctrine by pieces, he shall find she comes not from very far, and almost
all is new. It cannot be proved, that the ancient Church, in many ages, after
the Apostles, excluded the people from the Cup; or kept them from reading the
holy Scripture, or made Pictures of the Trinity, or yielded veneration to the
Images of Saints, or called the Virgin Mary the Queen of Heaven, or made
mention of the Roman indulgences, or of the power of the Pope, to depose Kings,
and fetch Souls out of Purgatory, etc. In a word, says old Doctor Du Moulin,
as it is now another Doctrine, so it is another Church, because it is another
Religion.

That true Antiquity is not of our Adversaries side: 1. The Greek Church
testifies: for the Grecians affirm, that their Church is the Mother of the
Roman Church, and has born the first prerogative in the orthodoxal verity. The
Syrians boast themselves to be the first Christians in the world, because that
St. Peter had his Seat seven year at Antioch before ever he went to Rome. 2.
The Eastern and Southern Churches do give the priority and privilege of
Antiquity unto the Church of Antioch before Rome.

Symmachus, a Pagan, Symmach.
writing to the Christian Emperors, Valens, Theodosius and Arcadius, he
desires them to have a reverence for the Pagan Religion, by reason^ of her
Antiquity. If (says he) the length of time gives authority to Religion, we
must keep Faith to so many Ages, and follow our Fathers, who have so happily
followed theirs. Then he personates the old Pagan- Rome, thus speaking to the
Emperors. Good Princes, Fathers of your Country, respect my years, unto which
the pious Ceremonies have brought me; permit me to use the Ceremonies of my
Ancestors. This Religion has subjected the World unto my Laws: these holy
Services have beaten back Hannibal from the Wails, and the Senones from the
Capitol. Have I been preserved unto this time, that I should be rebuked in mine
old age? The Correction of old age comes too late and is injurious. What could
Ambrose and Prudentius answer, who confuted that Epistle, but that the Law of
God is more ancient than Numa Pompilius, the Author of those Ceremonies? and
that all is new which is not from the beginning? and that Error cannot be
authorized by the number of years. Our Fathers received it of their Fathers,
August.
says Cresconius: sed errantes ab errantibus, says Saint Augustine.

Of Universality.
THe Papists say, their Church is universal, both in respect of time, person
and place: it has always been in the world, and has flourished in all
Countries and Nations, ergo it is the true Church. That it is universal, they
first prove by the name of Catholic. But if the name [Catholick] were an
unchangeable mark, or natural property of any real Church, it should be of the
Greek Church, or Nation, unto which the name of Catholic is prime and natural.
If the real property answering to this name, had belonged to the Romish Church,
the Holy Ghost would have expressed it by a Roman Name, and have called the
Roman Church the Universal Church: at least, the Romanists should have called
themselves Universals; not Catholics, as the learned Doctor Jackson notes. It
is easy to consider the vanity of this Assertion, Jack^on de Eccl.
that a Name should be an unseparable property proceeding of the nature of any
reality. But the Name of a Christian is a more honorable Title than the Name
of Catholics: for this was used in the Apostles time, Act. 11.26. and by the
Apostles themselves allowed: but it is not certain, that the Name [Catholick]
came from the Apostles. Secondly, they prove their Universality by the
multitude of people that have received the Romish Faith: and their Church (say
they) has replenished the greatest part of the world. They would prove this by
the Propagation of the Church in the Apostles time, in Tertullian, Irenaeus,
Hierom, Augustine, yea and afterward in Gregory's days: yea, and now also,
besides many great Countries in Europe, they have their Church in India,
America, and the unknown parts of the world, says Bellarmine. But the truth is
not always to be measured by the judgment or opinion of the multitude. The
greatest part is not the best: Christ calls his Flock a little Flock.
Besides, the Papists have nothing to do with the Church that was propagated in
the Apostles time, nor for the space of five or six hundred years after Christ:
and the most of their Errors are more lately sprung up than so. The Popes
Jurisdiction in Europe is much diminished. And for the Indians and Americans,
it is well known what cruelty the Spaniards used to win that simple people to
Christ, as Benzo the Italian has related it: and there are few or none of
their Popish Catholics in those Countries, but of their own brood that have
been sent thither. Universality, unless it be joined with verity, is no
sufficient note of the Church, says Mr. Fox.

Of Succession.
THey boast much of the long and perpetual Succession of their Popes from the
Apostles for the space of these 1500 years and more, condemning all Churches
which cannot show the like order of Succession. But the Bishops of the Churches
of Antioch and Rome, and Alexandria, boast themselves to be Successors of Saint
Peter, and yet are dissenting and separate in Communion. The Bishops of
Constantinople fetch their Succession from the Apostle Saint Andrew, as
Nicephorus goes about to prove in the eighth Book of his Chronology, Chapter
6. yet these Bishops, by the Judgment of the Roman Church, are Schismatics and
Heretics. Whence it appears, that the Succession of Chairs cannot be a fit
mark for the true Church, since it is found in Heretical Churches. In the Papal
See some Schisms have been, and diverse times many Popes together,
excommunicating one another, and reciprocally calling one another Antichrist,
and of those Antichrists the worst commonly overcame. So according to the very
Canons of the Roman Church, factions and corruptions, in the creation of Popes,
have frequently made their election void, and therefore have broken the thread
of that Succession.

Of Unity.
THe Papists boast much of Unity, Flac. Ilyric.
but it is without ground of truth, and yet they have many Dissentions.
Illyricus has written a Book to the purpose, concerning the several Sects and
Divisions amongst them. The Scotists and Thomists differ about meritum condigni
and congrui, about Original sin in the Virgin Mary, about a solemn Vow and a
single life. Great Differences there are between their Canonists and
Schoolmen. Albertus Pius dissented from Cajetan, Thomas from Lombard, Scotus
from Aquinas, Occam from Scotu; Alliancenses from Occam. The first Nicene
Council allowed Priests Marriage, and the Communion in both kinds. The Councils
of Basil and Constance forbad the Laity the use of the Cup: the same Councils
decreed likewise that the Pope should be subject to General Councils. Many
Antipopes have there been at one and the same time. Much also might be said of
the great Diversity of their Monks and Friars, in their Food, Habits, Shaving
and the like. Various are their Opinions likewise touching the Controversy of
the Sacrament. The Papists are very Schismatical, engrossing the Title of
Catholics, whereby they would imply both truth of Doctrine and universality of
Consent to be found only with them: but (as one well observes) upon no better
grounds than the Turks arrogate the Title of Mussulmann^, that is, Crocks
Hyp^^^.
Orthodox, and I^ann^, that is, at Unity. It is not their number that excuses
them from Schism, no more than the revolt of the ten Tribes from the house of
David, could make the two Tribes that clave to it guilty of that rent, and
themselves to be innocent. Unity must be in the truth; else the saying of
Nazianzen will take place. Better is Discord bringing Light, Greg. Nazianz.
Orat. 1. de ^^ace

Than Unity without all right.
Though Popery appear to have in it Unity, yet the same is Vanity and
Antichristianity, and not in Christ's Faith and Verity.

Of the Power of working Miracles.
BEllarmine does greatly upbraid our Church for the defect of Miracles, saying,
Hereticos non potuisse extorquere Miracula neque a Deo, neque a Diabolo, that
Heretics (meaning the Protestants) do neither extort Miracles from God, nor
from the Devil. But do they take a pride that the Devil is forward in advancing
their Cause, and so backward to do us any kindness; we will rest content with
such Miracles as our Savior and the Apostles wrought at the propagating of the
Gospel: but when we dissent from Christ's Doctrine we will cast about for new
Miracles.

I. A Miracle is a marvelous, The pretended Miracles of Saint Francis, reported
by Vincentius, Ant^rine, B^naventure, and Su^ius, are more than marvelous.
sensible, real Work, above the virtue of natural causes, wrought for good
ends, especially for the promoting of Gods Glory, and Man's Salvation. It is a
work of wonder, Act. 2.22. Luke 8.25. Act. 7.30, 31. So it is said of Simon
Magus, he continued with Philip, and wondered, beholding the Miracles and Signs
which were done; xstato, he was transported beyond himself with admiration. It
is true; many things may cause wonder, which are not miraculous; as, 1. Other
great Works. 2. False and seeming Miracles, wrought by the power and subtilty
of Satan. But here I speak of such Works as afford just cause of wonder, such
Works as deserve admiration from the wisest of men; false Miracles are wonders
in show only.

II. True Miracles are sensible Works, apparent to some or other of the Senses:
and therefore that pretended Popish Miracle of Transubstantiation is but an
absurd fancy, a thing denied by the Senses; the Smell, the Taste, the Eye, all
with one consent say, it is Bread and Wine, and not Flesh and Blood. When our
Savior turned Water into Wine, there was a sensible change, it had the color
and taste of Wine, and that so evident, that the Governor of the Feast
preferred it above any they had drunk before. When Melancton was a young
Scholar at the University, he heard one Lempus, a Popish Doctor, who would take
upon him to draw a Picture of Transubstantiation and so to present a shadow of
it to the Eye, though it were invisible, yea and impossible in it self: but
Melancton (though he was then but a youth) instead of wondering at the supposed
Miracle, admired the dotage and sottishness of the Doctor.

III. A Miracle is a true and real Work, false Miracles are deceitful
appearances: many Popish Miracles are mere cheats of some lewd persons,
couzening tricks of deceitful men, or wonders of lying spirits.

IV. True Miracles are above the virtue of natural causes: false Miracles may
seem to the weakness of men to be above the power of Creatures, but are not so:
many of them are effected by natural means, though in a secret and cunning way:
others of them are delusions of the Senses. Satan cannot work the least Miracle
by the power of his word. No power of the Devil can raise the dead to life,
which is a work simply above the power of Creatures; This Christ did with a
word, Mark 5.41, 42.

V. The ends for which Divine Miracles are wrought, are always good: chiefly
for the promoting of Gods Glory and Man's Salvation. So the Miracles wrought by
the power of Christ tended to declare him to be the Son of God, the Savior of
the World, that men might receive him, and believe in him to Salvation, to
prove and confirm the heavenly Doctrine of the Scripture, to seal the truth of
the Gospel, to confirm the Minds of men in this assurance, that the way of holy
worship commanded in Scripture, is appointed by the Lord himself, by whose
Almighty Power these Miracles are wrought: but the lying wonders among the
Papists, wrought by the cunning and power of Satan, are for evil and cursed
ends, like their Anthor; to draw people from the truth, to confirm them in
Errors, in Superstition, praying for the dead, and to the dead, worshipping of
Images, establishing Monkish dreams of Purgatory, and the like forgeries and
absurdities. Miracles are neither necessary, nor perpetual in the Church. If
any bring in a new Doctrine, it behooves him to do Miracles: But we, of whom
Miracles are demanded, bring no new Doctrine.

Of the Gift of Prophecy.
THis the Papists hold also to be a perpetual mark, whereby to know the Church:
for they say, that the true Church of God wants not those which are endued
with the spirit of Prophecy: and they tell us, that in every age there has
flourished some Prophet in their Church. And for this they produce a few forged
examples of Saint Bernard, and Saint Francis, a Popish Saint, and the Founder
of the superstitious Order of the Franciscans, and of such others. It is true,
there have lived some among them in their Church, which in those days were
counted Prophets and Prophetesses, as Hildegardis, anno 1146. likewise Bridget,
Catharine Senensis, whom Bellarmine reckons up among others that wrought
Miracles. But concerning these, a learned man answers, as the Jesuit does for
Sibilla, a Prophetess among the Heathen, that she prophesied as touching such
matters as should fall out to the Church, for a testimony of the Faith of the
Christians, and so to be counted herein a Prophetess of the Church, rather than
of the Heathen. So if those three abovenamed were Prophetesses, they were of
our Church, and not theirs; for they prophesied of the decay of their Church,
and raising up of ours. The Devil deluded many Popish Monks with strange
Raptures and Visions, though in their nature far different from those mentioned
in the holy Scripture. For Saint Paul in his Revelations was caught up into the
third Heaven; whereas most Monks, with a contrary motion, were carried into
Hell and Purgatory, and there saw apparitions of strange Torments. Fuller in
Vita Hildega^d.
Also Saint Johus Revelation forbids all addition to the Bible, under heavy
penalties; their Visions are commonly on purpose to piece out the holy
Scripture, and to establish such Superstitions as have no footing in Gods Word,
as a judicious Divine of ours has well noted.

We read of a notable Popish Prophetess in King Henry the eighths days,
Elizabeth Barton, a Nun, commonly called the holy Maid of Kent, who being
instructed by the Friars, seigned as though she had many Revelations: she
prophesied, that if the King proceeded in his Divorce, then in question between
him and Queen Catharine, that he should not be King one year, no not one month:
but he lived almost twenty years after that: and this Prophetess worthily
suffered for her demerits, with all her accomplices.

Of Prosperity, which the Papists make another Mark of the true Church.
NOw see how unlike the condition of the false Church of Rome is to the
condition of Saint Peter and the true Church of Christ. Saint Peter reckons
upon suffering persecution and death for the Gospel of Christ; and this he had
from the mouth of Christ himself after his Resurrection; and so we see that the
Church of Christ is not exempted from the Cross by the Victory of Christ, or by
his Resurrection from the dead. But wherein does the Church of Rome (which
pretends it self to be Saint Peter's Bishopric and Diocese, and its Bishop to
be its Successor) glory? In a flourishing Church-Monarchy, sufficient to make
Kings, Princes, Emperors, to wait at their Gates, to hold the Popes Stirrup,
lead his Horse, lay their Necks under his Feet, kiss his Foot; sufficient to
depose Kings and Emperors; sufficient to kill with Fire and Sword those that
oppose their Decrees and Inventions, though not convinced of any on Error by
the Word of God rightly understood. And in this estate they bragg, that their
Church has continued many hundred years, without any interruption. Could the
true Church of Christ ever say so much in any age? May not the Church say as
Saint Paul of himself, Bonds and imprisonment abide me, poverty, contempt from
the world: I am made a spectacle to Angels, to the world and to men. This true
Kings Daughter is all glorious with in, her Beauty consists in inward and
spiritual Graces not in Purple and Scarlet, Gold and precious Stones. The truth
is, the Popish Church glories in her shame: and that which she boasts of, is
a good argument to prove that she is not the true Church and Spouse of Christ:
who do talk so much of the Cross, and make so much of the sign of the Cross as
the Pope and his Followers? But who do less bear the Cross of Christ than they?
they lay it upon others backs with great cruelty and violence, even themselves;
that instead of being a suffering Church, it is a persecuting Church; instead
of giving its Blood for the Truth, it does so outragiously spill the Blood of
others, that it should make any one, that is not fearfully blinded, to renounce
it, and to come out of her as an accursed Babylon, a Cage of unclean Birds. Are
not the Popish cruelties registered, as it were, in Letters of Blood? consult
our Book of Martyrs, what banishing, excommunicating, cursing, imprisoning,
racking, reviling, drawing, beheading, hanging, burning, famishing, tormenting
diverse ways, sometimes of single persons, sometimes of Tow^^ and Cities,
sometimes by the common Executioner, sometimes by great Armies as may be
instanced in the Waldenses and Albigenses, somewhat more anciently, of later
times in Germany, France, Italy, Spain, England, Scotland, Ireland. The
scarlet-Whore seems (as it were) to have surfeited on the Blood of the
Saints: our Country has been polluted with horrible Murders, until the Reign
of King Henry the seventh, for the space of three hundred years, we were never
exempted from civil Wars. Here many of our sacred Kings have been deposed and
murdered by their near Blood and Kindred: how much innocent Blood was shed for
the space of five years in Queen Marys days? and how many Popish Conspiraces
were there in Queen Elizabeth's days? And this adds exceedingly to his
wickedness, that the Pope pretends to be a common Father of Christians, and
the Vicar or Deputy of Christ, and under this mask acts so mischievously
against Christ and Christians.

Other Errors are of the Papists concerning the Church: That there are no
Catholics, but those of the Roman Church: That he is a Catholic who believes
all that the Roman Church delivers, whether it be written in the Bible or
not. That there is no Salvation out of the Roman Church: That the sincere
preaching of the Gospel, and lawful administration of the Sacraments, Bp.
Downham. Ca^al.
are not a certain note of the Church: That to acknowledge the Roman Pope, and
to be under him as the Vicar of Christ, the only Pastor, the Head of the whole
Church, is a note of the true Church: That the particular Roman Church is the
Mother, Mistress and Lady of all Churches: yea, the Mother of Faith: That the
Roman Church did obtain this Primacy from our Lord and Savior himself: That
the Roman Church has power of judging all, neither is it lawful for any to
judge her Judgment: That the Roman Church, as it cannot err, much less can it
fail: That there is no sure ground for the authority of the Scriptures, but the
infallible testimony of their Pope, and Catholic Roman Church. But the true
Church must be discerned by the Scripture, and not the Scripture by the Church,
unless a man would in the dark seek to find out the candle by the candlestick;
whereas he should rather seek out the candlestick by the light of the candle:
for the Church is as the candlestick, and the Scripture as the light or candle.
Finally, the Papists assert, that we are to be subject to the Church without
limitation. So when, in the maintenance of their Opinions, they are beaten off
from the Scripture, they fly to the Church, and make use of its authority,
which is with them in effect the Pope, whom they make the Head of the Church,
and whose Sentence among them gives all force and authority to that which the
Church is said to define. Howsoever the Church does but signify such a Society
as consists of Men and Women: and therefore (set the Pope aside) to be
absolutely subject to the Church, what is it but to be the Servants of Men?
which Saint Paul forbids, and presses his Prohibition with an argument
drawn from the precious Blood of Christ the price of our Redemption. And
therefore when once Cochlaeus, a Champion of Popish Superstition, speaking for
the gross Idolatry of worshipping Images, used this reason, Quod Matter Ecclesia
hac in part audienda esset, cui hoc visum fuisset, that our Mother the Church
herein is to be obeyed, whose pleasure it is that Images should be worshipped;
Brentius, a learned Divine, is said to have answered, Quid si Pater diversum
praecipiat? what if our Father forbid it? no Command of our Mother, the Church
on Earth, can bear us out, if our Father, which is in Heaven, speak the
contrary. And therefore in yielding obedience to the Church, we must except our
duty to God, and obey her no farther than her commands are allowed by him: much
more must we reject the tyrannical and presumptuous Mandates of the Whore of
Babylon, pretending her self to be the Spouse of Christ, wanting that authority
which belongs to the Church, and yet still challenging far more than the
Churches right. A great misery, of so many millions of poor, wretched souls, it
is to be thus enslaved: and a most cursed practice it is of those, who go about
to bring them again into such Antichristian bondage, who now are out of
Babylon. But among all other Papists, how desperately wicked are the Jesuits,
and how slavish: swearing absolute obedience to the General of their Society
binding themselves by Oath to do whatsoever he commands them, Vide Gages
Survay of (...) W^st Indies.
without exception, though it be to murder Kings, and blow up Parliaments with
Gunpowder, and any such like villainies?

Of the Members of the Church.
THe Members of the Church considered severally, are The Clergy, The Laity.


Their Errors are,

1. That to make a Member of the Catholic Church, Bp. Downham Ca^^a^.
there is not required Grace or any internal virtue, but a profession of Faith
is sufficient.

2. That the Clergy are not held under civil Laws, by any coactive, but only
directive Bond, that is, that the Clergy are not subject to the civil
Magistrate.

3. That Clergymen are not bound to keep and observe the positive Laws of
Princes, if they be contrary to the Canons of the Church: neither ought they to
be cited before the civil Magistrate for any cause, or to be judged by him. It
is absurd, says Bellarmine, that the sheep should judge the Shepherd.

4. That the goods of the Clergy, both ecclesiastical and secular, are free
from the Tribute and Tax of secular Princes.

5. That the election of Bishops depends upon the Pope, and that they all
receive Jurisdiction from the Pope.

6. That single life is always joined to holy Orders by divine right; that
Marriage in the Clergy is a greater sin than Whoredom.

7. That men are to be prepared for holy Orders by the first shaving.

8. That the Clergymen of the first Order are Priests, properly so called,
which, they say, are instituted to offer an external and real Sacrifice.

9. That preaching is not necessary to the Priesthood: and in the Roman Church
the greatest part of Priests do not preach. They must have some other Charge or
Commission besides the Priesthood for to be Preachers.

10. There is that which they call Irregularity, that which hinders a man from
being capable of the holy Orders, or performing the Functions belonging
thereunto after they have received them, Ignorance makes not a man incapable
of holy Orders. Some of their Bishops could not read, (...) l. 1. c. 61.
but they give them a co-adjutor: for they hold, that a man may serve God by an
Attorney. Yea, they confer the sacred Orders upon Infants in the Cradle, as
Cardinal Tolet the Jesuit teaches. No man can receive nor exercise the
Priesthood, that has any notable defect in his Body, especially, if he has
lost one of the Fingers wherewith they handle the Host: That man is irregular
also that has had two Wives. An Hermophrodite is not irregular, provided, that
the virile Sex do prevail, as Emanuel Sa, in his Aphorisms, teaches. Item,
that man is irregular, that has cut off a member from any other man. An
Heretic also, though converted, is incapable of Orders and his Children
likewise, and his Childrens Children: yet in this nevertheless, the Pope gives
a Dispensation. Item a wilful Murderer: in which rank they are not placed that
disclose an Heretic to the Inquisition, for to put him to death, nor those
that carry wood for to burn him: nor that man that gives a woman a Potion to
drink for to kill a Child in her Womb, as the same Jesuit there teaches. A
married man is not admitted to any Order: but he that whoreth, or keeps at home
a Concubine, or more, may be a Priest, and perform the Functions belonging
thereunto, as Pope Innocent the third does define in the Title de Bigamis. And
thereupon the Gloss of the Doctors adds, Whoredom has more privilege here
than Chastity: Vide the J^us^^s Morals.
yea, a notorious Buggerer, or Sodomite, is not irregular or incapable of holy
Orders, and may sing Mass, as Navarrus teaches, who was the Popes Penitential,
and the most learned of all the Canonists.

11. They hold, that the Priests and all Spiritual persons ought to be rich,
because Saint Paul says, a Bishop must be given to Hospitality.

12. That no Priest is to be deprived for Fornication.

13. That Christians may be distinguished by diverse Names, and separated into
various Professions of different Religions.

14. That those Professions are the state of perfection.

15. That public exercises of Religion ought to be in an unknown Language.

16. That private exercises are performed that way also in a more holy manner.

17. That Kings enjoy their Kingdoms by the Popes favor.

18. That the Pope has right to give and take away, and translate Kingdoms.

19. That the Roman Church has Cardinals for Sides-men to the Pope, upon whom
the universal Church is turned as upon hinges.

20. That these are to be joined with the Pope in the Government of the
universal Church: and that those, whether they be Bishops, or Presbyters, or
Deacons, are not only to be preferred before other Bishops, Archbishops,
Primates, Patriarchs, but to be equalled even with Kings.

Their Errors concerning Justifying Faith.
1. THat Faith has its proper seat and place only in the understanding, not in
the heart and affection, and that it is not an assurance or considence of the
heart.

2. That Faith is but a bare assent of the Mind, without knowledge or
understanding of that whereunto it assenteth. That there is an implicit Faith,
which is the Faith of simple men, who although they are not able to give good
reason of their Belief, yet it is enough for them to say they are
Catholick-men, and that they will live and die in that Faith which the
Catholic Church does teach. Now this implicit Faith, which, they say, is
sufficient for common Catholics, is nothing else but to believe as the Church
believes, though they know nothing themselves particularly.

3. That it is not the property of Faith specially to apply to every Believer
the Promises of God in Christ, (for this they boldly call presumption) but
generally to believe whatsoever is contained in Gods Word to be true.

4. They affirm, that an historical Faith, a Faith of working Miracles, and
that Faith which justifies, are all one in substance. That the Faith of
Miracles differs only from justifying Faith in an accidental quality, of more
fervor, devotion, and confident trust: yea, the Rhemists are more absurd: that
Faith (say they) which Saint James calls a dead Faith, is notwithstanding a
true Faith, and the same which is called the Catholic Faith.

5. That true justifying Faith may be separated from Love, and other Christian
virtues.

6. That Faith does not justify as an Instrument, in apprehending the
Righteousness of Christ, but as a proper and true cause it actually justifyeth
by the dignity, worthiness, and meritorious work thereof.

7. That Works are more principal than Faith in the matter of Justification.

8. That we are said to be justified by Faith, because Faith is the beginning
only, the foundation and root of Justification.

9. That men are not justified by the only imputation of Christ's Righteousness,
or by the Remission of sins: or, that we are not formally justified by the
Righteousness of Christ.

10. That our particular Salvation is not to be believed by Faith.

11. That a man may fall away from the Faith, which once truly he had, and be
altogether deprived of the state of Grace, so that he may justly be counted
among the Reprobates.

Their Errors concerning Repentance.
1. THat Repentance (which they call Penance) is a Sacrament properly so called.

2. That Repentance in the New Testament is another thing from that Testament
is another thing from that which it was in the old: and also that in the New
Testament which is after Baptism, is another thing from that which is before.

3. That these three are the true and proper parts of Penance, Contrition,
Confession to the Priest, and Satisfaction to God for our sins.

4. Contrition (which otherwise neither ought nor can be excluded from
Repentance) is required by our Adversaries not simply in Repentance; but they
teach, that sins are blotted out, and satisfied for by Contrition.

5. They appoint a certain measure to Contrition, and do teach, that unless it
be sufficient, there is no Remission of sins granted.

6. In reckoning the parts of Repentance they omit Faith, and take away, as it
were, the soul and life of true Repentance.

7. That Repentance goes before Justification by Faith, and that it is a way
rather unto Faith and Justification in the Remission of sins.

8. That Contrition, which is joined with an inward terror of the Mind, and
proceeds from the sight of our sins, does not appertain to the Law, but to
the Gospel.

9. Some Papists affirm, that in Contrition it is not necessary to have a
formal, that is, a resolute and express purpose of newness of life, but that
this is always included in the detesting of sin; which implicit or inclusive
purpose is sufficient.

10. They teach, that Contrition ought to be perfect, because it must proceed
from the love of God, which is the most perfect kind of love.

11. They affirm, that Contrition is a necessary means unto Justification, and
they make Contrition (as a part of satisfaction for our sins, so) a cause of
Justification and Remission of sins, not only in disposing and preparing us
thereunto, but in that thereby we verily obtain and deserve Remission of our
sins.

12. S^ t li 4. (...) 3. (...). 17.
Contrition (they say) is not necessary for venial, or small offenses, neither
is a man bound thereunto. Some think that a general Confession suffices for
mortal sins, which a man understands not.

13. That there is a kind of Contrition, that proceeds only from the fear of
punishment, when a man leaves to sin, not for any love to God, but only for
fear of Hell.

14. That it is necessary to Justification, that sins all and every one (as far
as may be) be confessed to the Priest as to a Judge.

15. That none can rightly seek for absolution at the Priests hands, unless
they confess particularly, at least, all their mortal sins, whether they be
committed in mind, heart, will and cogitations only; or in word and work, with
all the necessary circumstances and differences of the same.

16. That this sacramental Confession (as they call it) must be made secretly
to the Priest.

17. That every Christian ought once in a year to present himself (when he is
come to years of discretion) to the Priest, and to make his confession to him,
viz. in time of Lent.

18. This order and custom of Confession they hold to be a divine Ordinance, no
humane Tradition.

19. That every one is to confess to his own Parish Priest.

20 By this means Confessors will fearch into the secrets of the Marriage Bed,
Benedict. C^nf s. To^et. de Institu^. Sac^rd Nava^. Sanchez. Burcha^d.
and enquire of things which ought not to be named: and under color of
examining the Consciences, they play with libidinous interrogations, and teach
all kinds of vices: you shall find there a thousand sorts of charms, philters,
vices against Nature, and meretricious tricks, under color of awaking benumbed
Consciences, and bringing them to Confession. Who so will understand some of
that impure Science, let him read the Book of Benedicts Confessions, Cardinal
Tolet of the Institution of Priests, Navarrus, Sanchez, the Roman Penitential,
and the Decree of Burchard Bishop of Worms. By the same Confessions Priests
discover the secrets of Kings, know their weaknesses, and learn their
intentions, of which they inform the Pope.

21. By the same Confessions the Popes have usurped a power over the Temporals
of Kings, and over their persons, imposing satisfactory Penances upon them
after Confession, and not granting them absolution but upon conditions
burdensome to their Crowns, and ignominious to their persons: I pass by the
sordid trick of taking twelve pence for a Confession. It seems they hold it
unreasonable, that a man should forgive sins for nothing.

22. Du Moulin.
One of the great abuses in this point is, that the Papists put Confession
among meritorious Works: as if a Murderer deserved recompenses for freely
confessing his crime. By that reckoning it will prove an useful and a salutary
course to commit a multitude of sins, to get multitudes of merits by confessing
them.

23. It is also a rule of these Doctors, that a sinner may confess part of his
sins to one Confessor, and part to another, and so have from each of them a
demi-absolution.

24. They assert, that it is not a sufficient satisfaction, to believe that
Christ has abundantly satisfied for us: neither yet is it enough to amend and
correct our lives, but God must also be satisfied for our sins, by the
punishment and chastisement of our selves, as by affliction laid upon us by
God, or penance enjoined by God, or by Prayer, Fasting, Alms-deeds, which we do
take up for our selves.

25. That satisfactory Works are not only profitable to the sufferers
themselves, but also for other their fellow members in Christ, and one may bear
the burden, and discharge the debt of another.

26. Not only amendment, and ceasing to sin, or Repentance in heart before God
is always enough to obtain full reconcilement, but there must be outward
penalty, correction and chastisement besides.

27. That Prayer, Fasting, Alms, are those satisfactory Works, whereby we do
satisfy God for the temporal punishment due to sin: and besides these there
are other Works which we are not bound unto; as whipping, beating of the body,
and the like.

28. Three ways, they say, God is satisfied. 1. By bearing patiently the
punishment that God lays upon us. 2. By assuming voluntarily the laborious
and painful works of penance. 3. In willing undergoing the Sentence of the
Priest in his penal injunctions.

29. The satisfactory and meritorious Works of the Saints which do abound,
being communicable, and applicable to the faithful that want, are the very
ground of the Indulgences and Pardons of the Church, and the very treasure
thereof, and to be dispensed according to every man's need by the Pastors of the
Church. Here many blasphemies and untruths are couched together.

1. That a man's penalties may be greater than his sins, and so his abounding
may supply another man's want. 2. That the Church Governors may dispense the
merits of one to another. They say the contrary themselves, that the abounding
passions of the Saints are applicable to others by the sufferers intention.
Rhem. 1. Colos. 2.2. Then not by the Churches dispensation. 3. It is a great
blasphemy, that one may be helped by another merits, and it does derogate from
the truth of Christ, whose only merits are the treasure of the Church. And what
a presumption is this, that they dare to match the sufferings of Christ and of
the Saints together?

30. That by the censure of the Church imposed upon offenders, they do not only
satisfy the Church, but God also; and so consequently the Indulgence of the
Church does set them free from the guilt of the punishment of sin, both before
God and Men.

Of the diverse Kinds of Indulgences, and the Profit of them.
BEllarmine rehearses five kinds of Indulgences, and justifies them all.

1. That there is an Indulgence of forty days, which is a release of the
penance which was to be done forty days.

2. There is an Indulgence of the third or fourth part of their sins, that is,
of the punishment due for so much of their sins.

3. An Indulgence plenary was for the whole punishment: and sometime
Indulgences are granted for ten or twenty thousand years. T^en so many
blasphemies and other sins, as are by some committed every moment, deserve many
thousand years penance: which notwithstanding by the sharpness of
Purgatory-pain may be satisfied for in three or four hundred years.

4. Indulgences are granted to some in their lifetime, to some in the point of
death.

5. Some are temporary, for a time, as limited to days, and years, same are
perpetual, which are tied to places, Churches, Altars, or to things moveable,
as to Rosaries, Holy-grains, etc.

1. They hold, that Indulgences are profitable to all whosoever, not only to
notorious and public offenders but even to those that are tending to
perfection.

2. That the power of granting Indulgences does rest only in the Pope, as the
Successor of Peter, to whom Christ said, Whatsoever you loose on Earth shall be
loosed in Heaven, Matthew. 16.19.

2. That plenary Indulgences can only be granted by the Pope, neither by
Cardinals, whose Indulgences exceed not an hundred days, neither by Bishops or
Metropolitans, who can grant Indulgences but for one year in the Dedication of
Churches, and for forty days at other times: nor yet by General Councils.

3. Bishops receive this power to give Indulgences, not immediately from God,
but from the Pope, from whom also they receive their Jurisdiction: and this is
an argument thereof, because the Pope may make void Indulgences granted by
Bishops: but so-can he not Orders, or Sacraments ministered by them.

4. That Parish-Pastors have no power to give Indulgences, but by Commission
from the Pope or their Bishop: because they are the Princes of the people of
God, to whom it belongs to distribute the common Goods of the Church.

5. That the power of Order is not necessary to give Indulgences, but the power
of Jurisdiction only; and therefore the Pope or Bishop may grant Indulgences,
though they be not in Orders.

6. Neither is this power of Indulgences lost by any deadly sin.

Of the Disposition required to be in them that receive Indulgences.
1. THe Papists say, that Indulgences, D^ Willet Controv.
may be granted to a sinner, and for such works as are done while he is in the
state of sin, as if a sinful man do contribute toward the recovering of
Jerusalem.

2. Yet a man cannot perceive the fruit of such Indulgences, unless he be in
the state of Grace.

3. If the good work enjoined to be done, be accompanied or joined with venial
sin, it hinders the fruit of Indulgence.

4. That he that will receive benefit by these Indulgences, must confess and be
truly penitent.

5. He cannot enjoy the Indulgence, that does not perform all the works that
are enjoined.

6. That Indulgences may be profitable to those that will not though they can,
satisfy for themselves, but do rest in the satisfaction of others.

How the Papists hold that Indulgences are profitable for the dead.
1. THat the Prayers of the living, and other works by way of impetration
profit the dead: ergo, the same works being also satisfactory, do also benefit
them by way of satisfaction.

2. That the faithful departed make one Body, and one Church with the faithful
living: therefore (say they) the satisfactions of the living may be applied to
the dead.

3. As to the manner how Indulgences are applied to the dead; some of them
affirm, that the Pope may judicially absolve the Souls in Purgatory, and that
they do belong unto his J^^^^diction and so he may extend (...) indulgences to
them, as unto the living. Some say, that Indulgen^^^ (...) profitable to the
dead, after (...) ^^^ner of the suffrage of the C^^^^^, as the Prayers of it do
(...) by way of merit, impetration, satisfaction; so Indulgences are granted to
the dead, as they are satisfactory; and so after the manner of a suffrage as it
is satisfactory. Some of them think that Indulgences do profit the dead of
condignity and worthiness.

4. They hold that Bishops and other inferior Prelates cannot apply
Indulgences to the dead, but only the Pope.

5. That Indulgences directly belong to the living indirectly to the dead, no
otherwise than as the living do perform the works enjoined for the dead.

6. That Indulgences do not profit the dead in common, otherwise than as they
rejoice one for another good; but only those Souls are delivered thereby, to
whom they are particularly intended.

7. That the Pope may release unto a man living the pain of Purgatory, which
otherwise he were subject unto.

But when the Papists have cast up their accounts, they shall find, that
neither Purgatory nor Pardons will serve their turn: their summa totalis will
be Christ crucified. As for Indulgences and Popes Pardons, the ancient Councils
were never of Council with them, the old Fathers never favored, nor so much as
savoured them.

Their Errors concerning Fasting.
WE are so far from condemning of Fasting, which is so often recommended in
Scripture, and joined with Prayer, that as Prayer sanctifies the Fast, so the
Fast may add heat unto Prayer, and bring down the insolency of the Flesh.
Sobriety preserves Chastity, bridleth Lust, and is a help to Watchfulness. Our
complaint of the Roman Church about Fasting, is,

1. That she has changed Fasting into a distinction of Meats. They place their
Fasts, not in Sobriety, or Temperance in Meat and Drink, neither in a total
abstaining from all Meat and Drink for a certain time, which was used of the
Ancients, but in abstinence from Flesh and white Meats.

2. They put Fasting among Merits and Satisfactions, of an exercise of Humility
making an occasion of Pride.

3. The Pope has taken this occasion to raise his Empire, to set a Rule to the
Markets, to the Kitchins, to the Bellies, reserving to himself the authority to
dispense; having to that effect multiplied Fasting-days to that number, that
they are more than one quarter of the year; taking upon him to give Laws to the
universal Church: whereas in old time Bishops gave Orders every one in his
Diocese, without any dependence upon the Prelat of Rome, as Doctor Du Moulin
notes.

4. That of sins against Gods Law, as Fornication, Stealing, and Lying, the
least Priests can give the Absolution; but eating a bit of Flesh in the holy
Week is a sin for which a man is sent to the Bishop, or to the Penitentiary.
And they account that man to commit a more heinous crime, who should taste
Flesh upon the days forbidden, than he that should be taken in Adultery, or
other wickedness. And in Italy and Spain men are in greater danger for tasting
Flesh upon the days inhibited, than for committing capital crimes.

5. In the Roman Church he that has eaten his belly full of Fish, is accounted
to have fasted: but he that for want of other meat has eaten a little Flesh,
is thought to have violated the Fast.

6. They lay a strait Yoke upon men's shoulders, charging them under pain of
damnation to keep their Fasting-days, making it deadly sin, yea Heresy to
transgress them; as one Lawrence Staple was persecuted, anno 1531; because, in
Lent having no Fish, he did eat Butter and Cheese.

7. There are many Mockeries in their Popish Lent-fast. 1. They permit most
delicate Fishes to be eaten, which are more dainty than any Veal or Mutton:
such as are Pikes, Trouts, Salmonds, Gudgeons, Lampreys, Oysters, etc. These
use to be Dainties many times in the more costly Banquets of rich men, perhaps
of Noble Personages: The use of these, and the drinking of choice Wines are a
fit means (forsooth) to tame the Flesh. 2. And that these Hypocrites may seem
to fast till evening, they sing their Even-song at Dinnertime, that afterward
they may freely banquet, and take their repast, as if God did not know the hour
of the day but by their Service and Singing. 3. In the evening they make a
Collation (so they call it) with diverse delicate Sawees, Confections, Spices,
Almonds, and Wine; and in the mean time they bear the World in hand that they
fast notably.

8. In the Roman Church one man fasteth for another, as if a Judge ought to
release a Fellon, because his Brother has not dined, as a learned man notes.

9. That the Penances of Fasting imposed on a sinner, are redeemed with Money,
and that corporal pains are changed into pecuniary.

10. That this opens a wide Gate unto Traffic: so far, that the Book called
the Taxation of the Apostolical Chancery puts a certain price to the Letters of
such Dispensations, in these Words: That a Layman may not be obliged to fast
upon the days to which he is obliged by the Church, and may eat Cheese. The
Letter cost twenty Groats.

Of their Dispensing with Fasts.
BUt the Jesuits have found many ways whereby to dispense with Fasts, and the
use of Meats on Fasting-days.

1. They will have the obligation to Fasting to commence only at the age of
twenty one years, and that it cease commonly at sixty.

2. Father Bauny dispenses for this Obligation with Laborers, Jesuits Morals.
Vine-dressers, Masons, Joyners, and generally all Handicrafts-men and
Artificers. To these he adds such as have any infirmity of Body or Mind. They
who complain of pain in Head, Heart or Stomach, and who being empty and without
food cannot sleep, are not comprised under this Precept. Tombou rine.


3. Tambourin extends the Dispensation for Fasting to those who are notably
sick, though they have fallen into this sickness by their own proper fault: and
that the same must be said of a sick person, unto whose Health Fasting might
happily conduce. The same must be said of him (says the same Author) who
cannot sleep in the night for a considerable time, unless he sup. The
Indulgence of the Church in permitting to eat at noon on fasting-days, is a
Rite according to this Casuist, which its Children may make use of against it,
to the neglect of its Commandment.

4. The Jesuits hardly leave any Profession which they exempt not from fasting.
1. All Laborers (as such) are exempt; for the Church (says he) has no
intention to deprive the faithful of the exercise of their Trades, and course
of life. 2. Those who climb the Pulpit (says Bauny) every day in Lent are not
obliged to fast, Bauny.
because of the extreme toil they are obliged unto by their Profession. There
is the same reason for Confessors and Missionaries, who spend whole days almost
in Confession; and for Professors, who commonly ascend their Chairs twice a
day, and continue therein commonly longer than Preachers.

5. Emanuel Sa says, Em. Sa.
when Fasting hinders the Husband from performing the Marriage-duty toward the
Wife, or causes the Woman to be disliked by her Husband, they are to be exempt
from fasting.

6. Tambourin says, a young Maid that would marry, if, by fasting all the
Lent, she notably blemish her Beauty, is also exempt from fasting.

7. Another Casuist says, that one may be justly excused from fasting, when he
cannot do it without trouble: as if Fasting were not in it self troublesome,
and were not instituted to cause pain, to subdue and mortify the Flesh.
Besides, they who are most averse to fasting, have commonly more need thereof
than others.

8. It suffices (says Tambourin) to the Pope for to dispense with Fasting,
that he has a design to show his kindness toward some persons who have
obliged him. If it be kindness to dispense with Fasting, commanded by the
Church, it is rigor contrary to the affection and humanity of the Church to
command it.

9. Escobar.
Escobar gives also another expedient to exempt us from Fasting without
necessity and dispensation; which is, to depart from the place where the Fast
is, and to go to another place, where it is not observed. And if any think,
that this is to deceive our selves, while we think to deceive the Church,
Filliut.
Fulliutius answers; That this is not to deceive the Church, nor to clude its
Command, but only to avoid the Obligation of the Commandment, in pursuance of
the right which every one has to do it when he can. Non est ulla fraus, si
quis utatur jure suo. Filliutius.

Their Errors concerning Oaths, and Vows.
1. THey teach men to swear by the Creatures: yea, they are bold to say, that
it is not only lawful to swear by Creatures, but sometimes more convenient than
to swear immediately by God himself.

2. They say, that it is lawful to swear by the name of Saints, because all is
referred to the honor of God.

3. They deny Oaths to be fit for the perfect.

4. They defend Vows that are made unto the Saints.

5. They say, that the Pope can absolve from the Bond of Vows and Oaths.

6. Oaths among the Papists are taken by touching the Saints Relics, that so
the Obligation of the Oath may be divided betwixt God and the Saints.

7. Upon the Question touching the necessity of keeping an Oath, and whether
the Pope can dispense with an Oath made to God, you have diverse and contrary
Councils, where the Pope did preside; which conclude contrary things, and
condemn and reverse the decisions one of another. And the worst opinion
prevailed at last: for yet at this day the Pope dispenses from Oaths, that is;
he takes upon him the power of declaring that a man is not bound to be faithful
to God.

8. They hold, that the proper Vows of Christians are voluntary, not of such
things which Christians are bound to do in duty, but of such as they may leave
undone, if they will, such as are their Popish Vows of Continency, and
voluntary (or rather wilful) Poverty.

9. All voluntary Vows (say they) made by Christians, though not commanded by
God, as not to eat Flesh, not to drink Strong Drink, or to live unmarried, do
concern the Worship of God, and thereby men are made more acceptable unto him.

10. There are three kinds of Vows which belong unto Monkery, the Vow of
voluntary Poverty: the Vow of Obedience unto the Monastical Governors: the Vow
of Continency.

11. They say, it is an acceptable Service to God, for a man to give all he
has to the poor, and by Vow to consecrate and addict himself to voluntary
poverty. They that do enter into the Monkish Profession, do Vow in all things
to become obedient to their Governor, and to follow his Rules and Injunctions:
as the Franciscans follow Saint Francis's Rule, who instead of a Girdle put a
Cord about him, went barefoot, in Winter-season covered his Flesh with Ice and
Snow. The Vow of Continency (say they) is commendable and meritorious in all
that do take it upon them: and after the Vow made they are sure to receive that
high Gift of Continence, if they duly labor for it: Rhem. Annotat. 1 Cor.
7.7. But (say they) whosoever marries after the Vow made sins damnably, and
turns back after Satan.

12. They assert, that those that are come to the years of Discretion, may at
any age take upon them the Vow of Monkery: that Children may enter into
Profession of Monkery without their Parents consent, as the Men of fourteen
years old, at the least, the Women of twelve.

13. That two married persons (the Man and the Wife) may separate themselves,
and vow and promise single life for ever, so long as they both shall live.

14. Their opinion is, that if the Marriage be contracted only, but not yet
consummate by the parties coming together, it is lawful for either of them
without the others consent to vow Chastity.

15. They allow of great variety of Vows, which have various Rules of Life,
invented by men beside the holy Scripture: And as if there were greater
perfection in those Rules, than in the Doctrine of the Gospel, and a more
compendious way to Perfection and Salvation.

16. They teach by the observation of them eternal Life, and a more excellent
degree of glory is obtained.

17. To any one that is buried in a Monks Cowl, especially that of St. Francis,
they promise Remission of sin in part.

Their Errors concerning Marriage set down by Bp. Downham.
1. THat Matrimony, though it were instituted in Paradise, is truly and
properly a Sacrament of the new Law.

2. And therefore does confer Grace upon the married, making them acceptable,
ex opere operato.

3. That the Church has power to constitute impediments that shall hinder
Marriage.

4. That the Church has power to dispense with the Degrees of Consanguinity
forbidden of God, and to make more Degrees, which shall not only hinder
Marriage, but break it.

5. That the solemn Vow of Chastity and holy Orders are an impediment, both
hindering Marriage to be made, and breaking it being made.

6. Also difference of Religion does not only hinder Marriage to be made, but
also break it being made.

7. That Marriage contracted between Infidels, when either is converted to the
Faith, is broken, viz. because that Marriage was not a Sacrament.

8. They say, that the Church of Rome did rightly prohibit Marriage of old to
the seventh, but afterward to the fourth degree of Consanguinity, according to
the Canonical Rule of Reckoning (but the fourth degree of Canonical Reckoning
is the seventh and eighth in the Civil Law.)

9. The spiritual Kindred (which arises, forsooth, from Baptism and
Confirmation) may hinder Marriage to be made, and break it being made. To these
more may be added.

1. They assert, Cusan. Ep. ad. Bohem.
that Virginity is to be preferred before Marriage, not only for that it is a
more quiet state of life, and freer from troubles in this world, but that it is
more convenient for the Service of God, and that it has a grateful Purity and
Sanctity both of Body and Soul, which Marriage has not.

2. They prohibit the Clergy to marry, saying, that Marriage is a state which
defiles a man, and makes him unfit for the exercising of sacred Offices.

3. The Pope in separating and dissolving Marriages lawfully contracted, upon
pretense of a greater perfection, August.
and to enter into the Monastical life, followed those old Heretics, called
Priscillianists, who did the same, of whom Saint Augustine to Quod vul.-Deus,
says, that they separated Marriages, and disjoined Husbands from their Wives
against their wills. If Marriage be made a Sacrament by the Faith mutually
given, or by the Blessing in the Church, as they hold in the Roman Church, how
dares the Pope dissolve a Sacrament?

4. The Papists use diverse Rites and Ceremonies in Marriage. Bellarm. c. 33. de
Matrim.
1. They which are joined in Matrimony are blessed of the Priest. 2. Oblation
is made for them in the Sacrifice of the Mass. 3. They are covered with a Veil.
4. They are coupled together vitta purpurea and candida, with a Scarf, or
Ribbon, partly white, partly purple. 5. The Bride gives to the Bridegroom a
Ring first hallowed and blessed of the Priest. 6. He commends them to God in
his Prayers. 7. He admonishes them of their mutual Duty. Some of those Rites
we altogether allow, and use them our selves: for both Prayers are made unto
God for them, and they are by the Minister put in mind of their Duty: and all
is done by us in the vulgar Tongue, much more to the edifying of the people,
and comfort of the parties themselves: whereas their Idolatrous Priest
chattereth all in an unknown Tongue.

Their Errors touching Extreme Unction.
1. THey say, that Extreme Unction is truly and properly a Sacrament of the New
Testament: Du Moul. Buckler of Faith.
which is the anointing of those that are extreme sick, to assure them of
Remission of their Sins, it is done after the Letany is read, wherein above
fifty Saints are named and called upon.

2. The Matter is Oil-Olive consecrated by the Bishop, not simple or
unhallowed, as is Water in Baptism. The form is in these words; By this holy
Unction, and by his most godly Mercy, God forgive me.

3. The Papists say, Dominic. a S^to Distinct. 23. qu. 1. art. 2.
it gives health of Body, it wipeth away the Relics of Sin. And therefore the
Priest thus says, By the virtue of this holy Ointment, and the most merciful
favor of God, the Lord forgive thee what thou have offended by the sight,
hearing, etc.

4. That this Sacrament does confer Grace, making us acceptable ex opere
operato, does restore health to the sick, and blot out sins if any remain.

5. That by Unction (which they apply to the Eyes, to the Ears, to the Mouth,
to the Loins, and to the Hands) God does grant to the sick whatsoever is
wanting by that fault of the Senses.

6. That by this Sacrament a man may sometimes be saved, who should otherwise
plainly be damned.

7. In the anointing of the sick. 1. They give power only unto their anointed
Mass-Priest, Council. Trid Sess 14. c 4.
to anoint their sick with Oil: Laymen have no authority to do it, nor
whosoever are no Priests. 2. For the Rite and Ceremony, the Priest coming to
the sick must anoint his five Senses; his Eyes, Ears, Nostrils, Mouth, also the
Reins which is the Seat of Concupiscence, and his Feet, which are the
Instruments of Execution; making the sign of the Cross with his Thumb dipped in
Oil.

Their Errors touching Order.
1. THat Ordination is truly and properly a Sacrament of the New Law, Council.
Trid Sess. 23. can. 3.
conferring Grace to the ordained ex opere operato.

2. Du Moul. Buckler of Faith.
That there are eight Sacraments of Order, all which are truly, or properly
called Sacraments, viz. the Order of Porters, of Readers, of Exorcists, of
Servitors, of Subdeacons, of Deacons, of Presbyters and Bishops.

3. That to every one of the ordained is given the sevenfold Grace of the
Spirit, yea Grace making them acceptable, and that ex opere operato.

4. Tileman. H^shus. loc. 14.
That anointing is required in Ordination. They do anoint the hands of such as
are ordained with Oil, and do enjoin them to shave their Crowns. And the higher
degree of Priesthood they have, so much broader must their shaven Crown be.

5. Bellarm. de Sacr. Ordin. 6. ca. 11.
They hold, that they are neither Priests nor Deacons, which are not ordained
of Popish Bishops.

6. The Sacrament of Orders, as they call it, gives a double Grace: 1. Say
they, it gives those that are ordained, ability and power to execute their
Office, which is to consecrate and offer up the Body and Blood of Christ,
wherein chiefly the Priesthood consists, and not in preaching the Word: for
they may be Priests, though they preach not. 2. Rhem. 2 Cor. 1. Sect. 7.
Another effect of their Sacrament of Orders (they say) is to imprint a certain
indelible character and mark in him that is ordained, which can neither by Sin,
Apostasy, or Heresy be blotted out: and therefore a Priest once ordained can
never lose his Orders, or become a Layman again.

Their Errors concerning Confirmation.
1. THat Confirmation is properly and truly a Sacrament: it was so decreed in
the Council of Trent.

2. The Matter of this Sacrament, they say, is Oil mixed and tempered with
Balm; first hallowed and consecrated by the Minister thereof, and striked in
manner of a Cross upon the forehead of him that is to be confirmed.

3. As to the Minister of Confirmation, the Papists are here divided. Some
think, that the Bishop is so necessarily the Minister of Confirmation, that it
can in no wise be committed to Presbyters: other of them are of opinion, that
it may be extraordinarily ministered by Presbyters. But Bellarmine says, the
Bishop is the ordinary Minister thereof.

4. That by this holy Chrism smeered on the forehead the Holy Ghost is given,
for strength and corroboration against all our spiritual Enemies, and to stand
constantly in the Confession of our Faith even to death with great increase of
Grace. And in this respect (say they) it gives more abundant Grace, in
strengthening us against the Devil than Baptism does.

5. That he will never be a Christian, that is not by Episcopal Confirmation
chrismated.

6. There are God fathers and Godmothers, between whom and the Child that is
confirmed by that Sacrament, there is a spiritual Parentage begotten, which
hinders Marriage, and which also causes the dissolution of Marriage,
notwithstanding the prohibition made by Jesus Christ, forbidding the
dissolution of Marriage, unless it be for Adultery.

7. That it ought to be celebrated Fasting.

8. That it imprints an indelible character in the Soul.

9. This Sacrament is administered in this manner. Du Moul. Buckler of Faith. p.
337.
A Child is presented to the Bishop by a Godfather if it be a Son; or by a
Godmother if it be a Daughter. The Bishop sits down, washes his hands, lays
them upon his Breast, says certain Prayers, by which he asks or requires
the sevenfold Spirit. Then he asks the Godfather the Child's Name, and
dipping his right thumb in the sacred Oil, which is called Chrism, which they
bring in a bottle, whereon the Bishop breaths to sanctify it, speaks to
the Oil, saying, Ave Chrisma, I salute thee, Chrism. That done, the Bishop
anointeth the Child's forehead therewith in manner of a Cross, saying, Bellarm,
cap. 10.
Signo te signo Crucis, and confirmo te Chrismate salutis, in nomine Patris,
Fili., and Spiritus sancti; I mark thee with the sign of the Cross, and confirm
thee by the Chrism of Salvation, in the name of the Father, of the Son and of
the Holy Ghost. After that he gives the Child a blow on the Ear to strengthen
him in the Faith, then he kisseth it, and having rubbed his thumbs with crumbs
of Bread, after many signs of the Cross by him made, he commands the
Godfathers and Godmothers to teach the Child the Creed, the Pater noster, and
Ave Maria. While this is doing, the Child, if it can stand upright, sets his
right foot upon the right foot of his Godfather or Godmother. The action ended,
they bind the Child's forehead with a cloth, and upon the Band put certain
Golden Spangles in manner of a Cross, and so the whole action is ended.

The Church of England retains that which is commendable in this custom,
where Confirmation is no other thing, but a Profession which the Child (having
attained to the age of discretion) makes to keep the Promise which his
Godfathers and Godmothers made in his name when he was baptized, and answers
touching his Faith and Instruction: which done, he receives the Imposition of
Hands and the Blessing of the Bishop, which is not called by them a Sacrament.
The French Churches, instead of that, cause Children to be presented at
Catechizing, and to answer publicly touching their Faith, before they admit
them to the Lords Supper, which is done with Prayer, that it will please God to
extend his Blessing on them.

CHAP. III.
THis is especially to be observed, that their Errors are not only about many
particular Points, but about the fundamental Rule of Faith, the holy
Scriptures, which makes the Disease the more dangerous, and the cure more
difficult

Of their Corruptions in Worship.
NOw for their Corruptions in worship many are implied in their corrupt
Doctrines; for they that corrupt the purity of holy Ordinances, do frame their
Doctrines accordingly, seeking to color such abuses and refusing to reform
their Corruptions by the Scripture. They seek to wrest the Scripture, and
corrupt the Sense of it, that they may seem to favor, at least, not to condemn
their Inventions.

Of their Latin Service.
ALl that is spoken in the Church should be to edification, 1 Cor. 14.6. but it
is impossible to edify by that which we cannot understand. If we understand
not our selves when we speak, then we edify not our selves: if our hearers
understand us not, then we edify not our hearers: if neither of us understand,
then neither of us is edified.

I know what they plead for their Latin Service, and their Latin Prayers, that
though it be a Tongue not commonly understood, yet it is none of the strange
Tongues that the Apostle speaks against, for it is one of the learned
Languages: and besides, it was dedicated to the use of the Church upon our
Saviors Cross. I answer, that the Greek and Hebrew are learned Languages too,
and that they were dedicated upon our Saviors Cross, as well as the Latin:
nay, all Languages were as well, and better, dedicated to the use of the Church
by the coming of the Holy Ghost, than those by Pilat's writing upon our
Saviors Cross. It follows not, because it was one of the learned Languages, it
is none of the strange Tongues; for any Tongue not understood, is to him that
hears it barbarous, and strange, not ob naturam vocis sed ob imperitiam, as
Chrysostom notes on that place.

Against the use of all such the Apostle speaks, and shows, that they be as
Trumpets uncertainly sounding, therefore they serve not for edifying, in utiles
sunt in quantum ignotae sunt; they be unprofitable, so far as they be unknown,
for we cannot say Amen to a Prayer, when we understand not the matter of a
Prayer. I had rather speak five words (says Saint Paul) to the understanding,
than five thousand in a strange Language. Illud plus ostentationis habit, iscud
plus utilitatis: there may be more ostentation on in that, but there is more
edification in this. As it is the work of an Architect to build up an house, so
of Christians by spiritual endeavors to build up one another: but that which
is not for the understanding of Christians, cannot be for the building up of
Christians, therefore of no use in the Church of God.

The Pope and his Clergy propound themselves two ends for the celebration of
the Mass and the ordinary Service in the Latin tongue. The first is to keep the
people in ignorance, and use them to believe without knowing, to follow their
leaders blindfold, and to obey without enquiring. They were afraid, that even
the Latin should be too intelligible, and therefore they would have the
principal parts of the Mass to be said with such a low murmur, that the voice
of the Priest cannot be heard. The second end, was to plant the marks and
Standard of the Popes Empire among the Nations which he had conquered. The
simple people believe, that their Religion must be Roman, as well as the Tongue
which is used in Religion, and that both Christian Faith and the Language come
from the same place. But the chief cause why the Pope will not have the Mass to
be understood by all, is, that the Mass contains many things, which would
either instruct or offend the people.

Of praying for the Dead.
THeir Opinion is, that the Prayers of the Living are neither available for the
Saints in Heaven, for they need them not, nor for the damned in Hell, for they
cannot be helped; but only for the Souls tormented in Purgatory, who do find
great ease (say they) by the Prayers of the Living.

Of the Canonizing of Saints.
THe Canonizing of Saints is nothing else, but the public Determination and
Sentence of the Church, whereby some that are dead are judged to be Saints, and
worthy of Honor and Worship; as to be prayed unto, Temples and Altars to be
set up in their names, Holy Days to be appointed for them, and their Relics
to be adored. And thus (say they) it is lawful, profitable, and expedient for
the Church to canonize Saints. This was the Popes own invention eight hundred
years after Christ, at the least; set abroach and continued in Policy, for the
confirmation of certain idolatrous Superstitions, which he labored thereby to
advance, and now are made the seven Points wherein the Canonization consists,
fetting the new Saints in the Calendar with red Letters. Who gave the Pope that
privilege to be infallible in that Judgment? for our Adversaries themselves
acknowledge they may be mistaken how many Factions and Solicitations are used
in the Court of Rome by Princes and States, that a man of their Country or
City be canonized. And at what vast expenses have they been to purchase it? The
City of Barcelona and the whole Country of Catelona spent many thousand pounds
in the canonizing Raimond de Pennafort, a Dominican Friar. The Jesuits spent
ten millions for the Canonization of their two twins, Ignatius Loiola and
Francis Xavier, whom they call the East India Apostle. The Book of sacred
Ceremonies does acknowledge, that the Pope sometimes was constrained, in some
sort, to canonize a man against his opinion, and therefore made a Protestation.
By that Protestation he thought to discharge his Conscience.

The words whereby the Pope canonizeth a Saint are these: The manner of
canonizing a Saint
In the authority of God Almighty, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and of the
blessed Apostles, Peter and Paul, and in our own, we decree and define, that N.
of good memory is a Saint, and must be put into the List of Saints, etc. But
before the pronouncing of that Sentence the Cause is pleaded in the Consistory,
and an Advocate presents himself, who represents the Reasons why such a one
ought to be sainted. The Apostles were not so sainted, nor their Disciples, nor
those Fathers, who were called Saints; as Ireneus Cyprian, Basil, Hierome,
Augustine, as a learned Divine notes. It happens, says he, to some poor
Saints, for whom the dignity of Saints is begged in the Court of Rome, to be
cast in their suit, and they cannot be Saints in Heaven, because men on earth
were not favorable to them. Sometimes the degree of Beati is obtained for
them, which is a middle degree, and an expectation of Saint-ship. By this means
Popes will give their Servants to be worshipped by the Nations of Christendom:
whch new Saints are far more honored than the Patriarchs and Prophets: for in
the Roman Church it fares with Saints as with Clothes, the newest are the
best, and most esteemed.

Of Invocation of the Saints.
THe Papists maintain the Doctrine of Angel-worship, of Invocation of Saints,
and of the Virgin Mary, and canonized Saints; calling especially upon the
Virgin Mary. They usually carve, pourtray, paint the Statue of the Virgin, and
represent her by them to the Eyes and Thoughts, when they pray unto her in all
their Offices, Primers, Psalters, Rosaries, Missals, Breviaries, Books of
Devotion, Churches, Chapels, Monasteries, Altars of our Lady; especially on
all their public Festivals dedicated to her Honor, in greatest state, crowned
with a Crown of Glory, as the Empress, Queen, Lady of Heaven, Earth and all
Creatures in them. In their public Liturgy they have a Letany whereby they
pray. 1. To her. 2. To the Archangels and Angels. 3. To Patriarchs and
Prophets. 4. To the Apostles and Evangelists. 5. To the Martyrs. 6. To Fathers
and Doctors. 7. To Popes and Confessors. 8. To Monks and Eremites. 9. To all
the Saints, Virgins and Widows, that they would join together to make
Intercession for them. And to these Saints they have their set Holy Days; to
them they burn Tapers, perform Masses and Trentals: each have their sundry
Collects, Hymns, Prayers, and Oblations; each have their sundry Offices
designed them. Some are over particular Towns and Cities; some over Trades and
particular Professions; same are over Diseases; some have the special gift of
bestowing Arts and Sciences.

Now what is this but to forsake the Fountain of living Waters, and to hew out
broken Cisterns that can hold no Water, as the Lord complains in a like case?
The rise of all this was from a preposterous admiration of Saints departed, or
(I may say of some of them, they were rather Devils incarnate:) and from the
perverse opinion of those who make no difference between civil Prayer to Men
living, and religious Prayer to Saints departed; which Error has been
maintained and heightened by the great ambition, and avarice of the Popish
Clergy: so that now the French Proverb is not without ground. (...) or ne
^ogn^ist Dieu plus ^ntre les Saints.
God cannot be known among so many Saints. Thus have they jumbled together God
and his Saints in a promiscuous manner of worship. Saint Peter tells them to
whom he writes, that he will endeavor that they may be able, after his
decease, to have these things always in remembrance, them. in 2 Pet. 1
2 Pet. 1.15. Whence the Rhemists (those Popish Corrupters, rather than
Interpreters of the holy Scripture) take upon them to tell us, if we will be so
sottish as to believe them. And they say it was this, that the meant to pray
for them: and as in his lifetime he meant to further their Salvation by
instructing them, so after his death, when he was in Heaven he would help them
by his Prayers. And upon this rotten foundation they lay on loads of hay and
stubble: upon this Popish abuse and mis-construction of the holy Scripture,
they would build not only the Saints praying for us, but also our praying to
the Saints: the former as being directly grounded upon this Text, and the
second as a consequent of the former.

Of their Distinction of the two kinds of Worship, Latria and Dulia.
THat kind of Worship which is proper to God, they say, See The Bee-hive of the
Romish Church. ch 7.
is fitly expressed by the Greek word latrea. The other word, doulea, is taken
for all kind of Service both of God and men: so that the Religious worship,
which is called latrea, is to be only given to God, the other, called douleia,
may be attributed to Angels and Saints, says Bellarmine. The Papists say, they
make not Gods of Saints, because they worship them with a lower degree of
worship than is Latria, or the worship proper to God: viz. they worship the
Saints with Dulia, the Virgin Mary with Hypordulia, a super-service. The
learned David Pareus, to disprove this distinction between latrea and doulea,
Pareus Dub. 9. in ^ 2. ad Romans
has taken pains to show the use of these words in the Scriptures: first, that
the worship of God is ofner signified by duleia than by latrea. The first is
found 39 times so used in the Old Testament, the other about 30 times, as he
has summed and set down the places. Secondly, he shows that the word Latria
is given to the Creatures, as in ten several places it is found, Thou shall not
do, (...), any servile work. Thirdly; the worshipping of Images is forbidden
under the term, Latria, 34 times in the Old Testament, and more in the New,
Romans 1.23. and 23 times under the other term Dulia. There is but one kind of
Religious worship, and that due unto God, and no Religious worship is to be
given to any Creature, no, not that inferior kind which they make less than
the Divine. This of the Papists is the same, as was that of the Heathen, who
(as Plato witnesses) did worship one God; that is, Jupiter for the chiefest
God: the rest they called lesser Gods, and worshipped them with a lower degree
of worship.

Of Image Worship.
1. THe Papists assert, that there is great difference between an Image and an
Idol. ikon, an Image (say they) is the true similitude of a thing; idolon does
represent that which is not, as were the Idols of Venus, Minerva, etc. But an
Idol is that Image which is set up with an intent to be worshipped. An Image is
a general name, as well to unlawful Pictures set up for Idolatry, as lawful,
which have but a civil use.

2. They affirm, that it is lawful to express the Trinity by Pictures, as God
like an old man, and with the World in his hand; Christ as he walked upon the
Earth; the Holy Ghost in the likeness of a Dove; the Angels with Wings: and
these Pictures (say they) are very meet and profitable to be set up in Churches.

3. That Images are to be reverenced and worshipped, say they, so it be not
with the Divine Honor due unto God.

4. They affirm, that Images may not only be set up in Churches, but that they
are no where better placed than there.

5. As to the manner of Worship that is to be given to Images, Bellarmin^
says: 1. That Images, though they are not properly to be worshipped with
Divine Honor; neither is it safe so to teach in the hearing of the People; yet
improperly they may have the same worship, which properly belongs to the
Saint whose Image it is. 2. There is a Religious Worship properly due unto
Images, as they are considered in themselves, and not only as they represent
another thing. After Images crept into the Church, the Clergy receiv^d great
profit thereby: for the advancem^nt of this new Doctrine, new Saints were
canonized, new Holy Days appointed: new Prayers and Services devised, new
Chapels erected and consecrated. Pope Leo the fourth appointed sundry Holy
days.

6. Touching making of Images, Image-makers, before they made an Image were
wont to go to the Priest, and shrive themselves as clean as if they should then
die, and take penance, and make some Vow of Fasting, or Praying, or Pilgrimage:
praying also to the Priest to pray for him, that he might have Grace to make a
fair and devout Image. In the Pontifical, the peculiar form of consecrating
Images and Crosses does show the same. They paint the Image of our Lady all in
Gold, Silver, broidered Hair, etc.

7. Order was also taken how Images should be consecrated; as first, with
Exorcism of Water and Salt, then with Prayer, afterward with censing, kissing,
anointing, and other Ceremonies. When the Rood in Saint Paul's Church was
erected, Bishop Bonner being in his Robes, with his Prebends about him, the
Rood was laid upon the Pavement. Then the Bishop, with others, sung diverse
Prayers to the Rood: that being done, they forthwith anointed the Rood with Oil
in diverse places: after the anointing they crept to the Rood, and kissed it;
then they took the said Rood, weighed him up, and set him in his place. All the
while this was doing, the whole Quire sung Te Deum, and they rung the Bells.

Of the Image of the Cross.
THe Papists say, that the Wood of the Cross, both the whole and every piece
thereof, is worthy of great Worship and Reverence. They give Divine Worship to
it, they pray and burn Incense, it is visited in Pilgrimages, and honored with
Festival days, as Inventio Crucis on May 3. and Exaltatio Crucis, on September.
14. In the Adoration of the Image of the Cross, the error is palpable: for in
the Roman Church upon Passion-Sunday they speak thus to the Image of the Wood
of the Cross; Crux ave, spes unica, etc. I salute thee, O Cross, our only hope,
in this time of the Passion, increase righteousness to the Godly, and give
pardon to the Guilty, thou have been alone worthy to bear the price of the
world. And a little after, Thou faithful Cross, the only noble among Trees. And
in another Hymn, Thou blessed Cross, out of whose arms the price of the world
did hang. Can any without great impiety speak unto Wood, and call it our hope,
and ask of it increase of Grace and remission of sins?

In the Missal of Sarum no less solemnity is used in carrying of the Cross,
than if Christ himself were present: there is such curtfying, kneeling,
kissing, attendance of Priests, bowing of the whole Quire, until the chiefest
Clerks proceed barefoot to the Adoration. Then it is carried through the midst
of the Quire, and with great reverence laid upon the high Altar. Then they sing
Hymns and Praises unto it, and adore it. Crucem tuam ador^mus, Domine, thy
Cross O Lord do we adore, etc.

There were so many pieces of the Cross dispersed in several places (as they
pretend) that as Erasmus writes; Erasmus.
if they were all laid together in one place, they would load a Ship. Some
write, that the Cross was found by Helena the Empress, and that she left the
greater part thereof at Jerusalem, and the other part she sent to her Son
Constantine the Emperor. If there had belonged unto the Church any Religious
care of it, the Apostles (doubtless) would have procured the safe keeping
thereof, and not have suffered the Church to want it 325 years; and it had been
an easier suit for Joseph and Nicodemus to beg the Cross, than the Body of
Jesus. Moreover, if the Cross were to be adored, yet who knows which is it, and
where it is to be found? and so one might worship a common piece of Wood for
the Wood of the Cross. But if the right Cross were to be had, ought it not to
be served as Hezekiah served the Brazen-Serpent, when the people began to make
an Idol of it? Damascen would have the Spear, the Nails, the Cave, the
Sepulcher, the Maunger, the place it self, Golgotha, and all things that
touched Christ's Body, to be adored, as well as the Wood of the Cross. The Wood
of the Cross then being forged in so many places, how can worship be yielded
unto it without great Idolatry?

Of Relics.
THe Fathers that lived nearest Christ were freest from worshipping Relics.
But the Romish Church abounds in this kind. Chemnit.
Chemnitius has noted twelve Errors and Abuses of the Papists concerning
Relics.

1. That the Bodies, Ashes, or Bones of the Saints are to be taken out of their
Graves, and to be placed upon some high place, as upon the high Altar, or some
other visible place, and to be dressed with Gold, Silver, Silk, etc.

2. That those Relics ought to be carried in public Processions, and
Prayers, and to be showed and offered for Christian people to see, touch, and
kiss.

3. That such Relics are to be approved by the Pope; and that approbation is
to be by canonizing them.

4. That it is a singular and meritorious worship of God, if the people, to
obtain help by it, shall touch, kiss, or walk before with an adoring mind and
gesture, or shall do reverence to these Relics by Candles, Silk-coverings,
Garlands, or other the like Ornaments.

5. That the Grace and Power of God (which they say is in them, or present by
them) is to be sought for in these Relics; and that they are made partakers
of it, who do touch them, or behold them.

6. That it is an acceptable Sacrifice to God to offer up precious gifts to
these Relics.

7. Many Indulgences for sin are promised to such as touch and kiss them, etc.

8. That our Prayer is the better, worthier, and more acceptable to God, if it
be done by or before the Saints Relics, by whose merits we may obtain help.
And therefore in our necessities we must make Vows, and take Pilgrimages unto
those places where the Relics of Saints are held to be, that we may call upon
them for their help.

9. That it adds much to the Holiness of the Sacrament of the Eucharist, if the
Saints Relics are set enclosed upon the Altar; nay, that the Altar is
consecrated by their touching it.

10. That the Saints Relics may be lawfully laid over one, or carried about
ones Neck, in devotion and Faith to God and the Saints, whose Relics they are.

11. And places among the Papists are full of uncertain, counterfeit, and false
Relics, to which without difference the same veneration and honor is given.
They say, that at Beavois there is one of Saint Christophers Teeth, so great,
that a dozen such Teeth would fill the mouth of an Oven. In Rome in St. John de
Laterans Church they pretend they have in their keeping the Foreskin of Jesus
Christ: In the Church which is in the Park of Wood at Vincennes, they have some
of the Powder of St. Martins Cloak, and one of Jesus Christ's sucking Teeth: At
Courchiverny near unto Bloys they keep Joseph's Hemme at the sound of his
Breathing when he hewed timber: Pilgrims that come from Galicia bring Feathers
of Hens, that are of the race of that Cock which crowed when St. Peter denied
Jesus Christ. Baronius makes mention of a Lock of the Hair of Saint Peter's
Beard, which did Miracles, although, says he, those that do sit in his throne,
seek to overthrow it by evil manners. And these Relics are kept so many ages,
and never corrupt. They say that the Virgin Marys Milk has continued 1600
years, and never was sour. And yet the Hosts that are called Jesus Christ
become moldy in a few days. At Chartres they have the Virgin Marys Smock,
which was brought from Constantinople into France by Charles the bald, as they
say that kept it. But Charles the bald was never in Constantinople; and in the
Virgin Marys time they wore no Smocks, which was the reason they used so many
Baths to wash the Sweat from their Bodies.

Richard Earl of Cornwall, Brother to King Henry the third, and King of the
Romans, brought (as was pretended) some of our Saviors Blood into England, and
builded the Abbey of Hales for the keeping of that Relic. King Henry the
third carried a Viol of Christ's Blood between his two eyes, barefoot, in a
Beggars habit, in procession from St. Paul's Church to Westminster, where it was
preached, esteemed to be reserved, and adored as Christ's very Blood, though a
gross imposture. And such was the Ignorance and Superstition of that age, that
the King, Prelates, Clergy, and generality of the people received, and really
adored it as Christ's very Blood wherewith they were redeemed. And not only then
( viz. anno 1247.) but the next ensuing years by the Kings special Summons, all
Fairs, or Sales of Wares in London, and elsewhere, were on that day
prohibited, viz. on St. Edwards day, to draw multitudes of people to
Westminster, to adore this false Relic, and enrich the Abbot, Monks, and
Inhabitants by the Profits of this Fair: which undid many Merchants resorting
to it with their Ware, as Matthew Paris there present does relate.

12. Oaths among the Papists are taken by touching the Saints Relics. The
Catechism of the Council of Trent, in the exposition of the third Commandment,
approves the custom to swear by the Relics of Saints. Now to swear by any
thing, is to take it for a witness of the uprightness of our heart, and for a
revenge in case of perjury, which belongs only to God, whose Commandment in
Deuteronomy. 6. runs thus: Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and shall serve him, and
swear by his Name. It is a frivolous excuse, to say, that to swear by Relics,
is to swear by God which has sanctified them. Also when they speak to those
Relics, worshipping them, they say things unto them which are agreeable unto
God. When they say, God preserve thee, Fuller H^st. of the holy War. ^assander
has observed a corruptions about Relics, viz. a superstitious confidence in
the worship of true Relics, and a sacrilegious forging of false Relics.
triumphant Wood, they speak not to God, which is not Wood: Or, if men speak to
any thing in honor of God, they must always understand that which is spoken to
it. Richard the first, King of England, redeemed from the Turks in Palestine a
Chest full of holy Relics (which they had gotten at the taking of Jerusalem)
so great, as four men could scarce carry any away. And though (says my Author)
some know no more than Esops Cock how to prize these Pearls, let them learn the
true value of them from the Roman Jewellers. First, they must carefully
distinguish between public and private Relics. In private ones some forgery
may be suspected, lest quid be put for quo, which made Saint Augustine put in
that wary Parenthesis, Si tamen Martyrum, if so be they be the Relics of
Martyrs. But as for public ones approved by the Pope, and kept in Churches
(such, no doubt, as these of King Richards were:) Oh let no Christian be such
an infidel, (says my Author) as to stagger at the truth thereof. If any
object, that the Head of the same Saint is showed at several places, the whole
answer is by a Synechdoche, that a part is put for the whole. As for the common
exception against the Cross, that so many several pieces thereof are shown,
which put together would break the back of Simon of Cyrene to bear them; it is
answered, says he, Distrahitur, non diminuitur, and like the Loaves in the
Gospel, it is miraculously multiplied in the dividing. If all these fail,
Baronius has a Rasor that shaveth all scruple clear away: Baron annal. E^cl.
in an. 1226.
For, says he, Quicquid sit, fides purgat facinu^. So that he that worshippeth
the false Relics of a true Saint, God takes his good intention in good part,
though he adore the hand of Esau for the hand of Jacob. But enough of these
fooleries.

Now as for those true Relics or Remembrances of the Saints; they are not
those which the Papists do so magnify, and superstitiously reverence, not
their old shoes, not pieces of bones, and the like; but their holy
instructions and examples, which should be had in remembrance for our
furtherance in the way of Godliness after their death. And as for the Bones of
Saints and such kind of Relics of them, I shall conclude with the words of
King James: If I had any such (says he) that I were assured were members of
their Bodies, I would honorably bury them, and not give them the reward of
condemned men's members, Premonit. p. 9.
which are ordained to be deprived of burial: but for worshipping them, or
Images, I must account it Idolatry.

Of the Vigils, and night-watches annexed to festival-dayes.
THe Papists were wont upon Saints Eeves to give themselves to fasting and
watching. But their night-vigils, or watches, they do not now so strictly
observe, because of the great abuses which did grow thereupon: yet they have
not altogether left them, for they have their nocturns, or mid night mattens,
and their prime hours in the Morning. It is true; the Christians in time of
persecution had their antelucanos hymnos, their early Songs and Hymns before
daylight; they met together to worship God before the Sun arose, because they
could not assemble together in safety in the daytime. But that is no reason
why the Church now should use Vigils or Nocturns, seeing we now have free
exercise of religion in the daytime, says Dr. Willet; no more than St. Paul's
example is to be urged, that prayed by the Rivers side with the people, and
there preached unto them, because in idolatrous Cities they could have no
places of meeting, that therefore we now ought to do the like, having Churches
and Oratories to assemble in.

How well they kept their Vigils may appear by that Decree of Innocentius,
Decret. Greg. lib. 3. tit. 41. ca. 9. we speak it with grief, that certain, not
only inferior Priests; but Prelates, spend the time in eating and drinking till
midnight, etc.

Of their Wax-Candles and Tapers.
THey have another superstitious custom, to set up Wax-Candles, and Taper-light
before Images, and upon the Altar, to carry them about in procession, and even
at midday, and high-noon. And Bellarmine would authorize this custom by the
continual burning of the Lamps day and night, as he says, in the Tabernacle
among the Jews. But the Lamps among the Jews, who abounded in Types and
Ceremonies, were lighted in the evening, and so burned all night for those that
kept the Watch in the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 13.1. and in the morning again they were
put out, 1 Samuel 3.3. And St. Hierome upon those words, [Before the Lamp of God
went out] thus writes, Intelligi oportet antequam lux diurna fieret, it must
be understood before it was day when the Lamp was put out. Tertullian speaks
against this use of Gentilism in burning Candles by day. Let them set up Lights
daily which have no Light, says he, the testimony or sign of Darkness well
agrees unto them. This then having been taken up by the Heathen, is worse to
be liked of, than if it had been a Jewish Ceremony; for it is a less fault to
play the Jews, than the Heathen. The ancient Eliberine Synod in Spain,
misliking the superstitious use of Candlelight by day, decreed thus: It
seems good unto us, that Candles should not be lighted in Churchyards by day.

Pope Zosymus ordained, Beacons Relics of Rome.
that the Paschal Taper should be hallowed on Easter even, and set up in every
Parish Church, and also that a fire should be made in every Church on that day
and hallowed: Again, that the Paschal should be lighted with the flame of that
fire, and all other Candles in the Church.

Of their Holy Water.
POpe Alexander the first (they say) ordained Water mingled with Salt to be
hallowed, and afterward to be sprinkled upon the people to put away their
sins, and to make them pure and holy. He also commanded, that it should be kept
in Churches, and in Houses, to chase away Devils and wicked Spirits, not only
out of houses where men dwell, but also out of the hearts of the faithful, as
though Faith and the Devil could dwell together in one heart. The words of Pope
Alexanders Canon are these: we bless the Water mingled with Salt for this
purpose, that all that be sprinkled therewith may be made holy and pure; which
thing we command all Priests likewise to do: For, says he, if the Ashes of an
Heifer sprinkled, made holy, and cleansed the people from venial sins, much
more Water sprinkled with Salt, and hallowed with holy Prayers, does sanctify,
make holy, and cleanse the people from venial sins. And if the Salt being
sprinkled by Elizeus, the barrenness of the Water was healed; how much more
Salt, being hallowed by Godly Prayers, takes away the barrenness of such as
appertain to man; and sanctifies and purges them that are defiled, and
multiplieth such Goods as we have need of, and turns away all the deceits of
the Devil, and defends men from all wicked fancies.

Are not the Scriptures here well applied? does not this Ceremony turn Christ
out of Office, with all his works and merits? Gulielmus Durandus says, that
the holy Water has deserved to have of God so great virtue, that as outwardly
it washes the Body from filthiness, so it inwardly cleanses the Soul from
sin. O intolerable blasphemy!

When men sprinkle themselves with this Water in the Church Porch, before they
enter into the Church, they are taught and commanded to say, Aqua benedicta sit
mihi salus and vita, etc. let the blessed Water be unto me health and life:
grant me, O Lord, by this creature of the sprinkling of Water, health of mind,
wholeness of body, defense of health, safeguard of hope, strengthening of
faith, now and in time to come.

Of Pilgrimages.
1. THe Papists hold, that Pilgrimages made to Rome, and to Jerusalem, and the
holy Land (as they call it,) and to the memories of the Saints in other places,
to ask and obtain their help, are godly and religious, and to be much used of
Christians.

2. Large Indulgences were promised to Pilgrims; especially to visit St. Peter
and St. Paul the Apostles. Pope Anacletus excommunicated, cursed, and
pronounced all such guilty of Sacriledg, as should hinder any man to go on
Pilgrimage, or to visit the Sepulchers of Saints. Pope Calixtus ordained, that
whosoever spoileth, robs, or hurts any such as go in pilgrimage to Rome,
or to any other holy places of Saints, the same should be excommunicated and
accursed.

3. ^reg. ^^^^en.
Some desired to worship in that place where Christ's feet had walked. Some
superstitiously attributed more sanctity to that place, than to any other.
Gregory Nyssen has a whole oration of this matter against those who go in
pilgrimage to Jerusalem. This going in pilgrimage, is in a manner to deny the
coming of Christ: for if Christ be come, there is no more difference in regard
of holiness between one ground and another. Whether it were then or not, now I
am sure it is a fond superstition for any to ask, as Naaman the Syrian did for
two burdens of earth out of that Country, as more holy than any other dust, 2
Reg. 5.17. Such idle vagaries do the Papists make to some other special places,
where perhaps the Devil has obtained leave to work some juggling feats and
lying miracles. Then presently the Saint his name is up, and well is he that
can spare time and money for a visitation of a senseless stock. Yea, many a
Saint, as good as he or she, shall be passed by with little more than a good
morrow, while the heat of their blind devotion carries them on to this
selected one: Yea, now and then the same Saint shall have little courtesy at
their hands, if they meet any where but at his Manner-house, as it were. Saint
James at Compostella is taken for a better man than when they find him other
where. Such brutish follies the Holy Ghost himself disdaineth with an heavenly
scorn, as appears by Elijahs mocking of Baals Priests, and Isaiahs character
of the blind Idolater.

The Writer of the History of the Holy War tells us, Fuller Suppl. of the Hist.
of the Holy War.
that besides those that went, many were either driven, or fled to the Holy
Land. Those were driven, who having committed some horrible sin in Europe, had
this penance imposed on them, to travel to Jerusalem, to expiate their faults.
Many a Whore was sent thither to find her Virginity: many a Murderer was
enjoined to fight in the Holy War, to wash off the guilt of Christian blood by
shedding the blood of Turks. The like was in all other offenses. Now God
forbid, says my Author, we should condemn them, if truly penitents, for
impious. But we find that many of them reverted to their former wickedness.
Others fled thither, who having supererogated the Gallows in their own
Countries by their several misdemeanors, to avoid the stroke of Justice,
protected themselves under this voyage, and coming to Palestine, so profited in
those Eastern Schools of Vices, that they learned to be more artificially
wicked. Thus He.

Of the Agreement between Paganism and Popery.
NOw let me show how the Papists in their Religion, have borrowed many things
from the Pagans; I will here insert them, as I find them in the Writings of
diverse Learned Men.

I. The Heathen had their Pilgrimages: The Heathen were wont to go on
Pilgrimage to such an Idol. So do the Papists; they go many of them on
Pilgrimage to our Lady of Lauretto, to St. Michael, to St. James, to visit the
Holy Sepulcher, and the Holy Hand-kerchief; which is a Relic in Rome, wherein
they say, the Picture of Christ's Face is, after it was wiped therewith. But
concerning Pilgrimages I have spoken in the former Section.

II. The Heathen made great Feasts, and kept a great number of solemn Holy
Days in honor of their Idols. And have not the Papists brought in many Holy
Days instead of the solemn Feasts of the Heathen. Calvin speaking against this
Superstition, Calvin Sermon in D^ut. 12.
in one of his Sermons upon Deuteronomy, says, men will say, we must not now
do as the Heathens did, for that were a serving of the Devil: But every Parish
will have a Church-Holy-day, to Play, to Dance, and to feed in, till they burst
again; and all in the Honor of God. Besides this, every one had his Patron
whom he worshipped; and said they, these things are not done any more in Honor
of the Idols, but in Honor of St. Martin: And let them Dance, and play the
Drunkards, all is well enough, so it be done in Honor of God, and his Saints.

1. Twelftide was an Imitation of the Saturnales, in which the Servants were
Masters. And the Lord of Misrule in Christmas is also a trace of the Saturnales
at that time of the Year.

2. Ashwednesday falls much upon the same time; as the Day of Purifications and
Propitiations for the Dead in the Pagan- Rome; which was upon the Eighteenth of
February.

3. As for Candlemas, Rhenanus acknowledges; that Candlemas is an imitation of
the Februal Ceremonies of the Romans; and the Insolences of Shrovetide came
from the Bacchanales.

4. The Rogations and Processions about the field of Corn, have succeeded to
the Processions called Ambarvalia.

5. The Heathens were wont to keep an Holy Day; which they called the Feast of
all Spirits. And the Papists change the word, and have the Feast of All Souls.

III. The Heathens had a Temple, which they called the Temple of all their
gods: The Papists call such a Temple the Church of All-hallowes, the Church of
All Saints; and they added a Church Holy Day unto it.

IV. The Heathen had their Sacrifices to their gods: And the Papists have their
Masses set up in the room of them. The Pagans had sacrificer for the Rain;
which were called Aquilicia: For the same use is the Shrine of St. Genovefa at
Paris.

V. The Jubilee was instituted after the Imitation of the Roman secular Games;
as Onuphrius acknowledges it, Lib. de ludis secularibus.

VI. The Pagans suffered not any Male to enter into the Temple of Bona dea: So
into some Popish Chapels, women enter not, as the Chapel of St. Laurence at
Rome without the Walls; as the Book of the Roman Indulgences shows it; and
the Quire of the Lateran Church at Rome.

VII. Agnus Deis hanged about the Neck, says Baronius, have been instituted
after the imitation of those Brooches, called Bullae; which the Pagan Boys wore
about their Necks to avert Charms.

VIII. The Pagans had their Convents of sacred Virgins; as the Vestals, and the
Faustinian Virgins, instituted by Marcus Antoninus Pius, as Julius Capitolinus
says in his Life.

IX. The Lacedaemonians would whip themselves, as the Penitents at Rome do now.
This custom came from the Luperci of the old Rome; for when they celebrated the
Lupercal Games, they went naked and masked through the Town, and smote with
whips such as they met in the way.

There are many other things also, which will show the Agreement between
Paganism and Popery.

1. The Pagan Emperors caused themselves to be called Gods. Caligula gave his
feet to Pompeius Pennus to kiss, as Seneca testifies. Julius Capitolinus says
the same of the young Emperor Maximinus. Pomponius Laetus says the same of
Dioclesian. The same Emperors caused themselves to be adored; and the Roman
Senate had the right of Canonizations. The Pope having usurped the place of the
ancient Emperors of Rome, has also usurped these Honors, and is also called
God on earth. He offers his Foot to be kissed by the greatest Princes, Kings
and Emperors. Hence it is said of him, Ense potens gemino cujus vestigiae
adorant,
Caesar, and aurato vestiti murice Reges.
Great Caesar with victorious Kings,
Who Golden Crowns do wear:
They do adore his footsteps, who
The double Sword does bear.
And another says of him, The Princes of the world adore and worship the Pope
as perpetual Dictator, the Successor, not of Caesar, but of Peter the Fisher.
It is said of Charles the eighth King of France, that he made a vow suppliciter
adorare, humbly to adore the Pope, and performed it: it is said of him,
adoravit Pontificem projectus, casting himself down he adored the Pope. And of
that potent Prince, Charles the fifth King of Spain, and Emperor, it is said,
Ille pie inflexo genu, pronus exosculato pede Pontificem adoravit, he piously
bending his knee, and bowing himself down, worshipped the Pope, kissing his
foot. Yea, it is said, that in the Lateran Council under Pope Leo the tenth,
this passage spoken of Christ by the Prophet, was blasphemously applied to the
Pope; The Kings of the Earth shall worship him, all Nations shall serve him:
Yea, and in diverse ages before, in the time of Alexander the third. It seems,
that Gregory the seventh, in his Bull of excommunication against Henry the
fourth, pretending to honor Peter and Paul, but intending to exalt himself as
their Successors, gives them the Title of Christ's: The Kings of the Earth
stood up, and the Princes [Secular and Ecclesiastical, Courtiers and common
people] assembled together against the Lord, and [you] his Christ's, or his
anointed ones, saying, let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their
Yoke from us. And that which the Prophet Isaiah says, Isai. 28.16. Behold, I
lay in Sion a Stone, a tried Stone, a precious Cornerstone, a sure foundation,
etc. applied to Christ by the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2.6. this place was applied to
the Pope. It is said of Pope Innocent the third, that he said thus of himself,
He that has the Bride is the Bridegroom. Am not I the Bridegroom, who have the
noble, rich, comely, chaste, gracious, sacred Church of Rome, which by Gods
Ordinance is the Mother and Mistress of all the faithful. So in a flattering
Oration directed to Pope Leo the tenth in the Council of Lateran: Stir up thy
self, arise, compass about Sion our Mother, and thou Spouse, her do thou
embrace: But St. Paul acknowledges no other Bridegroom, or Husband of the
Church, but Christ only, 2 Cor. 11.2. I am jealous over you with a godly
jealousy, for I have espoused you to one Husband, that I may present you as a
chaste Virgin to Christ. See the audacious wickedness of Antichrist, assuming to
himself the honor and dignity proper unto Christ. Again, whereas our Savior
says, Matthew. 28.18. All power is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth. It is
said in the Council of Lateran under Pope Julius, that it was said to the Pope,
All power is given to thee of the Lord in Heaven and in Earth. So in the Book
of Ceremonies concerning the blessing or consecrating of a Sword, this Papal
Sword figureth the supreme temporal power bestowed by Christ upon the Pope, his
Vicar in Earth; according to that, [All power is given to me in Heaven and in
Earth.] And elsewhere; He shall rule from Sea to Sea, and from the River to the
ends of the Earth. Again, it is said in the Council of Lateran under Pope Leo,
that these words were belched out: Behold the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, the
Root of David.] And it seems, it was said of the Sea of Rome, This is she
alone which shuts, and none opens, and opens and none shuts. So it is
recorded of Pope Martin the fourth: They cried unto him, Thou that take away
the Sins of the world, have mercy upon us. And again, Thou that take away the
Sins of the world, have mercy upon us. And the third time, Thou that take
away the Sins of the world, grant us peace. Boniface said, we declare, that it
is necessary to Salvation, that every humane creature be subject to the Pope of
Rome. Another says, the power of the Pope excels all power.

2. Papal Dignity was brought into the Church from among the Heathens. The
Idolatrous Romans had their superior and subordinate Priests. They had their
Salii, Flamines, Diales, their Augures, Pontifices, and above them all there
was a Pontifex maximus: the same Title which the Pope assumeth. A Dignity
esteemed (it seems) by their greatest Nobles: such as Fabius maximus,
Crassus, Aemilius, Lepidus, and Caesar himself. And Sozomen writes, S^zom. l.
5. ca. 1. and ca 15.
when Julian the Emperor had revolted from the Christian Religion to
heathenish Idolatry, (...), he called himself a chief-Priest. And in the same
Book and 15 Chapter he copieth out an Epistle written by this Heathenish
Apostate Emperor, to Arsacius, whom he styles chief-Priest of Galatia, and
enjoyneth him to censure, and (if need be) to deprive the inferior Priests of
their Office or Functions. So the Pope to this day has the very same Title of
Pontifex maximus, which was the proper Title of the chief-Priest in Rome, while
Rome was Heathenish. Gratian a meek and religious Emperor, who was slain by
the men of Maximus the Tyrant, is the first of the Christian Emperors, that
refused to be called Pontifex Maximus, holding that Title which his
Predecessors (though Christians) had born, to be unsuitable with a Christian
Prince, as derived from the Pagans, and relishing of Paganism: yet soon after
the Bishops of Rome suffered themselves to be called so, and took up that which
an Emperor had rejected, as a learned man well notes.

3. Secrat. l. 3. ca. 23.
The Popish fashion of swearing by Saints is but an imitation of the Pagans
Superstition, who used to swear by their Gods, as Libanius does oftentimes in
his Books swear by Hercules, Bacchus, Asclepius: The Heathens were of opinion,
that their swearing by their Idols was a token of their serving of them. And it
is a common thing for the Papists to swear by the Virgin Mary, and by the rest
of the Saints. They set the Virgin in Gods seat, as though it belonged to her
to judge the world* It is horrible treachery to swear by the Virgin Mary, or by
any other creature.

The Pagans had also diverse Rites belonging to their superstition.

1. The Heathen for Devotionsake made shadows about their Altars, in plashing
of Trees to make places dark, that when men entered into them, they might be
moved to a kind of aw and fearfulness. So it is among the Papists, if a place
be darksome, it seems to them to carry some Majesty in it, and the simple
sort are as it were amazed when they come into a Cave, and where the Windows be
dimmed with red or blew Glass, men's Eyes dazzle at it, and simple folk feel a
kind of motion in themselves, which makes them afraid and astonished; and to
their seeming it is good to stir them up to Devotion, thinking it is a
reverencing of God, whereas indeed it is stark foolishness.

2. The Pagans assigned particular Offices to each of their Gods: one governed
the Sea, another ruled in Hell: one took care of the Corn, another of Women
with Child: and every Land or Country had his Titular God or Goddess. Juno was
the Patroness of Carthage, Venus of Paphos, and Pallas of Athens. The Church of
Romc has transported these Titles to the deceased Saints, and has given to
every one their Office: St. Margaret Patroness of Childbed Women did succeed
the Goddess Lacina: St. Nicholas, who is invocated by Navigators, did succeed
Castor and Pollux: St. Eustache succeeds the hunting Diana: St. Christopher
succeeds Hercules: Jupiter Pluvius has given the Rain unto Genivieve: Ceres
has given over the Corn unto S. John and S. Paul: Esculapius gives Medicine
unto S. Cosm, Bacchus the Vines unto St. Urban: Mercurius the Oxen to Pelagius.
And every Kingdom Town and City has its titular Saint: St. Mark is the Patron
and Protector of Venice: St. James of Spain: St. Dennis of France: Saint
Martin of Germany: St. George of England, etc.

3. The Canonization of Saints is an imitation of the Pagan Apotheoses, that
is, Deifications, or making of Gods, whereby a man is made one of the Gods by
the authority of men. And the Senate of Cardinals has the right of Apotheoses,
or Canonizations, and to admit whom they please into the list of the Saints of
Paradise. The Preface of the second Book of the sacred Ceremonies calls the
Canonization of Saints of the Papacy, Divorum nostrorum Apotheosis, the
Deification, or Apotheose of our Saints.

4. The Church of Rome has borrowed from the Pagans the Equipage and Ornament
of her Images. They gave a Key to Janus, as the Church of Rome gives to Saint
Peter. They represented Jupiter Hammond with horns, as Moses is now pictured.
The Gen^i, or Houshold-Gods, had a Dog with them, so has the Popish Saint
Hubert. Vulcan of old had an Hammer, so has Saint Eloy now. Hercules had a
Club, so has St. Christopher. Before the Pagans Images Wax-lights were
lighted, and Incense was burnt, which is done still to the Images of Saints in
the Church of Rome. A custom much derided by Tertullian, Arnobius and
Lactantius. Of burning of Incense, it was so common a custom among the
Gentiles, as that Julian the Apostate, that he might cunningly bind the
Christians to the same, ordained, that when any man came to him according to
the custom, to receive any gifts at his hands, they should burn Incense before
him: whereupon some notable Christians having understanding of his purposed
intent, came and brought them back again unto him, that they might not be
polluted. About the year 800. Pope Leo the third ordained it should be used in
the Mass. Then for Tapers, Wax-Candles and Lights in the Churches, this
Ceremony took its passage from the Gentiles to the Christians in the time of S.
Hierome, that is, more than 400 years after the death of Christ. And
Vigilantius, Pastor of Barcelona, wrote against the same, complaining of it,
that he should see the superstition of the Pagans drawn into Religion, and
fetched from the Gods of Paganism to be bestowed on the Christian Martyrs.

5. Their Doctrine of Purgatory, and satisfaction after this life came from the
Heathen. Plato, in his Dialogue of the Soul, says, those that live
indifferently well come to that Lake, and there dwell, and being purged, and
having born the pains of their iniquities, they are released. Virgil follows
him, speaking thus of the Souls of Purgatory. -- Aliae panduntur inanes
Suspensae ad ventos, aliis sub gurgite vasto
Infectum cluitur scelus, aut exuritur Igni. Virgil. Aeneid. 6.
Hence Purgatory arose. As for the purgation of Souls at the Wind, or in the
Water, Pope Gregory the first teaches it in the fourth Book of his Dialogues,
where there are many apparitions of Souls, saying, that they are in Purgatory
in the Wind or in the Water, or in hot Bathes: for the Purgatory in a
subterranean fire was not yet invented. The Paynims divided man into two parts,
taking the Body for one, and the Soul for the other. Again, after that the Soul
was separated from the Body, they divided it into three parts. The same that
went down into those places called they called Inferos, or Inferna, they called
Manes, comprehending thereby all that which now-adays they call the Hell of the
damned, Limbus and Purgatory. Then there remained the Spirit, and that which
they called Vmbram, that is, a shadow. As touching the Body and the Spirit,
they were not of opinion, that any of them did ever come again into this world,
or that they were ever seen after that a man was once dead and buried: for they
did well see, that the Body did turn again into dust and into ashes. And as for
the Spirit, they were of opinion, that it went up again into Heaven, from
whence it had its original, and there did abide. And as for that which they
called the shadow, because it had no true bodily substance, they said it did
vanish away suddenly, as smoke, when any body came near it, and and would have
touched it. And therefore they named it Vmbra, because it was but a salse
representation, like unto the shadow of a Body. They said, that it did remain
about the Graves, and upon the Earth, where it was to wander and to appear unto
men. So, say the Papists, though the Bodies of men may be corrupted in the
Grave, and brought into ashes; so that they cannot come out of it before the
day of the general Resurrection, except it be by Miracle, yet it is otherwise
of the Souls, for they be immortal, and go not down into the Grave as the
Bodies do: therefore they may come again, and appear unto men on earth, and to
converse with them. But some of the Heathen have derided at these toys. Cicero
Tuscul. quaest. l. 1.
Cicero, where he makes mention of the Lake Avernus, says, they will that
these Images and Visions should speak: which thing cannot be done without
Tongue, Mouth, Throat, without the force and shape or figure of Lungs and Ribs.
Chrysostom. de Lazar^ and Divite.
Chrysostom says well, ne quaeramus audire a mortuis, quae multo clarissime
nos docent sacrae Scripturae; let us not seek to hear those things from the
dead, which the holy Scriptures do teach us most plainly.

6. Macrob. in somnscipio. l. 2.
Singing and Music was also used in the Funerals of the Paynims, of which
Macrobius speaks. Pythagoras and Plato speak of the Music and Harmony of the
Heavens proceeding from the continual moving of the heavenly Spears, or
Circles. And Plato and they that held opinion with him, that the Souls were
immortal, did think that they had their offspring and original from Heaven,
and that they were come down from thence to inhabit and dwell in the Bodies of
men; whereupon Macrobius says, that it was established by the Laws and
Statutes of many Countries, that they should follow the dead unto their Graves
with good Music and Singing; for the Paynims did believe, that the Souls,
after they were separated from the Bodies, did return to the original of the
sweet Music and Harmony, that is, into Heaven.

7. Before Bells were invented, the Pagans used Trumpets, which they
consecrated by washings and purifications, and the day of that Ceremony was
called Tubilustrium, as Ovid tells us, that is, the purifying and hallowing of
Trumpets. And because they were wont to use them in Funerals, they were wont to
purify and hallow them at the Feast of Minerva, called Quinquatria, and at a
certain Feast of Vulcan, as Festus Pompeius and Varro do testify; they did in
a manner the like with them, as the Pope who baptizeth Agnus Dei's, and Bells
also are baptized in the name of the sacred Trinity: and they have a Godfather
and a God-mother that give them a Name. Thus wickedly do they blaspheme the
holy Institution and Ordinance of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who has
ordained Baptism for a Seal of his faithful Congregation and People.

8 The Pagans applied Relics to women with Child: they used to gird their
Belly about with Rollers made before the Idols, much like the women in the Abbey
of St. German at Paris, girding themselves with the Girdle of S. Margaret.

9. Many popish Monks place merit in going barefoot. The superstitious had an
holy day in which they went barefoot, which S. Jerome in his first book against
Jovinian, calls Nudipedalia, of which Juvenal speaks: Observant ubi festa
mero pede Sabbata Regis. Juvenal.

10. The Papists are full of begging Friars. Such there were among the Pagans,
among whom the Priests of the Syrians Goddess, Ovid. F^^sti l. 4.
and those of Cyb^le went about begging from Town to Town, bearing sacks where
they put the Provision that was given them. An exact description hereof you may
find in the fourth book of Ovids Fasti, and in the eighth book of the Milesia
of Apulcius.

11. The spittle used in Baptism by the Roman Church is derived from the
Pagans, who made use of spittle for a preservative and expiation, as Persius
says.

12. The Indians had Gardens of Herbs and sweet Trees with Roses and Flowers
for the Altars; and this is also the Church of Rome's custom and superstition
to trim and deck their Saints and Altars with Garlands and Crowns of Roses and
other Flowers. The Pagans clothed their Images as the Papists do. The history
of Dionysius the Tyrant is known, who eased the Images of their golden heavy
cloakes, and gave them other cloaks of Cloth, saying those of Cloth were both
lighter and warmer.

The Indians had 2000 Gods, whose Images stood highest in the Temple upon the
Altars. They were made of stone in full proportion as bigg as a Giant, They
were covered with a lawn called Nacar: they were beset with diverse Pearls,
precious Stones and pieces of Gold wrought like Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Flowers,
adorned with Emeraulds, Turquies, Chalcedons, and other little fine Stones, so
that when the Lawn was taken away, the Images seemed very beautiful to behold.
So does the Church of Rome deck and adorn their Idol-saints, as the Heathens
did their chiefest Gods, called Vitzilopuchtli, and Tezcatilipuca. They cover
their wooden and stony Statues of Saints, and of the Virgin Mary with fine
lawn-shirts, and hide them with Curtains of cloth of Gold, and enrich them with
costly and precious jewels and Diamonds, not considering that they are the work
of their own hands.

13. In Mexico, and without the great Temple, and over against the principal
door thereof a stones cast distant, stood a Charnel house only of dead-mens
heads, Prisoners in War, and sacrificed with the knife. This Monument was made
like unto a Theater, more large than broad, wrought of lime and stone, Gages
Hist. of the West Indies.
with ascending steps, in the Walls whereof was graffed between stone and stone
a skull with the teeth outward. At the feet and head of this Theater were two
Towers made only of Lime and Skulls the Teeth outward; which having no other
stuff in the Wall, seemed a strange sight. So the Romish Church makes much of
their dead men's skulls and rotten bones, laying them up in their Churchyard,
under some arches made for that purpose in their Church-Walls.

14. At the Consecration of an Heathenish Idol, a certain vessel of water was
blessed with many words and ceremonies; and that water was preserved very
religiously at the foot of the Altar, for to consecrate the King when he should
be crowned; and also to bless any Captain General, when he should be elected
for the Wars, with only giving him a draught of that water. Justin Martyr
says, that the Gentiles, when they enter into their Temples, do sprinkle
themselves with water, and then they go and offer sacrifice to their Gods. And
Hippocrates says, in going in we sprinkle our selves with this water; to the
end, that we may be made clean from our sins. And is not this practiced in the
Roman Church? They had also among the Gentiles a peculiar form of sanctifying
it, dipping therein, as Athenaeus tells us, a firebrand taken off from the
Altar, whereupon they offered their Sacrifices. So likewise have they a
peculiar manner of making this, exorcising the salt first, then the water, and
after that both of them being mixed together: which being done, both the
Papists and the Gentiles do think that it purges away sins.

Of the Papists imitating the Jews and Pharisees in many things.
1. THe Pharisees boasted of Moses's Chair, as the Church of Rome does of that
of S. Peter, and of an imaginary succession.

2. The Pharisees were strict maintainers of Traditions, and unwritten Word, as
the Papists are. These were strict burdens they laid upon the people, Matthew.
15.4. They persuaded the people, that these Traditions were as necessary as the
Scriptures. The Jewish Rabbines affirm, that during the forty days that Moses
was in the Mount Sinai to learn the Law, Almighty God taught him in the
daytime Sepher Thorah, the Book of the Law; and by night for want of
Candlelight the Law not written, or orales Traditiones, oral Traditions, which
they call Simanim: and the Thorah without this, they say, is imperfect. And
this (as well as the Law written, Chemnit. ha^m^n. E^a^g. ca. 79.
they say) was delivered by God himself to Moses, by Moses to Joshua, by Joshua
to the Elders of Israel, by them to the Prophets, from the Prophets to a great
Council, whose Register, and chief Notary (they say) was Esdras the Scribe, who
(as they affirm) committed many of them to writing, and gathered them into
seventy two Books which they kept till their City and Temple was destroyed, and
themselves dispersed. Afterward one Rabbi Judas Ben-Simon, an holy man (as
they say) having saved that Book, gathered the Sum of it into one Book, whence
afterward all the Talmudists and Cabbalists took their ground. The Papists
borrow their esteem of unwritten vanities and traditions from the Jews: they
tell us, they have many things by Tradition from the Apostles themselves, who
taught them viva voce, when they bring never a word out of the Scriptures for
the confirmation of them.

3. The Scribes taught that children might neglect their duty to their Parents,
under pretense of a religious Corban, that is, that whosoever should be liberal
toward their Treasury in the Temple, and offer freely, with this protestation,
that he meant it not only for his own good, but also for his Parents, should
herein sufficiently discharge his duty to his Parents, and owe them no other
Service: so that by this means (it may seem) they provided well for their own
purses, and exempted Children from those duties toward their Parents, which
the Commandment of God tied them to perform. So do the Papists allow Children
to give their Means to Monasteries, though their Parents starve for want of
maintenance.

4. The Jews boasted of the Temple of the Lord, crying up the Temple of the
Lord; and in the meantime profaned it by an evil life, Jer. 7. The carnal Jews
were much affected with pomp in matters of Religion, and many of them men of
dissolute lives. So it is among the Romanists, in those Cities and Countries
wherein is most wickedness of life, there is also most cost in the Temples, and
most public superstitious worshipping of God and the Saints. What stately
Churches, Chapels, and Cloisters are in Rome? what Fastings, what Processions,
what appearances of Devotion? and yet on the other side, what Whoredoms,
Sodomies, and Profanations are committed in it? so that it was the saying of a
certain Friar, that there were more Atheists in Rome than in any other City in
the world. But no where does sin and wickedness so abound, as in Mexico, and
yet no such people in the world toward the Church and Clergy, who in their
lifetime strive to exceed one another in their gifts to the Cloisters, Nuns
and Friars; some erecting Altars to their best devoted Saints, worth many
thousand Ducats; others presenting Crowns of Gold to the Virgin Mary; others
Lamps; others Gold-chains; others building Cloisters at their own charge;
others repairing them; others at their death leaving to them two or three
thousand Ducats for an annual Stipend.

5. The Jews boasted, that their Prophets and Priests could not err, saying,
Jerem. 18.18. The Law shall not err from the Priest, and the Council from the
ancient. This is also the boasting of the Church of Rome, that the Pope (as
Pope) cannot fall into error, and that the Church of Rome cannot err.

6. The Pharisees used vain repetitions in Prayer, after the manner of the
Heathen, thinking to be heard for their much speaking, for which our Savior
taxes them, Mat. 6.7. repeating the same things over and over again, not out
of affection, but out of affectation. The same does the Church of Rome,
repeating the same Prayers while they turn their Beads, and binding themselves
to a certain number of reiterated words.

The Pharisees preached Justification by the Works of the Law, and the Jews
were forestalled with that Doctrine, which made S. Paul so careful to confute
that Error in the Epistles to the Romans and to the Galatians, establishing
Justification by Faith, without the Works of the Law. In this the Papists agree
with them, teaching Justification by Works.

8. Our Savior taxes the Scribes and Pharisees for their Hypocrisy. They
pretended great love to the ancient Prophets, Matt. 23.29.
whom their forefathers had persecuted and slain: and to show this, they used
both words and actions. They professed, that if they had lived in the days of
their forefathers, they would not have joined with them in their persecution
and murder of the Prophets. They bestowed cost in adorning the Sepulchers
wherein they were entombed. But now in the mean-time they hated to death, and
bitterly opposed Christ then living among them, to whom all those Prophets bear
witness. Thus may you see in the Papists their bitter hatred against the
Preachers of the Gospel, together with their pretended love to the ancient
Doctors: their proud conceit of Merit with their glorious outward Performances:
their gross Idolatry covered under a show of much reverence to the Saints.

9. The Jews were most strict in matters of smallest moment; they would pay
Tithe of Mint, Annis, and Cummin, but neglected the weightier matters of the
Law, Judgment, Mercy, and Faith, Math. 23.23. So does the Church of Rome
exactly observe distinction of meats, and amuse the people about a thousand
petty Ceremonies of Candles, Pilgrimages, Crossings, etc. and let
Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost stand by unsaluted; yet therein
does the Kingdom of God consist.

Thus the superstitious Priests among the Jews made no scruple to hire a
Traitor, to suborn false Witnesses, to Apprehend, to Bind, to Smite, to
Scourge, to Blaspheme, to Condemn the Innocent Lamb of God, and to Crucify the
Lord of glory; yet made great Conscience not to step over the Threshold into
the Judgment-Hall of an Heathen-Judg, lest (forsooth) they should be defiled,
but that they might eat the Passover, John 18.28. yet this shunning of Pilates
Hall was no Commandment of God. They made no Conscience to give a price for
Innocent blood, but made great scruple of putting it into the Treasury, as
being unlawful. So do the Papists, speaking lies in hypocrisy, forbid
Marriage, and yet allow Stews. They are very severe in enjoining abstinence
from meats, which God has created to be received with Thanksgiving; yet make
no scruple to Stab or Poison the greatest Princes (whom God has forbidden to
be touched) for the promoting of the Catholic Cause, as they varnish over
their own Interest. They will not touch money, nor eat flesh on a Friday, but
will take Rent for Brothel-Houses, and allow Priests an Absolution for defiling
silly Women, laden with diverse Lusts upon a slight Penance; while they make
their taking of Wives to avoid Fornication, to be a damnable sin. They are all
for Sacrifice, nothing for Mercy. A great part of their Religion (as a
Judicious Divine observes) consists in meats and drinks, in days, wherein
they place both Holiness and Necessity, yea merit and perfection. Their Fasts,
Feasts, their Jubilees (at first every fistieth, and of late (because gain is
sweet) every fifteenth year) are all professedly ascribed to the Jewish
Solemnities. Their Priests, Altars, Sacrifices, their Sanctum Sanctorum, are
all an imitation of the Jewish Ordinances. And in the Lateran Church in the
holy of Holies (if ye will believe them) instead of the Tables of the Law, and
the pot of Manna; Circumcisa caro Christi, sandalia chara;
Atque Vmbilici viget hic praecisio clara:
Christ's foreskin circumcised, his sandals dear,
And Navel-string cut off, does flourish there.
Yea at length they have found out Aarons Rod, and put it in an Ark. They have
an High Priest after the manner of Aaron: they have their Unction and
Consecration of Altars, and of all Vessels and Utensils belonging to their
superstitious Devotion.

10. The Pharisees misinterpreted the Law, for which our Savior rebukes them,
Matthew. 5. And what is the singularity of the ordinary Popish School Divinity,
but an adulterated body tempered with the drugs and dregs of human Reason? A
reconciling of S. Paul to Aristotle and Plato, rather than a transferring of
them over unto Paul. There is more Dross than Gold in it, more Poison than
wholesome Food in it; and therefore dangerous to young Students, and raw
Divines, who for want of use and experience have not their senses exercised to
discern both good and evil; nor judgment to discern of things that differ, and
to approve the things that are excellent, and to hold fast that which is good.
Luther complained of the Schoolmen, that they turned usum into utrum, all
practices of Religion into needless Disputes. In the dark times of Popery, when
the truth was almost banished out of the world, then was the world full of
Scholastic curiosities, which Luther calls phiolas illas aureas, the golden
vials of the wrath of God. How have they intruded on things which they have not
seen? The Popish Doctors can tell you punctually, how many Orders and Degrees
there are among the Angels, their very Names, Natures, Offices and Employments;
their Knowledge, their manner of Conference; as if they had traveled as many
years in Heaven, as Lucian did in the orb of the Moon; and can tell as many
stories of them, as Lucian did of that Lunary world: only with this difference,
as one says, that whereas Lucian, although an enemy to Religion, and to God
the Author of it, was yet so ingenious, as to acknowledge in his Book de vera
Historia, his Readers should take nothing for true in it, but only this one
Confession, that in it there was nothing true. The Romanists will have all
their lies taken for truth, and those no less than Divine. They can describe
Paradise, Purgatory, Hell: they can tell you what the Angels, the Virgin Mary,
S. Peter, S. Paul, do in Heaven, and what the cursed fiends do in Hell; how
many years such a one must lie in Purgatory, when he shall be delivered thence,
if his Friends will pay down such a round sum of money. But much more would his
Goodness be extolled, if the Pope would deliver at once all those his Purgatory
prisoners without that simonaical receipt of Money.

FINIS.

