An ACCOUNT OF The last hours Of Dr. PETER du MOVLIN, Minister of Gods Word,
and Professor of Divinity at SEDAN.

Who dyed in the said Town March 10. 1658. Stylo novo.

Translated into English Out of the French Copy printed at Sedan.

Numb. 23.10. Let me dye the death of the righteous, and let my last end be
like his. OXFORD, Printed, by A. L. Printer to the University, for Rich. Davis,
1658.

An account Of the last hours of DR. PETER du MOVLIN Minister of Gods word,
and Professor of Divinity at SEDAN.
SINCE his great hurt by a fall from his horse about three years and a half
before his death he enjoyed no health. Yet did he not give over the exercise of
his charges either in the Church or in the Schools, and very seldom mist
preaching once a week, and reading two Divinity Lectures. All his life time he
was much given to devotion, but in that last sickly time he was so
extraordinarily taken up with holy private exercises that he did almost nothing
else but pray and meditate. He kept to the last hour that neatness of language
wherein he was so eminent, and the readiness of his memory which afforded him
matter of solid discourses upon any subject offered to him in questions,

Upon Tuesday Febr. 26. he awaked in the morning so weak and oppressed in his
breast, that he thought himself not able to preach that day, yet taking heart,
he was led and helped up to the Church. Being got into the pulpit with much
difficulty, he fainted, and some wine being brought to him, he would not taste
it, choosing rather to expect Gods help, then to do any thing which might seem
to border upon indecency. And he was not disappointed of his hope, for after he
had read his text, which was Ps. 16.9. My flesh shall rest in hope, he spoke
with more vigor then he had done of a long time before, and applied the
doctrine to himself giving an account of his faith and hope to his hearers,
taking his leave of them in a manner, and preaching his own funeral Sermon,
as if he had a prophetical knowledge that he spoke the last time to his people
in the Church.

Upon Thursday the last day of Febr. he found his oppression so much increased
in the morning that there was no small fear of a sudden death. Being then
visited by his colleagues who prayed by him, he desired them to remember him
that day (which was a Sermon day) in the prayers of the Church. After the
Sermon a great company flocked to him to bid him farewell, and to receive his
blessing. He looked upon them all, and spoke to them with much facility and
presence of mind. To such as he knew to be of an exemplary life he gave praises
and encouragements to virtue and piety. Those in whose life he knew there was
matter of blame he would not in downright terms rebuke before that great
company, but going about in a discreet way he would (adressing his speech to
them) commend those virtues that were opposite to their vices, and would say to
them that were somewhat given to tricks, that of all crafts, the master-craft
was to be an honest man.

Seeing a blind woman in the company he told her. You want the eyes of the
body, but you have the eye of faith, penetrating as far as heaven. You see
not the light of the Sun, but God will let you see the brightness of his face.

Then turning his eyes upon a Gentleman who was a Roman Catholic, he said,
This is a worthy Gentleman, and speaking to him, he said, Sir, I suffer great
pains, but God will have mercy upon me; I have many ways offended him: Yet my
conscience bears me witness that I never preached or writ any thing but what I
believed to be consonant unto the word of God.

Next, he applied himself to his colleagues, and said, Fare you well, my
Masters, I have that satisfaction in my mind, that I leave this Church in the
hands of persons whom God has endowed with great gifts, and above all, with an
exemplary piety. I make no doubt but that you will carefully look to the
conduct of the flock committed unto you. One of them having answered, The Lord
grant, Sir, that we may imitate you, for you are that good servant who not only
have not buried your Talent, but have very much improved it. You have done good
service in your time, and your labors will live, and do good when you are
gone: He replied, Ah Sir, you know not how much you grieve me by speaking so:
for I have not done all the good that I should have done, and that little
benefit which the Church has reaped by my labor is not from me, but from the
grace of God in me, as it is usual with him to do a good effect by a weak
instrument, I am conscious to my self that I have neglected my duty in many
things, and that I have offended my God; but I have loved his holy truth, and I
hope in his mercy; He is my Father and my God, and Jesus Christ is my Savior;
Whosoever believes on him shall not perish but have everlasting life.

His friends told him that he did himself harm by speaking so much. It is true
(said he) but I will dye glorifying God.

The four or five first days of his sickness he spent in expressions of deep
humiliation. His prayers were vehement, fervent, and full of penitent sorrow.
He acknowledged himself the greatest of sinners, and the most unworthy of the
graces which he had received of God. He abhorred his own ungratefullness,
aggravating his faults, and despising all that others commended in him. Lord
(said he) I have done nothing but deserves punishment. Thou have heaped
blessings upon me, thou have honored me with a holy calling, but I have not
labored according to the great worth of it; I have mingled mine own glory
with thine, I have often neglected thy service to seek my particular interest;
O how much self love, how many perverse affections have opposed the Kingdom of
thy Son within me! How many times have I grieved thy good Spirit by a thousand
idle thoughts and carnal affections! But though it had been but justice in
thee to have crushed me in thy wrath, yet thou have always showed thy self a
merciful and gracious Father unto me. In very faithfulness thou have
afflicted me. Indeed thou have sometimes beaten me with thy most terrible rods,
thou have hid thy face from me for a moment, but thou have remembered me in thy
great compassions.

His devout expressions suffered but little intermission, and his holy
meditations none at all. For if sometimes he was kept silent by a drowzy fit
one might see by the lifting up of his eyes and hands that his heart was with
God. And every time that he resumed his discourse, it was evident that his
speech was but the attendence of a longer meditation.

As when he began thus, Lord thou will do it, thou art faithful in thy
promises, I am thy creature, Thou have led me, and taught me from my youth, O
forsake me not in this last period of my life: Have mercy upon me, my God, my
Father, have mercy upon me, O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord hearken and do,
defer not, for thine own sake, O my God; even for thy Sons sake, who has
loved me and has given himself for me.

That meditation of Gods mercy he did much stretch himself upon, saying. The
mercy of God is infinite as himself no sin so great but may be remitted. How
great was Aarons sin that made the golden calf? How grievous that of David in
the business of Vriah? And that of Solomon (whom God had so highly honored)
whose heart was seduced by the love of strange women to the abominable worship
of false Gods; And yet God said of him, that if he brake Gods statutes and kept
not his commandments, he would visit his trangression with the rod, and his
iniquity with stripes, but nevertheless he would not utterly take his loving
kindness from him. Then making application to himself he cried out, Thou will
pardon me, even me also, O my God; Thou will deliver me from every evil work,
and save me into thy heavenly Kingdom. Let me dye the death of the righteous.
Let me see thy face in righteousness. Let me taste those goods of which thou
have given me many foretasts. -- O how happy a thing it is to live in Gods
fear, and to dye in his peace!

His sickness being violent and his pains sharp, one of the Ministers seeing
how he suffered, bad him to be of good cheer, because the time of his
deliverance drew nigh: How welcome you are to me (said the holy patient) with
that good news! Welcome kind Death. O how happy shall I be to see my God, to
whom my heart has been of a long time aspiring! He will be merciful to me.
Pray to him that he perfect his work in me. The^ feeling his pulse. It is
intermittent (said he) and to another it would presage a sudden death, but my
soul cleaves so fast to this wretched body, that it shall have much ado to
come out of it.

Sometimes the violence of his pains extorted some complaints from him. O Lord,
(said he) lay not too heavy a hand upon thy poor servant. Thou have
sufficiently afflicted me to make me sensible of my sin. Then correcting
himself he added. Nay, Lord, I am far from murmuring against thee; I have kept
my self from that in my long trials. Why? I have deserved infinitely more then
I suffer. Bruise this dust and ashes, my body; and save my precious soul. As
miserable as I am, I would not exchange my condition with that of a King, while
I hope in the grace of my God.

He would be entertained with good discourses, and delighted much that his
friends should help him with those texts of Scripture which were the fittest
to strengthen his faith and raise his hope: And when they began a text he would
end it, and added something to it, or did illustrate it with some
interpretation. As when one told him the words of Jacob, I have waited for thy
salvation, O God; he said; Many of our Doctors by that salvation understand
the temporal deliverances which God did promise his people: but I will apply
it to my self in the same sense as you take it. When the words of the hymn of
Zacharias were used to him of the tender mercy of our Lord whereby the day
spring from on high has visited us. He added presently. Yea it is that Sun of
righteousness with healing in his wings. Likewise when he heard that text of
P. 130. I wayt for the Lord, my soul does wayt, and in his word do I hope, he
said; that word is the promise of the Gospel that whosoever, believes in Jesus
Christ has everlasting life, That is the word which my soul does wayt for.

He had very often the Ps. 51. in his mouth, and insisted especially upon this
verse, The sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit, a broken and a contrite
heart, O God, thou will not despise; and then he would say, That sacrifice, O
my God, I offer unto thee; Thou know my heart, and how it is bruised and
wounded with sorrow that I have offended thee. Forgive me, my God, graciously
forgive me all my sins, deal with me as thou did with the poor Publicane, as
with the humble Canaanitish Woman, as with the converted thief; O let me be
this day with thee in Paradise, crucify the old man within me, kill that man
of sin which is too quick and too strong, and raise me unto newness of life,
that I may behold thy face and be with my savior Jesus Christ.

He had a particular love for the holy tongue; Seeing a Student that was
learned in the same, he desired him to read before him some Psalms in Hebrew:
Then he began to reckon how many names were given to God in the Old Testament,
making learned considerations upon each. Thus passing from one good discourse
to another, he gave occasion to the Student to ask him whether he thought that
Hebrew was the Language used in the Kindome of Heaven: That is not revealed
(said the Doctor) neither do I think that the Language of Heaven is known here
in Earth; but I think that we shall learn it in a moment when God shall be all
in all, and that is that tongue of Angels which St. Paul mentions. This is as
other things which God has prepared for those that love him, things which eye
has not seen, nor ear heard, and which are not come into a man's heart.

The next Lords day morning being visited by the Minister that was to preach in
the morning, he desired him that for his sake the Congregation should sing the
one and fiftieth Psalm, which he would often repeat with a profound
humiliation; He had also the hundredth and thirtieth in his mouth very often,
and the two and thirtieth.

Once having said the first and second Verses of that Psalm: Blessed is he
whose trangression is forgiven, whose sin is covered. Blessed is the man unto
whom the Lord imputes not iniquity and in whose Spirit there is no guile, he
added, Thou know Lord that in sincerity and without guile I humble my self
before thy face: I am a miserable sinner and durst not lift up mine eyes
toward thee, did I not trust both in thy commandment and promise. Such as
labor under the sense of their miseries are those whom thou call, saying,
Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will ease you. O
then let me come unto thee. Draw me Lord that I may run after thee: I am tired,
I am weary to be absent from my God. My soul thirsts for God, for the living
God, when shall I come and appear before God. Alas! I am unworthy of it, for I
am conceived in sin; My whole life has been a continued transgression: yet
far be it from me to doubt of his power and faithfulness. Where sin
abounds his grace abounds much more. It is not for the righteous, but for
repenting sinners that he has given his Son, that whosoever believes on him
should not perish but have life everlasting. Lord I believe, help thou my
unbelief: Increase and strengthen my fuith: It is now weak and small, but it is
true and unfeigned, and stays upon Jesus Christ only: There is no salvation
in any other: he is the way, the truth, and the life; None can come to the
Father but by him. Away with all other intercessions; Away with all merits of
works, all our righteousnesses are but pollutions. Ah my God! I have no
righteousness but thine, for I am conceived in sin. I never did any work so
good but it needs pardon. Mercy, Lord, Mercy. Pardon me my sins, Pardon me my
righteousnesses. Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity and cleanse me from my
sin. Purge me with Hyssope, but let it be dipped in the blood of the Lamb without
blemish and without spot, which takes away the sins of the world. Thou
know, Lord, that I have loved thy holy truth, and that I have believed thy
promises. They are the joy of my heart. They are the comforts which have kept
up my soul from being cast down with sorrow; O God, perfect thy work within me.
Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right Spirit within me. Restore
unto me the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit.

When by too long a bending of his Spirit and voice he found himself, spent and
constrained to intermit these elevations, he would say or cause to be read
before him some Psalms and chose them himself, leaving out those verses which
were not for his present use. As when he said the 6. Psalm, he would go no
further then the 4. verse, Return O Lord, deliver my soul, O save me for thy
mercies sake, then came to the 9. verse: The Lord has heard my supplication,
the Lord will receive my prayer, and then said, All the rest of the Psalm is
not for me; For death is not my fear, but my joy and deliverance from a
languishing life; and I have no enemies.

He that read Psalms to him would also skip over that which was not for the
Doctor's use. And if sometimes he did forget some text fit for his turn, he
would presently take notice of it. As when the 31. Psalm was read to him, He
said to the Reader, you have omitted the fat^est and most convenient text for
me; into thine hand I commit my Spirit; Thou have redeemed me O Lord God of
truth: and you have omitted something about the 11. Verse: I left it out
purposely (said the Reader) because you are not a reproach among your
neighbors, nor a fear to your acquaintance, neither do they that see you, flee
from you. You see that all your Sheep are flocking about you, They bless you
and they crave your blessing. I am not sorry (said the Doctor) That my
Ministry leaves a good savor after me. I beseech God with all my heart that
he send faithful laborers into his harvest, which may do that holy work
better then I: O Lord I have not been diligent as I should have been, but I
have obtained grace to be faithful. For with all the affection of my heart I
have studied to speak and to defend the truth, and I have been grieved with the
affliction of the Church. O Lord purify her from all scandal: Let her be
blessed and let not the adversaries of thy truth triumph over her for ever.

So humble he was, and such a contemner of himself, that he could not abide
those that expressed before his face the great value which they set upon him, or
said any thing to his commendation: And when they came out with some praises,
he rejected them with a kind of indignation. Away (said he) with that flattery,
pray to God that he have mercy upon me.

His sickness was an inflammation of Lungs, with a burning Fever, which
redoubled every day at the same hour. Once coming out of a strong fit, which
had handled him very sore, he said: My God how weary, how tired I am! When
shall I rest in thy bosom? When shall I be filled with the true goods? When
shall I drink in the River of thy pleasures? I am unworthy of it, O my God! but
thou art glorified by doing good to the unworthy. It is not for them that are
whole, but for them that are sick that thy Son the great Physician was sent.
Who so believes on him is past from death to life.

He was compassed about with his family and his chief friends. Every one
comforted him according to his Talent. Being asked by one of them whether he
did not perfectly hope in the grace of God which was presented to him. I hope
(said he) but not perfectly, yet as much as I am able. I suffer now the pains
of death: But God will redeem my soul from the power of the grave for he shall
receive me.

When some comfortable place of Scripture was brought to him, whereby he found
himself strengthened, He would rise to embrace him that spoke it, and being too
weak to do it, he would take his hand and kiss it, giving him some blessing,
and saying, It was the Spirit of God that spoke by your mouth. The Lord bless
you and increase his graces in you.

Another time after an exhortation which had affected him very much, he said,
These are excellent words. The Lord by his grace deeply print them in my heart.

This text of Ephesians. 1. was alleged to him. Blessed be God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us in all spiritual blessings in heavenly
places in Christ. He added the following verse, According as he has chosen us
in him, before the foundation of the World.

Sometimes he was in such a rapture, hearing them that spoke to him of the
excellency of that glory which he was going to possess that he opened his
mouth and his eyes in an exstaticall countenance pronouncing but few words with
great intervalls between, as, O what is it to see Gods face in righteousness!
O when shall I be satisfied with his likeness!

Many times he would say these words of Psalm. 36. How excellent is thy loving
kindness O God! Therefore the Children of men put their trust under the shadow
of thy wings. They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy
house, and thou shall make them drink of the river of thy pleasures. And these
again, For with thee is the fountain of life, and in thy light shall we see
light. And out of the Psalm. 67. Blessed is the man whom thou choosest and
causest to approach unto thee, that he may dwell in thy Courts. We shall be
satisfied with the goodness of thy house, even of thy holy Temple.

Very often he would repeat the 27. the 63. and the 71. Psalm. In the last
staying especially upon these words: O God thou have taught me from my youth,
and hither to have I declared thy wandrous works; Now also when I am old and
gray headed, O God forsake me not.

No day past but he prayed for his Children both present and absent, saying.
The Lord bless them, and give them his peace, his love, and his fear.

Every hour his family did look that he should expire, but he examining his
pulse would say, You shall see me very sick, but I shall not so soon dye.

The four first days of his sickness he spoke both day and night with little
intermission; So that it is impossible exactly to follow the sluency of his
discourse and the fervency of his expressions, especially in his prayers. So
much we relate here as we his diligent hearers can remember, for all this was
spoken before many and worthy witnesses that resorted to him to hear him, and
to learn to dye. But the six last days of his sickness he was for the most
part of the time in a deep slumber, against which he did earnestly strive.
Prick me, said he. Now I should watch. It is not time now to sleep but to dye.
Watch and pray (said my savior) that you enter not into temptation. O great
God, abandon me not to mine infirmities, but so preserve and keep up my Spirit
that I may glorify thee even when I am a dying.

And though after such expressions he fell presently into his slumber, one
might see by his gestures, and by the words which he spoke now and then, that
one might say of him as the spouse said of her self, He was asleep, but his
heart waked. He opened his eyes, He lift up his hands, He said often Lord be
merciful to me, Be gracious to me. Even when he seemed to be deep asleep he
would come out with five or six words, which showed what his mind was set upon.
Death (said he) is swallowed up in victory. And a good space after: It is the
gift of God -- It is my hope -- It is my comfort. Sometimes the same thing came
often to his mind and mouth. For a whole day he would say every time that he
awaked: The Word was made flesh.

When he was too long without speaking his friends were careful to awake him,
to know whether he had sense and knowledge still. Being awaked he was asked
whether he did lift up his soul unto God. He answered Yes, incessantly. He was
asked again whether he would be glad to go to God: O (said he) when shall I see
him, that good God!

He was not much troubled with his slumber in the morning from seven to nine,
because then his fever was less, which used to redouble about nine. In that
intervall he would speak with facility. That intervall was husbanded to comfort
him and to pray by him. He would then hearken to prayers with great attention
and to all the good things that were said to him: And it is observable that in
this his sickness he was less deaf then he had been ten years before.

Many times he would feel his pulse, and then said: O what a grief is this? I
cannot dye. Good God have mercy upon me; Set my soul free. I am weary of being
absent from my God. I desire to depart and to be with Christ. O my God, come
fetch me, shorten the days of my combat. Let me dye I beseech thee. Into thy
hands I commend my Spirit, for thou have redeemed me. O Lord God of truth.

His Chamber was full of people day and night. Once opening his eyes after a
slumber he said: Here is a great company. One answered him. Sir they are your
Sheep that desire you to call for Gods blessing upon them.

The Lord bless them (said he) and give them his fear and the promised
salvation.

The two last days of his sickness added to his burning fever and deadly
slumber contractions of sinews, and convulsions. Every hour was thought to be
his last. None looked to hear him speak any more. All his friends thought that
his deep sleep would end in that of death. But about midnight he opened his
eyes and said to one of them that stood by: I shall soon be eased, I am going
to my Father and my God: He has heard me indeed. And soon after: I go to him
with confidence for he has arrayed me with his robe. Then being raised into an
unexpressible rapture he said, I see him, and with an exclamation, O how
beautiful he is. Being thus exalted in Spirit far above the world, although he
was always tenderly affected toward his family, he said to them that were
there present, putting them far with his hand. I renounce all earthly
affections. I will no more love any thing in the World but thee, O God, who
do alone possess me. After these words he continued a good while in that
holy rapture causing more edification in all the standers by which his
countenance without words, then with all the words which he had spoken before.
His eyes were clear and sparkling, his mouth open and panting after the living
God. His arms stretched up to heaven, and his body striving wonderfully to
rise, as it were to meet and to embrace that beautiful object of his love. All
that were present wished that God would receive him in that happy instant. But
his hour was not yet come.

All the next day, which was Saturday the ninth of March, he struggled with the
agony of death, being tormented with frequent convulsions, and still fighting
the good fight by faith, humility and patience. Toward the evening the tokens
of his approaching death made his assistants to double their endeavors to
comfort him. He understood all that was said to him, and showed holy elevations
in his prayer, he gave thanks to those that prayed, saying, the Lord hear you,
and the Lord bless you.

When he heard the glory at hand extolled in some emphatical terms of
Scripture, he returned into his former raptures. And once more he pronounced
those words of Psalm. 17. I shall be satisfied with thy likeness when I awake.
And twice or thrice Come Lord Jesu, come, come, Lord Jesu, come. And for the
last time that text which he loved so much, He that believes in Jesus Christ
shall not perish, but have everlasting life. Then a little after: Lord Jesu
receive my Spirit. He that comforted him said to him: Sir you shall see your
Redeemer with your eyes. To which he answered with an effort, laying his hand
over his heart, I believe it.

That was the last intelligible word which he pronounced, though he made yet
great efforts to make himself understood, and was a quarter of an hour speaking
with a fervent affection; But the fleames that filled his throat and palate
suffered not the assistants to understant any of his words.

After this he was half an hour without speaking, yet without loosing sense and
knowledge. His friends made the last prayer, during which he did perpetually
lift up his eyes and hands to heaven. And some moments after he quietly gave up
the last breath, dying with peace and joy visible on his face. It was half an
hour after midnight, the tenth of March 1658. in the fourscore and tenth year
of his age.

FINIS.

