THE ANCIENT LAWS, Customs and Orders OF THE MINERS IN THE King's Forest of
Mendipp In the County of SOMERSET.

LONDON, Printed for William Cooper at the Pelican in Little Britain. 1687.

The Laws and Orders of the Mendipp Miners.
BE it known that this is a true Copy of the Enrolled in the King's Exchequer
in the time of King Edward the Fourth, of a debate that was in the County of
Somerset, between the Lord Benfield and the Tennants of Chewton, and the Prior
of Green Oar: the said Prior complaining unto the King of great Injuries and
wrongs that he had upon Mendipp, being the King's Forest, the said King Edward
commanded the Lord Chock, the Lord Chief Justice of England to go down into the
County of Somerset to Mendipp, and sit in Concord and Peace in the said County
concerning Mendipp, upon pain of high displeasure. The said Lord Chock sat
upon Mendipp on a place of my Lords of Bath, called the Forge: Whereas he
commanded all the Commoners to appear, and especially the four Lords Royals of
Mendipp (that is to say) the Bishop of Bath, my Lord of Glaston, my Lord
Benfield the Lord of Chewton, and my Lord of Richmond, with all the appearance
to the Number of ten thousand People. A Proclamation was made to enquire of all
the Company how they would be ordered, then they with one consent made answer,
that they would be ordered and tried by the four Lords of the Royalties; And
then the four Lords Royals were agreed, that the Comminers of Mendipp should
turn out their Cattle at their out-lets as much the Summer as they be able to
Winter, without hownding or pounding upon whose grounds soever they went to
take their course and recourse. To which the said four Lords Royals did put
their Seals, and were also agreed, that whosoever should break the said Bonds
should forfeit to the King a thousand Marks, and all the Comminers their bodies
and goods to be at the King's Pleasure or Command that does either hound or
pound.

The old Ancient Occupation of Miners in and upon Mendipp, being the King's
Forest of Mendipp within the County of Somerset, being one of the four Staples
of England, which have been exercised, used and continued through the said
Forest of Mendipp, from the time where of no man living has not memory, as
hereafter does particularly ensue the Order.
1. FIrst, that if any man whatsoever he be, that does intend to venture his
Life to be a Workman in the said Occupation, he must first of all crave License
of the Lord of the Soil where he does purpose to work, and in his absence of
his Officers as the Lead Reave or Bailiff and the Lord, neither his Officers
can deny him.

2. Item, That after the first License had, the Workman shall never need to ask
leave again but to be at his free will, to pitch within the Forest, and to
brake the ground where and in what place it shall please him to his behalf and
profit, using himself trustily and truly.

3. Item, If any man that does begin to pitch or groof shall have his Hackes
through two ways after the Rake. Note that he that does throw the Hacke must
stand to the girdle or wast in the same groof, and then no Man shall or may
work within his Hackes Throw, provided always that no Man shall or can keep
but his wet and dry Groof and his Mark.

4. Item, That when a Workman have landed his Oar he may carry the same to
cleansing or blowing to what Minery it shall please him for the speedy making
out of the same. So that he does truly pay the Lord of the Soil where it was
landed his due, which is the tenth part thereof.

5. Item, That if any Lord or Officer has once given License to any man to
build, or set up any Hearth or Washing-house, to wash, cleanse or blow Oar, he
that once has leave shall keep it for ever, or give it to whom he will, so
that he does justly pay his Lot Lead, which is the tenth pound, which shall be
blown at the Hearth or Hearths, and also that he does keep it tennantable as
the Custom does require.

6. Item, That if any man of that Occupation does pick or steal any Ledd or
Oar to the value of thirteen pence halfpenny, the Lord or his officer may
arrest all his Lead works, House and Hearth, with all his Groofs and Works, and
keep them as safely to his own use, and shall take the Person that has so
offended, and bring him where his House is, or his Work, and all his Tools or
Instruments to the Occupation belongs as he uses, and put him into the said
House and set fire on all together about him, and banish him from that
Occupation before the Miners for ever.

7. Item, If that Person does pick or steal there any more, he shall be tried
by the Law, for this Law and Custom has no more to do with him.

8. Item, That every Lord of the Soil ought to keep two Miner Courts by the
year, and to swear twelve Men of the same Occupation, for the redress of
Misdemeanors touching the Mineries.

9. Item, That the Lord or Lords may make and grant manner of Arrests (viz.)
first for strife between Man and Man, for their Works under the Ground or
Earth. Secondly for his own dutys for Lead or Oar, wheresoever he finds it
upon the same Forest.

10. Item, That if any man by means of Misfortune take his death, as by falling
of the Earth upon him, by drawing or stifeling, or otherwise, as in time past
many have been, the Workmen of the same Occupation are bound to setch him out
of the Earth, and to bring him to Christian Burial at their own costs and
charges, although he be forty Fathom under the Earth, as heretofore has been
done, and the Coroner or any officer at large shall not have to do with him in
any respect.

FINIS.

