A LOYAL TEAR Dropped on the VAULT OF THE High and Mighty PRINCE CHARLES II.

Of Glorious and Happy Memory.

2 Chronicles. 35. 24. -- And all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah.

By HENRY ANDERSON, M. A. Vicar of Kingsumborne in Hampshire.

LONDON, Printed for Luke Meredith at the Kings Head in St Paul's Churchyard.
1685.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND RIGHT REVEREND FATHER in GOD, PETER Lord BISHOP of
WINTON, AND PRELATE of the GARTER.
MY LORD,
THE actings of Providence are no less various than unsearchable, and it is
both a pleasant and pious Employment to observe and meditate on Gods miraculous
proceedings with Mankind. For Providential Dispensations are discoveries of the
Wisdom and Goodness of God in disposing of the conditions of his People,
whereby they may best glorify him in whatever befalls them in this Temporal
Life; because a true Christian does as seriously study the Celestial Sphere and
occurrences of Divine Providence, as others do the Terrestrial Globe of this
Corruptible Earth. And since it has pleased Almighty God to speak to this
Nation and Kingdom by the Messenger of Death, in taking to his infinite Mercy
our late Gracious Sovereign King Charles, it must be acknowledged the bounty of
a Divine Hand, and we are bound to adore the Wisdom and Benignity of Heaven, as
S. Hierom suggested to Paula concerning the Death of Blaesilla, whatsoever a
good God does, cannot be bad; therefore we must submit to the Divine Providence
in translating that blessed Prince to a more glorious station, to a Kingdom
that cannot be shaken, which is above all possibility of decay, being
incorruptible, and fades not away, Eternal in the Heavens. Though the gain be
his, yet the loss is ours; for when a good Prince dies, a general damp and
consternation seises the hearts of all Loyal Subjects, because public Calamity
charges every Man with a rate of sorrow proportionable to the tenure of his
understanding; and the Memory of his late Majesty may justly oblige all his
People to an excess of Tears as a signal of grief, and Your Lordship comes in
as a Chief Mourner, who has had the Emanations of his Royal Favor, which
incourages my confidence to implore Your Lordships Patronage: whereunto if you
will vouchsafe to give the least approbation, I shall not despair of the more
favorable Censures of others; and therefore it entreats Your Candid
Interpretation and Acceptance of these Dedicatory Lines, as a sincere Testimony
of my Duty. And that Your Lordship would be pleased to place me in the number
of those that honor Your true Worth, not only as to Episcopal Jurisdiction
inspecting the Flock, over which the Holy Ghost has made You Overseer, but
also to Your Bounty and Liberality, which sounds as far as your Name* and
displays the Ensign of Your Dignity, worthy of double Honor: for Your Generous
and Brave Mind, al* must needs acknowledge and pay You Homage and Obeisance, as
Joseph's Brethren did to him, with the greatest Veneration; in which respect
(my most honored Diocesan) I am no less than

Your Lordship's most Obedient Son, and humble Servant, HENRY ANDERSON.

A LOYAL TEAR Dropped on the VAULT OF THE High and Mighty PRINCE CHARLES II.
THE frequent Objects of Mortality, even of the greatest Monarchs, daily
presented before our Eyes, should make us carefully to manage the moments of
our Mortal Life, Walking circumspectly, not as Fools, but as Wise, (...),
redeeming the time, because it is enacted by the Statute Law of Heaven, semel
mori, and written indelibly in the Dust, That all must Dye. If Adam had stood
in his Primitive Glory, and not fell from his Original Purity in the state of
Innocence, we had not known what Death or Misery had meant, but continued a
piece of Immortality to this very Genesis 3. 19.
Day: but Adam in an instant after he had sinned became Mortal, no sooner Sin
entered into his Soul, but mortality and corruption immediately entered into his
Body; then the parcels of Dust that were bound together by the bond of
innocence, were shaken loose by the grosser spots of Sin our first Parents
disobedience contracted, and involved their Posterity in a Labyrinth of
Miseries, and our Misery is not of yesterday, but as ancient as the first
Criminal, and our perplexities almost coaeval with Genesis 2. 17.
Humane Nature. The Day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely Dye, viz. thou
shall be guilty of Death, and thy Body shall that very hour become Mortal,
subject to infinite number of Chances, Diseases, and Old Age, continually
decaying unto the last Destruction of this Bodily Mass, languishing to its
fatal period, and hastening to the dark Cells of the Grave, which are the (...)
dormitories and sleeping Places of the Dead, till the joyful Morning of the
Resurrection. Death insults over the frailties of Mankind, for all the Tombs
and Charnels of the World are but so many Monuments of Deaths Conquests, and
the instability of Humane Greatness, how all things on this side Heaven are
fleeting and transitory. If I should procure you a Painter to pencil Death, he
would show you a grim Anatomy, with a lean Body, a pale Face, and a wann
Countenance, etc. That which has devoured the World so many times over (like
Pharaoh's lean Kine) is as lean as ever. The Bell still toles for the
voluptuous Epicure; and the Earth, that insatiable Grave, longs for his
corpulent Body to feast Worms. The swift motion of the Heavens roles up the
thread of our Lives, and the fleet Horse on which Death runs is still posting
after us. Crowns nor Scepters cannot secure from the Artillery of Death. There
is no confidence to be placed in Humane Prosperity; for neither Kingdom,
Empire, nor any Greatness whatsoever can secure their owners from ruin. Behold
Andronicus clothed in Purple, adored by Nations, commanding the East, his
Temples enriched with a Royal Diadem, the Imperial Scepter in his Hands, and
his very Shoes studded with Oriental Gemms, yet pays his Life as Tribute to
Death: so that the Majesty of the greatest Monarchs are subject to perish.
Think upon this seriously, that the Gates of Death are ever open, and the Enemy
lies continually in ambush to assault u^; nay, there is not a Vein, or Artery,
but is a Room in Natures Workhouse, wherein our humors (as so many Cyclops's)
are forging those Instruments of Mortality, and in an instant hurry us into our
Graves. Every Day, Hour, and Moment, wears away a part of our Life, and so much
as is already spent, so far we are already Dead. So that the longest liver (as
the Antediluvian Patriarchs witness) is no more but only Genesis 5. Heb. 9. 27.
longer a dying than others. It is appointed, says the Apostle, (...), unto
Men once to dye, but after this to Judgment, where they shall receive for the
deeds Eccl. 12. 14.
of the Body, whether it be good or evil. They that have done good to the
resurrection of life, and they that have done evil unto eternal damnation. This
proclaims our happiness or misery, and as it tells the danger, so in all reason
it should awaken our care: but Heaven and Hell are Vtopia's in conceit, says
the Atheist, and no where exist but in melancholy distempered Brains. The joys
of the one promised to a virtuous and holy Life are only pleasant Fancies, and
torments of the other denounced against Vice and Impiety but fearful Dreams.
Our Savior, who knows it best, has described unto us the management of the
whole affair, and the different Portions of the good and bad. When the son of
man, says Matt. 25. 31.
St Matthew, shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with him; all
nations shall be gathered before his throne, 32.
and he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divides his sheep
from the goats. To the good the King Ib. 34.
shall say, Come ye blessed; a Benediction far surpassing that of the old
Patriarchs, and putting down the dew of Hermon, which dispersed it self over
the Mountain of Sion. Here thou shall dwell for ever in a Land flowing with
Milk and Honey of Divine Blessing, abounding with the Bread of Angels and
Heavenly Manna, freed from all Captivity by the presence of our Lord. But unto
41.
the Wicked, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. Be gone thou cursed Fig Tree, thou art not worthy to take Root in
blessed Earth, to have any place in the Garden of my delight; and they are not
only eternally exiled from the Glorious Residence of Heaven, but their Doom is
sealed up to infernal Flames, delivered over into the power of the Dragon,
without all hopes of escaping from him, who will seize upon their Souls, and
carry them to the Abyss of Hell, there to be tormented for ever. And these
shall go, says M(...) 25. 46. Dan. 12. 2.
the Evangelist, into everlasting punishment, but the righteous into life
eternal. Men being adjudged rewards and punishments in a future state or life
to come, suitable to their actions in this World, was a general resentment among
the Heathens, as Justin Martyr truly tells the Greeks in his Oration to them,
That not only the Prophets, and other Divine Persons of the Old Testament, but
also those that were accounted wise among the Heathens, both Poets and
Philosophers, did acknowledge a Judgment to come after Death. If the thoughts
of the Worlds last Day, filled St Hierom's Heart with such a dread as made him
lose both his food and repose, because the voice of the Archangels Trumpet
sounded incessantly in his imagination, surgite mortui, and venite ad judicium,
Arise ye Dead, and come to Judgment: What weight should that Eternal Doom have
in all our Hearts, that shall crown the Just with Glory and Immortality, but
involve the Wicked in quenchless flames. Death is (...), said an Heathen
Philosopher, which in Job's Language may be rendered, the King of Terrors. 18.
14.
Nature shrinks when we see the pale-horse of Death approaching. It is a sharp
corrosive to most Men and Women in the World, when they think of the separation
of these dear Companions, the Soul and Body, the two constitutive parts of Man.
His breath goes forth, says the Psalmist, there is the egress of the one; and
he returns to his Earth, there is the regress of the other; the one is verified
in ipso articulo mortis, in the very point of Death; the other is most evident
in sepultura corporis, at the time of Burial: they have slept their sleeep, and
all the Men whose hands were mighty have found nothing. The Life of Man is but
of little value, and all his Honor but contemptible, because Mortality is the
disgrace of all sublunary things. With David, the Psalmist Royal, Psalm. 146. 4.
I may call him a vain shadow; and with the Holy Prophet, less than nothing,
and altogether lighter than vanity it self, were it nor for Eternity. Consider
now the Day is far spent, the Night is hastening and spreading its wings over
us, the Grave expects us and bids other Corpse make room. Death is ready to
grasp us in its cold Arms, and hale us to the dreadful Tribunal, and yet how
little of our great Work is done; we burn away our precious Days, and miserably
wast our light and Life; we exhaust our strength, and lavish out our affections
on fond Toys and Nothings, as if Eternity were to be expected here, and none
hereafter. Is the blind and the lame a sacrifice for the great God? shall we
devote the flower of our Youth to Vanity and Folly? and can we think the
Majesty of Heaven will accept of the frozen and cold affections of decrepit Old
Age? he may surely say, go to the Gods that ye have served, therefore let us
remember our Creator in the morning of our Youth, not Eccl. 2. 1
consuming our Days in Vanity, and Years in Folly, letting the delights and
pleasures of this World, steal away our Hearts and Affections from God our
Maker, drawing us from true Happiness. The young Man may rejoice, but not so as
to forget his Creator, and if they live many years and triumph in them all, yet
let them consider the days of darkness. It is not Crowns Imperial, nor Thrones,
nor Diadems, that can escape the great Assize. The last judgment is such a day,
as neither Wisdom, nor Riches, nor Honors can deliver them from it. The
Minions of the world may brave it awhile as the only Favorites and Darlings of
the age, they may swim in a stream of Gold, and tumble Eccl. 11. 9.
in Arabian Spices, but know for all these things God will bring you into
judgment: therefore the vast concernments of an everlasting state requires the
most serious thoughts and consideration both of Prince and People. Every object
should read something to our observation either of our own mortality, or excite
us to piety and holiness, that so by the memory of death we may learn to live
in Gods holy fear, that we may die in his favor, and dwell in those
everlasting habitations of glory and happiness. The Romans of old did put a
Sergeant in the triumphal chariot to keep the Conqueror amidst all his triumphs
within bounds of moderation and sobriety of Spirit, by crying to him, Memento
te esse mortalem, Remember thou art a mortal Man. Philip King of Macedon
directed his Page to call at his chamber door with this morning Salutation,
Memento mori, Remember death, and so put him in mind, that in the midst of all
enjoyments they are still but Stewards, and know not how soon our Lord may
summon us to appear at the great Audit. Saladine also the puissant Emperor of
Persia, who had extended the limits of his Empire by many victories and
successful battles, and being in no pitched field ever vanquished or overcome,
at last falling mortally sick, caused one of his chief Commanders to hang his
Winding sheet on a staff, and to proclaim in the streets of Persia, This is all
he can have of his many conquests, nisi parva quod urna capit, but what may
suffice to bury him. The Jews likewise, who were of the greater and better
sort, had their Sepulchers in their Gardens, that in the midst of their
pleasures they might be mindful of Death, and to be unto them as monitors of
their mortality: So while we are contriving our profits and pleasures, our
employments and recreations, and sharing out our lives among them, let us not
forget how easily we may be cut off by the sudden and surprising strokes of
death. Fabius the Roman Senator was suffocated with a hair in a little milk.
Pope Adrian by a gnat flying into his mouth. Anacreon the Poet swallowed death
in a grape. Homer also was murdered by a fit of grief. And Sophocles died of an
excess of joy. Death may possibly fly to us, as once to Aeschylus in an Eagles
wing, or fall like Pindarus by our repose, or else we may be snapped in pieces
by some sad accident, and the thread of our Life worn away by a languishing
Consumption, and burnt asunder by a violent Fever, benumbed with Palsies,
Lethargies, Epilepsies, Convulsions, and other innumerable diseases, that cause
the dissolution of our earthly Tabernacle, and bring us into Job's Lineage, I
have said to the Grave thou Job 17. 14.
art my house, to Corruption thou art my Father, Brother to the Worms, and
Sister to the Dust. If we contemplate the nature of things, we may see how
nothing is without the Empire of death; the day dies into night, and the Summer
into Winter; the life of to day is the death of yesterday: we die daily, and it
is great ignorance to think the greatest Potentates are exempt from the common
ruin. Every little public, or personal Cross is a petty death, and a
Harbenger sent by that insatiable enemy of humane nature to take possession of
his right. An Apoplexy in the Brain, an Inflammation or Quinsie in the Throat,
a violent eruption or sudden Rising of the Lights, may quickly dispatch us, and
cause us in an instant to die and shut the great Gulf of Eternity, and
Eternity at one draught swallows up the fluency of time, and is above the
temporal conditions of past, present and to come. Man is a compound of jarring
qualities, heat, cold, drought and moisture, which are always wageing an
intestine war within him, so that poor mortals are subject to desolation every
moment. For the truth of this, let us search the Records of the Grave, there
lies the rich and the poor, the wise and the foolish, the learned and
unlearned, the Noble and Ignoble, even the rubbish of a thousand generations
heaped up one upon another. Our very Graves were once living, we dig through
the veins of our Forefathers, and we must shortly become earth to bury our
Posterity, therefore let us learn the necessity of dying, for amongst all Arts
and Sciences whatsoever, there is none in comparison, more beseeming our
Christian care, than that which teaches us to live righteously and godly here,
that afterward we may live eternally when we depart hence, and be happy in the
Regions of bliss in the world to come. Life is a spot of time between two
Eternities, and it is an act of the greatest prudence to pray for Divine
Arithmetic to number our days and apply our hearts to wisdom, and contemplate
with our selves of the uncertainty of life, that our hearts may be lifted up to
desire the Heavenly inheritance. It is but a small remnant of time we have to
live, our Days are but a span long, while we turn our selves, Immortality will
be here. Abraham had not in the Land of Canaan any Ground of his own to dwell
in, but only the Inheritance of a Sepulcher. And this is that we may truly
claim, for we are Sojourners as all our Fathers were in Houses of Clay (as
Eliphaz Job 4. 19.
the Temanite fitly calls them) whose foundation is in the dust, because the
claims of honor can give no privilege from the Arrests of the grim Sergeant
Death.

Pallida mors aequo pulsat pede pauperum tabernas,
Regumque turres --
If Majesty or Greatness could have staid the violent hands of Death, we had
not condoled the Funeral Obsequies and mournful Solemnity of the Royal Charles;
but as the Painter Tymanthes being to express Agamemnon's Grief, conceived for
the loss of his Daughter Iphigenia, drew him with his Face covered over with a
Vail, that Men might conceive that sorrow which he could not express: So in the
rehearsal of our present sufferings, who can express that Grief of Heart the
English Nation is plunged in for the Death of the High and Mighty Prince
Charles our most Dread Sovereign? who has not a Vail cast over their Face in
token of a great dejection, paying the tribute of Sorrow to his Memory, which
they owed of Love and Allegiance to his Person? Our Royal Joshua, and all the
Elders of our Israel, the King and Kingdom, put on Sable Colors as it fit for
Mourners, all wearing the Blacks of Sadness, pouring forth their Souls into
melting Accents, showing it self in Sobs and Sighs, and commenting on it with
Tears for a forced Separation, -- quis talia fando
Temperet a lachrymis.
In the fall of this Royal and Stately Cedar: for as the Apple Tree among the
Trees of the Wood, so was He among Cant. 2. 3.
the Sons of Men.

First, The Apple Tree as it is a good flourishing and beautiful Tree, and it
does not only bud and blossom, but bring forth Fruit: So this Royal Tree, that
is cut down by the Axe of Death, whilst it stood was beautiful and flourishing;
His Converse gave his Nobles a pattern of harmless and inoffensive Mirth, a
sweetness and familiarity that at once gained Love and preserved Respect in all
his Subjects; a Nobility and Grandeur safe in its own Worth, not maintaining it
self by a morose distance, but comporting with the greatest Majesty: so that
Gallantry and Bravery of Spirit and Deportment were the Buds of this Royal
Tree; thus Virtue and Honor become Rivals, and Vice and Baseness become
extinct. Pure Oil cannot mingle with Water, nor the extracted quintessence of
true Nobleness with the dregs of unworthiness; and so Clemency, sweetness of
Nature, and candor of Disposition, were the buds and blossoms of this Royal
Tree.

Tam been convenient, and in una sede morantur
Majestas and Amor --
He fettered them with Goodness, this Chain's stronger
Than that made out of Brass, and does last longer.
This is a double Conquest, which does bind
The Soul in Chains, and captivate the Mind.
Thus was he a mighty Sovereign in the hearts of his People, ruling all his
Dominions with the Scepter of his Clemency and Tenderness, which is the most
amiable thing to Mankind. And who is it that can disparage that commendable
ornament of civil and decent demeanor, it being congruous to the simplicity of
the Gospel, which aggrandizes the renown of this mighty Monarch to the most
wise, and perpetuates his worth with the remembrance of honor. These
qualifications meeting with a brave and aspiring mind conquered men, and killed
envy with the Majesty of a look,

-- and with a gentle glance
Could pierce more hearts than e're the spear or lance:
Affections were his Rents whose wisdom knew
How to disarm whole troops, how to subdue
Proud Forts, to make strong Bulwarks yield and move,
And in an instant on his Subjects Love
TO erect new Trophies where his name shall dwell
Guarded from malice and each Furies spell.
O think what a Potent Oratory there is in Princely Clemency! Who would not be
captivated by so sweet a Conqueror? Who would not be melted in so delicate a
Flame? What Heart would not entertain so pleasant an Arrow? It struck through
the Hearts of all his Liege People; and they as faithful Subjects returned the
streams of Loyalty and Love, Duty and Obedience unto the Ocean whence it
flowed. Clemency and Tenderness in Princes, does not only cast a Glorious
Luster round about, attract the Eyes and Hearts of others, but it also reflects
with cheerful and comfortable Gleams on Majesty it self: for Man being designed
by God for a sociable Creature, has such propensions and inclinations as are
proper to that end; and these are gratified and pleased, when they so demean
themselves as may answer that intention. Mercy and truth, says the Royal
Philosopher, Prove. 20. 28.
preserve the King, and his throne is established by mercy. It is the splendid
Diadem of the Crown of Heaven; and therefore the greatest Glory of Temporal
Sovereignty. It is the Goats Milk of mild Mercy, not the hard stroke of the
Hammer, that dissolves the Adamantine Heart. It is the warm sparks of Charity
and Love, not the frost of a frowning Brow, that makes the Icy obdurate
Conscience to melt and drop into Tears. It was the soft still Voice, not the
Whirlwind and Earthquake, that caused Elias to cover his face with his
mantle; therefore this Pious Prince qualified all violent administrations and
corrosive notions with the antidotes of Mercy: so that Clemency and Tenderness,
Sweetness and Candor of Disposition were the Buds and Blossoms of this Royal
Tree, while he reigned and flourished upon Earth; therefore it may be said of
this Pious Prince, what the Son of Sirach did of Judas Maccabeus, His memorial
is and shall be blessed for ever. It is true what Fame reported him, he was a
most excellent Monarch, and the Life of the Deceased hangs on the File of
Memory, and registered in the remembrance of the Living; his Royal
Accomplishments, like Bullion new coined, having the stamp of Majesty upon it,
will be transmitted to Posterity and Generations to come.

Secondly, The Apple Tree has great variety, it is not an easy matter to
reckon the several Apples of different taste: So neither can we the rare and
singular Perfections, and Theological Graces, Excellencies and Endowments of
this Pious Prince, all harmoniously mixed, which speaks great variety. Some
indeed owe their innocence to their dullness and stupidity, and are not vicious,
because not witty enough to be takingly and handsomely wicked; but here it is
far otherwise, as will appear from the quickness of his Parts and Ingenuity,
his Activity and Motion, Wisdom and Prudence meeting in him, with all other
Virtues and Excellencies mutually embracing each other. And the Endowments of
his Mind will give it a clear illustration, his Apprehension was quick and
pierceing, his Memory faithful and retentive, his Fancy sprightly and active,
and his Judgment overruling them all; neither prejudicated by vulgar Opinions,
nor easily cosen'd by varnished and plausible error. He was an Angel clothed
in Flesh, a lawful Image of his Maker, a model of Heaven made up in Clay, a
living Temple of the Holy Ghost, a Patron of Christianity, and a most tender
Nursing Father of the Church and People of England. He was Pater Patriae,
Father of Gods Israel, and Defender of the Faith: for Religion, says Plato, is
the Bulwark of Laws and Authority, the Fountain of Justice and Fidelity, and
all other Virtues. Religion is the Pillar on which the great Fabric of the
Microcosm stands, and all Humane Societies, and Civil Associations, are
united by this Holy Cement in the Bands of Concord, Unity, and Love. The Nation
in the Reign of this Piou sPrince was enriched with all Regal Blessings, as
does illustriously appear in the Peace of his Kingdoms, the Serenity of his
People, the Tranquillity of Public Affairs, the growing Riches of his
Subjects, and universal Happiness of his Government both in Church and State
ever since his Majesty's Happy Restoration, which we have peaceably enjoyed
many Years, and owe the Happiness of it (under God) to his Goodness and
Conduct: his Majesty therefore having done so much for his People, and pursued
them with such unparalleled instances of Clemency and Tenderness, it now
remains on us, not only to retain a grateful Memory, and Hearts full of Duty
and Allegiance to his Heir and Successor, but to bless God for setting so
Gracious a King to Reign over us.

Carolus de Carolo erit major Carolo Magno.
The Meekness of Moses, and Wisdom of Solomon, the Affability of David, and
Friendliness of Jonathan, the Liberality of the Emperor Titus, and Goodness of
Constantine, all these lovely Qualities and Graces were resplendent and shining
in this Great and Mighty Monarch, putting on Righteousness as a Garment, and
Judgment like a Robe and a Diadem. And the King, who is the Supreme, is not
like the Sun, which by his motion carries his light through his whole Circuit;
but he is like the Sea, having all fullness in it self, sends from it self
Fountains and Rivers to water all the Continent, where the Sea it self cannot
come; which shows him a most Gracious Sovereign, and calls on the House of
David, the House of Nathan, the House of Levi, and all the Elders of our
Israel, and every Family, to the House of Mourning to bear a part of the sad
Chorus of England's Sorrow, weeping out Elegies and Lamentations for the Death
of our good King of Blessed and Immortal Memory.

Thirdly, The Apple Tree is a most fruitful Tree. So this Royal Tree while he
Reigned, Flourished upon Earth, brought forth his Fruit in Season; the Fruits
of Piety and Holiness to God, long Suffering, Meekness, and Charity, or
Tenderness to all his People.

1. His Piety. Religion is the fair Daughter of the Almighty, and that Immense
Being has planted it in the Heart of Man, to direct us in our way to Heaven. It
is the universal Patrimony which entitles us to be the Sons of God, and by
which we are Adopted unto the assured Hope of Life and Immortality. It is the
most Sacred Anchor which upholds Church and State; for without the knowledge
and fear of a Deity, all things would run into disorder and Confusion; without
an opinion of Providence to see and reckon with us, Might, Craft, and Falsehood
would sway alike with Men and Beasts, and the Conscience of good and Evil would
be all one. Religion then is the Loadstone with which when our Souls are once
touched, they are directed to the right Pole of the beatifical Vision, and
without which we must infallibly expect to split against the Rocks of Eternal
Perdition; therefore this Pious Prince did think it the greatest Character of
his Glory to be truly Religious toward God, and to preserve the Honor of the
Divine Majesty in his own Soul, because in a pure Conscience Gods Face is to be
seen, and no where else on Earth. It is the Mountain of Transfiguration where
we may see the Kingdom of God. This is the only Isle Patmos where are the
Visions and Revelations of the Son of Man. It is the Garden God walks in. It is
the Temple that the Holy Ghost dwells in, the Golden Pot, the hidden Manna is
laid up in it. It is Gideon's Fleece which all the Dew of Heaven falls on; for
he that has a pure Heart, and clear Hands, washed not in Water but Innocence,
may with Holy David compass Gods Altar; their Walks are in a Wood dropping
Honey, their Dwellings on a Mountain of Myrrh, and Lodging on a Bed of Spices.
We read in Holy Writ that the Sun and Moon speak loud, their sound is gone out
into all the Earth; but yet a holy and virtuous Life speaks louder, Psalm. 19. 1.
the sound of it is heard in Heaven, and causes Joy among the Angels. The
sound of it also goes out to the Earth, and fills the Mouths of Men with
Gladness and Rejoicing. It is the manifestation of Grace and Virtue, which
makes the Lord to be admired in them who fear him. This opens every ones Eyes,
and causes all to confess that God is in them of a Truth: practiced Piety is
the most persuading Oratory to Piety and Godliness, and all Virtue. They who
live in the unfruitful Works of Darkness dishonor their Maker, it is only the
Trees of Isal. 61. 8.
Righteousness which Glorify him: so says our Savior, Herein is my Father
glorified, when you bring forth much John 25 8.
Fruit. I need not mention Abraham's Faith, nor Job's Patience, Elias's Zeal,
David's Uprightness, or Moses's Meekness: these things are writ for our
Learning; not only for our remembrance and speculation, but for our practice
also and imitation. Every Grace, and every Virtue of a Christian, is a real
Sermon to convince the World of its Impiety. The Pious Man's Devotions confute
Atheistical Profaneness. The Chaste Man's Behavior teaches the wanton Modesty,
and the Sober Man's Carriage declaims against Excess, and bespeaks Sobriety to
the Intemperate. The Meek Man's Conversation preaches Mercy to the furious Ones,
and so it is the pious manifestation of Grace and Virtue for which Men bless
God, and the abundant Grace bestowed on our late Gracious Sovereign, his
admirable Courage, Piety, and Patience in the greatest Agony of his Sufferings,
and with earnest Prayer and Supplication, desiring the dissolution of his
Earthly Tabernacle, speaks him the most Christian King, and that Sanctity and
Piety as Fruit did grow on this Royal Tree. These were the Principles of his
Piety and Religion on which this Mighty Monarch served God, with Fasting and
Prayer (like Anna the Prophetess) Night and Day in the Temple, and with Fear
and Reverence worshipped God in his Holy Sanctuary; therefore praise waits
upon him in the Gate, for the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, a
good understanding have all they that do thereafter. For the knowledge of God
is the Philosophers Stone in Divinity, by it we may turn all events into Golden
Advantages to our Souls. This is the Knowledge that speeds our passage to
Eternal Glory, that is the shortest cut to Immortal Happiness; and the truest
Honor is inveloped in this rich Mantle of Wisdom, in that it appears God
himself is the Grand Teacher thereof. Our Wise Solomon, as a prudent Deputy
under God, and a worthy Successor of a Blessed Father, served the God of his
Father with a perfect Heart and a willing Mind, and performed all things in
order according 2 Chronicles. 8. 14.
to the commandment of David the man of God. And it is also the commendation of
his late Majesty, as of 2 Chr. 35. 24.
other good Kings, Asa, Jehosaphat, Hezekiah and Josiah, that they did that
which was right in the Eyes of the Lord, as did David their Father. Now as all
Judah and Jerusalem mourned for their good King Josiah; should not the tide of
Englands sorrow swell so high for Britain's Josiah, King Charles the Second,
seeing the parallel consideration is as full of Equity, and transforms us into
Niobes, making our Heads Rivers of Waters, and our Eyes Fountains for continual
Tears?

2. His Princely Goodness to all his People, is evidenced,

First, In the rare Christian Grace of Humility: though he was the fountain of
Honor, and advanced above others, shining like the Sun in the lower Firmament,
bright with Rays of Glory and Greatness; yet he did not soar on the wings of
Pride and Ambition, either fondly to disdain the meanest of his Subjects, or
proudly to lord it over others: nor yet did the Greatness of Majesty make him
forget his Parentage or Mortality, or to derive his Pedigree from the
Offspring of Death: But this illustrious Prince as the Son of Wisdom, and it
is justified of her Children, did know he was cast of the same Mould with those
of a lower Species; and though he did sit as a God, in respect of Imperial
Authority, yet he must die like Man, and rest also in the Bed of Silence, and
by necessary consequence not neglect holy and serious preparation for it. Thus
may we discover his Christian Piety by the Virgin-temper of Humility, walking
in the Steps of his Blessed Savior and Redeemer, beholding him from his Cradle
at Bethlehem to his Cross at Jerusalem as a mirror of Humility. And this Pious
Prince, as a Noble Imitator of his Lord, followed the Grand Exemplar of the
Christian Religion, who bids us learn of him to be meek and lowly, therefore he
was clothed Matt. 11. 29. 1 Pet. 5. 5. Jam. 4. 6.
with Humility, as the Apostle speaks, and had it written in the Table of his
Royal Heart, God resists the proud, but gives grace to the Humble, which now
is consummated with Glory; for he wants not the envied Crowns of this World,
having exchanged the shadows of an Earthly Kingdom for one Eternal in the
Heavens, wearing the Crown of Righteousness and Perseverance in a better World.

Secondly, His admirable Patience or Long-suffering. In Long-suffering, says
one of the Ancients, the Lord does inhabit. This sublime Spirit indeed
possessed the Royal Breast of his late Majesty, which raised him above the
ordinary Rank of Mankind in a truly Pious Patience under the greatest
Sufferings. His Christian Meekness, Compassionate Kindness, Tenderhearted
Charity, and Pious Patience against all injuries, declare him not only one of
the greatest Worthies of the English Nation, but the Best of Kings, and shows
that Religion and Virtue, as Fruit, did grow on this Royal Tree. We may without
Sword or Fire become Martyrs, if we have Patience in our Hearts. For true
Patience carries with it a singular property, that Satan has not the power to
attain so much as a shadow of it, (...), he is always in Impatience; Patience
is too beautiful for his deformed Nature and crooked disposition, being a
composition of all those lovely Virtues and Graces of the Holy Spirit, to which
he is a perfect stranger. To die by a Persecutor, it s Martyrdom in open work;
but to suffer injuries, and love our hater, it is Martyrdom in heart. Let
Baptism be your Armor, Faith your Helmet, Love your Spear; but (...), Patience
Cap-a-pe, your whole Armor of defense, it is the sweetest Salve to mishap, or
desire of revenge, the truest Remedy of Injuries, and the Shield against
Wrongs, because, through Patience in well-doing, we seek for Glory and Honor,
Life and Immortality. It is great Fortitude, if being hurt, to forgive. It is
great Glory if thou might punish, and yet to Pardon. This was one of the
Gemms in the Crown of his late Majesty, that he exercised a Sovereignty over
all his Subjects with a rejoicing and delightful kind of Patience, which does
eternize his Memory, and blazon his Honor to Posterity, even his auspicious
and most gentle Government; and Chronicle will free me from the least tincture
of flattery, if any think I am beyond the bounds either of Sincerity or Truth.
Now if the Prophet Jeremiah composed the whole sorrowful structure of his
Lamentations on the mournful Obsequies of the Good King Josiah, shall not the
English World weep out Elegies, and condole the Death of the Royal Charles, the
light of our Eyes, and breath of our Nostrils, of whom we said, under his
shadow we shall live among the Heathen.

Thirdly, His wonderful Beneficence or Christian Charity displays it self,

First. In forgiving his Enemies, when they had forsaken their Allegiance by
acts of Rebellion, and his late Majesty could have crushed them with the Hand
of Greatness; yet he made an act of Indemnity or Oblivion the vehicle of his
Kindness, which speaks his Kingly Beneficence, that he was a Patron of Goodness
and Charity, and gives us occasion to discern how transporting a delight it is
to a Noble and Generous Mind, to be an Instrument of good to others. As the
bountiful light in the Body of the Sun, illuminates and beautifies all the
Orbs, and Heavenly Bodies about it; by the projection of its beams, it begets
all the Beauty, Glory, Sweetness, we have here below on the Earth, and it is so
communicative of doing good, as it never restrains the free Communication of
its Influence and Glory, until it determine by natural and necessary
expiration: Even so proportionably his late Majesty, as the Sun, did cherish
and enliven Terrestrial Bodies, and folded not up his Rays, but dispensed them
freely, so that his Princely Clemency and Charitable Disposition, like a rich
Fountain, did run with large streams of Goodness, which renders his Deceased
Majesty deservedly honored by all his Subjects; for all things that have an
affinity with the Heavens, have a communicative Goodness, and move upon the
Center of another which they benefit; and Man may be, by so much, Neighbor to
the Gods, by how much he does good beyond requital: for self is a poor Center
of a Man's actions; but to do good to others begets a strong reflection of
Majesty and Honor. O that all those who pretend to greatness of Mind would
copy out this Munificence, taing all Opportunities (...) to do good; for it is
goodness which sits gloriously Triumphant at the Top of Heaven, and
uncharitableness lies miserably grovelling under the bottom of Hell. Heaven
descends from one as its principal Cause, Hell is built on the other as its
main Foundation; as the one approximates the Blessed Angels to God, and
beatifies them; so the other removes the cursed Fiends to such a distance from
God and Happiness (says a Reverend Divine) not to wish, not to do any good. It
is true Nobleness, and carrys with it the signatures of Majesty and Greatness,
Honor and Piety, to be of a large diffusive Spirit, exercising Bounty and
Mercy, Tom. 2.
as holy Athanasius in his Works affirms, that Mercifulness is the Queen of
Virtues; and his late Majesty (whose Sacred Memory we celebrate) did practice
this high piece of Christian Perfection, according to the Prescriptions of
Matt. 5. 41.
our Lord, in forgiving his Enemies: which shows that Goodness and Charity, as
Fruit, did grow on this Royal Tree.

Secondly, His Kingly Munificence and Liberality, not only to the Tribe of
Levi, but to all that implored his Royal Favor, dispensing of his Treasures to
the supply of the needy, and putting on Bowels of Mercy to those in want and
necessity, giving Bread to the Hungry, and clothing the naked with a garment:
And one Charitable Action (performed in Obedience to the Divine Command) will
be more conducive to our Eternal Welfare, than the value of innumerable Worlds.
Therefore this Pious Prince was inclined to acts of Beneficence and Compassion,
who now injoys the happy consequences thereof; for Bread cast upon the Waters
is trajectitia pecunia, Money, for which you take a Bill of Exchange from God,
and it meets you in a far Country, no Robbers by Land, no Piracies by Sea, no
unfaithfulness of Factors, no violence of Tempests shall take it from you. He
has dispersed, he has given to the poor (says the Psalmist) and his
righteousness Psalm. 112. 9.
endures for ever. And so Goodness and Charity did shine in this Mighty
Monarch, like the precious Stones in Aarons Breast Plate. There is no felicity
now a wanting (to this illustrious Monarch) but that of Virginius Ruffus, to
have another Tacitus to write his Funeral Obsequies, those just Encomiums and
Praises due to his rare and singular Perfections; for Virtues are Copies drawn
for imitation, and left as paths for succeeding Ages to tread in: Regis ad
Exemplum totus componitur Orbis.
And his late Majesty being Dead, yet speaks by his Royal Example to all his
loving Subjects, in the Language of the Holy Apostle, Be ye followers of me, as
I was of Christ, in Faith and Hope, Humility and Meekness, Charity and
Patience, till you come ad interior a velaminis, above the reach of dull
Mortality, filling up those seats of Blessedness, and triumphing in the Glories
of a Savior. Death, however we figure it with the Pencil of Fancy, yet it does
but rend the vail of Mortality, and lets the Soul into the Palace of
inestimable Majesty, where we shall not only behold Jesus in all his Glory, but
receive the utmost effects of his mighty Love, and live with him for ever in
Heavenly Places. The quality of the Grave is altered since Christ slept there;
it was a Prison, now a Chamber of repose. The Prophet Isaiah, speaking of the
Isai. 57. 2.
Death of the faithful, says, They shall enter into peace, they shall rest in
their beds, for Death of a formidable Enemy is made a Friend, and a Blessing in
Christ, a passage from the Valley of Tears to the Kingdom of Glory. Now who
would be afraid to be Happy? Indeed were our Tombs the Everlasting Repositories
of our molded Ashes, and the Grave a sad Closet of Eternal Sleep, a Man had
some reason to tremble at the apprehensions of Death; and since the Day cannot
arise but through the shadows of the Night, and there is no transition to
Heaven and Eternal Life but through the Chambers of a Temporal Death, we should
be content to go that way to Glory, that our Savior went before. Venerable
Job, under the sad Tragedy of Misery, with a Triumphant kind of Joy, Job 19.
25, 26, 27.
laid up in his Bosom this joyful expectation, I know my Redeemer lives, and
though Worms destroy this Body, yet in my Flesh shall I see God. The same
individual Bodies Joh. 5. 28.
that died will be raised, Marvel not at this, for the hour is coming in the
which all that are in the Grave shall hear John 11. 25.
his voice, and come forth. And the Resurrection of our Bodies is assured by
Christ's Testimony, the veracity of Acts 10. 38, 39, 40, 41. 1 Cor. 15. 20.
Christ is witnessed by his Resurrection, for Christ is the first fruits of
them that sleep. As the first Fruits are a sure demonstration and evidence of
the near approach and drawing on of the Harvest, so the Resurrection of Christ
is a sure ground of hope and comfort for assuring us, that 1 Cor. 15. 14, 15.
all those who dye Christ's Disciples, shall rise to a Blessed Immortality. He
shall make us partakers of his Glory, and bring us into those everlasting
Habitations, where dwells an undisturbed Peace, where neither Diseases approach
the Body, nor Vices have access unto the Mind, where shall be life without fear
of Death, and Joys without mixture of Sorrow. In the Primitive Times, at
Funerals, they were wont to sing Psalms of Thanksgiving. The (...), or
Triumphant Song of St Paul, O death, where 1 Cor. 15. 5.
is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory, bringing them as Champions to the
Grave, as those that have passed the Pikes, and finished their Course, and kept
the Faith, and have conquered the World, Sin, and Death. What cause is there
now of Sorrow or Lamentation? but rather of Joy and Gladness: when we consider
Deaths Errand, it is our convoy to Heaven, the dawning of an Eternal Day, and
Eve of a Glorious Festival, the way wherein we must walk to Happiness If old
Jacob, when he saw the Chariots come from Egypt, his Heart did leap within
him, because he should see his Son Joseph: We may imagine what a comfort it
will be in the beatifical Vision, when Adam shall see all his Grandchildren
the Sons of Enos together; Abraham his faithful Seed; Moses his true
Israelites; Aaron his Spiritual Posterity; John the Baptist shall see his
Penitents; Peter his Converts; Paul his Followers; the Angels shall see all
their Wards; God all his Sons; Christ all his Members What a glorious appeaing
will there be? What a ravishing Heavenly Quire? What an Anthem shall there be
gloriously sung, when the Gates of Heaven shall be as it were shut, there being
no more to enter, and these made welcome by the mutual and ineffable
embracements of God and Christ. Christ now and his Believers, like Joseph and
Benjamin, falling about each others Necks, not weeping, but shouting for Joy. O
that this confideration might have its proper operation in the Hearts and Minds
of all, so as to fear God and practice Religion, that we may obtain a Glorious
Reward; for all Ornaments and Excellencies, whether of Art, Nature, or Policy,
are but a dead thing, unless they be animated and quickened with the power of
Religion and fear of God: therefore whether we aim at a Temporal or Spiritual
good, Religion is mainly to be magnified. Many Blessings belong to the
Religious which they enjoy in this Life. The Riches of Grace are poured on
them, and the Word of Life is preached unto them; their Thoughts are Heavenly,
and Hearts the Throne of the Holy Ghost; their Tongues talk of the Praises of
the Almighty, and their Feet stand in the Temple of the Lord; their Prayers are
like Incense, and the lifting up of their Hands as an Evening Sacrifice; Who
will not now become Religious? to wear a Crown that never shall have an end
after Death, to have Angels their Companions, and Saints their Fellows, Heaven
their dwelling Place, and Pleasures of Paradise the recompense of their Reward.
If sumptuous and stately Buildings do delight, what Habitation is so
Magnificent and Glorious as the New Jerusalem? If Riches, what so Rich as that,
whose Foundation and Wall are of Precious Stones, and Gates of Orient Pearls?
If Honor, what Honor comparable to this, to be Servants of the Most High, the
Sons of so mighty a King, and Heirs of so Glorious a Kingdom; where neither the
Teeth of Time can consume, nor Rancor of Envy deprive of Honor, nor Power of
Adversary spoil its Glory, being endless and Incomprehensible. There is no such
gain as trading to Heaven, to be Merchant Adventurers for Happiness, all other
things are nothing; let this so raise your apprehensions as your Lives may be
an Argument to prove it: for if we do expect Salvation, Mercy and Glory, at the
Hands of the Almighty, we must be active in well doing, Obedient to his Laws,
Confident in his Promises, and Religious in his Service, that so being
followers of the Blessed Saints, who are departed out of this Life in the Faith
of Christ, directing our Lives after their Good Example, and particularly of
this Pious Prince, who has changed the Terrestrial Paradise of all his
Kingdoms, to be partaker of a Celestial One, which is beyond the Power of
Empire, and grasps greater things than Authority or Command can compass; his
Name survives his Life, and is anagram'd in the choicest Memories, and stands
in Renown amongst the greatest Worthies that either Pole can boast of, being
Embalmed in Honor, and whose Actions blossom in the Dust. A voice from Heaven
has declared Happiness to the Righteous, Because blessed Revel. 14. 13.
are the dead which dye in the Lord; even so says the Spirit, for they rest
from their labors, and their works follow them.

NOW after the days of Mourning in England for the Death of Britain's Josiah,
the Great and Good King James the Second has given us a day of rejoicing in
the peaceable Accession to the Imperial Throne of these Kingdoms, which has
been long and happily enjoyed by his Royal Ancestors, and by an unquestionable
Right and lineal Succession descends on his Sacred Majesty. We have great cause
to rejoice, when we consider our happiness, that it has pleased the Almighty
God to give us for our King a Prince of the same Blood, Son of Charles the
Martyr, and Brother to Charles the Good and Great: and His Sacred Majesty has
attained the Character of James the Just, who is not only an Inheritor of the
Crowns of his Royal Progenitors in all the Triumphs and Glories of a
Coronation, but of their Virtues. And since the Blood of the Martyrs is the
Seed of the Church, it is the happiness of this Nation that the Seed of that
Glorious Martyr of happy Memory, is still to reign over us, which turns our
Tears into Joy and Exultation of Spirit, praising and glorifying God for so
great a Benefit. We adore the Divine Goodness, and acknowledge it a Miracle of
Mercy, by which he kept his Sacred Majesty in Store, a Blessing in reserve for
us, who in the depth of our Affliction, has vouchsafed to bring us from Death
to Life again, by guiding us through the Horror of our Fears into a State of
Security and Comfort, by his Princely Word and Promise to follow the Example of
our late Dread Sovereign in Clemency and Tenderness to his People. And with
equal Gratitude and hearts full of Duty and Allegiance, we pay the Tribute of
Thanks to his Sacred Majesty, for his most Indulgent Declaration, that he will
take our Lives, Liberties and Religion into his immediate Protection; and the
inviolable Steddiness of his Royal Word is that on which we rely with an entire
Confidence, for the Support and Enjoyment of our Established Religion; a
Religion, that has been (as his Majesty graciously observes) and ever will be
for the Maintenance of Monarchy. And as our Church is the Rule to us of a pure
and unspotted Loyalty, so it is not possible we should lose the one, since his
most Illustrious Majesty is so graciously pleased to preserve the other. And
what can we desire more on this side Heaven, than that we live under his
auspicious Reign, safe in our Religion and Properties. What better pledges
could we have asked for them, than what we have; his Sacred Word, which has
made us entirely secure; and has left us nothing now to wish or pray for, save
only that it would please Almighty God by a merciful and over ruling Providence
to defeat the Malice, and to frustrate and disappoint all the Conspiracies of
his Enemies. And we humbly beseech the Great God, the King of Kings, to
preserve his Sacred Majesty in Health and Happiness, to prosper all his Affairs
at home and abroad, and make all his Subjects truly Loyal and Obedient, and
establish his Royal Throne many and many Years, that he may long and happily
Reign over us to the utmost period of Humane Nature; and when the Crown shall
slide from his Sacred Temples, be at last translated to an Eternal Throne of
Glory.

Amen, Amen.
FINIS.

