Obijt 1626. Aetatis Suae 71.

EFFIGIES R.P. LANCELOTI ANDREWS QVONDAM EPISCOPI WINTONIENSIS
portrait of Lancelot Andrews, Bishop of Winchester, in clerical dress, holding
a book W.M. sculpsit.
If ever any merited to be
The Universal Bishop, this was He
Great ANDREWS who ye Whole vast Sea did drain
Of Learning, and distilld it in his brain;
These pious dropps are of the purest kind
Which trickled from ye limbeck of his mind.
Ia: Howell


A MANUAL OF THE PRIVATE DEVOTIONS AND MEDITATIONS OF The Right Reverend Father
in God, LANCELOT ANDREWS, late Lord Bishop of Winchester.

Translated out of a fair Greek MS. of His Amanuensis.

By R.D. B.D.

LONDON, Printed by W.D. for Humphrey Moseley at the Prince's Arms in S. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXLVIII.

TO HIS HIGHNESS THE PRINCE OF WALES.
SIR,
IT was the special Command of Your RoiaandFather, our most Gracious Sovereign,
to the Bishops of London and Elie, now with God, to take care that, of the
innumerable Papers of This Reverend Prelate, none should be committed to the
Press, but such as They found perfected by His accurate hand.

In prosequution whereof we are much bound to Their care and faithfulness for
the communication of His Incomparable Sermons and Discourses, which now enrich
the World with Piety and Learning; and put it to the wonder to see the
Quintessence of the Fathers and School distilled through His Limbeck, in so fit
language and expressions, to the great advantage of the Church of God.

Why This most excellent Piece of His Devotions was not by Them presented with
the rest, the Language, wherein it was conceived and used by Him, will give
abundant satisfaction to Your Highness. His Greek had been but a Barbarian unto
them, whose benefit was chiefly intended in all the Publications of His Works.
Nor is Your Highness now to be assured, that They, who were employed in that
service, were Wise and Honorable Persons, that They well knew Their Work, and
did it.

And truly, SIR, the Commands of His Majesty shall ever be so sacred to me,
and the Judgment of Those Reverend Prelates so much esteemed by me, that I
should not have presumed on this Essaie, had not the Honor of This Renowned
Bishop been eclipsed, by obtruding on the World some broken parcels, miserably
defaced by a careless Press, under the glorious Name of Bishop Andrews.

If this be thought no sufficient ground for this high presumption, I shall
proceed in my presumption on Your Highness, to be a Mediator to Your most
Glorious Father, for His Gracious Pardon to a sinner, who, not being without
great hopes of advancing Piety by his sin, is confident of obteining Your
Princely Interposition that it is Felix Error. And that, the benefit hereof so
much redounding to the Glory of God, by promoting Christian people in
Devotion, it would have been a greater sin against the Public, to detein so
precious a Jewel from improvement: It being the peculiar happiness of Sacred
Commodities, to be made better by their using.

And to whom should Devotion address her self for Patronage, in this Age of
Irreligion and Profaneness; in this great invasion upon God, the King, the
Church, and whatsoever is called Holy, if not to Your Highness? It will be no
sin in us, to look for the righting and maintenance of them all, from Your
Princely Arm, assisted with the Power of Heaven.

Ride on, Great Prince, upon the Horses of Salvation, and the Lord of Hosts
sight your battles. May the Sword of the LORD and Prince CHARLES be mighty in
operation, for the Redemption of His Sacred Majesty, and the Restitution of
This Church and Kingdom to Their ancient Liberty and Glory. May Honor,
Prosperity and Peace so accompany and crown Your Pious, Christian, and
Princely undertakings, that our eyes may once more see the King upon His
Throne, gloriously triumphing in the Affections of His Subjects, happily united
in the indissoluble bonds of Love and Loialtie.

This is the sum of all our desires, and the daily Prayer of him, whose
highest ambition is, not to be utterly incapable of doing service to the Church
of God, and of approving himself,

SIR, Your Highness's most humble, and most loially devoted Orator and Servant,
RICHARD DRAKE.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
AMong the many blessings, for which I am eternally indebted to Heaven, I ever
highly esteemed the possession of This precious threasure, This sacred Relic
of the most Reverend Bishop Andrews. Which, being used by Him, in His most
secret conference with His God, not only acquaints us with the Devotion of His
soul, but also gives us an example, how Earth may traffic and communicate
with Heaven.

Had you seen the Original Manuscript, happy in the glorious deformity
thereof, being slubber'd with His pious hands, and watered with His penitential
tears, you would have been forced to confess That Book belonged to no other
then pure and Primitive Devotion.

Of that having had the happiness to obtein a Copy under the fair hand of His
Amanuensis, I should not so long have detained from you the Communication
thereof, but that some reasonable and just arguments effectually prevailed with
me.

But at last, finding a great invasion made upon His honor, I resolved to pay
my due respects to His precious memory, and to exercise so much Charity,
which I had learned from His Devotions, toward others, as not to ingross to my
own private use and benefit, what I was confident would be most serviceable and
welcome to the Church of God.

From the general inspection of these His set and sacred Forms, as you are
convinced of His Piety, so you may learn His Judgment concerning Ex tempore
Conceptions, and undigested Prayers.

I am confident He had as great abilities of expressing himself to purpose
without premeditation, as any Rabbie that pretends to the highest pitch of
Inspiration. But His Devotion had not taught Him to cast off His Humility; nor
was He so little acquainted with His God and Himself, as not to know His
distance and to keep it. It had been a sin to Him to appear before His God
empty, or with that which cost Him nothing.

There is too much of a Pharisee in him that dares trust to his Memory, his
Phancie, or Invention before the Majesty of Heaven; when even his most
premeditated and weighed thoughts, though clothed in the best attire of
language, would be esteemed by himself too too unworthie to be offered to his
Prince. And yet such is the irreligion of this Age, the most High God must take
up and be content with that homely entertainment, which my Lord or Lady,
forsooth, would not receive from their most faithful servant without great
scorn and indignation.

But it is the highest pitch of sacrilege to make the Scripture patronize
Impiety. They abuse the Text and the Apostle, that urge His, I will pray with
the spirit, to justify Enthusiasm in Praijing, unless they will, what never
any brainsick Novellist attempted, interpret to us, I will sing with the
spirit, with their extemporarie Music.

His Reading had not taught this learned Father to make such wild conclusions;
Nor would His Piety pcrmit Him to license them to others, or Himself. Hence is
it that, in His addresses to His God, His Heart was kindled, first, with holy
fire; nor would He then present His Thoughts upon the Altar, til He had weighed
them in the balance of the Sanctuary, and by committing them to Faithful
writing left no room for fruitless matter or idle words.

The truth hereof will evidently appear in the ensuing Prayers: where you may
see the actings of the Spiric, to the hight of the Apostles sense. The Matter,
Form, and Phrase of His Devotions all borrowed from the Sacred Scriptures, the
Holy Fathers, and Primitive Liturgies, cherished with those pious slames of
actual Intention, burning Charity and profound Humility, will give the most
invincible assurance, that He, that prayed thus, made good S. Paul's, I will
pray with the Spirit.

Nor did His Method vary from Him neither. Prayers, Supplications,
Intercessions, and Giving of Thanks, make up the Body of His Devotions. That
was His unquestionable Directorie in these His Sacred Forms. Where you shall
ever find His Faith, His Hope, and Charity, that sacred Triad of supernatural
and Theological virtues in the highest pitch of Elevation.

And now, I think, there need no arguments, to persuade your acceptance and
improvement of them. It is enough that You know the Man and His Communication.
Thus did He discourse with God, and so may You: building confidently on this
infallible Oracle, That the effectual fervent Prayer of a righteous man
avails much; that, like a Prince, it has power with God, and conquers Heaven.

The Citations of the Sacred Scriptures, the Holy Fathers, and Primitive
Liturgies; the very few Additions thus [] included in the Body of the Text,
together with some Titles and Annotations, by way of Exposition or
Illustration, intended for your greater benefit, are all my (...), my
voluntary Oblations; or, if you pleas to call them so, Presumptions: which if
I may obtein your pardon for, you see the terms, on which I dare commend these
Devotions to the truly pious soul. What is amiss you may assure your self is
not in Greek, is not the Bishops; the English may have faults, but that is
mine: And, I shall not doubt, your Charity, in covering them, will extend it
self to Him, who had not now been guilty of them, but out of Charity to you.
To which if you shall add the recommendation of him in your prayers, who shall
never be unmindful of you in his, you shall eternally oblige in the most sacred
bonds

On the Nativitie of S. Jo. Baptist, 1648. Your most humble servant in our Lord
JESUS, RICHARD DRAKE.

S. Hierom.
Oras?
Loqueris cum Sponso.
Legis?
Ille tecum Ioquitur.
Epist. ad Eustoch. Virg. Gul. Parisiensis.
Lectio Orationem impinguat.
Lectionem Oration illuminat.
De Rhetor. Divina. cap. 30. S Gregor. Nazl^^^.
(...)

Orat^^^^^ pologet. ^^^^a. S. Bernard.
Noli vilipendere Orationem tuam, quon^am Ille, ad quem eras, n^^ vilipendit
eam: sed, antequ^m egredi^tur de ore tuo, Iese ser^^i eam juber in (...) l^ro
suo. Eo unum e duobus indubitanter sperare debemus, quoniam aut dabit nobis
quod petimus, aut quod nobis nove^it esse utalius.

Meditat. Devotiss. cap. 6. The Contents of this MANUAL.
THe Times of Prayer. page 2 The Places of Prayer. p. 4 The Gestures of the
Body denoting the Affections of the Soul. p. 6 Prayers Preparatorie to all our
Devotions. p. 8 At our Ent'rance into the Church. p. 9 Morning Prayer. p. 15
Prayers for Sundaie. p. 36 Prayers for Mundaie. p. 90 Prayers for Tuesdaie. p.
115 Prayers for Wensdaie. p. 132 Prayers for Thursdaie. p. 165 Prayers for
Friedaie. p. 187 Prayers for Saturdaie. p. 214 A Form of Prayer for all the
World, and particularly for our special Relations. p. 237 A Recommendation of
our selves and ours to Gods blessing. p. 240 Prayers Preparatorie to all our
Thanksgivings. p. 242 A Form of thanksgiving for Temporal and Spiritual
Blessings. p. 243 A Letanie to be used upon special occasions of Public or
Private Humiliation. p. 253 Hosanna in the Highest. Or, a Supplication for
Spiritual Blessings. p. 267 Hosanna upon Earth. Or, a Supplication for Temporal
Blessings. p. 274 Evening Prayer. page 281 A Prayer for all Estat^s. p. 300
Prayers for the Holy Communion. p. 302 Special Duties recommended to Christian
People. p. 318
MEDITATIONS AND DEVOTIONS.
AS for me, God forbid that I should sin against the Lord, in ceasing to pray
before Him for you, and to show you the good and the right way. 1 P. Sam.
12.23.

But we will give ourselvs continually to Prayer, and to the Ministry of the
Word. Acts 6.4.

[The Times of Prayer.]
Pray
Always. S. Luke 18.1 Without ceasing. 1 These. 5.17. At all seasons. Ephesians.
6.18.
Three times a day he used to kneel on his knees, and to pray, and to give
thanks before his God, as he used to do aforetime. P. Dan. 6.1.0.

Evening and Morning, and Noon will I pray, and cry aloud, and he will hear
my voice. Ps. 55.18.

Seven times a day do I praise Thee. Psalm. 119.164.

1. In the Morning, a great while before day. S. Mark 1.35. 2. In the Dawnings
of the Morning. Psa. 63.7. secund. LXX. 3. At the Third Hour of the day. S.
Mark 15.25. Acts 2.15. 4. About the Sixth Hour. Acts 10.9. 5. At the Hour of
Prayer, being the Ninth Hour. Acts 3.1. 6. At Evening, Genesis 24.63. 7. By Night.
Ps. 134.2
At Midnight Psalm. 119.62. Acts 16.25.

[The Places of Prayer.]
IN all Places, wheresoever I record My Name, I will com unto thee, and I will
bless thee. Exodus 20.24.

Congregation.

In the Assembly of the righteous, and in the Congregation. Psalm. 111.1.

Closet.

Enter into thy Closet, and when thou have shut the door, pray in secret. S.
Mat. 6.6.

Hous-top.

He went up on the Hous-top to pray. Act. 10.9.

Temple.

They went up into the Temple. Acts 3.1.

Seashore

We kneeled down on the Shore. Acts 21.5.

Garden.

Christ in the Garden. S. John 18.1 collated with S. Mat. 26.36.

Bed.

Upon their Beds. Psalm. 149.5.

Wilderness.

Christ withdrew Himself into the Wilderness, and prayed. S. Luke 5.16.

Pray everie-where, lifting up holy hands, without wrath and doubting. 1 Timothy
2.8.

[The Gestures of the Body, denoting the Affections of the Soul.]
1 BOwing of the Knees, Falling on the Knees, Face,
Humility and Dejection of Soul. My soul is brought low even unto the dust; my
belly cleaves unto the ground. Ps. 44.25.

2. Bowing of the Head, Shamefastness. Heaviness.

3. Smiting on the Breast, * Indignation.

4. Trembling, * Fear.

5. Sighing, Wringing of the Hands. Sorrow.

6. Lifting up of the Eyes, Hands,
* Vehement Desire.

7. Chastising and keeping the body under. * Revenge. * 2 Corinthians. 7.11.

[Praiers preparatorie to all our Devotions.]
O Thou that hear prayer, unto Thee shall all flesh come;

Even my flesh shall come:

My misdeeds prevail against me; O be Thou merciful unto my sins. Psalm. 65.2, 3.

Thou shall open my lips, O Lord: and my mouth shall show Thy praise. Psalm.
51.15.

[At our Ent'rance into the Church.]
AS for me, I will come into Thy House, even upon the multitude of Thy mercy;
and, in Thy fear, will I worship toward Thy Holy Temple. Psalm. 5.7.

O Lord, hear the voice of my humble petitions, when I cry unto Thee; when I
hold up my hands toward the Mercie-seat of Thy Holy Temple. Psalm. 28.2.

We wait for Thy loving kindness, O God, in the midst of Thy Temple. Psalm. 48.8.

Be mindful of the Brethren, who are present, and join together in prayer with
us, now:

Remember their devotion and their zeal.

Be mindful of them also, who upon good cause are absent:

And have mercy upon them and us, according to the multitude of Thy mercies, O
Lord.

We bless Thee for our Godly Princes, Orthodox Prelates,
and for the Founders of This Thy Holy Habitation.

Glory be to Thee, O Lord, Glory be to Thee; Glory be to Thee, because Thou
have glorified them; for and with whom we also glorify Thee.

Let Thine Eyes be open, and Thine Ears graciously attent, to hear the prayer,
which Thy servant prays in this place, wherein Thy Name is called upon. 2 Chronicles. 6.20, 33, 40.

Woe is me, I have sinned against Thee, O Lord,

I have sinned against Thee.

O how evilly have I don? and yet Thou have not requited me, according to my
sins. H. Job 33.27. secund. LXX.

But I am ashamed, and turn from my wicked ways, and return to my own heart,
and with all my heart I return to Thee, and seek Thy face; and pray unto Thee,
saying, I have sinned, I have don perversely, I have committed wickedness:

Lord, I know the plague of my own heart, and, behold, I return unto Thee with
all my heart, and with all my might.

And now, O Lord, in Thy dwelling place, the glorious throne of Thy Kingdom in
Heaven, hear the prayer and supplication of Thy servant.

Psalm. 41.4.
And be merciful unto Thy servant, and heal his soul. [K. Solomon's Prayer at
the Dedication of the Temple. 1 Kings 8. and 2 Chronicles. 6.


I dare not so much as lift up mine eyes unto heaven,

But, standing afar off, I smite upon my breast, And say with the Publican, God
be merciful to me a sinner, S. Luke 18.13.

To me, a greater sinner then the Publican, be merciful as to the Publican.

The Earnest desire of man shall be to Thy praise, and the continuance of that
desire shall hold a Festival to Thee. Psalm. 76.10. secund. LXX.

[Morning Prayer.]
Glory be to Thee, O Lord; Glory be to Thee: Glory be to Thee, who have
given me sleep, for the refreshing of my weakness, and for the eas of my labors
of this flesh subject to weariness.

* That this day and every day may come on perfect, holy, peaceable,
healthful, and without sin,

Grant, Lord, we beseech Thee.

* That an Angel of peace, a faithful guide, a Guardian of our souls and
bodies, may pitch a tent about us, and ever suggest what is needful for my
salvation,

Grant, Lord, we beseech Thee.

S. Chrysostom. Liturgy.
The pardon and remission of all sins, and of all transgressions,

Grant, Lord, we beseech Thee.

S. Chrysostom. Liturgy.
What things are good and profitable to our souls, together with peace in this
world,

Grant, Lord, we beseech Thee.

S. Chrysostom. Liturgy.
That we accomplish the rest of our life, in Repentance and godly Fear, in
Health and Peace,

Grant, Lord, we beseech Thee.

What things are true, what are honest, what are just, what are pure, what are
lovelie, what are of good report, wherein there is virtue, wherein there is
praise, that we may reckon of these things to do them, Philip. 48.

Grant, Lord, we beseech Thee.

S. Chrysostom. Liturgy.
A Christian end of our life, without Sin, without Shame, and if Thou think
good, without Pain, and a good Apology at the dreadful and terrible Tribunal
of our Lord JESUS Christ,

Grant, Lord, we beseech Thee.

O Being above all Being, O uncreated Nature, Thou Framer of the whole world,

I set Thee, Lord, before me; Psalm. 16.9.

I lift up my soul unto Thee; Psalm. 25.1.

I fall down on my knees and worship Thee; Psalm. 95.6.

I humble my self under Thy mighty hand; 1 S. Pet. 5.6.

I stretch forth my hands unto Thee;

My soul [is] for Thee as ground without water. Psalm. 143.6.

I smite upon my breast, and say with the Publican,

God be merciful to me a sinner; S. Luke 18.13.

To me altogether a sinner;

To me the chief of sinners; 1 Timothy 1.15.

To me, a greater sinner then the Publican, be merciful as to the Publican.

O Father of Mercies, I beseech Thee, by Thy Fatherly bowels of compassion,
Despise me not; An unclean worm, Psalm. 22.6.

A dead dog, 2 P. Sam. 9.8.

A stinking carcass.

Despise me not, The work of Thy hands; Psalm. 138.8.

Thine own Image; Genesis 1.27.

Despise me not, Though I bear the brands of mine iniquity.

Lord, if Thou will, Thou can make me clean:

Lord, speak the word only, and I shall be cleansed. S. Mat. 8.2, 8.

And Thou, O Savior Christ, O Christ my Savior, Savior of sinners, of whom I am
chief. 1 Timothy 1.15:

Despise me not.

Despise me not, O Lord, The price of Thine own blood; Upon whom Thy Name is
called; O Lord, Despise me not.

But look upon me with those Thine eyes, with which Thou lookedst upon Marie
Magdalen at the Feast, Peter in the High Priests Hall, The Thief on the Cross.


That, with The Thief, I may humbly call upon Thee, saying, Lord, remember me
in Thy Kingdom; S. Luke 23.42.

Peter, I may weep bitterly; S. Matthew. 26.75. And O that mine eyes were a
fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night! P. Jer. 9.1.

Marie Magdalen, I may hear Thee, saying, Thy sins are forgiven Thee. And that
with her I may love much, because my many and manifold sins are forgiven me.
S. Luke 7.47, 48.

And Thou, all-holie, and gracious, and quickening Spirit, Despise me not:
Despise me not Thine own Iuspiration, Holy thing;


But turn Thee again, O Lord, at the last, and be entreated to look upon Thy
servant. Psalm. 90.13.

BLessed art Thou, O Lord our God, the God of our Fathers,

Who turnest the shadow of death into the Morning; P. Amos 5.8.

And renewest the face of the earth; Psalm. 104.30.

Who have dispelled the darkness, by the presence of the light;

Who separatest the Night, and bring in the Day;

Who have light'ned mine eyes, that I sleep not in death; Psalm. 13.3.

Who have delivered me from the terrors of the Night; and from the Pestilence,
that walks in darkness; Psalm. 91.5, 6.

Who have driven sleep from mine eyes, and slumber from mine eielids; Psalm.
132.4.

Who make joyful outgoings of the Morning and Evening; Psalm. 65.8.

For I laid me down and slept, and rose up again; Psalm. 3.5.

And Thou, Lord, made me dwell in safety; Psalm. 4.9.

For I awaked and beheld; and my sleep was sweet unto me. P. Jerem. 31.26.

O Lord, blot out as a Night-mist mine iniquities; P. Isa. 44.22.

Scatter my sins as a Morning-cloud.

Grant that I may become a child of the Light, and of the Day. 1 These. 55.

That I male walk soberly, chastely, and honestly, as in the Day. Romans 13.13.

Vouch safe to keep me this day without sin. Te Deum.

Uphold me, when I am falling, and lift me up when I am down; Psalm. 145.14.

That I may never harden my heart, as in the provocation, Psa. 95.8. with the
tentation, or deceiptfulness of any sin. Heb. 3.8, 13.

Moreover, deliver me, this day, From The snare of the Hunter, The noisome
Pestilence, The arrow that flies by day, Mischance, The Noon-daie destruction
Psalm. 91.3, 5, 6.


Preserve this day from any evil of mine; and me from the evils of the day.

Let not my days consume in vanity, nor my years in trouble. Psalm. 78.33.

Let one day certify another. Psalm. 19.2.

Let this day add some knowledge or practice to yester day.

Psalm. 143.
O Let me hear Thy loving kindness betimes in the Morning, for in Thee is my
trust: show Thou me the way, that I should walk in, for I lift up my soul unto
Thee. Ver 8.

Deliver me, O Lord, from mine enemies; for I fly unto Thee to hide me. Ver. 9.

Teach me to do the thing that pleases Thee, for Thou art my God:

Let Thy loving Spirit lead me forth in the way of righteousness. Ver. 10.

Quicken me, O Lord, for Thy Names sake; and for Thy righteousness sake bring
my soul out of trouble. Ver. 11.

REmove from my mind thoughts that are without understanding. Wisd 1.5.

Inspire good thoughts into me, even such as shall be well pleasing unto Thee.

Turn away mine eyes, lest they behold vanity. Psalm. 119.37.

Let mine eyes look after that which is right; and mine eielids after just
things. Prove. 4.25.

Hedge in mine ears with thorns, that they listen not to foolish discourses.

In the Morning give me an ear to hear with; and open mine ears to the doctrine
of Thy Oracles. P. Isa. 50.4, 5.

Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth; and a door, with a guard, about my lips.
Psalm. 141.3.

Let my speech be seasoned with salt, Col. 4.6. that it may minister grace
unto the hearers. Ephesians. 4.29.

Let me do nothing that shall make my heart ache, or be a scandal to me. 1 P.
Sam. 25.31.

But let my doings be such, for which Thou may remember me for good: And
spare me according to the greatness of Thy mercy. H Nehem. 13.22, 31.

INto Thy hands I commend My Spirit, Soul, Body;
Thou have Created, Redeemed, Regenerated
them,

O Lord, Thou God of truth. Psalm. 31.6.

And, with my self, I commend unto Thee all mine, and all that belong unto me:

Thou, O Lord, have graciously given them unto Thy servant. Genesis 33.5.

Preserve us, O Lord, from all evil: O Lord, I beseech Thee, keep our souls.
Psalm. 121.7.

Keep us from falling, and present us faultless, before the presence of Thy
glory, S. Jude Ver 24. at that day. 2 Timothy 1.18.

O Lord, preserve my going out, and my coming in, from this time forth for
evermore. Psalm. 121.8.

Prosper, I beseech Thee, Thy servant this day; and grant him mercle in the
sight of all he shall meet with. H. Neh. 1.11.

Haste Thee, O God, to deliver me;

Make haste to help me, O Lord, Psalm. 70.1.

O Turn Thee unto me, and have mercy upon me; give Thy strength unto Thy
servant, and help the son of Thine handmaid.

Show some good token upon me for good; that I be not put to shame in the sight
of them that hate me; because Thou, Lord, have helped me, and comforted me.
Psalm. 86.16, 17.

[ The Planetarie Character or Hieroglyphic of SUNDAIE, called in H. Scripture
the First Day, Genesis 1.5. the First Day of the Sabbaths, 1 Cor. 16.2. and the
LORDS Day, Revel. 2.10.]

BY the tender mercies of our God, the Daie-spring from on high has visited
us. S. Luke 1.78.

Glory be to Thee, O Lord, Glory be to Thee, who createdst the Light, to
enlighten the world. Genesis 1.2.

The Visible Light: The Beam of the Sun; The Flame of Fire; The Day and Night;
The Evening and Morning. The Intelligible Light: That which is Known of God;
Romans 1.19. Written in the Law. S. Luk 10.26.
The Oracles of the Prophets; The Melody of the Psalms; The Instruction of the
Proverbs; The Knowledge of Histories. The Eternal Light, without any Evening.
God is the Lord, who has showed us Light; keep an Holie-daie, full crowding
up even to the horns of the Altar. Psalm. 118.27.

By Thy Resurrection raise us unto newness of life, affording unto us the means
of Repentance.

O God of peace, who did bring again, from the dead, the Lord JESUS Christ,
the great Sheepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting
Testament,

Make us perfect in every good work, to do His Will, working in us that which
is welpleasing in His sight, through JESUS Christ, to whom be glory for ever
and ever. Amen. Heb. 13.20, 21.

O Thou, who, upon This Day, did send down Thy most Holy Spirit upon Thy
Disciples, withdraw not the same again from us, but renew it daily in us, Psalm.
51.10, 11. who call upon Thee.

MErciful and gracious Lord, long-suffering and of great pity, I have sinned,
Lord, I have sinned against Thee.

O wretched man that I am! Romans 7.24.

I have sinned against Thee, O Lord, I have greatly and grievously sinned; and
that by giving heed to vanity and lies. P. Jonas 2.8.

I conceal nothing, H. Jos. 7.19.

I pretend no pretenses. Psalm. 141.4.

I give glory unto Thee, O Lord, this day. H. Jos. 7.19.

I confess my sins against my self;

In very deed I have sinned against the Lord; and thus and thus have I don. H.
Jos. 7.20.

O what have I don? P. Jerem. 8.6. and Thou have not punished me, as my sins
have deserved. H. Job 33.27.

And now what shall I say? or how shall I open my mouth?

What shall I answer? for I, even I have don it.

I am without any pretense, all * excuse, * Romans 2.1.

I am condemned of my self. Tit. 3.11.

My destruction is from my self. P. Hos. 13.9.

To Thee, O Lord, belongs righteousness: but to me confusion of face. P. Dan.
9.7.

And Thou art just in all that is come upon me; for Thou have don right, but I
have don wickedly. H. Neh. 9.33.

And now what is my hope? Art not Thou, O Lord?

Surely my hope is from Thee. Psalm. 39.7.

Surely, I have hope of salvation.

Surely, Thy loving kindeness vanquisheth the multitude of my sins.

O remember upon what I subsist. Ps. 89.46.

That I am The Work of Thy Hands, The Image of Thy Countenance, The Price of
Thy Blood,
Called by Thy Name, A Sheep of Thy Flock, A Son of Thy Covenant.


O despise not the work of Thine own hands: Psalm. 138.8.

Despise not Thy Image and Likeness.

Have Thou made me for naught? Psalm. 89.46.

Even for naught, if Thou destroy me.

And what profit is there in my destruction? Psalm. 30.9.

Thy enemies will rejoice at it. Psalm. 35.19.

Let them not rejoice, O Lord; Do not gratify Thine enemies with my
destruction.

Look upon the face of Thy Christ. Psa. 84.9.

And by the blood of Thy Testament, P. Zech. 9.11.

By His propitiation for the sins of the whole world, 1 S. John 2.2.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner: S. Luke 18.13.

Be merciful, O Lord, to me, the first, the chief, the greatest
of sinners.

For Thy Names sake, O Lord, be merciful to my sin, for it is great, Psa.
25.11. very great

Even for that Thy Name, beside which there is no other Name, under heaven,
given among men, whereby we may be saved. Act. 4.12.

The Holy Spirit himself helping our infirmities, and making intercession for
us, with groanings which cannot be uttered. Romans 8.26.

For the Paternal bowels of God the Father; Bleeding wounds of God the Son;
Unutterable groans of God the H. Ghost;
O Lord hear, O Lord forgive;

O Lord, hearken and do; Deferr not for Thine own sake, O Lord, O Lord my God.
P. Dan. 9.19.

But as for me, I do not forget my offenses; for they are ever before me. Psalm
51.3.

I recount them in the bitterness of my soul. H. Job. 7.11.

I am perplexed, I take thought for them. Psalm. 38.18.

And turning myself, I mourn, P. Isai. 30.15. secundum LXX.

I am moved with indignation, I take vengeance on myself, I am displeased with
myself, I abhor and chasten myself,
that I do it no better, fuller.


I repent, Lord; Lord. I repent:

Help Thou my want of Repentance.

And yet more and more pierce my heart; break my heart; grind my heart;


Pass by, forgive and pardon all my transgressions, which make my heart ache,
and are a scandal to me. 1 P. Sam. 25.31.

Cleanse Thou me from my secret faults;

Keep Thy servant also from presumptuous sins. Psalm. 19.12, 13.

Make Thy mercies to be admired over me, who am an high and notorious sinner;

And say unto me in due time, Be of good cheer, Thy sins are forgiven thee; S.
Mat. 9.2.

My grace is sufficient for thee; 2 Cor. 12.9.

Say unto my soul, I am Thy salvation. Psalm. 35.3.

Why art thou so heavy, O my soul? and why art thou so disquieted within me?
Psa. 42.6, 14. and 43.5.

Turn again then unto thy rest, O my soul, for the Lord will be gracious unto
thee. Psa. 116.7.

Collected out of the Seven Penitentials.
O Lord, rebuke me not in Thine indignation, neither chasten me in Thy heavy
displeasure. Psalm. 6.1.

Collected out of the Seven Penitentials.
I said, I will confess my sins unto the Lord, and so thou forgavest the
wickedness of my heart. Psalm. 32.6.

Collected out of the Seven Penitentials.
Lord, Thou know all my desire, and my groaning is not hid from Thee. Psalm.
38.9.

Collected out of the Seven Penitentials.
Have mercy upon me, O Lord, after Thy great goodness; according to the
multitude of Thy mercies do away mine offenses* Psalm. 51.1.

Collected out of the Seven Penitentials.
Lord, Thou shall arise, and have mercy upon me, for it is time that Thou have
mercy upon me, yea, the time is come. Psalm. 102.13.

Collected out of the Seven Penitentials.
If Thou, Lord, wilt be extreme to mark what is don amiss, O Lord, who may abide
it? Psalm. 130.3.

Collected out of the Seven Penitentials.
Enter not into judgment with Thy servant; for in Thy sight shall no man living
be justified. Psalm. 143.2.

I Lift up my hands, O Lord, unto Thy Commandments, which I have loved. Psalm.
119.48.

Open mine eyes, and I shall see, Ver. 18.

Incline my Heart, Ver. 36. and I shall affect, Order my steps, Ver. 133. and I
shall walk in the path of Thy Commandments.

O Lord God, Be Thou my God. Let me have no other God but Thee; No other beside
Thee; Nothing else with Thee.


Grant that I may worship and serve Thee with 1 Truth of Spirit; 2 Decency of
Body; 3 Benediction of Mouth;


In 4 Public and Private.

Grant also That I may render

5 Honor to my Governors,

By Obedience and Submission to them who have the rule over me. Heb. 13.17.

Natural affection to those who belong to me,

By taking care of and providing for them. 1 Timothy 5.8.

That I may

6 Overcome evil with good. Romans 12.21.

7 Keep my vessel in holiness and honor. 1 These. 4.4.

8 Have my conversation without coverousness, and be content with such things
as I have. Heb. 13.5.

9 Profess the Truth with Charity. Ephesians. 4.15.

10 Desire, not covet. lust in concupiscence. 1 These. 4.5. walk after my lusts.
1 S. Pet. 4.3. S. Jude v. 16.


The Fense of the Law.
[Give me grace, O Lord,]

To bruise the Serpents head. Genesis 3.15. To remember the last ends. Deuteronomy.
32.29. To cut off the occasions of sin. 2 Cor. 11.12. To be sober. 1 S. Peter
5.8.
Not to sit idle. S. Mat. 20.6.

To shun wicked company. Psa. 26.4, 5. Tit. 3.10. To consort with good men.
Romans 12.9. To make a covenant with mine eyes. H. Job 31.1. To bring my body
into subjection. 1 Cor. 9.27. To set apart times for Prayer. I Corinth. 7.5. To
withdraw my self for [the exercise of] Repentance. 2 S. Pet. 3.9.
Hedge up my way with thorns, that I find not the path to follow after
vanity. P. Hos. 2.6.

Hold me in with bit and bridle, when I keep not close to Thee. Psalm. 32.9.

O Lord, compel me to come in unto Thee. S. Luke 14.23.

O Lord, I believe In Thee, the Father, Word, Spirit,
one God.

1. That by Thy love and power all things were created.

2. That, by Thy goodness and love to Mankind, were gathered together in one
all things in Thy Word.

Who, for us men, and for our salvation, was made Flesh; Conceived and Born;
Did Suffer, was Crucified; Did Die, was Buried; Did Descend, and Rise again;
Did Ascend, and Sits;
Shall Return, Reward.

3. That by the Illumination and Operation of the H. Spirit, a peculiar people
is called, out of the whole world, to be a Corporation.

according to the belief of the Truth. 2 These. 2.13. holiness of Conversation,
1 S. Pet. 3.2.


By whom we are made partakers of the Communion of Saints, Remission of Sins,
in this present world;

By whom we look For Resurrection of the Flesh, For Eternal Life,
in the world to come.

THis most holy Faith, once delivered to the Saints, S. Jude ver. 3.

Lord, I believe.

Help Thou mine Unbelief. S. Mar. 9.24.

Supply the defects of my weak Faith. S. Luke 17.5.

Grant me also To Love the Father, for His tender Love. To Adore the Almighty,
for His Power.


To commit the keeping of my soul to Him, in weldoing, as unto a faithful
Creator. 1 S. Pet. 4.19.

Grant me to enjoie From Jesus, Christ,
salvation, anointing, the only begotten Son, Adoption.

To serve the Lord For His Conception, in Faith, For His Nativitie, in
Humility; For His Sufferings, in Patience and Antipathie to Sin. For His
Cross, in Crucifying all occasions of Sin. For His Death, in Mortifying the
Flesh. For His Burial, in Burying my bad purposes by good works. For His
Descent, in Meditation upon Hell. For His Resurrection, in Newness of Life* For
His Ascension, in Setting my affections on things above, For His Session, in
Seeking those better things at His Right hand. For His Return, in Aw of His
Second coming. For His Judgment, in Judging myself, before I com to be judged.


From the Spirit, to receive the Breath of saving Grace.

To be partaker In the Church, of Vocation; In the Holy Church, of
Sanctification; In the Cathol. Church, of Distribution and Communication, Of
the Holy Mysteries, Prayers, Fastings, Groans, Watchings, Tears, and suffering
of afflictions.



To a firm persuasion of the Remission of my sins.

To a consident Hope Of Resurrection Translation
to Life Eternal.

O Thou, that art the Hope of all the ends of the Earth, and of them that
remain in the broad sea; Psalm. 65.5.

O Thou, on whom our Fathers hoped, and Thou did deliver them; on whom they
trusted, and were not confounded; Psa. 22.4, 5.

O Thou who art my Hope even from my Youth, Psalm. 71.4.

Mothers breasts, On whom I have been left from the womb, Psa. 22.9, 10.

Be Thou still, and still, my Hope and my Portion in the Land of the living.
Psalm. 142.6.

My Hope is in Thy Nature, Names, Types, Word, Deed.

O let me not be ashamed of this my Hope. Psalm. 119.116.

O Thou, who art the Hope of all the ends of the Earth, Psalm. 65.5.

Remember all Thy creatures for good:

Visit the world with Thy mercies.

O Thou, Preserver of men, H. Job 7.20.

O Lord, the Lover of men,

Remember all mankind; and Thou, who have shut up all in unbelief, Romans 11.32.

Have mercy upon all, O Lord.

O Thou, who did die, rise and revive, That Thou might be Lord both of the
Dead and Living, Romans 14.9.

Whether we live or die, Thou art our Lord; v. 8. Whether Living or Dying, Have
mercy upon us, O Lord.

O Thou the Helper of the helpless, the Refuge in due time of trouble, Psalm.
9.9.

Remember all who are in any necessity, and stand in need of Thy help.

O Thou, the God of Grace and Truth, S. Joh. 1.14.

Confirm all, who stand, in Grace and Truth: 1 Thessal. 3.2, 13. and 2 S. Pet.
1.12.

Restore all who are sick of Heresy and Sin. Gal. 6.1 and 1 Timothy 6.4.

O Thou, who art the buckler and horn of salvation, through Thy Christ, Psalm.
28.9.

Think upon Thy Congregation, whom Thou have purchased and redeemed of old.
Psalm. 74.2.

Let there be one heart, and one soul of all Believers. Act. 4.32.

O Thou, who walk in the midst of the golden Candlesticks, Revelat. 2.1.

Remove not our Candlestick out of the place thereof. Revel. 2.5.

Set in order the things that are wanting; Tit. 1.5.

Establish what remain, which Thou might reject. Revel. 3.2.

O Thou, who art the Lord of the Harvest, Send forth Laborers sufficiently
enabled by Thee into Thy Harvest. S. Mat. 9.38.

O Thou who art the portion of them who continually attend in Thy Temple, 1
Cor. 9.13.

Grant that Thy Clergy may rightly divide the Word of Truth. 2 Timothy 2.15.
They may walk uprightly, according to the same. Gal 2.14.


Grant, that all they who love Christ may obeie and submit themselves to them.
Heb. 13.17.

O Thou the King of all Nations to the ends of the earth,

Establish all Governments in all the world, as being Thine own ordinance, Romans
13.2. though an ordinance among men. 1 S. Pet. 2.13.

Scatter Thou the people that delight in war. Psalm 68.30.

Make wars to cease in all the world, Psalm. 46.9.

O Lord, who art the Hope of the Islands, and on whom the Isles wait, P. Isa.
51.5. and 60.9.

Deliver this Island and Country wherein we dwell, from all distress, danger
and necessity. S. Chrysostom.

O Thou, who art the Lord of Lords, and Prince of Princes,

Be mindful of all Princes, to whom Thou have given Right to rule upon earth.

But, above all, be mindful of our most Gracious King, preserved by Thee:

Work mightily with Him, and prosper Him in all things:

Speak good unto His soul, for Thy Churches, and for Thy Peoples sake:

Grant unto Him a settled peace, which may not be taken away;

That in His prosperity we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty. 1 Timothy 2.2. S. Chrysostom.

O Thou, by whom all Powers are ordained, and ordered,

Grant to All that be in eminency at Court, that they may be eminent in
virtue, and in the Fear of Thee.

The Council, Thy holy wisdom.

All that are in power and authority over us, that they may have no power to
do any thing against the Truth, but for the Truth. 2 Corinthians. 13.8.

The Judges, Thy judgments, that they may judge all Persons in all Causes,
without prejudice and partiality. 1 Timoth. 5.21.

O God of Sabbath, Thou Lord of Hosts, Prosper and strengthen all Christian
Armies against the enemies of our most holy Faith.

Grant to All the People of this Kingdom, to be subject to their Prince, not
only for Wrath, but also for Conscience sake. Romans 13.5.

Husbandmen and Dealers in Cattle, Fruitful seasons.

The Navy and Fishermen, Calm seas and happy passage.

Tradesmen, grace not to overreach one another.

Artificers and Workmen, even to the poorest Beggars, to do their work, and
deal uprightly in their Vocations.

O God, the God not of us alone, but also of our seed.

Bless all the youth among us, that they may grow up in wisdom, and stature,
and favor with God and men. S. Luke 2.52.

O Thou, who command us to provide for our own, 1 Timothy 5.8. and hate them
who are without natural affection,

Remember, O Lord, all my Kindred according to the flesh, Romans 9.3.

Grant that I may speak peace to them, and seek their good.

O Thou, who willest us to recompense them who do good to us,

Remember, O Lord, for good all whom I have received any benefit from;

Preserve them, and keep them alive, that they may be blessed upon earth; and
deliver Thou not them into the will of their enemies. Psalm. 41.2.

O Thou, who have taught us, that he, who provideth not for his own house, is
wors then an Infidel; 1 Timothy 5.8.

Remember, according to Thy good pleasure, all in my family;

Peace be to my house;

The Son of peace be with all therein. S. Luke 10.5, 6.

O Thou, who have commanded that our righteousness exceed the righteousness of
sinners, S. Mat. 5.20.

Grant, O Lord, that I may Love them that love me, S. Mat. 5.46. Never forsake
mine, or my Parents Friends, and the Children of those Friends.


O Thou, who have commanded us to overcom evil with good; Romans 12.21. and to
pray for them, who despightfully use us; S. Mat. 5.44.

Be merciful to mine enemies, O Lord, even as to myself; and bring them, with
me, unto Thy heavenly Kingdom.

O Thou, who graciously respectest the prayers of Thy servants, which they make
for others;

Remember, O Lord, for good, and show mercy unto all, who remember me in their
prayers: And show mercy unto all, whom I am desired to remember in mine.

O Thou, who in every good work acceptest of a ready mind, 2 Corinthians. 8.12.

Remember them, O Lord, who, upon reasonable causes, find no leisure to pray;
even as Thou do them who call upon Thee.

Thou will arise and have mercy upon all, who are in extreme necessity: for
it is time that Thou have mercy upon them; yea the time is come. Psalm. 102.13.

Be merciful to them, O Lord, as to myself in my extremity.

Be mindful, O Lord, of The Infants, The Lads, The Men, The Children, The
Youth, The Aged.
All in Extreme Age and Weakness. The Hungry, The Naked, The Prisoners, The
Harborless, The Thirsty, The Sick, The Strangers, The Unburied.


Such as are Possessed by the Devil, and tempted to make themselves away;

Vexed with unclean spirits; Acts 5.16.

In Despair; Sick in Soul, Body;
Faint-hearted; In Prison and Bonds; Condemned to die.

All Orphans, Widows, Strangers; Travailers by Land, Water;
Women with Child, giving Suck;
In hard Servitude, in the Mines, Galleys,
In Solitude.

Thou, Lord, shall save both Man and Beast: How excellent is Thy mercy, O God?
and, doubtless, the children of men shall put their trust under the shadow of
Thy wings. Psalm 36.7.

THe Lord bless us, and keep us;

The Lord make His face to shine upon us, and be gracious unto us;

The Lord lift up His countenance upon us, and give us peace. Numb. 6.24, 25,
26.

LOrd, I commend unto Thee My Soul and Body, My Mind and Thoughts, My Prayers
and Wishes, My Senses and Members, My Life and Death. My Brethren and Sisters,
and their children. My Friends and Benefactors; My Family and Nighbors; All
commended to my prayers; This my Native Country; and all Christian people.


LEt us lift up our hearts unto the Lord, as it is very meet, right, and our
bounden duty, that we should in all, and for all Things, at all Times, in all
Places, by all Means, ever, every where, every way, Make mention of Thee,
Confess to Thee, Bless Thee, Worship Thee, Praise Thee, Sing laud to Thee, Give
Thanks to Thee,


The Creator, Nourisher, Preserver, Governor, Physician, Benefactor, Perfecter,
Lord and Father, King and God,
of all.

The Fountain of Life and Immortality, Threasurie of eternal good things:
Whom

The Heavens, and the Heavens of Heavens, Angels, and all the Celestial Powers
sing praise unto;


Uncessantly crying one to another, (and we, base and unworthie we, with them
under their feet) Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts, Heaven and Earth is
full of the Majesty of Thy Glory. P. Isa. 6.3.

Blessed be the Glory of the Lord from His place. P. Ezech. 3.12.

For His Divinity, Incomprehensibleness, Sublimitie, Dominion, Almightiness,
Eternity, Prevision and Providence.


My God, my Strength and Stay, Refuge and Deliverer, Helper and Defender, Horn
of salvation, and my Lifter up. Psalm. 18.1.

[The Planetarie Character or Hieroglyphic of MVNDAIE, called in H. Scripture,
the Second Day, Genesis 1.8.]

MY voice shall Thou hear betimes, O Lord; early in the Morning will I direct
my prayer unto Thee, and Thou will look upon me. Psalm. 5.3.

BLessed art Thou, O Lord, who createdst the Firmament of the Heaven, Genesis 1.6.

The Heaven and the Heaven of Heavens.

The Celestial Powers, Angels, Archangels, Cherubim, Seraphim.

The Waters above the Heavens: Vapors, Exhalations; from whence Clouds from the
ends of the earth, P. Jer. 10.12.

Storms, Dew, Hail; Snow as Wool, Hoar Frost as Ashes, Ice as Morsels:
Psalm. 147.

Lightnings, Thunder: Winds out of His Threasures, P. Jer. 10.12.

Tempests. The Waters beneath the Heavens, For Drink, Washing.


P. Moses.
O Lord, I confess mine iniquities, and the iniquities of my Fathers, with the
trespass which I trespassed against Thee, and that I have walked contrary unto
Thee, Levit. 26.40.

Set not, O Lord, set not my misdeeds before Thee; (my whole age is in the
fight of Thy countenance. Psalm. 90.8.)

But pardon the iniquity of Thy servant, according to the greatness of thy
mercy; and as Thou have forgiven me from my childhood, even until now. Numb.
14.19.

H. Job.
I have sinned, what shall I do unto Thee, O Thou Preserver of men?

Why have Thou set me as a mark against Thee, so that I am a burden to myself?

O put my wickedness out of remembrance, and wash away all my sin. Chapt. 7.
Ver. 20, 21.

Deliver me from going down into destruction, for Thou have found in whom to be
appeased. Chapt. 33. Ver. 24.

The Canaanitish woman.
Have mercy upon me, O Son of David.

Lord, help me.

Yea, Lord, even the dogs eat of the crumbs, which fall from their Masters
table. S. Mat. 15.22, 25, 27.

The Servant owing 10000. Talents.
Lord, have patience with me: yea rather (I confess, I have nothing to pay,)
Forgive me all my debt, I beseech Thee. S. Mat. 18.26, 29, 32.

K. David.
1. How long will Thou forget me, O Lord, for ever? how long will Thou hide Thy
face from me?

2. How long shall I seek counsel in my soul, and be so vexed in my heart? (day
and night?) how long shall mine enemies triumph over me?

3. Consider and hear me, O Lord my God, lighten mine eyes that I sleep not in
death.

4. Lest mine enemy say, I have prevailed against him; for, if I be cast
down, they that trouble me will rejoice at it.

5. But my trust is in Thy mercy. Psalm. 13.

[LOrd] remove far from me 1 All Impiety and Profaneness, Superstition and
Hypocrisy.
2 Idolatry and Self-wil-worship. 3 Rash Oaths and Cursing. 4 Withdrawing
from, and Irreverence in Thy Public Service, Hebr. 10.25.38. 5 Pride and
Carelessness. 6 Strife and Wrath. 7 Wantoness and Uncleaness. 8 Idleness and
Deceit. 9 Lying and Slandering. 10 All wicked and unbeseeming Imaginations.
All Lascivious Thoughts, Filthy Desires.

Give me 1 Piety and true Godliness. 2 Grace to Adore and Worship Thee. 3 Not
to speak, but with Blessing, Not to swear, but with Religion. 4 Decent
Confession in the Congregation. 5 True Natural Affection, and a Tractable
Disposition. 6 Patience and Meekness. 7 Chastity and Temperance. 8
Contentation and Goodness. 9 Truth and Integrity. 10 Good Thoughts and
Perseverance to the end.


I Believe in God, I. The Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven, Earth.
II. JESUS Christ, His only begotten Son, Our Lord. The Articles of Christ's
Humiliation,
Who was 1 Conceived by the Holy Ghost, 2 Born of the ever-virgin Marie, 3
Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was 4 Crucified, 5 Dead, 6 Buried.

The Articles of Christ's Exaltation.
Who 1 Descended into Hell, 2 Rose from the Dead, 3 Ascended into Heaven, 4
Sits on the Right hand, 5 Shall com thence again, 6 To judge the Quick, Dead.

III. The Holy Ghost. The 1 Holy Church, 2 Catholic Church, 3 Communion of
Saints.
The Forgiveness of Sins. The Resurrection of the Body. The Life Everlasting.



ANd now what is my Hope?

Art not Thou, O Lord?

Surely my Hope is from Thee. Psalm. 39.8.

In Thee, O Lord, have I put my trust Psalm. 38.15.

Let me never be confounded. Psalm. 25.1.

LEt us beg of the Lord,

For all Creatures, the gift of Healthful times. Fruitful times. Peaceful times.


For all Mankind, Not Christians, Atheists, Ungodlie, Heathens, Turks, Jews,
Conversion. Christians, Laboring under Infirmities, Sins,
Restoration. Endowed with Grace, Truth,
Confirmation.


Help and Comfort to all Men and Women laboring under Dejection of Mind,
Infirmity of Body, Poverty, Trouble.
Thankfulness and Moderation to all that enjoie Cheerfulness of Mind, Health of
Body, Plenty of Estate,
Freedom from Trouble.

For the Church Catholic, Confirmation and Enlargement; Eastern, Deliverance
and Unity; Western, Perfection and Peace; British, Supply of what is wanting,
Establishment of what remains.


[Let us beseech the Lord,]

For the Bishops, Presbyters,
and all the people that love Christ.

For all Estates throughout the world, Christian and Other; Nighboring, This
among Us.


For all in Authority, Our King, preserved by God, The Queen, The Prince.
Courtiers, Counselors, Judges, Magistrates, People, Underofficers,
Husbandmen, Dealers in Catel, Fishermen, Merchants, Tradesmen, Artificers, even
to the Laborers, Poor.


For the Succession and good Education of all the Roial Seed, Noble Branches;
Students
in the Universities, Inns of Court, Schools. Shops, in the City, Country.



For all who are recommended to my Prayers,

By Kindred or Alliance; My Brethren, My Sisters.


The blessing of God be upon them and their children.

By the obligation of any Benefit received from them.

Do Thou requite them all, O Lord, according to that good I have received from
them:

Even all, who have ministered to my necessity in carnal things.

By Tuition and Charge; "All Instructed, and "at any time "Ordained by me. "My
"College, "My "Parish.
"The Collegiate "Church of "Southwel, "S. Paul, "Westminster.


"The Dioceses of "Chichester, "Elie, "Winchester.


"The "Clergy, "Laity, "Officials, "Governors of them.


"The Deanrie of the "Kings Chapel.

"The Colleges committed "to "My Visitation, My Family. [In stead of the
Bishops particular Relations, marked thus" put in your own.]


By Moral Friendship; All that love me, though some of them unknown to me.

By Christian Charity; All that hate me without a cause; and some for Truth and
Righteousness sake:

By Nighborhood; All that live quietly and harmlesly by me.

By Promise; All whom I have undertaken to remember in my Prayers.

By mutual Office; All that remember me in their Prayers; and desire the like
of me. For those, who, for want of their own leisure, and upon reasonable
causes, are hind'red from coming to Prayers.

For those, who have no body to pray for them in particular.

For those, who at present labor under extreme necessity, great affliction.


For those, who undertake any great Design, whereby Glory may come to the
Name of God, or some great Good to the Church.

For those who have don any notable Good work for the Church, or Poor.

For those, who at any time have been scandalized by me in Word, Deed.


Psalm. 67.
GOd be merciful unto me, and bless me: Show me the light of His countenance,
and be merciful unto me. Ver. 1.

God, even our God, give me His blessing. V. 6.

God bless me. V. 7.

REceive, O Lord, this my supplication, Direct my life in Thy Commandments,
Sanctify my Soul, Purify my Body, Rectify my Thoughts, Cleans my Desires,
Renew My Soul Mind Heart
and Body, Spirit, Reins,
My whole man.

For, if Thou will, Thou can.

The 1 Lord, the Lord, 2 God, 3 Compassionate, 4 Merciful, 5 Long-suffering,
Abundant in 6 Goodness, 7 Truth. 8 Keeping mercy for Thousands. Forgiving 9
Iniquity, 10 Transgression, 11 Sin. 12 Not clearing the Guilty. 13 Visiting
the iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children. Exodus 34.6, 7.


I Will always give thanks unto the Lord: His praise shall ever be in my mouth.
Psalm. 34.1.

Glory be to God in the Highest, on Earth Peace, Good-wil toward Men. S. Luke
2.14.

The Hierarchy of Heavenly Essences, commonly called The Nine Orders of
Angels, with their distinct Operations.
ANgels, Tuition;

Archangels, 1 Thessal. 4.16. Illumination;

Virtues, 1 S. Pet. 3.22. Miracles;

Thrones, Judgment;

Dominions, Beneficence;

Principalities, Government;

Powers, Colos. 1.16 Against Devils;

Cherubim, Knowledge;

Seraphim, Charity.

The Planetarie Character, or Hie^oglyphic of TVESDAIE, called in H. Scripture,
The Third Day, Genes. 1.13.

O God, Thou art my God; early will I seek Thee. Psalm. 63.1.

BLessed art Thou, O Lord, who did gather the Waters into the Sea; and make
the dry Land appear.

Who did cause the Earth to bring forth Herbs Trees
yielding fruit. Genesis 1.9, 11.

The Depths and Seas, as in a bottle. Psalm. 33.7.

Lakes, Rivers, Fountains.

The Earth, Continent, Islands.


Mountains, Hills, Valleys.

Arable, Medows, Woods.

Green things, Corn, Grass, Herbs, Flowers,


For Food, Pleasure, Medicine.


Trees for Fruit Wine, Oil, Spices.
Timber.


Things under the Earth. Stones, Metals and Minerals, Coals.


Blood and Fire, and Vapor of smoke. Acts 2.19.

K. David.
WHo can tell, how often he offends? O cleans Thou me from my secret faults.

Keep Thy servant from presumptuous sins; lest they get the dominion over me.
Psalm. 19.12, 13.

For Thy Names sake, be merciful unto my sin, for it is great. Psa. 25.10.

My sins have taken such hold upon me, that I am not able to look up:

Yea, they are more in number, then the hairs upon my head; and my heart has
failed me.

O Lord, let it be Thy pleasure to deliver me; Make haste, O Lord, to help me
Psalm. 40.15, 16.

Show Thy mavelous loving kindness upon me, Thou that art the Savior of them,
that put their trust in Thee. Psalm. 17.7.

I said, Lord, be merciful unto me; heal my soul; for I have sinned against
Thee. Psalm. 41.4.

K. Solomon.
I have sinned; but I am ashamed, and turn from my wicked ways; and return
unto my heart; and with all my heart I return unto Thee;

And seek Thy face; and pray unto Thee; saying,

I have sinned, I have don perversely, I have committed wickedness.

Lord, I know the plague of mine own heart:

And, behold, I return unto Thee, with all my heart, and with all my strength.

And now, O Lord, from Thy Habitation, and from the Throne of Thy glorious
Kingdom in Heaven, hear Thou the prayer, and the supplication of Thy servant.

Psalm. 41.4.
And be merciful unto Thy servant; and heal his soul. 1 Kings 8. and 2 Chronicles. 6.

The Publican
God be merciful to me a sinner. S. Luke 18.13.

Be merciful to me the chief of sinners. 1 Timothy 1.15.

Prodigal.
Father, I have sinned against heaven, and against Thee;

I am no more worthy to be called Thy son;

Make me one of Thy hired servants.

Make me one, though even the last, and the least of them all. S. Luke 15.18,
19. Psalm. 30.

What profit is there in my blood, when I go down to the pit? Ver. 9.

Shall the dust give thanks unto Thee? or shall it declare Thy truth? Ver. 10.

Hear, O Lord, and have mercy upon me; Lord, be Thou my helper. Ver. 11.

Turn my heaviness into joie. Ver. 12.

[O Lord, forgive me]

My Thoughts, Slips, Guilt, Falls, Sins, Transgressions, Iniquities,
Abominations.


[Work in me]

Carefulness, Clearing of myself, Indignation, Fear, Vehement Desire, Zeal,
Revenge. 2 Cor. 7.11.

Faith.

1. THe Deity. Love, Power, Providence.
II. Salvation, Anointing, Adoption, Dominion, Conception, Birth, Sufferings,
Cross, Death, Burial; Descent, Resurrection, Ascension, Session, Return,
Judgment. III. Inspiration and Sanctification. Calling out of the world.
Sanctifying in the world. Communion of Saints, H. Mysteries.
Forgiveness of sins, Resurrection, Life Eternal.

BE Thou my Hope, O Thou that art the Hope of all the ends of the Earth;

And of them that remain in the broad sea. Psalm. 65.5.

[BLess, O Lord, All] Thy Creatures, Mankind, Compassed with infirmities.


The Church Catholic, Eastern, Western, British.


The Bishops, Presbyters, Clergy, People, that love Christ.


All Estates of the World, Christian, Nighbour, Our.


Godly Princes, Kings,
Our. Counselors, Judges, Magistrates, Commanders at Land, Sea,
Commonaltie. Succession: Learning, All in the Court, City, Country.
All, who, any way, minister To our Souls; Bodies
Food, Raiment, Health; Things for this Life.

[All whom we are bound to pray for, By] Nature, Good-turns, Charge formerly,
at present,
Friendship, Charity, Neighborhood. Promise, Mutual respects.
All who Find no leisure to pray; Are in great want, extreme necessity.


Psalm. 121.
THe Lord be my Keeper; the Lord be my Defense upon my right hand. Ver. 5.

The Lord preserve me from all evil; Yea, the Lord keep my soul. V. 7.

The Lord preserve my going out, and my coming in, from this time forth for
evermore. V. 8.

O Lord, Thou know how, Thou art able and willing to do good to my soul:

I, wretched man that I am! Romans 7.24. neither know how, nor am able, nor, as I
ought, willing to do it.

Do Thou, O Lord, I beseech Thee, in Thy unspeakable loving kindness, so order
and dispose of me, as Thou know to be best pleasing to Thee, and most
expedient for me.

See The Triumph of Mercy in the Bishops Manual for the Sick.
GOodness, Grace, Love; Kindness, Humanity; Tit. 3.4.

Gentleness, Meekness; 2 Cor. 10.1.

Forbearance, Longsuffering; Romans 2.4.

Manifold Mercies; 1 S. Pet. 1.3.

Great Mercies; Psalm. 51.1.

Compassions, Romans 12.1.

Multitude of Compassions; Psalm. 51.1.

Bowels of Compassions; Col. 3.12.

Tenderness of Abundant tender Compassions, S. Jam. 5.11.

In Passing by, P. Mich. 7.18. Overlooking, Acts 17.30. Conniving, P. Isai.
57.11.


Many Times; Years;
H. Nehem. 9.28, 30.

Unwillingly [angrie] Lament. 3.33.

Not [suffering His] whole [displeasure to arise.] Psalm. 78.39.

Not according [to my desert.] Psalm. 103.10.

Not always. Psa. 103.9.

In wrath [remembring] mercy. P. Hab. 3.2.

Repenting of the evil. P. Joel 2.13.

[Thinking every stripe] two. P. Isa. 40.2.

[Receiving] to Pardon, Reconciliation, Propitiation,


[The Planetatie Character or Hieroglyphic of WENSDAIE, called in H. Scripture,
the Fourth Day, Genesis 1.19.]

IN the Morning watches I thought upon Thee, O Lord;

Because Thou have been my helper. Psalm. 63 7, 8.

BLessed art Thou, O Lord, who createdst the Two Lights, The Sun, Moon;
The greater, lesser.



And the Stars, Genes. 1.16.

For Light, Signs Seasons.
V. 14.

For Spring, Summer, Harvest, Winter.


For Days, Weeks, Months, Years.


And to rule over The Day, Night.
V. 18.

P. Isaiah.
BEhold, Thou art wroth, for we have sinned:

We are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses as filthy rags:

We all fade as a leaf; and our iniquities, like the wind, have taken us away.

But, now, O Lord, Thou art our Father:

We are the claie, we all are the work of Thy hands.

Be not wroth with us very sore;

Do not suddenly remember our sins:

But behold, look upon us, O Lord, we are all Thy people. Chapt. 64. V. 5, 6,
8, 9.

P. Jeremiah.
Though our iniquities testify against us, O Lord, show mercy to us, for Thy
Names sake;

For our backslidings are many; we have sinned against Thee.

Yet, Thou, O Lord, art in the midst of us; and Thy Name is called upon among
us;

O forget us not.

O Lord, our confidence, who savest us in the time of trouble,

Why art Thou as a Forreiner in the land?

Or as a Native, that comes but to his Inn?

As one that is fallen into a sleep?

As a man that is not able to save? Chapt. 14. V. 7, 8, 9.

O Lord, forgive our iniquities; and remember our sins no more. Ch 31. V. 34,

S. Paul.
Lord, I am carnal, sold under sin:

In me (that is in my flesh) dwells no good thing.

For, the good, that I would, I do not; but the evil, that I would not, that I
do.

I consent unto the Law, that it is good;

And I delight in the law, after the inner man:

But I see another law in my Members, warring against the Law of my Mind; and
bringing me into captivity to the Law of Sin.

O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death?

I thank God through JESUS Christ, Romans 7. V. 14, 16, 18, 19, 22, 23, 24, 25.

Because, where sin abounded, Grace did much more abound. Chapt. 5. V. 20.

O Lord, Thy graciousness leads me unto Repentance. Romans 2.4.

O give me Repentance, That I may recover myself out of the snare of the
Divil, who am taken Captive by him at his will. 2 Timothy 2.25, 26.

S. Peter.
The time past of my life is sufficient to have wrought the will of my lusts;

When I walked in lasciviousness, revellings, banquetings, and in all excess of
riot. 1 Epist. 4. Chap. 3. V.

O Lamb of God, without blemish, and without spot,

Who redeemedst me with Thy precious blood. 1 Epist. 1. Cha. 18. and 19. Ver.

For that same Blood, have mercy and save me;

For that Blood, and for that Name of Thine, beside which there is no other
under Heaven, given among men, whereby we must be saved Acts 4.12.

K. David.
God, Thou know my simpleness; and my faults are not hid from Thee. Psalm.
69.5.

Lord, all my desire is before Thee; and my groaning is not hid from Thee.
Psalm. 38.9.

Let not them, who trust in Thee, O Lord God of Hosts, be ashamed for my cause:

Let not them, who seek Thee, be confounded through me, O Lord God of Israel.

Take me out of the mire, that I sink not;

O let me be delivered from them that hate me; and out of the deep waters.

Let not the water-flood drown me; neither let the deep swallow me up; neither
let the pit shut her mouth upon me. Psalm. 69. V. 6, 15.16.

1 PRide, an [ The VII. Cursed Nations, Deuteronomy. 7.1.]
1 Amorite; 2 Envy, an [ The VII. Cursed Nations, Deuteronomy. 7.1.]
2 Hittite; 3 Anger, a [ The VII. Cursed Nations, Deuteronomy. 7.1.]
3 Perezite; 4 Gluttony, a [ The VII. Cursed Nations, Deuteronomy. 7.1.]
4 Girgashite; 5 Wantoness, an [ The VII. Cursed Nations, Deuteronomy. 7.1.]
5 Hivite; 6 Worldly Carkings, a [ The VII. Cursed Nations, Deuteronomy. 7.1.]
6 Canaanite; 7 Lukewarm Carelessness, a [ The VII. Cursed Nations, Deuteronomy. 7.1.]
7 Jebusite.
1 Humility, 2 Mercy, 3 Patience, 4 Temperance, 5 Chastity, 6 Contentation,
7 Alacrity and Diligence.
I Believe In the Father Affection and Good Will; Almighty, Saving Power;
Creator, Providence;
To Preserve, Govern, Perfect
the World.

In JESUS, Salvation; Christ, Anointing; The only Son, Adoption;


To Our Lord, Service [is due.]

In His Conception, the purging of our unclean Conception and Birth. Birth, the
purging of our unclean Conception and Birth. Sufferings, that, what we should,
we might not. Cross, the Curse of the Law; Death, the sting of Death; Burial,
eternal corruption in the Grave, is taken away.


In His Descent, that, whether we should [go] we might not. Resurrection, as
the First Fruits of them that sleep. Ascension, to prepare a place for us.
Session, to appear, and make intercession [for us.] Coming again, to take, to
Himself, those that are His. Judging, to render to every one, according to his
works.


In the holy Ghost, Power from on high, Outwardly and Invivisibly, but
Powerfully and Manifestly, converting unto Holiness, The Church, The Mystical
Body of them, who are called out of the whole world, to a Corporation
according to Faith, Holiness.


The Communion of Saints, the Members of that Body.

A mutual Participation in the Holy Mysteries;

To a Full persuasion of the Remission of sins;

Hope of Resurrection, Translation
to Life Eternal.

MY Trust is in Thy mercy, for ever and ever. Psalm. 52.9.

How excellent is Thy mercy, O God! Psalm. 36.7.

If I have any Hope, it is in Thy mercy.

Let me not be ashamed of this my Hope. Psalm. 119.116.

WE beseech Thee, O Lord, remember all for good;

Have mercy upon all, O Lord;

Be reconciled to us all.

Settle the multitudes of Thy people in peace;

Dissipate all Scandals;

Ceas all Wars;

Stop all rising Heresies.

O God our Savior, and the Hope of all the ends of the Earth, Psalm. 65.5.

Grant unto us Thy Peace and Love.

Remember to crown the year with Thy goodness; Psalm. 65.12.

For the eyes of all wait upon Thee; and Thou give them their meat in due
season;

Thou openest Thy hand, and fillest all things living with Thy gracious
bounty. Psalm. 145.15, 16.

Remember Thy Holy Church, from one end of the world unto the other;

And give Peace unto her whom Thou have purchased with Thy precious blood;

And establish her unto the consummation of the world.

Remember all who bring forth fruit, and do good works in Thy Holy Churches;

Them also who are mindful of the Poor and Needy;

Reward them with Thy rich and heavenly gifts;

Give them For Earthly, Heavenly; Corruptible, Incorruptible; Temporal,
Eternal Blessings.


Remember them, who lead their lives In Virginity, Chastity, and
Mortification.


Them also, who in honorable Marriage, in Piety, and the Fear of Thee.

Remember every Christian soul, who being in any Affliction, Trouble, Agony,
stands in need of Thy mercy and help.

Remember our Brethren, who are in Captivity, Prisons, Bonds, Bitter Servitude.


Giving Conversion to all, who go astraie; Health to the Sick; Deliverance to
the Captives.


Remember all Pious and Faithful Kings, to whom Thou have given a Right to
reign upon earth.

And chiefly, O Lord,

Remember our most Gracious King, preserved by Thee;

Establish his Throne;

Subdue to him all his enemies;

Speak good to his soul, for Thy Churches, and all Thy Peoples sake.

Give him long Peace, which may not be taken away;

That under his happy Government, we may lead a peaceable and quiet life, in
all godliness and honesty. 1 Timothy 2.2.

Remember, O Lord, all Principalities and Powers; and all that be in place at
Court;

Those who are of the Counsel;

Or in the Seats of Judgment.

And all that fight Thy battles for us, by Land or Sea.

Furthermore, be graciously pleased, O Lord, to remember The Holy Fathers of
the Church; Venerable Presbytery, and all the Clergy,
who rightly divide the Word of Truth, 2 Timothy 2.15. and walk uprightly
according to the same. Galat. 2.14.

Remember, O Lord, our Brethren, who are present, and join together in prayer
with us, in this holy hour.

Remember their Devotion and their Zeal.

Remember them also, who upon good cause are absent;

And have mercy upon them and us, according to the multitude of Thy mercy.

Fill our garners with all good:

Preserve our married people in peace and concord;

Cherish up all Infants;

Instruct the Youth;

Strengthen the Aged;

Comfort the Fainthearted;

Gather the Dispersed;

Bring back again them that are gone astraie;

Unite them to the Holy, Church. Catholic, Church. Apostolic Church.


Deliver all that are possessed with unclean spirits;

Sail with all that go by Sea;

Travail with all that go by Land;

Take care of the Widows;

Defend the Orphans;

Set the Captives at Liberty;

Heal the Sick.

Remember, O God, all who are questioned at the Bar of Justice; condemned to
the Mines and Galleys.
who are in Banishment any other Affliction, Necessity, Distress,
Need of Thy great: mercy.
who Love Hate
us.

All recommended to us Thy unworthie servants, to be remembered in our Prayers.

Remember, O Lord, our God, all Thy People; and pour upon them all the riches
of Thy mercy; giving, to all, their desires tending to salvation.

Remember, O God, all, whom we, through ignorance, forgetfulness, or multitude
of names, have not remembered;

Thou know the condition and name of every one;

Thou know every one, from his Mothers womb.

For Thou, O Lord, art the Helper of the Helpless; Hope of the Hopeless;

The Savior of them who are tossed with Tempests;

The Haven of them who sail;

The Physician of them who are sick:

Be Thou all to all, Thou who know every one His Desires, Habitation, Wants.


O Lord, deliver this City, and all the Country wherein we dwell, From
Pestilence, Famine, Earthquakes, Inundations Fire, Sword, Foreign Invasion,
and Civil Insurrections.


Appeas the Schisms of the Churches;

Abate the Insolences of the Heathen;

And receiv us all into thy Kingdom; owning us for children of the Light;

And grant unto us Thy Peace and Love, O Lord our God.

Remember, O Lord our God, all Spirits and all Flesh, whom we have remembered,
and whom we have not remembered.

O Lord, make the end of our Life Christian, acceptable to Thee; and, if Thou
think good, without Pain, in Peace; gathering us together under the feet of Thy
Elect, when Thou will, and as Thou will, only without Shame and Sin. Collected
out of the Liturgies of SS. James, Basil, and Chrysostom.


THe Glorious Majesty of the Lord our God be upon us;

Prosper Thou the work of our hands upon us;

O prosper Thou our handie-work. Psa. 90.17.

LOrd be Thou Within me, to strengthen me;

Without me, to Keep me;

Above me, to Protect me;

Beneath me, to Uphold me;

Before me, to Direct me;

Behind me, to Reduce me;

Round about me, to Defend me;

BLessed be Thou, O Lord God of Israel, our Father, for ever and ever.

To Thee, O Lord, belongs Majesty, Power, Glory, Victory, Strength,
Confession;

For Thou art Lord over all, in Heaven and on Earth. 1 Chronicles. 29.10,

Every King and Nation trembles at Thy presence: P. Isa. 64.2.

Thine, O Lord, is the Kingdom and Exaltation over all Things, Dominion;


Riches are from Thee, and Honor from Thy presence;

Thou reignest over all, O Lord;

Thou have Dominion over all Dominion;

And in Thy hand is Power and Might.

And in Thy hand it is to make great, and to give strength to all:

And now, O Lord, we confess to Thee; and praise Thy glorious Name. 1 Chronicles.
29.12, 13.

[The Planetarie Character, or Hieroglyphic of THVRSDAIE* called in H.
Scripture, The Fifth Day, Genes. 1.23.]

LEt us be satisfied with Thy mercy, O Lord, in the Morning. Psalm. 90.14.

BLessed art Thou, O Lord, who broughtest forth, out of the Waters, every

Living Creature that moves, and the Whales, and winged Fouls;

And blessedst them, so that they were fruitful, and did multiply. Genesis 1.20,
21, 22.

The Graduals.
SEt up Thy self, O God, above the heavens;

And Thy glory above all the earth. Psa. 108.5.

By Thy Ascension draw us unto Thee, O Lord; S. John 12.32.

That we may set our affections on things above, and not on things of the
earth. Colos. 3.2.

By the wonderful Mystery of Thy Holy Body, and Thy Precious Blood,
instituted in the Evening of this Day, O Lord have mercy.

P, Ezechiel.
AS I live, says the Lord God, I will not the death of a sinner; but that the
wicked turn from his ways, and live.

Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die, O house of Israel.
Chapter 33. V. 11.

P. Jeremiah.
Turn Thou us unto Thee, O Lord; and so shall we be turned. Lam. 5.21.

P. Ezechiel.
Turn us from all our transgressions; and let not iniquity be our ruin. Chapter
18. V. 30.

P. Daniel.
I have sinned, I have don unjustly, I have been ungodlie, in departing from
Thy Precepts and Thy Judgments.

O Lord, righteousness belongs to Thee; but to me confusion of face; as at
this day: be cause of our unfaithfulness, for which Thou have cast us off.

O Lord, to us confusion of face, and to our Princes; because we have sinned
against Thee.

O Lord, Thy righteousness is in all things:

According to all Thy righteousness let Thine anger, and Thy fury be turned
away:

And cause Thy face to shine upon Thy servant.

O my God, incline Thine ear, and hear;

Open Thine eyes, and behold my desolation.

O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord hearken; hearken O Lord, and do; do and
defer not; for Thine own sake, O Lord, O Lord my God:

For Thy servant is called by Thy Name. Chapter 9. V. 5, 7, 8, 16, 17 18, 19.

S. James.
In many things we offend all. Chapter 3. V. 2.

Lord, let Thy mercy triumph over Thy justice, in my sins. Chap. 2. Ver. 13.

S. John.
If I say that I have no sin, I deceive myself, and the truth is not in me.

But I confess my sins, many and grievous; and Thou, O Lord, are faithful and
just to forgive my sins to me confessing them. Ep. 1. Chapter 1. V. 8, 9.

But even for this I have an Advocate, with Thee, to Thee,

Thine only begotten Son the Righteous.

Let Him be the propitiation for my sins, who is for the sins of the whole
world. Ep. 1. Chapter 2. V. 1, 2.

K. David.
Will the Lord absent Himself for ever? and will He be no more entreated?

Is His mercy clean gone, for ever? and is His promise com utterly to an end,
for evermore?

Has God forgotten to be gracious? and will He shut up His loving kindness in
displeasure?

And I said, now I began: this is the change of the Right hand of the most
High. Psalm. 77. V. 7, 8, 9, 10.

[O Lord, give me grace to lay aside]

Every weight, and the sin that does so easily beset me; Heb. 12.1.

All Filthiness, and Superfluity of naughtiness; S. James 1.21.

The lust of the Flesh, Eye,


And the Pride of life; 1 S. John 2.16.

Every motion both of flesh and Spirit, which is contrary to the will of Thy
holiness.

[GIve me grace also]

[The eight Beatitudes.]
1 To be Poor in spirit; That I may have my part in the Kingdom of Heaven.

2 To Mourn; That I may be comforted.

3 To be Meek; That I may inherit the earth.

4 To Hunger and Thirst after righteousness; That I may be filled. To be
Merciful;

5 That I may obtain mercy

6 To be Pure in heart; That I may see God.

7 To be a Peacemaker; That I may be called a child of God.

8 To be ready to suffer persecution for Righteousness sake;

That my reward may be in the Kingdom of Heaven. S. Mat. 5.

COming unto God, I believe That He is; He is a Rewarder of them, who
diligently seek Him. Hebr. 11.6.


I know that

My Redeemer lives. H. Job 19.25.

He is Christ, the Son of the living God. S. Mat. 16.16.

He is indeed the Savior of the world. S. Joh. 4.42.

He came into the world, to save sinners; of whom I am chief. 1 Timothy 1.15.

We believe that, through the grace of our Lord JESUS Christ, we shall be saved,
even as our Fathers. Acts 15.11.

I know that this my flesh, which has shared in all, shall rise again upon the
earth. H. Job 19.25.

I beleev verily to see the goodness of the Lord, in the Land of the living.
Psalm. 27.15.

OUr heart shall rejoice in Him; because we have hoped in His Holy Name. Psalm.
33.20.

In the Name, Of the Father: Savior, Mediator, Intercessor, Redeemer: Double
Paraclete,
Under the Figures of a Lamb, Dove.


Let Thy merciful kindness, O Lord, be upon us; like as we do put our trust in
Thee. Psalm. 33.21.

[Collected out of S. James, and S. Chrysostom. Liturgy.]
IN the peace of God, let us pray

For the Peace which is from above, and for the salvation of our souls;

For the Peace of the whole world:

For the Establishment of the Churches of God; and the Union of them all:

For this Holy Place; and all that enter into it, with Faith and Reverence:

For our Holy Fathers the Bishops; the Venerable Presbytery, and Deaconrie in
Christ:

For the whole Clergy and Laity:

For this Holy Mansion; all this City and Country; and all Faithful people,
who dwell therein:

For good Temperature of the Air; Fruitful Seasons; Peaceable Times:

For all who travail by land or by water:

For all who are sick, ill at eas, and in Captivity; and for their safety:

Help and save us;

Have mercy on us; and keep us by Thy grace, O God.

Neither are we unmindful to bless Thee, for the most Holy, Pure, highly
Blessed, the Mother of God, Marie the eternal Virgin; with all the Saints:

Recommending our selves and our whole life to Thee, O Lord, our Christ and God:

For to Thee belongs glory, honor and worship.

THe grace of our Lord JESUS Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of
the Holy Ghost, be with me, and with us all. Amen. 2 Cor. 13.14.

I commend both my self, and mine, and all that I have, to Him who is able to
keep me from falling, and to present me faultless before the presence of His
glory,

To the only wise God, and our Savior;

To whom be glory and majesty, dominion and power, now and for ever. Amen. S.
Jude Ver. 24, 25.

O Lord my God, For my Being, Life, Endowment with Reason, Nourishment,
Preservation, Guidance, Education, Civil Government and Religion.

For thy Gifts of Grace, Nature, the World;


For my Redemption, Regeneration, Catechizing;


For Thy Calling, Recalling, Manifold recalling me, again and again.


For Thy Forbearance, Long-suffering Long long-suffering toward me many times,
years,
Even until now;

For all whom I have received any good benefit
from;

For them, if any, whom I have don any good unto;

For the use of Thy Present good things,

For Thy Promise and my Hope of enjoying Future good things.

For my Good and careful Parents, Gentle Masters, Ever memorable Benefactors,
Brethren of the Clergy, who are of one mind, Understanding Auditors, True
friends, Faithful servants.

For all who have any way benefited me By their Writings, Sermons,
Discourses, Prayers, Examples, Reproofs, Injuries;


For all these, and for all other, Known or Unknown, Manifest or Secret,
Remembered or Forgotten by me, From whom I have willingly or unwillingly
received good, I prais Thee, I bless Thee, I give Thee thanks; And I will prais
and bless, and give Thee thanks all the days of my life.

What am I? and what is my Father's house? 2 P. Sam. 7.18.

That Thou should look upon such a dead dog, as I am. 2 P. Sam. 9.8.

What reward shall I give unto the Lord, for all the benefits that He has don
unto me? Psalm. 116.11.

What thanks can I render unto God, for all wherein He Has spared forborne me
until now?

Holy, Holy, Holy, Thou art worthy, O Lord our God, to receiv glory, and
honor, and power;

For Thou have created all things; and for Thy pleasure they are and were
created. Revel. 4.8, 11.

[The Planetarie Character or Hieroglyphic of FRIEDAIE called in H. Scripture,
the Sixth Day, Genesis 1.31. and the (...) and (...), The Day of Preparation,
and the Day before the Sabbath, in the H. Evangelists.]

IN the Morning shall my Prayer come unto Thee. Psalm. 88.13.

BLessed art Thou, O Lord, who did bring forth of the earth Beasts, Catel,
Creeping things.
Genes. 1.24, 25.

For Nourishment, Clothing, Help.


And did make Man after Thy Image, to have Dominion over the earth; and
did bless him. Genesis 1.26. and 28.

[Special Heads of Meditation.]
The Consultation [of the blessed Trinity about him] Genesis 1.26.

The Work of His hands. Psalm. 138.8.

The Breath of Life. Genesis 2.7.

The Image of God. Genesis 1.26.

The Setting him over the Works. Genes. 1.28. and Psalm. 8.6.

The Charge to the Angels concerning him. Psalm. 91.11.

Paradise. Genesis 2.8.

[Special Heads of Meditation.]
Heart, Reins, Eyes, Ears, Tongue, Hands, Feet.

[Special Heads of Meditation.]
Life, Sense, Reason, Spirit, Freewill, Memory, Conscience.

[Special Heads of Meditation.]
That which is Known of God; Romans 1.19.

Written in the Law; S. Iuke 10.26.

The Oracles of the Prophets;

The Melody of the Psalms;

The Instruction of the Proverbs;

The Knowledge of Histories;

The Service of Sacrifices.

BLessed art thou, O Lord, for Thy great and precious Promise, on This Day,
con cerning That Life-giving seed; Genesis 3.15.

And for the fulfilling thereof in the fullness of time, Gal. 4.4. upon This Day.

Blessed art Thou, O Lord, for Thy Holy Passions on This Day.

O, by Thy saving Passions on This Day, save us, O Lord.

P. Hosea.
I Have stood out against Thee, O Lord, Chapter 13. V. 16.

But I return unto Thee;

I am weakened by mine iniquities;

But I take with me words, and turn to Thee, saying,

Forgive my sin, and receiv my prayer;

So will I render to Thee the fruit of my lips. Chapter 14. V. 1.2.

P. Joel.
Spare, O Lord, spare;

And give not Thine heritage to reproach, among Thine enemies. C. 2. V. 17.

P. Amos.
O Lord, O Lord, be gracious; ceas, I beseech Thee.

By whom shall Jacob arise? for he is small.

Repent, O Lord, concerning this: Let it not be. Chapter 7. V. 2, 3.

P. Jonah.
Observing vanity and lies, I have forsaken mine own mercy:

And I am cast out of Thy sight.

But, when my soul fainted within me, I remembered the Lord.

I will look yet again toward Thy Holy Temple.

Thou have brought my life from corruption. Chapter 2. V. 4, 6, 7, 8.

P. Micha.
Who is a God like unto Thee, who passest by the iniquities of the remnant of
Thine heritage?

Thou will not always retein Thine anger, for a testimony [against us] because
Thou delightest in mercy.

Turn again, and have mercy upon us, O Lord; drown our iniquities, and cast
all our sins into the depths of the sea,

According to Thy Truth and Mercy. Chapter 7. V. 18, 19, 20.

P. Habakkuk.
O Lord, I have heard Thy speech, and was afraid;

I have considered Thy works, and was astonished;

In wrath remember mercy. Chapter 3. V. 2.

P. Zachariah.
Behold me, O Lord, clothed with filthy garments;

Behold Satan standing at my right hand. Chapter 3. V. 1.3.

And by the blood of Thy Covenant, O Lord, Chapter 9. V. 11.

In that fountain opened for the purging of all uncleaness, Chapter 13. V. 1.

Take away mine iniquities, and cleans my sins.

Save me, as a brand plucked out of the fire. Chapter 3. V. 2.4.

Father, forgive me; for I know not, in truth I know not, what I have don, in
sinning against Thee. S. Luke 23.34.

Lord remember me, when Thou come into Thy Kingdom. S. Luke 23.42.

Lord, repaie not mine enemies their sins. Acts 7.60.

Repaie not me my sins, O Lord.

By Thy Sweat, and great drops of Blood; The Agony of Thy Soul; S. Luke 22.44.


By Thy Head, crowned with Thorns, S. Matthew. 27.29. set on with staves; Weeping
Eyes; Heb. 5.7. Ears, filled with revilings; S. Matthew. 27.39. Mouth, given
vinegar and gall to drink; Ver. 48. Face, shamefully defiled by spitting; Ver.
30.


By Thy Neck, loaded with the burden of the Cross; S. Joh. 19.17. Back,
furrowed with stripes and wounds; Psalm. 129.3. and 1. S. Pet. 2.24. Hands and
Feet dug; Psalm. 22.17. Strong Cry, Eli, Eli, S. Mat. 27.46. and Heb. 5.7.
Heart, pierced with the spear; S. John 19.34. Water and Blood running out; V.
34. Body broken; Blood shed.


Psalm. 85.
Lord, forgive the offenses of Thy servant; and cover all his sins. V. 2.

Take away all Thy displeasure; and turn Thy self from Thy wrathful
indignation. Ver. 3.

Turn me, O God of our salvation; and let Thine anger ceas from us. V. 4.

Will Thou be angry with us for ever? and will Thou stretch out Thy wrath,
from one generation to another? Ver. 5.

O God, Thou will turn again, and quicken us; and Thy people shall rejoice in
Thee. V. 6.

Show us thy mercy, O Lord; and grant us Thy salvation. V. 7.

THe Works of the Flesh.

Adultery, Fornication, Uncleaness, Lasciviousness. Idolatry. Witchcraft.
Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Sedition, Heresies, Envyings,
Murders. Drunkeness, Revellings, and such like. Galat. 5.19, 20, 21.
THe Fruits of the Spirit. Love, Joie, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness,
Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance.
Galat. 5.22, 23.

THe Spirit Of Wisdom, Understanding, Counsil, Might,


Of Knowledge, Godliness, The Fear of the Lord.
P. Isai. 11.2.

THe Gifts of the Spirit.

The Word of Wisdom;

The Word of Knowledge; Faith;

The Gifts of Healing;

The Working of Miracles; Prophecy;

Discerning of Spirits;

Diverse Kinds and Interpretation of Tongues. 1 Cor. 12.8, 9, 10.

LOrd, I believe, That Thou did Create me,

Despise not the work of Thine own hands.

That according to Thy Image and Likeness,

Suffer not Thy Likeness to be blotted out.

That Thou did Redeem me with Thy Blood,

Suffer not the price of Thy Redemption to be lost.

That thou did set me out for a Christion, after Thine own Name,

Despise not me, who am called by Thy Name.

That thou did Sanctify me in the Regeneration,

Destroy not me, whom Thou have Sanctified.

That Thou did ingraff me, in the good Olive Tree, Romans 11.24. as a Member of
the Mystical Body,

Cut not off a Member of Thy Mystical Body.

O Think upon Thy servant, as concerning Thy word; wherein Thou have caused me
to put my Trust. Psalm. 119.49.

My soul faints with longing for Thy salvation; and I have a good Hope
because of Thy Word. V. 81

LEt us pray

For the prosperity and strengthening of all Christian Armies against the
enemies of our most Holy Faith.

For our Holy Fathers, and all our Brethren in Christ:

For all that hate us and love us:

For all that have mercy upon us, and minister unto us:

For all whom we are desired to remember in our prayers:

For the Redemption of the Captives:

For our Fathers and Brethren who are absent:

For all Seafaring persons:

For all who are cast upon the bed of sickness:

For plenty of the fruits of the earth:

For the souls of all Orthodox Christians.

Let us commemorate Our Godly Kings, Orthodox Prelates,


The Founders of This Holy habitation,

Our Parents, and all our Forefathers and Brethren who are gone before us.

LEt Thy mighty hand, O Lord, be my defense;

Thy mercy in Christ, my salvation;

Thy all-true Word, my instruction;

The Grace of Thy quickening Spirit, my consolation, unto the end, and in the
end.

Let the Soul of Christ sanctify me; Body of Christ strengthen me; Blood of
Christ redeem me; Water of Christ cleans me; Stripes of Christ heal me; Sweat
of Christ refresh me; Wounds of Christ hide me.


The Peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep my heart and mind, in
the knowledge and love of God. Phil. 4.7.

* O Lord, who did not despise, nor forsake man, transgressing Thy
Commandment, and falling;

But, as a tender-bowel'd Father, did visit him fundrie ways;

Giving him (...) Thy great and pre^^ous Promise, con^^rning the Blessed
qui^kning Seed;

Ope^^ng unto him a door of Faith and Repen^ance unto Life;

And, in the fullness of time, sending the same Thy Christ, to take the seed of
Abraham;

And, by the Oblation of His Life, to fulfill the Obedience of the Law;

And, by the Sacrifice of His Death, to take away the Curse thereof;

By His Death to redeem the World;

And by His Resurrection t^ quicken the same;

W^o did all things to this end, to bring back Mankind to Thee, that he might
be partaker of the Livine Nature, and of Eternal Glory:

Who did attest the Truth of Thy Gospel,

By many and manifold Miracles;

By the ever memorable Conversation of Thy Saints;

By their supernatural Patience under Torments;

By the most wonderful Conversion of the whole world, unto the Obedience of
Faith without Strength, Rhetoric, or Force;


Blessed, praised, celebrated, magnified, highly exalted, glorified, and
hallowed be Thy Name; the mention and memory, and all the monuments thereof,
both now and for ever. S. James's Liturgy


THou art worthy to take the Book, and to open the seals thereof;

For Thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to our God, by Thy Blood, out of
every kindred, and tongue, and people, and Nation.

Worthy is the Lamb, that was slain, to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom,
and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing.

To Him that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb, Blessing, and Honor, and
Glory, and Power, for ever and ever. Revel. 5.9, 12, 13.

Salvation to our God, who sits upon the Throne; and to the Lamb.

Amen:

Blessing, and Glory, and Wisdom, and Thanksgiving, and Honor, and Power, and
Might, be unto our God, for ever and ever. Amen. Revel. 7.10, 12.

[The Planetarie Character, or Hieroglyphic of SATVRDAIE, called in H.
Scripture, The Seventh Day, Genesis 2.2. and the H. SABBATH, Exodus 16.23.]

O Lord, have mercy upon us, for we have trusted in Thee:

Be Thou our arm every Morning; and our salvation in the time of trouble. P.
Isai. 33.2.

BLessed art Thou, O Lord, who did rest, the Seventh Day, from all Thy Works;

And did bless, and sanctify it. Genesis 2.2, 3.

Of [Heads of Meditation and Devotion.]
[The Institution and Rites of] the Sabbath. The Rest in the Returns thereof.


Of the Death and Burial of Christ: Ceasing of Sin [therby.]


Of Those who are [gon] before us [and are] at rest [from their labors.]

P. Ezra.
O My Ood, I am ashamed, and blush to lift up my face to Thee;

For mine iniquities are increased over my head;

And my trespasses are waxed great unto the heavens.

Since the days of my youth I am in a great trespass, even to this day;

And I cannot stand before Thee, because of this. Chapter 9. V. 6, 7, 15.

K. Manasses.
I have sinned above the number of the sands (...) the sea;

My transgressions are multiplied; and I am not worthy to look up, and to see
the hight of heaven, because of the multitude of mine iniquities:

Neither have I any releas; For I have provoked Thy wrath, and don evil before
Thee; not doing Thy will, nor keeping Thy commandments.

And now I bow the knee of my heart, beseeching Thee of grace;

I have sinned, O Lord, I have sinned, and I acknowledge mine iniquities.

But, I humbly beseech Thee, forgive me, O Lord, forgive me; and destroy me
not with mine iniquities;

Be not angry with me for ever, by reserving evil for me;

Neither condemn me into the lower parts of the earth:

For Thou art the God, even the God of them that repent;

And thou shall show in me all Thy goodness, if Thou will save me, that am
unworthie, according to Thy great mercy:

And I will praise Thee for ever.

Lord, if Thou will, Thou can make me clean:

Lord, speak the word only, and I shall be healed. S. Mat. 8.2, 8.

Lord, save me. S. Mat. 8.25.

Carest Thou not that we perish? S. Mark. 4.38.

Say unto me, Be of good cheer; Thy sins are forgiven thee. S. Matthew. 9.2.

JESUS Master, have mercy on me. S. Luke 17.13.

JESUS, Thou Son of David, have mercy on me; S. Mar. 10.47, 48.

JESUS, Thou Son of David;

Thou Son of David.

Lord, say unto me, Ephphata. S. Mar. 7.37.

Lord, I have no man [to do it] S. John 5.7.

Lord, say unto me, Thou art loosed from thine infirmity. S. Luke 13.12.

Say unto my soul, I am Thy salvation. Psd. 35.3.

Say unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee. 2. Corinthians. 12.9.

Psalm. 79.
Lord, how long will Thou be angry, for ever?

Shall Thy jealousy burn like fire?

O remember not our old sins; Let Thy mercies, O Lord, speedily prevent us, for
we are come to great misery.

Help us, O God our Savior, for the glory of Thy Name;

O Lord deliver us, and be merciful to our sins, for Thy Names sake. V. 5.8, 9.

All my Debts, Faults, Slips, Defects, Falls,
Offenses, Stumblings, Transgressions.

Sins, Wickednesses, Ignorances, Iniquities, Ungodliness, Unrighteousness,
Abominations; The Guilt; Graciously forgive, Pardon, Remit, Pass by, Spare, Be
merciful, Repaie not, Impute not, Remember not.

The Filthiness Pass by, Pass over, Look beside, Look beyond, Cover, Wash away,
Blot out, Cleans.

The Damage Releas, Heal, Save from, Take away, upon Thee,
Cancel, Frustrate, Disappoint, Bring to naught.

Let them not be found, Let them not be.

[GIve me grace,] to add

To Faith, Virtue; Virtue, Knowledge; Knowledge, Temperance; Temperance,
Patience; Patience, Godliness; Godliness, Brotherly Kindness; Brotherly
Kindness, Charity:


And, not forgetting that I am purged from my old sins, to give diligence to
make my calling and election sure, 2 S. Pet. 1.5.6, 7, 9, 10. by Good Works. 1
Timoth. 2.10.

I Beleev in Thee the Father;

Behold then, if Thou be a Father, and we Children,

As a Father pitieth his own Children, Psalm. 103.13. let Thy bowels yern upon
us, O Lord.

I beleev in Thee the Lord;

Behold then, if Thou be a Lord, and we Servants,

Our eyes wait upon Thee, our Lord, until Thou have mercy upon us. Psalm. 123.2.

I beleev, that, were we neither Sons, nor Servants, but dogs only,

It should be lawful for us, to eat of the crumbs that fall from Thy Table. S.
Mar. 7.28.

I beleev, that Christ is the Lamb of God:

O Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world, S. John 1.29.

Take away mine also.

I beleev, that JESUS Christ came into the world, to save sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15.

Thou, who came to save sinners,

Save even me, the first and chief of sinners.

I beleev, that Christ came to save that which was lost, S. Mat. 18.11.

Thou, who came to save that which was lost,

Suffer not, O Lord, that to be lost, which Thou have saved.

I beleev, that the Spirit is the Lord and Giver of Life. [Nicen Creed.]

Thou, who gave me a living soul, Genes. 2.7.

Grant, that I may not receiv this my soul in vain.

I beleev, that the Spirit communicates Grace in the Holy Mysteries.

Grant, that I may not receive the Grace of them, nor the Hope of His Holy
Mysteries in vain. 2 Cor. 6.1.

I beleev, that the Spirit makes Intercession for us, with groans that cannot
be uttered, Romans 8.26.

Grant, O Lord, that I may be partaker of that His Intercession, and of those
His groans.

OUr Fathers hoped in Thee, they trusted in Thee, and Thou did deliver them:

They called upon Thee, and were helped; They put their trust in Thee, and were
not confounded. Psa. 22.4, 5.

As Thou did our Fathers in the former generations, even so, O Lord, deliver
us, who trust in Thee.

O Heavenly King, Establish all our Christian Kings;

Confirm the Faith;

Assuage the rage of the Heathen;

Set the World at Peace;

Graciously preserve this Holy habitation;

And, according to Thy goodness and love to man, receive and protect us in our
Orthodox Faith, and in Repentance.

LEt the Power of the Father guide me;

Let the Wisdom of the Son inlighten me;

Let the Operation of the Spirit quicken me, Preserve my Soul, Strengthen my
Body, Elevate my Senses, Order my Conversation, Compose my Manners, Bless my
Works, Perfect my Prayers, Inspire Holy Thoughts, Pardon what is Past,
Rectisie what is Present, Prevent what is to come.

TO Him, that is able to do exceeding abundantly, above all that we ask or
think, according to the power that works in us,

To Him be glory in the Church, by Christ JESUS, throughout all ages, world
without end. Amen. Ephesians. 3.20, 21.

BLessed, Praised, Celebrated, Magnified, Exalted, Glorified, Hallowed be Thy
Name, O Lord,

The mention, the remembrance, and every memorial of it,

For the 1 Patriarchs Honorable Senate; 2 Prophets ever-Venerable Quire; 3
Apostles All-glorious Company; 4 Evangelists; 5 Martyrs most Noble Army; 6
Confessors; 7 Doctors Assembly; For 8 Them that give themselves to the Exercise
of Devotion; For the Beauty of 9 Virgins; For the Delicious Order of 10
Infants.


For their 1 Faith, 2 Hope, 3 Labors, 4 Truth, 5 Blood, 6 Zeal, 7 Diligence, 8
Tears, 9 Chastity, 10 Glory.


Glory be to Thee, O Lord, Glory be to Thee, Glory be to Thee, Because Thou
have glorified them, for and with whom we also glorify Thee.

Great and manifold are Thy Works, Lord God Almighty;

Just and true are Thy ways, O Thou King of Saints:

Who shall not fear Thee, O Lord, and glorify Thy Name?

For Thou only art Holy;

For all Nations shall come, and worship before Thee;

For Thy Judgments are made manifest. Rev. 15.3, 4.

Praise our God all ye His servants; and ye that fear Him, both small and great.

Allelujah;

For our Lord God omnipotent reigns;

Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to Him. Revel. 19.5, 6, 7.

Behold the Tabernacle of God is with men, and He will dwell with them;

And they shall be His people, and God Himself shall be with them*

And He shall wipe away all tears from their eyes:

And there shall be no more death, nor crying; neither shall there be any more
pain;

For the former things are passed away. Revel. 21.3, 4.

[A Form of Prayer for all the World, and particularly for our special
Relations.]
DO good, O Lord, and visit with Thy mercies

All Creatures, Mankind.


The World, Habitable part thereof.


The States of the World, Catholic Church.

Christianity. All particular Churches, States.


Our Church, State.
Country.

The several Orders in either of (...). The Sacred.

The several Persons in those Orders, The King, Prince.


The London.
City, [wherin I was Born.] All-Hallows Berking.
Parish, [wherin I was Baptized.] Merchant. Tailors and S. Paul's.
Two Schools, Cambridg.
Universitie, Penbroke Hall.
College, [wherin I was Brought up.


The Parish of Saint Giles [Creeple-gate] committed to my charge.

"Penbroke Hall.

"The "Three Churches "Of "Southwel, "S. Paul, "Westminster.


"The Three Dioceses "Of "Chichester, "Elie, "Winchester. [In stead of the
Bishops particular Relations, marked ["] thus, put in your own.]



My Family, Kindred.


All that have Showed mercy, Administered
to me.

My Nighbors, Friends.


All commended to my Prayers.

[A Recommendation of our selves, and ours to Gods blessing.]
O Lord, I commend unto Thee My Soul and Body, Mind and Thoughts,
My Wishes and Prayers, Senses and Members, Words and Deeds, Life and Death.
My Brethren, and Sisters, and their Children. My Benefactors, Well-willers,
Family, Nighbors, Country.



All Christian People.

O Lord, I commend unto Thee My Motions and Opportunities; Resolutions and
Undertakings; Going out and Coming in; Sitting down and Rising up.



[Praiers Preparatorie to all our Thanksgivings.]
THou, O Lord, art worthy to be praised; and unto Thee shall the Vow be
performed. Psalm. 65.1.

Worthy art Thou, O Lord, our Holy God, to receive glory, and honor, and
power. Revel. 4.11.

O Thou, that hear Prayer, unto Thee shall all flesh come:

Even my flesh shall come:

My misdeeds prevail against me; O be Thou merciful unto my sins. Psalm. 65.2, 3.

That I may come to confess to Thee, with all Thy Works; and with all Thy
Saints to bless Thee.

Thou shall open my lips, O Lord; And my mouth shall show Thy praise. Psalm.
51.15.

[A Form of Thanksgiving for Temporal and Spiritual Blessings.]
MY soul praises the Lord, for that He has don good To all Creatures, Mankind.
To the World, Habitable part thereof.
To the States of the World, Catholic Church. Christianity. To all particular
Churches, States.
To our Church, State.
Country. To the several Orders in either of them. The Sacred. To the several
Persons in those Orders, To the King, Prince.
To the City, wherein I was Born.] Parish, [wherin I was Baptized.] Two
Schools, Universitie, College, [wherin I was Brought up.]
To my Family, Kindred.
To all that have Showed mercy, Administered
to me. To my Nighbors, Friends.
To all commended to my Prayers.


For that He has showed mercy to me In my Soul, Body, Goods.


For the Gifts of Nature, Grace, the World.


For all things wherein I have Received benefit, been successful formerly, at
present.



For the good, if any, which I ever did.

For my Health, good-Name, Sufficiency, Safety, Liberty, Quiet.

Thou have not cut off, as a Weaver, my Life; but, from day even to night,
Thou preservest me. P. Isai. 38.12.

Thou have graciously given me Life and Breath, until this hour.

From my Childhood, from my Youth upward, even until now, to Old age. Psalm.
71.15, 16.

Thou have held my soul in life, and Thou will not suffer my foot to slip.
Psalm. 66.8.

Delivering me From Dangers, Diseases, Poverty, Servitude, Public Shame, Evil
Accidents.


Not giving me up to perish in my sins.

Always waiting for my Conversion.

Leaving in me a Turning to my heart, Remembrance of the [Death, Judgment,
Heaven, Hell.]
last ends.


Some Shame, Horror, Trembling
for my sins past.

O give me oftener and greater, greater and oftener, more and more, O Lord.

Giving me good hopes of the Remission of them, by Repentance, and by the Works
thereof, thorough the Power of the most Holy Keys, and Sacraments in Thy
Church.

So that, day by day, for these Thy benefits, which I remember;

And so also for many more forgotten by reason of their multitude, and my
forgetfulness;

For them bestowed on me, Willing, Knowing, Asking,
Not Asking, Knowing, Willing,


I confess and give thanks to Thee, I bless and praise Thee, as is meet, every
day.

And I pray with all my soul; and with all my mind I pray;

Glory be to Thee; O Lord, Glory be to Thee; Glory be to Thee; And Glory be
to Thy most Holy Name, For all Thy Divine Perfections in them.

For Thy unspeakable and unexpressable goodness and mercy toward sinners, and
the unworthie:

And even toward me, altogether the most unworthie of all sinners.

Yea, O Lord,

For this and for the rest,

Glory and Praise, and Blessing, and Thanksgiving, with the Voices, and the
Harmony of the Voices of Angels and Men; of all Thy Saints in Heaven; and of
all Thy Creatures, whether in Heaven or Earth:

And, under their feet, of me, an unworthie and miserable sinner, Thy poor
Creature; both now in this Day and Hour; and daily unto my last breath, and
unto the end of the world; and for ever and ever.

[Amen.]

[A Letanie to be used upon special occasions of Public or Private Humiliation.]
O Father, who did create.

Destroy not him, whom Thou did create:

O Son, who did redeem,

Destroy not him, whom Thou did redeem:

O Spirit, who did regenerate,

Destroy not him, whom Thou did regenerate.

Remember not, Lord, our offenses, nor the offenses of our Forefathers, neither
take Thou vengeance on our sins; on Their, Mine;


Spare us, good Lord;

Spare Them, Me;


Spare Thy people; and, in Thy people, Me Thy servant, whom Thou have redeemed
with Thy precious Blood; and be not angry with us, for ever. Be merciful, Be
merciful,


Spare us, O Lord,

And be not angry with us, for ever. Be merciful, Be merciful,
Have* mercy on us, O Lord, And be not angry with us very sore, Not very
sore, O Lord.

Deal not with me according to my sins;

Neither reward me after mine iniquities.

But deal with me according to Thy great mercy,

And reward me after the multitude of Thy compassions.

Even according to that great mercy;

And after that multitude of compassions,

As thou did deal with our Fathers in the generations of old.

By whatsoever is dear unto Thee,

From all evil and adversity,

In all times of necessity,

From the evil and adversity at this present time,

Stand up, O Lord, rescue and save me,

Deliver me, O Lord,

And destroy me not.

In the Bed of Sickness, Hour of Death, Day of Judgment,


In that terrible and dreadful Day,

Deliver me, O Lord, and save me*

From Beholding the stern countenance of the Judge; Standing on the left hand;
Hearing that fearful sentence*


Depart from me; S. Mat. 25.41.

From being Bound in the chains of darkness, 2 S. Pet. 2.4. Cast out into outer
darkness, S. Mat. 25.30. Tormented in the bottomless pit of Fire and Brimstone,
where the smoke of torments ascends up for ever and ever, Revel. 14.10, 11.
Be merciful, Be merciful,


Spare us;

Deliver us, O Lord, and save us; and destroy us not for ever; not for ever, O
Lord.

And that this may not be,

Remove far from me, O Lord, *1 Hardness of heart; *2 Want of Remors after
sinning; Ephesians. 4.19. *3 Obduration of heart; S. Mark. 3.5. and 6.52. *4 Setting
light by Thy threatenings; *5 A seared Conscience; 1 Timothy 4.2. *6 A Reprobate
Mind; Romans 1.28.


The sin against the Holy Ghost; S. Matthew. 12.32.

The sin unto Death. 1 S. John 5.16.

[1. Voluntary Murder. Genes. 4.10. 2. Unnatural Lusts. Genesis 18.20.21. 3.
Oppression of the Poor, the Fatherless, and Widows. Exodus 22.22, 23. and Deuteronomy.
15.9. 4. Detention of the Wages of the Laborers. Deuteronomy. 24.15. and S. Jam. 5.4.]
The Four Crying sins:

The * Six forerunners of the Sin against the Holy Ghost.

From the grievous and terrible Evils of this World.

From Pestilence, Famine, War; Earth quakes, Inundations, Great Fires; Plague
of immoderate Rains; Drought; Corrupting Winds, Blasting; Thunder, Lightning,
Tempest; Epidemial, acute and evil Diseases; And from sudden Death,
[Good Lord deliver us.]

From pernicious Evils in the Church,

From Private Interpretations, 2 S. Peter 1.20. Innovations in Holy things;
Strange Doctrines; 1 Timothy 1.3. Doting about Questions, and making endless
strifes; 1 Timothy 6.4.


From Heresies, Schisms, Scandals,
Public and private. [Good Lord deliver us.]

From the Deifying of Kings, Act. 12.22. the Flattering of People, S. Mark
15.15. Act. 12.3. and 24.27. Profaneness of Saul, 1 P. Sam. 15. Scorns of
Michal, 2 P. Sam. 6.16. Fleshhook of Hophni, 1 P. Sam. 2.13.
[Good Lord deliver us.]

From the Massacre of Athalia, 2 Kings 11. Priesthood of Micha, Judge. 17.10.
Combination of Simon [Magus,] Acts 8.18. and Judas [Iscariot] S. Matthew. 26.15.
Doctrine of the unlearned and unstable, 2 S. Pet. 3.16. Pride of Novices, 1 Timothy 3.6. People that strive with the Priest; P. Hos. 4.4.
[Good Lord deliver us.]

From pernicious Evils in the State.

From Anarchie, Multitude of Kings, Tyranny; Ashur, Jeroboam, Rehoboam,
Gal.+lio, Haman;


From the Dangerous council of Achitophel, 2 P. Sam. 16 21. Foolish counsil of
Zoan, P. Isai. 19.11.13. Statutes of Omri, P. Mich. 6.16. Judgments of Jezreel,
2 Kin. 10.7. Floods of Belial, Psalm. 18.4. Plague of Peor, Number. 25. Vallie of
Achor, H. Jos. 7.26. Pollution of Blood, Seed,

[Good Lord deliver us.]

From Foreign Invasion, Civil War, Displacing of good and upright
Magistrates, Exalting of bad and corrupt men into office,
[Good Lord deliver us.]

From an uncomfortable life, In Sadness of Spirit, Infirmity of Body, Ill
report, Want, Danger, Servitude, Tumults,
[Good Lord deliver us.]

From Death In Sin, Shame, Torture, Distraction, Filthiness, Violence,
For Treason. From Sudden Eternal
Death, [Good Lord deliver us.]

Hosanna in the Highest, [Or, A Supplication for Spiritual Blessings.]
REmember me, O Lord, according to the favor that Thou bear unto Thy people;

Visit me with Thy salvation;

That I may See the felicity of Thy chosen, Rejoice in the gladness of thy
people, Give thanks with Thine inheritance. Psalm. 106.4, 5.

For there is a glory to be revealed: 1 S. Peter 5.1.

And, when the Judge comes, Acts 10.42.

Some Shall See His face with joy; H. Job 33.26.

Be placed on His right hand; S. Matthew. 25, 33.

Hear that most sweet voice, Come ye blessed; V. 34.

Be caught up in the Clouds, to meet the Lord; 1 Thessalonians. 4.17.

Enter into His joie; S. Mat. 25.21.

Enjoie the Vision of Him;

Be ever with Him. 1 These. 4.17.

These only, only These, are blessed among the sons of men.

O give to me, the meanest of them all, the meanest place there, under their
feet, under the feet of Thy Elect, of the meanest of them.

And, to this end, Let me find grace in Thy sight, that I may serve Thee
acceptably, with reverence and godly fear. Heb. 12.28.

But let me find this grace also, That I may not receive that grace in vain, 2
Cor. 6.1.

Nor fall short of it, Heb. 12.15.

Much less so neglect it, 1 Timothy 4.14.

As to fall quite from it: Gal. 5.4.

But to stir it up, 2 Timothy 1.6.

So as to grow in it: 2 S. Pet. 3.18.

Howsoever, to continue still in it, Acts 13.43. to the end of my life.

And, O, make up the defects of Thy Graces in me; Of Faith; Increas my little
Faith: S. Luke 17.5. Hope; Confirm my trembling Hope; Love; Kindle the smoking
Flax thereof. S. Matthew. 12.20.
Shed abroad in my heart the Love of Thee; Romans 5.5.

That I may love Thee. My My Friend, in Thee. My Enemy, for Thee.


O Thou, who give grace to the humble, S. James 4.6.

Give me grace to be humble.

O Thou, who never failest them that fear Thee,

Let my heart rejoice in the Fear of Thee; Psalm. 86.11. secund. LXX.

Let this my Fear be my Confidence; H. Job 4.6.

Let me Fear one thing only; to Fear any thing more then Thee;

As I would that men should do unto me, so let me likewise do to them. S. Mat.
7.12.

Nor let me think of my self more highly then I ought; but let me think
soberly. Romans 12.3.

Give light to them who sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death.

Guide our feet in the way of Peace. S. Luke 1.79.

That we may Be like-minded one toward another; Romans 15.5.

Rightly divide; 2. Timoth. 2.5.

Uprightly walk; Gal. 2.14.

Edify one another; 1 These. 5.11.

With one mind and one mouth glorisie God. Romans 15.6.

But, if any thing prove otherwise, Let us walk by the same rule, whereto we
have atteined. Phil. 3.16.

Let us hold fast Order; Col. 2.5. 1 Corinthians. 14.40.

Decency; 1 Corinthians. 14.40.

Stedfastness. Col. 2.5.

Hosanna upon Earth

[Or, A Supplication for Temporal Blessings.]
REmember, O Lord, to crown the Year with Thy goodness: Psalm. 65.11.

For the eyes of all wait upon Thee, O Lord;

Thou give them their meat in due season;

Thou openest Thy hand, and fillest all things living with Thy gracious
bounty. Psalm. 145.15, 16.

Vouchsafe us therefore, O Lord,

The blessings of Heaven, and of the dew from above;

The blessings of the Springs of the deep from beneath;

The Returns of the Sun;

The Conjunctions of the Moon;

The benefits of the rising Mountain, and of the lasting Hills;

The fullness of the Earth, and of all that breeds therein. Deuteronomy. 33.13.14, 15,
16. secund. LXX.

Fruitful Seasons, Temperate Airs, Plenty of Corn, Abundance of Fruits, Health
of Body, and Peaceable times.
Good and Fair Government, Wise Counsels, Just Laws, Righteous Judgments, Loial
Obedience, Due Execution of Justice, Sufficient store for life, Prosperous
Issue, Happy Births,


Good and Fair Plenty, Due Breeding, Right Institution
of children.

That our Sons may grow up, as the young plants; and that our Daughters may be
as the polished corners of the Temple.

That our Garners may be full and plenteous with all manner of store; that our
Sheep may bring forth thousands.

That our Oxen may be strong to labor; that there be no decaie; no leading
into captivity; and no complaining in our streets. Psalm. 144.12, 13, 14.

ONe thing have I desired of the Lord, which I will require; that I may dwell
in the House of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the fair beauty
of the Lord; and to visit His Temple. Psalm. 27.4.

Two things will I require of Thee, O Lord; deny me them not, before I die.

Remove far from me Vanity and Lies:

Give me neither Poverty, nor Riches.

Feed me with food convenient for me.

Lest I be full and deny Thee, and say, Who is the Lord?

Or lest I be poor and steal, and take the Name of God in vain. Pro. 30.7, 8, 9.

Let me learn how to abound, and let me learn also how to want:

And in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content. Phil. 4.11, 12.

And, beside what I have, never either to desire, or exspect, any earthly,
transitory, corruptible thing.

Give me A Holy Life In Godliness, Gravitie, Purity, All Goodness;
Cheerfulness of Mind, Health of Body, Good Name, Content, Safety, Liberty,
Quiet. A Happy Death. Eternal Life.


[Evening Prayer.]
HAving passed over this day, Lord, I give thanks unto Thee.

The Evening draws nigh, make it comfortable.

An Evening there is, as of the Day so, of this Life.

The Evening of this Life is Old Age:

Old Age has seized upon me; make that comfortable.

Cast me not away in the time of age;

Forsake me not, when my strength fails me. Psalm. 71.9.

Be thou with me until Old Age, and even to hoar hairs do Thou carry me. P.
Isa. 46.4.

Do Thou do it, do Thou forgive,

Do Thou receive and save me, O Lord.

Tarry Thou with me, O Lord, for it is toward Evening with me: and the Day is
far spent, S. Luke 24.29. of this my toilsom life.

Let Thy strength be made perfect in my weakness: 2 Corinthians 12.9.

THe Day is vanished and gone; so does my Life vanish; my Life no Life.

The night is coming on, and so does Death; Death without Death.

The end, as of the Day so, of our Life is at hand:

We therefore, remembering this, beseech Thee, O Lord, that the end of our Life
being Christian, and acceptable to Thee, without Sin, without Shame, and, if it
please Thee, without Pain, Thou would guide us in peace, O Lord our Lord;
gathering us together under the feet of Thine Elect, when Thou will, and as
Thou will, only without Shame and Sin.

GRant that we may remember the days of darkness, that they are many.
Eccles. 11.8. that we be not cast out into outer darkness. S. Mat. 22.13. and
25.30. and that we may remember to prevent the Night, by doing some good.

Judgment is at hand,

Grant us, O Lord, that we may make a good and acceptable account at the
dreadful and terrible Tribunal of JESUS Christ.

IN the Night I lift up my hands toward Thy Sanctuary, and bless the Lord.
Psalm. 134.2, 3.

The Lord has granted His loving kindness on the Day time, and in the Night
season will I sing of Him, and make my prayer unto the God of my life. Psalm.
42.10.

As long as I live will I magnify Thee on this manner, and lift up my hands in
Thy Name. Psalm. 63.5.

Let my prayer be set forth in Thy sight as the Incense; and let the lifting up
of my hands be an Evening sacrifice. Psalm. 141.2.

BLessed art Thou, O Lord our God, the God of our Fathers,

Who did create the interchanges of the Day and Night;

Who give us occasions of songs in the Night. H. Job. 35.10.

Who have delivered us from the evil of this Day;

Who have not cut off, like a Weaver, my Life, nor in this Day before Night
did make an end of me. P. Isa. 38.12.

LOrd, as we add days to our days, so we add sins to our sins. Ecclus. 5.5.

A just man falls seven times a day; Prove. 24.16. but I, a wretched sinner,
seventie times seven times. S. Mat. 18.22. wonderfully and horribly, O Lord. P.
Jerem. 5.30.

But I turn from my wicked ways, and bewailing them, P. Isa. 30.15. I return
to my heart; P. Isa. 46.8. and turn to Thee with all my heart, Deuteronomy. 30.2. O
Thou that art the God of them that repent, O Savior of sinners.

And Evening after Evening I return, with the utmost strength of my soul; and,
out of the deep, my soul cries unto Thee, Psalm. 130.1.

Lord, I have sinned against Thee, I have sinned grievously against Thee:

Forgive, forgive; alas, alas! woe worth my miserable condition:

I repent, woe is me, I repent; spare me, O Lord;

I repent, woe is me, I repent; Help my want of repentance.

Have pity, spare me, O Lord;

Have pity, Be merciful unto me:

I said, Lord be merciful unto me, heal my soul, for I have sinned against
Thee. Psalm. 41.4.

Have mercy upon me O Lord, after Thy great goodness; according to the
multitude of Thy mercies do away mine offenses. Psalm. 51.1.

Forgive my guilt, Heal my sores, Take out the stains, Deliver me from shame,
Rescue me from the tyranny of sin, And make me not an example.


DEliver me, O Lord, from my necessities, Psalm. 25.16.

Cleans me from my secret faults;

Keep Thy servant also from presumptuous sins. Psalm. 19.12, 13.

Impute not to me the wanderings of my mind; Wisd. 4.12. nor my idle words; S.
Mat. 12.36.

Stop the black and filthy inundation of unclean and wicked thoughts.

O Lord, my destruction is from my self. P. Hos. 13.9.

Whatsoever I have don amiss, graciously pardon;

Deal not with us after our sins;

Neither reward us after our iniquities. Chapter Eng. Letanie.

Mercifully look upon our infirmities, and for the glory of Thy most Holy
Name turn from us all those evils and afflictions, which to our sins, and to us
for them, are most justly and worthily due.

ANd, O Lord, give rest to me that am weary; renew my strength to me that am
tired with labor;

Lighten mine eles that I sleep not in death. Psalm. 13.3.

Deliver me from the terrors of the Night, and from the Pestilence that walks
in darkness. Psa. 91.5.6.

Grant me wholesome sleep, and to pass this Night without fear.

Thou Keeper of Israel, who do neither slumber nor sleep, Psalm. 121.4.
Preserv me this night from all evil, O Lord keep my soul. Ver. 7.

Visiting me with the salvation of Thy children:

Open my understanding in the visions of the night. H. Job 33.15, 16.

But, if not this, for I am not worthy,

I am not worthy,

Yet, O Lord, Thou Lover of men, let my sleep be a rest, as from labors so,
from sin;

Even so, O Lord.

And sleeping let me not dream of any thing, that may offend Thee, defile my
self.


Let not my loins be filled with illusions. Psalm. 38.7. but rather let my reins
chasten me. Ps. 16.8.

Preserve me, without grievous fear, from the dismal sleep of sin; and lay
asleep in me all earthly and wicked imaginations.

Give me sweet sleep, free from all carnal and diabolical phancies.

Lord restrein the malice of my never sleeping invisible enemies; and the
inclinations of my sinful flesh, O Thou who made me.

Let the wings of thy mercy shadow me. Psalm. 17.8. and 91.4.

Raise me up in due time, in the hour of Prayer; and grant that I may be
early up, Psalm. 63.1. at my Praises and Worship of thee.

BLess O Lord, Thy Creatures; Mankind. All in Affliction or Prosperity; Error
or Truth; Sin or Grace. The Universal Church: The Eastern, Western, This among
Us. Prelates, Clergy, Laity. The Governments of the Earth; Christian; About
us; Our: The King, Queen, Prince. All in authority, and eminency.
Counselors, Judges, Magistrates, Officers, People. Husbandmen, Merchants,
Artificers, even to the Laborers, Poor.
All, whom Kindred, Good turns, Ministering in carnal things, Charge formerly,
now,
Moral friendship, Charity, Nighborhood, My Promise, Their Desire, Want of
their own leisure, Compassion on them being in extremity, Worthy Acts, Good
Works, Scandal given to, Want of any else to pray for them, commends to my
prayers.


LOrd, into thy hands I commend my self;

My Spirit, Soul, Body,


Thou have created redeemed
them,

O Lord Thou God of truth. Psalm. 31.6.

And together with my self all mine, and all that belong unto me:

Thou, O Lord, have graciously given them unto thy servant. Genesis 33.5.

Preserve my lying down, and my rising up, Psalm. 139.1. from this time forth
for evermore. Psalm. 121.8.

Grant that I may remember Thee upon my bed, Psalm. 63.7. and search out my
spirit. Psalm. 77.6. that I may rise again, and still be with Thee, Psalm.
139.18.

I will lay me down in peace, and take my rest; for it is Thou, Lord, only,
that make me dwell in safety. Psalm. 4.9.

[A Prayer for all Estates.]
[BLess O Lord] The World.

The habitable part theof.

The Church, Kingdom, Throne, Altar, Council Table, Judgment Seat,
Universities, Shops.


All Infants, Children, Striplings, Youth, Men, Grown in Years. Old men, Infirm
men.

The Possessed, Fainthearted;

Sick, Prisoners;

Orphans, Widows;

Strangers;

All Travailers by Land, Water:


Women with Child, giving suck.


In hard servitude, solitude,
Heavie-laden.

[Praiers for the Holy Communion.]
[Before the Receiving of the Blessed Sacrament.]
O Lord, I am not fit, nor worthy that Thou should come under the filthy
roof of the house of my soul. S. Matthew. 8.8. because it is wholly desolate and
ruinous; neither have Thou, with me, a fit place where to lay Thy head. S.
Mat. 8.20.

But as Thon did vouchsafe to be laid in a Stable and Manger of unreasonable
Beasts; S. Luke 27.

As Thou did not disdeign to be entertained even in the house of Simon the
Leper; S. Matthew, 26.6.

As Thou did not reject the Harlot, a sinner like unto me, coming unto Thee,
and touching Thee;

As Thou did not abhor her foul and profane mouth; S. Luke 7.37, 38.

Nor yet the Thief, on the Cross, confessing Thee; S. Luke 23.43.

Even so vouchsafe to admit me also, an overworn, miserable, and out of
measure sinful creature, to the receiving and communicating of the most pure,
most auspicious, quickening and saving Mysteries of Thy most Holy Body, and
Precious Blood.

S. Chrysostom. Liturgy.
ATtend, O Lord, our God, from Thy holy habitation, and from the glorious
Throne of Thy Kingdom, and come and sanctify us.

O Thou who sit on high with the Father, and art here invisibly present
with us, come and sanctify these gifts here presented, and those also by and
for whom, and the end whereto they are brought hither.

S. Chrysostom. and S. Basil's Liturgy.
And grant us to partake of them

In Faith, that need not be ashamed, Love, without dissimulation, Romans 12.9.


For the Keeping of the Commandments, Stirring up of all Spiritual fruits,
Healing of Soul and Body.


For a Symbol of our Communion, Act. 2.42. Memorial of Thy Dispensation, S.
Luke 22.19.


For the Showing forth of Thy Death, 1 Corinthians 11.26. Communion of Thy Body
and Blood, 1 Cor. 10.16. Participation of Thy Spirit, 1 Corinthians. 12.13.
Remission of our sins, S. Mat. 26.28.


For an Amulet against all evil, 1 Cor. 5.7.

For the Quieting of our Conscience, S. Mat. 11.28.

For the Blotting out of our Debts, Col. 2.14. Act. 3.19. Purging of our Spots,
Heb. 9.14. Healing of the Infirmities of our Souls, 1 S. Pet. 2.24. Renewing of
our Covenant, Psalm. 50.5. Viands of our Spiritual Life, S. Joh. 6.27. Increas
of strenthning Grace, Heb. 13.9. soul-ravishing Comfort, Psa. 104 15. Enforcing
of our Repentance, 1 Corinthians. 11.29. Enlightening of our Understanding, S. Luke
24.31. Exercise of our Humility, S. Joh. 13.11.


For A Seal of our Faith, 2 Cor. 1.22. The Fullness of Wisdom, S. John 6.35. A
Sufficient Account of our Oblations, 1 Cor. 16.1.


For the Armor of Patience, 1 S. Pet. 41.

For the stirring up of our Thankfulness, Psalm. 116.11.

For Confidence in Prayer, Psalm. 116.12. Mutual Inhabitation, S. John 6.56. A
Pledge of our Resurrection, S. Joh. 6.54. An acceptable Apology at the Bar of
Judgment, 1 Cor. 11.29. A Testament of our Inheritance, S. Luke 22.20. A Type
of Perfection, S. Joh. 17.23.


That we with all Thy Saints, who, from the beginning, have pleased Thee, may
be partakers of Thy most pure and eternal good things, which Thou have
prepared, O Lord, for them that love Thee, in whom Thou art glorified for ever.

O Lamb of God, who take away the sin of the world, S. Joh. 1.29. Take away
mine also, who am a notorious sinner.

We therefore, O Lord, in the presence of Thy Holy Mysteries,

Being mindful of

The saving Passions of Thy Christ,

His life-giving Cross, precious Death, three days Burial, Resurrection from
the dead, Ascension into Heaven, Session at the Right hand of Thee the Father,
glorious and dreadful Return,


Humbly beseech Thee, that we, receiving a part of Thy Holy Mysteries with a
pure testimony of our Conscience, may be united to the Holy Body and Blood
of Thy Christ.

Let me so receive these Mysteries, that I may be worthy to be ingraffed into
Thy Body, which is the Church; That I may become one of Thy Members, and Thou
my Head; That I may remain with Thee, and Thou with me; That now, not I in my
self, but Thou in me, and I in Thee, May for ever continue in an indissoluble
bond of love.

Wash out the stains of my old and fresh sins; Never let any sinful spot
abide, where so pure Sacraments have entered.

Through this Sacred Mystery, which I here call to mind, Bury me, already
dead to this world, with Thee in Thy Grave. [These Prayers [thus "marked] are
not in the Greek, but in the Latin MS.]


And receiving this Sacrament, not unworthily, let us procure Christ's dwelling
in our hearts, Ephesians. 3.17. and be made a Temple of Thy Holy Spirit, 1 Cor.
6.19.

Even so, O Lord.

And make not any one of us guilty of these Thy dreadful and heavenly
Mysteries; nor weak in Soul or Body, by our unworthie partaking of the same. 1
Corin. 11.27, 29.30.

But grant that, to our utmost and last gasp, we may worthily receive the hope
of these Thy Mysteries, To our Sanctification, Illumination, Strengthening,


To the eas of the burden of our many sins;

As a Preservative against all the assaults of the Devil,

As a Deleterie and Impediment of our evil Customs;

For the Mortification of our lusts; Keeping of Thy Commandments; Increas of
Thy Divine Grace, and Possession of Thy Kingdom.


[After the Receiving of the Blessed Sacrament.]
IT is good for me to hold me fast by God, and to put my trust in the God of my
salvation. [In the Latin, nor in the Greek MS.]


We have now, O Christ our God, finished and perfected, according to our
ability, the Mystery of Thy Dispensation:

For we have had the Memorial of Thy Death; seen the Type of Thy Resurrection;
been filled with Thy endless Life; enjoied Thy never failing Dainties;


Whereof vouchsafe to make us all partakers in the world to come.

THe good Lord pardon every one, that prepares his heart, to seek the Lord
God of his Fathers, though he be not cleansed according to the purification of
the Sanctuary. 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19.

[Special Duties recommended to Christian People.]
1 WHat shall I do to inherit eternal Life;

1 Keep the Commandments. S. Matthew. 10.17, 19.

2 What shall we do? 2 Repent, and 3 Be Baptized every one of you. Acts 2.37,
38.


3 What must I do to be saved?

4 Believe on the Lord JESUS Christ. Acts 16.30, 31.

4 What must we do? 1 He that has two Coats, Meats,
Let him give to him that has none. To the People. 2 Require no more then that
which is appointed you. To the Publicans. 3 Do violence to no man, neither
accuse any fasly. 4 Be content with your wages.
To the Soldiers. S. Luke 3.11.13, 14.

1 Knowledge of the Righteousness [of God,]

For Fear, Humility, Repentance, Fasting, Prayers, Patience,
As a Sacrifice.

2 Faith in the Mercies [of God,] For Hope, Comfort, Thanksgiving, Alms, Hymns,
Obedience,
As an Oblation.

FINIS.

