A CALL TO ALL Bishops, and Others, Who are zealous for the Book of
Common Prayer, etc. (for which I have been also sometime zealous) By way of
remembrance, now to come to the Way of the Quakers to the Grace of God, to the
Light and Spirit of the Lord, etc. which they so often in words have prayed for
and desired, as may appear by the ensuing Relation, and Collection out of the
Book of Common Prayer, compared with the Principle and Practice of the People
called QVAKERS. And let them read it in moderation, and mark and consider it
well; for it is a serious Invitation to them all, from the Lord. And henceforth
cease to persecute the Quakers, for the practice of those things, which they so
often pray for; and not to mock God, to pray for that which they themselves
will not receive and obey, and so condemn themselves in that which they allow.
And let them also consider, how in days past the Jews (when Christ came) were
in earnest expectation, and desired his coming, and yet when he was come, they
persecuted him, and would not receive him: So now, many pray for the Grace and
Spirit of God, and yet resist it as it comes, and persecute them that have
received it, and do obey it, and bring forth the fruits thereof; and worship
God according to his own Institutions in spirit and in truth, for which we
ought not to be questioned or persecuted; for the service of God is perfect
Freedom; and he expects to have the free exercise of our hearts and minds
therein: And who shall gainsay him and prosper? J. A.

Printed in the Year, 1670.

A Call to all Bishops, etc. to come to the Quakers Way, which they have so
often prayed for, and desired, etc. and to Persecute them no more.
Common Prayer, in the general Confession. GRANT O Most Merciful Father -- That
we may hereafter live a Godly, Righteous, and Sober Life, to the Glory of thy
Holy Name, Amen.
Quaker.
And that which is here desired is our Way, which we are come unto: And by the
Grace of God, that brings Salvation, which has appeared unto all men, are we
taught and enabled to deny Ungodliness and Worldly-lusts, and to live Soberly,
Righteously, and Godly in this present World; And by Grace are we saved, Tit.
2.11, 12. Ephesians. 2.8.

And who can come thus to live, until they come to the Grace of God, and
receive it, which is our Way, which is sufficient. And where does the Grace of
God appear, within, or without a man? And how does it appear, that you may
receive it? And why should any Mock God, to Pray so to live, and yet live quite
contrary, and reject the Grace of God?

Com. Pr. in the Absolution. Wherefore we Beseech him to grant us true
Repentance, and his holy Spirit, that these things may please him, which we do
at present, and that the rest of our Life hereafter may be Pure and Holy.
Quaker.
And the Lord has granted us true Repentance (Praises to his Name for ever)
not only to Confess our Sins, but to forsake them. And Gal. 4.6. God has sent
forth the Spirit of his Son into our Hearts, Crying Abba Father: And he has
written his Law in our Hearts, and put his Truth and Spirit in our inward
parts, Jer. 31.33. Heb. 8.10. Whereby we are enabled to do that which is well
pleasing in his sight. And we have Learned of the Word of God, which is pure
and perfect, wherewithal a young man may cleanse his Way, by taking heed
thereunto, Psa. 119.9. And we are Sanctified through the Truth, Joh. 17.17. And
thy Word is Truth: And the Word is nigh thee, in thy Heart and in thy Mouth,
that thou may hear it and do it, Deuteronomy. 30.14. Romans 10.8. And this Word is
Quick and Powerful, whereby we are enabled to live a Pure and Holy Life, Heb.
4.12.

Com. Pr. Te Deum Laudamus. Vouchsafe, O Lord, to Keep us this Day without Sin.
Quaker.
And is not this a perfect State? And how can this be accomplished, unless ye
come to Christ Jesus, who is come to save his people from their Sins, which is
our Way? Mat. 1.21.

Com. Pr. after the Creed. O God make clean our Hearts within us, and take not
thy Holy Spirit from us.
Quaker.
And We are come to the Washing of Regeneration, and we are come to the Blood
of Sprinkling, and we are come to the Word of Faith, which purifieth the Heart,
and cleanses the Conscience, from Sin and from dead Works, Tit. 2.3, 4, 5.
Heb. 9.14. to serve the Living God: And as we abide in Gods Fear our Hearts are
kept clean: And as we walk in obedience to Gods holy Spirit, it is always with
us; to Teach us, to Comfort us, and to Lead us into all Truth; and this is our
Teacher that cannot be removed into a Corner. And why should not God take away
his Holy Spirit from them that daily Resist it, Quench (...) ^rieve it; for his
Spirit shall not always strive with man that corrupt his ways; therefore obey
the Spirit (which is our Way) if you will not have it taken away from you.

Com. Pr. 2 Collect. O God, who art the Author of Peace and Lover of Concord --
whose Service is perfect Freedom.
Quaker.
And we have learned of the Lord to seek Peace and ensue it, and are a
Peaceable People; and our God has spoken Peace to us, as we are turned from
Wickedness, and from the evil of our Ways, unto him: And we have waited in the
Power and Spirit of the Lord to know Freedom from Sin, and so to serve the Lord
in newness of Life: And so his Service is perfect Freedom, without the Force or
Impositions of man, even by his own Spirit, which makes Free.

Com. Pr. 3 Collect. Lighten our Darkness we beseech thee O LORD.
Quaker.
And here you pray for our Way also, for the Light within, where the Darkness
is, in your hearts, there to be enlightened. And we say Christ Jesus is the
true Light, that Lights every man that comes into the World; and the Light
is our Way, which has led us out of Darkness, which has shined in our hearts,
and given us the knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Christ Jesus, 2
Cor. 4.4, 6. which is the Fountain of Light and Life; And the Light shines in
the Darkness, John 1.5, etc. And so wait to know its illumination, that ye may
no longer abide in Darkness, nor hate the Way of the Quakers, which is the true
Light.

Com. Pr. in the Letany. From all Evil and Mischief, from Sin, from the Crafts
and Assaults of the Devil, from all Blindness of Heart, from Pride, Vainglory,
and Hypocrisy, from Envy, Hatred, Malice, and all Incharitableness*
From Fornication, and all other Deadly Sins; and from all the Deceits of the
World, the Flesh and the Devil. Good Lord Deliver us.

Quaker.
And if this be granted, there will be as great a change wrough upon you, as
there is upon the Quakers; and if you come to know Deliverance and Freedom from
these things, whether you will own and be of our Way, and be Perfect, yea, or
nay, when you are cleansed from all filthiness of flesh and spirit? And who
shall deliver you, but the Lord Jesus Christ, our Savior? And how are you in
the Way of his Salvation, so long as you live in these things, which are quite
contrary unto him? And how can you expect to be freed from Wrath to come, and
live in Sin unto Death? And therefore it is good to repent, and return unto the
Lord withal your hearts, and not Mock God.

For we say, Christ is come to save us from all these things, and as we have
believed in him and obeyed him, we are come to know Salvation by him, and his
coming is to destroy these things, which are the Works of the Devil; yea, and
also to destroy the root of sin in the heart, from whence all these things do
proceed; and so he comes to finish sin, and to set an end to Transgression, and
so brings in everlasting Righteousness. And if you be delivered from all
Blindness, then you will come to be wholly Light in the Lord; and from all the
aforesaid Evils, then surely we shall be no farther Persecuted; for there is
many strive after Perfection, and many have attained it, Blessed be the Name of
the Lord: And Christ Jesus has given himself for us, that he might redeem us
from all Iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar People Zealous of good
Works, Tit. 2.14. And if we walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, we have
fellowship one with another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us
from all Sin: So here is a perfect State, if you would come to the Light, and
walk in the Light, which is our Way; and because men hate it, and walk not in
it, therefore they are not cleansed.

Com. Pr. Letany. That it may please thee to bring into the Way of Truth all
such as have Erred.
Quaker.
This is that we have and do Pray for, and the Lord has beard and answered;
and he has brought many from the error and evil of their ways, into the Way
of Truth, and they walk therein, Blessed be the Name of the Lord: And how can
people be brought into the Way of Truth, but by the Spirit of the Lord, which
leads into all Truth, John 16.13. Which is our Way and Leader?

Com. Pr. Letany. That it may please thee, O LORD, to endue us with thy Holy
Spirit, to Amend our Lives.
Quaker.
And why do you not receive it and obey it then, as we have done? For his Grace
has appeared, and his Spirit has appeared, and convinced you of sin in your
Hearts and Consciences, John 16.8. As you say elsewhere, Take not thy Holy
Spirit form us. So you confess you have it, therefore obey it, and bring forth
the Fruits thereof, while it strives; and deny Ungodliness, or else, you have
no Reason or Ground to expect his Abode with you, John 14.17.23. etc.

Com. Pr. First Sunday in Advent. Almighty God, give us Grace, That we may cast
away the Works of Darkness, and put upon us the Armor of Light, now in the
time of this Mortal Life.
Quaker.
And this is our Armor, which we have put on, which is not Carnal but
Spiritual, and Mighty through God to the pulling down of the strong Holds of
Sin and Satan; and in this we make War in Righteousness, not against Flesh and
Blood, but against spiritual Wickedness, wherein the Lord has prospered us:
And have put off the Works of Darkness, and walk as Children of the Light and
of the Day, in the time of this mortal Life, and have not delayed and put off
the Day of the Lord, as many do, and yet in words pray for his coming.

Com. Pr. Collect. on St. Stevens day. Grant, O Lord, that in all our
Sufferings here upon Earth, for the Testimony of Truth, we may steadfastly look
up to Heaven, and by Faith behold the Glory that shall be revealed; and being
filled with the Holy Ghost, may learn to Love and Bless our Persecutors, by the
Example of thy first Martyr, St. Stephen, who prayed for his Murderers.
Quaker.
And who are the Persecutors? And who are the Persecuted now? And who shall
pray this Prayer now? Not they that are filled with Iniquity and Rage, but they
that are filled with the Holy Ghost, for the Testimony whereof we Suffer.

Com. Pr. Collect. on Innocents day. Mortify and Kill all Vices in us, and so
strengthen us by thy Grace, that by the Innocence of our Lives, etc. we may
glorify thy holy Name.
Quaker.
Oh that we might see this Innocents day, every day, in your lives and
Conversations! And where would there be Vice then, when all is mortified, and
that in you? And where would be Wrong then, and Oppression then, when all
become Innocent? Then there would be no more hurting or spoiling one of
another, in our Streets, when all become as little Children, as all must that
will enter the Kingdom of God; What Violence will there be then? But to keep a
Day in remembrance of the Innocents, and just to be as little Children,
Harmless and Innocent; but to Persecute them that are such, is very unsuitable:
For the Lord would have us all to walk according to his Royal Law, written in
our Hearts, To do to others as we would be done unto: Oh this is an even Path
and a good Way to walk in! And why should men choose another Way, to their own
hurt and ruin? And consider Herod's cruelty against the Innocent, and beware
least you be found like-minded, to persecute the Innocent for the Lords Sake.

Com. Pr. Collect. Circumcision of Christ. Grant us the true Circomcision of
the Spirit, that our Hearts and all our Members being mortified from all
Worldly and Carnal Lusts, we may in all things obey thy blessed Will.
Quaker.
And this is our Way: And where is room for any sin then? And the Lord has
granted our Requests; and we are come to the Circumcision that is made without
hands which is in the Heart, by the Power and Spirit of the Lord, and through
the obedience of the Spirit are come to kno^ the deeds of the Flesh mortifi^^,
who the old man with his Affections and lust crucified, and know the new man
formed, whose Nature it is to obey his Fathers Will in all things: and by the
Power and Spirit of the Lord are we ena^^^^ ^o be fruitful in every good Word
and Work; and it is not of our selves, but by the Grace of God we are what we
are, whose praise is not of man but of God: And he who is thus circumcised is
not a Jew outward, but a Jew inward, in whose heart there is no Guile. And this
we desire and labor to bring all men unto, to Truth in the inward parts, which
the Lord delights in, and has regard to them that love it, and are not
Hypocrites.

Com. Pr. Collect. Quinquagissima Sunday. Send thy Holy Ghost and Power into
our hearts, that most excellent Gift of Charity, the very Bond of Peace and all
Virtues, without which, whosoever lives is accounted dead before thee.
Quaker.
And the Lord has sent his Holy Spirit and Power into our Hearts; Gal. 4.6.
That most excellent Gift of Charity: And we have believed and received him, and
so have received power thus to walk in Charity, and Good Will toward men, and
rejoice in the Truth, and not in Iniquity, and suffer long, 1 Cor. 13.4, 5, 6,
7. verses read. And the Bond of Peace is known, and we seek peace with all men,
and ensue it, and if all did come to this (which is our Way) they would be
bound to Peace, and there would be an end of all strife; and as Charity
abounds, Peace abounds; and because men are out of it, therefore so much
Wickedness and Strife abounds: And so as you Pray, wait to receive an Answer,
that you may with us have Charity and Good Will toward all men, and be
quickened by the Power and Spirit of the Lord, that you may not be dead while
you live; and forbear to persecute them who are quickened and live unto God.

Com. Pr. Collect. first day of Lent, called, Ashwednesday. Create and make in
us New and Contrite Hearts.
Quaker.
And this is that we are come unto, the Word of God in our hearts; and have
felt the operation thereof, to break down and abase the Loftiness and Pride of
man's Heart; and to purge and cleanse our Hearts, and so create in us new and
contrite Hearts; and here we with the Prophet have felt the Word of the Lord as
a Fire, and as a Hammer.

And Friends, when you come to know this Work wrought in you by the Word of
God, by which all things were made, then shall your faces gather Paleness; and
ye shall also know what it is to tremble at the Word of the Lord: And so do not
reproach nor scorn our Way.

Com. Pr. 2d Sunday after Easter, Collect. Almighty God, who have given thine
only Son, etc. And also endeavor our selves to follow the blessed Steps of his
most holy Life.
Quaker.
And so be ye Followers of us, as we are Followers of Christ, as the Apostle
has said; and he will teach you to be Meek and Lowly, and to be of no
Reputation in this World: And as you learn of him, he will teach you to be
otherwise minded; and to seek the good and welfare of all men, and not to
persecute; For he came not to destroy, but to save men's lives; Which is the Way
of God.

Com. Pr. 5th Sunday after Easter, Collect. Lord grant, that by thy holy
Inspiration we may think those things that be good, and by thy merciful
guiding, may perform the same.
Quaker.
It is granted: And the Inspiration of the Almighty has given us
Understanding. Job. 32.8. whereby we think, and do, that which is good; and it
is not of our selves: And so here Inspiration, and the immediate Teachings of
Gods Spirit is owned: And why should the Cry of the people be so vain, as to
say, The Spirit cease now, (and if it be so, it is to them that are
Disobedient to him) and Inspiration cease, and Revelation cease now; what
then is become of the Knowledge of God in those days, whom to know is eternal
Life? for it is written, No man knows the Father save the Son, and he to whom
the Son reveals him, Mat. 11.27. And Gods people are taught by his Spirit; and
as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God, Romans 8.14.
And this is our Teacher and Leader; And if Justification be ceased, why then do
ye still pray for it in vain?

Com. Pr. the Sunday after Assension, Collect. Send to us thy Holy GHOST, to
comfort us.
Quaker.
He is come to be our Comforter, which bears us up in all Trials and
Persecutions; and he speaks not peace nor comfort to the Wicked.

Com. Pr. Whitsunday Collect. GOD, which have taught the Hearts of thy faithful
People, by sending them the Light of thy holy Spirit; Grant us by the same
spirit to have a right Judgment.
Quaker.
So here the Light is the Teacher, which we own, and bear Witness to; and have
believed, and received it in our hearts, and are taught by it, which gives the
knowledge of God, and gives us Judgment and Understanding of these things that
differ: And if ye were like-minded, you might come to be of a right Judgment;
and then you would not persecute us for receiving that which you desire.

Com. Pr. 9th Sunday after Trinity, and 15th Sunday. Grant us LORD, we beseech
thee, thy Spirit, to think and do always such things as be rightful -- Lead us
to all things profitable to Salvation.
Quaker.
Here are many and frequent desires after our TEACHER; Oh that People would
receive him, and be taught by him! and they would profit more then by all other
Teachers whatsoever; For the Lord teaches his People to profit* And this is he
that helps our Infirmities, and teaches as to Pray, and makes Intercession
for us with Sighs and Groans that cannot be uttered, Romans 8.26. And by him we
both think and do that which is rightful, and acceptable in the sight of the
Lord: And why should we be persecuted for so doing? And Godliness is profitable
to Salvation, 1 Timothy 4.8.

Com. Pr. St. Andrews day, Collect. Almighty GOD, grant unto us all, that we
being called by thy holy WORD, may forthwith give up our selves, obediently to
follow thy holy Commandments.
Quaker.
And why should not this Prayer be fulfilled, which is universal? And why
should we not go to Preach and Declare the Everlasting Gospel, being called by
the WORD of GOD? And many have freely given themselves up, to follow the Lord's
holy Calling and Commandment therein: And who should let or hinder that which
is so prayed for? And so that which is now come to pass has been desired in
former Ages: And Moses that good Man, envyed not, nor would not have others
envy for his sake, when Eldad and Medah, Prophesied, in the Camp of Israel, in
days of old, but wished. That all the Lords people were Prophets, who preached
freely, and declared the Word of God freely, without Money and without Price:
And in the Apostles days, who freely had received, freely gave: And why should
any be offended when the Lord grants that which they themselves pray for?

Com. Pr. St. John Baptist. Almighty God, make us constantly speak the Truth
boldly; rebuke Vice; and patiently suffer for the Truths sake.
Quaker.
And why should we be hindered, troubled, or persecuted for the practice of
those things, that have been so long prayed for; being come to the fulfilling
of what has been desired by the Martyrs and primitive Reformers, since the
Apostasy, who desired to see this Day; and endeavored in their day and time a
Reformation, according to the best of their Knowledge, in those days? And
seeing that is now come to pass and fulfilled, which many good men, in their
day and time, desired to see; and their Souls traveled after, and they
suffered for: Why should not all now with one accord, freely lay hold upon the
largeness of God's Love, and Rejoice that the Kindgom of Heaven is come unto
them, and press after it? And not to push at them who are come to walk in the
Way, and are guided and led by the Spirit of the Lord, in the Path of Holiness,
the end whereof is Everlasting Life: And why should not all come to walk in
this Way And also prayed for on Simon and Jude^s day.
in the unity of the Spirit of the Lord, and all be made a holy Temple for the
Lord to dwell in, and be Worshipped, who dwells not in Temples made with hands?
And why should any envy us for walking in this Way, that has been so long
desired, and yet is? And why should any endeavor to bring us back again after
so many years travel on, out of your Way, in the WAY to Everlasting Happiness;
but rather encourage us to go on, and rejoice that some are come to the Good
Old Way, and yet New and Living Way, that you and many others have so long in
words talked of, and desired; and say in your hearts, This is the Truth, come
let us walk in it; and this would make you right honorable in the sight of the
Nations: And lift not up a hand against us any more, until you have convinced
us by sound Arguments, touching these things and practices: But let us go on to
walk in the Light of the Lord God, and of the Lamb, in which the Nations of all
them that are saved must walk. And bless God that there is a Remnant that have
obtained that which you desire; and endeavor not to turn them out of the Way;
for that which is of God shall stand; and that which is of man, and by man,
shall have an end, and come to nothing: For the Lord will stain the Pride and
Glory of all Flesh, and exalt his own Name and Truth over all; unto whom be
Praises and Glory for evermore, Amen.

J. A.
The 13 th of the 7 th Month, 1670.
THE END.

