A MANVAL of directions for the Visitation of the sick with sweet Meditations
and Prayers to be used in time of sickness.

by Lancelot Andrews late Bishop of Winchester.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Cartwright at the hand and Bible, in Duck-lane. 1642



A MANVALL OF Directions for the visitation of the sick, with sweet
Meditations and Prayers to be used in time of sickness.

Whereunto is added a Short confession of the Faith, with a form of
Thankesgiving; and Prayers for Morning, and Evening.

BY, LANCELOT ANDREWS late Bishop of Winchester.

LONDON, Printed by R. Cotes, for Samuel Cartwright, and are to be sold at the
sign of the hand and Bible in Ducke-Lane. 1642.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, Sir EDWARD LITTLETON, KNIGHT, Baron Littleton of
Mounslowe, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of ENGLAND, AND One of his Majesty's
most Honorable Privy COUNCIL; Grace and Peace be multiplied.
Right Honorable,
MAY it please you in these troublesome days of ours, to behold the man, who
though (with open mouth) he tells not all things that every one has done,
Yet (by lively example) teaches what every one ought to be ready to do; Even
for Kings, and for all that are in Authority; that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life, in all godliness, and honesty.

His Person, whilst he lived, wanted not the love and favor of a King, to
advance him to dignity; and let not this Posthume work of his lack your
Honors protection and patronage, to keep it from indignity.

A Midwives care reaches no further than the safe bringing the Infant into the
world, the maintenance and protection thereof, she commends to the Father and
other Friends.

This Orphan by my means has happily seen the Light, but wanting a Father,
as being deceased before his birth, I presume to commend its defense and
tuition to your Honor as a friend, and your Lordshippes self to the gracious
protection of the Lord, who grant you ever the continuance of your honor, to
you and your posterity for ever:

So prays Your Honors humbly devoted I.G.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
COurteous Reader, I shall not need, I conceive, to use many words by way of
Preface. The Author of this Manual, and his former Works, have been of such
note and esteem amongst us, as that I doubt not, but it may justly be said,
concerning them, even to most men, which Jehu, of the Prophet that anointed
him to be King over Israel, 2 King. 9.11. Ye know the man and his communication.

For this, how like it is the rest of its Brethren, I leave you to judge, and
yet I doubt not but some way may be made to your more willing entertainment of
it, by telling you it was conceived about that time the Reverend Author was
Parson of Saint Giles Creplegate, and used by him in his ordinary Visitation of
the sick.

To this let me add, the love of public good, not respect of private profit,
has moved him to fit this to the Press, who otherwise would never have seen
his name in Print, and now desires the praise of the work may be given to the
right Author, resting

Yours in the Lord I.G.

Inquiries to be made by the Minister.
The Parties.
THe Sex, 2 The Age, The condition of life.
1 Whether learned, structed, 2 Sound in mind, memory. 3 The sense of heari^^
perfect.
1 whether patient, unquiet, 2 Cheerful of deje^^ 3 If being well, found
comfort,
1 Reading, 2 Hearing, 3 Repeating any particulars.
Whether any mate^^ all point, whereof to admonished.

To take occasion out of ^is own words.
What man is he that lives, and shall not see death? Psalm. 89.48. It is
appointed for all men once to dye. Heb. 9, 27. I am a stranger and sojourner
with thee, as all my Fathers were, Psalm.39. 12. We have here no abiding City,
Heb.13.14. The night comes when no man can do any work, Ioh.9.4. Where the
tree falls whether to the North, to the South, there it ^^eth, Eccles.1.1.3.
A MANVALL for the SICK.
1. Comfortable Scriptures to be used to the sick party.
Esaias 54.10
THe Mountain may remove, and the Hills may faldown, but my mercies shall not
depart from thee, nor the covenant of my peace come to nothing, says the Lord,
that has compassion on thee.

Heaven and earth shall pass, but my Word shall not pass.

All the promises of God are in him, Yea and Amen.

In whom we have most great and precious promises, that we should be partakers
of the Divine Nature.

Jeremy 31.18.
I have heard Ephraim lamenting thus,

Thou trast corrected me, and I was chastised, as an untamed Heifer; convert
thou me, and I shall be converted, for thou art the Lord my God.

Surely after that I had converted, I repented, I smote upon my thigh, I was
ashamed, yea confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth.

Since I spoke to him, I still remember him, therefore my bowels are troubled
for him; I will surely have compassion on him, says the Lord.

I will visit their iniquity with a rod, and their sin with secourges,
nevertheles my mercy will I not take from him, nor suffer my truth to fail.

Prove. 3. 11,12.
My son, refuse not the chastisement of the Lord, neither be grieved with his
correction; for the Lord corrects him whom he loves, even as the father does
the child in whom, for all that, he delights.

Ioh. 5. 17,18,19.
Behold, blessed is the man whom God corrects; therefore refuse not thou the
correction of the Almighty.

For he makes the wound and binds it up; he smites, and his hands make
whole again.

He shall deliver thee in six troubles, and in the seventh, the evil shall
not come nigh thee.

Heb. 12. 5.
Forget not the consolation that speaks unto you as unto children.

If you endure chastening, God offers himself unto you, as unto a son, for
what son is it whom the Father chasteneth not?

If therefore ye be without correction, whereof all are partakers, then are
ye bastards and not sons.

Moreover, we have had the fathers of our bodies which corrected us, and yet
we gave them reverence, should we not much rather be in subjection to the
father of Spirits, that we may live?

For they verily for a few days chastened us after their own pleasure, but he
chasteneth us for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness.

Now, no chastening for the present seems joyous, but grievous; yet
afterward, it brings the quiet fruit of righteousness unto them which are
thereby execised.

Wherefore lift up your hands which hang down, and your weak knees.

Ioh. 16.22.
And you now are in sorrow, but I will see you again, and your heart shall
rejoice, and your Joy shall none be able to take from you.

Esa. 54. 7, 8.
For a little while have I sorsaken thee, but in great compassion will I gather
thee.

For a moment in mine anger I hid my face from thee, but with everlasting mercy
will I have compassion on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer.

Modicum and videbitis me.

A little time and ye shall see me.

Psalm. 94. 12.13.
Blessed is the man whom thou chastisest (O Lord) and teach him thy Law,
that thou may give him rest in the days of evil.

1 Cor. 11. 31.
But when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, because we should not
be condemned with the world.

They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy, Psalm. 129.5.

The Lord has chastened and corrected me, but he has not given me over unto
death, Psalm. 118.18.

Iam. 1. 2, 4.
My brethren count it exceeding joy when you fall into diverse afflictions:
knowing that the trying of the faith brings patience; and let patience have
her perfect work, that you may be complete, entire, taking nothing.

Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted, Mat. 5.4.

When I am weak, then am I strong, 2 Cor. 12. 10.

2. Ejaculations for the sick.
CAst me not away in the time of my weakness, forsake me not when my strength
fails me.

Though I be afflicted on every side, yet let me not be distressed; though in
want of some of thy comforts, yet not of all.

Though chastened, yet not forsaken; though cast down, yet not perished.

As mine outward man does wear and decay, so let mine inward man renew daily.

O let this light affliction, which will quickly be over, cause unto me a far
more excellent and eternal weight of glory.

In the midst of the sorrows that are in mine heart, let thy comforts (O
Lord) refresh my soul.

My flesh and my heart fails, but be thou the strength of my head, and my
portion forever, Psa. 73. 26.

Thou (O Lord) up-holdest all such as are falling, and liftest up those that be
down.

Thou healest the broken in heart, and give Medicine to heal their
sickness.

As thou art faithful (O Lord) so suffer me not to be tempted above that I am
able.

But (good Lord) give me an issue with the Temptation, that I may be able to
bear it.

3. Heads of comfort to be administered from the consideration of God. Christ.

God.
A creator (...) and so faithful, 1 Pet. 4. ult.

A possessor or owner, (...) I am thine, part of thy possession, Genesis 14. 19.

A Redeemer at large, (...) Psalm. 130. 7.

A Redeemer (...) as of the same flesh and blood, Job. 19.25. 26.

I. Christ a Mediator,
1. Between God and us, his Priesthood and Sacrifice.

A Lion.
2. Between us and Satan, his Kingdom and conquest.

II. A Lamb.
1. Between us and sin, his Innocence.

2. Between us and our Concupisence, his Charity.

III.
1. Between us and the punishments due to our sin, his passion, and
bloodshedding satisfaction.

2. Between us and our conscience, and the Judgment of God, his Advocate-ship.

IIII.
1. Between us and our want of Righteousness, his absolute and complete
obedience.

2. Between us and our want of desert of the eternal Reward, his Merit.

V.
Between us and our want of sorrow in repenting, his Agony and bloody sweat.

These Recount.

Show.

Offer.

Set between.

4. Things to be recommended to the sick: such as are Prayer, Alms,
Repentance, Faith, Love, Hope, Well-doing.
Prayer.
PRay unto the Lord if happily this may be forgiven thee, Act. 31. 6.

Alms.
Blessed is the man that considers the poor and needy, Psalm. 41.1.

By mercy and truth are sins cleansed or forgiven, Prove. 12.

Break off thine unrighteousness by mercy to the poor, Dan. 4. 14.

They showed the Garments which she had wrought with her own hands, Act. 9. 39.

(...).
1. Except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish, Luke 13. 5.

2. Without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6.

3. If I have all faith and no love, it profits me nothing, 1 Cor. 13.2.

4. We are saved by hope. Romans 8. 24.

5. Hope thou in the Lord and be doing good, Psalm. 37.3.

And they shall come forth that have done good, to the resurrection of life.
Job. 5.29.

Make you friends of the unrighteous Mammon, that when you must hence, they may
receive you into everlasting Tabernacles, Luke 16.9.

5. Propositions and inferences to be made to the sick.
1. YOu are persuaded that no sickness or Cross comes by chance unto any.

2. But you believe that it is God that fendeth them, without whose providence
they fall not on us.

3. You acknowledge God to be most wise, and to suffer nothing to befall us,
but what is expedient it so should.

4. Therefore God having sent this his visitation now to you at this time, that
it is expedient for you thus to be sick.

Say,

I know (O Lord) that thy judgments are just, and that thou of very
faithfulness have caused me to be troubled, Psalm. 119.75.

1. You know and confess that God to al, but Christian men especially,
carries the asfection of a father toward his children.

2. You know also that a father, whether he makes much of his child, or
whether he chasten him, continues a father in both, and loves him in the one
no less than in the other.

3. Think the same of God touching your self, that while he gave you good
days, he loved you; and that now he sends you some evil, he loves you
also, and would not have sent these evils, but to be a cause unto you of
greater good, that being called home by them, you might be at perfect peace with
him.

Say,

Before I was troubled I went wrong, but now shall I learn thy word, Psalm.
119. 67.

1. You are not only to take it patiently, (I held my peace and opened not my
mouth because it was thy doing, Psalm. 39.9. It is the Lord, let him do what
seems him good in his own eyes) but (2) even to give him thanks for it, as
for an wholesome medicine; the Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away,
as it pleases the Lord, so is it come to pass, blessed be the Name of the
Lord. I will take the cup of Salvation, and give thanks to the Name of the
Lord.

3. Especially for that we in the time of our health forgetting him, yet he is
so merciful, that he gives us not over with the world; but for all we have
grieved his holy Spirit, and fallen from grace, he visits us again, and
offers it afresh unto us.

4. That if his will had not been to have showed mercy by his chastisement,
he could and would suddenly have taken you away with a quick destruction, and
not given you this time to bethink your self, and to seek and sue to him for
grace.

Say,

When I am judged, I am chastened of the Lord, that I might not be condemned
with the world, 1 Cor. 11.32.

Gods very punishment is a part of his mercy, Psalm. 89.31.

It is the great mercy of the Lord that we are not suddenly consumed Lam. 3. 22.

For giving you a time and space. O tarry thou the Lords leisure, be strong,
and he shall comfort thine heart, and put thou thy trust in the Lord, Psalm. 17.
14.

O cast thou thy burden on the Lord, and he shall refresh thee, and shall not
suffer the righteous to fail for ever, Psalm. 55.22.

O put your trust always in him ye people, power out your hearts before him,
for God is our help, Psalm. 62. 8.

He will not always be chiding, nor keeps he his anger for ever, Psalm. 103.
9.

In his wrath will he remember mercy, Hab. 3. 2.

Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning. Psalm. 30. 5.

For a little while have I forsaken thee, but with great compassion will I
gather thee: For a moment in mine anger I hid my face from thee, but with
everlasting mercy have I had pity on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer. Esaias,
54. 58.

6. Questions to be urged to the sick, and Scriptures to be propounded in
answer of them.
1. DO you acknowledge your self, not to have lived so well as you ought, but
to have sinned, done amiss and dealt wickedly?

2. Do you call to mind the years of your life spent amiss in the bitterness
of your soul?

3. Do you desire to have your mind illuminated by God, touching those sins
you never knew, or which you once knew, but have now forgotten, that you may
repent you of them?

4. Do you desire to feel greater sorrow in your Soul, for the sins
committed, than you do? Would you be glad if you did feel it, and are you
grieved that you feel it not, that you are no more grieved?

5. Be there, or is there any special or peculiar sin that does lie heavy on
your conscience, for the which you need, or do require the benefit of private
absolution?

Say,

Thou with rebukes do chasten man for sin, and make his beauty to consume,
as a moth fretteth a garment, Psalm. 39. 11.

There is no health in my flesh, by reason of thy wrath, neither is there any
rest in my bones, by reason of my sin, Psalm. ^,8.3.

Lord be merciful to me, heal my soul, for I have sinned against thee Psalm.
41.4.

Lord, I confess my wickedness, and am sorry for my sin, Psalm. 38. 18.

I call to mind the misspent years of my life past, in the bitterness of my
Soul, Esaias 38.15.

My misdeedes have prevailed against me, O be thou merciful unto my sin,
Psalm. 65.3.

For thy Names sake (O Lord) be merciful unto my sin, for it is great, Psalm.
25.11.

O remember not the offenses and fraileties of my youth, but according to thy
mercy, think thou upon me (O Lord) for thy goodness. Psa. 25. 67.

Namely (O Lord) and especially, be merciful unto me; Herein the Lord be
merciful unto his Servant, 2 Kin. 5.18.

O Lord, lay not my sin to my charge, Acts 7. 60.

If thou (Lord) be extreme to mark what is done amiss, Lord who may abide
it? Psalm. 130. 30.

O enter not into judgment with thy servant, for no flesh is righteous in thy
sight, Psalm 143. 2.

My confusion is daily before me, and the fear of death is fallen upon me,
fearful nesse, and trembling are come upon me, and an horrible dread has
overwhelmed me, Psalm. 55.4. 5.

The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a contrite heart, and will save such as
are of an humble spirit, Psalm 34. 18.

A broken and a contrite heart (O Lord) thou shall not despise. Psalm. 51.17.

7. Questions to be added further, upon answer of the former.
REpent you of these your sins?

That is,

1. Have you a purpose to judge your self for them, if you live? 1 Cor. 12. 31.

And to inflict upon your self, punishment for committing them, according as
you shall be directed? 1 Cor. 7.11. Lev. 5.18.

2. Are you resolved, if God send you life hereafter to amend and live more
carefully, and to avoid both those means and occasions that may provoke you to
sin again, and those signs and marks which testify you delight in it?

3. Do you holily promise thus much in the presence of God, his grace ayding
you?

4. Do you desire, if God send you health again, to be specially put in mind
thereof?

Turn us (O God our Savior) and let thine anger cease from us. Psalm. 85.4.

1. Believe you the Christian Creed, or confession of our most holy Faith, once
delivered to the Saints?

2. Believe you, that you cannot be saved, except you believe it?

3. Are you glad in your soul, and do give God hearty thanks, that in this
Faith you were borne, have lived in it, and now shall die in the same?

4. Do you your self desire, and do you wish as to desire at the hands of
God, that this Faith may not fail you until the hour, and in the hour of
death?

5. If your sense fail you, or if the pains of your disease, or weakness
other-wayes, so work with you, as it shall happen you with your tongue to
speak ought, otherwise than this your Faith and Religion would, do you now
renounce all such words as none of yours, and is it your will, we account of
them, as not spoken by you?

Is there in your mind any scruple touching any matter of Faith or religion?

Say,

Lord I believe, help thou mineunbelief, Mar. 9. 24.

1. Do you forgive them, that any manner of way have offended you, as freely
as you your self would be forgiven at Gods hands?

2. Do you likewise desire of God that he would forgive them?

3. That amends which they are bound to make you, in that they have offended
you, are you content to remit them also?

4. Are you willing that so much be showed them from you, that you have
forgiven them freely, lie, and fully, and desire God to do the like?

Say,

Father forgive them, they knew not what they did, Luke 23.34.

O Lord, lay not these sins to their charge, Act. 7. 60.

You your self living in the world, it cannot be but some you have offended.

1. Do you desire that all such as you have offended, would pardon and forgive
you?

2. Do you remember or call to mind any person or persons in special, whom
you have so offended?

3. Will you, that so much be signified to them in your name, that you desire
them to forgive you?

In as much as the offenses against the seventh Commandment, of getting any
children, (by the act of Adultery) committed with the Wife of another Man, and
against the eighth Commandment touching men's goods, are not forgiven, unless
restitution be made to the parties wronged: and against the ninth
Commandment, touching men's credits and good names:

Are you willing and ready to restore and make satisfaction to such as you have
wronged, in thrusting in a child, begotten by you, and likely to deprive the
true children of the party, and begotten by him, of a child's part, or portion:
And to such as you have wronged in their goods: And to satisfy those whom you
have any way touched in their name, and that without all fraud or delay: can
you call to mind any persons in particular, who^ you have so offended?

8. Several parts of prayer to be used by the sick party, taken out of
Scripture.
ANd now (O Lord) what is my hope? truly my hope is in thee, Psalm. 39. 7.

Thou that art the hope of all the ends of the earth, and of them that remain
in the broad sea.

Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him. Ioh. 13. 15.

Though I walk through the vale of the shadow of death, yet will I fear none
evil, Psalm. 23. 2. 4.

Lord, thou know whereof we be made, thou remembrest we are but dust,
Psalm. 103. 14.

Call to mind, we are but flesh, a wind that passes away, and comes not
again, Psa. 78. 39.

Remember (Lord) of what time I am, what our substance is, wherefore have thou
made all men for naught? Psalm. 89. 47.

Lord, considermy complaint, for I am brought very low.

Let my present misery more prevail to moove compassion, than my sinful
life past, to provoke thine indignation.

Lord, how long will thou be angry with thy servant that prays?

Behold Lord, I show the lowliness of a suppliant, show not thou to me the
rigor of a Judge. Ne(quaeso) premat Sententia Iudicis,
Quem sic submittit Petitio supplicis.


O deliver not thine own inheritance over into the will of thine enemy, Psalm,
119. 94. I am thine, O save me! I am thine, carest thou not that I perish? Mar.
4. 38.

Behold (O Lord) how that I am thy servant.

I am thy servant, and the son of thine handmaid. Psalm. 116. 16.

Thine unprofitable evil servant, yet thy servant.

Thy lost unkind child, yet thy child. Luke 15.

Though I have not showed to thee the duty and affection of a child, yet do
not thou cast from thee the natural kindness and compassion of a Father.

I commend my self into thy hands as unto a faithful Creator. 1 Pet. 4. 19.

Receive (O Lord) thine own creature, not made by any strange god, but by thy
self, the only true, and living God, despise not (O Lord) the work of thine
own hand. Psalm. 138. ult.

Lord,

I am created to thine own Image, and likeness, Genesis 1. 26.

Suffer not (O Lord) suffer not thine Image to be utterly defaced, but renew
it again in righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians. 4. 24.

I commend my self into thine hands, for thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of
truth, Psalm: 31. 5.

Behold (Lord) I am the price of thy blood, of thy most precious blood, 1 Cor.
6. ult.

Suffer not so great a price to perish; Suffer not that to be cast away, that
thou have so dearly bought.

O Lord, thou came down from heaven to redeem that which was lost, suffer
not that to be lost, which thou have redeemed.

Behold (O Lord) thou art in the midst of us, thy name is called upon us, we
are called by thy name, Christians, Dan. 9. 19.

For thy names sake be merciful unto us, Psa. 25. 11.

Spare thine own name in us, Psalm. 19. 9.

And do not (good Lord) so remember our sins, that by remembering them, thou
forgettest thine own name.

Lord we call upon thy name, there is no name under heaven, wherein we can be
saved, but only it, Act. 4. 12.

Though we be unfaithful, yet thou art true, and can not deny thine own
name, 2 Timothy 2.13.

I commend my self into thine hands, as to my true and only sanctifier.

Lord, I have been the Temple of thy holy spirit, 1 Cor. 3.16.

Though it has been polluted by my frailty, yet Lord destroy it not; But
dedicate it, hallow it anew, and sanctify it to thee yet once again: make an
Encaenia of it.

Spare us good Lord, spare thine own handiwork, thine own Image, thine own
name, the price of thine own blood in us.

The good Lord be merciful unto every one that prepares his heart to seek
the Lord God, the God of our Fathers: though he be not according to the
cleanness of the Sanctuary, 1 Chronicles. 30.19.

Behold (O Lord) ae bruised Reed, O break it not; smoking flax, yet (O Lord)
quench it not, Esa. 42.3. Mat. 12. 20.

Lord, I have never denied thy name, but confessed it ever, and in the
confession and invocation of it, I desire to spend my last breath, and to
depart this life.

Lord, I have desired to fear thy Name, Neh. 1. 11.

My soul has been desirous to long after thy Commandments, Psalm. 119.20.

Lord, I do acknowledge my wickedness and I am sorry for my sin, Psalm.
38.18.

Lord, I believe, help thou mine unbeleife.

Lord, I hope verily to see the goodness of the Lord, in the land of the
Living, Psalm. 27.13.

Let not this hope confound me, nor make me ashamed, Psa.119.16.

Lord, I freely forgive whomsoe'r I have ought against, those poor pence or
mites they owe me. Mat. 18.28.

Lord, I held my peace and opened not my mouth at thy chastisements, because it
was thy doing, O Lord, Psalm. 39.9.

Lord, I seek thee, and thou never failest them that seek thee, Psalm. 9. 10.

I come unto thee, and of them that come unto thee, thou castest none out.
Ioh.6.37.

Nevertheless, though I be sometime afraid, yet put I my trust in thee, Psalm.
56.3.

O Lord, in thee have I trusted, let me never be put to confusion, Psalm. 71
1.31.1.

O Lord my God, in thee have I put my trust, save me from them that seek after
my soul and deliver me, lest he devour my soul like a Lion, and tear it in
pieces whiles there is none to help, Psalm. 7.1,2.

The snares of death compassed me round about, the overflowings of ungodliness
made me afraid, Psalm. 18.4.

The sorrow of death overtooke me, and the pains of hell gat hold upon me,
Psalm. 18.5.

I have found trouble and heaviness, and I will call upon the name of the Lord,
Psalm. 116.3.

O Lord, I beseech thee deliver my soul. Psa.116 4.

Hear my voice (O Lord) out of thy holy Temple, let my complaint come before
thee, let it enter even into thine cares, Psalm. 18.6.

Send down from on high, and deliver me, take me out of many waters, Psalm.
18.16.

Gracious is the Lord and righteous, yea our Lord is merciful, Psalm. 116.5.

The Lord preserves the simple, I am in misery, but he will think upon me,
Psalm. 116.6.

Turn again then to thy rest, (O my Soul) for the Lord has regarded thee,
Psalm. 116.7.

Psalm 22.
verse 1. My God, my God, look upon me, why have thou forsaken me, and art so
far from my health, and from the words of my complaint?

ver. 2, 3. O my God, I cry in the day time, and thou hearestnot, and in the
night season also, I have audience, yet thou continuest holy, O thou Worship of
Israel.

ver. 4. Our Fathers hoped in thee, they trusted in thee, and thou did
deliver them.

5. They called upon thee, and were helped, they put their trust in thee, and
were not confounded.

9. But thou were he that tookest me out of my Mothers womb.

10. Thou were my hope when I hanged upon my Mothers breasts.

11. I have been left unto thee ever since I was borne, thou art my God even
from my Mothers womb.

16. O go not far from me, for trouble is hard at hand, and there is none to
deliver me.

20. Deliver my soul from the sword, my darling from the power of the dog.

21. Save me from the Lions mouth, deliver me from among the horns of the
Unicornes.

Psalm 25.
ver. 11. For thy names sake (O Lord) be merciful unto my sin for it is
great.

16. O turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me, for I am desolate and in
misery.

17. The sorrows of my heart are enlarged; O bring thou me out of my troubles.

18. Look upon my adversity and misery, and forgive me all my sin.

20. O keep my soul and deliver me, let me not be confounded, for I have put
my trust in thee.

Psalm 28.
verse 1. Unto thee do I cry (O Lord) my strength, think no scorn of me, lest
if thou make as though thou hear not, I become like those that go down
into the pit.

2. Hear the voice of my humble petitions when I cry unto thee, when I lift up
my hands toward the Mercy seat of thy holy Temple.

O hide not thy face from me, neither cast thy servant away in displeasure,
Psalm. 27.9.

Thou have been my succor, leave me not, neither forsake me, O Lord God of
my salvation.

Psalm 40.
verse 11. Withdraw not thou thy mercy from me, (O Lord) let thy loving
kindness and truth always preserve me.

12. For innumerable troubles are come about me, my sins have taken hold upon
me, that I am not able to look up, yea, they are more in number than the
hairs of my head, and my heart has failed me.

13. O Lord, let it be thy pleasure to deliver me, make have (O Lord) to help
me.

17. As for me, though I be poor, and in misery, yet the Lord cares for me.

Thou art my helper, and my redeemer, make no long tarrying, O my God.

Psalm 31.
14. Lord, my hope has been in thee, I have said, thou art my God.

15. My life is in thine hand, O deliver me, and be merciful unto me.

16. Show thy servant the light of thy countenance, and save me for thy
mercies sake.

Psalm 38.
21. Forsake me not (O Lord my God) be not thou far from me.

22. Haste thee to help me (O Lord God of my Salvation.)

Psalm 54.
1. Save Me (O God) for thy names sake, O deliver me in thy strength.

2. Hear my prayer (O Lord) and hide not thy self from my petitions, and
hearken unto the words of my mouth

Psalm 55. 1.
Hear my prayer (O God) and hide not thy self from my petitions; take heed
unto me, and hear me, how I mourn in my prayer, and am vexed.

Psalm 61.
1. Hear my crying (O God) give ear unto my prayer.

2. From the ends of the earth will I cry unto thee, when my heart is in
heaviness (O Lord) let me make my prayer unto thee in an acceptable time.

Psalm 39.
13. Hear me, O God in the multitude of thy mercies, even in the truth of thy
Salvation.

14. Take me out of the mire that I sink not: O let me be delivered from them
that seek my soul, and from the deep waters.

15. Let not the water-floods drown me, neither let the deepswallow me up,
and let not the pit shut her mouth upon me.

16. Hear me (O Lord) for thy loving kindness is comfortable; turn thee
unto me, according to the multitude of thy mercy.

17. And hide not thy face from thy servant, for I am in trouble, O haste thee,
and hear me.

18. Draw nigh unto my Soul and save it, O deliver me.

19. As for me, when I am poor and in heaviness, thy help (O Lord) shall lift
me up.

Psalm 109.
21. But deal thou with me (O Lord) according to thy name, for sweet is thy
mercy.

22. O deliver me, for I am helpless and poor and my heart is wounded within
me.

23. I go like the shadow that departs, I am driven away as the Grasshopper.

24. My knees are weak through fasting, my flesh is dried up for want of
fatness.

26. Help me (O Lord my God) O save me according to thy mercies.

27. And men shall know that it is thy hand, and that thou (Lord) have done it.

Psalm 74.
1. Oh God, why art thou absent from us so long? why is thy wrath so hot
against the sheep of thy pasture?

2. O think upon the Congregation, which thou haste purchased, and redeemed of
old.

17. O deliver not the Soul of thy Turtle unto the multitude of thine enemies,
and forget not the distressed of thy servants for ever.

O let not the simple go away ashamed, but let the poor and needy give praise
unto thy name.

Turn us again, (O Lord God of Hosts) show the light of thy countenance, and
we shall be whole. Psalm. 80.3.

Psalm 85.
2. O forgive the offenses of thy servants, and cover all their sins.

3. Take away all thy displeasure, and turn away thy self from thy wrathful
indignation.

4. Turn us then, O God our Savior, and let thine anger cease from us.

5. Will thou be displeased at us for ever, and will thou stretch out thy wrath
from one generation to another?

6. Will thou not turn again and quicken us, that thy people may rejoice in
thee.

Show us thy mercy (O Lord) and grant us thy Salvation, haste thee to help me,
O God of my Salvation.

Psalm 70.1.
Haste thee (O Lord) to deliver me, make haste to help me, O Lord.

Psalm 44.
23. Up Lord, why sleep thou? awake, and be not absent from us for ever.

24. Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and forgettest our misery and trouble? For
our Soul is brought low, unto the dust, our belly cleaves to the ground.

Arise and help us, and deliver us for thy mercy sake.

Psalm 86.
1. Bow down thine ear (O Lord) and hear me, for I am poor, and in misery.

2. Preserve thou my Soul, for thou gave it me, my God, save thy servant,
which puts his trust in thee.

3. Be merciful unto me, (O Lord) for I will call daily upon thee.

4. Comfort the Soul of thy servant, for unto thee do I lift up my Soul.

5. For thou (Lord) art good and gracious, and of great mercy to all them that
call upon thee.

6. Give ear (Lord) unto my prayer, and ponder the voice of my humble desires.

7. In the time of my trouble, I will call upon thee, for thou hear me.

15. For thou (Lord) art full of compassion, and mercy, long suffering,
plenteous in goodness and truth.

16. O turn thee then unto me, and have mercy upon me, give thy strength
unto thy servant, and help the son of thine handmaid.

17. Show some token upon me for good, that they which love thee, may see it
and be glad, because thou (Lord) have helped and comforted me.

Psalm 142.
1. I cried unto the Lord with my voice, yea, even unto the Lord did I make my
supplication.

2. I powered out my complaint before him, and showed him of my trouble.

3. When my spirit was in heaviness, thou knew my path.

4. I looked also on my right hand, and lo there was none to help me.

5. I had no place to fly unto, and none was able to deliver my Soul.

6. I cried unto thee, and said, thou art my hope, and my portion in the Land
of the Living.

O consider my complaint, for I am brought very low.

9. Bring my soul out of prison, that I may give thanks unto thee; which
thing, if thou will grant me, then shall the righteous resort unto my company.

Psalm. 141.8
Mine eyes look unto thee (O Lord;) In thee is my trust, O cast not out my
soul.

Psalm. 88.
1. O Lord God of my salvation, I have cried day and night before thee.

2. O let my prayer come into thy presence; Incline thine ear unto my calling.

3. For my soul is full of trouble, my life draws nigh unto the Grave.

9. Lord, I have called daily upon thee, I have stretched out mine hands unto
thee.

10. Do thou sher wonders among the dead? or shall the dead rise up again
and praise thee.

11. Shall thy loving kindness be showed in the grave, or thy faithfulness
in destruction?

12. Shall thy wonderful works be known in the dark, or thy righteousness
in the Land where all things are forgotten?

13. Unto thee do I cry (Lord) and early shall my prayer come before thee.

14. Lord, why abhorrest thou my soul? and why hidest thou thy face from me?

15. I am in misery, and like unto him that is at the point to dye: from my
youth up, thy terrors have I suffered with a troubled mind.

16. Thy wrathful displeasure goes over me, and the fear of thee has undone
me.

Psalm. 141.
1. Lord, I will call upon thee, haste thee unto me, and consider my voice,
when I cry unto thee.

2. Let my prayer be set forth in thy presence as the incense, let the lifting
up of my hands be as an evening sacrifice.

Psalm. 79.
5. Lord how long will thou be angry? for ever and shall thy Jealousy burn
like fire?

8. Oh, remember not mine old sins, but have mercy upon me, for I am come to
great misery.

9. Help me O god of my salvation, for the Glory of thy Name; Oh deliver me,
and be merciful unto my sins, for thy names sake.

Psalm. 143.
6. Lord I stretch forth my hands unto thee; my soul gapeth unto thee like a
thirsty Land.

7. Hear me (O Lord) and that soon, for my spirit waxes faint, hide not thy
face from me, lest I become like unto them that go down into the silence.

Psalm. 13.
1. How long will thou forget me? (O Lord) for ever? how long will thou hide
thy face from me?

2. How long shall I seek Counsel in my soul, and be so vexed in my spirit?
how long shall mine enemies triumph over me?

3. Consider and hear me (O God) lighten mine Eyes that I sleep not in death.

Psalm. 30.
6. In my prosperity I said, I shall never be removed, thou (Lord) of thy
goodness had made my state so strong.

7. Thou did turn away thy face from me, and I was sore troubled;

8. Then cried I unto the Lord, and gat me to my God right early.

9. What profit is there in my blood, if I go down into the pit? Shall the
dust give thanks unto thee? or shall it declare thy truth?

10. Hear me (O Lord) and have mercy upon me, and be thou my helper,

Psalm. 77.
1. I will cry unto the Lord with my voice, yea even unto God will I cry with
my voice, and he shall hearken unto me.

2. In the time of my trouble I sought the Lord; my sore ran, and ceased not:
In the night season my soul refused Comfort.

3. When I am in heaviness I will think upon God, when my heart is vexed I
will complain.

4. Thou hold mine eyes waking, and I am so feeble that I can scarce speak.

5. I have considered the days of old, and the years that are past.

6. I call to remembrance my songs, and in the night I commune with mine own
heart, and search out my spirits.

7. Will the Lord absent hinselfe for ever? and will he be no more entreated?

8. Is his mercy clean gone for ever? is his promise come utterly to an end
for evermore?

9. Has God forgotten to be Gracious? and will he shut up his loving kindness
in displeasure?

10. And I said, it is mine own infirmity, but I will remember the years of
the right hand of the most High.

O God, there is no strength in us, neither do we know what to do, but only
we lift up our eyes unto thee. 2. Chron. 20.12.

O Lord, how long will thou look upon this? This thou have seen, (Lord) hold
not thy tongue then, go not far from me (O God) Psalm. 35.17.22.

Save me (O God) for the waters are come even unto my soul. Psalm. 69.1

Let God arise, and let his enemies be scattered, let them also that hate him,
flee before him. Psalm. 68. 1.

Lord it oppresses me, answer thou for me Esaias. 38. 14.

Thou shall answer for me (O Lord) my God. Psa. 38.15.

9. A Prayer to be used by the Minister.
O Lord, it is a great presumption that one sinner should dare to commend
another to thy divine Majesty, especially, the greater, the less; and who
would not fear to undertake it; but only that thy Commandment it is by thy
holy Apostle, when any is sick, that the Minister should be called for, that
they should pray for the sick party, and that their prayers thou will receive,
and save, and forgive the sins of the party so prayed for?

And now behold (O Lord) we that are no way meet, but unworthy, utterly
unworthy to sue for ought for ourselves (charity and compassion so binding us)
are enforced to become suitors to thee for others.

Even (O Lord) for this thy servant ready to depart this world.

To thee we hope, to thee we desire, to thee we entreat and pray in all meek
manner, and even from the bottom of our hearts.

O Lord, that which justly thou might deny to our unworthiness, deny not,
we beseech thee, to thine own gracious goodness.

O Lord forgive us our sins, our great and grievous sins, often and many
times committed, long and many years most wretchedly continued; that so we may
be meet to pray for others, that so we may make our prayers unto thee in an
acceptable time.

Graciously look upon our afflictions, pitifully behold the sorrows of our
hearts.

Mercifully forgive the sins of thy people.

Favorably with mercy hear our prayers.

Both now and ever, vouchsafe to hear us, O Christ.

Graciously hear us, O Christ.

Graciously hear us, O Lord Christ.

10. A Letany to be used for the sick.
OH God the Father of Heaven, have mercy upon him (or her) keep and defend him.

Oh God the Son, Redeemer of the World, have mercy upon him: Save and deliver
him.

Oh GOD the Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son, haver mercy
upon him; strengthen and comfort him.

Oh Holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, have mercy upon him.

Remember not Lord, our offenses, call not to mind the offenses of his
forefathers, but spare him good Lord, spare thy servant whom thou have redeemed
with thy most precious blood, and be not angry with him for ever.

From thy wrath and heavy indignation, from the guilt and burden of his sins,
from the dreadful sentence of the last Judgment, Good Lord deliver him.

From the sting and terror of Conscience, from the danger of impatience,
distrust, or despair, from the extremity of sickness, anguish or agony, that
may any way withdraw his mind from thee, Good Lord deliver him.

From the bitter pangs of eternal death, from the gates of hell, the power of
darkness, the illusions and assaults of our Ghostly enemy, Good Lord deliver
him.

By thy manifold and great mercies, by the manifold and great mercies of Jesus
Christ thy Son; his Agony and bloody sweat, strong crying and tears, bitter
Cross and Passion, mighty Resurrection, glorious Ascension, effectual and
most acceptable intercession, and mediation; By the graces and comforts of the
Holy Ghost, Good Lord deliver him.

For thy names sake, the glory of thy name, thy loving mercy, thy truths sake,
thine own self: In this time of his most extremity, in this his last and
greatest need, in the hour of death, and at the day of Jndgement, Good Lord
deliver him.

Deliver him (O Lord) from all danger and distress, from all pains and
punishments both bodily and ghostly, Amen.

As thou did deliver Noah from the flood, so save and deliver him.

Lot from the fire of Sodom, so save, etc.

Isaac from present death, so save, etc.

Job fnom his tentations, so save, etc.

Moses from the hand of Pharaoh, so save, etc.

Daniel from the Lions den, so save, etc.

Jonas from the belly of the Whale, so save, etc.

And as thou have delivered all thy blessed Saints, and servants from all their
terrors and torments, so deliver his soul, and receive it to thy mercy.

We sinners do beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to remember him with the favor thou bear unto thy
people, and to visit him with thy salvation.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to save and deliver his Soul from the power of the
enemy, lest as a Lion he devour it, and tear it in pieces, if there be none
to help.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to be merciful, and to forgive all his sins, which
by the malice of the devil, or by his own frailty he has at any time of his
life committed against thee.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee not to lay to his charge, what in concupiscence of his
eyes, in pride of life, vanity, or superfluity he has committed against thee.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee not to lay to his charge what in carnal desires of
the flesh, in lust, or in the unclean passions thereof, he has committed
against thee.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee not to lay to his charge, what in the fierceness of
his wrath, in the eagerness of an angry spirit, he has committed against
thee.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee not to lay to his charge, what in vain and idle
words, in the looseness and slipperynesse of the tongue, he has committed
against thee.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to make him partaker of all thy mercies, and promises
in Christ Jesus.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to vouchsafe his soul the state of joy, bliss, and
happiness, with all thy blessed Saints, in thy heavenly Kingdom.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may pleasethee to grant his body rest and peace, and a part in the
blessed resurrection of life and Glory.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

Son of God we beseech thee to hear us. O Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of
the father, that take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon him; thou
that take away the sins of the world, grant him thy peace.

Thou that sit at the right hand of God the father, have mercy upon him.
Lord have mercy upon him; Christ have mercy upon him; Lord have mercy upon him.

Our father which art in heaven, etc.

Oh Lord deal not with him after his sins.

Neither reward him according to his iniquities.

O God merciful father that despisest not the sighings of a contrite heart,
nor the desire of such as be sorrowful, mercifully assist our prayers which
we make before thee, at such times specially when our greatest and grievous
extremities are ready to oppress us: And (O Lord) graciously hear us, that
those evils, those illusions, terrors and assaults which thine and our enemy
works against us may be brought to naught, and by the providence of thy
goodness be dispersed, that we thy servants, being swallowed up with no
tentations, may evermore give thanks unto thee in thy holy Church, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

11. Several choice expressions of prayer to be used for the sick party.
In the midst of life we are in death, of whom then may we seek for succor,
but of thee (O Lord) who for our sins art most justly displeased with us?

Yet (O Lord) most holy, O Lord most mighty, O holy and most merciful father,
deliver us not over to the pains of Eternal death.

Thou know (Lord) the secrets of our hearts; shut not up against us the
cares of thy mercy, but spare us, O Lord most holy, O Lord most mighty, O
immortal and most merciful father.

Thou most worthy Judge eternal, suffer us not in our last hour, for any
terror of death to fall away from thee.

We commend unto (O Lord) the soul of this thy servant.

He (or she) is the work of thine hands.

Despise not (O Lord) the work of thine own hands.

The likeness of thine Image.

Suffer not (O Lord) thine Image to be utterly defaced.

The price of thy blood.

Let not so great a price be cast away.

A Christian man (or woman) the name of thy Son is called upon him.

For thy names sake, be good unto thy name.

Thine () O save him.

Give not over that which thine is, to the will of the enemy.

Though he have sinned, yet thy name has he not denied, but called upon it,
and confessed it, unto his lives end, and there is no name under heaven, but
thine wherein he expects salvation.

Though he have sinned, yet he has not hid his sin, nor excused it, Psalm.
141.4. but acknowledged it, and been sorry for it, and wishes even tears of
blood wherewith to lament it.

Though he have sinned yet others also have sinned against him, which from the
heart he forgiveeth, and desires forgiveness of them at thy gracious hands.

O establish thy word with thy servant, and let him not be disappointed of his
hopes.

Though he have sinned, yet in thee he trusts; O suffer him not for ever
utterly to be confounded.

Though he have sinned, yet he seeks thee.

And thou Lord never failest them that seek thee Psalm. 9. 10.

Yet he comes to thee

And of them that come to thee, thou castest none out. Ioh. 6.37.

O Lord,

Let not the guiltiness of a sinner more prevail to condemn, then the
gracious goodness of a most merciful Savior to acquit, to pardon.

O Let not the unrighteousness of man, make the goodness of God of none
effect.

O Lord, do not so remember the unkindness of this thy Child, that thereby
thou forget the Compassion, and kindness of a father.

Do not think upon our sin, that thou thereby forget thine own nature and
property, which is always to have mercy.

Do not so remember our sin, that thou thereby remembrest not thine own
name, which is Jesus, a loving and most kind Savior.

Lord if thy life in our life, have not sufficiently appeared, yet let not thy
death lose the full power and effect thereof in our death also.

Suffer not (O Lord) in both, so great a price to perish. Lose not (O Lord)
that which thou have redeemed, since thou came to redeem that which was lost.

That which was so dear to thee to redeem; suffer it not to be lost, as a
thing of no value.

Have mercy upon him, (O Lord) consider the pains which he suffers, thou, who
only do deliver from the gates of death. Psalm. 9.13.

Show thy mavelous loving kindness, thou which art the Savior of them
which put their trust in thee. Psalm. 17.7.

O keep him, as the apple of thine eye: hide him under the shadow of thy
wings, Psalm. 17.8.

O Iet thy merciful Ioving kindness be his comfort, according to thy word
unto thy servant. Psalm. 119.76.

He (or she) is troubled above measure, O be merciful unto him, according to
thy goodness.

O consider his adversity, and deliver him, for he is brought very low.

His eyes long sore for thy word, saying, When will thou comfort me?

His eyes are wasted away with looking for thy health, and for the word of thy
Righteousness.

O think upon him (O Lord) as concerning thy word, wherein thou have caused
him to put his trust

O look thou upon him and be merciful unto him: as thou usest to do to those
that love thy name.

Cast him not away now in the time of his weakness, forsake him not now, when
his strength fails him, Psalm. 71.9.

In the multitude of the sorrows that are in his heart, let thy comforts (O
Lord) refresh his soul.

O Lord, when it oppresses, comfort thou him, Esaias 38.14.

O Lord, let thy strength be made perfect in his weakness, 2 Cor. 12.9.

Let no tentation oppress him, but such as is incident to thy children; But as
thou art faithful (O Lord) so suffer him not to be tempted above that he is
able to bear.

But (good Lord) with the temptation, give an happy issue, that he may be able
to overcome it, 1 Cor. 10. 13.

O Lord, though he be afflicted on every side, yet let him not be distressed;
though in want of some of thy comforts, yet not of all; though chastened, yet
not forsaken; though cast down, yet not perish 2 Cor. 4, 8,9.

Remember him (O Lord) with the favor thou bear unto thy children: O visit
him with thy salvation.

That he may see the felicity of thy chosen, and rejoice with the gladness of
thy Saints, and give thanks with thine inheritance, Psalm. 106. 5.

O Remember not his former sins, but have mercy upon him (O Lord) and that
soon, for he is come to great extremity, Psalm. 79.8,9.

Help him (O LORD God of his Salvation) for the glory of thy name: O deliver
him, and be merciful unto his sins, for thy names sake.

Call to remembrance (O Lord) thy tender mercies and thy loving kindness,
which have been ever of old.

O Remember not the sins and offenses of his youth; but according to thy
mercy think thou on him (O Lord) for thy goodness.

Cleanse him (O LORD) from his secret sins: from whatsoever he has offended:

By thought, word, or deed; by ignorance, or error; by frailty, or negligence;
in excess, or in defect; by leaving good undone, or by doing evil; in
public or private; by day or by night; against thee, his neighbor, his own
body.

Before, or since his effectual calling; by himself or by other; Remembered or
forgotten.

From them all cleanse him (O Lord) even from them all; lay none of them to his
charge, cast them behind thee, bury them, drown them, scatter them as the
mist, and as the morning cloud, make them to vanish away and come to nothing.

And wherein soever his conscience most accuses him, therein (O Lord) be thou
most merciful.

O enter not into judgment with thy servant; if thou should, no flesh
should be righteous in thy sight.

If thou (O Lord) should be extreme to mark what is done amiss, (O Lord)
who may abide it? Psalm. 130.3.

But (good Lord) one deep calls another; the deep of our misery, the deep
of thy mercy, Psalm. 42.

Where sin has abounded, there let grace over abound, Romans 5.

And in and through all sins and offenses, (O Lord) let thy mercy triumph
over thy Justice, Iam. 2.

O Lord hear.

O Lord forgive.

Consider (O Lord) and do it. Dan. 9.

Delay not (O Lord) for his spirit waxes faint; Turn not thy face from him,
lest he become like those that go down into the silence.

Be favorable (O Lord) be favorable.

For thy names sake.

Forthy truths sake.

For thy mercies sake.

Thy many great wonderful mercies sake.

For thine own self,

O Lord,

Our Creator and Redeemer.

Our Lord and our Father.

Our King and our God.

Commendatio Animae. 12. The Commendation of the Soul to God, immediately
before the departure.
Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace. Luke. 2. Into thy hands (O
Lord) we commend his spirit, for thou have redeemed it O Lord thou God of
truth. Psalm. 31.

Bring his soul out of prison, that it may praise thee Psalm. 142.

Oh deliver him from this body of death. Romans 7.

Say unto his soul, I am thy salvation. Psalm. 33.

Say unto him, This day shall thou be with me in paradise. Luke. 23.

Let him now feel the salvation of Jesus.

Let him now feel the anointing of Christ, even the oil of Gladness,
wherewith thou art anointed.

Guide thou him through the vale of the shadow of death. Psalm. 23.

Let him see the goodness of the Lord in the Land of the living. Psalm. 27.

O Lord command his spirit to be received up to thee in peace.

O Lord, will him come unto thee. Mat. 14.

Lord Jesus receive his spirit. Act. 7.

And open to him the gates of everlasting glory.

Let thy good spirit conduct him into the Land of righteousness. Psalm. 143. 10.

Into thy holy hill and Heavenly Kingdom. Psalm. 15.

Send thine Angel to meet him, and to bring him into Abraham's bosom. Luke. 16.

Place him in the habitation of Light and peace, of joy and gladness.

Receive him into the arms of thy mercy and give him an inheritance with thy
Saints in light, there to reign with thine elect Angels, thy blessed Saints,
thy holy prophets and glorious Apostles, in all joy and glory, felicity and
happiness for ever and ever.

13. Scriptures to be applied to those who survive, when the party is departed.
Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints. Psalm. 116.

I heard a voice from Heaven, saying, Write; Blessed are the dead, that dye in
the Lord, for they rest from their labors, and their works follow them.

Moses.
We have sinned (O Lord) thou have set our faults before thee, and our secret
sins in the sight of thy countenance. Psalm. 90.8.

Return (O Lord) how long? and be pacifyed toward thy servants, Psa. 90. 13.

Job.
I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of mankind? why
have thou set me as a mark against thee, that I am become a burden to my
self? Job 7. 20.

Have mercy upon me (O Lord) and restore unto me my righteousness again.
Say, concerning me, (Lord) deliver him, for I have received a Reconciliation,
Job 33. v. 24

That I have offended thee, woe is me, Job 10.15

Yet if thou kill me, I will put my trust in thee, Job 13.15.

David.
My misdeeds have prevailed against me, Psalm. 65. 3.

O be thou merciful unto my sin, ibid.

I have gone astray like a sheep that is lost:

O seek thy servant, for I do not forget thy Commandments, Psalm. 119. ult.

We have sinned with our Fathers, we have done amiss, and dealt wickedly,
Psalm. 105.

For thy names sake (O Lord) be merciful unto our sin, for it is great,
Psalm. 25.

My foot has slipped, let thy mercy (O Lord) lift me up, Psalm. 94.

Esaias.
Behold, thou art angry; for we have sinned: we all have been as an unclean
thing, and all our Righteousness as a defiled cloth. We all fade as a leaf:
and our iniquities (like a wind) have taken us away.

But now (O Lord) thou art our Father: we are but as clay, and thou art our
Potter: we all are the work of thy hands.

Be not angry (O Lord) above measure, neither remember our iniquities forever.
Lord, we beseech thee, remember, we are thy people.

Jeremy.
Lord, our iniquities are against us; our rebellions be many: we have sinned
against thee.

Yet deal thou with us according to thy name for thou (Lord) art in the
midst of us, and thy name is called upon us; (O Lord) forsake us not.

O Lord, thou hope of Israel, the Savior of it in the time of trouble,
forsake us not.

Daniel.
We have sinned, (O Lord) we have transgressed, and done wickedly; yea, we
have rebelled, and have departed from thy precepts, and from thy Commandments.

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion and shame of
face, because of all the offenses we have committed against thee.

Yet compassion, and forgiveness is with thee (O Lord,) though we have
rebelled against thee (O Lord) according to thy goodness, I beseech thee, let
thine anger and thy wrath be turned away from us, and cause thy face to shine
upon thy servant (O my Lord) incline thine ear, and hear, open thine eyes,
and behold my affliction, for we do not present our supplications before thee
in our own righteousness, but for thy manifold and great mercies.

O Lord, hear, O Lord, forgive, consider, and do it (O Lord) defer not for
thine own sake, O my God.

Jonas,
O Lord, in following lying vanities, I have forsaken mine own mercy, for the
which I am cast out of the sight of thine eyes. Ion. 2.4.

Yet I remember thee, (O Lord) yet will I look again toward thy holy Temple;
O Lord, hear, and have mercy.

The Prodigal Child,
Father, I have sinned against heaven, and against thee, I am no more worthy to
be called thy son.

But forgive me, and make me one of the meanest of thy hired servants, Luke
15. 28.

Lord be merciful unto me a sinner; Jesu, Master, have mercy upon us.

Have mercy upon me, (Lord) thou Son of David, Mat. 15.

O Lord help me.

O Lord, even the little whelps eat of the crumbs of thy Table.

Paul,
O Lord, I am carnal, and sold under sin, and in me, that is, in my flesh,
dwells no good.

The good things I do not which I would: the evil that I would not, that do
I.

Though I consent to the Law, according to the inner man, yet I feel another
Law in my nature, rebelling against the Law of my mind, and leading me captive
to the Law of sin.

O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? Romans
7.14.

But this is a true saying, and by all means worthy to be received; That
Jesus Christ came into the world, to save sinners, whereof I am chief.

Peter,
We have spent the time past of our life, after the lust of the heathen,
walking in wantonness, lust, surfeiting, uncleanness, and other excesses. 1
Pet. 4.

But thou have redeemed us (O Lord) by the precious blood of Christ, the
undefiled Lamb, 1 Pet. 1.

Have mercy upon us in that name, besides which thou have given none under
heaven, whereby we must be saved. Act. 4.

John.
If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us.

If our heart condemn us not, God is greater then our heart, and knows all
things.

But we confess our sins, and confessing them, we have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins.

James,
In many things we offend all.

But Lord let thy mercy triumph over thy Justice.

14. A form of Confession according to the ten Commandments.
1.
1. I have not studied to know and seek thee as I ought.

2. Knowing thee, I have not glorified thee, nor been thankful to thee;
especially not for thy chastisements.

3. I have doubted of thy promises, and not trusted to thy help.

4. I have made flesh mine arm, and have hoped for prosperity from man, rather
then from thee.

2.
1. I have, touching thee, been full of roving imaginations and evil thoughts.

2. I have not worshipped thee in spirit and truth.

3. I have not performed the duty of invocation, with that reverence which I
should.

4. I have drawn near unto thee with my lips, but my heart has been farie
from thee.

3.
1. I have not with due regard taken thy name into my mouth.

2. I have with rash oaths and eager execrations often abused it.

3. I have not given occasion to others, to sanctify thy name, but have caused
it to be evil spoken of through mine evil dealing.

4. I have not duly regarded and reverenced those things whereon thy name is
imprinted.

4.
1. I have not spared to absent my self from thy holy assemblies without
sufficient cause.

2. I have not to thy sabbath or sanctuary brought that care which I should.

3. I have not spent the days assigned to holy exercises, upon them only, but
have in them intended mine own private business.

4. I have been content in them with the use of the means only, without any
practice at all.

5.
1. I have not so reverently spoken of, nor so dutifully carried my self
toward some whom thou have placed over me, as was meet I should.

2. I have not so carefully prayed for them as was requisite.

3. Chiefly those who had me in government touching my soul.

4. I have not opposed to them, who unreverently in terms have used them.

6.
1. I have not wished or provided for the good of my Neighbor as I should, but
rather maligned, been angry and quarelled with him, and sought revenge, upon
every light occasion.

2. I have not rejoiced in the good success of my Neighbor, but envied his
welfare.

3. I have not had due compassion on the poor, nor ministered to their
necessities.

4. I have not defended them against the wrongs of others as I might.

7.
1. I have suffered my fancy to wander licenciously.

2. I have not eschewed the occasion of lust, nor made a Covenant with mine
eyes, not kept mine ears and tongue as I should.

3. I have not brought under my body, nor kept it in subjection with
abstinence, but have wore studiously, and with more cost intended my flesh then
my spirit.

4. I have not possessed my vessel in holiness and honor, nor preserved it
from pollution, as became the temple of God.

8.
1. I have not reckoned godliness great gain, nor been content with mine
estate, but wished an higher.

2. I have not been so exact in paying, and dealing with those I had to deal
with all, as in justice I was bound.

3. I have by undue means interverted to mine own use that which was not mine.

4. I have not, of that I had more then enough, been willing to part with to
the relief of the needy.

9.
1. I have not been so studious of speaking the truth as I should.

2. I have been defirous to seem, and to be reputed more then I was.

3. I have not had that care of the good name of my brother, which I was bound
to have.

4. I have not hated flattery as I should.

5. I have not stood for, and defended the Truth, as was meet.

10.
I have been full of wandering desires, wicked affections, unlawful
concupiscences, evil suspicions and surmises, and inordinate lusts, touching
my Neighbor, and that which is his.

15. Several Remembrances of Gods Mercy.
God In his Mercy is (...) 2 Cor. 10. 1 Genesis 18.32. takes all in the better
part; If it will admit any good sense, so he construes it.

(...), Meek, 2 Cor. 10. 1. not irritable, not easily stirred up or provoked.

(...), Sees, and sees not, makes as if he did not see.

(...), overlookes, beyond our sins; not at them.

(...), passes by, or over them, dissimulat peccata propter poenitentiam.

(...),

When he cannot but see, yet he forbeares, is patient.

M(...).

Forbeares long, suffers long, many times, many years.

(...),

When he can suffer no longer, yet stands as over Ephraim, asking, how shall I
stay yet? Expect at ut misereatur.

When he can stay no longer, but punish he must, he does it not from the
heart, Lam. 3.33. but against his will.

When he punishes, he does it, not suffering his whole displeasure to arise,
containing himself and his anger.

Not according to our deserts; nothing so much.

Not long, it indures but a moment in comparison, Psalm. 30.5.

He thinks every stripe two, is quickly weary, Esa. 54.7,8.

In his wrath remembers mercy, Hab. 3.2.

Repents him of the evil, is moved with the fight of our misery, Joel 2 13.
Psalm. 106.

Has Mercy, (...) Great mercy, multitudes of mercy.

Has Compassions, (...), the bowels of compassion, the bowels of a parent, of
a mother, Psalm. 103.15. Esa. 49.

Many Bowels, (...). Is soon appeared, and easily, Esa. 30. 15.

Forgives, pardons, is reconciled, Mat. 18.32. 27.

Takes into favor again, Receives to grace, 2 Cor. 5.19. Luke 15.22. Rom 3.25.

All have sinned, and are defective in giving glory unto God, Romans 3.23.

In his Angels he found folly; the stars are not clean in his sight, Ioh 25
5. and 4.18. and 15.15.

But God has not made all men for naught, Ps. 89

Yet if God should be extreme to mark what is done amiss, who were able to
abide it. Psalm. 130. 3.

If he should enter into Judgment with his servants, no flesh should be found
righteous in his sight, Psalm. 147.2.

None were able to answer one for a thousand, no not Job himself, Job 9.3.

Therefore God has shut up all under sin, that he might have mercy upon all,
Romans 11.32.

He would have none to perish, but to come to him by Repentance, 2 Pet. 3,9.

He would not the death of a sinner, but that he should turn and live. Eze.
33.11.

He would have all to be saved, 1 Timothy 2.4.

All that know their sin, Psalm. 51.3. Know, and acknowledge it, Psalm. 31.5.
Luke 15.18.

Acknowledge it, and be sorry for it, Psalm. 38.

Be sorry for it, and be ready to leave it, Prove. 28. 13.

Not only to leave it, but to judge themselves for it, 1 Cor. 11.31. Eze. 36.

And to punish themselves for it.

By the fruits of mortification, Joel 2.13. Ion. 7.5.

Accompanied with prayer, Psalm. 32.6.

Aliens, Esa. 58.7. Prove. 6.6 Dan. 4.24.

At the estimation of the Priest, who may forgive us in the person of Christ
Ioh. 8.9.2 Cor. 2.10. Ioh. 20.22.

Which his mercy is not only for common and ordinary sinners, but for the
chief:

Such as Manasses, Paul; such as David, Peter; such as Jonas, the thief on the
Cross: such as Rahab, Mary Magdalen; such as the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 5.1.

Et eratis, the Jews his betrayers and murderers, Act. 3.15.19.

David was a man according to Gods own heart.

Christ is the son of David, and David forgave Shimei, and wept for his
rebellious son Absolon, 2. Sam. 19.29.

The preface or Style of the Law, Exodus 3.46.

The Lord, the Lord, gentle and merciful, patient and of much mercy, which
keeps mercy for thousands, and forgiveth.

The discourse of Elihu, Ioh. 3. 23.

Taste and see how gracious the Lord is. Psalm. 34. 8. 1 Pet. 2.3.

His mercy is sweet. Psalm. 109. 10.69.17.

His mercies are many, there is a multitude of them. Psalm. 5.7. 51.1.

There is plenteous redemption. Psa. 130. ult.

The mercies are great, they have a magnitude, Psa. 86.5. 119. 56.

In height. Psa. 103. 11. Psalm. 36.5. 108.4.

In depth. Psa. 42.9.

In length. Psalm. 26.6. 13.6.

There is no end of his salvation, Psalm. 71.13.

Mercy shall be set up for ever. Psalm. 89. 4.

His mercy is over all his works. Psalm. 145.9.

As is his Majesty, so is his mercy. Psalm. 102.40.

His property is to have mercy. Esaias. 28.21.

He is the father of mercyes. 2 Cor 1. 3.

He is mercy it self. Psa. 59.

He was so merciful, that he forgave their misdeedes, and destroyed them not.

Yea many a time turned he his face away, and would not suffer his whole
displeasure to arise, for he considered they were but dust. Psalm. 78. 1.38.

The Lord waits, that he may have mercy on you, Esaias. 30.18.

In the father of the lost child his image. Luke. 5. 22.

God has shut up all under sin, that he might have mercy upon all, Romans 11.
32.

Where sin abounds, there grace does over-a-bound. Romans 5. 20.

Mercy ttiumpheth over Justice. Iam. 2. 1.

This is a true saying, and by all means worthy to be received, that Jesus
Christ came into the world to save sinners.

In this God set forth his love to us, that when we were his enemies Christ
dyed for us. Romans 5. 10.

Christ dyed once for our sins, the just for the unjust, that he might offer
us unto God. 1. Pet. 3. 18.

We have an Advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is
the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but for the sins of
the whole world, 1. Ioh. 2.2.

I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. Mat. 9. 13.

Come unto me, you that travail and be heavy laden, I will refresh you. Mat.
11. 20.

Of them that come to me, I cast none out. Ioh. 6.37.

Thou never failest them that seek thee. Psalm. 9.10.

Why art thou so heavy O my soul, and why art thou so disquieted within me?

O put thy trust in God, for I shall yet give him thanks, for he is the help
of my Countenance, and my God.

Return thou unto my rest, O my soul, for the Lord has been gracious unto
thee.

If the Lord had not helped me, it had not failed but my soul had been put to
silence.

In the midst of the troubles that were in mine heart, thy Comforts have
refreshed my soul.

Nevertheless, my soul, wait thou still upon God, for of him comes my
salvation.

He verily is my hope and my strength, he is my defense, so that I shall not
greatly fall.

Let us go with boldness unto the Throne of grace, that we may find mercy
in the time of need, Act. 4. ult.

16. Expressions of Gods Mercy, fit to be used to him in Prayer.
Lord

Of life and death, of sickness and health, and al things thereto belonging.

By whose appointment we were borne, and again, by whose appointment we m^^
dye; our time is in thine hand; and unt(...) belong the issues (...).

Th(...)est nothing th(...) made, nor do (...)terly forsake the works of
thine own hands.

Thou that art a defense for the oppressed, a refuge in the needful time of
trouble.

Thou that never failest them that seek thee, and to whom none ever prays
without hope to be heard.

Thou that promised, the poor shall not always be forgotten; that the patient
abiding of the meek shall not perish for ever.

For the comfortless troubles sake of the needy, and for the deep sighing of
the poor, arise (O Lord) and men shall know that it is thy hand; and that it
is thou Lord that have done it.

O Lord,

Whose mercy reaches to the Heavens, and whose faithfulness to the clouds

Of whose mercies there is neither number nor end

The greatenesse of whose goodness is not shut up under any time.

Who call unto thy vineyard, even at the eleventh hour.

Which rulest not with rigor, but with meekness do govern the things
thou have made.

Thou that killest, and revivest, that bring to the gates of death, and
bring back again.

That hate nothing of that thou have made, that have shut up all under sin,
that thou might have mercy upon all.

Lord,

The Savior and saving health of all the faithful.

The fountain of all grace and goodness.

The father of mercies and Consolation.

Thou that upholdest all such as are faling.

And liftest up those that be down.

Thou that healest the broaken in heart.

And give medicine to cure their sickness.

The Comfort of them that be in heaviness.

The strength of them that be in weakness.

The health of them that be in sickness.

Hear (O Lord) and have mercy.

Look down from heaven, behold and visit, visit with thy salvation.

A Confession.
The Foundation and groundwork of Prayer is Faith, Theoph.

The ground of Faith is the promise of God.

Lift up your hearts.

He which gives us life, teaches us to pray.

The prayer of the humble pierces the clouds, Eccles. 35.17

Prayer, is a conference with God.

I will set my sins before me, that they may not appear before thee.

Lord my heart is ready

Lord, I fear it is not ready.

Would God it were so.

Woe is me that it is not so.

Lord, I fit and prepare my self.

Assist my preparation, and make me more fit.

A Confession of the Faith.
Lord I believe, help my unbeleefe.

First, In God, 1. The Father, 2. Almighty, 3. Creator of Heaven and Earth.


In the Father, natural affection.

Almighty, power of deliverance.

Creator, providence; To Preserve, To Govern, To Perfect, and consummate all
things.


Secondly, In Jesus Christ, His only Son, Our Lord.


The great Mystery of godliness. God manifest in the flesh, for us men, and
for our Salvation.

God and Man,

The Son of the Father

Anointed of the spirit Our Lord, As Creator. As Redeemer.


1. That he was conceived. To purge forth the sin wherein we are conceived.

2. Was Borne. To cleanse us of the sin wherein we are borne by nature.

3. Suffered. What we should have done, that we might not suffer.

4. Was Crucified. To take away the curse of the Law.

5. Dyed. To take away the sting of death.

6. Was Buried. To take away the corruption of our bodies in the grave.

1. That he descended into bell. Whither we should have gone, that we may
never come there.

2. Rose again from the dead. That being made the first fruits of them that
sleep, he might raise our nature together with himself.

3. Ascended up into heaven. That he might prepare a place for us.

4. Now sits at the right hand of God. that he might make intercession for
us.

5. Whence he shall come. That he may receive us.

6. To be a Judge. For the consummation of all things.

Thirdly, In the Holy Ghost. And in him power from on high, to sanctify and
quicken unto eternal life.

Outwardly, and visibly, but powerfully and manifestly working in us, by the
illumination of knowledge, infusion of grace.

In Reproof, In Instruction, In Long sufferance, In Assistance, In
Witnesse-bearing, In Consolation.
Grace is the fruit of the Spirit.

Fourthly, The holy Catholic Church. The mystical body of Christ the head,
and them which the Spirit has called out of the whole world.

To the belief of the divine truth.

To a holy conversation. To the mutual participation of all the members of the
body.

To the Communion of Saints, and remission of sins in this world, and hope of
Resurrection, and translation to life eternal, in that to come.

I believe, (Lord supply the defects of my Faith.)

That I may love thee the Father. Reverence thee the Almighty.

That I may commit the keeping of my Soul to thee, as to a faithful Creator.
1 Pet. 4.

That I may ever give thanks to thy word, and only begotten Son, as the
purger of our nature, in our conception and Birth.

As the Redeemer of our persons, By his Passion, By his Cross, By his Death.


As the triumpher over hell in his Descension, over death his Resurrection.

As our forerunner in his Ascension.

As our Advocate in his Intercession.

As the Repairer of our Faith, in his second coming.

That Christ may be formed in us.

That we may be conformed to his Image, in good works. Conception, in Faith.
Birth, in humility.

For his Passion-sake, to have sympathy with him as suffering for us.

To suffer for him, when it shall please him to have an antipathie with sin, as
the cause of his Passions.

To Revenge sin in us. To Crucify sin in us. To Mortify sin in us. To Bury
sin in us.
To make us conformable to his Descension into hell, by our often coming there
by meditation. To his Resurrection, rising again to newness of life. To his
Ascension, seeking and laboring after those things that are above.

To his Judgment, judging our own selves, that we may not be condemned with
the world.

To make us remember, when we are cold in prayer, and want any grace or
heavenly comfort, Thy Seat, Thy Appearing, Thy Intercession.


To make us never forget, when we burn through concupiscence, and sinful
lust,

His dreadful and fearful tribunal, and often to think on the last trumpe.

That for thy Christ his sake, the only begotten of thee the Father, we may
receive thine anointing, the grace of Sanctification, the unspeakeable gift of
the Holy Ghost.

In a happy conjunction, flowing knowledge, fervent prayer, diffusion of
charity.

That I may not quench the Spirit, or resist him, or make him sad, or at any
time dishonor him.

That we may be called in thy catholic Church, living members both by now and
holy affection.

That we may be common partakers of holy persons, actions, prayers, Liturgies,
or public service, to the full assurance of remission of sins.

Hope of Resurrection, and translation to life eternal. Lord increase my
Faith, as a grain of Mustard seed.

Not a dead, Faith. Not a temporary, Faith. Not a hypocritical Faith.
Destroying the Law, But working by charity cooperating with good works,
subservient to virtue.

A living Faith. A pure Faith. A holy Faith.
Amen.
A Confession of sins.
Lord, I confess, I was borne in iniquity, and in sin did my Mother conceive
me, Psalm. 51.7.

A root of bitterness, A vine of Sodom, A spawne of Vipers, A wild Olive
branch, A son of wrath. A vessel of wrath,
1. A rebellious heart, like a deceitful bow. 2. A mouth, like an open
sepulcher, full of folly. 3. Polluted lips. 4. A tongue, a world of
wickedness. 5. Eyes, full of adultery. 6. Uncircumcised ears, like a deaf
Adder. 7. A whorish forehead, like brass. 8. A hard neck, like an iron sinew.
9. Hands, slow to good. 10. Feet, swift to evil.
Whatsoever I have done, either was a Spiders web, or Basiliskes egg.

I have sinned before the Lord; Thee the Lord, and done this evil in thy sight.

I am by nature, corruption, a worm, very dust.

By sin, a slave of Satan, and most vilde firebrand of hell.

I have sinned sins many in number, more than there are drops of water in the
Sea, stars in Heaven, hairs on my head.

Of many kinds.

In many places, on every green field, under every green tree: Often
reiterated, at several turns, as a Fountain casts out her waters, Ier. 6.7.

Till they became habitual as skarlet, Esa. 1.18.

I sold my self to do wickedness, 1 King. 21.25.

Till they became natural, like a Leopards spots or Ethiopians skin.

I have sinned large sins, Esa. 57.8. hard sins, Ier. 30. 14.

Great, in quantity v. 15

Long, from my Mothers womb, Psalm. 24.11.

Thick, cords of vanity, Esa: 5. 18.

Deep; heavy, as a burden, Lead, Psa. 38. 4.

Having their cry reach to heaven.

I have sinned, heinous sins, because fruitelesly, vainly; for a handful of
corn, for a piece of bread because with greediness, Ephesians. 4.19.

One sin after another, because with a whores forehead, Ier. 3. 3.

Because deceitfully, Gal. 2.18. Iam. 4. 10.

Because even to offense, because I have been unthankful, Romans 1.21.

As a dog to the vomit, as a sow to the wallowing in the mire, 2 Pet. 2.22

But deliver me from them, O Lord, because thou art righteous, and upright are
thy judgments, Psalm. 119.137.

I eat the fruit of a lie.

For what fruit have I now of those things, whereof I am ashamed, Romans 6.21.

Broken cisternes, which can hold no water, Ier. 2. 13.

My days are passed away in thy wrath, my years are as a tale that is told,
Psalm. 90.9.

Thou have given me up to a reprobate mind, to do the things that are not
convenient, Romans 1.28

There is no soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger: neither is there
any rest in my bones because of my sin, Psalm. 38.3.

Add hither the confusion that is continually before me, and the shame of my
face that has covered me, Psalm. 44.15.

Moreover my troubled mind and fear, because of thy judgments.

Lastly, bitterness worse than of death, both because I have forsaken God and
am forsaken by him.

Woe be to me revolter, that I have done these things.

See, O Lord, how vilde I am become, even abhorring my own self.

I waste for very grief.

What shall I say? or how shall I open my mouth? what shall I answer, seeing I
have done these things? Esa. 38.15.

To which of the Saints may I flee?

Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Romans
7.24.

Since I can neither say or do more, I will lift up mine eyes toward thee.

Though I be unworthy to look toward thee, yet I will look toward thee.

Out of the deep have I called to thee, O Lord, Lord hear my prayer, Psalm.
130.2.

If thou be strict to observe what is done amiss, Lord, who shall be able
to abide?

Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord, for in thy sight shall no
man living be justified, Psalm. 143.2.

I appeal therefore, O Lord, from thee, to thee.

From thee being Just, to thee being Merciful.

From the throne of justice, to the throne of grace,

From thee; being a Judge, to thee being a Father in Christ.

Accept, O Lord, this humble appeal.

Suffer me not to perish Lord carest thou not that I perish? Mar. 4.33.

Which wilt that all men be saved. 1 Timothy 2.4.

That no man perish, 2 Pet. 3.9.

Lord I am thine, therefore save me, Psalm. 119.94.

Despise not the work of thine own hands, Wis. 10.4.

Thy servant, and son of thy handmaid, Psalm. 116.15.

Thy servant, a prodigal, Mat. 18.27. yet a Servant.

First, Thy Son: the price of thy Sons blood, that I might be adopted.

Though I have forgotten the duty of a Son, yet remember thou the love of a
Father.

Though I am a wicked prodigal Son, yet I am a Son, Luke 15.17.

I am called by thy name, Dan. 9.19.

Thou art not ashamed to be called my God, Heb. 11.16.

We are Christians, thy Christ's ransomed ones, we are called by his name.

Spare thy work, spare thy name the price of thy blood, though thou spare not
us.

Secondly, But I am a sinner, and God hears not sinners, Job.9.20.

Yet consider I beseech thee, of what I am made.

Remember that I am but flesh, a wind that passes away, and comes not
again, Psalm. 78.39.

Consider our frame, remember we are but dust, Psalm. 103.14.

Frail dust, Light wind, Corruptible flesh.
Lord will thou break a leaf driven to and fro? will thou pursue the dry
stubble? Job 13.24.

Will thou hunt after a flea? 1 Samuel 24.15.

Thirdly, thy Creature. But miserable, humble. Spare me being humble.

David spared railing Shimei, 2 Samuel 19.19.

And David was a man after thine own heart, Act. 13. 22.

Spare me therefore, O Lord.

Behold, we have heard the Kings of Israel are merciful; let us therefore put
sackcloath on our loins, and ropes upon our heads, and go to the King of
Israel, and say, Let my soul live, 1 King. 20.31,32.

It may be he will save us.

Is any King of Israel mercifuller then thou?

Thou Lord sparedst Ahab, which sold himself to do wickedness, because he
humbled himself. 1 King. 21. 27.

Spare me also.

How long will thou be angry against the prayer of thy people? Psalm. 80. 4.

Lord, I cover not my sin as Adam. Job 31.33.

I do not extenuate and lessen my sins.

I freely confess

I have sinned.

Wrought wickedness.

Transgressed.

Been rebellious.

But I condemn my self. 1. Cor. 11. 31.

Call it often to mind.

Confess it.

Punish my self for it.

Spare me O Lord.

Accept the sacrifice

Of a broaken spirit.

Contrite heart.

Troubled mind.

Afflicted reins.

Wounded Conscience.

I have sinned against thee.

Fourthly, but Lord thou will have pity on some; have thou made man for naught?

Shall thine enemy say, thou have made us to kill us? because thou hatedst us
thou have made us for to be destroyed; or that thou could not save us? Number.
14. 15.

Remember this that the enemy has reproached, O Lord, and that the foolish
people have blasphemed thy name. Psalm. 74. 18.

As also that all have sinned and come short of the glory of God. Romans 3. 23.

If thou will contend, the most holy cannot answer for one of a thousand. Job.
9. 3.

Neither the infant of a day old, nor the stars are pure in his sight, yea he
has found folly in his Angels. Job. 25. 3.

If thou, O Lord, should mark iniquities who should stand? Psalm. 130. 3.

If thou enter into judgment, no man shall be justified.

And what shall become of thy great name, of the riches of thy mercy, of the
blood of thy Son? Gal. 2. 21.

Shall he dye to no purpose?

Let the world rather perish; then thou should not multiply thy mercies
upon us.

Be it far from us.

Thou have included all under sin, that thou might have mercy on all.

All which desire to acknowledge your sins, and the misery due for them,
return to the Lord with your whole heart.

All those thou have loved, in thy beloved.

Not small sinners.

But Manasses, and Paul.

That in them thou might manifest the excellency of thy mercy, and open a
gate of hope.

The chief of sinners.

Fifthly, wherefore spare me desiring to return into thy favor.

For what profit is there in my blood, when I go down into the pit? Psalm.
30.9.

In death there is no remembrance of thee, in the grave who shall give thee
thanks? Psalm. 6.5.

Shall thy wonders be known in the dark, and thy righteousness in the Land
of forgetfulness? Ps. 88. 12.

Verily the grave cannot praise thee, death cannot celebrate thee, they that
go down into the pit, cannot hope for thy truth. Esaias. 38. 18. 19.

The living, the living shall praise thee, as I do this day.

I shall not dye, but live, and tell the works of the Lord. Psalm. 118. 17.

Sixthly, But if I have known thee, O Lord, and thy dealings, thou art good to
them that are good and deserve well. gracious to strangers and mourners:
merciful to the bad, and them that deserve ill.

Here I Insist.

When thou can not for any one, for anything, yet for thine own sake thou
pardonest sins. Esaias 43. 44.

I may come so easily.

Seaventhly. David the prophet adventureth thus to pray.

Be merciful unto me, according to thy Law, Psalm. 119.24.

As if the Law set forth thy mercy, and indeed so it does; The very Law from
thy mouth sounds,

The Lord reigns, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and
abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving
iniquity, and transgression, and sin, Exodus 34.6.

And by this very word thy servant Moses besought thee to spare thy people,
Number. 14.15.

Eighthly, the Prophet Isaiah, and Habakkuk, presume to call mercy thy work, as
if to punish were strange to thee, and belonged to another, Esa. 28 20. Hab.
3.2.

Neither do the Law, and the Prophets only, but nature it self, but the
direction of the Holy Ghost teach Job this.

If there be a messenger with him, an interpreter, one among a thousand, to
show unto man his uprightness, then he is gracious unto him, and faith,
Deliver him from going down into the pit, I have found a ransom, Job 33. 23.

He shall pray unto God, and he will be favorable.

O taste and see that the Lord is gracious.

Blessed is the man that trusts in him, Psalm. 34.8.

His mercy is good, Psa. 109.21. tender, Psa. 69.16. better than life, Psalm.
63. 3

The mercy of God, is Great, Psalm. 5.7.

Manifold, Psalm. 51.1.

Abundant, 1 Pet. 4. 10.

Large, Psalm. 130.6.

Broad to the East, Psa. 86.5.

To the West, Psalm. 119. 156.

Deep as a pit, Psalm. 103 12.

High, to the heavens, and above the heavens, Psalm. ^2.9. and 36.5.

Eternal every way, Psa: 25.6. and 103.17, and 13.6.

His mercy is above all his works, Psalm. 145.9.

Above our sins, To. 5.20.

Above his Justice, Iam. ^.13.

According to his greatness, so is his mercy, his salvation infinite. Psalm. 71.

I know no end thereof.

He is the father of mercy.

It is natural to him.

God is called mercy it self, Psalm. 59.10.

Oh happy name, under which, no man may despair! Aug.

Great is the pit of my sins, but more, the deep of Gods mercies, Chrysostom.

First, kind, patient, long-suffering, slow to wrath, long containing it self.

Winking at the sins of men, because they should amend, Wisd. 11.23.

He being full of compassion for bare them 40. years, and forgave their
iniquity, and destroyed them not. Yea many a time turned he away his anger, and
stirred not up all his wrath, Psalm. 78.38.

O that thou had known this!

It is the mercy of God that we are not all consumed.

Secondly, mild in correction, so that his judgments want not mercy; his
punishments are parts of mercy.

I will visit their transgression with a rod, and their iniquity with stripes
nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him, Psalm. 89.
32.

He has not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us according to our
iniquities, Psa. 103. 10

Little correction suffices a Father, for great offenses.

How shall I give thee up Ephraim? Hos. 11.8.

Thirdly, Placability, because his wrath is easily appeased.

He will not always chide, neither will he keep his anger for ever, Psalm.
103.9.

His anger endures but a moment, Psalm. 30.5.

In a little wrath hid I my face from thee, for a moment: but with everlasting
kindness, will I have mercy on thee, etc. Esa. 54.8.

In wrath he remembers mercy, Hab. 3.2.

When I said my foot slippeth; thy mercy, O Lord, helped me, Psalm. 104. 13.

I said, I will confess my transgression unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the
iniquity of my sin, Ps. 32.5.

David said, I have sinned against the Lord: and Nathan said unto David, The
Lord, has put away thy sin, thou shall not dye, 2 Samuel 1. 8.

Though for no other cause, yet for mine own sake, says the Lord, Esa. 43.25.

The Lord is merciful, and will not keep anger for ever, Ier. 3.12.

The Lord waits that he may be gracious unto you, Esa. 30.18.

Fourthly, Compassion, for though we suffer deservedly, yet he pityeth us in
our misery.

He is said to have bowels of mercy, or tender mercy, Luke 1.78.

The Lord is very pityfull, and of tender mercy, Iam. 5.11.

Nevertheless, he regarded their affliction, when he heard their cry, Psalm.
106. 44.

Hence he hears sinners, being in trouble, who in their prosperity knew him
not.

If we seek him in the time of trouble, he will hear us, and be merciful to
us.

Fifthly, Readiness to pardon, Psalm. 130.4.

As David at first would not look on Absalon, yet afterward kissed him.

A Father will not only pardon a prodigal Son, returning, but put on him a
robe, and a ring and kill a fatted calfe, Lu. 15.22.

There is joy and triumph in heaven, over one sinner that repents, Luke 7.

Neither does God only pardon small faults, but great sins.

They say, if a man put away his wife, and she go from him, and become
another man's, shall he return unto her again? shall not that woman be
greatly polluted? but thou have played the harlot with many lovers, yet return
again unto me, says the Lord, Ier. 3. 1.

And thus he did to his Disciples leaving him.

Peter denying him with an oath, the thief blaspheming him, and the Jews
crucifying him, Act. 3.15.19.

He is kind unto the unthankful, and to the evil, Luke 6.35.

Sixthly, Neither does he only grant pardon, but grace also; preventing,
following, compassing about on every side, Psalm. 79.8. and 23.6. and 32.10

Seventhly, What ever good work we do, being assisted by his grace, he will
reward it.

He crowns us with loving kindness, and tender mercies, Psalm. 103.4.

He is merciful, and rewards us far above what we deserve.

He suffers not a cup of cold water to be given without a reward.

Eighthly, Neither is he merciful by nature only, but also by practice.

He has learned to be gracious, and showed it for ever of old, Psalm. 25.6.

We say rightly therefore, Our Fathers trusted in thee, they trusted, and thou
did deliver them, Psalm. 22.4.

Has God forgotten to be gracious? has he in anger shnt up his tender
mercies? Psalm. 77.9.

The Fountain is not dried up, his hands are not shortened, his ears are not
heavy.

Where are thy former. loving kindnesses? Psalm. 89.49.

I will sing of the mercies of the Lord, for I have said, mercy shall be built
up for ever.

Ninthly, As God shows mercy, so he promises it: so says David, Remember
the word unto thy Servant, upon which thou have caused me to hope, Psalm.
119.49.

For what if some did not believe? shall their unbeleefe make the faith of God
without effect? Romans 3.3.

If Isaac could not. change his word, Genesis 27. 33.

The Persians theirs, Dan. 6.8.

Nor Pilate his, Job. 19. 22.

Surely Gods promises shall never be altered.

I will not let thee go, except thou bless me, Genesis 32.26.

Yea Lord, even dogs eat of the crummes that fall from their Masters table,
Mat. 15.27.

But all these are as one in Christ, whereby are given unto us many great and
precious promises, 2 Pet. 1.4.

And in whom all promises are yea, and Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 19.

Whom to have named is sufficient.

Jesus thou Son of David have mercy on us, Mat. 15.22.

Jesus, this is his name, because he saves us from all our sins, Mat. 1.21.

Lord, do not so remember my sins, as to forget thy mercy, Aug.

Son of David, who forgave railing Shimei, thy sworn enemy.

And thou Lord forgive.

Christ hear us.

Christ, intercede with us, and for us.

Expiate our sins.

Procure thy Fathers favor, give us what thou art thy self.

Say to my Soul, I am thy salvation.

Thy apostle has not said in vain, This is a faithful saying and worthy of
all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom
I am chief, 1 Timothy 1.15.

Where sin abounded, grace did much more abound, Romans 5.20.

He has concluded them all in unbeleife, that he might have mercy upon all,
Romans 11.32.

He commands his love toward us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ
dyed for us, Romans 5.8.

And another Apostle speaks to the same purpose; Christ also has once
suffered for sins, the Just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, 1
Pet. 3.18.

So a third, Mercy rejoices against Judgment, Iam. 2.13.

And a fourth, if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous and he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for our
sins only, but also for the sins of the whole world, 1 Io. 2.1,2.

Yea, he himself says, Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden and
I will give you rest Mat. 11.28.

I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance, Luke 5.32.

These words have not been uttered in vain, they cannot be so uttered

Wherefore in the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my
soul, Psalm. 94. 19.

Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain
mercy, and find grace to help in the time of need, Heb. 4. ult.

Now therefore, O our God, hear the prayer of thy servant, and his
supplications, and cause thy face to shine, Dan. 9.17.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

Lord hear me, and that soon, for my spirit fails me.

A form of Thankesgiving.
Praise is comely.

I was formerly unworthy let me not now be unthankefull.

The Soul that blesses shall be made fat.

When ye shall have eaten and are satisfied, ye shall praise the Lord your God,
for that good land which he has given you.

Blessed be the Lord God of Iethro.

Let us sing unto the Lord God of Israel.

Thou art my god.

I will magnify thee, and praise thee.

Another.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his
abundant mercy, has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the Resurrection
of Jesus Christ from the dead, 1 Pet. 1.3.

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who has visited and redeemed his people,
Luke 1.78.

Blessed he God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of
mercies, and God of all comfort, which comfort us in all our tribulations, 2
Cor. 1.3.

I will praise the Lord with my whole heart, in the assembly of the upright,
and in the Congregation, Psalm. 111.1.

I will praise the Lord, for I am fearfully, and wonderfully made; mavelous
are thy works, and that my soul knows right well, Psalm. 139. 14, 15.

My substance was not hid from thee, when I was made in secret, and curiously
wrought in the lowest parts of the earth.

Thine eyes did see my substance, yet being unperfect, and in thy book all my
members were written, which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there
was none of them, Psalm. 16.

Thine hands have made and fashioned me together around about. Thou have
powered me out like milk, and cruddled me like cheese, Job 10.8,9,10,

Thou have clothed me with skin and flesh, and have fenced me with bones
and sinews. Thou have granted me life and favor, and thy visitation has
preserved my spirit, Job 10.11,12.

I will bless the Lord, who has given me counsel Psalm. 16.7.

I am not worthy of the least of thy mercies, and of all the truth, which thou
have showed unto thy servant: For with my staff I passed over this Jordan, and
now I am become two Bands, Genesis 32.10.

O bless our God ye people, and make the voice of his praise to be heard,
which holds our soul in life, and suffers not our feet to be moved, Psalm.
68.8,9.

For thou Lord have made me glad through thy work, I will triumph in the
works of thy hands, Psalm. 92.4.

Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me, bless his holy name,
Psalm. 103.1.

Bless the Lord, O my Soul: and forget not all his benefits, v. 2.

Who forgiveth thee all thine iniquities, who heals all they diseases, v. 3.

Who redeemeth thy life from destruction; who crowns thee with loving kindness
and mercy, v. 4.

Who satisfyeth thy mouth with good things: so that thy youth is renewed like
the Eagle, v. 5.

Thou have turned my mourning into dancing, thou have put off my sackecloath,
and girded me with gladness, Psalm. 30.11.

To the end that my glory may sing praise unto thee, and not be silent; O Lord,
I will give thanks unto thee for ever, v. 12.

Thou which have showed me great troubles, quicken me again, and bring me up
again from the depths of the earth. Psalm. 71.20.

My lips shall greatly rejoice when I sing unto thee, and my soul which thou
have redeemed, Psalm. 71.23.

My tongue also shall talk of thy righteousness all the day long, v. 24.

Lord God, who is like unto thee?

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who only does wondrous things, and
blessed be his glorious name for ever; and let the whole earth be filled with
his glory, Amen, Amen, Psalm. 72.18.

Blessed be the name of the Lord, from this time forth and for evermore, Psalm.
113.2.

Blessed be the glory of the Lord, from his place, Ezekiel. 3.12.

Honor and glory, Rev. 4.9.

And Power, v. 11. And Wisdom, Re. 5.12 And Strength, And Blessing, v. 13. And
Salvation, Re. 7.10 And Thankesgiving, And Praise,
To the blessed and individual Trinity, now and ever,

Amen.
Another.
That I, Have any being, Live, Have reason,


That I, Am civil, Am a Christian, Am of honest parentage, Am of a right
mind, Sense, Members, Am borne freely, Am brought up with learning.


For deliverance from Danger, Disgrace, Trouble. For Health, For A competent
estate, For Redemption, For Regeneration, For Instruction, For Vocation, For
Thy patience, For My repentance, For Hope of pardon, For Prevention, For
Healing, For Benefits which we have received, For That we have done any good,
For Present comfort, For Future hope, For Good and honest Parents, For Masters,
For Benefactors, For Good friends, For Children, For Faithful Servants.


For all that have been presidents to me, By Writing, By Preaching, By
Discoursing, By Prayers, By Examples, By Reproves, By Injuries.


For these, and all other things, Known, or unknown, Manifest, or hidden,
Remembered, or forgotten,


I do, and will praise thee;

I do, and will bless thee;

I do, and will thank thee, all the days of my life.

Morning Prayer.
Lord the day is thine; and the night also is thine, thou have prepared the
light and the Sun. Psalm. 74.16.

They continue this day according to thine ordinances, for all are thy
servants. Psalm. 119. 91.

Evening, and morning, and at noone will I pray, and cry aloude; and thou Lord,
wilt hear my voice. Psalm. 55. 17.

My voice shall thou hear in the morning, O Lord, in the morning will I direct
my prayer unto thee and look up. Psalm. 5. 3.

Blessed art thou O Lord,

Who turnest darkness into light, and renuest the face of the earth. Psalm.
104. 30.

Who deliverest us from the terror by night, and from the pestilence that
walks in darkness. Ps. 91. 5.

Who make sleep depart from mine eyes, and slumber from my eye lids. Psalm.
132. 4.

Blot out O Lord, as a thick cloud, my transgression, and as a cloud my
sins. Esaias. 44.22.

Make us children of light, and children of the day. 1. These. 5. 5.

Grant that we may walk soberly, and wisely as in the day.

Vouchsafe O Lord to keep us this day without sin.

Preserve us from the arrow that flies by day, and from the devil, which
walks at noone day.

Deliver us from the snare of the Hunter, and bitter words, preserve us from
the malice of this day.

This day let salvation and peace be unto this house.

Cause me to hear thy loving kindness in the morning, for in thee do I
trust: cause me to know the way wherein I should walk, for I lift up my soul
unto thee. Psalm. 143 8.

Deliver me O Lord, from mine enemies, I fly unto thee to hide me.

Teach me to do thy will, for thou art my God: thy spirit is good, lead me into
the Land of uprightness. Psalm. 143.10.

Let thy work appear unto thy servants, and thy Glory unto their children.
Psalm. 90.16.

Establish thou the work of our hands upon us, yea the works of our hands
establish thou.

Set a watch (O Lord) before my mouth, keep the door of my lips. Ps. 141. 3.

Let my speech be always with grace, seasoned with salt, that I may know how to
answer every man. Col. 4. 6.

Let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart, be acceptable in
thy sight, O Lord my strength and my redeemer. Psalm. 19. 14.

Lord prosper our going out and coming in, now and ever.

Amen.
Evening Prayer.
By night lift up your hands in the sanctuary, and bless the Lord. Psalm. 134.3.

Evening, and morning, and at noone will I pray, and cry aloud, and thou Lord
wilt hear my voice Psalm. 55. 17.

The Lord will command his loving kindness in the day time, and in the night
his song shall be with me, and my prayer unto the God of my life. Psalm. 42. 8.

Let my prayer be set forth before thee as Incense, and the lifting up of my
hands as the evening sacrifice. Psalm. 141. 2.

Blessed art thou O Lord,

Who make the day and night, and give rest unto the weary.

Who give songs in the night, and make the outgoings of the morning, and
evening to rejoice. Psalm. 65. 8.

Who deliverest us from the arrow that flies by day, and from the devil that
walks at noone day. Psalm. 91. 4.

Who have not cut off like a weaver my life, and from day unto night wilt not
make an end of us. Es. 38. 12.

Lord as one day succeeds another, so have we added one sin to another.

A just man falls seven times and rises up again, but the wicked shall fall
into mischief. Prove. 24. 16.

This day has both Massah and Meritah.

But we return unto thee, and all our bones cry out we repent. Luke 17. 4.

Let not the son set in thine anger.

Lord thou have done all our good works for us, whatsoever has been well
done, accept favorably.

Lord, sin and destruction proceed from us.

Pardon us wherein we have offended.

Accept of the good we do.

Forgive what we do amiss.

Blessed art thou O Lord,

Who give thy beloved sleep, and make them that fear thee to rest quietly
Psalm.127. 2.

Deliver us from the terror by night, and from the pestilence that walks in
darkness.

Behold, he that keeps Israel, shall neither slumber nor sleep. Ps. 121. 4.

Lord deliver us from evil, Lord preserve my soul.

Lord I sleep, but my heart waketh.

Visit me with thy salvation, and show me thy visions by night.

Let my sleep be a cessation from sin, as well as labor, that so by dreams
I may neither offend thee, nor pollute my self.

Make me to remember the darkness hides not from thee, but the night shines
as the day. Psalm. 139. 12.

Make me when sleep departs from mine eyes to remember thee, that I may
keep thy statutes.

Make me to commune with mine own heart upon my bed in the night to search
mine own ways, and not to neglect the chastning of my reins.

What is right, what more right, how I may be more pleasing to thee, better
useful to men.

Thou that compassest my paths, bed and reiues

With a clear lantern to see thee, with a dark Lantern to see thee.

Make me think long sleep, to be the sleep of death, and my bed to be a
grave, whose stuffing is worms, and covering dust.

I will lay me down and take my rest, for thou Lord make me dwell in safety.
Psalm. 4. 9.

Into thy hands O Lord I commend my spirit, because thou have redeemed me, O
Lord God of truth. 1. Pet. 4. 1.

FINIS.
The Contents contained in this Book.
1 Comfortable Scriptures to be used to the sick party. 2 Ejaculations for the
sick. 3 Heads of comfort to be administered from the consideration of God,
Christ. 4 Things to be recommended to the sick, such as are, Prayer, Alms,
Repentace, Faith, Love, Hope, Well-doing.
5 Propositions and inferences to be made to the sick. 6 Questions to be urged
to the sick, and Scriptures to be propounded in answer of them. 7 Questions to
be added farther upon answer of the former. 8 Several parts of prayer to be
used by the sick party, taken out of Scripture. 9 A Prayer to be used by the
Minister. 10 A Letany to be used for the sick. 11 Several choice expression
of prayer to be used for the sick party. 12 The commendation of the Soul to
God, immediately before the departure. 13 Scriptures to be applied to those who
survive when the party is departed. 14 A form of confession according to the
ten Commandments. 15 Several remembrances of Gods mercy. 16. Expressions of
Gods Mercy, fit to be used to him in Prayer. A confession of the faith A
confession of sins. A form of Thankesgiving Another. Morning Prayer. Evening
Prayer.

FINIS.

