A MANUAL OF DIRECTIONS FOR THE SICK.

With many sweet Meditations and Devotions of the R. Reverend Father in God,
Lancelot Andrews, late L. Bishop of Winchester.

To which are added Prayers for the Morning, Evening, and H. Communion.

Translated out of a Greek MS. of His Private Devotions.

By R. D. B. D.

London, Printed for Humphrey Moseley at the Princes Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1648.



To the Christian READER.
THe great errand of our coming into this World, is but to prepare ourselvs for
a better. Which being the chief scope and aim of this Manual, I cannot but
commend his pious intention, who formerly presented it to publik view. But,
observing a great want of that Impression, besides many literal imperfections,
omissions and misquotations of Holy Scriptures therein, and generally so great a
want of that care and exactness, which was due to any piece of him, to whom it
claimed relation, and which made the child so unlike the Father, I counseled
this Second Edition of it, assuring myself that it would be an acceptable
service to the Church of God, and not a little engage the world in a reverend
estimation of this holy Prelate, who not only taught them the way to heaven by
his incomparable Sermons, but also assisted them in it by his Example and
Devotions.

It has been too great a fault in all ages, to wrap up their drugs in gold,
and to vent false wares under glorious titles, imposing an the world, and on
famous Authors many broken and imperfect Relics.

That this Reverend Father has suffered somewhat by this false play, is too
notorious in the world: and in the former Impression of this Manual there were
some crude additions, which, though not justifiable by any authentik evidence or
Remain of his, were yet imposed on him and us, and dared to call him Master.

These being hence remanded to their proper place of silence and obscurity, I
give you this as his genuin issue. Which I am the rather induced to believe so,
not only by the internal arguments, the spirit and genius, the method and
peitie thereof, but also, by the external testimony and conveighance of it to
us, as His, under the fair hand of his Amanuensis; from which collated with
another Manuscript, and that in print, I give you this corrected.

That it was conceived and used by him in his ordinary Visitation of the Sick,
when he was Vicar of St. Giles Creeplegate, though I take for no good Topic to
gain your entertainment of it by; yet this persuasion it may happily beget,
that all the business of a ParishPriest is not consined to the Pulpit; but that
there is other business, if the people could think on it, wherein to employ men
of that Profession: which if so well attended as it ought, we should not hear of
so many scandalous complaints against a lazy Clergy, nor be so much infested
by sacrilegious intruders into our Sacred Office.

Your pardon, if I tell you what I mean, not in mine own, but his expressions,
who knew better what belonged to the Court of Conscience:

I take it to be an Error, to think the fruits of Repentance, and the worth of
them, to be a matter any common man can skill of well enough: needs never ask S.
John, or S. Paul, what he should do; knows what he should do as well as S. Paul
or S. John either: And that it is not rather a matter, wherein we need the
counsel and direction of such as are professed that way. Truly it is neither
the least, nor the last part of our learning to be able to give answer and
direction in this point. But therefore laid aside and neglected by us, because
not sought after by you. Therefore not studied, but by very few, quia nemo nos
interrogat, because it is grown out of request quite.

We have learned, I know not where, a new, a shorter course, which flesh and
blood better likes of: To pass the whole course of our life, and, in the whole
course of our life, not to be able to set down, where, or when, or what we did,
when we did that which we call Repenting: What fruits there came of it; what
those fruits might be worth. But even a little before our death, (and as little
as may be) not til the world have given us over, then, lo, to come to our Quid
faciemus? to ask, What we shall do? when we are able to do nothing: And then
must one come, and (as we call it) speak comfortably to us, that is, minister
to us a little Divinity Ladanum, rather stupefactive for the present, then
doing any sound good, and so take our leaves to go meet with ira ventura.

This way, this fashion of Repenting Saint John knew it not; it is far from his
fructus dignos; S. Paul knew it not; it is far from his opera digna. And I can
say little to it, but I pray God, it deceive us not. It is not good trying
conclusions about our souls. See Bishop Andrews's Eighth Sermon of Repentance
and Fasting.


This I take for so fair an item to a tender and pious Christian, as I doubt
not of diverting him thereby from deferring the making of his accounts eaven
with heaven, til the Cross or Bed of sickness call upon him. Sure, that is no
time, or place, to contest with two such Enemies, as are Infirmities and Sins:
and an Age is too short a time to provide ourselvs in for Eternity.

With this Protest and Caveat against this Unchristian course and fashion of
the World, I commend This to you as your Vade mecum; and as your faithful
friend and Counselor. Which, though it speak in special to the Sick, will be
found upon serious thoughts to be servieeable to all estates and conditions
whatsoever, whether in Sickness or Health, Prosperity or Adversity; making in
us such deep impresses of the Divine Excellency, and our Human Frailty, as
must needs force us from the cobweb comforts of This, to the desire of enjoying
those more solid and immutable in a better World, in the Expressions and with
the Longings of the Roial Prophet, My foul is athirst for God, yea even for the
living God: when shall I come to appear before the presence of God! Psalm. 42. 2.

I need not mind you of the reading of the Psalms after the Old Translation of
the Liturgy. For, besides that there was no other then in being, the constant
use of those Expressions, to which the Church was so habituated in her daily
Offices, had made them so familiar and known to all, that any other reddition
of them might have been taken for the greatest injury and invasion that could
possibly have been made upon Devotion.

One presumption I shall promise myself your pardon of, My affixing Titles and
Inscriptions, They being wholly designed out of charity, for the better use and
service of the Many; who, not being able to digest and apply what is given in
gross, may under these special and distinct Heads find matter proper for their
Meditations and Devotions, according to their several exigencies.

The Forms of Morning and Evening Prayer, being very lame and broken in the
former Edition, I give you here complete and perfect. To which I have added, as
the Crown and complement of all our Services, His Devotions for the Holy
Communion; all translated out of the Greek Copy of His Amanuensis. You will
need no other reason of the addition of this last, when I shall tell you, that
(besides that I find it in Latin annexed with the Manual for the Sick) the
Participation of that Sacred Mystery is the most proper companion for persons
in that condition, as being the Viaticum of the Soul, and a Pledge of the
Resurrection.

I shall add no more, but the promise of my Prayers for a blessed improvement of
this intended for your good; and a desire of Your for him, who accounts himself
happy in nothing more then the Prayers of Christian people, as the highest
obligation that can possibly be laid upon

April 21. 1648. Your most humble servant in our Lord JESUS. R. D.

The Contents of this Manual.
INquiries to be made concerning the Party. page 2. General Considerations of
the Mortality of man. p. 3. Comfottable Scriptures to be used to the sick
Party. p. 5. Several Duties recommended to the Sick. p. 15. Propositions and
Inferences to be made to the Sick. p. 19. Concerning the Wisdom and Providence
of God in the ordering of all afflictions in general, and this in special. p.
19. Concerning the fatherly Affection and Love of God. p. 21. Concerning the
Patience and Thankfulness required in the sick. p. 23. Concerning the
Contrition and Repentance of the sick. p. 28. Concerning the Belief of the
sick. p. 35. Concerning the sick parties Forgiving offenders against him. p.
38. Concerning the sick parties Desire of Forgiveness from them whom he has
offended. p. 39. Prayers and Expressions of the souls affiance in God. p. 42.
The Commendation of the sick party to the blessed Trinity. p. 46. A
Profession of the Christianity of the sick party, demonstrated in many
special graces. p. 52. Heads of comfort to be administered from the
consideration of God. p. 55. Christ. p. 55. A Collection of Prayers out of the
Psalter, suitable to the exigencies of the sick. p. 58. A Prayer to be used by
the Priest, begging pardon of his own unworthiness, and aceeptance of his
devotions for the sick. p. 91. A Letanie for the sick person in danger of
death. p. 94. An humble recognition of human frailty, and a deprecation of
falling from God. p 108. An affectionate recommendation of the sick person to
Gods mercy, grounded upon his special relations to God, and the sincerity of
his soul. p. 110. A Prayer for Mercy and Divine assistance to uphold the sick
person in his present affliction. p. 117. A Prayer for the Grace of God, and
the Pardon of the sins of the sick party. p. 121. Commendatio Animae: Or, The
Recommending of the soul to God. p. 128. Comfortable Scriptures to be applied
to the friends of the deceased party. p. 132. A General Confession of sins,
collected out of the Holy Prophets and Apostles. p. 133. A Confession of sins,
according to the branches of the Decalogue. p. 147. The Triumph of Mercy, in
many Gradual Expressions, and Remembrances, propounded to us in the Holy
Scriptures. p. 156. Spiritual Comforts and Confidence issuing from the
contemplation of Gods Goodness. p. 172 Devout Ejaculations grounded on the
consideration of our Human Frailty, and the Divine Providence and Mercy. p.
175. Prayers
For the Morning. p. 181. Evening. p. 201. H. Communion. p. 220.

A MANUAL FOR THE SICK.
SEt thine house in order, for thou shall die, 2 Kings 20. 1. P. Isa. 38. 1.

Is any sick among you? let him call the Priests of the Church, and let them
pray over him.

And the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up.

And if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him, S. James 5. 14, 15.

Inquiries to be made concerning the Parties
1. Sex. 2. Age. 3. Condition of life.
Whether 1. Learned, instructed? 2. Sound in Mind? Memory? 3. The sense of
hearing: perfect?

Whether 1. Patient, or Unquiet? 2. Cheerful, or Deject?

If being well, he found comfort

in Hearing, Reading, Repeating particulars.

Whether any material point, whereof to be admonished?

To take occasion out of his own words.

General Considerations of the Mortality of Man.
WHat man is he that lives, and shall not see death? Psalm. 89.48.

It is appointed to men once to die. Hebr. 9.27.

I am a stranger with Thee, and a sojourner, as all my fathers were. Psalm.
39.14.

Here we have no continuing City. Hebr. 13.14.

The night comes, when no man can work. S. John 9.4.

If the tree fall toward the South, or toward the North, in the place where the
tree falls, there it shall be. Eccles. 11.3.

Comfortable Scriptures to be used to the sick party.
THe mountains may remove, and the hills may fall down, but my mercy shall not
depart from thee, nor the covenant of my peace come to nothing, says the Lord,
that has compassion on thee. P. Isa. 54.10.

Heaven and Earth shall pass, but my word shall not pass. S. Mat. 24.35.

All the promises of God are in Him Yea and Amen. 2 Cor. 1.20.

In whom we have most great and precious promises, that we should be partakers
of the Divine nature. 2 S. Pet. 1. 4.

I have heard Ephraim lamenting thus, Thou have corrected me, and I was
chastised, as an untamed heifer.

Convert thou me, and I shall be converted: For thou art the Lord my God.

Surely, after that I had converted, I repented: I smote upon my thigh: I was
ashamed, yea even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth.

Since I spoke to him, I still remembered him: therefore my bowels are troubled
for him: I will surely have compassion on him (says the Lord.) P. Jerem. 31.
18, 19, 20.

I will visit their offenses with the rod, and their sin with scourges:
Nevertheless my mercy will I not utterly take from him; nor suffer my truth to
fail. Psalm. 89. 32.

My son, refuse not the chastening of the Lord, neither be grieved with his
correction.

For the Lord corrects him, whom He loves; even as the Father does the
child, in whom, for all that, he delights. Pro. 3. 11, 12.

Behold, blessed is the man, whom God corrects: therefore refuse not thou the
chastening of the Almighty.

For He makes the wound, and binds it up; He smites, and His hands make
whole again.

He shall deliver thee in six troubles, and in the seventh the evil shall not
touch thee. Job 5. 17, 18, 19.

Forget not the consolation that speaks to you, as unto children,

My son, despise not the chastening of the Lord; neither faint when thou art
corrected of Him:

For whom the Lord loves he chasteneth; and scourges every son whom he
receives.

If you endure chastening, God offers himself unto you, as to a son: for what
son is he whom the Father chasteneth not?

If therefore ye be without correction, whereof all are partakers, then are ye
baftards, and not sons.

Moreover, we have had the Fathers of our bodies, who corrected us, and yet we
gave them reverence; should we not much rather be in subjection to the Father
of spirits, that we might live.

For they, verily, for a few days, chastened us after their own pleasure; but
he chasteneth us for our profit, that we might be partakers of His holiness.

Now no chastening, for the present, seems joyous, but grievous: yet
afterward it brings the quiet fruit of righteousness to them who are thereby
exercised.

Wherefore lift up the hands that hang down, and the weak knees. Heb. 12.5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.

And ye now are in sorrow, but I will see you again, and your hearts shall
rejoice; and your joy shall none be able to take from you. S. John 16. 22.

For a little while have I forsaken thee, but with great compassion will I
gather thee.

For a moment, in mine anger, I hid my face from thee, but with everlasting
mercy will I have compassion on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer. P. Isa.
54.7, 8.

Modicam and videbitis me. S. John 16. 16.

Blessed is the man whom Thou chastisest, O Lord, and teach him in Thy Law;

That Thou may give him rest in the days of evil. Psalm. 94. 12, 13.

But, when we are judged, we are chastened of Thee, that we should not be
condemned with the world. I Cor. 11. 32.

They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy. Psalm. 126. 6.

The Lord has chastened and corrected me, but he has not given me over unto
death. Psalm. 118. 18.

My brethren, count it exceeding joy, when ye fall into diverse afflictions:

Knowing that the trial of your faith brings forth patience:

And let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be complete, entire,
lacking nothing. S. Jam. 1. 2, 3, 4.

Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. S. Mat. 5. 4.

When I am weak, then am I strong. 2 Corinthians. 12. 10.

Thou, Lord, upholdest all such as are falling; and liftest up those that be
down. Psalm. 145. 14.

Thou healest the broken in heart, and give medicine to heal their sickness.
Psalm. 147. 3.

My flesh and my heart fails; but be Thou the strength of my heart, and my
portion for ever. Psalm. 73. 25.

As mine outward man does wear, and decay, so let mine inward man renew daily.

O let this light affliction, which will quickly be over, cause unto me a far
more excellent and eternal weight of glory. 2 Cor. 4. 16, 17.

Several duties recommended to the sick.
Prayer.
PRay unto the Lord, if happily this may be forgiven thee. Acts. 8. 22.

For this cause shall every one that is godly make his prayer unto Thee. Psalm.
32. 6.

Alms.
Blessed is the man that considers the poor and needy. Psalm. 41. 1.

By mercy and truth are sins cleansed, and forgiven. Prove. 16. 6.

Break off thine unrighteousness by mercy to the poor. P. Dan. 4. 24.

They showed the garments which she had wrought with her own hands. Acts 9. 39.

(...)
I.
Except ye Repent, ye shall all likewise perish. S. Luke 13. 5.

II.
Without Faith it is impossible to please God. Heb. 11. 6.

III.
If I have all Faith, and no Love, it profits me nothing. I Cor. 13. 2.

IV.
We are saved by Hope. Romans 8. 24.

V.
Hope thou in the Lord, and be doing good. Psalm. 37. 3.

And they shall come forth, that have done good, to the resurrection of life. S.
John 5. 29.

Make you friends of the unrighteous Mammon; that, when you must hence, they
may receive you into everlasting Tabernacles. S. Luke. 16. 9.

Zacheus stood forth and said unto the Lord, Behold Lord, the half of my goods
I give to the poor, and if I have taken any thing from any man, by false
accusation I restore him fourfold S. Luke. 19. 8.

Propositions and Inferences to be made to the sick.
Concerning the Wisdom and Providence of God in the ordering of all
afflictions in general, and this in special.
1 YOu are persuaded that no sickness, or cross, comes, by chance, to any.

2. But you believe, that it is God who sends them, without whose providence
they fall not on us.

3. You acknowledge God to be most wise, and to suffer nothing to befall us,
but when it is expedient it so should.

4. Therefore, God having sent this His visitation to you at this time, than it
is expedieent for you thus to be sick.

Say, I know, O Lord, that Thy judgments are just, and that Thou of very
faithfulness have caused me to be troubled, Psalm. 119. 75.

Concerning the fatherly Affection and Love of God.
1 YOu know and confess, that God to all, but to Christian men especially,
carries the affection of a Father toward His children.

2. You know also, that a Father, whether he make much of his child, or whether
he chasten him, continues and Father in both; and loves him in the one, no
less then in the other.

3. Think the same of God, as touching your self: that, while He gave you good
days, He loved you; and that now He sends you some evil, He loves you also;
and would not have sent this evil, but to be a cause unto you of a greater
good; that, being called home thereby, you might be at peace with Him.

Say, Before I was troubled, I went wrong: but now sbal. I learn Thy Word.
Psalm 119.67.

Concerning the Patience and Thankfulness required in the sick.
YOu are not only to take it patiently, ( I beld my peace, and opened not my
mouth, because it was Thy doing,) Psalm. 39.9.

It is the Lord, let Him do what seems good in His eyes. I Sam. 3.18.

2. But even to give Him thanks for it, as for a wholesome medicin:

The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away: as it pleased the Lord, so
is it come to pass: Blessed be the Name of the Lord. Job 1.21.

I will take this cup of salvation, and give thanks to the Name of the Lord.
Psalm. 116.12.

3. Especially, for that we, in the time of our health, forgetting Him, yet He
is so merciful, that He gives us not over with the world: but, for all we have
of grieved His Holy Spirit, and fallen from grace, He visteth us again, and
offers it afresh unto us.

4. That, if His will had not been to show mercy by this chaftisement, He
could and would have suddenly taken you away with a quick destruction; and not
given you this time to bethink yourself, and to seek and sue to Him for grace.

Say, When I am judged, I am chastened of the Lord, that I might not be
condemned with the world. I Corinth. 11.32.

Gods very punishment is a part of His mercy. Psalm. 89.32.

It is a great mercy of the Lord, that we are not suddenly consumed. Lament.
3.22.

For giving you a time and space. Revel. 2.21.

O tarry thou the Lords leisure, be strong, and He shall comfort thine heart,
and put thou thy trust in the Lord. Psalm. 27.16.

O cast thy burden upon the Lord, and He shall refresh thee, and shall not
suffer the righteous to fail for ever. Psalm. 55.23.

O put your trust in Him always, yea people: Pour out your hearts before Him;
for God is our hope. Psalm. 62.8.

He will not always be chiding, neither keeps He His anger for ever. Psalm.
103.9.

In His wrath He will remember mercy. P. Hab. 3.2.

Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy will come in the morning. Psalm. 30.5.

For a little while have I forsaken thee, but with great compassion will I
gather thee:

For a moment in mine anger I bid my face from thee, but with everlasting
mercy have I had pity on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer. P. Isa. 54.7, 8.

Concerning the Contrition and Repentance of the Sick.
DO you acknowledge yourself not to have lived so well as you ought? but to have
sinned, don amiss, and dealt wickedly?

Do you call to mind the years of your life spent amiss, in the bitterness of
your soul?

Do you desire to have your mind illuminated by God, touching those sins you
never knew; or which you once knew, but have now forgotten; that you may repent
of them?

1 Do you desire to feel greater sorrow in your soul, for your sins committed
then you do? 2 Would you be glad if you did feel it? 3 And are you grieved that
you feel it not? that you are no more grieved?

Be there, or is there any special sin, that does lie heavy on your
conscience, for the which you need or would require the benefit of private
Absolution?

Say, Thou with rebukes do chasten man for sin, and make his beauty
consume as a moth fretting a garment. Psalm. 39.12.

There is no health in my flesh by reason of Thy wrath: neither is there any
rest in my bones, by reason of my sen. Psalm. 38.3.

Lord be merciful unto me: Heal my soul, for I have sinned against Thee. Psalm.
41.4.

Lord, I confess my wickedness; and am sorry for my sin. Psalm. 38.18.

I call to mind the misspent years of my life in the bitterness of my soul. P.
Isa. 38.15.

My misdeeds have prevailed against me: O be Thou merciful unto my sin. Psalm.
65.3.

For Thy Names sake, O Lord, be merciful unto my sin, for it is great. Psalm.
25.10.

O remember not the offenses and frailties of my youth; but, according to Thy
mercy, think Thou upon me, O Lord, for Thy Goodness. Psalm. 25.6.

Namely, O Lord, and specially in -- be merciful unto me.

Herein the Lord be mertiful unto His servant. 2 Kings 5.18.

O Lord, lay not -- to my charge. Acts 7.60.

If Thou, Lord, be extreme to mark what is don amiss, O Lord, who may abide it?
Psalm. 130.3.

O enter not into judgment with Thy servant: for no flesh is righteous in Thy
sight. Psalm. 1 43.2.

My confusion is daily before me, and the shame of my face bath covered me.
Psalm. 44.16.

My heart is disquieted within me, and the fear of death is fallen upon me.

Fearfulness and trembling are come upon me, and an horrible dread has
overwhelmed me. Psalm. 55.4, 5.

The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a contrite heart; and will save such as
are of an humble spirit. Psalm. 34.17.

A broken and contrite heart, O Lord, will Thou not despise. Psalm. 51.17.

Repent you of these your sins?

That is,

1. Have you a purpose to judge yourself for them if you live? 1 Cor. 11.31.

2. And to inflict upon yourself punishment, for committing them, according as
you shall be directed? 2 Cor. 7.11. Levit. 5.18.

3. Are you resolved, if God send you life hereafter, to amend and live more
carefully? and to avoid both those means and occasions that may provoke you to
sin again? and those signs and marks which testify you delight in it?

4. Do you holily promise thus much in the presence of God, His grace aiding
you?

5. Do you desire, if God send you health again, to be specially put in mind
thereof?

Turn us then, O God our Savior, and let Thine anger cease from us. Psalm. 85.4.

Concerning the Belief of the Sick.
Believe you the Christian Creed, or Confession of our most Holy Faith, once
delivered to the Saints?

Believe you that you cannot be saved, except you did believe it?

Are you glad in your soul, and do you give God hearty thanks, that in this
Faith you were born, have lived in it, and now shall die in the same?

Do you yourself desire, and do you wish us to desire at the hands of God, that
this Faith may not fail you, until the hour, and in the hour of death?

If your sense fail you, or if the pain of your disease, or weakness otherwise,
so work with you, as it shall happen you with your tongue to speak ought
otherwise then this your Faith or Religion would, do you renounce all such
words, as none of yours? and is it your will, we account of them as not spoken
by you?

Is there in your mind any scruple, touching any matter of Faith or Religion?

Say, Lord, I believe, help Thou mine unbelief. S. Mark 9.24.

Concerning the sick parties Forgiving offenders against him.
DO you forgive them, that any manner of way have offended you, as freely as
you would be forgiven at Gods hand?

Do you likewise desire of God, that He would forgive them?

That amends which they are bound to make you, in that they have offended you,
are you content to remit them also?

Are you willing that so much be showed them from you, that you have forgiven
them freely, and fully, and desire God to do the like?

Say, Father forgive them: they knew not what they did. S. Luke 23. 34

O Lord, lay not these fins to their charge. Acts 7. 60.

Concerning the sick parties Desire of Forgiveness from them whom be has
offended.
YOu yourself living in the world, it cannot be but some you have offended, Do
you desire that all such, as you have offended, would pardon and forgive you?

Do you remember or call to mind any person or persons in special, whom you
have so offended?

Will you that so much be signified to them, in your name, that you desire them
to forgive you?

Inasmuch as the offenses against the Seventh Commandment of getting any
children by the act of adultery committed with the wife of another man; and
against the Eighth Commandment, touching men's goods; and against the Ninth,
touching men's credits or good names; are not by God forgiven, unless
restitution be made to the parties wronged; Are you ready and willing to
restore, and make satisfaction to such as you have wronged, in thrusting in a
child begotten by you, likely to deprive the true children of the party, and
begotten by him, of a child's part and portion? and to such as you have wronged
in their goods? and to satisfy those whom you have any way touched in their
good name? and that without all fraud or delay?

Can you call to mind any persons in particular, whom you have so offended?

Prayers and Expressions of the souls affiance in God.
ANd now, Lord, what is my hope? Truly, my hope is in Thee. Psalm. 39.8.

Thou that art the hope of all the ends of the earth, and of them that remain
in the broad sea. Psalm. 65.5.

Though He kill me, yet will I trust in Him. Job 13.15.

Though I walk through the vale of the shadow of death, yet will I fear no
evil. Psalm. 13.4.

Lord, Thou know whereof we be made; Thou remembrest that we are but dust.
Psalm. 103.14.

Call to mind we are but flesh: but a wind that passes away and comes not
again. Psalm. 78.40.

Remember, Lord, of what time I am: what our substance is: wherefore have Thou
made all men for naught? Psalm. 89.46.

Lord consider my complaint, for I am brought very low. Psalm. 142.7.

Let my present misery more prevail to move compassion, then my sinful life
past to provoke Thine indignation.

Lord, how long will Thou be angry with Thy servant that prays? Psalm. 80.4.

Behold, I show the lowliness of a suppliant: show not thou to me the rigor of
a Judge.

Ne quaeso premat sententia Judicis, Quem sic submittit petitio supplicis.

O deliver not Thine own inheritance over into the will of Thine enemy. Psalm.
74.20.

I am Thine; O save me. Psalm. 119.94.

I am Thine; carest Thou not that I perish? S. Mark 4.38.

Behold, O Lord, how that I am Thy servant: I am Thy servant, and the son of
Thine handmaid. Psalm. 116.14.

Thy unprofitable evil servant. S. Matthew. 18.32. yet thy servant.

Thy lost unkind child. S. Luke 15.24. yet Thy child.

Though I have not showed to Thee the duty and affection of a Son, yet do not
Thou cast from Thee the natural kindness and compassion of a Father.

The Commendation of the sick party to the blessed Trinity.
INto Thine hands I commend myself, as unto a faithful Creator. 1 S. Pet. 4.19.

Receive, O Lord, Thine own Image, not made by any strange god, but by Thyself,
the only true and living God.

Despise not, O Lord, the work of Thine own hands. Psalm. 138.8.

Lord, I am created to Thine own Image. Genesis 1.27.

Suffer not, O Lord, suffer not Thine own Image to be utterly defaced:

But renew it again in righteousness and true holiness. Ephesians. 4.24.

Into Thy hands I commend myself, for Thou have redeemed me, O Lord, Thou God
of Truth. Psalm. 31.6.

Behold, O Lord, I am the price of Thy blood, of Thy most precious blood. 1
Cor. 6.20.

Suffer not so great a price to perish. Suffer not that to be cast away, that
Thou have so dearly bought.

O Lord, Thou came down from heaven, to redeem that which was lost. S. Luke
19.10.

Suffer not that to be lost, which Thou have redeemed.

Behold, O Lord, Thou art in the midst of us: Thy Name is called upon us. (P.
Jerem. 14.9.) we are called by Thy Name, P. Dan. 9.19. Christians.

For Thy Names sake be merciful unto us. Psalm. 25.10. and 79.9.

Spare Thine own Name in us.

And do not, good Lord, so remember our fins, that, by remembering them, Thou
forget Thine own Name.

Lord, we call upon Thy Name.

There is no Name under heaven whereby we can be saved, but only It. Acts 4.12.

Though we be unfaithful, yet, Thou art true, and can not deny Thine own
Name 2 Timothy 2.13.

Into Thy hands I commend my self, as to my true and only Sanctifier.

Lord, I have been the Temple of Thy Holy Spirit. 1 Cor. 3.16.

Though it has been polluted through my frailty, yet, O Lord, destroy it not:
But dedicate it, hallow it anew, and sanctify it to Thee. Yet once again make
an Encoenia of it.

Spare us good Lord.

Spare Thine own Handiework. Image. Name. The price of Thine own blood in us.

The good Lord be merciful to every one, that prepares his heart, to seek the
Lord God, the God of our Fathers, although he be not according to the cleaness
of the Sanctuary. 1 Chre. 30.18, 19.

Behold, O Lord, a bruised reed;

Break it not.

Behold smoking flax; and yet, O Lord, quench it not. P. Isa. 42.3 S. Matthew.
12.20.

A Profession of the Christianity of the sick party, demonstrated in many
special graces.
LOrd, I have never denied Thy Name; but confessed it ever:

And in the confession and invocation of it, I desire to spend my last breath,
and to depart this life.

Lord, I have desired to fear Thy Name. Nehem. 1.11.

My soul has been desirous to long after Thy commandments. Psalm. 119.20.

Lord, I do acknowledge my wickedness, and am sorry [ cogitabo, anxius ero,
take thought] for my sin. Psalm. 38.18.

Lord, I believe, Help Thou mine unbelief. S. Mark 9.24.

Lord, I hope verily to see the goodness of the Lord in the Land of the living.
Psalm. 27.15.

Let not this hope confound me, nor make me ashamed. Psalm. 119.116.

Lord, I freely forgive, whomsoever I have ought against, those poor pence, or
mites they ow me. S. Mat. 18. 28.

Lord, I held my peace, and opened not my mouth at Thy chastisement; because it
was Thy doing, O Lord. Psalm. 39. 10.

Lord, I seek Thee; and thou never failest them that seek Thee. Psalm. 9. 10.

I come unto Thee; and of them that come to Thee, Thou castest none out. S.
John 6. 37.

Nevertheless though I am sometime afraid, yet put I my trust in Thee. Psalm.
56. 3.

O Lord, in Thee have I trusted, let me never be put to confusion. Psalm. 31. 1.
and 71. 1.

Heads of comfort to be administered from the consideration of God. Christ.
GOD is A Creator. (...) and so faithful. I S. Pet. 4. 19.

A Possessor or Owner. Genesis 14. 19. (...)

I am Thine. Psalm. 119. 94.

Part of Thy possession. A Redeemer at large, (...) Psalm. 130. 7.

A Redeemer (...) as of the same flesh and blood. Job 19. 25.

Christ is a Mediator
Between God and us, His Priesthood and Sacrifice. A Lamb.

Between us and Satan, His Kingdom and Conquest. A Lion.

Between us and sin, His Innocence.

Between us and our Concupiscence, His Charity.

Between us and the Punishment due to our sins, His Passion and bloodshedding
Satisfaction.

Between us and our Conscience, and the Judgment of God, His Advocateship.

Between us and our want of Righteousness, His absolute and complete Obedience.

Between us and our want of desert of the eternal Reward, His Merit.

Between us and our want of Fervor in Praying, His Intercession.

Between us and our want of sorrow in Repenting, His Agony and bloody Sweat.

These recount, show, offer, set between.

A Collection of Prayers out of the Psalter, suitable to the exigencies of the
sick.
Psalm. 7.
O Lord my God, in Thee have I put my trust; save me from them that seek after
my soul, and deliver me. Ver. 1.

Lest he devour my soul, like a Lion, and tear it in pieces, while there is
none to help. Ver. 2.

Psalm. 18.
The sorrows of death compassed me round about; the overflowings of ungodliness
made me afraid. V. 3.

The snares of death overtook me; the pains of hell gat hold upon me. Ver. 4.

Psalm. 116.
I have found trouble and heaviness; and I will call upon the Name of the Lord.

O Lord, I beseech Thee, deliver my soul. Ver. 4.

Psalm. 18.
Hear my voice, O Lord, out of Thy Holy Temple: Let my complaint come before
Thee; let it enter even into Thy ears. Ver. 6.

Send down from on high, and deliver me; take me out of many waters. Ver. 16.

Psalm. 116.
Gracious is the Lord, and righteous; yea, our God is merciful. V. 5.

The Lord preserves the simple: I am in misery, but He will think upon me.
Ver. 6.

Turn again then to thy rest (O my soul) for the Lord has regarded thee. Ver.
7.

Psalm. 22.
My God, my God, look upon me, why have Thou forsaken me; and art so far from
my health, and from the words of my complaint? Ver. 1.

O my God, I cry in the day time, and Thou hear not: and in the night
season also I have no audience. Ver. 2.

Yet Thou continucst Holy, O Thou Worship of Israel. Ver. 3.

Our Fathers hoped in Thee; they trusted in Thee, and Thou did deliver them.
Ver. 4.

They called upon Thee, and were helped; they put their trust in Thee, and were
not confounded. Ver. 5.

But Thou art He that took me out of my mothers womb: Thou wast my hope, when I
hanged yet upon my mothers breasts. Ver. 9.

I have been left unto Thee, ever since I was born: Thou art my God, even from
my mothers womb. V. 10.

O go not far from me; for trouble is hard at hand; and there is none to help
me. Ver. 11.

Deliver my soul from the sword; my darling from the power of the dog. Ver. 20.

Save me from the Lions mouth; deliver me from among the horns of the Unicorns.
V. 21.

Psalm. 25.
For Thy Names sake, O Lord, be merciful unto my sin, for it is great. Ver. 10.

O turn Thee unto me, and have mercy upon me; for I am desolate and in
misery. Ver. 15.

The sorrows of my heart are enlarged: O bring Thou me out of my troubles. V.
16.

Look upon my adversity and misery, and forgive me all my sin. Ver. 17.

O keep my soul, and deliver me: let me not be confounded; for I have put my
trust in Thee. V. 19.

Psalm. 28.
Unto Thee do I cry, O Lord my strength; think no scorn of me; lest, if Thou
make as though Thou heardest not, I become like them that go down into the pit.
Ver. 1.

Hear the voice of my humble petitions, when I cry unto Thee: when I hold up
my hands toward the Mercie-seat of Thy Holy Temple. V. 2.

Psalm. 27.
O hide not Thou Thy face from me; nor cast Thy servant away in displeasure.
Ver. 10.

Thou have been my succor: leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my
salvation. Ver. 11.

Psalm. 40.
Withdraw not Thou Thy mercy from me, O Lord; let Thy loving kindness and Thy
truth always preserve me. V. 14.

For innumerable troubles are come about me; my sins have taken such hold upon
me, that I am not able to look up; yea, they are more in number then the hairs
of my head, and my heart has failed me. V. 15.

O Lord, let it be Thy pleasure to deliver me; make haste, O Lord, to help me.
Ver. 16.

As for me, though I be poor, and in misery, yet the Lord cares for me. Ver.
20.

Thou art my Helper and Redeemer: make no long tarrying, O my God. Ver. 21.

Psalm. 31.
O Lord, my hope has ever been in Thee. I have said, Thou art my God. Ver. 16.

My time is in Thy hand, O deliver me, and be merciful unto me. V. 17.

Show Thy servant the light of Thy countenance; and save me for Thy mercies
sake. V. 18.

Psalm. 38.
Forsake me not, O Lord my God; be not Thou far from me. V. 21.

Haste Thee to help me; O Lord God of my salvation. Ver. 22.

Psalm. 54.
Save me, O God, for Thy Names sake; and deliver me in Thy strength. V. 1.

Hear my prayer, O God; and hearken unto the words of my mouth. Ver. 2.

Psalm. 55.
Hear my prayer, O God; and hide not Thy self from my petition. Ver. 1.

Take heed unto me, and hear me, how I mourn in my prayer, and am vexed. Ver. 2.

Psalm. 61.
Hear my crying, O God; give ear unto my prayer. Ver. 1.

From the ends of the earth will I call unto Thee, when my heart is in
heaviness. Ver. 2.

Psalm. 69.
O Lord, let me make my prayer unto Thee, in an acceptable time. V. 13.

Hear me, O God, in the multitude of Thy mercies; even in the truth of Thy
salvation. Ver. 14.

Take me out of the mire, that I sink not: O let me be delivered from them that
seek my soul, and out of the deep waters. Ver. 15.

Let not the water flood drown me, neither let the deep swallow me up: and let
not the pit shut her mouth upon me. Ver. 16.

Hear me, O Lord, for Thy loving kindness is comfortable; turn Thee unto me,
according to the multitude of Thy mercies. Ver. 17.

Hide not Thy face from Thy servant, for I am in trouble: O haste Thee and hear
me. V. 18.

Draw nigh unto my soul, and save it: O deliver me. Ver. 19.

As for me, when I am poor, and in heaviness, Thy help, O God, shall lift me up.
Ver. 30.

Psalm. 109.
But deal Thou with me, O Lord God, according to Thy Name; for sweet is Thy
mercy. Ver. 20.

O deliver me, for I am helpless and poor; and my heart is wounded within me.
Ver. 21.

I go like the shadow that departs; and am driven away as the Grasshopper. V.
22.

My knees are weak through fasting; my flesh is dried up for want of fatness.
Ver. 23.

Help me, O Lord my God; O save me according to Thy mercy. V. 25.

And men shall know how that this is Thy hand; and that Thou Lord have don it.
V. 26.

Psalm. 74.
O God, wherefore art Thou absent from us so long? why is Thy wrath so hot
against the sheep of thy pasture? Ver. 1.

O think upon Thy Congregation, which Thou have purchased and redeemed of old.
Ver. 2.

O deliver not the soul of Thy Turtle dove unto the multitude of Thine enemies;
and forget not the distressed of Thy servants for ever. Ver. 20.

O let not the simple go away ashamed; but let the poor and needy give praise
unto Thy Name. Ver. 22.

Psalm. 80.
Turn us again, O Lord God of Hosts; show the light of Thy countenance, and we
shall be whole. V. 3, 7, 19.

Psalm. 85.
O forgive the offenses of Thy servants, and cover all their sins. V. 2.

Take away all Thy displeasure, and turn Thyself from Thy wrathful indignation.
Ver. 3.

Turn us then, O God our Savior, and let Thine anger cease from us. V. 4.

Will Thou be displeased at us for ever? and will Thou stretch out Thy wrath
from one generation to another? Ver. 5.

Will Thou not turn again, and quicken us: that Thy people may rejoice in thee?
Ver. 6.

Show us Thy mercy, O Lord: and grant us Thy salvation. V. 7,

Psalm. 70.
Haste Thee, O Lord, to deliver me; make haste to help me, O Lord. V. 1.

Psalm. 44.
Up Lord, why sleep Thou? awake, and be not absent from us for ever. Ver. 23.

Wherefore hidest Thou Thy face, and forgettest our misery and trouble? Ver. 24.

For our soul is brought low, even unto the dust: our belly cleaves unto the
ground. Ver. 25.

Arise, and help us; and deliver us for Thy mercies sake. V. 26.

Psalm. 86.
Bow down Thine ear, O Lord, and hear me: for I am poor and in misery. Ver. 1.

Preserve Thou my soul, for Thou gave it me: my God, save Thy servant who
puts his trust in Thee. V. 2.

Be merciful unto me, O Lord: for I will call daily upon Thee. V. 3.

Comfort the soul of Thy servant: for unto Thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul.
V. 4.

For Thou, Lord, art good and gracious, and of great mercy to all them that
call upon Thee. Ver. 5.

Give ear, Lord, unto my prayer: and ponder the voice of my humble desires.
Ver. 6.

In the time of my trouble I will call upon Thee, for Thou hear me. Ver. 7.

For, Thou, O Lord God, art full of compassion and mercy: longsuffering,
plenteous in goodness and truth. Ver. 15.

O turn Thee then unto me, and have mercy upon me: Give Thy strength unto Thy
servant, and help the son of Thine handmaid. V. 16.

Show some good token upon me for good, that they, who love Thee, may see it,
and be glad, because Thou, Lord, have helped me and comforted me. Ver. 17.

Psalm. 142.
I cried unto the Lord with my voice: yea even to the Lord did I make my
supplication. V. 1.

I poured out my complaint before Him, and showed Him of my trouble. Ver. 2.

When my spirit was in heaviness, Thou knew my path. V. 3.

I looked also upon my right hand, and lo, there was none that could help me.
Ver. 4.

I had no place to fly unto: and none was able to relieve my soul. V. 5.

I cried unto Thee, O Lord, and said, Thou art my hope and my portion in the
land of the living. Ver. 6.

O consider my complaint, for I am brought very low. Ver. 7.

Bring my soul out of prison, that I may give thanks unto Thee: which thing if
Thou will grant me, then shall the righteous resort unto my company. V. 9.

Psalm. 141.
Mine eyes look unto Thee, O Lord God; in Thee is my trust; O cast not out my
soul. V. 9.

Psalm. 88.
O Lord God of my salvation, I have cried day and night before Thee: O let my
prayer enter into Thy presence; incline Thine ear unto my calling. V. 1.

For my soul is full of trouble, and my life draws nigh unto hell. Ver. 2.

Lord, I have called daily upon Thee, I have stretched out mine hands unto
Thee. V. 9.

Do Thou show wonders among the dead? or shall the dead rise up again, and
praise Thee? Ver. 10.

Shall Thy loving kindness be showed in the grave? or Thy faithfulness in
destruction? Ver. 11.

Shall Thy wonderful works be known in the dark? or Thy righteousness in the
land where all things are forgotten? Ver. 12.

Unto Thee do I cry, O Lord; and early shall my prayer come before Thee. Ver.
13.

Lord, why abhorrest Thou my soul? why hidest Thou Thy face from me? Ver. 14.

I am in misery, and like unto him that is at the point to die: even from my
youth up Thy terrors have I suffered with a troubled mind. Ver. 15.

Thy wrathful displeasure goes over me; and the fear of Thee has undon me. V.
16.

Psalm. 141.
Lord, I will call upon Thee, haste Thee unto me; and consider my voice when I
cry unto Thee. Ver. 1.

Let my prayer be set forth in Thy sight as the Incense: Let the lifting up of
my hands be as an evening Sacrifice. Ver. 2.

Psalm. 79.
Lord, how long will Thou be angry? and shall Thy jealousy burn like fire for
ever? V. 5.

O remember not mine old sins, but have mercy upon me, for I am come to great
misery. V. 8.

Help me O God of my salvation, for the glory of Thy Name: O deliver me, and
be merciful to my fins, for Thy Names sake. Ver. 9.

Psalm. 143.
Lord, I stretch forth mine hands unto Thee: my soul gaspeth unto Thee, like a
thirsty land. Ver. 6.

Hear me, O Lord, and that soon, for my spirit waxes faint: Hide not Thy face
from me, lest I be like unto them that go down into the silence. Ver. 7.

Psalm. 13.
How long will Thou forget me, O Lord, for ever? how long will Thou hide Thy
face from me? V. 1.

How long shall I seek counsel in my soul, and be so vexed in my heart? how long
shall mine enemies triumph over me? Ver. 2.

Consider and hear me, O Lord my God; lighten mine eyes, that I sleep not in
death. V. 3.

Psalm. 30.
In my prosperity, I said, I shall never be removed: Thou, Lord, of Thy
goodness had made my state so strong. Ver. 6.

Thou did turn away Thy face from me, and I was sore troubled. V. 7.

Then cried I unto Thee, O Lord; and gat me unto my Lord right humbly. V. 8.

What profit is there in my blood, if I go down into the pit? V. 9.

Shall the dust give thanks unto Thee? or shall it declare Thy truth? V. 10.

Hear, O Lord, and have mercy upon me: Lord be Thou my helper. V. 11.

Psalm. 77.
I will cry unto God with my voice, even unto God will I cry with my voice,
and He shall hearken unto me. V. 1.

In the time of my trouble I sought the Lord; my sore ran and ceased not: in
the night season my soul refused comfort. Ver. 2.

When I am in heaviness I will think upon God: when my heart is vexed, I will
complain. Ver. 3.

Thou hold mine eyes waking; I am so feeble that I can scarce speak. V. 4.

I have considered the days of old, and the years that are past. V. 5.

I call to remembrance my song; and in the night I commune with my heart, and
search out my spirits. V. 6.

Will the Lord absent Himself for ever? and will He be no more entreated? V. 7.

Is His mercy clean gone for ever? is His promise come utterly to an end for
evermore? V. 8.

Has God forgotten to be gracious? and will He shut up His loving kindness in
displeasure? ver. 9.

And I said, It is mine own infirmity; but I will remember the years of the
right hand of the most High. ver. 10.

2 Chronicles. 20.
O God, there is no strength in us: neither do we know what to do; but only we
lift up our eyes unto Thee. Ver. 12.

Psalm. 35.
Lord, how long will Thou look upon this? ver. 17.

This Thou have seen, O Lord; hold not Thy tongue then; go not far from me, O
Lord. V. 22.

Psalm. 69.
Save me, O God; for the waters are come in, even unto my soul. ver. 1.

Psalm. 68.
Let God arise, and let His enemies be scattered: let them also, that hate Him,
flee before Him. ver. 1.

P. Isa. 38.
Lord, it oppresses me, answer for me. v. 14.

Psalm. 38.
Thou shall answer for me, O Lord my God. ver. 15.

Psalm. 130.
Out of the deep have I called unto Thee, O Lord: Lord hear my voice. ver. 1.

O let Thine ears consider well the voice of my complaint. ver. 2.

Psalm. 79.
O let the sorrowful sighing of the prisoners come before Thee: according to
the greatness of Thy power preserve Thou those that are appointed to die. ver.
12.

A Prayer to be used by the Priest, begging Pardon of his own unworthiness and
acceptance of his devotions for the sick.
O Lord, it is a great presumption, that one sinner should dare to commend
another to Thy Divine Majesty; especially, the greater, the less: and who
would not fear to undertake it? But Thy commandment it is, by Thy Holy
Apostle, When any is sick, that the Priests should be called for: that they
should pray for the sick party, and that their prayers Thou will receive; and
save and forgive the fins of the party so prayed for.

And now behold, O Lord, we that are no way meet, but unworthie, utterly
unworthie, to sue for ought for our selves, charity and compassion so binding
us, are enforced to become suitors to Thee for others.

Even, O Lord, for this Thy servant, ready to depart this world.

To Thee we hope, to Thee we desire, to Thee we entreat and pray in all meek
manner, and even from the bottom of our hearts.

O Lord, that, which justly Thou might deny to our unworthiness, deny not,
we beseech Thee, to Thine own gracious goodness.

O Lord, forgive us our sins, our great and grievous sins, often and many times
committed; long and many years most wretchedly continued; that so we may be
meet to pray for others; that so we may make our prayer unto Thee, in an
acceptable time.

Graciously look upon our afflictions.

Pitifully behold the sorrows of our hearts.

Mercifully forgive the sins of Thy people.

Favorably with mercy receive our prayers.

Both now and ever vouchsafe to hear us, O Christ.

Graciously hear us, O Christ.

Graciously hear us, O Lord Christ.

A Letanie for the sick person in danger of death.
O God the Father of Heaven,

have mercy upon h.

keep and defend h.

O God the Son, Redeemer of the world,

have mercy upon h.

save and deliver h.

O God the Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son,

have mercy upon h.

strengthen and comfort h.

O Holy, Blessed and Glorious Trinity,

have mercy upon h.

Remember not Lord h. offenses.

Call not to mind the offenses of h. forefathers: But spare h. good Lord, spare
Thy servant, whom Thou have redeemed with Thy precious blood, and be not angry
with h. for ever.

From Thy wrath and heavy indignation; The guilt and burden of h. fins; The
dreadful sentence of the last Judgment.

Good Lord deliver h.

From The sting and terror of Conscience; The danger of impatience, distrust or
despair; The extremity of fickness, anguish, or agony, that may any way
withdraw h. mind from Thee.

Good Lord deliver h.

From the Bitter pangs of eternal death; Gates of Hell; Power of darkness;
Illusions and assaults of our ghostly enemy.

Good Lord deliver h.

By Thy manifold and great mercies;

By the manifold and great Merits of JESUS Christ Thy Son;

By His Agony and bloody Sweat; Strong Crying and Tears; Bitter Cross and
Passion; Mighty Resurrection; Glorious Ascension; Effectual and most
acceptable Intercession and Mediation;

By the Graces and Comforts of the Holy Ghost;

Good Lord deliver h.

For Thy Names sake; The glory of Thy Name; Thy loving Mercy; Thy Truths
sake; Thine own self. In this Time of h. most extremity; H. last and greatest
need. In the Hour of death, and Day of Judgment.

Good Lord deliver h.

Deliver h. O Lord, from all danger and distress; from all pains and
punishments, both bodily and ghostly. Amen.

As Thou did deliver

Noah from the Flood;

so save and deliver h.

Lot from the fire of Sodom;

so save and deliver h.

Isaac from present death;

so save and deliver h.

Job from all his tentations;

so save and deliver h.

Moses from the hand of Pharaoh;

so save and deliver h.

Daniel from the Lions den;

so save and deliver h.

Jonas from the belly of the Whale;

so save and deliver h.

And, as Thou have delivered Thy blessed Saints and Servants from all their
terrors and torments;

so deliver h. soul, and receive it to Thy mercy.

We sinners do beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please Thee to remember h. with the favor Thou bear unto Thy
people, and so vifit h. with Thy salvation.

We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please Thee to save and deliver h. soul from the power of the
enemy, lest, as a Lion, he devour it, and tear it in pieces, if there be none
to help.

We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please Thee to be merciful, and to forgive all h. sins and
misdeeds, which by the malice of the Devil, or by h. own frailty h. has at
any time of h. life committed against Thee.

We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please Thee not to lay to h. charge, what in concupiscence of the
eye, pride of life, vanity or superfluity h. has committed against Thee.

We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please Thee not to lay to h. charge what in the fierceness of h.
wrath, or in the eagerness of an angry spirit he has committed against Thee.

We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please Thee not to lay to h. charge, what in vain and idle words,
in the looseness and slipperiness of the tongue h. has committed against Thee.

We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please Thee to make h. partaker of all Thy mercies and promises in
Christ JESUS.

We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please Thee to vouchsafe h. soul the estate of joy, bliss, and
happiness, with all Thy blessed Saints, in Thy heavenly Kingdom.

We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please Thee to grant h. body rest and peace, and a part in the
blessed Resurrection of Life and Glory.

We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.

Son of God, we beseech Thee to hear us.

O Lord God, Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world,

have mercy upon us.

Thou that take away the sins of the world,

have mercy upon us.

Thou that take away the sins of the world,

grant h. Thy peace.

Thou that sit at the right hand of God the Father,

have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our Father, who art in heaven, etc.

O Lord deal not with h. after h. sins.

Neither reward h. according to h. iniquities.

O God merciful Father, that despisest not the sighing of a contrite heart, nor
the desires of such as be sorrowful, mercifully assist our prayers, which we
make before Thee; At such times specially, when our greatest and most grievous
extremities are ready to oppress us. And, O Lord, graciously hear us, that
those evils, those illusions, terrors and assaults, which Thine or our enemy
works against us, may be brought to naught, and by the providence of Thy
goodness may be dispersed, that we Thy servants, being swallowed up with no
tentations, may evermore give thanks unto Thee in Thy Holy Church, through
JESUS Christ our Lord. Amen.

An humble recognition of humane frailty, and a deprecation of falling from
God.
IN the midst of life, we are in death: of whom then may we seek for succor,
but of Thee, O Lord, who, for our sins, art most justly displeased with us?

Yet, O Lord most Holy, O Lord most mighty, O Holy and most merciful Father,
deliver us not over to the bitter pains of eternal death.

Thou know, Lord, the secrets of our hearts; shut not up against us the ears
of Thy mercy; but spare us, O Lord most Holy, O Lord most mighty, O immortal
and most merciful Father.

Thou most worthy Judge eternal, suffer us not in our last hour for any pains
of death to fall from Thee.

Chapter Engl. Office for Burial.

An affectionate recommendation of the sick person to Gods mercy, grounded
upon his special relations to God, and the sincerity of his soul.
I.
WE commend unto Thee, O Lord, the soul of This Thy servant.

He is the Work of Thy hands;

Despise not, O Lord, the work of Thine own hands;

the Likeness of Thy Image;

Suffer not, O Lord,

Thy Image to be utterly defaced.

the Price of Thy Blood;

Let not so great a Price be cast away.

a Christian; the Name of Thy Son is called upon him;

For Thy Names sake be good unto Thy Name.

He is Thine, O save him. Psalm. 119. 94.

Give not over that Thine is into the will of the enemy.

Though he has finned, yet Thy Name has he not denied; but called upon it,
and confessed it unto his life's end: And there is no other Name under heaven,
but Thine, whereby he hops to be saved. Acts 4. 12.

Though he has finned, yet he has not hid his sin. Job 31. 33. nor excused
it. Psalm. 141. 4. but has confessed it, and been sorry for it, and wishes
even tears of blood, wherewith to lament it.

Though he has sinned, yet others also have sinned against him, whom he from
the heart forgiveth, and desires forgiveness of them at Thy gracious hands.

O stablish Thy word with Thy servant. Psalm. 119. 38. and let him not be
disappointed of his hope. Psalm. 119. 116.

Though he has sinned, yet in Thee he trusts; O suffer him not for ever
utterly to be confounded.

Though he has sinned, yet he seeks Thee: And Thou, Lord, never failest them
that seek Thee. Psalm. 9. 10.

Though he has sinned, yet he comes to Thee: And of them that come to Thee,
Thou castest none out. S. John 6.37.

II.
O Lord,

Let not the guiltiness of a sinner more prevail to condemn, then the gracious
goodness of a most merciful Father to acquit and to pardon.

O let not the unrighteousness of man make the goodness of God of none effect.
Romans 3.3.

O Lord, do not so remember the unkindness of this Thy Child, that thereby Thou
forget the compassion and kindness of a Father.

Do not so think upon our sins, that Thou thereby forget Thine own nature and
property, which is always to have mercy. Chapter Engl. Liturgy.

Do not so remember our sins, that Thou thereby remember not Thine own Name,
which is JESUS, a most loving and kind Savior.

III.
Lord,

If Thy Life in our Life has not sufficiently appeared, yet let not Thy Death
lose the full power and effect thereof in our death also.

Suffer not, O Lord, in both, so great a price to perish.

Lose not, O Lord, that which Thou have redeemed; since Thou came to redeem
that which was lost. S. Matthew. 18.11. S. Luke 19.10.

That, which was so dear to Thee to redeem, suffer not to be lost as a thing of
no value.

A Prayer for Mercy and Divine assistance to uphold the sick person in his
present affliction.
HAve mercy upon him, O Lord; consider the pains which he suffers, Thou who
only do deliver from the gates of death. Psalm. 9.13.

Show Thy mavelous loving kindness, Thou that art the Savior of them that put
their trust in Thee. Psalm. 17.7.

O keep him as the apple of Thine eye: hide him under the shadow of Thy wings.
Psalm. 17. 8.

O let Thy merciful loving kindness be his comfort, according to Thy word unto
Thy servant. Psalm. 119. 76.

He is troubled above measure. Psalm. 119. 107. O be merciful to him according
to Thy goodness.

O consider his adversity, and deliver him: for he is brought very low. Psalm.
142. 7.

His eyes long sore for Thy Word, saying, O when will Thou comfort me? Psalm.
119. 82.

His eyes are wasted away with looking for Thy health, and for the word of Thy
righteousness. Psalm. 119. 123.

O think Thou upon him, O Lord, as concerning Thy word, wherein Thou have caused
him to put his trust. Psalm. 119. 49.

O look Thou upon him, and be merciful unto him, as Thou usest to do to those
that love Thy Name. Psalm. 119. 132.

Cast him not away, in the time of his weakness; forsake him not now, when his
strength fails him. Psalm. 71. 9.

In the multitude of the sorrows that are in his heart, let Thy comforts, O
Lord, refresh his soul. Psalm. 94. 19.

O Lord, when it oppresses, comfort Thou him. P. Isa. 38. 14.

O Lord, let thy strength be made perfect in his weakness. 2 Cor. 12. 9.

Let no tentation oppress him, but such as is incident to Thy children: But as
Thou art faithful, O Lord, so suffer him not to be tempted above that he is
able: But, good Lord, with the tentation give an happy issue, that he may be
able to overcome it. 1 Cor. 10. 13.

O Lord, though he be afflicted on every side, yet let him not be distressed:
though in want of some of Thy comforts, yet not of all: though chastened, yet
not forsaken: though cast down, yet not perish. 2 Cor. 4. 8, 9.

A Prayer for the Grace of God, and the Pardon of the sins of the sick party.
REmember him, O Lord, with the favor Thou bear unto Thy children: O visit
him with Thy salvation:

That he may see the felicity of Thy chosen, and rejoice with the gladness of
Thy Saints, and give thanks with Thine inheritance. Psalm. 106.4, 5.

O remember not his former sins, but have mercy upon him, O Lord, and that
soon; for he is come to great extremity.

Help him, O Lord God of his salvation, for the glory of Thy Name: O deliver
him, and be merciful to his sins for Thy Names sake. Psalm. 79.8, 9.

Call to remembrance, O Lord, Thy tender mercies, and Thy loving kindness which
has been ever of old.

O remember not the sins and offenses of his youth; but according to Thy mercy
think Thou upon him, O Lord, for Thy goodness. Psalm. 25.5, 6.

Cleanse him, O Lord, from his secret sins. Psalm. 19.12.

From whatsoever he has offended

By Thought, Word, or Deed. Ignorance or Error. Frailty or Negligence.

In Excess or in Defect.

By Leaving Good undon, or Doing Evil;

In Publik or Private;

By Day or Night;

Against Thee, His Neighbor, Own Body;

Before, or since, his effectual Calling;

By Himself, or by Others;

Remembered or Forgotten;

From them all cleanse him, O Lord, even from them all;

Lay none of them to his charge;

Cast them behind Thee;

Bury them; Drown them;

Scatter them as the mist, and as the morning cloud;

Make them to vanish away and come to nothing.

And, wherinsoever his conscience most accuses him, therein, O Lord, be Thou
most merciful.

O enter not into judgment with Thy servant. If Thou should, no flesh should
be righteous in Thy fight. Psalm. 143.2.

If Thou, Lord, should be extreme to mark what is don amiss; O Lord, who may
abide it? Psalm. 130.3.

But, good Lord, one deep calls another. Psalm. 42.9. the deep of our misery,
the deep of Thy mercy.

Where fin has abounded, there let grace over-abound. Romans 5.20.

And in and through all fins and offenses, O Lord, let Thy mercy triumph over
Thy Justice. S. James 2.13.

O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, consider O Lord, and do it. P. Dan. 9.19.

Delay not, O Lord, for his spirit waxes faint: Turn not Thy face away from
him, lest he be like unto them that go down into the pit. Psalm. 143.7.

Be favorable, O Lord, be favorable.

For Thy Names sake; Truths sake; Mercies sake; For Thy Many mercies sake;
Great mercies sake; Wonderful mercies sake;

For Thine own self; O Lord,

Our Creator and Redeemer; Lord and our Father; and our God. King and our
Father; and our God.

Commendatio Animae; Or, The Recommending of the soul to God.
LOrd, now let Thou Thy servant depart in peace. S. Luke 2.29.

Into Thy hands, O Lord, we commend his spirit; for Thou have redeemed it, O
Lord, Thou God of truth. Psalm. 1.6.

Bring his soul out of prison, that it may praise Thee. Psalm. 142.9.

O deliver him from this body of death. Romans 7.24

Say unto his soul, I am Thy salvation. Psalm. 35.3.

Say unto him, This day shall Thou be with me in Paradise. S. Luke 23.43.

Let him now feel the salvation of JESUS.

Let him now feel the Anointing of Christ; even the oil of gladness, wherewith
Thou art anointed.

Guide Thou him through the vale of the shadow of death. Psalm. 23.4.

Let him see the goodness of the Lord in the Land of the living. Psalm. 27.15.

O Lord, command his spirit to be received up to Thee in peace.

O Lord, will him to come to Thee. S. Matthew. 14.28.

Lord JESU receive his spirit. Acts 7.59. Andopen to him the gates of
everlasting glory.

Let Thy good Spirit conduct him into the land of righteousness. Psalm. 143.10.
Into Thy holy Hill, Psalm. 15.1. and heavenly Kingdom.

Send Thine Angel to meet him, and to bring him into Abraham's bosom. S. Luke
16.22.

Place him in the habitation of light and peace, of joy and gladness.

Receive him in the arms of Thy mercy; and give him an inheritance with Thy
Saints in light. Colos. 1.12.

There to reign with Thy elect Angels, Thy blessed Saints departed, Thy holy
Prophets, and glorious Apostles, in all joy, glory, felicity, and happiness
for ever and ever.

Amen.
Comfortable Scriptures to be applied to the friends of the deceased party.
Precious in the fight of the Lord is the death of his Saints. Psalm. 116.13.

I heard a voice from heaven, saying, Write, Blessed are the dead, who die in
the Lord: For they rest from their labors, and their works follow them. Revel.
14.13.

A General Confession of sins, collected out of the Holy Prophets and Apostles.
P. Moses.
WE have sinned, O Lord.

Thou have set our faults before Thee, and our secret sins in the fight of Thy
countenance. Psalm. 90.8.

Return, O Lord; how long? and be merciful toward Thy servants. Psalm. 90.13.

H. Job.
I have sinned: what shall I do unto Thee, O Thou Preserver of men? Why have
Thou set me as a mark against Thee, that I am become a burden to myself. Job
7.20.

That I have offended Thee, woe is me. Job 10.14.

Have mercy upon me, O Lord, and restore unto me my righteousness again. Say
concerning me, O Lord, Deliver him, for I have received a reconciliation. Job
33.24, 26.

Yet, if Thou kill me, will I put my trust in Thee. Job 13.15.

P. David.
My misdeeds have prevailed against me.

O be Thou merciful unto my sin. Psalm. 65.3.

I have gone astray like a sheep that is lost.

O seek Thy servant, for I do not forget Thy co^mandments. Psalm. 119.176.

We have sinned with our fathers: we have don amiss, and dealt wickedly. Psalm.
106.6.

For Thy Names sake, O Lord, be merciful unto our sin; for it is great. Psalm.
25.10.

My foot has slipped. Let Thy mercy, O Lord, lift me up. Psalm. 94.18.

P Isai.
Behold Thou art angry; for we have sinned: We have been as an unclean thing;
and all our righteousness as a defiled cloth.

We all fade away as a leaf; and our iniquities, like a wind, have taken us
away.

But now, O Lord, Thou art our Father: we are the clay, and Thou art the
Potter: We all are the work of Thy hands.

Be not angry, O Lord, above measure; neither remember our iniquity for ever.
Lord, we beseech Thee, remember we are all Thy people. Chapter 64. V. 5, 6, 8, 9.

P. Jeremie.
Lord, our iniquities are against us: Our rebellions are many; we have sinned
against Thee.

Yet deal with us according to Thy Name: For Thou Lord art in the midst of us,
and Thy Name is called upon us.

O Lord, forsake us not.

O Lord, the Hope of Israel, the Savior of it in the time of trouble, forsake
us not. Chapter 14. Ver. 7, 8, 9.

P. Daniel.
We have sinned, O Lord, we have transgressed, and don wickedly: Yea we have
rebelled, and have departed from Thy precepts, and from Thy judgments.

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto Thee, but unto us confusion and shame of
face, because of all the offenses we have committed against Thee.

Yet compassion and forgiveness is with Thee, O Lord our God: though we have
rebelled against Thee: O Lord, according to all Thy goodness, I beseech Thee,
let Thine anger and Thy wrath be turned away from me, and cause Thy face to
shine upon Thy servant. O my God, incline Thine ear and hear; open Thine eyes,
and behold my afflictions.

For we do not present our supplications before Thee for our own righteousness,
but for Thy manifold and great mercies.

O Lord hear: O Lord forgive.

Consider and do it, O Lord.

Defer not for Thine own sake, O my God. Chapter 9. V. 5, 7, 9, 16, 17, 18, 19.

P. Jonas.
O Lord, in following vanities, I have forsaken mine own mercy: For which I am
cast out of the fight of Thine eyes.

Yet I remember Thee, O Lord; yet will I look yet again toward Thy Holy Temple.

O Lord hear, and have mercy. Chapter 2. v. 8. 4.

Prodigal child.
Father, I have sinned against heaven and against Thee.

I am no more worthy to be called Thy son.

But forgive me; and make me one of the meanest of Thy hired servants. S. Luke
15.18, 19.

God be merciful to me a sinner. S. Luke 18.13.

JESU, Master, have mercy upon us. S. Luke 17.13.

Have mercy on me, O Lord, Thou son of David. S. Mat. 15.22.

O Lord help me. v. 25

O Lord, even the little whelps eat of the crumbs of Thy table Ver. 27.

S. Paul.
O Lord, I am carnal, and sold under fin:

And in me (that is, in my flesh) dwells no good. Romans 7.14, 18.

The good thing I do not, which I would: The evil that I would not, that do I.
V. 15.

Though I consent to the Law, according to the inner man. V. 22.

Yet I feel another law in my nature, rebelling against the Law of my mind, and
leading me captive to the Law of sin. V. 23.

O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from this body of death? Ver.
24.

But this is a true saying, and by all means worthy to be received,

That JESUS Christ came into the world to save sinners, whereof I am chief. 1 Timothy 1.15.

S. Peter.
We have spent the time past of our life, aster the lusts of the heathen;
walking in wantoness, lust, surfeting, uncleaness, and other excesses. 1 S.
Pet. 4.3.

But Thou have redeemed us, O Lord, by the precious blood of Christ, the
undefiled Lamb. 1 S. Pet. 1.1, 18, 19.

Have mercy upon us in that Name, besides which Thou have given none under
heaven, whereby we must be saved. Acts 4.12.

S. John.
If we say, we have no fin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us. 1
S. John 1.8.

If our heart condemn us not, God is greater then our heart, and knows all
things. 1 S. John 3.20.

But we confess our sins, and confessing them we have an Advocate with the
Father, JESUS Christ the Righteous, and He is the propitiation for our sins. 2
S. John 1.2.

S. James.
In many things we sin all. Chapter 3. V. 2.

But, Lord, let Thy mercy triumph over Thy Justice. Chapter 2. V. 13.

A Confession of sins according to the branches of the Decalogue.
I.
I Have touching Thee, O Lord, been full of roving imaginations and evil
thoughts.

I have not studied to seek and know Thee, as I ought.

Knowing Thee, I have not glorified Thee, nor given thanks to Thee accordingly.

I have doubted of Thy promises, and not trusted to Thy help.

I have made flesh mine arm, and hoped for prosperity from man, rather then
from Thee.

I have not performed the duty of Invocation, with that reverence I ought.

I have not been thankful: specially not for Thy chastisements.

II.
I have not worshipped Thee in spirit and truth.

I have drawn near to Thee with my lips, but my heart has been far from Thee.

I have been more careful of the outward ceremonial part of Thy worship, then
of the inward and spiritual.

III.
I have not with due regard taken Thy Name into my mouth.

I have with rash oaths and eager execrations often abused it.

I have not given occasion to others to sanctify Thy Name: but have caused it
to be evil spoken of, through mine evil dealing.

I have not duly regarded and reverenced those things whereon Thy Name is
imprinted.

IV.
I have not to Thy Sabbath or Sanctuary brought that care which I should.

I have not spared to absent my self from Thy Holy Assemblies, without
sufficient cause.

I have not spent the days assigned to Holy exercises, upon them chiefly; but
have in them too much intended mine own private business.

I have been content in them with the use of the Means alone, without any
practice at all.

V.
I have not so reverently spoken, nor so dutifully carried myself toward some
whom Thou have placed over me, as was meet I should.

I have not so carefully prayed for them, as was requisite.

I have not opposed to them, who unreverently in terms used them.

Chiefly those who have had me in government touching my soul.

VI.
I have not wished or provided for the good of my neighbor as I should: but
rather maligned, been angry, and quareled with them; and sought revenge upon
every light injury.

I have not had that compassion on the poor that I should; nor ministered to
their necessities.

I have not defended them against the wrongs of others, as I might.

I have not rejoiced in the good success of my neighbor; but envied his welfare.

VII.
I have not possessed my vessel in holiness and honor; nor preserved it from
pollution, as the Temple of God should be.

I have suffered my phancie to wander licentiously.

Mine ears and tongue I have not kept, as I should.

I have not eschued the occasions of lust, nor made the covenant with mine eyes
that I should.

I have not brought under my body, nor kept it in subjection with such
abstinence as I should.

I have more studiously, and with more cost intended my flesh then my spirit.

VIII.
I have not reckoned godliness gain: nor been content with my estate, but
wished an higher.

I have not been so exact in paying and dealing with those I have dealt
withal, as in justice I was bound.

I have by undue means interverted, to my use, that which was not mine.

I have not of that, whereof I had more then enough, been willing to part with,
to the relief of the needy.

IX.
I have not been so studious of speaking the truth, as I should.

I have been desirous to seem, and to be reputed more then I was.

I have not had that care of the good name of my brother, I was bound.

I have not so hated flattery, as I should.

I have not so stood for and defended the truth, as was meet I should.

X.
I have been full of wandering desires, wicked affections, unlawful
concupiscences, evil suspicions and surmises, and inordinate lusts, touching my
neighbor, and that which is his.

The Triumph of Mercy, in many Gradual Expressions, and Remembrances,
propounded to us in the Holy Scriptures.
GOD, In his Mercy, is,

(...) 2 Corin. 10.1. Genesis 18.32.

Takes all in the better part.

If it will admit any good sense, so he construes it.

(...) 2 Cor. 10.1.

Meek: not irritable: not easily stirred up or provoked.

(...) Wisd. 11.24.

Sees and sees not: makes, as if He did not see.

(...) Acts 17.30.

Overlooks, looks beyond our sins, looks not at them.

(...) P. Micha 7.18.

Passes by (or over) them.

Dissimulat peccata propter poenitentiam.

(...) Romans 2.4.

When He cannot but see, yet He forbears, is patient.

(...) Romans 2.4. Neh. 9.28, 30.

Forbears long, suffers long, many times, many years.

(...) P. Hos. 6.4. and 11.9.

When He can suffer no longer, yet stands (as over Ephraim) asking, How shall I?
stays yet.

Expectat ut misereatur. P. Isa. 30.18.

When He can forbear no longer, but punish He must, He does it not from the
heart, Lament. 3. V. 33. but against His will.

When He punishes, He does it,

Not suffering His whole displeasure to arise. Psalm. 78.39. containing Himself
and His anger.

Not according to our deserts, Psalm. 103. 10. nothing so much.

Not long: it indures but a moment in comparison. Psalm. 30.5. and 103.9. and P.
Isa. 54.7.8.

He thinks every stripe two. P. Isa. 40.2. is quickly weary.

In His wrath He remembers mercy. P. Hab. 3.2.

Repents Him of the evil. P. Joel 2.13.

Is moved with the sight of our misery. Psalm. 106. 43, 44.

Is soon appeased. easily appeased.

P. Isa. 30. 18. and 55.7. S. Mat. 18.32.

Has mercy. (...) Multitudes of it.

Has compassion. (...)

the bowels of compassion, S. Luke 15.20. a parent, Psalm. 103.13. a mother. P.
Isa. 49.15.

many bowels. (...). S. James 5. 11. secundion Edit. Complut.

Forgives, Pardons. S. Mat. 18.27.

Is reconciled. 2 Cor. 5 19.

Takes into favor again. S. Luke 15.22, 23.

Receives to grace. Romans 3.25.

All have sinned, and are defective in giving glory to God. Romans 3.23.

In His Angels He found folly; and the stars are not clean in His fight. Job
4.18. and 15.15. and 25.5.

But God has not made all men for naught. Psalm. 89.46.

Yet, if God should be extreme to mark what were don amiss, who were able to
abide it? Psalm. 130.3.

If He should enter into Judgment with His servants, no flesh should be found
righteous in His sight. Psalm. 143.2.

None were able to answer one for a thousand. No not Job himself. Job 9.3.

Therefore God has shut up all under fin, that He might have mercy upon all.
Romans 11.32.

He would have all to be saved. 1 Timothy 2.4.

He would have none to perish: but to turn to him by Repentance. 2 S. Pet. 3.9.

He would not the death of a sinner, but that he might turn to Him and live. P.
Ezech. 33.11.

All that 1 know their sin. Psalm. 51.3.

Know it and 2 acknowledge it. Psalm. 32.5. S. Luke 15.18.

Acknowledge it, and 3 be sorry for it. Psalm. 38.18.

Be sorry for it, and 4 be readic to leave it. Pro. 28.13.

Not only to leave it, but 5 to judge themselves for it. 1 Cor. 11.31. P. Ezech.
36.32. 1 Cor. 9.27.

And to 6 punish themselves for it. 2 Cor. 7.11.

By the 1 fruits of Mortification. P. Joel 2. 12, 13. P. Jonab 3.5. accompanied
with

2 Prayer. Psalm. 32.7. Acts 8.22.

3 Alms. P. Isa. 58.7. Pro. 16.6. P. Dan. 4.27.

At the 4 estimation of the Priest. Levit. 6.6.

5 Who may forgive us in the person of Christ. S. John 8.11. and 20.23. 2 Cor.
2.10.

Which His Mercy is not only for common and ordinary sinners; but for the
chief:

such as Manasses. Paul. such as David. Peter. such as Rahab. Marie Magdalen.
such as Jonas. The Thief on the Cross. such as The Corinthian. 1 Cor. 5.1. The
Corinthians. 1 Cor. 6.11.

Et haec eratis.

such as the Jews, His Betrayers, Murderers.

Acts 3.13, 14, 15.

David was a man according to Gods own heart.

Christ is the Son of David: and David for gave Semei. 2 Samuel 19.23. and wept
for his rebellious son Absalom. 2 Samuel 18.33.

The Preface or style of the Law.

The Lord, the Lord, Gentle and Merciful, Patient and of much mercy,

who keeps mercy for thousands and forgiveth. Exodus 34.6, 7.

The Discourse of Elihu. Job 33.23, 24.

If there be a Messenger with Him, an interpreter, one among a thousand, to
show unto man his uprightness.

Then He is gracious unto him, and says, Deliver him from going down to the
pit; I have found a ransom.

Taste and see how gracious the Lord is. Psalm. 34.8. 1 S. Pet. 2.3.

His Mercy is sweet. Psalm. 109.20.

His Mercies are many.

There is a multitude of them. Psalm. 69.17. and 5.7. and 51.1.

There is plenteous Redemption. Psalm. 130.7.

His Mercies are great. Psalm. 86.5. and 119.156. Have a magnitude.

Great in height. Psalm. 103.11. 108.4. 36.5. depth. Psalm. 42.9. length. Psalm.
26.3. and Psalm. 136.

There is no end of His salvation. Psalm. 71.13.

Mercy shall be set up for ever. Psalm. 89.2.

His Mercy is over all His works. Psalm. 145.9.

As is His Majesty, so is His Mercy. Ecclus. 2.18.

His property is to have mercy. P. Isai. 28.21.

He is the Father of mercies, 2 Cor. 1.3.

He is Mercy itself Psalm. 59.17.

He was so merciful that He forgave their misdeeds, and destroyed them not.

Yea many a time turned He His wrath away; and would not suffer His whole
displeasure to arise.

For He considered they were but dust. Psalm. 78.38, 39, 40.

The Lord waits that He may have mercy on you. P. Isa. 30.18.

In the Father of the lost child, His Image, S. Luke 15.22.

Without shedding of blood there is no remission of sins. Heb. 9.22.

God has shut up all under sin, that He might have mercy upon all. Romans 11.32.

Where sin abounds, there Grace does overabound.

Mercy triumphs over Justice. S. James 2.13.

In this GOD set forth His love to us ward, that, when we were His enemies,
Christ died for us. Romans 5.8.

This is a true saying, and of all men worthy to be received, that JESUS
Christ came into the world to save sinners. 1 Timothy 1.15.

Christ died once for our sins, the just for the unjust, that He might offer us
unto God. 1 S. Pet. 3.18.

We have an Advocate with the Father, JESUS Christ the righteous;

And He is the Propitiation for our sins; and not for our only, but for the
sins of the whole world. 1 S. John 2.1, 2.

I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. S. Mat. 9.13.

Come unto me, you that travail, and be heavy laden, and I will refresh you.
S. Mat. 11.28.

Of them that come to me, I will cast none out. S. John 6.37.

Thou never failest them that seek Thee. Psalm. 9.10.

Spiritual Comforts and Confidence issuing from the contemplation of Gods
Goodness.
WHy art thou so heavy, O my soul? and why art thou so disquieted within me?

O put thy trust in God; for I shall yet give Him thanks: For He is the light of
my countenance, and my God. Psalm. 42.6, 7, 14, 15. and 43.5, 6.

Return then to Thy rest, O my soul; for the Lord has been gracious to thee.
Psalm. 116.7.

If the Lord had not helped me, it had not failed, but my soul had been put to
silence.

In the midst of the troubles that were in my heart, Thy comforts have
refreshed my soul. Psalm. 94.17, 19.

Nevertheless, though I be sometimes afraid, yet, put I my trust in the Lord.
Psalm. 56.3.

Nevertheless, my soul wait thou still upon God; for of Him comes my salvation.

He verily is my hope, and my strength; He is my defense, so that I shall not
greatly fall. Psalm. 62.5, 6.

Let us go with boldness to the Throne of Grace, that we may find mercy in the
time of need. Heb. 4.16.

Devout Ejaculations grounded on the consideration of our Humane Frailty, and
the Divine Providence and Mercy.
I.
LORD of life and death, of sickness and health, and all things thereto
belonging;

By whose appointment we are born; and again, by whose appointment we die:

Our time is in Thy hand, Psalm. 31. 17. and unto Thee belong the issues of
death. Psalm. 68. 20.

Thou that hate nothing that Thou have made, nor do ever utterly forsake
the work of Thine own hands:

Thou that art a defense for the oppressed: a Refuge in the needful time of
trouble:

Thou that never failest them that seek Thee, Psalm. 9.9, 10.

And to whom none ever prays without hope to be heard:

Thou that have promised,

The poor shall not always be forgotten; that the patient abiding of the meek
shall not perish for ever. Psalm. 9.18.

For the comfortless troubles sake of the needy: and for the deep sighing of
the poor, Psalm. 12.5.

Arise O Lord:

And men shall know that it is Thy hand, and that it is Thou, Lord, that have
done it. Psalm. 109.25.

II.
O Lord whose mercy reaches to the heavens, and whose faithfulness to the
clouds. Psalm. 36.5. and 57.11.

Of whose mercies there is neither number nor end;

The greatness of whose goodness is not shut up under any time;

Who call into Thy Vineyard even at the eleventh hour. S. Matthew. 20.6, 7.

Who rulest not with rigor, but with meekness do govern the things Thou have
made;

Thou that killest and revivest; that bring to the gates of death, and
bring back again;

Thou that hate nothing that Thou have made;

That have shut up all under sin, that Thou might have mercy upon all. Romans
11.32.

Lord,

The Savior and the saving health of all Thy faithful;

The Fountain of Grace and Goodness;

The Father of mercies, and God of consolation. 2 Cor. 1.3

Thou That up hold all such as are falling, and liftest up those that be
down. Psalm. 14.5.14.

Thou That healest the broken in heart; and give medicine to heal their
sickness. Psalm 147.3.

The comfort of them that be in heaviness,

The strength of then that be in weakness,

The health of them that be in sickness,

Hear, O LORD, and have mercy;

Look down from Heaven;

Behold and visit;

Visit with Thy salvation.

FINIS.
PRAYERS For the Morning, Evening, H. Communion.

TRANSLATED

Out of the Greek Manual, of the Private Devotions of the R. Reverend Father in
God,

Lancelot Andrews, late L. Bishop of Winchester.

Never before printed.

LONDON,

Printed for Humphrey Moseley at the Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1648.

Morning Prayer.
Glory be to Thee, O Lord; Glory be to Thee; Glory be to Thee, who have
given me sleep, for the refreshing of my weakness, and for the eas of my labors
of this flesh subject to weariness.

S. Chrysostom. Liturgy.
That this day and every day may come on perfect, holy, peaceable, healthful,
and without sin,

Grant Lord, we beseech Thee.

S. Chrysostom. Liturgy.
That an Angel of peace, a faithful guide, a Guardian of our souls and bodies,
may pitch a tent about us, and ever suggest what is needful for my salvation,

Grant Lord, we beseech Thee.

S. Chrysostom. Liturgy.
The pardon and remission of all sins, and of all transgressions,

Grant Lord, we beseech Thee.

S. Chrysostom. Liturgy.
What things are good and profitable to our souls, together with peace in this
world,

Grant Lord, we beseech Thee.

S. Chrysostom. Liturgy.
That we accomplish the rest of our life, in Repentance and godly Fear, in
Health and Peace,

Grant Lord, we beseech Thee.

Philip.4. 8.
What things are true, what are honest, what are just, what are pure, what are
lovelie, what are of good report, wherein there is virtue, wherein there is
praise, that we may reckon of these things to do them,

Grant Lord, we beseech Thee.

S. Chrysostom. Liturgy.
A Christian end of our life, without sin, without shame, and if Thou think
good, without pain, and a good Apology at the dreadful and terrible Tribunal
of our Lord JESUS Christ,

Grant Lord, we beseech Thee.

O Being above all Being, O uncreated Nature; Thou Framer of the whole world,

I set Thee, Lord, before me; Psalm. 16.9.

I lift up my soul unto Thee; Psalm. 25. 1.

I fall down on my knees and worship Thee; Psalm. 95.6.

I humble myself under Thy mighty hand; 1 S. Pet. 5.6.

I stretch forth my hands unto Thee,

My soul [is] for Thee as ground without water. Psalm. 143.6.

I smite upon my breast, and say with the Publican,

God be merciful to me a sinner; S. Luke 18. 13.

To me altogether a sinner;

To me the chief of sinners; 1 Timothy 1.15.

To me a greater sinner then the Publican, be merciful, as to the Publican.

O Father of Mercies, I beseech Thee, by Thy Fatherly bowels of compassion,

Despise me not;

An unclean worm, Psalm. 22.6.

A dead dog, 2 P. Sam. 9.8.

A stinking carcass. Despise me not,

The Work of Thy hands; Psalm. 138.8.

Thine own Image; Genesis 1.27.

Despise me not,

Though I bear the brands of mine iniquity.

Lord, if Thou will Thou can make me clean: Lord, speak the word only, and I
shall be cleansed. S. Mat. 8.2, 8.

And Thou, O Savior Christ, O Christ my Savior, Savior of sinners, of whom I am
chief, 1 Timothy 1.15.

Despise me not.

Despise me not O Lord,

The price of Thine own blood;

Upon whom Thy Name is called;

O Lord despise me not.

But look upon me with those Thine eyes, with which Thou lookedst,

upon Marie Magdalen at the Feast, Peter in the High Priests Hall, The Thief on
the Cross.

That with

The Thief, I may humbly call upon Thee, saying, Lord, remember me in Thy
Kingdom; S. Luke 23.42.

Peter, I may weep biterly; S. Matthew. 26.75

And O that mine eyes were a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and
night! P. Jer. 9.1.

Marie Magdalen, I may hear Thee, saying, Thy sins are forgiven Thee. And that
with her I may love much, because my many and manifold sins are forgiven me. S.
Luke 7.47, 48.

And Thou all-holie, and gracious, and quickening Spirit,

Despise me not: Despise me not

Thine own Inspiration, Holy thing;

But turn Thee again,

O Lord, at the last, and be entreated to look upon thy servant. Psalm. 90.13.

BLessed art Thou, O Lord our God, the God of our Fathers,

Who turnest the shadow of death into the Morning; P. Amos 5.8.

And renewest the face of the earth; Psalm. 104. 30.

Who have dispelled the darkness, by the presence of the light;

Who separatest the Night, and bring in the Day;

Who have light'ned mine eyes, that I sleep not in death; Psalm. 13. 3.

Who have delivered me from the terrors of the Night; and from the Pestilence
that walks in darkness; Psalm. 91.5, 6.

Who have driven sleep from mine eyes, and slumber from mine eielids. Psalm.
132.4.

Who make joyful outgoings of the Morning and Evening. Psalm. 65.8.

For I laid me down, and slept, and rose up again: Psalm. 3.5.

And Thou, Lord, made me to dwell in fafetie, Psalm. 4.9.

For I awaked and beheld, and my sleep was sweet unto me. P. Jer. 31.26.

O Lord, blot out as a Night-mist mine iniquities; P. Isa. 44.22.

Scatter my sins as a Morning cloud.

Grant that I may become a child of the light and of the Day. I These. 5.5.

That I may walk soberly, chastely and honestly, as in the Day. Romans 13.13.

Vouchsafe to keep me this day without sin. Te Deum.

Uphold me, when I am falling, and lift me up when I am down. Psalm. 145.14.

That I may never harden my heart, as in the provocation, Psalm. 95.8. with the
tentation, or deceiptfulness of any sin. Heb. 3.13.

Moreover, deliver me this day,

From The snare of the Hunter, The noisome pestilence, The arrow that flies by
day, Mischance, The Noonday destruction. Psalm. 91.3, 5, 6.

Preserve this day from any evil of mine; and me from the evils of the day.

Let not my days consume in vanity, nor my years in trouble. Psalm. 78.33.

Let one day certify another. Psalm. 19.2.

Let this day add some knowledge, or practice to yesterday.

Psalm. 143.
O Let me hear Thy loving kindness, betimes in the Morning: for in Thee is my
trust: show Thou me the way that I should walk in, for I lift up my soul unto
Thee. Ver. 8.

Deliver me, O Lord, from mine enemies; for I flee unto Thee to hide me. Ver. 9.

Teach me to do the thing that pleases Thee, for Thou art my God: Let Thy
loving Spirit lead me forth in the way of righteousness. Ver. 10.

Quicken me, O Lord, for Thy Names sake, and for Thy righteousness sake bring
my soul out of trouble. Ver. 11.

REmove from my mind thoughts that are without understanding. Wisd. 1.5.

Inspire good thoughts into me, even such as shall be well pleasing unto Thee.

Turn away mine eyes, lest they behold vanity. Psalm. 119.37.

Let mine eyes look after that which is right; and mine eielids after just
things. Prove. 4.25.

Hedge in mine ears with thorns, that they listen not to foolish discourses.

In the Morning give me an ear to hear with; and open mine ears to the doctrine
of Thy Oracles. P. Isa. 50.4, 5.

Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth, and a door, with a guard, about my lips.
Psalm. 141.3.

Let my speech be seasoned with salt, Col. 4.6. that it may minister grace unto
the hearers. Ephesians. 4.29.

Let me do nothing that shall make my heart ache, or be a scandal to me. 1 Samuel
25.31.

But let my doings be such, for which Thou may remember me for good: And
spare me according to the greatness of Thy mercy. Nehem. 13.22, 31.

INto Thy hands I commend my spirit, soul and body; for Thou have Created,
Redeemed, Regenerated them, O Lord, Thou God of truth. Psalm. 31.6.

And with myself, I commend unto Thee all mine, all that belong unto me:

Thou, O Lord, have graciously given them unto Thy servant. Genes. 33.5.

Preserve us, O Lord, from all evil: O Lord, I beseech Thee, keep our souls.
Psalm. 121.7.

Keep us from falling, and present us faultless, before the presence of Thy
glory, S. Jude, Ver. 24. at that day. 2 Timothy 1.18.

O Lord, preserve my going out, and my coming in, from this time forth for
evermore. Psalm. 121.8.

Prosper, I beseech Thee, Thy servant this day; and grant him mercy in the
sight of all he shall meet with. Neh 1.11.

Haste Thee, O God, to deliver me;

Make haste to help me, O Lord. Psalm. 70.1.

O Turn Thee unto me, and have mercy upon me; give Thy strength unto Thy
servant, and help the son of Thine handmaid.

Show some good token upon me for good; that I be not put to shame in the sight
of them, that hate me; because Thou, Lord, have helped me, and comforted me.
Psalm. 86.16, 17.

Evening Prayer.
HAving passed over this day, Lord, I give thanks unto Thee.

The Evening draws nigh, make it comfortable.

An Evening there is, as of the Day so, of this Life.

The Evening of this Life is Old Age.

Old Age has seized upon me; make that comfortable:

Cast me not away in the time of age;

Forsake me not, when my strength fails me. Psalm. 71.9.

Be Thou with me until Old Age, and even to hoar hairs do Thou carry me. P.
Isa. 46.4.

Do Thou do it, do Thou forgive,

Do Thou receive and save me, O Lord.

Tarry Thou with me, O Lord, for it is toward Evening with me, and the Day is
far spent, S. Luke 24.29. of this my toilsome life.

Let Thy strength be made perfect in my weakness. 2 Corinthians 12.9.

THe Day is vanished, and gone; so does my Life vanish; my Life no Life.

The Night is coming on, and so does Death; Death without Death.

The end, as of the Day so, of our Life is at hand:

We therefore, remembering this, beseech Thee, O Lord, that the end of our Life
being Christian, and acceptable to Thee, without Sin, without Shame, and, if it
please Thee, without Pain, Thou would guide us in peace, O Lord our Lord;
gathering us together under the feet of Thine Elect, when Thou will, and as
Thou will, only without Shame and Sin.

GRant that we may remember the days of darkness, that they are many. Eccles.
11.8. that we be not cast out into outer darkness. S. Matthew. 22.13. and 25.30.
and that we may remember to prevent the Night, by doing some good.

Judgment is at hand,

Grant us, O Lord, that we may make a good and acceptable account at the
dreadful and terrible Tribunal of JESUS Christ.

IN the Night I lift up my hands toward Thy sanctuary, and bless the Lord
Psalm. 124.2, 3.

The Lord has granted His loving kindness on the Day time, and in the Night
season will I sing of Him, and make my prayer unto the God of my life. Psalm.
42.10.

As long as I live will I magnify Thee on this manner, and lift up my hands in
Thy Name. Psalm. 63.5.

Let my prayer be set forth in Thy sight as the Incense, and let the lifting up
of my hands be an Evening sacrifice. Psalm. 141.2.

BLessed art Thou, O Lord our God, the God of our Fathers,

Who did create the interchanges of the Day and Night;

Who give us occasions of songs in the Night. Job 35.10.

Who have delivered us from the evil of this Day;

Who have not cut off, like a Weaver, my Life, nor in this Day before Night
did make an end of me. P. Isa. 38.12.

LOrd, as we add days to our days, so we add sins to our sins. Ecclus. 5.5.

A just man falls seven times a day; Prove-24.16. but I, a wretched sinner,
seventie times seven times. S. Mat. 18.22. wonderfully and horribly, O Lord. P.
Jerem. 5.30.

But I turn from my wicked ways, and bewailing them, P. Isa. 30.15. I return to
my heart; P. Isa. 46.8. and turn to Thee with all my heart, Deuteronomy. 30.2. O Thou
that art the God of them that repent, O Savior of sinners.

And Evening after Evening 1 return, with the utmost strength of my soul; and,
out of the deep, my soul cries unto Thee, Psalm. 130.1.

Lord, I have sinned against Thee, I have finned grievously against Thee:

Forgive, forgive; alas, alas! woe worth my miserable condition:

I repent, woe is me, I repent; spare me, O Lord;

I repent, woe is me, I repent; Help my want of Repentance.

Have pity, spare me, O Lord;

Have pity, Be merciful unto me:

I said, Lord be merciful unto me, heal my soul, for I have sinned against
Thee. Psalm. 41.4.

Have mercy upon me, O Lord, after Thy great goodness; according to the
multitude of Thy mercies do away mine offenses. Psalm. 51.1.

Forgive my guilt,

Heal my sores,

Take out the stains,

Deliver me from shame,

Rescue me from the tyranny of sin,

And make me not an example.

DEliver me, O Lord from my necessities; Psalm. 25.16.

Cleanse me from my secret faults; Psalm. 19.12.

Keep Thy servant also from presumptuous sins. Psalm. 19.13.

Impute not to me the wanderings of my mind; Wisd. 4.12. nor my idle words; S.
Mat. 12.36.

Stop the black and filthy inundation of unclean and wicked thoughts.

O Lord, my destruction is from myself. P. Hos. 13.9.

Whatsoever I have don amiss, graciously pardon;

Deal not with us after our sins;

Neither reward us after our iniquities. Chapter Eng. Letanie.

Mercifully look upon our infirmities, and for the glory of Thy most Holy
Name turn from us all those evils and afflictions, which to our sins, and to us
for them, are most justly and worthily due.

ANd, O Lord, give rest to me that am weary; renew my strength to me that am
tired with labor;

Lighten mine eyes that I sleep not in death. Psalm. 13.3.

Deliver me from the terrors of the Night, and from the Pestilence that walks
in darkness. Psa. 91.5, 6.

Grant me wholesome sleep, and to pass this Night without fear.

Thou Keeper of Israel, who do neither slumber nor sleep, Psalm. 121.4.

Preserve me this Night from all evil, O Lord keep my soul. Ver. 7.

Visiting me with the salvation of Thy children:

Open my understanding in the Visions of the Night. H. Job 33.15, 16.

But, if not this, for I am not worthy,

I am not worthy,

Yet, O Lord, Thou Lover of men, let my sleep be a rest as from labors, so from
sin;

Even so, O Lord.

And sleeping let me not dream of any thing,

that may Offend Thee, defile myself.

Let not my loins be filled with illusions. Psalm. 38.7. but rather let my reins
chasten me. Ps. 16.8.

Preserve me, without grievous fear, from the dismal sleep of sin; and lay
asleep in me all earthly and wicked imaginations.

Give me sweet sleep, free from all carnal and diabolical phancies.

Lord, restrein the malice of my never sleeping invisible enemies; and the
inclinations of my sinful flesh, O Thou who made me.

Let the wings of Thy mercy shadow me. Psalm. 17.8. and 61.4.

Raise me up in due time, in the hour of Prayer, and grant that I may be early
up, Psalm. 63.1. at my Praises and Worship of Thee.

BLess O Lord, Thy Creatures; Mankind.

All in Affliction or Prosperity; Error or Truth; Sin or Grace.

The Universal Church:

The Eastern, Western, This among Us.

Prelates, Clergy, Laity. The Governments of the Earth; Christian; About us;
Our:

The King, Queen, Prince. Counselors, Judges, Magistrates, Officers, People.

Husbandmen, Merchants, Artificers,

even to the Laborers, Poor.

All, whom Kindred, Good turns, Ministering in carnal things,

Charge formerly, now,

Moral friendship, Charity, Neighborhood, My Promise, Their Desire,

Want of their own leisure, Compassion on them being in extremity, Worthy
Acts, Good Works, Scandal given to, Want of any else to pray for them, commends
to my prayers.

LOrd, into thy hands I commend myself;

My Spirit, Soul, Body: Thou have created them, redeemed them,

O Lord Thou God of truth.

And together with myself all mine, and all that belongs unto me:

Thou, O Lord, have graciously given them unto Thy servant. Genesis 33. 5.

Preserve my lying down, and my rising up, Psalm. 139. 1. from this time forth
for evermore. Psalm. 121. 8.

Grant that I may remember Thee upon my bed; Psalm. 63. 7. and search out my
spirit. Psalm. 77. 6. that I may rise again, and still be with Thee. Psalm. 139.
18.

I will lay me down in peace, and take my rest; for it is Thou, Lord, only,
that make me dwell in safety. Psalm. 4. 9.

Prayers for the Holy Communion.
Before the Receiving of the Blessed Sacrament.
O Lord, I am not fit, nor worthy that Thou should come under the filthy
roof of the house of my soul. S. Matthew. 8.8. because it is wholly desolate and
ruinous; neither have Thou, with me, a fit place where to lay Thy head. S. Mat.
8.20.

But as Thou did vouchsafe to be laid in a Stable and Manger of unreasonable
Beasts; S. Luke 2.7.

As Thou did not disdeign to be entertained, even in the house of Simon the
Leper; S. Matthew. 26.6.

As Thou did not reject the Harlot, a sinner like unto me, coming unto Thee,
and touching Thee;

As Thou did not abhor her foul and profane mouth; S. Luke 7. 37, 38.

Nor yet the Thief, on the Cross, confessing Thee; S. Luke 23.43.

Even so vouchsafe to admit me also, an overworn, miserable, and out of
measure sinful creature, to the receiving and communicating of the most pure,
most auspitious, quickening and saving Mysteries of Thy most Holy Body, and
Precious Blood. S. Chrysostom. Liturgy.

ATtend, O Lord, our God, from Thy holy habitation, and from the glorious
Throne of Thy Kingdom, and come and sanctify us.

O Thou who sit on high with the Father, and art here invisibly present
with us, come and sanctify these gifts here presented, and those also by and
for whom, and the end whereto they are brought hither. S. Chrysostom. and S.
Basil's Liturgy.

And grant us to partake of them

In Faith, that need not be ashamed, Love, without dissimulation, Romans 12.9.
For the Keeping of the Commandments, Stirring up of all spiritual fruits,
Healing of Soul and Body. For a Symbol of our Communion, Act. 2.42. Memorial
of Thy Dispensation, S. Luke 22.19. For the Showing forth of Thy Death, 1 Corinthians. 11.26. Communion of Thy Body and Blood, 1 Cor. 10.16. Participation
of Thy Spirit, 1 Corinthians. 12.13. Remission of our sins, S. Mat. 26.28.

For an Amulet against all evil, 1 Cor. 5.7.

For the Quieting of our Conscience, S. Mat. 11.28.

For the Blotting out of our Debts, Col. 2.14. Acts 3.19. Purging of our Spots,
Heb. 9.14. Healing of the Infirmities of our Souls, 1 S. Pet. 2. 24. Renewing
of our Covenant, Psalm. 50.5. Viands of our Spiritual Life, S. Job. 6.27.
Increas of strengthening Grace, Heb. 13. 9. soul-ravishing Comfort, Psalm. 104.15
Enforcing of our Repentance, I Corin. 11.29. Inlight'ning of our Understanding,
S. Luke 24.31. Exercise of our Humility, S. John 13.11. For A Seal of our
Faith, 2 Cor. 1.22. The Fullness of Wisdom, S. John 6.35. A Sufficient Account
of our Oblations, 1 Cor. 16.1.

For the Armor of Patience, 1 S. Pet. 4.1.

For the stirring up of our Thankfulness, Psalm. 116.11.

For Confidence in Prayer, Psalm. 116.12. Mutual Inhabitation, S. John 6.56. A
Pledge of our Resurrection, S. Joh. 6.54. An acceptable Apology at the Bar of
Judgment, 1 Cor. 11.29. A Testament of our Inheritance, S. Luke 22.20. A Type
of Perfection, S. Joh. 17.23.

That we, with all Thy Saints, who, from the beginning, have pleased Thee, may
be partakers of Thy most pure and eternal good things, which Thou have
prepared, O Lord, for them that love Thee, in whom Thou art glorified for ever.

O Lamb of God, who take away the sin of the world, S. John 1.29. Take away
mine also, who am a notorious sinner.

We therefore, O Lord, in the presence of Thy Holy Mysteries,

Being mindful of The saving Passions of Thy Christ,

His life-giving Cross, precious Death, three days Burial, Resurrection from
the dead, Ascension into Heaven, Session at the Right hand of Thee the Father,
glorious and dreadful Return,

humbly beseech Thee, that we, receiving a part of Thy Holy Mysteries with a
pure testimony of our Conscience, may be united to the Holy Body and Blood
of Thy Christ.

"Let me so receive these Mysteries, that I may be worthy to be ingraffed into
Thy Body, which is the Church; That I may become one of Thy Members, and Thou
my Head; That I may remain with Thee, and Thou with me; That now, not I in
myself, but Thou in me, and I in Thee, May for ever continue in an indissoluble
bond of Love. Wash out the stains of my old and fresh sins; Never let any
sinful spot abide, where so pure Sacraments have ent'red. Through this Sacred
Mystery which I here call to mind, Bury me, already dead to this world, with
Thee in Thy Grave." [These Prayers [thus " marked] are not in the Greek, but in
the Latin MS.]


And receiving this Sacrament, not unworthily, let us procure Christ's dwelling
in our hearts, Epbes. 3. 17. and be made a Temple of Thy Holy Spirit, 1 Cor.
6. 19. Even so, O Lord.

And make not any one of us guilty of these Thy dreadful and beavenlie
Mysteries; nor weak in Soul or Body, by our unworthie partaking of the same 1
Corin. 11.27, 29, 30.

But grant that, to our utmost and last gasp, we may worthily receive the hope
of these Thy Mysteries,

To our Sanctification, Illumination, Strengthening;

To the eas of the burden of our many sins;

As a Preservative against all the assaults of the Devil;

As a Deleterie and Impediment of our evil Customs;

For the Mortification of our lusts; Keeping of Thy Commandments; Increas of
Thy Divine Grace, and Possession of Thy Kingdom.

After the Receiving of the Blessed Sacrament.
"IT is good for me to hold me fast by God, and to put my trust in the God of
my salvation." [In the Latin, not in the Greek MS.]


We have now, O Christ our God, finished and perfected, according to our
ability, the Mystery of Thy Dispensation:

For we have had the Memorial of Thy Death; seen the Type of Thy Resurrection;
been filled with Thy endless Life; enjoied Thy never failing Dainties;

Whereof vouchsafe to make us all partakers in the world to come.

THe good Lord pardon every one, that prepares his heart, to seek the Lord
God of his Fathers, though he be not cleansed according to the purification of
the Sanctuary. 2 Chronicles. 30. 18, 19.

FINIS.

