THE ENGLISH NVNNE. BEING A Treatise, wherein (by way of Dialogue) the Author
endeavors to draw young and unmarried Catholic Gentlewomen to embrace a
Votary, and Religious Life.

Written by N. N.

Heereunto is annexed a short Discourse (by way of Conclusion) to the Abbesses,
and Religious women of all the English Monasteries in the Low Countries, and
France.

Enter you by the narrow Gate (meaning of Austerity) that leads unto Life:
because large is the Way that leads to Perdition.

Matthew. 7. Present your self a chaste Virgin unto Christ.

2. Cor. 11. Permissu Superiorum. M. DC. XLII.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY. To the young, and unmarried Catholic Gentlewomen of
England.
WORTHY, and virtuous young Gentlewomen: My Pen for your spiritual good, is
willing in these ensuing leaves, to spread it self. You are all Catholics in
Faith and profession, and therefore the more apt to receive (if so Gods Grace
be not wanting) the impression of the Advice and Counsel, which in this
Treatise is given.

My main project at this present is, since you all (to whom I write) as yet
remain in your Chaste and Virginal state, and free from Marriage, to persuade
you (what in me lies) to abandone this Wicked World, and to embrace a Votary
and Religious life. A hard labor (no doubt) in your judgments, but facile and
easy to such of you, who have a feeling, and true apprehension of the joys of
Heaven, and torments of Hell.

I do not speak this, as if one in a married state could not arryue to Heaven,
and avoid Hell. Noe, God forbid; For I acknowledge with the Apostle, Hebr. 13.
Marriage to be honorable, but withal I hold Virginity to be more honorable.
I here only propound the most secure way to come to Heaven, and escape Hell.
And here I demand, if any of You were married, and after the death of your
husbands, were to enjoy a great, and rich Ioynture, of a thousand, or two
thousand pounds yearly; would you not be desirous, that besides the common
Course of making Ioyntures (which perhaps might be subject to some danger) to
take (by your learned Counsel) the best means for the ratifying and better
securing of your Right to your said Ioynture? I know, you would be most
solicitous herein.

You all pretend Title to the kingdom of Heaven; a kingdom infinitely
surpassing in worth, all worldly Iointures that the whole Earth can affoard;
and will you then content your selves to seek by the common, and ordinary
Course of a Secular life, to obtain this kingdom (in which state, as I grant,
many living have gained it, so inco^parably far many more have lost it;) but
that rather you will enter into that Vocation (how severe, how strict, how
cross soever to flesh and blood it shall seem) which may give you greater
assurance, and more strengthen your Interest, and Title to that most Blessed
Kingdom?

This Treatise I have composed in form of a feigned Dialogue, as hoping that
thereby you will be sooner induced to the reading and perusing it at full; then
if it were written in one long continued speech, without any vicissitude, or
change of Persons.

In the Persons here feigned by supposall, I have thought good to incorporate
all the Reasons (as delivered by them) chiefly moving to a Religious and
retired Life; as also such objections, as commonly are made against that most
happy Course; as you may be more fully instructed by perusing the Argument, or
subject hereof next following.

And seeing the chiefest bar, and ^et in women to a Monastical life, is
desire of Marriage, and hope of children; I will (besides what is treated thereof
hereafter) insist here a little, discovering the insufficiency of this Motive;
showing that the accustomed miseries of a married life, and of having issue,
ought much rather to sway with women, for their forbeara^ce of Marriage.

And first, whereas Life is the dearest thing to man or woman; yet we find,
that besides the certain great pains of Childbirth, Life it self in young
married women, is for the most part, every one, or two years greatly
endangered to be lost: witness hereof is the daily experience of women dying
in Childbed.

What true desire then can a woman have to undertake that course of life,
wherein lies so great a peril of loosing that (I mean he^ Life,) which is
most dear unto her; and that her body thereby shall, before its prefixed time
by God, become meat for worms

If any one of you had a Jewels set with rich and Orient pearl, valewed at
some hundreds of pounds, how careful would you be in keeping of it? and how
would your care be doubled from endangering the loss of it, at any time? And
yet only for the enjoying of a little momentary pleasure (attended after with
multitude of miseries) you can be content so often to hazard the loss of your
own life, the most precious Jewel, that God and Nature has bestowed upon you
in this world. O fondnes of Judgment!

But to proceed. Admit, that a woman in bringing forth her Children, should be
freed from all danger of death; yet to how many other insupportable afflictions
does she become thrall, and lie open? For we observe (and this not seldom)
that the Husband becomes unkind, withdrawing his love and affection, from
whence it is due, and placing it on others where it is not due. Again, the
Husband (I mean, no few number of them) does oftentimes dissipate and waste
his Estate and Patrimony in sensuality and riot, to the utter overthrow or
beggary (in the end) of Himself, his Wife, and Children.

But suppose, the Husband be exempt from these disorders; yet ^f the wife have
many Children, falls it not often out, that the children through the
negligence of their Father, are brought up in all liberty and dissolution, to
the inconsolable grief of the poor Gentlewoman their Mother, and to the
eternal Damnation of the Childrens souls? And what comfort then can that
woman have, to be an instrument of bringing forth that Child, who shall become
for ever, an Heir of Hell-fyre?

O how many wives are there in England, who find by over late, and too dearly
bought experience, all this to be true, which I here affirm, of the frequent
dangers, griefs, and afflictions of mind commonly accompanying Marriage? From
all which languors of spirit, that woman delivers herself, who forbearing
marriage does determine to lead a Religious life.

In proof of the Truth her said, I appeal even to the certain knowledge of
diverse of your selves, who, if you will but cast your ^es upon some of your
own ^yndred, and friends, (at least of our acquaintance, that live in ^ate of
marriage) must needs confess that all, or diverse of the a^^re mentioned
miseries and calamities, do daily oppress many ^f them. You are yet free;
beware ^en of such dangers. Nor will any further enlarge my self in ^his place
upon this Subject, but will refer you to the serious peru^ll of the Book it
self.

If this Discourse were a second Sir Philip Sidneys Arcadia, reating of
amourous Conceyts; with what a greedines would many of you read it? Condemn
then your own want of spiritual fervor in such of you, as but only vouchsafe
to cast a curious eye here and there upon these leaves; and yet it may be in
part said, that this Book in general discourses of the same subject, of which
the Areadia does; to wit of Love. But the Arcadia, of sensual and Vayn^ Love,
attended on with sin, and Repentance; This, of chaste, and holy Love, whereby
a Soul by solemn vow espouseth herself to Christ her Bridegroom: so
verifying those words of the A Present 1. Cor. 11.
you a chaste Virgin Vre^^ Christ.

I only wish, that what Cosmophila (a feigned young Gentlewoman in this
Dialogue) is supposed to do, you really, and truly would act her Sceene, in
your proceedings: So might you by a mortifyed life, not only avoid all
spiritual dangers both of foul and body; but infallibly purchafe to your
selves, an eternal Crown of Glory.

If any of you reap such profit by this my Labor, as by the ^eading hereof,
to shake hands for ever with the vanities of the world, and happily to Cloister
your selfs in some devout Monastery; how fully should I think any pains to
be recompensed herein? And with this I cease, inreating your remembrance of he
(only for my intention at east, and endeavor of aduaning your spiritual good)
at the best times of your devotions.

Yours in all Christian Charity. N. N.

The Explication of certain Greek Nam^^^ used in this Treatise.
Caelia, A woman exercising a Heauen^^^ life. Cosmophila, A woman, that loves
(...) World. Christophila, A woman deuoting her l^^^ to Christ. Monadelphus,
One only Brother. Orthodoxus, A man professing the (...) Faith. Gynecia,
Womanhood. Belgiopolis, A City in Belgium, or (...) Low-Countreyes.
The Argument, or Subject of the ensuing Dialogue.
ORthodoxus, an imaginary Catholic Knight in England, and of a great State,
has three Children by his Lady Gynecia; two Daughters, and one Son: The
elder daughter is called Caelia; the younger Cosmophila; His son Monadelphus.
Calia is permitted with consent of her parents, to become Religious, and
accordingly is sent over unto an English Monastery of Nuns, in Belgiopolis.

Whiles she is in her Nouiship; or year of Probation, her Brother Monadelphus
dies. Hereupon Orthodoxus writes to Caelia (since as yet she was not
professed) to return back, because (for want of Heyres-Male) he was
determined to dispose of both his daughters in Marriage, and to divide (after
his death) his State between them.

He receaueth no answer from Calia. In the end, Orthodoxus is forced to send
his younger daughter Cosmophila to Caelia, to persuade her return. Cosmophila,
as being fully instructed by her Father, (who furnished her with diverse
Objections, commonly made against a Religious life) was most earnest with her
Sister to satisfy their parents desire; and this in the presence of the
Confessarius, and Abbess of that Monastery.

Caelia remains constant and immovable in her pious Resolution. The
Confessarius learnedly displayeth the weakness and insufficiency of all those
Reasons and Arguments which Cosmophila brought. That done, he begins to
discourse in a most full manner of the Dignity, Worth, Excellency, Privileges,
and Benefits of a Monastical Life.

His Speeches, by little and little, did so strongly work with Cosmophila, as
that she fully repenting her of former persuasions to her Sister, wholly
alters her judgment; is resolved to lead the same Religious life with Caelia;
takes the Habit of the Monastery; begins her Nouiship, and changes her
former name into Christophila.

The two daughters write a joint letter to their parents, acquainting them with
what has fallen out. They withal entreat the Confessarius to write (with
theirs) his own letter to Orthodoxus and his Lady. He agrees to their request.

Their parents receiving these Letters, were at the first much agrieued. But
within some small time after, partly by force of the said Letters, but chiefly
seeing they saw it was Gods will and Ordination, that their only son should
dye; both their daughters should become Religious; and that they should (as
being hopeless of more issue) leave no Heirs. Male of their own bodies
behind them, they humbly submit themselves to Gods good pleasure therein.

They do so repentingly acknowledge their former Error in dehorting of Caelia,
as that both being well stroke^ in years, they resolve for satisfaction of that
fault, to live no longer together as man and wife; but to spend the rest of
their life in a Religious Course. Hereupon Orthodoxus acquainteth the
Confessarius by Letter, that he intends to enter into some Religious House of
the Capuchins; and Gynecia into the Monastery, where her two daughters do
remain.

THE DIALOGVE.
COSMOPHILA being sent over into the Low-Countreyes, by her Father Orthodoxus
(as is before declared) with instruction, and order to bring back her sister
Caelia into England; and now safely arrived at Belgiopolis, meeting with a
Reverend Man ^n the street, courteously saluteth him in this manner.

Cosmophila. Reverend Sir, God save you. It seems by your habit, that you are
a Clergyman, and so in likely hood the better able to satisfy my demand. I am
a Stranger, and an English woman, and but at this very hour arrived, with my
Servants, to this Noble City of Belgiopolis. My desire is, that you would be
pleased to direct me, unto the Monastery of the English Nuns in this Town.


The Confessarius. Gentlewoman (and it should appear by you^ attendance, of
Worthy State and Condition I will not only satisfy your request, but wi^^ my
self conduct you to the Monastery: for am the Confessarius to the Religious
and virtuous women of that House. Therefore, if (...) please you, let us go
together, for it is clo^^ by. This is the Monastery. Come in, and re^^ your
self a while in this room, till I sha^^ send for the Lady Abbess unto the
Grate t^ speak with you, and entertain you according to your worth. And lo,
where she approaches.


The Abbess. Is there any one here, who would speak with me?


Confessarius. Yes Madame: For as I was passing through the Streets, I
ouertooke this worthy Gentlewoman, a stranger, and English (as she says) by
birth. She desired me, to show her this Religious house; but what the cause of
her coming hither is, or why she is desirous to see this house, I know not.
Noe doubt she will acquaint your Ladyshippe with her Motives thereof.


Abbess. Gentlewoman: Are you the party, that would speak with me? If it
please you then, you may relate your business.


Cosmophila. I am. And herewith I am to make known unto you, that I have a
Sister in this your house, called Caelia, whom I would gladly see; And to her I
shall impart all the particulars of my long, and tedious journey.


Abbess. I will send for her, to come unto you presently. And here she
comes: Sister Caelia, ^now you this English Gentlewoman who you ^ee on the
other side of the Grate? She says, ^e knows you.


Caelia. O God! It is my Sister Cosmophila (for we ^oth had one Father and
Mother:) dear Sister, ^ow do you? How do our parents? Are they health?


Cosmophyla. Most loving Sister, how glad am I to see ^ou? Our parents are in
good health of body; But our only good Brother Monadelphus (for you know we had
but one, and therefore we were usually for many years accustomed so to call
him) since your departure out of England, is dead, (to the inconsolable grief
of my Father and Mother) though I trust he live with Christ Jesus in Heaven.
And his death is the only occasion, why my Father has sent me unto you: With
the cause whereof, seeing this Religious Lady is in the end to be acquainted, I
think it convenient to declare it in her presence; though from others I would
have the matter concealed. But must in the mean time, this unkind, or rather
envious Irongrate (through which I only yet but see you) must it (I say) bar
us from mutually embracing one another, now after my wearisome journey, of so
many miles, both by sea and land?


Abbess. Mistress, it shall not: you shall have free access to come in, to
speak, and converse with your Sister: Our house is not of that severe
disposition, as to forbid that familiar consolation of Sisters, which even
Nature, and all moral Ciuility warranteth. Nevertheless you do prudently, to
acquaint me with any private business, which may pass between you and your
Sister, for it is the custom of our house (as also of other Monasteryes) that
no particular discourse of moment shall pass between any of our Sisters, and
Strangers (how near soever they be in kindred) without the priuity of the
Abbess, or of some other appointed by her order. Therefore come with me, I will
take you into a retired place, where not any shall be present, but this our
Reverend Father Confessarius (to whom is ordinarily made known the greatest
business of our house) my self, you, and your Sister Caelia. Well: Now here
you are; You may freely impart the occasion of your coming, to your Sister,
and so to us both.


Cosmophila. Well then Good Sister, let me first salute and embrace you. Now
touching the business, this it is: Take notice, that, as I have abous told you,
our only Brother is dead; In regard hereof my Father hearing, that as yet you
have not made any Vow of a Religious life, nor yet in conscience stand obliged
to any such spiritual course, you being only in your Nouiceship; He is
desirous therefore, that you return presently into England with me; for his
meaning is (through want of heyres-Male,) to deuyde his living between us,
which, to speak sparingly, is two thousand pounds yearly; himself as you
know well, being a knight (if so I may deliver it with modesty) of good place
and rank. He wrote to you some months since about this business, but it seems
his letters did miscarry; and therefore he was the more willing to send me unto
you, to persuade you to satisfy herein his just desire: Therefore seeing we are
Sisters in Nature, I hope you will bear to my speeches a Sisterly, and listing
ear. And since you are the elder Sister, my Father commanded me to tell you,
that upon your marriage, he will bequeath to you at his death the better part,
or moity of his state and living. This is the Tenor of my message, and it is
warranted with such strong Reasons and Motives, as that I cannot be persuaded,
but that you will conform your self to our Father herein with all promptitude
and readiness of Resolution; and that you will within few days prepare your
self for your return with me into England.


Caelia. O dear Sister, you could not have brought me a more distasteful and
unpleasing message, then this: I am most sorry that our Brother is dead (and
yet we all must once dye,) but that his death should be the occasion of my
forsaking my intended (and now entered into) course of life. I infinitely loath.
Therefore O most merciful Redeemer Jesus Christ (to whom I am already devoted
in soul, never to espouse any but thy self) here upon my knees, I most
humbly beseech thee, even by the force of thy bitter passion, so to strengthen
and fortify the weakness of my Sex with thy alouercomming grace, as that
neither the ghostly Enemy of man's Soul, nor any temporary or vain Allectiues,
or Motives may be of strength to work so upon my judgment, as ever to bear me
from the station of my present Resolution, to embrace a Monastical and votary
life. O Good God; of whom it is said, That thou Psalm.
choosest the weak to confound the strong; arm my imbecility with thy
succurrency and help, to subdue all assaults, which either the Enemy, or the
World shall be able to plant against me.


Abbess. Rise up dear Sister Caelia; you have spoken well; and I assure my
self, God will not be wanting with his grace toward you. For he never
forsakes that party, who puts his trust in him: for we read: Psalm. 60.
God is a tower of strength from the face of the Enemy.


Cosmophila. What Sister? Must this be the message, the which I must return
from you to your Father? Where then is your obedience to your parents? It
seems it is wanting; and yet I have heard learned Clarks say, that 1. Kings c.
15.
Obedience is better then Sacrifice. Can it be an effect of a Religious life,
to cast of that duty to our parents, which the Religion of God commands us
ever to bear? Is it not one of the precepts, imposed upon us by God himself:
Honor ( Exodus 20.
thy Father and Mother, that thy days may be long upon earth? Therefore good
Sister, recall your self, and cast an eye of introuersion upon your own
actions. And let both you and me even meditate (according to our Fathers
desire) of Husbands (of Husbands I say) the very sound of which word is so
grateful to our sex. And let us both remember, that since we are borne to live
in this world, we are for the time to be lovers of the world, and to be
partakers of the Honors thereof; as to have our Coaches, our Attendance, brave
and rich Apparel, to live at London, and the like.


Caelia. O how do your words wound my poor heart with grief! And why do you
cast an aspertion of disobedience upon me? I honor my Father, and Mother; yet
I honor my Sweet Jesus more. My Father gave a being to my body in this world;
God is the supreme Agent, giving a creation both of my soul and body: My
Father entreats, but God out of his irresistible power, commands: My Father
promises temporal lands, and preferments; God promises me an eternal and
heavenly Kingdom: Briefly, my Father has maintained me being once borne, with
necessaries to my life: God (being borne) has redeemed me (being borne) with
the effusion of his most precious blood, and ever since has fed and nourished
my soul with the celestial juice of his Grace-bringing Sacraments. Why then
should my Soul be so traiterous to his divine Majesty, and so hurtful to it
self, as to preferte a temporal Father, before a divine Father? Not: For in
this sense my carnal Father cease to be my Father; and here are justified
those words of our Savior: Call Math. 23.
no man Father upon earth; for one is your Father, which is in Heaven. Now, as
for your sensual allurements of a Husband, of Coaches, rich apparel, and such
like vain toys (for the love I be are to my dear Redeemer) I contemn them
all.


Cosmophila. Well Sister, I grieve to find you so strongly enthralled to your
own Judgment; Therefore the more easily to reclayme you from your settled
Obstinacy (pardon me for using toward you so unkind a word,) I will be
content, you shall continue in this your Resolution, if so I cannot give you
sufficient Reasons for your alteration thereof: Only I expect, that force of
Reason (once being discerned) may take place in your Soul, and that it may be
of strength to void it of all partia^ity of Judgment. Therefore, Sister, you
must call to mind, that it was first your extraordinary and impatient desire of
taking this your intended course, which extorted (and as it were wrunge out) a
consent from my Father and Mother, for your coming into these parts. For I
have often heard my Father talk of the dangerous state of a Religious life; and
how it is beset with many difficulties; though the state of Religion, as it is
merely considered in it self, and abstracted from those difficulties, he ever
(as being a Catholic) did much approve and reverence: Therefore I will make
bold, with the good license of your Lady Abbess, and Confessarius here, to
relate to you (so far as my weak memory will serve) diverse of my Fathers
speeches, an he discoursed often with my Mother, touching this subject.


Abbess. We give you free liberty therein, hoping that our Father Confessarius
will lay open and display the weakness of all your Reasons ane Motive impugning
a Religious life; which point being once performed, will much fortify your
Sisters already embraced Resolution: and truly I partly fear by your
ouer^ures and secret dislike of a retired course of life that those words used
by our Savior in the Gospel to the two Sisters (it so a woman may without
overmuch boldness, allege passages of Scripture) may in part be verifyed of you
and your Sister: Martha, Luc. 10.
Martha, sollicita ^^erg a plurima, Maria optimam partem elegit quae non
auferetur ab ea. Cosmophila, Cosmophila, you labor much about these worldly
aduancements; but your sister Calia has chosen the best part, which shall not
be taken from her.


Cosmophila. Well then. My Father (who you know i^ a Scholar, and was an
University man for many years) did much insist in the difficulties and
austerities necessarily accompanying a Religious life; as much fasting, much
praying, rising in the night, Obedience to the Superior, Poverty, perpetual
Chastity, and the like; Things most adverse to man's nature, and such, as they
beget an horror in the mynds both of men and women, from undertaking so rigid
a course of life. To the undergoing then of these unsupportable burdens, you
tie your elfe (good Sister) if so you prosecute your lately begun state:
Therefore I hold it more secure both for your soul and body, rather to
withdraw back your foot in time, then to go on forward, and in the midst of
your dangerous journey to faint, and to say secretly to your soul: O that I
had not entered into this ^horny way of Religion, but had lived a good Catholic
in England.


Confessarius. Women out of their want of reading, and specially young Nouices
(such as our Sister Caelia is) are perhaps not able to solue all the objected
Arguments, made by sensual men against a votary life: Therefore I being the
Confessarius to this virtuous Monastery, hold ^t my duty and function, to
refute all such vr^ed Reasons. To this then your first objection I say; I
yield, that the votary life has ^s difficulties; but these difficulties
proceed ^ot from the nature of the life it self; but ^ur own corrupt flesh,
not subiecting it self ^o Reason, is the cause of them. For certain it is,
since a strict service of God, is sortable t^ Reason, that therefore this
service is pleasing to a Man of Reason: I further answer, tha^ there are two
things, which much sweet the pains of a Religious life. First and
principally, the Merit thereof; the subject of which Merit is, the enjoying the
eternal felicity o^ Heaven. So true is that saying in Scripture Romans 8.
The Passions of this time, are not worthy of the glory to come, which shall be
revealed unto us. And upon this ground we read, that S. Ignatius the Martyr had
just reason thus joyfully to cry out in these fiery words: Ignat, in Epist. ad
Romans.
Let fire the Cross devouring Beasts, the cutting of my body asunder, i^
breaking of my bones, the dissipation of all my members, the distraction of all
my body; Yea, let all the scourges and torments of the Devil come upon me,
that I obtain Jesus Christ. But what are all the afflictions incident to a
Religious life, to be compared for the enjoying of Christ, to the Torments, so
earnestly thirsted after by thi^ Blessed Martyr? Since these afflictions can b^
but short, whereas the enjoying of Christ for ever; and certain it is, that
nothing (i^ compare of Eternity) is long, which is measured with the yard of
time.

The second thing, which much less nei^ the apprehension and feeling of
Monastica austerities, is the internal comfort, and consolation, with which
God does oftentimes vi^ his servants, to make them more couragious^ hold out
in their begun conflict. And the in the sweetness of this spiritual Wine, taste
by the servants of God, all the sowry acc^dents belonging to a Monastical
Life, are wholly absorpt and drowned. Hence it is, that our Savior says: Math.
11.
My yoke is sweet, and my burden light. And God the Father thus ^ollaceth a
man for Justice sake; Psalm. 90.
I am with him in his tribulation Finally, the Apostle out of his experience in
tasting of Gods most comfortable hand in the throng of his troubles spent in
the service of God, thus bursteth forth: 2. Cor. 7.
I am replenished with Consolation, and do exceedingly abound in joy, in all
our tribulations. What say you now Cosmophila? Are the asperities of a
religious Life such, as they are not much sugared by God, for the better
supporting and bearing of them? These passages and testimonies alleged by me,
are the Written Ward of God: Either they are true, or God in his holy Scripture
(which God forbid, that any Christian should so dream) is false. But if it
please you, you may pass to your next imaginary bug-beare (serving only to
affright Children) against a votary and virginal life.


Cosmophila. Indeed (Good Sir) I cannot deny, but that these two spiritual
Medicines (so to call them) are able much to aswage the pains endured in
Religion. But seeing it is your pleasure, I should proceed further in my
Fathers former discourse of this Subject, I will. The next point then, of which
he would often speak is this, that if all men and women should become
Religious, then the world would (contrary to Gods preordination therein) soon
perish, and be brought to an utter dissolution; and that each Gentleman's
particular house and family should instantly decay; since by this means the
expectation of all posterity (marriage, and conversation between man and woman
being wholly taken away) would presently fail.


Confessarius. It seems by this Objection, that your Father is a Scholar (as
you said above,) and has borrowed it out of the writings of S. Austin; who
relating this very reason to be much urged by certain ancient Heretics in
disproofe of a Religious life, does answer the Argument in these particular
words: Austin. de bono coniug. c. 10.
Would to God, all men would do so (to wit, that men and women would live a
single, chaste, and unmarried life) then the City of God would be sooner filled,
and the end of the world would hasten on. Which answer is most warrantable;
since it were far better, that the Kingdom of God should presently come (which
we daily beg in our Pater noster, and have been taught to beg the same by our
Savior himself) then to produce and draw out our days in this uncertainty
and confusion of dangers. Though this answer be very sufficient, yet S. Jerome
gives another solution hereto no less forcible, in this manner; Fear not,
lest all be Virgins; Ierom. lib. 1. contra Iouinianum.
Virginity is a hard thing, and therefore rare, because it is hard; Which
answer takes its strength from that sentence of Christ delivered of
Virginity: Math. 19.
Not all receive this word.

Now, whereas some may boldly reply (which perhaps, Cosmophila, you in modesty
and bashfulnes forbear to do) that the disparity of sex, and the faculties of
generation would be but fruitles, and in vain, in such persons who will not
marry, and use the act of generation; and that hereupon, it might seem to
follow, that God, and Nature should work in vain (which were most impious and
absurd to maintain) in giving both the Sexes those different faculties for
generation, and yet for them to make no use thereof. But to this I answer,
that what is instituted herin, is not instituted idly, and in vain; though in
some particulars in that kind, it has not its proper effect, so that in other
particulars it have. For who observes not, that in all kind of fruits and
herbs, comes a great quantity of seed, which is never sown, and that but a
small part thereof is used to that and; and yet we cannot accuse Nature, as if
he had made it in vain, or erred therein?

Now touching the decay of particular an^ient Howses and families, whose
absolute dissolution and extinguishment the forbeaance of Marriage does
threaten; which mo^ue I presume preuayles overmuch (Cosmophila) with your
Father: Let us stir the ground little, about this reason, and observe how
weak, and unworthy it is. True it is, that the ^^sse of an only heir is in
some moderate ^^rt to be apprehended, and bewailed. But here I demand, whether
the Sanctity of a Soul does not incomparably exceed the benefit of Posterity?
Now these men (so much prizing posterity) need not to fear the want of an
heir; For who is he, that has not many of his Kindred, though perhaps not
many of his name? Which point is only a poor priuiledg resting in a sound of
few letters. And if he has not any of his name, nor of his kindred; Yet there
are many poor and distressed people in the world, among whom to distribute his
state, is to make in them, Christ his heir, and this with most happy
conditions: For one man, that is heir to another, cannot recompense the
kindness of the party, being dead; But Christ does at that time remunerate, or
repay a man (making him his heir) with an eternal reward.

Again, it is not certain (as it falls out in your Fathers Case) that the
only heir remaining, shall live, and have issue. And if this should so
fortune, yet shall the line and succession at last fail and cease, and this
(which is to be deplored) without thanks, or reward. The truth of which point
experience daily assures us; since how many ancient houses and families in our
own Country of England, have within these last forty years, come to utter
desolation and ruin; the very names of such families, being oftentimes wholly
extinct, and buried in forgetfulness? Upon this point did S. Jerome much insist,
when he persuaded Furia from marriage, thus speaking: S. Jerome in^ Epist. 10.
Do thou fear, the line of Fu^ia should fail, and that thy Father shall not
have a little one ^f thee to creep into his breast. Fear not, for all that
are married, have not Children. It is a great oversight (...) hope for certain,
that which thou see many have ^ot; and many loose it, when they have it. To
whom ^en do I counsel thee to leave all thy riches? To Christ, who cannot dye.
What heir by thus doing shall ^hou have? Him who is thy Lord and Savior. Thus
^r S. Jerome of this point* But to pass further in ^his Subject, since it not
only much swayeth with your Father, but with most worldlings, though otherwise
in faith, and life they be Catholics.

Let us balance a little the success to pre^^iue a man's family, with the
happiness of a Religious life. Well then, it is ordained by God, that not only
particular men, but whole families shall once eye, though they continue many
years for the time, and thus in the end ^hey are wholly brought to nothing
Therefore what stupidity and dulnes of judgment is it in man, so to feed
himself with hope, for ever ^o continue his house and family with new
offspring, and so much to covet the same, as to ^ppose himself to the Counsel,
and contrary determination of God therein, and thereupon ^o labor (what in him
lies) to prevent and ^inder Gods ordinance?

I will close up our discourse touching your Objection, with this passage
following: To ^it, that this thirsting and insatiable desire of ^ontinuing a
descent in blood, is most unworthy a Christian, and rather more sorting a
Heathen or Infidel. And the reason even according to Aristotiles l. 1. Polit.
c. 1.
Philosophy is this: Beasts a^^ men have a desire ingrafted by nature to
pe^petuate themselves, or for ever to prolong their being; because all things
desire to be a^ ways, and always to continue: But where this so much covered
continuance cannot effected by themselves since they are all subject to death;
they therefore labor to compass, and obtain it at least in their own kind,
in which they seem (after a certain manner and degree) to live, so long as a^
branch descending from them does live. No^ here I demand, what force has this
Reason the Philosopher in the light of Christianity, sin^ Christian Religion
assures us o^ a most certain and (...) promise of Eternity our own persons,
both in body and Soul? therefore we need not to seek to obtain that in
others, which we shall have in our selves. And thus far touching the weakness of
the so common and so much pretended difficulty, That a Religious Course is a
hindrance to the continuance of the world, and the preservation of wh^ Howses
and Descents. But (good Cosmophila) yo^ may (if it please you) come to other
reason objected by your Father against a Votary li^^


Cosmophila. It was urged by my Father, that such ^ profess a votary life,
(whether men, or women) do much lie open to several dreadfu^ temptations, as
apprehending ^uer greatly the severity of that life, or the fear of abandoning
their undertaken Course; thus having a conflict in themselves in resisting
their own ever molesting passions; from which, such persons as live in the
world, are most exempt and free. Yea, the Religious are so assured to undergo
these spiritual Conflicts and temptations (and oftentimes also be overcome by
them) as that I well remember, that my Father would allege in proof thereof
these ensuing words of the Scripture: Eccles. c. ^.
Son coming to the service of God, stand in fear and trembling, and prepare
thy soul for temptation. Now, what a dying life is this, for one to draw out
his days in this spiritual war, and combat of Temptations, when a man must
at every instant be ready to resist the forcible assaults of his Enemy? Or what
repose or joy can any have thus living, or rather (since life it can hardly be
called) but thus breathing?


Confessarius. It is a lamentable thing to observe, how ready men are to detort
the sacred word of God, for patronizing of their own pusillanimity and
weakness, in going forward in Christ's service. True it is, that Gods holy writ
does in the former words premonish the pious to expect Temptations; But withal
we are to observe, that the Scripture does not counsel us to avoid and
decline a more holy life, by reason of these Temptations; but fore warns us
to be ready, and expect in resisting of the said Temptations, with the weapons
above named; to wit, Fear and Trembling The soldiers of this world do not for
any fear forbear to fight in their Princes behalf, but rather seek to
encounter their Enemy: Shall then a Soul thirsting after its own salvation,
forbear the best means of obtaining it, for fear of the Temptations, which
the spiritual Enemy (the devil I mean) shall suggest against it?

To proceed further: Certain it is, that women living in the world, are more
thrall to Temptations, then Religious women. For secular persons lie open to
every bayte, and temptation, which either the devil, or the outward senses
present unto them; they ever conuersing, and traficking (as it were) in
temporal and worldly affairs. Now, Religious women are freed from all outward
occasions, and allurements of Temptations: Since there is a continual watch,
and ward kept over them. For their outward Senses (as their ears, and eyes,
and the rest) are barred and restrained from all such dangerous objects, as may
occasion temptation. Again, their Institution, Orders of their House,
Obedience to their Superiors; yea the very walls themselves within which they
are enclosed do guard them from all such dangerous and spiritual incursions.
And which is infinitely more then all this, God has obliged himself to minister
means, (and principally his grace) to his Servants for ouercomming all
Temptations, suffered for his sake: for these are the Apostles most cheerful
words: 1. Cor. 10.
God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that, which you
are able: but will make also with the temptation, a way to escape, that you may
be able to sustain.

I grant, it cannot be denied, but that Religious persons seem in a vulgar eye
to suffer more Temptations, then the Laity does. And the reason hereof is this:
Religious persons, when they are once resolved to live a pious and retired
life, do instantly begin to cast their eye back upon their former less
virtuous Courses; and thereupon to see (so far as liberty is granted them) in
what state their Souls stand in Gods sight, with intention to better their
former careless proceedings. Now our ghostly Enemy not brooking this, as loath
to loose that hold and interest, which he had in them, does by all means cast
before them temptations concerning a virtuous life, thereby more easily to
withdraw them from prosecuting of the same. But to such of the Laity, as
continue in the thraldom of the devil, by their bad and impious lives, the
devil seems to sleep, (I mean) so long as they continue under his power and
command, and this with good show of Reason: For he houlds it better policy, to
let them sleep in their sins without affrighting them with any fearful
Temptations, then to disquiet them with such suggestions, they being already
in his power.

I will end this point of Temptations, urged to fall out in a religious life;
whether these temptations have reference to austerity in Religion, as to
Obedience, Chastity, Poverty; or whether otherwise the temptation concern
immediately either the Body or the Soul; And I will only say, that of my own
experience I have known many young English Gentlewomen of very nyce Education,
of weak constitution of body, and most dear to their parents, having once
entered into a Religious and votary life, have most wonderfully overcome all
such temptations; even betrampling under their feet all the stratagemes that
the Devil, the flesh, and the World could cast before them (as stumbling
blocks) to hinder their already undertaken Course of virtue. But what was the
Cause hereof? To wit, the hope of eternal Felicity, and because they
disclaymed from their own forces herein, and relied upon Gods goodness and
providence, for the ouercoming of their temptations, and so veryfying in
themselves those words of Christ: Sufficit 1. Cor. 12.
tibi gratia mea; my grace and assistance is sufficient to give thee victory,
over all thy Enemies. And why then may not our Sister Caelia receive in her
Monastical life, the like favors and indulgence from God, which he daily
imparteth to others? O let not any exclude themselves from receiving the
spiritual blessing of God, the which he, with so large and bountiful a hand
communicates to those, who endeavor to serve him in all purity of Soul and
Body.


Cosmophila. I grant, I cannot deny but that there are diverse Gentlewomen
heretofore of my own familiar acquaintance, who have entered into Religion;
whose tenderness of body and delicacy of breeding (I thought) could never have
brooked the daily austerities therein used. And therefore to confess my
private judgment herein, I have been forced to ascribe this their joyful
perseverance to Gods peculiar care, and goodness toward them.

But to go forward in this our discourse: My Father would thus reason: The
Commandments of God are inviolable, and not dispensable: But one of the Ten
Commandments, given to his people is: Exo. 20.
Thou shall not kill. Well then, thus would he dispute: Yt we be commanded by
God not to kill one another; much more are we commanded not to kill our selves,
since true it is, that a Homicide, who depriueth another man of his life, is
most hateful in the sight of God; how execrable then is he in Gods Eye, who
becomes his own butcher? But many such persons there are (said he) who
through entering into a most strict and severe order of a votary life, do often
by their great fastings, little sleep, immoderate disciplines, and by other
unaccustomed rigidnes (if not immediately kill, yet at least) shorten their own
days, and draw the period of their life, to a far narrower compass, and
number of years, then God otherwise has ordained to them. Thus good Sir you
see, that it may be auerred (at least with some show of probability) that a
Religious life (so much advanced by you, and entertained by my Sister) may
seem to be prohibited, and forbidden by Gods own hand-wryting.


Confessarius. O how wanton and bold is Man's Nature to wrest and misconster
Gods holy word, for the impugning of that course of life, which God himself
first instituted! For how can it be, that the ten Commandments given by God to
the Jews, should forbid that state of life, which God after ordained among the
Jews? But here I must make bold to charge your Father with want of reading:
For it seems he is ignorant, that among the Jews (Gods chosen people) there
were certain Religious men, called Essenes, of whom Josephus (the learned Jew)
thus discourses: Joseph. an tiq. Iudaic l. 28. c. 2.
The righteousness of the Essenes is meruaylous; They enjoy their riches in
common; and in this course, above four thousand men do live, having neither
wives, nor servants. And further of them in another place: They are Jews by
Nature, Joseph. l 2. de bello Iudaic. c. 7.
and do observe Continency, avoid Marriage, are Comemners of riches. With whom
accords the learned Philo. a Jew, Philo de vita Contemplatiua.
who speaks much of the same Essenes, of their Monasteries, and of their
wonderful fasting from Meat, saying of them: Vix semel triduo cibi
recordantur: They scarce taste once of meat in the compass of three days.

But to answer this your Fathers Reason more particularly; First I say, that
worldly people (who are not reprehended for so doing) do undertake as great, or
greater seuerities even for temporal respects, as religious women do for the
gayning of Heaven. How many Tradesmen are there, who watch most part of the
night in labor, and spare diet, for getting of means to maintain themselves
and their charge, with poor meat and mean clothes? How many Sailors and
seamen, beaten with cold, thunder, and storms, spend fewer hours in sleep,
then Religious persons do, and all for a little dross and gain? Briefly, how
many Lawyers are there in England, who living far from London, do consume a
good part of the year only in traueling up and down from their own houses to
the Term, not regarding (like to ordinary Carries) any weather or foulenes of
the way whatsoever? And when they come to the Term. all the forenoone they
bestow in going to Westminster. pleading (it is to be feared) sometimes an
unjust cause: and all the afternoon they do shut themselves up in a little
closet, for their Clyents to resort unto them; which sitting course for so many
hours would be most paynefull to other men: and all this vassallage they
undergo, for scraping together a little gold and silver.

If then temporal men forbear not such infinite drudgery, which in a common
eye may seem to shorten their days, and yet they are not to be charged for
hastening of their death; why then shall Religious women for undertaking lesser
austerities for Gods sake and desire of gayning of Heaven, be reputed Killers
of themselves, or guilty of their death? In this last place I say, that it is
experimentally most certain, that worldly men, who live in all affluency, and
abundance of riches and pleasures, do commonly live fewer years, then
Religious persons do. For such temporal men through Epicurisme, and delicacy
of fare, or through intemperance in the sins of the flesh, do fill their
bodies with crudities, raw humors, and diverse diseases attending the same,
whereby their lives are sometimes shortened: Whereas Religious persons, through
their spare diet, moderate labor, and daily meditation of Heavenly matters,
have produced their lives to many years. According hereto (to insist in two or
three particulars) we read, that S. Antony (the Hermit) lived a hundred and
five years, S. Jerome who spent much of his time in the wilderness, lived a
hundred years; and S. Romualdus also arrived to more then to a hundred years.
So little Reason there is, to charge a Religious course, with shortening the
lives of its Professors.


Abbess. I pray you, Father Confossarius, and you Cosmophila, give me leave to
urge one reason (as more fitting to be delivered by a woman) to prove, that
religious women are less subject to shorten their lives, then other women who
live in the world; and this is Childbirth. How many women are there in the
world (though otherwise of most strong, and healthful constitution of Body)
who have in the compass of a day, or two in the deliverance of their children,
lost their lives? This point is so cuident, and daily subject to our hearing,
that it were-lost labor to spend more words therein. Now, Religious women, who
ever remain shut up in their Monasteries from the sight of men, are thereby
exempted from this danger, by the which Lay-women do oftentimes come to a
sudden and unexpected death: and it may be perhaps your fortune (Cosmophila)
after your marriage to shorten your life by this means; whereas it is
impossible, that your Sister Caelia, continuing in her present Resolution,
should thereby abridge her days. But you may proceed (Cosmophila) in your
other difficulties, and pretenses against Religious women.


Cosmophila. I partly acknowledge the weakness of this my objected Reason, for I
discover it for such, through the several answers above given thereto. But to
prosecute my Fathers discourse of the former Subject: He (more then once) would
say, that one by embracing a votary or Monastical life, does thereupon even
shake hands with the world, giving it, its last Adieu; since he depriueth
himself of all the pleasures, which the world affords. And thus such a man or
woman cease to be themselves, forbearing the ends for which in some sort they
were created. For they disclayme from all Riches, Honors, Marriage, corporal
pleasures, and other consolations, and comforts whatsoever, which the world
daily affoardeth to others. And this indeed I hold to be the greatest
hinderance of all others, for entering into that retired course of life,
whereunto you (Reverend Sir) do so much persuade.


Confessarius. I am of your mind (Cosmophila) that this is the maynest obstacle
of all others in this kind; yet I think it may be removed and taken away with
as much facility (or more) then any other of your objected Reasons. And first,
I discover the weakness thereof, by laying down the frequent Testimonies of
Gods holy Writ, which proclayme the world to be an utter Enemy to man's
salvation; and thereupon do most forcibly dehort men from the love of the world,
and from the pleasures thereof. Now who is so careless, or desperate of his
Salvation, that will contract an inviolable, or strait intercourse of
friendship with his fatal and designed Enemy? And to begin: Do not we find S.
Paul thus to pronounce: 1. Cor 3.
The wisdom of this world is foolishnes before God? In like manner. S. James
assenteth thereto in these words: Iac. 4.
Know you not, that the friendship of this world is an Enemy to God? Who
therefore will be a friend of this world, is mide an Enemy of God. S. John
says: 1. John. 2.
Love not the world; if any man love the world, the Charity of the Father is
not in him. And again: The whole 1. John 2.
world is set in wickedness. To come to S. Peter, who thus teaches of this
point: 1. Petr. 1.
Fly the corruption of the Concupiscence, which is in the world.

Now, if the testimonies of Christ his Apostles should be little preuayling with
you, I will close this point, with the sacred words of Christ himself, thus
speaking to the Pharisyes, and Jews: (a) You are of this world; I am not of
this world; thus excluding himself from the world, as a professed Enemy
thereof. Yea our Blessed Savior proceeds in words further against the world,
thus speaking in his prayer to his heavenly Father: (b) I pray not for the
world, but for those, which thou have given me. O dreadful exception! What
shall become of those persons eternally both Soul and Body, for whom the
Redeemer of the world will not vouchsafe to pray? Or what hope of their
Salvation can there be? Therefore happy are those, who during their
peregrination and exile here, are forced for the time to be in the world, yet
are not of the world. But I will add to these former authorities this ensuing
inference: If diverse most learned Physicians should with joint consent
prescribe to their patients, that such and such meats they should forbear, as
being maine enemies, or poison to their Health; would not those Patients, who
should contemn their prescriptions herein, and should most earnestly covet
and seek after such prohibited meats, be thought to be insensible, stupid, and
careless of the weal, and good state of their Body? How then chances it,
that so many thousands of the world, hearing and reading the former sacred
authorities, (in which our B. Saurour and his Apostles do even anathematize,
and curse the world, protesting themselves to be Enemies to it, and it to them)
should nevertheless put all their confidence, love, (...) comfort in the
World, and in the pleasures and delights thereof? O madness!


Cosmophila. Reverend Sir. you have (I grant) fully convinced me (and that from
the holy Scriptures) in my overmuch preiudging and esteeming of the imaginary
worth of the world. And indeed I do see such a main opposition between our
Savior and the world, as that I much grieve, that my Father did (and I fear
hitherto does) so highly prize and estimate the same. And particularly touching
my self, I do acknowledge no small misfortune, that at the time of my Baptism,
the name of Cosmophila (which I am told, signifies a lover of the world) was
given unto me. But that is past. Well Good Sir, seeing the world and the
inuitements thereof are most domagable to a spiritual and retired life, as
evidently appears from the Scriptures above alleged: I would therefore in
treat you to enlarge your discourse of this subject; seeing it is the chiefest
snare, within which man's spiritual Enemy does entangle so many thousands of
poor Souls. And that what you have, already proved from the written word of
God, you would fortify with other most forcing proofs, either of Example
(which is much preuayling) or el^^ of Reason: Since not only to my self, but
to any other, to whom these your speeches may hereafter come, this your whole
discourse may be very beneficial, as begetting in them a hatred to that (I
mean to the world) the which our Savior, and his Apostles did so much hate.


Confessarius. Cosmophila, I will satisfy your Request: and I am resolved to
launch forth into an Ocean of deeper discourse, in regard of the importance of
the subject here treated of, then in the beginning I did intend. Therefore to
prove that all this world is Vanity, and consequently not of just force to with
hold a Man, or Woman, from undergoing a more spiritual life; I will not
insist (as I did before) only in speculation of this point; but I will rest in
the confession of such an one, who enjoyed all the pleasures in the world in
the highest degree; and yet in the end, was enforced to confess them all to be
Vanities. This, whom I mean, is King 1. P^ralyp. c. 7.
Solomon, whom the Scripture auerreth, that he enjoyed all the pleasures of
the world (either for riches, or for subjection of other Tributary Kings to
him) for he had all the Kings from the River of the Philistians unto Egypt, as
his servants, or for magnificence of his Train and retinue; or for the
wonderful daily expenses in his Court, Lastly for his sensual and corporal
pleasure of the flesh, for he had seven hundred Wives, as Queens, and three
hundred others as Concubines: All which Gods sacred Word relates of the
worldly wealth, wisdom, riches, and prosperity of King Solomon. But now after
his fruition for a long time of all these 3. Reg. 4. 3. Reg. 1^. Eccles. 1.
several temporal felicities, observe his judgment of them (as his Motte) in
these few words: Vanitas vanitatum and omnia vanitas: Vanity of vanities, and
all is vanity. Where more clearly to express his meaning of these few words,
by Vanity of vanities, he understands (according to the judgment of S. Ierom
in cap. 1. Eccles.
Jerome) the greatness of this Vanity, above all other Vanities that may be
imagined. And again the same Solomon, casting his eye backward upon all the
temporal felicities before enjoyed by him, thus closes this point: I saw Reg.
vbi supra.
in them all, vanity, and afflict on of mind.

Now, to fortify more strongly the judgment of Solomon, calling the vanities of
the world Affliction of the mind, let us call to mind the words of our
Redeemer, bearing the same Sense with the former sentence of Solomon: For our
Mar. 13.
Savior calls the pleasures and vanities of the world, Thorns; insinuating
thereby that they prick and wound the Soul, as Thorns do the Body. That this
is true, is most evident. since we find by experience, that the Honors,
pleasures, and commodities of the world do never afford any true repose, rest,
or quietness to the Soul. For we daily may observe, that the worldly thoughts
of these transitory things never cease to prick and gaul the minds of such,
as prosecute and follow after them. They rush upon them in the morning as soon
as they awake; they attend upon them all the day; they bring them to their bed,
and hinder their sheep, and afflict them with imaginary dreams. O how many
worldlings enthralled either to Riches, to Honors, or Pleasures of the flesh,
find this to be true, which now I speak? and therefore these Vanities are
called by the Prophet Jeremy. Ierem. 16.
those Tyrants, which will not affoard any rest, neither night, nor day.

To what has been above said, we may adioyne the several miscryes, which
necessarily attend upon these worldly pleasures; I will insist only in one, or
two. The first then may be, that admitting these pleasures were in themselves
to be much prized and desired; yet observe how their sweetness is abated. First
by the Instability, and Uncertainty of enjoying them for any long time; and
therefore how great a misery is it to a worldly man, whose felicity wholly
rests in the fruition of these Vanities, suddenly, and unexpectedly to be
pulled from them? And how an inexplicable a grief was it to the Richman in the
Gospel to hear that discomfortable message: Stulte Lue. 12.
hac nocte etc. Fool this very night thou shall dye, and the things which thou
have provided, whose shall they be?

Another Attendant of the world is Coffeehouse, which sowers and makes
bitter all the pleasures thereof. For cast your eye on every several temporal
delight, and observe the sauce adjoined to it. For example; the pleasure of the
flesh, even when it is lawful and honest, is (as S. Paul affirms) attended
with tribulation 1. Cor. 7.
of the flesh, (this is for you Cosmophila, if you intend hereafter to marry)
but if it be enjoyed with sin, then infinitely more it is environed with
several anxietye^ of mind in like manner the advancement to Honors and
Dignities stands subject to all Vassallage and Servitude that can be devised,
a^ also to the danger of being after cast down into Disgrace and Contumely.
Briefly the possession of Riches lies open to fear of loosing them and upon
the sudden to be pulled from them. And the Truth of all this is so clear and
undeniable, as tht I could exemplify it (not speaking of times past) in diverse
persons of these times, and some of them of my near and familiar acquaintance.

Now all this being most true, I demand, Of what judgment or brains is that
Man or woman, who for the enjoying of such worldly fooleryes, will forbear the
heavenly Course of a Religious life? And thus far of this subject, wherein I
have spread my self more largely, by reason it seems by your own words
(Cosmophila) that this Motive of the World, and the pleasures thereof, is one
main impediment, why your Father (though otherwise a Virtuous good Catholic)
does not give that full approbation, and allowance to a votary life, as could
be wished.


Cosmophila. Sir, you have spoken very fully and irrepliably, and indeed even
till this present I did much prize the worldly allurements and felicities at a
far higher rate, then now, after your discourse thereof is finished, I do. So
much blinded (I grant) was my poor womanish judgment, in not truly ballancing
and weighing of these matters before this time. But yet (Good Sir) though you
have partly touched upon that point above, (I mean) that the pleasures and
delights of this world have their counterpoyze of Discontents adjoining to
them; yet if it shall please you to treat more largly thereof, your pains
therein (I hope) will be worthily bestowed; and the rather, seeing there are
many persons persuaded, that the careless Christian enjoys his pleasures in
all full manner, wholly exempt from all anxieties of the mind, and that the
virtuous do live in a continual sadness and Melancholy, full of Grief, and
void of pleasure.


Confessarius. I am content so to do. And first then you are to know, that both
the Virtuous and Wicked have their continual Crosses, (as I may ^arme them)
and Afflictions in this world and ^his through divine Providence; yet these two
different sorts of men have them after a most different manner, as hereafter I
will show. First, that the Virtuous have their desolations and Afflictions
sometimes, is evident out of the words of our Savior himself, thus saying:
Luc. 14.
He that does not bear his Cross, and come after me, cannot be my Disciple.
To whom accords the Apostle in these words: 2. Tim. 3.
All who will live goodly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution. So ^rue is
that saying, of S. Chrysostom: In Homil. 67. ad pop. Antioch.
Tribulation is an and ^ssoluble and inseparable bon^ of a Christian life. All
which is from the immediate hand of God, for the good the Soul of his Servants.

Now to descend to the Wicked, or loose Christian^^l say, that their men have
also such discontents and (...), as well may be termed their Crosses. For
though the Wicked suffer no injuries from the Virtuous, yet are they several
ways afflicted. For first (besides what is above briefly said of this point)
we find daily that one worldly, or sensual man receive the grief and vexation
from another worldly, o^ sensual man. Secondly, such men suffer Tribulation
even from their own proper Vices; to the which they become worse then
Gallyslaues, as wholly enchayned, and enthralled to perform whatsoever along
continued habit of these Vices shall command, and exact from them; they not
being able to make any resistance, or repugnancy thereto. Thirdly, the wicked
suffer tribulation even from their own bad Consciences; So truly does S.
Austin say, speaking of the Worms of Conscience (as the Scripture Mar. ^.
calls it.) No tribulation August. in Psalm. 45.
is greater, then the Conscience of ones sins.

But now let us balance a little the adversities or desolations of pious and
Religious persons, with the Afflictions of the Wicked; and so observe thereby
whether of these sorts of affliction were rather to be undergone, and suffered.
And first, the Afflictions of the Just are but short, and momentary, during
only the time of their banishment in this world: And therefore the Scripture
says of Just and pious men, dying: Apoc. 14.
Blessed are the dead, who shall dye in our Lord; Even so says the spirit,
that they shall rest from their labors. And again; that God Apoc. 21.
shall then wype from their eyes all tears. But to proceed further to other
privileges accompaning the Tribulations of Religious and virtuous persons:
First, Christ himself auerreth, that ineffable Comfort and Joy does ever
attend the Tribulations of the Just; saying to his Disciples, and in them to
all other virtuous souls: Joan. 16.
You shall weep and lament but the world shall rejoice, And you shall be made
sorrowful but your sorrow ^halbe turned into joy; The truth of which words the
Apostle S. Paul tried in himself, thus saying in the throng of all his
Adversities: 2. Cor. 7.
I am replenished with Consolation, I do exceedingly abound in all Tribulation.

The third privilege of the Crosses of the ^ust, is that they are most
Fruitful and profitable to the souls of the pious; since Tribulation is a
means appointed by God, for the obtaining of the kingdom of Heaven; For thus
we ^ead our Savior to say: Math. 25.
Blessed are they, who suffer persecution for Justice sake, for theirs is the
kingdom of Heaven. And the Apostle much celebrateth the benefit of the
Anxietyes and Crosses of the virtuous in these words: The Romans 8.
Passions of this time are not worthy of the glory, which ^halbe revealed in
us. But now to turn the leaf over, and to contemplate a little of the
misc^ies of the wicked, even in the midst of their ^nioying temporal
felicities, and to observe, how their Tribulations are wholly, destitute of
those privileges, granted to the troubles o^ the Just. First, we find, that
the afflictions of the wicked are perpetual and interminable: for of them it
is said: Esaias ^^.
The worm of the wicke^ (meaning in hell) shall not dye, and their fi^^ shall
not be extinguished; And therefore the loss^ and detriment (instead of all
gain) which comes from the Crosses and Tribulation of the Wicked, is related
by our Savior in those words, which shall be spoken at the da^ of the last
judgment: Math. 25.
Go into eternal fire which is prepared for the Devil and his Angels: O
most miserable Relegation!

Thus far (Cosmophila) I have waded in thi^ subject for your pleasure and (if
it may be) for the greater satisfaction of the worthy knight your Father, who
apprehends worldly pleasures and delights (as free from all grief^ of mind)
with so strong a bent both of understanding, and will. And now for the closure
of all, I refer to his more retired and impartial^ judgment; Whether the
commodities and pleasures of the world being encompassed about on all sides
with miseries and afflictions o^ mind, ought to prevail so far with any man or
woman (careful of their eternal felicity as to withdraw and hold them from
embracing a most virtuous, and retired Course o^ life; granting that the said
Religious life is no for the time altogether deprived of desolations,
deiections, and other languishments commonly incident to the said virtuous life.


Cosmophyla. I cannot deny (Sir) but that you have declared all these reasons
urged by my Father, not to be of that solidity and weight, as I did at the
first take them to be (I would to God, that my Fathers judgment could be as
easily herein convinced;) which difficulties in a religious life, were the only
(or at least principal) Motives for his giving the less approbation to this
severe and sequestered Course, here in this place practiced. For you know (Good
Sister Caelia) as I said above it was with much soliciting and entreating of
him and my Mother, that they gave their consent for your departure out of
England: But seeing my judgment is greatly altered (or rather much quieted)
touching the force or weakness in the allowing of the said Reasons of my Father;
I will proceed to another point; in which I am to entreat your furtherance of
discourse, Reverend good Sir.


Caelia. Stay a little your intended proceeding (dear Sister) to any other
branch of Speech; for I mean, with the allowance of our much Reverend
Abbess, and Ghostly Father here present, to insist in one impediment touching
a Votary life, of which I confess I had several times strong Temptations;
(through the subtilty of the Enemy of man's soul, and Weakness of my own
flesh) for the relinquishing of my undertaken Course: But through his Grace,
which is never wanting to those, who beg it with all humility and prayer, I
most easily over came it at last. I am more willing to discover the same,
thereby that others (when the like occasion may occur) be not wholly dismayed
at such like Temptations. It was this: (which is in part before touched by my
Sister Cosmophila, and in part answered by Father Confessarius, yet here I will
repeat it having been for the time greatly afflicted therewith; and things of
moment, may warrantably be iterated, or related oftener, then once.)

Oftentimes I was assaulted by the Enemy, in my mind, that many things are so
hard in Religion, that I much doubted, whether my body (through its former
delicacy, and softnes in education during my stay in England) could ever brook
and endure all those corporal mortifications and austerities, which are found
in a Religious Life; as rising in the night, fasting, and sparenes of diet,
submission to be under another, silence at certain times, and the like. But in
the end (during the small time I have yet continued in this Monastery) I
overcame them all, and did find an extraordinary repose and quietness of my
soul in the subduing of them; fully confessing in that behalf, those words of
our Savior to be most true: In Luc. 21.
your Patience you shall possess your souls. And indeed when I came seriously
to weigh those suggested austerities in the balance of Reason; I did find most
unanswerable Reasons, whereby our body might be most forcibly impelled to a
voluntary, and willing bearing, and practicing of them.

And first, I was wont often to call to mind, what I had heard learned men to
say; to wit, That though our flesh affects liberty, and much cherishing, yet
the Body even as its first creation, was made to be subject to the soul, and
not the soul to the Body; and therefore we are to chastise our body, and to
curb all the inordinate motions thereof. And indeed seeing the Soul is to
have a true command and Sovereignty over the body (and this by Gods
ordination,) the maistring of the body in not yealding to the temptations
thereof, is nothing so difficult a matter, as is commonly feared by most, that
have a desire to enter into a religious life. And the reason hereof is, in
regard of many forcible Motives, which may much strengthen the soul, to curb
the inbred desires of the flesh, and bring it into subjection. And those
Motives (among diverse others here omitted) may be drawn; First from the Love
which we bear to God; which Love of God does naturally take comfort in
suffering hardness, tribulation, or any adverse fortune, for Gods sake. Again,
the example of Christ himself ought to be a great Spur unto us, in this
Conflict between the Spirit and the Body, who suffered so much for our
Redemption: Why then is it not reasonable for us to follow his footesteps, in a
far lower degree of suffering?

Thirdly, as above is intimated, the Divine comforts and Heavenly Consolations
(with which God usually visits that soul, which courageously wars with the
body, for the souls own good) greatly animate the soul to this battle; since
these spiritual comforts (as hidden Manna) much allay the asperities,
undergone for the conquering of the flesh, and its pleasurs. Again, the
Expectation of an eternal Reward and Crown, which is infallibly after this
life to be given to all such, who bring the body into Obedience for the better
serving of God, makes all the voluntary labors of the body to seem nothing.
Lastly, I may urge, that the Feareof eternal damnation both of soul and body
(which is incurred through the unlawful pleasures, and cherishments of the
body,) ought infinitely to encourage us, for not yealding our selfs, as thrall
to all the pleasures of the body. O how terrible a saying will it be to a soul
in Hell, to hear those words, spoken by Abraham to the rich Glutton, then
lying in Hell: Thou Luc. 16.
did receive good things in thy life time, but now thou art tormented? Now
then if one be of such nycenes and delicacy, as not to endure any corporal
affliction or mortification, how then shall he endure the eternity of torments
and pains, which are prepared for all loose, delicate, and sensual
Christians? Let that soul then which wholly gives way to all corporal
pleasures, solaces, and Indulgency of the body, remember those most dreadful
words in the Gospel: Math. 22.
Bynd him hands and feet, and cast him into utter darkness, where there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Therefore to conclude this point, every one, who has holy Inspirations from
God, for the embracing of a Votary and religious life, ought to cast their Eyes
upon all those, who are gone before us, and have in far greater measure of
mortification traced that course of life, of which we here speak; I mean,
they are to call to mind the religious life's of S. Hilarion, S. Jerome, S.
Benedict, S. Bernard, S. Francis, and many hundred more; all whose bodies were
made of the same flesh and blood, of which our bodies are made; and yet most
valiantly they subdued their bodies to the spirit. They in so doing did expect
the same reward, which other religious persons at this day do expect: They now
enjoy Heaven, and so may we hereafter by following (though in a far lower
proportion) their austerities of body arrive to the same Heaven. But to press
this point more particularly, as concerning our own Sex, let us remember those
blessed Women, Caecilia, Agnes, Agatha, Barbara, Dorothea, Catharina, and many
more of former times, who not only resisted, through their intemerate and vowed
virginity all the temptations and allurements of the flesh; but also with most
wounderfull constancy and fortitude, endured glorious Martyrdomes for the love
Christ, and saving of their own souls.

Therefore briefly, let each of us in the midst of our Austerities take
courage, and say with the Apostle: I Philip. 4.
can do all things through Christ, who strengthens me.


Cosmophila. Good sister, this your spiritual Resolution in ouercomming your
mortifications, is far greater, then I ever expected to have found in you, at
which I much joy. But to turn my self to you (good Father Confessarius) I
cannot deny, but that you have greatly discovered the weakness and insufficiency
of all my former objected reasons, against the embracing of a retired and
religious life; Yet seeing it is the honor and privilege of Truth, not only
to be able to with stand and break through the forces raised against it, but
withal to fortify and strengthen it self with unanswerable Arguments and
Reasons, for the patronizing and warranting of it self: And further, seeing
diverse things there are, which as they cannot be greatly impugned by Arguments;
so they have few, or no Arguments for their supporting (though I presume; the
warrantablenes of a Religious life is not of this Nature) therefore I am to
make bold both with you, and with the Reverend Abbess here present (for I am
persuaded, that her long government and experience in matters of this subject do
much enable her) that both of you would insist in your future discourses, in
laying open the Dignity, Antiquity, prooffes, privileges, Benefits (and other
such preuayling Circumstances) of a Votary life, which may most forcibly
conduce to the securing of the Resolution of such, as may hereafter undergo
that spiritual Course: The Heart of every one is in the hands of God, and who
knows how he will dispose of it?


Confessarius. Both I, and (no doubt) the Lady Abbess, will condescend to this
your pious request, since Charity binds as thereto: And for my self, I
think it most expedient, somewhat to enlarge my speech upon those three main
points, which are Essential to a Religious life; I mean, Chastity, Poverty,
and Obedience; to the which all Religious persons are by solemn Vow obliged.

Now the more fully to know the dignity of these three points, it will be
fitting here to set down the admonition of the Apostle Saint John given to all
Christians; and then after to show what particular reverence these several
distinct Vows do bear to his said Admonition: Thus then that Apostle
counsels: Love 1: Joan. 2.
not the world, neither the things that are in the world; If any love the
world, the Charity of the Father is not in him; Because all that is in the
world is Concupiscence of the flesh, and Concupiscence of the eyes, and pride
of life. Thus is the kingdom of this world divided into these three parts, as
it were into three distinct Provinces.

Now for the better unfolding and explaining the true meaning of this passage
of Scripture, we are to understand that by the Concupiscence of the flesh, the
Apostle comprehends all sensual pleasures of the body, and other delights
used in cherishing and pampering the flesh, whereby the flesh may burst out into
any unlawful and sinful Actions; By the Concupiscence of the Eyes, he means
all beauty, and bravery of Riches; By pride of life, he signifies the Vanity
of Ambition, consisting in worldly honor and Estimation. These three then are
the most general Vanities of this life, I mean, Carnal pleasures,
Covetousness, and Ambition; By which three, as by his strongest Nets, the Devil
does daily ensnare man ye poor Christians to his subjection, and to their
Souls eternal perdition.

But now observe how the malice and Venom of these three most pestilent
diseases, are cured by the vows performed in a Religious life: First then the
Vow of perpetual Chastity of body (with the performance of the prescriptions
adjoined thereto) cures the malady of the Concupiscence of the flesh: The Vow
of Poverty destroys the disease of Concupiscence of the Eyes, to wit, desire
of enjoying riches, and the unquenchable thirst of Avarice. Lastly the Vow of
Obedience cutteth away from the soul, all pride of life; since he, or she, who
willingly subject themselves in all lawful things to the direction of another,
is fat from offending in vain Glory, which the Apostle above calls, Pride of
life. By this then we may see, how a Votary and religious life (being truly
performed and led) does meet with all the main temptations of the Devil;
over coming them, and bearing them down through the assistance of Gods Grace,
which is never wanting to such, as by due appointed means, do implore it at
his hands.

And here it will be much conducing if (besides what is already touched
thereof) we insist longer in the displaying the Worth and dignity of the
objects of the three former Vows: And to begin with Chastity. Chastity then
teaches Chastity.
us (as the Apostle affirms) how These. 4.
to ^ossesse our Vessel in sanctification, that is our body, which is a
Vessel, or Receptacle of our Soul. Now, who does violate this precept, shall
not as S. Paul says) possess Galat. 5.
the kingdom of Heaven. Here then we are to observe, that for the preservation
of Chastity, many things do occur in a Religious life; As for example, the
^loystering, and secret retiring of the party, ta^eth away the sight and speech
of such things, ^s are dangerous in this kind; as dangerous ^ompanye, and
familiarity; and most of all, ^he occasion, and Commodity, or Opportunity ^or
the giving the reins to ones natural de^^re, for the enjoying of corporal,
and unlawful pleasures.

A second help to Chastity (besides the spa^enes of diet) is the daily practice
of all kind of ^ertue, which is continually used in a Religious life; and this
is Prayer, Meditation, and over virtues, which increase the devotion of ^he
spirit, even by their own Nature; And his must necessarily be the effect of
Prayer, and ^editation; seeing by how much our soul and ^ind is more
strengthened, by so much the body is more weakened. And to conclude this ^int of
Chastity with the praises thereof ascribed thereto, in Gods holy word: First,
the ^^ngkome of Heaven is compared to Math. 25.
Virgins. Again, that a Virgin is called, Filia E. say. 37.
Sion; in which place by the word Virgo is understood the Church of God.
Moreover, we read that. The 1. Cor. 7.
woman unmarried and the Virgin do think (...) the things that pertain to God.
And yet more w^ find it commanded 2. Cor. ^^.
Virginem castam exhibe^ Christo; to present our self a christ Virgin to
Christ* Finally it is said, as a special privilege allotted to Virgins, Apo.
al. 14.
That they shall follow the Lambe^ wheresoever be shall go: They are the first
fruits t^ God, and to the Lamb.

I will finally close this point with this on^ observation; to wit, that Christ
himself was Virgin; Our Blessed Lady (Christ's Mother) was Virgin; Christ's
Precursour (I mean S. John Baptist) was a Virgin; and Christ's best beloved
Evangelist S. John, was a Virgin. Is not then that Stat^ most Blessed glorious,
and most to be desired the which both the Redeemer of the world and those, who
were most near to him i^ love and affection, did wholly and inviolable
profess? And thus far of Chastity, and the vo^ thereof, whereby all unlawful
and fiery Concupiscence of the flesh is wholly quenched.

Next I will descend to the Concupiscence the Eyes, (by which is understood the
vani^ of Riches, and wealth of the world) which i^ like sort is extinguished by
voluntary poverty. Now to conceive in part the worthiness Voluntary Poverty, it
will be much conducing Poverty.
to observe the danger of Riches, and the perilous state of the soul, wherein
a rich man stands, and all this proved even out of the sacred Scriptures: Of
this point then, we the^^ thus read: Proverb. 11.
Riches shall not profit a man in the ^ay of Revenge; and hereupon it is said
in Gods ^oly word in the person of Rich men lying tormented in Hell: Sapient. 5.
What has the vaunting of ^ur riches profitted us? But to descend to the New
Testament. Do we not find our Lord in S. Luke ^o be wayle the state of rich men
in these words? Woe Luc. 6.
be to you rich men, for that you have receahed your Consolation in this life.
And the reason hereof is delivered by S. Paul, thus saying: They, 1. Timoth. 6.
which will be rich do fall into temptations, and into the snares of Satan; and
into many improfitable and hurtful desires, which do drown them in
everlasting destruction and perdition. So just reason therefore had our Savior
thus to conclude generally against rich men: Math. 19.
Amen, I say unto you because a rich man shall hardly enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven: O that rich men would ponder deeply these points. Here now we see
the vanity and dangers of riches, which danger is wholly prevented by its
contrary, that is, by voluntary Poverty; through which a Religious person
disclaymeth from having any wealth or substance in particular to himself.

This then being so, is not that religious woman most happy, who by her
profession of Poverty, has freed herself from all those spiritual dangers
set down in the Scriptures, whereunto the rich worldlings do stand thrall, and
subject? and in lieu thereof does purchase to her diverse privileges and
spiritual benefits, which rise from her voluntary Pruerty, and a free
relinquishing of all worldly wealth? Of which many privileges I will here
recount some few: First then Religious Poverty takes away pride, and
haughtines of mind, which commonly accompanies Riches, and withal it takes
from us the power of committing many liones, which are wrought by the occasion
of wealth; so forcing a man by a kind of necessity to live well. Secondly
Religious Poverty not only preuenteth in us the perpetrating of many sins;
but withal it ingendreth in the enioyers thereof diverse Virtues, as Modesty,
Temperance, and Humility; which last Virtue has a kind of affinity or near
enter course with Poverty.

A third benefit of Religious Poverty is, that it is of force to cancel and
blot cut the sins of a man's whole former life, so satisfying for them. And
according hereto we find the Prophet Esaias thus to speak in the person of God:
Esaias 48.
Behold, I have boiled thee thoroughly, but not as silver; I have chosen thee
in the furnace of Poverty, meaning hereby, that he has so refyned and purged
him through Poverty, as that he deserves to be chosen and loved. A fourth
benefit of Poverty (to pretermit all others) is, that it conformeth us to Our
Blessed Savior, who so loved Poverty, as that he was not only wholly deprived
or all riches, but had not as much, as any place (as Luc. 9.
Luke records) to repose his head. And accordingly hereto we find, that when
Jesus gave authority to his Apostles to go abroad into several Countries to
preach the Gospel, he commanded them (by reason of his love to Spiritual
Poverty) Luc. vbi supra.
that they should take nothing for their iourny, nor scrip nor bread, nor
money, neither have two Coats, as we read in the same Evangelist. Now what
Christian of judgment, and careful of his soul, will not highly prize that
state of life, in which Christ (both God and Man) did choose to himself to
live, and which he most carefully recommended to his own beloved Apostles?

To come to the third and last worldly Vanity set down, which is Pride of
life; where, by Pride of life the Evangelist 1. Joan. 1.
understands vain glory, and desire of worldly honor, and dignity. This
vanity, being a spiritual and most dangerous impediment of serving God, is
taken away by the vow of a Voluntary Obedience and subjection, practiced in a
religious Obedience.
life; For whosoever (Man or woman) does most willingly vow to obey their
Superior in all lawful things; that person cannot (so long as he observes
his vow) fall into the danger of Pride of life. This vanity of Vain Glory,
consisting in the words of other men's mouths passed upon one, is (as the other
two former points set down by S. John) much disliked and reprehended in the
Scriptures: for thus we read therein: Proverb. 27.
As silver is tried in the fire by blowing to it; so is a Man tried in the
mouth of him that prayseth. For if the silver be good, it takes no hurt by the
^yre, but if it be base and not pure, it resolves all into sum; so fares it
with a vayne-glorious man through praise and commendation. Just reason
therefore had King David to avoid all vain glory resting in others speeches;
thus crying out against it: Away Psalm. 140.
with this oil, and ointment of sinners: let is not come upon my head: And
the like just reason had the Apostle to contemn the praises of other men
passed upon him; thus saying: 1. Cor. 4.
I esteem little to be judged of you, or of the day of man.

Now the worth of this Virtue of Obedience is much celebrated in Gods sacred
word: For we read it to be preferred before Sacrifice, the Prophet Samuel thus
saying thereof: 1. Reg. 15.
Obedience is better then Sacrifice (which passage you Cosmophila could allege
above in a wrong sense.) And these words S. Gregory thus interprets:
Obedience S. Greg. Morah 35. c. 10.
is better then Sacrifice; because in Sacrifice the flesh of another thing; by
Obedienceour own will is killed, or as it were sacrifized to God. Now the
spiritual fruit springing from Obedience is great; for first (as S. Gregory
says) Gregor. ibid. c. 19.
Obedience is the only virtue which planteth all other virtues in the mind; and
preserves them after they are once planted. The truth of which assertion is
proved several ways: First because the liberal offer of a man's self to God
(which is made by the Vow of Obedience) provoke God to be bountiful and
liberal toward that man again; For it is the peculiar goodness and
disposition of God, never to suffer himself to be overcome in bounty and love;
therefore it follows, that whosoever gives himself by Obedience unto God,
(which is done, when a man resigneth his will by vow of Obedience to those, who
are substituted in Gods place) he doubtlesly in recompense thereof receaueth
from God all spiritual Graces, and finally God himself. Secondly, Obedience
is said to plant all other Virtues in the mind, because in the practice of
Obedience, it follows, that we must practice them all.

Another fruit of Obedience is, that it does subject us, and all our actions
to the will and pleasure of God, and this without any reluctation or
resistance; but with such perfection, as that they are wholly dependant of him,
and guided or directed by him, Since what action soever the Obedient religious
person does, the same he does for Gods sake: Therefore in further proof of the
fruit and dignity of Obedience I will conclude this point with the testimony
and words of the Blessed and learned Cardinal Bellarmine, he thus writing
thereof: D^ Septem verb. Domin. l. 2. c. 26.
Quam ingens lucrum est etc. How great a gain is reaped by obedience, as to
merit with God in every action? for that man who does nothing of his own
proper Will but by Obedience of his Prelate or Superior, does in every work
Sacrifice unto God, a most grateful Sacrifice. And which is altogether most
admirable, if the Superior perhaps does sin in Commanding. the subject
obeying his Commandment sins not but does merit in obeying; so long as the
thing Commanded is not evidently a sin. Thus the Cardinal.

Now thus far (Good Cosmophila) I have spread my self in discourse of the
three essential Vows of a votary life (to wit, of Chastity, Poverty, and
Obedience.) And here now you see upon what principal grounds a Religious life
is seated, these three virtues being (as it were) the three main pillars,
which support the Edifice of a Monastical and votary state: and withal you
may see, what strong Reasons your sister Caelia has for her continuance in her
retired course; and how little Reason you have for seeking to divert and change
her judgment and will from the same.


Cosmophila. Good Sir I yield. And here I pronounce openly that never (never
more) shall my tongue utter any word of derogation, touching the worth and
dignity of a Religious life. But Sir I would entreat you to proceed to other
Heads, from whence this Heavenly life may be warranted with more store of
Reasons, in the judgment of us who be of the Laity.


Confessarius. I am most ready thereto; so willing I am to alter your judgment
herein, being erroneous; and to fortify and strengthen it, being once rightly
established and confirmed. The next point then, which I will take into my
consideration, is to show the Antiquity of a Religious state, seeing men much
pryze Antiquity of Antiquity of a Religious Course.
things; as we find they do in the beginning of Kingdoms, private Families, in
points of faith etc. Now referring you to what is above said, touching the
Essenes, being religious men among the Jews; I here further say, that our
Savior himself, did first institute a religious life, since he first
instituted the foresaid three essential points of that life, I mean Chastity,
Poverty, and Obedience. For besides what is delivered above by the Apostles in
commendation and warrant of these three virtues, we find our Savior thus to
speak of Chastity: There be Math. 19.
Eunuchs, who have gelded themselves for the Kingdom of God; which words are
spoken only of those; who have cut off all power of marrying, by a perpetual
and solemn vow, and such as Religion obliges us unto.

In warrant of Voluntary Poverty, Christ thus says: Unless Luc. 11.
a man renounce all that he possesses, he cannot be my Disciple. And hereupon
as prescribing this Rule of Poverty to his Disciples, he commanded them, that
Luc. 10.
they should not possess either gould or silver, and did bid them (as is above
showed) that they should carry with them neither bug, nor scrip, nor meat, nor
any thing else, when they went to preach to strange Nations: Lastly, Christ did
institute Obedience in those words: He Luc. 9.
that will come after me; let him deny himself, which words all ancient and
chief Fathers do generally interpret of the Vow of Obedience. Now that the
Apostles did follow Christ his Institution herein, and profeiled a Religious
life, is proved from the words of S. Peter to Christ: Math. 19.
Behold we have forsaken all things, and we have followed thee: which words do
not declare only the Poverty of the Apostles, but also their Chastity; seeing
under the name of all things, the wives of the Apostles must necessarily be
understood: Furthermore religious Obedience is gathered out of those last words
of S. Peter above rehearsed, And we have followed thee; since to follow
another, is nothing else, but to live according to that others direction,


Caelia. Reverend Father, you have spoken fully of the Antiquity of a Religious
life in general, as proving it from our Saviors time; but I would entreat
you to descend more particularly to the Antiquity of Religious Virgins; seeing
that point concerns me more nearly, in regard of my already begun Course:
And it also will give I think) better satisfaction to my sister Cosmophila.
For what you have above said of the first Institution of a religious life, may
perhaps by her not be extended to women, but to strayned only to men.


Confessarius. I will condescend to your words: First then we find that S.
Ignatius the martyr (who was the Apostles Scholar) affirms Colleges of
Virgins, and saluteth them in his Ignat. Ep. ad Philip.
Epistles. Yea some of our Adversaries the Protestants, do thus confess of
this point: In the flower of the Church (meaning in the beginning of the
primitive Church) there were Abraham Schultetus in medula Theologlcae,
Virgins, that professed perpetual Chastity. And which is more, our learned
Adversaries (the Century writers I mean, all being eminent Protestants) even
out of the rack of Truth confess, that in Constantines time being the first
Christian Emperor, there were Monasteries Centur. 4. col. 467. under the
title: De Monasterijs Virginum.
of Virgins; That there Cent. 4 col. 1^5.
then was a woman Gouernesse of professed Virgins. And furthermore the said
Protestants make particular mention of the Veyle Cent. 4. col. 468.
of the Virgins, Of their religious Cent. 4. col. 874.
habit and particularly of their Consecration Centur. 4. col. 865. and col. 869,
; and all this in the time of Constantine who lived three hundred years after
Christ. To conclude this point, the Antiquity of Virgin Nuns, is much
celebrated by Ioninian the third Emperor after Constantine; and he had them in
such Honor, as that he published an Edict, That who This is related by
Zozomen, in hist. l. 6. cap. 3.
should seek not only to violate, but even to marry a professed Nun, should
loose his life. Thus much of this point.


Caelia. I thank you, Good Father, for thus your discoursing; For I take great
pleasure to hear, that this Religious Course by me begun; is warranted with
such great Antiquity, and particularly in us Women. And now Sister Cosmophila
you may see, that this my Chosen Course of life, is no late Innovation, or out
an humane invention, as some Enemies thereto are not ashamed to affirm.


Cosmophila. I agree with you (Good sister) in judgment herein. But (Reverend
Good Sir) seeing this Religious Course of life, has continued so many hundred
years, as that no more touching this point can be expected; I would gladly
know, what kind of men, and especially of women have embraced this course;
whether they have been but of the meaner sort only; or of more noble and
worthy Persons; since this later degree of persons (if so you can prove it)
will give a great luster and glory to a Religious life; For I observe that
diverse of high place and rank in these days do even contemn that Course;
holding it as sorting only to the meanor condition and sor^ of Men of Women.


Abbess. You shall give me leave (Good Cosmophila) to take this task touching
this your lost question or demand, from Father Confessarius, with his good
leave, and to impose it upon my self, and to relate what I have read, as
concerning this point in spiritual books written of this subject in our own
tongue. I am the more bold herein, because many great examples not only of Men
out even of women, embracing this state of life, may be here alleged; And
there Examples of women, do more nearly concern v^ Women, and therefore may
with good show of Reason be delivered by a woman. Therefore I will most briefly
begin with men, but will chiefly rest in the Presidents of Women.

First then we find, (to insist somewhat in fortaine Princes) Lothaerius a
Western Emperor, about the year 800. Anastasius a Grecian Emperor in the
year 750. besides some other Emperors; Hugo King of Prouence and Emperor in
the year 920 Pipin king of Italy and eldest son to Charles the Great king of
France, in the year 800. Bamba king of Spain, about the year 670. to have
undergone a Religious and Monastical life. I will conclude, omitting many other
foreign kings and Princes, with Charlemaine, who was king of Austrasia and
Sueuia, and who received the habit of a Monk at Pope Zachary his hands. But to
look a little into our own Country of England, we shall find it to have been
most fertile herein, whiles the Land of England was divided into many kingdoms.
According hereto we may reckon Sigebert king of the Northumbers, anno 640.
Ethelred king of the Mercians, anno 704. Offa king of the East Saxons; Some
small time after Kenred; Finally Inas, king of the same West Saxons, all which
did forsake the world, and became Religious Monks. Thus far of men; omitting
to speak of many other Princes, Lords, and Noble men, embracing the same
Religious Course.

But now to come to women of worth and dignity, as being more peculiar to our
drift and intention, I will restrain my self to Empresses and Queens; who
have forsaken all Regal dignity or sovereignty, and after the death of their
Husbands entered into a Monastical life, and became Nuns, as we are at this
pre^ent. First then, Theodora the Empress, about the year 880. embraced this
course of life. ^ugusta, another Empress, anno 1190. Richar^is, wife to the
Emperor Charles le Gross, did build a Monastery, into the which she after
entered, and therein dyed anno 890. Cunegundes, wife to Henry the Emperor.
Agnes, wife to the Emperor Henry the third, governed some years the Empire,
after her husbands death, but in the end she surrendered up the Empire, and
chose to live in the humility of a Monastical life, anno 1150. Elizabeth, wife
to the Emperor Albertus the first, and Archduke of Austria, did build a
Monastery in the year 1290. and in that Monastery taking the Monastical habit
of a Nun most happily ended her days. This Elizabeth had two Daughters, who
followed her Example; The one of them was married to the King of Hungary, the
other to the Count of Ot^ighen, in like sort the said Elizabeth had two grand
children, to wit, the Queen of Polonia, and her daughter, who both entered
into a Religious life of Nuns, although her said daughter was in some sort
assured in marriage to the Duke of Vratistaw.

To come to particular Queens. And first Tesia, wife to Rachisius king of
Italy with her Daughter Retruda, ended their days in a Monastery, spending
their time in great Sanctity. In France Radegundis, who was married to king
Clotaire, got his consent to depart from him, and entered into a Monastery at
Poictiers, living and dying there with great show of piety and devotion, in
anno 520. Within some few years after Adocra, wife to Chilperick king of
France, together with her daughter Childerade, betook themselves to this
heavenly profession. Balda about the year 650. wife to King Clouis, king of
France, after the decease of her husband went to Celles, where she enlarged a
Monastery, before built, and till death professed therein a Nuns life. Yt we
cast our eyes into Spain, we shall find the like Examples of Devotion; For we
read that Nunez, wife to Veremond king of some Provinces of Spain, and Teresa,
wife to Abdadas king of Toledo, became before their deaths two Religious and
Cloystered Nuns.

I will come to our own Country of England; where we find great store of such
Examples. And first Eldrede, wife to the king of the Northumbers in the year
670. Ethelburg spouse to Inas king of the East Saxons, did both undertake a
votary life. In like sort Etheldred who being wife to two English kings, kept
her Virginity with them both, and obtained of the later husband (which was
granted her) that she might enter into a Monastery of Virgins. O how highly (to
the disgrace of many, who now live in the world) did this Queen conceive of a
Religious and cloystred profession! But to proceed further. Sexburg (sister to
Etheldred) being Queen of Kent, after the death of her husband, followed her
sister in her religious Course. Finally Alfrede, Queen of the Mercians and
Northumbers, did lead a most austere life in a Monastery which herself had
built, upon her own charges, about the year 970. Here now I make an end in
relating what worthy Emperors and Kings have left their diademes, to profess
in Monasteries, Religion and Devotion as also (as more fitting for me to
allege, i^ regard of their Sex) what truly Noble Empresses, and Queens, have
shaken for ever hand with the world, to lead a Votary, Monastical, and
retired life.

Most happy Emperors and Kings, and most happy Empresses and Queens you are
who voluntarily relinquished your terrestria^ Crowns, for your gayning of a
Celestial Crown, which at this day all you do enjoy and shall enjoy without
any change for al^ eternity! And now here (Cosmophila) you may conjecture by
that which is above delivered, that your Sister Caeliae by continuing in her
much desired state of a Religious life, after her dissolution of body, shall
have whole Troops of most Blessed Empresses and Queens, for her Companions
and fellows in Heaven. For seeing both they, did, and she will, end their
days in one and, the same Religious course of life; therefore all of them are
to enjoy one and the same heavenly Reward, and Community of Saints.


Cosmophyla. Most Religious Lady, This your discourse has given me great
contentment: And indeed it is most sortable to your state, that you as being a
woman, and Gouernesse of many Religious women, should be conversant in the
lives of those women (whether Empresses, or Queens) who leaving all
sovereignty and Royal dignity, did make choice to live and dye in your own
Course, and order of life.

But now, R. Father Confessarius, to turn my speech again to you: I would
entreat you to enter into a further Ocean, or main Sea, in discovering the
great Dignity and worth, ever attending upon a Religious Course.


Confessarius. I am as willing thereto, as you (Cosmophila) are; so fruitfully
should I esteem my speeches to be bestowed, if so they could be of force to
draw you to acknowledge all that Honor and worth, which is found to be in a
Religious life. Therefore in this place, I will show that a Rellgious life is
(as it were) a Compound made of the mixture of most other virtues. Now if this
can be proved (as hereafter I will prove) how worthy, and how much is to be
admired the state of Religion? For seeing virtue is the only true wealth (as I
may term it) of a Christian; it must necessarily follow, that who has more
virtue, is more spiritually rich. Well then to pass over (as above is both
proved and granted) that the three Virtues of Chastity, Poverty, and Obedience
do essentially concur to the true Profession of Religion, I will descend to
other virtues, ever accompanying that state.

And to begin with the three Theological Virtues, as they are commonly called,
I mean, Faith, Hope, and Charity. And first touching Faith.
Faith, (the Basis, or foundation of all Christianity) most clear it is, that
a Religious state cannot be without an assured and eminent Faith. The reason
whereof is this: That Man or Woman, who enters into Religion, forsakes all
present and temporal benefits and pleasures: for benefits and pleasures which
are unseen, and future, and so future as that they are not to come, but after
a long distance of time; this man, or woman relyeth herein only upon the sole
promise and Word of God: but this no man would do, but he that is fully
persuaded, that the future is much more certain and assured, then that which
is present. And this is the greatest Act of Faith, which a Christian can
perform.

What shall we say of Hope? Hope consists in two points; First and
principally, in hoping Hope.
for the glory of Heaven; which though it be to come, yet Religion gives such
full pledges thereof; as that it causes a man to undergo all difficulties
whatsoever in a religious life, for his infallible Hope of the said glory of
Heaven. The second point wherein Hope rests, is to extend and stretch it
self out to the necessary helps of this present life: but this kind of Hope is
most fully and actually practiced in Religion; since what man is there, who
reposeth more confidence in the goodness and providence of God for his enjoying
of sufficiency of necessaries in this life, then a Religious man, who
voluntarily depriueth himself of all things, which before he did enjoy, or
might have need of; wholly casting himself (through a most erected Hope) into
the hands of Gods goodness, care and benignity, for his provision or necessaries?

To descend to Charity; Charity brancheth it Charity.
self into three Parts; One extends it self toward God; the second branch,
to those persons who are of the same Institute; the last to all men whatsoever.
Now touching that Charity which is borne to God, this most crearely shines in
a religious life; since it is the only Charity which a man bears to God,
which forces him to abandon the world, for the more strict and severe serving
of God; therefore the force of that Charity must be extraordinary great, which
surpasses all the love, which we bear to our Patents, Brethren, Kindred,
Riches, and all worldly temporalities, and finally the love to our selves; for
how were it possible, that one should abandon and forsake all these things for
God, if he loved not God more then all things?

Touching the second branch of Charity we are to conceive, that the streams of
Charity toward our Neighbors, are derived from the love of God, as from its
source and fountain. And thus these streams run first toward them, whom
God has linked and tied together in one and the same Community, or Institute
of life, who by reason of this proximity and nearenes, have ever been
accustomed to call one another, by the sweet and loving ^ome of Brethren. Now
the ground, whereupon Religious people do agree and unite themselves together,
is neither neerenes in hloud, nor n^y civil Contract; but only supernatural
Love, which is Charity; which Charity did first breed this strict association,
and after did maintain and continue it; For without Charity it would instantly
decay and vanish away.

The third Branch of Charity (as I said above) extends it self to all men;
For excepting certain Institutes in a Religious life, which have reference
wholly to Contemplation, all the rest are so wholly bent to the service of their
Neighbors (especially by daily prayers, offered up for them) that all their
Thoughts and Endeavors seem to lean that way, and the Employment of every
religious family gives sufficient testimony hereof. Thus may a Religious
person justly say, as S. Paul said of himself: 1. Cor 9.
We have made our selves servants to all men. Hitherto of the three supreme and
supernatural Virtues of Faith, Hope, and Charity. But to come to other
Inferior, and moral virtues.

And to begin with Prudence, defined by S. Prudence.
Austin, to be the knowledge of what Austin. l. 83 q 61.
we are to desire and what we are to fly. But in what state of life does
Prudence more manifest and discover it self, then in a Religious life? Now
from the definition of Prudence given above by S. Austin, it ineuitably
follows, that perfect Prudence cannot reside or dwell in a sinners soul. The
reason hereof is, in that perfect Prudence is a Virtue, which considers the
true End of Man, and does apply for the purchasing of that End, upright advise,
upright judgment, and upright Command. Now heered demand where is the true End
of man better considered of, and better weighed, then in Religion, where we
direct and deuote our selves wholly to God, and put our selves entirely under
his Dominion, and power?

To come to Justice. Where does this virtue Justice.
more resplendently thine, then in a Religious life? since the Office of
Justice consists in giving every one his own, and chiefly to God that which
belongs to God. Now the state of a religious life barreth a man from all
Occasion of fraud and de^cite, as with-houlding that from another, which
belongs to him; And certainly a true Religious soul would not for a thousand
worlds do any Injustice to another, but infinitely more willingly would rather
brook to suffer wrong, then to do wrong.

Temperance is also a moral virtue: whose Temperance.
office is to bridle and curb the pleasures of the Body, but especially those
pleasures, which consist in the senses of touching, and tasting; The first
belongs to generation, the desires whereof are in themselves most violent and
intemperate; and yet they are all suppressed, or rather extinguished by the vow
of perpetual Chastity, and with closing ones self within a Monastery. The
pleasure of tasting appertains to the sustenance and maintenance of the body
by eating and drinking: but all exorbitant and superfluous effects hereof, are
taken away in religion; Since a religious life confineth it self within the
limits of necessity, and poverty; contenting it self with such poor and
necessary sustenance, meat, and drink, as is able to maintain the Body in
good and perfect Health, for the better serving of God. Thus you see, how this
Virtue of Temperance is practiced in a religious Life.

To come to the last Moral Virtue, which is Fortitude. This Fortitude, of
which we discourse Fortitude.
in this place, rests not in fighting in the field with one; But (it being
the strength of the Just, is practiced in subduing the flesh in contradicting a
man's own will, in quenching the delights and pleasures of this life, in
contemning all that, which this world so much admireth, for the Hope of an
eternal kingdom; briefly in sleighting te^porall prosperity, and in patient
bearing of Adversity. Now what state of men in the world is there, who
prosecute all these points of spiritual fortitude with greater sedulity,
diligence and bent of Will, then a good Religious man, or woman in their
private Monasteries?

Thus far of these four prime and Cardinal Virtues of Fortitude, Temperance,
Justice, and Prudence; where you may see Cosmophila, how they all are most
fully and diligently professed in Religion. I could further instance, how the
Virtues of Patience, and Humility; how the gifts of the Holy Ghost, I mean,
Wisdom, Understanding Counsel, Piety, and the fear of God, are all found in
a most high degree, in the state of Religion. And the reason in general hereof
is, because some of these virtues receive their Operation from a Religious love
toward God; and the rest are the gifts of God, through his love toward the
Religious. But what is already said touching the former Virtues both
Theological and Moral, may serve at this present to prove, that a Religious
life, is of that spiritual ampli^u^e and largenes, as that it does incorporate
and combine within it self the practice of all Virtues.


Cosmophila. O how pleasing are these your speeches to my ears! I grant, I now
much more honor (...) Religious life, then before my entrance into this house
I did. But Good Father since you have begun this your discourse most charitably
in the behalf of my Sister and me (toward her, for her confirmation in
judgment; toward me, for my alteration of judgment) continue, I beseech you in
your assumed Scene with the like charity.


Confessarius. Well then, to proceed further, for Charities sake; since that
the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 8.
Charity does edify, Charity is 1. Cor. 13.
benign and hops all things: I will in this next place, (for the greater
honor of Religion) show, how a Religious life may well be termed (for its
worth) a kind of Martyrdom. This is proved in that it bears a great
resemblance with Martyrdom. Furthermore, as Martyrdom surpasses a religious
life in diverse points; so in some points a Religious life exceeds Martyrdom.
To express these things, here we are to know, that there are two kinds of
Martyrdom. The one of the Body; the other of the Soul: That of the body is,
when a Man or Woman loose their lives and blood in protestation and defense of
the true faith. The Martyrdom of the Soul or mind is, to dye to the world,
and to all the pleasures thereof; and such a person may truly say with the
Apostle: Galat. 6.
The world is crucified to me, and I to the world. And what persons in the
world do suffer a greater Martyrdom of the mind, then such as are Religious;
since they are dead even to the pleasures of the flesh (I mean to marriage)
dead to Riches, dead to Dominion or rule; Finally dead to all the fading
comforts and consolations, which the world promises?

Now for the justifying of these two several Martyrdomes, I will insist in the
authorities of two or three ancient Fathers. Here then we find S Austin thus
to admonish all good Christians: Let us Austin. sermon. 150. de Temp.
strive against deadly allurements of sin, knowing, that Christians cannot
want daily Martyrdomes even in these things: For if Christ be Charity, Fruth,
and Justice, he that seeks to overthrow in Man these virtues, is a
persecutour, and he a Martyr that is resolved to maintain them in himself, and
defend them in others. Thus S. Austin. S. Gregory is herein more clear, thus
teaching: Gregor. hom. 35. in Euang.
There be two kinds of Martyrdom; the one in mind the other both in mind and
outward work. We may add hereto what S. Jerome speaks, to wit: Ierom. Ep.
^7.
Not only the shedding of blood is to be accounted Martyrdom but the unspotted
behavior of a devout mind, is a daily Martyrdom. So far S. Jerome.

Now to compare a Religious life, with Martyrdom of the body. It is then to be
observed, that as in many things Martyrdom surmounteth a Religious life; so
also a Religious life in some some things even excels Martyrdom. To
instance this Martyrdom of the body surpasses a Religious life, in that it
undergoes far greater pains and torments; yet the greater the torments are,
they must therein be the shorter, and sooner bring the tormented party to
Heaven. But in Religion, though the pains be not so violent, yet they are of
greater and longer endurance. Again, Martyrdom is to be preferred, in that by
means thereof a man lays down his own life; which is the dearest pledge,
that one can perform for another: Religion, though wanting this glory yet it
has the continuance of a most holy life, and store of merits, and this for
many years, which does advance a man very highly in the favor of the divine
Majesty, and reward him with many degrees of glory and eternal happiness in the
Heavenly Jerusalem; And according hereto, we may sately affirm, that many
years spent in holy conversation and retirednes of life, will be attended with
a greater increase of Reward, then the loosing of ones life, by only one short
Act of Martyrdom, shall procure.

Now this Advantage Religion has above Martyrdom: To wit, that a Religious
Course is a more safe way to gain Heaven, then the expectation thereof by
Martyrdom. And the reason hereof is; in that many Christians at the time, when
they should suffer Martyrdom for the profession of their Religion, have
shamefully fallen from their faith for the avoiding of their torments. And this
is evident out of the writings of S. Cyprian, Cyprian, sermon de Lapsis.
who relates the miserable falls of several hundreds, who (as he says) were
overcome before the battle, and overthrown before the encounter. Now
Religion lies not open to this danger, since a Religious life more sorreth to
a man's disposition, then Martyrdom does; and there be many things in it, which
(as above is showed) assuage the hardness of that Course.

Another privilege, which a true Religious life has above Martyrdom is, that
where as Religion is ever at hand, and ready to be embraced at all times;
Martyrdom seldom happens: since Martyrdom is not in our power; for neither
ought we to kill our selves, nor to provoke others to kill us; for either of
these were an Act of great presumption, and most displeasing to God. Now I will
conclude the resemblance between Martyrdom and a Religious life, with this
ensuing observation: That as without death there is no Martyrdom of the body;
so a Religious life may be said to suffer a certain kind of death: For seeing
death depriueth us of our wealth of our friends and of all manner of things in
this world; we in like manner find, that a Religious Cause does deprive a man
of all the same things; and this so wholly, that a Religious man can no more
enjoy these things, then if he were truly and really dead. Yet here is a
disparity, which makes in behalf of Religion: which is, that when by
Martyrdom we dye our bodily death, it is an easy matter to want all these
worldly things; because we then going to a better life, shall have no need of
them; whereas seeing in this life we have need of them, we forbear the
fruition and enjoying of them, with greater difficulty and resistance of
Nature. Therefore impasse no further in this subject, I conclude (in respect of
all that above said) that by Martyrdo^ a man diet to his Body; by Religion he
dies to himself.

Here now (Cosmophila) you may behold the splendor and worth of a Religious
life, which, as it is surpassed in some respects by Martyrdom, so in others it
exceeds it; I say, it exceeds Martyrdom, the suffering whereof even our
Savior himself so much celebrateth in these words: Greater Joan. 15.
love, then this no man has, that a man yealdeth his life for his friends.


Caelia. O good Father. You much strengthen my resolution with the sweetness of
these your discourses. But now it comes to my mind, that you, one day in
discoursing to our Religious Sisters of the dignity of a Religious state, did
call it a Sacrifice to God: your meaning therein I did not (I confess) nor yet
do perfectly understand. I would desire your Reverence to express your self
more plainly, that so my sister Cosmophila, and my self may be the better
instructed therein.


Confessarius. Well then to come to that point. I did then say nothing, but
what I will prove at this present. And first in warrant of that my Assertion
that Religious persons are a continual Sacrifice to God, in respect of the
oblation, which they make of themselves to God. I do produce S. Austin thus
teaching: Austin. l. 10. de Ciuit. Dei c. 6.
A man consecrated and vowed to the Honor of God, is a Sacrifice, in regard
that he dies to the world, that he may live to God. When we chastise our body
by temperance, if we do it for God (as we ought to do) to the end not to yeald
our members weapons of Iniquity, but weapons of Justice to God it is a
sacrifice. If therefore our body, which is but as it were) a servant and
instrument of our soul, be a sacrifice; if the good and pious use thereof he
directed to God; How much more then shall a soul be a Sacrifice, when it
deuoteth it self to God to the end that being inflamed with the fire of his
love, it may destroy in it self the form and impression of all worldly
Concupiscence, and be reformed according to his unchangeable likeness subject
unto him; and this Sacrifice shall be so much the more grateful, by how much
it partaketh of his beauty?

Thus far does S. Austin discourse of this point. With whom agrees S. Gregory
thus speaking: Gregor. 9. Moral. 3.
We offer our selfs in Sacrifice to God when we dedicate our life to his
divine Service.

Thus these Fathers; to whom I could allege the like authorities of many other
of them. And now from hence I may infer. That if it be a Sacrifice for us to
offer any thing up to God then doubtlesly to offer up our selves to God, is
truly a Sacrifice; the true Nature and essence whereof consists in the
absolute oblation of our selves (I mean of our bodies and souls, and of all
the powers of our Souls, and particularly in offering up the power of our
will:) especially in such an oblation, as being once offered up, it is not in
our power to recall. Now, how most acceptable the sacrifizing of our Soul and
body is to God; is proved by this reason following: If the Sacrifices of the
Old Testament, consisting in offering up to God a Heiffer of three year old,
or a Calfe, or some other such beast, were so pleasing to God, and that God did
receive those Sacrifices (as the Scripture says) in Exodus 29. Ecclesiast. 35.
an odor of sweetness: How ineffably pleasing then, is that Spiritual
sacrifice, (which is bought, and redeemed by the most precious blood of our
Redeemer) to wit, the sacrifizing of the soul and body to his divine Majesty?
And can we then doubt, but that he will receive such a Sacrifice, in an
incomparably far greater Odor of sweetness, then he received those legal
sacrifices in the Old Testament? with this I conclude this point, since little
more needs to be added hereto.


Cosmophila. Very Reverend Sir, You have so fully manifested and said open the
worth, dignity, and splendor of a Religious life, as that more in this kind
cannot be expected. Nevertheless, seeing all persons are not of one and the
same disposition of mind; some men (and these of more noble spirits) being
affected to things in regard of the true estimation and honor, which is found
in the same things; Others again being carried violently, and with an
immoderate love to such things, or courses of li^e, which are ever attended on
with hope of great benefit; and profit derived from thence; Therefore to
encourage that soul, which bears an eye chiefly to its own benefit and
emolument, I should be desirous to know, what fruit may be reaped by
professing a Votary and Religious life, which by other virtuous courses is not
so easily obtained. We see how worldly men are carried with an impetuous
stream of their Will, to such professions of life; wherein they hope to reap
profit, thereby to quench their unquenchable thirst of gain. For example, to
this end does the Countryman labor in rillage of his ground; to this end the
Marchant-venturer sends his ships with danger to most far and discoasted
Nations: Briefly, to this end, our Lawyers in England take such indefatigable
pains. Since then a Religious life infinitely transcendeth in worth these
former, and all other temporal courses of life. I doubt not, but that it is
furnished with many peculiar benefits and profits; and those of so much the
more worth, by how much the profession of a Religious life is more honorable,
then the profession of any kind of mercenary life. Therefore (Good Sir) insist,
I beseech you, in this subject; so far forth as you shall think good. I do
assure you, I do bring with me (now at this present) greedy and listening eats
to your speeches; let them not therefore be defrauded of their expectation.


Confessarius. As above I said, so now again I will comply with, and satisfy
your requests in what I can: and indeed there are so various and diverse
benefits flowing necessarily from a Religious and professed life, as that I may
say with the Poet: Inopem me copia fecit, Abundance of matter makes me
uncertain where to begin. Therefore at this present I will rest in presenting
to your judgment the chiefest fruits and benefits derived from a Religious
life, pretermitting for breuity others of less moment.

First then we hold, that a man, or woman by entering into Religion, has even
by the force and virtue of that Act (as men of ripe age have by their Baptism)
a full remission of all their sins committed till then, throughout Remission
of sins.
their whole life. Now, how great, immense, and sovereign a benefit is this?
The greatness whereof is best discerned by observing the effects wrought
thereby; to wit, First, the avoiding of Hell-fyer for all Eternity, or the fire
of Purgatory, which is more insufferable (as S. Austin affirms) then any
torments in this world can be. Secondly, the obtaining of the kingdom of
Heaven, which is reserved and given only to those, whose sins are remitted
and forgiven. I will add hereto this one consideration; That if we be to
redeem but only one mortal sin, how great pains ought we to take, in
procuring a true Co^trition thereof, in afflicting our bodies with fasting,
disciplines, and other such austerities? how impreciable then, and most worthy
to be esteemed, is that Course of life wherein a man or woman entering into does
by that one Act, deface and cancel out, not one only sin, but all sins and
lesser imperfections, which a sinful or careless Christian has committed
before all his life time?

Now that the Profession of a Religious life, does even by virtue of that Act,
blot out all sins before committed. Thomas Aquinas (that great Doctor, and
Saint) thus disputes: If S. Thom. 2. 2. q. vlt. art. 3.
. Almes-deedes do deliver sins (as we find in the Prophet Daniel how much
more shall the entrance into Religion work the same effect? Which kind of
voluntary Penance is not only of equal worth with Almes-deedes, but does
greatly exceed it. And the reason hereof S. Thomas gives in another place in
these words: S. Thom. 4. d. 4. q. 3. art. 3.
When we enter into Religion our sins are forgiven us; but yet so, as that we
on our part lay down a real and very great satisfaction for t^em: For when we
deliver up our will wholly to God, and bequeath our selses to his service, we
give him that which is more dear unto us, then all thing else in the world; and
consequently we do fully satisfy for all sins that are past. Thus S. Thomas.
And upon this ground it is, that S. Jerome Ierom. Ep. 25.
calls entering into a religious life, a second Baptism; and this with good
Reason, since in religion we dye to the World, in Baptism we dye to sin.

Thus far (Gosmophila) of the first fruit, of a Religious life; the greatness
whereof who can truly apprehend? O if a Man by some traitorous and disloyal
Act to his Prince, were enchayned, and were daily to suffer insupportable
torments for such his Crime: Or if one were infinitely indebted to his
Creditours, and fat more then all his temporal state were able to discharge,
how happy would that first man, or this other think themselves to be, if so
the one could be set at liberty from his daily punishment, and the other
discharged of all his debts, by performing one only Act, which should be most
grateful to the Prince of the one, and to the Creditours of the other? The
Case is here a like: We all by sin commit a spiritual treason toward God,
and also by them, we daily increase the heap of our debts, that is, our
Transgressions, for which we say in our Lords Prayer, Forgive us our
trespasses. And yet all the punishments due to be inflicted upon us, and all
the debts we owe to God, may be taken away and discharged by one only Act of
entering into Religion. How sottish then, and stupid are most men, who cannot,
or at least will not, apprehend the benefit thereof? And thus briefly to prove,
that the Act of first entering into a Religious life (if other requisite
circumstances be not wanting) does obliterate and blot out all sins before
committed, and that, in that respect, it is justly called, A second Baptism.


Cosmophila. Good Father, never can a subject of this Nature, thus learnedly
discoursed of by you, breed any saciety to my Ears, nor can they ever be
cloyed there with: such inexplicable pleasure I take therein, and so strongly
have your words, delivered of the state of a Religious life, invaded my
judgment; making it most contrary (so far as concerns Religion) to that
unworthy conceyte I had thereof, at my first entrance into this virtuous
Monastery: But presuming of your voluntary continuance in your former Charity,
touching the more fully rectifying of my weak and feminine Judgment herein; I
would desire you to descend to the displaying of other fruits and benefits,
springing from the root of a Religious life.


Confessarius. Most willingly. The next benefit then, wherein Remission of
pains, in Purgatory.
I will insist is, to show that a Religious life through Gods most merciful
acceptance thereof, does often expiate and make satisfaction for all sins,
whose temporal punishments (after the guilt of eternal damnation is remitted)
are to be suffered either in this world, or in the next, in the fire of
Purgatory; That a Religious life is of this efficacy and virtue, is thus
proved. If a Religious life can procure a full remission of all sins, in
respect of eternal damnation due to our sins, as above I have showed, it
does; then much more a Religious life, is of force to procure the less; that
is, to cancel and blot out all temporal punishment: Since the torments in
Purgatory, are so much inferior to everlasting damnation, as time is inferior
to all Eternity; and to endure torments for certain years only, is more
sufferable, then to endure torments for ever and without End. And the less we
are here to admire, that a Religious life can take away all the pains of
Purgatory, if so we call to mind, that this life is a state or Penance, and so
commonly called, in regard that most of the time thereof is bestowed in
bewayling and lamenting the sins of our life, and in repairing the faults and
negligences of former years.

Now the greatness of this benefit of a Religious life (if we apprehend two
things touching Purgatory) will more easily appear. First, the greatness of
those temporal torments in Purgatory: Secondly, if we conceive, that there are
very few persons, (and those only of extraordinary sanctity) which do escape
the fire of Purgatory. Now touching the first point, I will enlarge my
discourse with the testimonies and judgment of S. Austin, delivered upon this
point. Well then let us hear of what judgment S. Austin is herein, who thus
writes of the atrocity of the pains of Purgatory: Austin. in Psalm. 37.
Because 1. Cor. 3.
S. Paul affirms, that they (meaning those in Purgatory) do suffer detriment,
but yet they shall be saved, as by fire: Therefore (says S. Austin) this fire
is contemned: but certainly, though they shall be saved by it; yet is this fire
more grievous, then whatsoever a man can suffer in this life; albeit you know
how great and intolerable things men have, and can suffer.

Again S. Austin. homil. 16. ex 50. homil.
Austin in another place thus: They, which have done things worthy of temporal
punishment, (whom the Apostle says, shall be saved by fire) must pass through
a fiery r^uer, and most horrible shallowes of buring (...). Finally the same
Father thus further discourses hereof in these words: If Austin. lib. de vera
and falla poenitentia, c. ^^.
a sinner by repentance and Conversion escape death, and obtayneth life, yet
for all this I cannot promise him, that he shall escape all pain or
punishment, which must be suffered in Purgatory fire; and this fire (I tell
you) though it be not everlasting, yet it is passing grievous, for it does
exceed all pains, that man can suffer in this life.

In this place now I will descend to show, that most holy Servants of God have
been greatly afraid of the pains of this purging fire; Now if such men of
eminency for virtue and Piety, have stood in such fear and horror thereof,
what then shall become almost of all Lay People, who live in the world, and
forbear to take the Course of Religious life, which is very auayleable to
prevent and free them from that raging fire? I will then first set down the
words of S. Gregory touching the dread, that the Prophet David had of the
temporal fire of Purgatory: Thus then he writes, expounding those words of
David: In Psalm. 3. Poenit. Psalm. 17.
O Lord, rebuke me not in thy fury, nor correct me in thy wrath. This is (says
S. Gregory) as if he had said, I know, that after this life some must be
cleansed by purging fire, and others must receive Sentence of eternal
damnation. But because I esteem that purging fire (though it be transitory) to
be more intolerable, then all the tribulation, which in this life may be
suffered; Therefore I only do not desire, not to be rebuked in the fury of
eternal damnation, but also I greatly fear to be purged in the wrath of
transitory Correction: Thus S. Gregory; From whose words we may conceive in
what fear of Purgatory both David, as also S: Gregory himself (allowing the
judgment of David) did stand.

S. Ambrose (that Holy Father) feared no less, but that he might suffer the
pains of Purgatory; who thus writes of himself: Ambros. praecat. praeparat.
ad Missam.
O Lord, if thou reserve any thing in me to be revenged in the next life, yet I
humbly beseech thee, that thou give me not up to the power of wicked spirits
whiles thou wypest away my sins by the pains of Purgatory. I will conclude
with S. Bernard, who in these passionate words following, discovers his
conceived dread and horror of suffering the temporal pains of fire in the
next life: Bernard. sermon. de Sex tribul cap. 16. and 55. in Cant.
O would God, some man would now before hand provide for my head abundance of
Water, and to mine Eyes a fountain of tears; for so perhaps the burning fire
should take no hold, where running tears had cleansed before.

Thus far (Cosmophila) of this subject; And now from hence I present to your
judgment the consideration of two points. First, the violent extremity of the
pains of Purgatory; Secondly; that the most holy men who have lived, stood
most fearful, that their lives and Actions should be tried, refyned and
purged in this fire. Now both these two passages being most evident, (and above
by me so cleared) what dread then may Lay People (such as your self Cosmophila
is) conceive of this fire? Wherein all the Idle words (to apply my speech
particularly to your Sex) of young Gentle-women, all heir amarous Conceits, and
discourses with men, all multitude of lighter sins, all desire of superfluous
bravery in apparel, and new fashions, all idle spending of several hours in
the day for adorning and beautifying of their faces and bodies, to be gazed on
by men, shall be purged? and for how many years God himself only knows. If a
man should put his hand into the fire, but for the space of a quarter of an
hour, what insupportable pains should he endure? Yet all this were but a
flea-byting in regard of the torments of Purgatory, conunuing for many years.
Now then to turn and apply my speech to the beginning of this main passage:
If a Religious life be so worthy in it self, and of such efficacy, (as being a
state of Continual Penance) as that by it a Religious person may labor daily
to cancel his sins, and to escape the pains both of Hell, and Purgatory;
how weak then is the judgment of all those, who slight and prize little the
privileges granted by God to such a life? And on the contrary side how happy
(Cosmophila) is your Sister Caelia, in choosing this her retired and votary
life, for her better avoiding of all the former threatened dangers?


Abbess. Reverend Father Confessarius, and you Cosmophila, with both your good
leaves, I will make bold to relate one Fruit or benefit of a Religious life,
and hereto I am the more willing, in that out of my own experience and
government over others, I find the Fruit by me here understood, to be most
exactly practiced by Lowlines of mind, or Humility.
all those religious sisters, who live under my charge. This benefit, whereof I
here speak, is an Humble lowlines of mind, in the Professors of a votary
life. And the greatness of this virtue is of so large an extent, as that S.
Bernard houlds it to be a sign of predestination; who in one of his Sermons,
turns his speech to his own Brethren, and thus speaks: Dearly Bernard.
sermon. 2. do Ascensione.
beloved, persevere in the Course already undertaken; that by Humility, you may
ascend to Sublimity. This is the way, and there is no other way, but it. He
that goes otherwise, does rather fall: for Humility exalts; Humility leads
to life. Thus S. Bernard. The truth whereof from experience appears; seeing
we may daily observe, that that Man, or Woman, who is most poor in spirit
(that is most humble) is commonly most rich in the gifts of the spirit; and
according hereto (if so I remember the words) the Prophet David thus speaks:
Our Psalm. 112.
Lord is high, and regards humble things.

Now for the further displaying of the great fruit of Humility, we may call to
mind, that it preuenteth many dangers of the soul, unto which dangers high
minded persons lie open. Humility also ministers many helps to eternal
Salvation; for they, that are in honor and Elation of state, are ever in great
danger of a headlong falling; whereas a good humble Soul reposeth it self
most willingly in the lowest place, and is thereby more remote from any
spiritual slipping down. And by this we may gather how much we are obliged to
Religion, whereby keeping us out of the traffic and commerse of the eyes of
men, and from all worldly aduancements, we rest in a holy and wholesome place
of Refuge; we being by this means made mere strangers to the World, and the
World to us.

And touching the practice of this precious Virtue of Humility, (if I may
speak it in all sobriety of judgment,) it is most exactly and daily put in
execution by the Sisters of this our poor Monastery. For (though I say it)
there are diverse Sisters here, worthily for their parentage descended; and yet
they even strive and contend (through a pious and religious Emulation) which of
them shall perform the most and lowest works of Humility. How often (to my
own great edification) have I commanded such, or such a Sister of no mean
Descent, to undergo this or that mean office in out house? Yea so willingly
has each of the^ with a ready and smiling consent performed what I appointed,
as that, though I be their unworthy Gouernesse, yet I may bouldly pronounce,
that they are my Instructours in the practice of this Virtue. And for the more
certainty hereof, I dare appeal to the judgment of you (Sister Caelia) whose
eyes are able to depose the daily truth, of what I here say; but (though I be
their Superior) heerin I will not glory in our selves, but according to the
Apostles words, I 1. Cor. 1.
will glory in our Lord.


Caelia. I freely auerre, that my own sight, since my first entrance in to
this holy House, has observed strange and unexpected Examples of this kind.
And indeed to speak under both your licenses, I do find not only Humility, but
many other Virtues to be daily exercised among our Sisters, to the great
strengthening and encouraging of me, in this my selected life. So as I may
justly term this Monastery (and no doubt, all other well governed Monasteries,
either of Men, or Women) a very School of Virtue. For besides the three
Theological virtues (to wit, Faith Hope, and Charity) as also besides the
three essential vows of a religious life, (I mean of Chastity Poverty, and
Obedience) finally besides Humility (above spoken of) what other virtue,
sorting to a Christian life, is there not practiced by the blessed Nuns of
this Monastery, and this in a high degree? The due Consideration of which
point, (I grant) has increased my thirst in embracing this most happy life,
and in loathing the world, and all the fruitles pleasures thereof. O dear
Sister Cosmophila. I would to God, I were daily to endure no small pains of my
body (and this for no thort time) that you had so fully seen in this place,
the practice of virtue, as I have done; and that the sight thereof had made so
deep an impression both in your Understanding and Will, as to my infinite
comfort (through the unspeakable goodness of his divine Majesty) it has done in
mine: Then (Good sister) I should be assured that you would not so much depresse
and vnderu^lew the state of a Religious life, as in the beginning of this
discourse you did. Yea I would not be altogether in despair, but that your
self, for the Eternal good and welfare of your soul, (with a pious contempt
of all those trifling allurements above mentioned by you, as Marriage, splendor
in apparel, attendance, and the like) might perhaps embrace the same religious
Course of life with me.

But Reverend Father, (to turn my speech to you) your Reverence may proceed
further (if so you shall think good) in unfolding the fruits and benefits of
Religion; My sister seems by her words to take no small delight therein; and
as for my self (to the greater, nourishment of my spiritual life) I do even
feed upon these your virtuous and religious discourses.


Confessarius. I will not be sparing of my labor herein. But because this
Scene of mine; in setting down the benefits and commodities arysing by a
Religious life, has been somewhat long; therefore I will pass over many
fruits thereof, As that a man does discharge his debt, in giving himself wholly
to God, in Religious state. That Gods peculiar care and protection is over
those, who live in a Religious life. That the prayers of Religious persons are
easily heard. That among religious people there is mutual communication of
Good works. That in a Religious state, the Commvndements of God bynding under
the penalty of damnation, are far more easily kept, then in the state of the
Layty. That there is greater merit of one and the same good work, performed by
a Religious person, then the same is being performed in a Lay person and this
by virtue of a Religious state. That those who are truly Religious people, do
ever the Will of God. That a Religious life (as above is partly showed) cutteth
off and preuenteth all occasion of sin. That by a Religious state we she the
world, and all the dangers thereof. All these particular points Religion
promises a safe and quiet death.
(I say) I will pretermit to enlarge my self upon, and I will close this long
Passage, touching the Fruits and benefits of a Religious life, by here
showing, That one maine or chief Fruit thereof is, that it promises a safe,
quiet, and happy death. The greatness of which benefit what tongue can express,
or understanding conceive, since Gods sacred writ assures us, Apocal. 14.
Blessed are they, that dye in our Lord?

Now for the better and more full apprehension of this so inexplicable a
benefit, we are to call to mind, that at the hour of our death three things
are accustomed to afflict us. The (...), Death it self; the remembrance where
of (in regard, that thereby we are to leave the world, and all its temporal
pleasures) begets even a horror in Man's Nature; and therefore it is most
truly said by the Wiseman, that the remembrance Ecclefiast. 41.
of Death is bitter. The second reason making death so unpleasing is, that that
is the time, when the Devil is most accustomed to tempt a Soul, with his
wicked suggestions. The third (and most dreadful) is the astonishing fear of
the last Sentence, o^ doom of a Soul, which instantly follows after death.
Now the discontents and terror of all these three things, are much more
mitigated, sweetened, and lessned in Religion, then they are (or commonly can
be) in the death of Lay persons.

To begin with the first; This grief in the Laity, proceeds; that by death,
we are t^ leave all worldly Riches, states, honors, ye^ wife and children.
Finally that the soul (...) leave the body, they two having lived so lon^ as
most dear friends. Now most of this grief^ is taken away in one, dying in the
state of Religious life; And the reason hereof is, t^ cause when a Religious
man, or Woman by their professed state, have once forsaken the world they have
given then aforehand; their last farewell to all Riches. Honors, neerene^ of
kindred and the like; and then seeing the^ have parted with all these
allurements before, a^ their first entering into Religion; it cannot (...) any
great grief the second time, to part with them to wit at the time of their
death.

Now touching the second point, which the Assaults and temptations, with which
(...) Enemy of Man's Soul is accustomed to trouble each one at his death, we
dare say. That if there be any kind of men, that are not troubled at that time,
or but very little with his wicked suggestions, the Religious Man is that man.
And this is thus proved: First, in that the goodness of God, will not suffer
himself to ^eaue and forsake that person, in that last point of a most
dangerous state, upon which person God has in his life time heaped so many
spiritual graces and favors, as are necessarily concurring for ones entering
into a Religious state. Secondly I maintain, that it is most sor^ing and
agreeable even to the Justice of God, to protect, and defend in that dangerous
hour, that person, who with all sincerity and simplicity of heart has vowed
himself, (I mean both his Body, Soul, and all the powers thereof) to a most
strict, severe, and Religious Course of serving his divine Majesty. Wherefore
no good Religious person has just Reason to fear, but that God at the hour
of his death will cover him under the wings of his protection, and will
strengthen his Soul with internal comfort.

To the lessening or breaking of the forces of the former temptations of the
Devil, at the time of a Religious Man's death, we may add the comfort and
consolation, which every Religious man at that hour receaueth of his Brethren,
and every Religious Woman of her Sisters. This I mean, by the assistance of
their Brethren, and Sisters; which assistance consists in their exhortations,
Counsel, and continual prayers; which always, but especially at the instant
of death, are very powerful to animate us in hope, and to repel the fierce
attempts of the Enemy.

Concerning the third and last point, which makes death most terrible; which
is the lear^ of the dreadful doom, which immediately follows the separation
of the body from the soul: The fear of which doom is much diminished by the
hope of Salvation, which i^ Religious man may more securely promise to
himself, then any Lay person for the mo^^ part can. And this Hope is grounded
principally upon two points. First, that it is presumed, that a Religious Man
is not guilty to himself of any mortal and grievous sin. Secondly, his Hope
is confirmed with the remembrance of the abundance of his good works, during
his life time: neither of which can be wanting in a Religious Course. And
hereupon we read S. Jerome, exhorting Iulia^ to a Religious life, thus to write
to him: Jerome Epist. 34.
Happy is that man, and worthy of all blessedness, whom old age ouertaketh
serving Christ; whom the last day shall find fighting under our Savior, or to
whom i^ shall be said; Thou have received ill things in thy life but now shall
rejoice.

Hitherto (worthy Cosmophila) I have labored both for your own, and your
Sister Caelia her spiritual good, in discoursing of a Religious state. And
briefly to recall to our memory what has passed in our former words thereof,
even from the beginning of our speech. First, you may remember, that I did
discoue^^ the weakness and insufficiency of all those Reasons and Objections,
insisted upon by ^ou, with which your Father so much labo^ed to impugn (at
least to disesteeme, and dis^alew) a Votary and Monastical life. After that,
showed the worth of that kind of life, by seting down the three Essential
Vows (I mean, of Chastity, Poverty, and Obedience) whereupon a Religious life
is grounded or seated. That done, I did spend diverse passages of ^each, in
laying open the Excellency, Antiquity, honor, Splendor, and Dignity of the
same kind ^ life. And now in this last place, I have ran^ed together diverse of
the chiefest and most ^rincipall Fruits, and benefits, ever necessarily
^^tending upon a Religious state. So as now I how not, what more can needfully
be said ^uching this subject.

That your Sister Caelia has by these my words, strengthened and fortifyed her
pious resolution, for embracing this course of life, I ^^st fully assured: Now
what operation my ^eaches have found in you (Cosmophila) will ^est appear by
your own relation. Only I ^ould be glad, (as through some words by ^ou above
uttered I partly hope) if so by force these my speeches, your Judgment might
fully induced, only to have a true and wor^^y conceit of a Religious life.


Cosmophila. Only to have a true and worthy conceit of a Religious life! O God
(if so I may say without ^^^ence) I must think (Dear Sir) you do partly
wrong me, in restrayning my Judgment to such niggardly limits of affection
toward Religion: Therefore most Reverend Sir, and you most Virtuous Lady, as
also you, my dearest Sister Caelia; I say unto you all three, that hither to I
have in part concealed, what the forc^ of this our discourse has stealingly,
and by degrees wrought in my Soul. Now I will freely vnbreast, and lay open my
most in ward thoughts to you all. My Judgment is wholly vanquished; I freely
confesle, that I am persuaded, that no other course of life is more propitious
and grateful in the sight of God, the^ a Religious state. But (which is the
chiefest poin^of this my acknowledgment, ever hid till thi^ instant) My Will,
(My Will I say) burns with a fiery and unquenchable desire to implant my
self with my Sister, in this so much celebrated state.

I speak not this out of a womanish Passion; I speak it our of true Judgment,
for see no other more short Cut, for arriving t^ Heaven, then by a Religious
life. Therefore (Most Reverend Confessarius, and most worthy Lady Abbess) here
upon my knees I prostrat^ my soul before God, my Body before you both, humbly
(most humbly) beseeching you that I may be received as a Religious Woman, into
this your Monastery. No dear sister you shall not need to take any daily
corporapenance for any change of my former judgment (as most kindly you wished
in your latwords) I am wholly yours without any sucforced necessity.

O sweet Jesus, what a celestial life is this, described by you (Good Sir!)
The Common sentence is, that there is but one Heaven; but I say there be two
Heavens; The one, here upon Earth in a Religious Monastery, serving as a Type
of the second; The other, that most happy and blessed kingdom above, wherein
God with all his Saints does reign for all Eternity; which supreme Heaven is
the reward of all such as here live virtuously to their last moment of
breathing, in this terrene Heaven. O how happy then is he, or she, who
betramples under their feet all pleasures, benefits, and other glorious
miseries of this life, and do willingly embrace a Religious course; making
themselves by this means, with continuing a life sortable to their Course,
undoubted heirs to the Kingdom of God? Know you then any reason, Reverend
Lady, and you Father Confessarius, why I may not range my self, within the
number of these Happy Ones? I know you do not. And I hope his Divine Majesty
will be as ready both to inspire good resolutions in me, and to give me grace
to assent to his inspiratio^s, as he has already done to my own Sister here,
and to many thousands more. Therefore once more I say, take full notice (all
you three,) That from this present hour, I am fully resolved to abandon the
World, and all the transitory inuitements thereof, and to become a Recluse, or
Religious Woman (under your license and consent) in this your Monastery.

Farewell therefore, thou Deceitful World for ever after, withal thy
flattering blandishme^ts Farewell, Most dear Parents, more careful (Fear) of
my body, then of my soul. Farewell all expectation of enjoying part of your
state and Lands. I care not for inheriting of temporalities, Let me inherit
Eternity, and Heaven: Thither my thoughts shall hereafter b^ bent: Thereupon
the Eyes of my understanding, as the Eyes Psalm. 222.
of a handmaid upon the band of her mistress, shall be fixed. And in place of all
these dangerous illaqueations and Nets, serving only to entangle the soul,
Come my Sweet Jesus, and knock at the door of my Heart and I will be ready to
open unto thee. Come all you blessed Saints in Heaven (and especially thou
Queen of Heaven, Mother of my Savior) and defend, and guard me with your
impetrations and prayers, in this my piou Resolution. To conclude, come into my
Soul all those celestial consolations, not to b^ communicated to flesh and
blood; and fill up those Rooms of my soul, which heretofore temporal
delights were accustomed to possess. God has at this time even arrested m^ in
this Monastery, with the hand of his holy Providence, and Benignity; from hence
it is his pleasure I shall never stir. Here I have found God, so as I may well
say with holy writ: Cant. 8.
I have found him, I have taken bold t^ him, and I will not let him go.

And to turn my words to you dear Sister Calia: Pardon my rough and harsh
speeches given to you in the beginning; I was then over earnest (I confess) in
my parents behalf with you, and did not rightly balance together the duty we
owe to God, and the duty we owe to our Parents. What I before spoke, spoke in
ignorance; Let ignorance then ^xcuse me. And as hitherto we have been Si^^ers
in Nature, so hereafter I hope we shall be ^isters in Religion, by embracing
the same kind (...) a Religious life in this your Monastery. No ^ore will I be
your Sister Cosmophila, but ever (...) the time hereafter (upon my receiving of
^^e Sacrament of Confirmation, which as yet I ^aue not) your sister
Christophila; Since all my ^^ue, my affection, my vassassage of soul and ^ody,
I most humbly bestow upon my dear ^edeemer Jesus Christ.


Confessarius. Rise up, good Cosmophila (for as yet we will ^^ayne in you that
Name.) I much joy at this ^appy change in you, and that my former ^ords have
had such an Influence and power ^uer your judgment, as to beget in you such
(...) unexpected alteration.


Abbess. And I as fully congratulate this your determination; and shall be
ready to further it to my ^ower, so far forth as true judgment shall lead (...)
to.


Caelia. And think you Dear sister, that I do not a bound with an excess of
joy, to see you become now what you are, and to be so much different from your
former self? Alas my fear before was, that you would bear an unalterable
disaffection to my course of life. Must not then infinitely rejoice to see you
thus altered in judgment? But let us both therefore give thanks to him, who at
his pleasure is able to cause, that crooked Lue. 3.
things shall become straight and rough ways plain.


Abbess. Though we all much rejoice at this you happy determination: yet what
satisfaction can you give to your Father, who perhaps wi^thinke himself
wronged by this our Monastery, in detayning two of his daughters, contrary to
his mind and pleasure. Therefore to prevent all unjust and suspicious
Aspertions which otherwise may be laid upon ou^ House, and particularly upon
our Confessariu^ and my self, I should hold it partly convenient; that you
return into England for the time, to get your parents good consent here to.
And if absolutely they refuse to give their consent, then nevertheless you may
return back, continuing in this your pious resolution: For we read, Act. ^.
God must be obeyed, rather than man.


Confessarius. I conspire wholly in Judgment with the La. ^bbesse herein; So
desirous I am, that our Monastery should avoid all obloquy, into which ^erhaps,
by reason of others wrongfully mis^^er preting our sincere Intentions, it might
^unne. Therefore Cosmophila (though we abolutaly leave the business to your
self) I hold not amiss for you to return into England, ^o the end to get
the allowance and approba^ion of your parents in this matter.


Cosmophila. Both of you (I see) speak this by way of persuasion, not by way
of command; therefore you both must pard on me, if I proceed contrariwise
herein. O, I fear, neither of you do ^ully know, the snares and temptations,
which ^ong Gentlewomen (when they once intend to serve God truly, and
sincerely, and especially, when they resolve absolutely to break with the
world) do oftentimes to their spiritual damage find in England. I am guilty of
my own weakness; and therefore loath I shall be (by my return into England)
to expose my soul to all those assaults, which may be planted against it: As,
the contrary command of parents, attended on with tears and sighs; the
inuitements rising from enjoying a very worthy temporal state, and the far
greater in regard of my Sister Caelia her resolution, and thereby my parents
whole state to be le^ to me alone; Marriage, and hope of Children thereby;
Finally the undermining battery o^ all other worldly delights and honors: know
not, if I should return into England what strength, all, or any of these
forcible motives might have over my Soul. Therefore hold it most secure for
me in this place t^ stay, and to put in present execution the piou^ motions,
which his Divine Goodness has vouchsafed to inspire into me.

I will relate to you examples of two worth Catholic Gentlewomen, whose
unexpected Events or Fortunes beget a fear in me for putting of (though it be
but for a short time) and delaying the practizing of Gods holy Will touching
the spiritual courses of ones soul* And what is delivered of these two
Gentlewomen, is truly delivered (I speak in all sincerity) without any
fiction, or imagining that to happen to them, which really did not happen: for
the Relatour hereof was well acquainted with them both.

The first is, of a Young Gentlewoman, to whom was left by her deceased Father
(a man of a great estate, and of very good rank) two thousand and five hundred
pounds for her portion: This Gentlewoman would oftentimes make great ouertures,
and shows of her desire to enter into a religious state; and many holy
inspirations from God (no doubt) she had thereto. But she going up to London
out of her own Country (whether to the end of taking that blessed course, or
not, I certainly know not) did fall in acquaintance with a young Gentleman, far
undeserving her, or her estate or portion: Him she married, and within the
compass of a year had a Child by him, and both she and the Child dyed in
Childbed, and so he went freely away with her good portion.

The other was a Gentlewoman, descended from a very honorable stem. This
Gentlewoman being married, her first husband dyed, and did leave her a very
fair Iointure, Presently upon the death of her husband, nothing was with her
so frequent in her speeches, as a Monastery, with an absolute Resolution to
enter into Religion. This Gentlewoman also (as the former) making a journey to
London (a fit place for Women to get bad Husbands) wrought means to a worthy
Gentleman, (from whose mouth I heard it) that he would procure passage for her
going over into the low-Countryes. Well, it so unfortunately happened, that in
the mean time she grew acquainted with a younger brother of good descent, but
of most small means, or otherwise of desert. To conclude, to him she espoused
herself, and now at this present day they five parted with great discontent;
he having about the half of her yearly means allutted to him, and she the
rest; she so living in no abundance, if not in want. O how happy those two
Gentlewomen had been, if they had prosecuted their good desires proceeding
from God, with all promptitude of putting them in ^^^cution, and had not
deferred the time! They both then might have spent many years in a pious and
Religious Course; furthering others in their Monastery (and therein their own
souls) with what was more then needful to their own maintenance.

Now, Good Madame, and you Reverend Father; who both persuade me to return
into England, procuring my Parents consent to this my late Vocation; here I
demand of you both: What greater security can I promise to my self, in
perseuering in this my intended course, then these two former Gentlewomen
could? They had temptations of Marriage, so I may have the same: They were
subject to the amarous passion of Love, I cannot say, I am naturally free from
it. In the end, they gave the bridle to their affections, with less benefit in
all likelihood to their own Souls; O sweet Jesus give me grace, that their
examples may be a fore warning and document to me, that I may (y) Apoc. 3.
open the door to thy first call, at what time thou may suppe with my soul,
and that I may put in practice without any delay, the good Motions and
inspiratious, which thou have powered into my Soul! Therefore neither of you
both, I humbly beseech you (as you prize the eternal welfare of my Soul)
seek to persuade me^ to go back into England, though with expectation of a
speedy return. I grant I am weak; suffer me then to overcome temptations
rather by flying from them, then by a positive resistance of them.


Abbess. Well, good Cosmophila, seeing you are so much auerted from your
return into England, I (and I presume that our Reverend Confessarius will be
also yealding hereto) do give our full consents for your stay here, and that
you shall not return back to your Parents. Nevertheless I hold it most
sorting, even in respect of your duty toward them, as also in true judgment,
that at least by letters, both your Sister Caelia and yourselfe, do labor to
give them all satisfaction possible, to appease their otherwise afflicted minds.


Caelia. I do hold this your admonition (Good Madame) of writing to our
Parents, to be most necessary; for seeing they are our parents, we owe to them
all true duty, and this without any offense to him, who is the Common Parent of
us all; since certain it is, that, Grace does not destroy Nature.


Cosmophyla. I do much approve both your judgments herein, and do desire that
it may be performed: Yet one thing I could wish to be added hereto; That is,
that Reverend Father Confessarius here would be pleased to write also to my
Father, a moving Letter from himself, that thereby my Father and Mother might
the more easily and dispationatly apptehend the first report of both our
settled Resolutions. He will be able (no doubt) by force both of divine and
humane Authorities, even to convince my Fathers and Mothers judgment, touching
the Election of this our Religious course, and consequently to ease and pacify
their minds. And indeed, as concerning my self in particular, it seems to me
that you (Reverend Sir) do in some sort stand obliged to perform, what I here
desire. For since it is the force of your pious and virtuous discourse which
has first wrought so much upon my Soul, as to induce it (I hope irreuocably)
to the undergoing of a Religious life; that therefore you are even in your own
reputation, bound to give my Father by your letters full satisfaction, for the
warranting of this my chosen State.


Confessarius Good Cosmophila, I will not be wanting in any thing to satisfy
your desire, or to advance your spiritual good. Therefore I will not only
write to your parents in both your behalfs, (howsoever, I know not how they
will respect the letters of a mere stranger) but I will withal send to them
in writing the whole Discourse, which has passed between you (Cosmophila) and
my self to try thereby, if it may in any sort sway with them. All which
shall be sent together with your own letters to them. But now you must give me
leave to acquaint you, before you and I do write to your parents, with a
custom, which we generally hold with every one, who desires ^o enter as
Religious, into this our Monastety; It is this. We do give to every such one
certain Points of devotion to meditate upon; in which they usually spend some
few days. By this, when this short Spiritual Exercise (for so it is commonly
called) is ended, both themselves and the Governors of their ^oules, may be
better assured of the certainty and firmness of their vocation; and whether
their vocation proceed from God, or from the ^nemy (the Prince of darkness) who
sometimes transformes himself in show, into an Angel of light. That labor
then being once happily finished, with a General Confession of your whole life
to this very time, we will ^res^ntly send our letters with the former Dis^^unse
to your Parents.


Cosmophila. O dear Father, this is more then ever I heard of, but I like it
wonderfully well. This course ^ierceth even to the heart of the Soul; and no
^oubt so good a ground work, cannot be at^^nded on with any evil Event:
Therefore *Good Father) command me herein what you will, I am most ready to
obey.


Confessarius. Well then seeing (Cosmophila) you are young and not experienced
in this kind of Exercise Therefore that this work shall not become over
fastidious and wearisome unto you, will content my self with appointing you to
meditate on these four points following which are commonly called the Quatuor
N^nissima. Of which the holy Scripture th^^ says: Eccles. cap. 7.
In all thy works remember (Nouissima thy later End, and thou shall not sin
for ever. 1. Death. 2. Judgment. 3. Hell. 4. Heaven.


The manner and form of meditating these points, which I would wish you to
follow, and which is particularly observed b^ the Religious of this our
Monastery, is s^ down by the late Holy Bishop of Geneua, i^ his book
entitled, An introduction to a deuou^ life. These former points are so fully
and m^^ingly disposed in that book, and for the better begetting in the
Readers Soul a Contr^tion and loathing of sin, as that I will ta^ the
pains, to write the said Meditations dow^ for you (omitting diverse others for
your greater ease,) even in the same words without any alteration, as they are
delivered by the for ^^id Book. For to alter them in any sort (an that perhaps
to the worse) were by deprauing is book, even mightily to wrong the worthy and
pious Author. Therefore you may ^editate on them, as they shall be in Order set
^owne; and you may bestow a whole day at several chosen houers) to meditate
only ^n one of them; so as within the compass of ^esse then one Week, you may
perform the Meditations of them all. The Lady Abbess will ^llot to you a
retired room, as more fitting ^or meditation, where you are to stay from the
^ompany of all others during the time of these your Meditations. And she will
assign one to ^ttend upon you for all necessaries belonging ^o your body, and
herself at least once a day will visit you, and further you with her
directions in this your spiritual labor, and to see, and you proceed therein.


Cosmophila. I am most ready to follow your prescribed ^^me; and indeed I am
most willing, that ^our Reverence, and my good Lady Abbess, hold even mould
me a new, as both of you shall think best; presuming it will turn to ^e
honor of God, and benefit of my own Soul; Therefore I will now leave you for
the ^yme (Good Father) and attend you Madame, or your showing me the place of
my retirement.


Abbess. Follow me then (hopeful Cosmophila) and will bring you to it. Come
in; Do this is you Chamber, where for some few days you a^ to stay alone,
during the performance of you Meditations. You shall have a sister to atten^
you with all necessaries, and my self will moreover visit you every day at
diverse times to your greater encouragement in so pious and profitable spending
of your hours. And with this for the present, I will leave you; and send you
instantly the forsaid transcribed Meditations, which (...) Confessarius has
wished you to pe^use, and seriously to ponder.


Cosmophila. Well, Dear Lady, I commend my self first to Almighty God, and to
all the Blessed Saints in Heaven, and then to Your and Father Confessarius good
prayers, that I may reap such spiritual benefit by the said ensuing
Meditations, as may most comfort my Soul, and strengthen it in prosecuring,
with all ^eruour and true fortitude, my intended Course of life.


The first Meditation, of Death.
The Preparation.
1. Place your self reuereutly, in the presence of God.

2. Pray him to inspire you with his grace.

3. Imagine your self to be extremely sick lying upon your deathbed,
without any hope of recovery.

Considerations.
1. Consider the uncertainty of the day of your Death. O my poor soul, thou
must out of this body one day: but when shall that day be? Will it be in
Winter, or in Summer? In City, or Country? By day, or by night? Shall it be
unawares, or with advertisement? By sickness, or by casuality? Shall thou have
leisure to confess thee or not? Shall thou have the assistance of thy Ghostly
Father, or not? Alas, O my Soul, of all these things we know not one; only
certain it is, that dye we must, and always sooner, then we imagine.

2. Consider, that at that time, the whole world shall have an end, so far
forth as concerns thy self, that is, there shall be no more worlds for thee;
yea, it will turn vpside down before thine Eyes: for then the pleasures, the
vanities, the worldly joys, the fond affections of thy life will seem unto
thee like flying shadows, and fading clouds. Ah! wreethed Captive that I am;
for what trifles and bables have I offended almighty God? Thou shall then
evidently see, that thou have offended him for just nothing. Contrary-wise, at
that hour, all devotion, piety, and other good-workes, will seem unto thee,
the greatest, and sweetest Treasures in the world. O wherefore did I not follow
this fair and pleasant path, will thou then say? At that sorrowful time, thy
sins, which before seemed unto thee but little Molehills, will appear bigger
then huge Mountains; and thy devotion so little, that thou will be scarce able
to perceive it.

3. Consider, the long and languishing Fare-wells, and Adieu's that thy
distressed soul will then give to this world: how sorrowfully she will bid
adieu to Riches, to Honors, to Vanities, to vain Company, to Pleasures, to
Pastimes, to Friends, to Neighbors, to Parents, to Kinsfolks, to Husband, to
Wife, to Children, and in a word, to all creatures: And finally to her own
body, which she must likewise leave all pale, wrinckled, hideous, loathsome,
and most detestably smelling.

4. Consider the impressions, that one shall have, to lift up, or lay hand on
this thy body* The great have, that even thy best friends will make, to carry
thy carcass out of doors, and to hide the same full deep under the ground
far enough from their sight: and this done how seldom afterward the world
will think upon thee? Surely no more then thou thy self have thought upon
other men who have deceased before thee: God have mercy on his Soul (will they
say) and there is all. O death how art thou to be pondered? How art thou
terrible, pittiles, and without compassion?

5. That at this departure from the body the Soul takes his way on the
righthand, o^ the left. Alas, alas, whither then shall thine go what way shall
it take? Surely no other the^ that, which it has heretofore begun in this
world.

Affections, and Resolutions.
1. Pray earnestly to God, and cast thy self with trembling love betwixt his
arms, and say: Alas, O my Lord, receive me into thy protection at that
dreadful day. Make that last hour happy and favorable unto me; and let
rather all the rest of my life be nothing else, but days of sorrow,
affliction, and calamity.

2. Despise the world, thus saying: Seeing know not the hour, wherein I must
leave thee, O wretched world. I will no more set my love upon thee. O my dear
Friends, Kinsfolks, and Allies, suffer me ^ bear you only that affection,
which is compatible ^ith an holy amity, and may therefore last eternally. For
why should I unite my self to you, in such sort, as that afterward we should
be forced to break the knot ^f amity betwixt us?

3. I will therefore from this very instant, prepare my self for that perilous
hour, and take that care which is requisite to end this journey happily. I
will se^ure the state of my conscience, to the uttermost of my ability and take
present order for the reformation, and amendment of such, and such my defaults
etc.

Conclusion.
Give thanks unto God, for these Resolutions, which he has infused and given
unto ^hee: and offer them again, thankefully, lo^ingly, and lowly unto his
Majesty. Entreat him a new, to give thee a Happy death, for the death of his
dearly beloved Sons sake, our Lord and Savior. Implore the assistance o^
the Blessed Virgin Mary, thy Angel Guardian, and all the holy Saints in Heaven.

The second Meditation, of Judgment*
The Preparation.
1. Place thy self in the presence of God.

2. Pray him to assist thee with his grace.

Considerations.
1. After the time, that God has ordained for the continuance of the world;
and after a number of dreadful signs, and bo^r, bl^presages; the terror
thereof shall make a man wither, for fear and anguish. A consuming flood of
fire shall burn, and reduce to ashes, every thing that is upon the face of the
earth ^ nothing (we see) excepted to be privileged from this fyery deluge.

2. After this fearful flood of flames and lightnings, all men shall rise from
their graves (excepting such as already be risen) and at the summoning of the
Archangels voice, they shall appear before the judgment Throne, in the valley
of Iosaphat. But alas, with what difference? For the one sort, shall arise with
glorified bodies, casting forth rays of exceeding light; and the other in
bodies, or rather in Carcasses, most hideous and Ioathsome to behold.

3. Consider the Majesty, wherewith the Sovereign judge will appear,
environed with all the armies of his Angels and Saints. Before him shall be
borne triumphantly, his ^acred Cross, shining much brighter then the ^unne: A
standart of Grace to the Good, and of ^igour and terror to the Wicked.

4. This Sovereign Judge, by his redoub^ed commandment; and which shall
suddain^y, and in a moment be put in execution, shall separate the good from
the bad: placing the one at his right hand, and the other at his left. O
everlasting separation, after which these two bands, shall never more meet
again together!

5. This separation being made, and the books of Consciences being laid open,
all men shall see clearly, the malice of the wicked and the contempt which
they have borne to the Majesty of God. And on the other side, the ^ennance of
the good, and the effects of the grace of God, which they have received and
nothing at all shall be hidden or kept secret ^n that great Consistory. O good
God! What a shameful confusion will this be for the one, and what a glorious
consolation for the other!

6. Consider the last sentence pronounced against the wicked: Go you Math. 25.
cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Weigh well
these words, which are so weighty. Go says he: a word of eternal reiection
and abandoning of those unfortunate wretches, banishing them eternally from his
glorious face. Next, he terms them, accursed: O my Soul, how dreadful a
Curse? a Curse comprising in i^ all manner of mischief and misery; An
irreuocabl^ curse, comprehending all times, and eternity. He adds, into
everlasting fire. Behold, O my heart, the grievous horror of this eternity: O
eternal eternity, and boundless infinity of pains, how dreadful art thou!

7. Consider the contrary Sentence, given and pronounced in favor of the good.
Come, says Math. vbi supra.
the Judge; (O sweet word, and beginning of salvation, by which God draws us
up unto himself, and receaueth us into the bosom of the rest and glory) the
Blessed of my Father, (O dear blessing, treasure of bliss) Possess the
kingdom, which is prepared for you, from the beginning of the world. O good
God, what excess of favor! for this kingdom has no end.

Affections, and Resolutions.
1. Tremble, O my soul at the remembrance heerof. O my God who can secure me,
at that dismal day, in which the pillars of heaven shall tremble for fear?

2. Detest and abhor thy sins; for only they can cast thee away, at that
dreadful hour.

3. Ah, wretched heart of mine, resolve to amend all. O Lord, I will judge my
self now, with all care and stricktnes, least I be then judged far more
rigorously, I will examine and condemn my self, that the eternal Judge
condemn me not in the latter day. I will with all sorrow and humbleness,
frequent the Sacrament of Confession, and will accept all necessary penance,
and aduises etc.

Conclusion.
1. Thank the Goodness of God, that has given the means, to provide for that
day, and ^yme, and opportunity to do penance.

2. Offer him thy heart to perform it.

3. Pray him to give thee grace, well, and truly to accomplish it.

The third Meditation, of Hell.
The Preparation.
1. Place thy self in the presence of God.

2. Pray him to asist thee with his grace.

3. Imagine to thy self a dark City, all on fire with pitch and brimstome,
and thronged with miserable Citizens, which cannot get out.

Considerations.
1. Consider, that the damned are within this bottomless pit of Hell, as
within this unfortunate City, where they suffer unspeakable torments in all
their senses, and in all their members: Because, as they have employed all
their senses and members to commit sin; so shall they suffer in all their
senses and members, the pains and torments due unto sin. There the wanton
eyes, and lascivious looks shall be afflicted with the horrible vision of
Devils, and hellish spactacles. The ears for delighting in vicious
discourses, detractio^s, and slanders, shall hear nothing but lamentable
outcries, and desperate howlings; and so o^ others.

2. Consider, that over, and above all these bitter torments, there is yet
another greater then they all; Which is, the loss and Priuatio^ of the glory
of God, from whose amiable face, and fruition, they are for ever irreuocably
debarred. Now if Absalom found, that the privation of the face of his Father
David, was more grievous unto him then his very exile; O merciful Lord what an
infinite grief will it be, to be for ever deprived from behoulding of thy most
delightful and lovely face!

3. Consider withal, the Eternity of these pains, which only thing, makes
Hell intolerable. Alas, if a flea in our ear, or if the heat of a little
fever, make one short night so long and tedious; how tedious and terrible
shall the night of Eternity be, accompanied with so many unspeakable torments!
Of this Eternity grows, in the damned, an eternal desperation, infinite
rage, and most abominable blasphemies, etc.

Affections, and Resolutions.
1. Terrify thy soul, and stir thy self up to fear, with the words of holy
Job: O my soul, art thou able to live for ever, with everlasting flames, and
amidst this devouring fire? Will thou willingly forsake the sight of thy God
for ever?

2. Confess that thou have deserved it. And wretch that I am, how often? O my
dear Lord, from henceforth* I will take a new course, and tread contrary way;
for why should I descend into this bottomless pit of Hell? I will therefore do
this, or that ^ndeauour to avoid sin, which only can beget this ^nmortall
death.

The fourth Meditation, of Heaven.
The Preparation.
1. Place thy self in the presence of God.

2. Pray him, to assist thee with his grace.

Considerations.
1. Consider a fair and clear night, and think how pleasant a thing it is,
to behold ^he sky, all spangled with an innumerable multitude, and variety of
stars. Then again, in thine imagination, join all this nights goodly
beauty, with the beauty of a sayre sunshine day; such a one, that the
brightness of the sun beams, should not hinder ^he sight of the golden
stars, nor the silver ^ayes of the Moon: and after all this, say ^ouldly,
that all this is nothing, in regard of the excellent beauty of that great
Paradise. O ^ow this place is to be desired, and to beloved! O how ^^elious is
this noble City!

2. Consider the Nobility, Beauty, and (...) of the Inabitants; and Citizens of
this Blessed Country; those millions of millions of Angelis, and Archangells,
of Cherubins and ^^^phins; those troops of Apostles, Prophets, Martyrs,
Confessors, Virgins, and holy Matrons. O how blessed is this blessed Company?
The low and meanest whereof, is more beautiful t^ behold, then all this
visible world: what sight will it then be, to see them altogether But O my God,
how happy are they? They sing cont^nually, melodious songs of eternal love;
they always enjoy a constant and steadfast estate of gladness; the enterchange
one to another unspeakable contentment and live in the comfort of endless, and
indissoluble a^mity.

3. In a word, consider what good the all have to enjoy God, who gratifyeth
they for ever, with his amiable countenance; and b^ the same, powers into
their hearts, an abyss o^ delights. What a good is it, to be united
everlastingly to their beginning? They are there like happy birds, which fly
chir^ing, and singing perpetually in the Heaven of thy Divinity; which
compasses them on all sides, with unspeakable pleasures. There every one
strives with an holy emulation, who may do best; an^ without any envy, sing
the praises of their Creator. Blessed he thou, O sweet Lord, and sovereign
maker, who are so bountiful unto us, and doe^ communicate unto us so
liberally, the everlasting treasures of thy glory! And on the other-syde, Go^
blesses them all, with an eternal benediction. Blessed be you for ever (says
he) my beloved creatures, who have so faithfully served me, and who shall
praise me everlastingly, with so great love courage, and contentment.

Affections, and Resolutions.
1. Admire, and ever praise this heavenly Country. O how beautiful art thou,
my dear Jerusalem?

2. Reproach unto thy heart, the little courage, which it has had unto this
present, for having gone so much awrye, from the way of this glorious
habitation. O wherefore have I so much estranged my self from my sovereign
Good! Ah! wretch that I am, for these pleasures, so displeasant and light, have
I a thousand, and a thousand times, left the eternal and infinite delights.
Where was my wit and understanding, to despise such goods so desirable, for
desires so vain and contemptible?

3. Aspire notwithstanding, with vehement resolution, to this delicious and
desired abode. O my gracious God since it has pleased you, at the length to
recall my wandering steps, and to direct them into the right way, never
hereafter will I turn back to those by-ways; never hereafter will I stray
from the true path. Let us go with courage, my dear Soul, Let us run
toward this blessed Country, which is promised us, in the kingdom of Heaven:
What make we so long in this beggarly country of Egypt? I will therefore
dispatch my self from all such things, as may put me out of the way, or hinder
me in so happy a journey. I will perform such, and such things, as may bring
me safely, and speedily to my iourneys end.



Abbess. Reverend Father Confessarius. The time is now ended of Cosmophila her
recollection, and all her Meditations are now finished. Therefore I hold it
convenient for her, to leave her solitary Chamber; and so we both may see, what
fruit the has reaped of this her allotted time. Indeed I am in great hope,
that her Meditations have wrought very forcibly upon her Judgment. I my self
will go, and bring her forth.

Lo Good Father, I have freed Cosmophila of her voluntary imprisonment, and
have brought her forth again to your Reverence. Now Cosmophila, you may freely
here unfold to Father Confessarius, whether you have reaped any spiritual
profit by this your willing restraint, and by meditating of the points, which
were appointed you.


Cosmophila. O Good Madame, and you Reverend Father: I should be most
ungrateful, not only to your selves, but chiefly to his divine Goodness, if I
should conceal the benefit, which (I trust) I have gotten in this Spiritual
Exercise: such internal consolation in has pleased his divine Majesty to
power (...) Soul. And indeed I here confess with an inexplicable comforts
that whereas before my retyrement I was most willing to embrace a Religious
life; my desire thereof is now so infinitely increased, as that my words are
scarce able to express my thirsty greedines thereof. And to lay my self
openly to you both, besides the prefixed order of meditating the foresaid
points set down in writing; I after labored to apply (according to my weakness
of judgment) the use of every particular Meditation, to the seconding and
furtherance of my intended course of a Religious life; I will exemplify this
point in all the Meditations.

1. In my meditation of Death, I thus discoursed with my own Soul: If the
ryme of our ^eath be most uncertain unto us; If at that time there must be an
end of all the world, so far forth as concerns v^; If at that hour, all our
time fruitlesly before spent in the pleasures of the world, will seem most
^sple using to our Memory in regard what is to follow death; have not I then
just reason, to spend my time ^reas^er is that most strict course of life,
which will ^n^^melesse unwilling to entertayne death, when soe^er it shall come
and will afford me greater confidence and hope of my future Salvation?

2. The Meditation of Judgment did most affraight my poor Soul; considering
the (...) and terrible signs, which are to be the, forerunners of the day of
judgment. But specially considering the last Sentence pro^^inced by the Judge
to the wit led, and to be Good or virtuous To the wicked in these words: Go
you cursed into everlasting fire. To be Good and virtuous: Come you blessed of
my (...) pos^esse the kingdom, which is prepared for you (...) beginning of
the world. I then concluded with my self, That no pains or labor in this
world could be thought by any man enjoying but any spark of reason, to be
overmuch for the avoiding of the everlasting fire, or for the gayning of that
promise kingdom.

3. In the meditation of Hell; I did consider two points with reference to my
determined life. First, the insufferablenesse of the pains of Hell; Secondly,
that they were t^ continue for all Eternity. Alas, thought I, who is all the
rigor and austerities in the most str^ct course of Religion that is in the
world, in respect of the lea^^ part of those dreadful torments? Again, What
is to lead a life somewhat paynefull to flesh and blood only for the space of
some few years, in respect suffering insupportable torments for alleternity,
and without end? Then did I conclude in the secr^^ of my Soul: Happy is that
Man, or woman, wh^ with a Christian Resolution and courage, is wholly be^ to
lead a most severe and austere life, for the preu^nce^ the grieuousnes of the
pains of Hell, which are to continue for ever. And then were presented unto my
trembling Heart those words of the Holy Scripture: Who Esaias. 33.
can dwell with devouring fire and with everlasting ardours?

4. To end with the Meditation of Heaven O now was my Soul ravished with
inexplicable comfort in pondering, that it is in on power and will, by
suffering some laborio^^ Acts in this world, and through the mercy God, to
purchase those most happy joys Heaven. Then I said to my self: Shall the
observance of the three Vows of a Religious life, she fasting, shall rising in
the night to praise God, or she any other Mor^ifications whatsoever practiced
in Monasteries, be thought too great a price, for the buying of the most
precious Margarite M. tb. 13.
of the kingdom of Heaven, where all the Saints do now reign with God, and
shall reign for ever, and everlastingly? No: and hereupon came presently into
my mind those words of the Apostle (sometimes repeated by my own Father:) The
sufferings Romans 8.
of this time are not worthy of the glory to come, that shall be showed unto
us. In this sort were my thoughts busied, after I had performed the Method
prescribed in every Meditation.


Confessarius. I much rejoice (Happy Cosmophila) at this your (more then
expected) fortunate proceeding. Well then; Seeing things so prosperously go
on, there remains nothing, but that the Lady Abbess now at the feast of S.
John Baptist (my Patron) which is within these few days, do admit you into the
Nouiship, with your sister Caelia. In the mean time both of you, may make your
Letters ready, which you mean to send to your Parents; and mine joined to the^
by that time shall not be wanting. Your Retinue, which you brought with you,
may stay here until the time aforesaid, when you shall publicly receive the
usual Habit, or clothing of the Nuns of this Monastery; at the performance
whereof your said-seruants may be present, that so they may with greater
confidence assure your Parents of all things here falling out, either
concerning you, or your Sister Caelia. And seeing Religious Women in most
Monasteries, do change their Names, at their first entrance into Religion,
therefore since your own desire (upon your receiving of the Sacrament of
Confirmation) above expressed is such hereafter in^teed of Cosmophila,
signifying A lover of the world, you shall be called Sister Christophila as
having deuored your self wholly to the Love, and service of Christ, our
Redeemer and Savior.


Abbess. I condescend (Cosmophila) most willingly to all that, which Reuer
Father Confessarius has disposed, touching your admittance; And at the day
above named, I will give you your Habit, and we will by Gods Grace account you
hereafter, as one of our own.


Caelia. No more then Cosmophila, but sister Christophila. O happy hours* We
are now Sisters in a double manner; Before by Nature, now by Grace; before by
Generation of P^rents, now by Regeneration of God himself; briefly, before by
a certain constraint and Necessity, proceeding from Man; now by our voluntary
(...) of one and the same Religious form of li^e, rising from the blessed
imp^^ations of his Divine Goodness. But (Good sister) seeing the time of your
admittance will be within these so few days ^et us in the mean while have
ready a joint letter, written from (...); to our loving Parents, to acquaint
them with all the passages concerning us both.


Cosmophila. I shall (loving Sister) be most willing to put my name and hand to
all, what has passed touching either of us, since my first arrival to this
place: Therefore I could with you (as being the elder Sister) to indite and
pen the letter. And Reu. Father Confessarius will (as he says) send with
ours, both his own letter to our Parents, and a Copy of the discourse passed
between him and me. Therefore let us both go presently about it; which being
perfected, I will give the letters and the discourse (the day after my
Clothing) to one of my Servants, that he may present them from us, to our most
dear Parents.


A Letter written by the two sisters Caelia, and Cosmophila, to Sir Orthodoxus
Knight, and his Lady Gynecia, their dear Parents.
MOst Dear and loving Parents; who under God, have been the ^^le means, that
we have any being in this world, and that we breath this common Air: We your
two most humble and Obedient Daughters, beseech you to read the Contents of
this our mutual Letter, with all serenity of mind, and freedom from grief
and passion, and that you would be pleased, that these f^owing tears equally
shed by us both, at the writing hereof, may not become fruitles, and neglected
in your Eyes. We then in all prostration of body and mind, hereby do make
known to you, that your daughter Caelia cannot be induced upon any Motive
whatsoever to forsake her happy and blessed vocation; and (which perhaps will
seem far more strange in your apprehension) that her Sister Cosmophila, in
place of withdrawing her sister Caelia from her votary life, is fully
determined to undergo with her the same Course, and here to remain without
any thought of ever seeing her Country again: Yea indeed she has already
taken upon her the Habit of this our Monastery. The more certain particulars
of both our Resolutions, the letters sent at this present from our most
Reverend Confessarius will fully lay open to you; since the unexpected change
of Cosmophila, was wrought by the devout and learned Discourse, which he did
use unto her.

Now then Most dear Parents we know you love us sincerly; let your love
descend chiefly to the love of our Souls. True it is, you intend us great
aduancements; but what are our Souls bettered thereby? You are willing to
procure for us high Marriages; But what more noble Spouse, then Christ? You
covet, that we may live in all affluency and abundance of temporal commodities
and pleasures: O how opposite and cross is this way, to that chosen way of
life, which our Savior, the Apostles, and other most eminent Saints have
before us trodden? Briefly, you even thirst to have by us (as being your next
heirs, now after the death of our Brother Monadelphus) the descent of your
house and family (which we know, for some hundred years has already
continued) to be produced, extended, and drawn out hereafter, from time to
time. But is there any time so long, as Eternity, to the which we both being
your Children, and the branches of your bodies, by embracing this our so much
wished and desired life, do hope to aspire? Let not then, (O let not) temporal
worldlings be preferred in your judgment, before our Savior; Let not the
prosperous life of sensual men ouerballa^ce with you the most austere and
severe life of Christ himself, of his Apostles, and of all other most glorious
Saints now raigneing in Heaven. Finally, let not the desire of the continuance
of your descent and House only for certain years here upon the earth and that
most uncertain) endanger to prevent the eternal continuance of your Children,
and Issue in Heaven.

No, No. It is vanity, to set our Love upon those things, which speedily pass
away, and to neglect that, which (as the chief means) conduces to our
Celestial joy, which is ever permanent. We know, you are Rich in the world;
Our chiefest Ambition is, to be Rich in Christ, who was so poor, as that he
had no place, in which to rest himself; for do we not ^ead: Lue. 9.
The foxes have holes, the birds of the air (...) nests, but the son of man
has no whereto re^^se his head? Give us both therefore your absolute and most
voluntary consents (even for his sake, who was so poor, and who suffered death
for the saving of all men's Souls) that we maimitate in part his Poverty, and
answer to hi^ heavenly inspirations bestowed upon us, for the saving of our
Souls.

And although we be not Scholars, yet w^ have read in devout spiritual Books
thu^ much in our defense (this we speak not b^ way of contestation with you,
noe, God forbid, but only by most hubly exhibiting what may be said in our
behalf) that, what thing soever houlds one from following the inspirations an^
Motions of God must of necessary be a Temptations But every Temptation (you
know) proceed from the Enemy of man. We might (as per^nent to us) here also
alledg the advice, which S. Jerome gives to Furia, a noble matrone (who (^)
Ierom. Ep 10.
entered into Religion) in these words: (2) The Father willbe sorry (meaning for
taking a Religious Course,) but Christ will be glad; Thy fami^^ will lament,
but the Angels will give thee joy: L^^ thy Father do what he will with his
temporal stat^ Thou art not so much his whose thou art by genertion, as his,
whose thou art by regeneration; His mean, who redeemed thee at a dear price,
with h^ own blood. Thus this Blessed Father meditate^ of this point. And may
not (under both you corrections) these words be in some sort applied to our
Cause?

What answer to this our Letter, you wi^^ return, we know not: yet certainly
no an^ were but one (worthy your selfs, worth Christian Parents) you can
return, which able to case our troubled minds. That is; I, a^ your mother
Gynecia do with all joy entertayne both ^ur happy Resolutions; Therefore we
both give you ^r full and free consents, to proceed, as you have be^^n, Since
your Souls are your own, not ours; and ^u, not ^e, must answer for them. We
both therefore (...) withal cheerefullnes of mind, Fiat voluntas ^ei; and most
loath and unwilling shall either of us ^reafter be to resist Gods blessed
Ordination herein, how would this answer relieve and che^h us, dispelling from
our afflicted hearts all ^auines of mind, no small hinderance to a ^ertuous Life.

And thus in the good Hope of this our so ^uch desired Answer, we even upon
our ^ees do beg both your blessings, and will ever cease to power out our
poor prayers to is Divine Majesty, to preserve you both in his watch and
custody; that so after your peregriation in this world is once ended, we all
may ^eet together in the Heavenly Jerusalem, and ^ay mutually and daily enjoy
that most bles^ed sight of him, who is our Creator, our Fa^^er, and our
Redeemes.

Yours truly most dutiful, and Obedient Daughters, Caelia, Cosmophila.


Another letter of the Confessarius, written to the worthy Knight Sir
Orthodoxus, and to the Lady Gynecia his wife, at their house in London.
Worthy Sir. Notwithstanding all want of knowing one another, much less of
any former straight intercourse betweeene your Worship and my self: ye^ I
hold it expedient to salute you and the worthy Lady (your Bedfellow) with
these my letters: With the Subject whereof, upon your opening of them, you will
be fully acquainted. They concern (as you may perceive) the present state of
your two daughters Caelia, and Cosmophila, Gentlewomen of such desert, as that
you have reason greatly to rejoice in a spiritual consolation, that you are
become Parents to two such Children.

The elder of them (to wit Caelia) came over the last year (as you know) to
become Religious, and this with both your consents (though not at the first,
yet at the last obtained.) Your second daughter (I mean Cosmophila) was lately
sent by you, upon the death of Monadelphus your only Son and Heir, to
persuad^ her Sister (not being as yet professed) to leau^ her vocation, and to
return back with her in to England, for their mutually enjoying o^ your fair
and worthy Estate after your death* And hereby you may take notice, how Go^
has far, contrary to your expectation, disposed in these matters.

Your daughter Caelia slands immoueabl^ (indeed inexorable, to all the
persuasion^ which her Sister to the contrary, could mak^ to her) in her
resolution to proceed in her already begun state. And Cosmophila her self i^
at the length determined (through my speeches, and reasons to her alleged, as
a poor and subordinate Instrument under God here in) to embrace the same
Spiritual Course with her Sister, and rests firmly resolved (as you may
further understand by their own letters) here to remain with us. For she
already is entered into the Company of the Religious Sisters, and has begun to
make her Nouiship. Who can deny but that in this business there is Digitus Dei,
Gods Good providence, and preordination?

Now, Worthy Sir, whereas your self and your virtuous Lady are Catholics,
professing one and the same Religion with me, I hold it the rather my duty to
give you both what satisfaction I am able, for the alleuiating and lessining of
both your griefs, which perhaps you may conceive by this strange alteration in
your younger daughter, and perseverance in the Elder. And for the better
facilitating of this point (with the consent of both your Daughters) I have
sent with these letters, A Goppy of the whole discourse, which passed between
Cosmophila, and my self. By perusing whereof, you may conceive; First, the
weakness of those Objections, made by you against Religious life, so much for
the time insisted upon by your daughter Cosmophila. Secondly, you may here see
the several arguments and vnanswearable Reasons, fully warranting the Election
and choice of that state of life, which both your daughters have made. And
these said Reasons are taken from the Worth, Dignity, Honor, and benefits of a
Religious and votary life.

And notwithstanding my sending to you ^eformer whole discourse; yet
considering how strongly and violently (and this perhaps with some offense to
God.) You, and your Lady may entertain at the first these unexpected
occurrences; therefore intending to transgress the bonds of a letter, I have
thought it convenient, for both your Spiritual good, a^ also for the good of
other parents, to whom this my discourse may perhaps hereafter be made known
(if so themselves have any Children desirous to take a Religions Course) to
enlarge my self in these leaves following, by discovering and expressing how
dangerous a thing it is in Catholic parents, and how domageable both to their
own Souls, and to the Souls of such their Children, (who would gladly
embrace a Religious life) to hinder, resist, and withstand them in this their
pious Resolution.

Touching then this Subject, I will divide my whole future discourse into three
general branches, or Heads. First, I will show the grieuousnes of the sin,
in Parents, diswading their Children from the Election of so blessed a Course.
Secondly, I will alledg diverse examples of Gods just, and severe punishments
inflicted upon parents, and other such persons, who have labored to withdraw
and alter the minds of those, who have made choice of this Monastical and
retired Course. In the third, and last place, I will prove by force of Reason,
that parents ought to be content, quietly to resign their Wills, to Gods Will
herein; I mean in joyfully suffering their Children to be called by God, to
this his so peculiar service.

To begin with the first: And first, it is evident, that such Parents do fight
and war even against Gods own will and predetermination: a war most
impious, and withal most exitious, and fatal to them that undertake it. For
can it be denied, but that to scatter abroad that, which God has gathered
together; to diswade those Soldiers, which his divine Majesty has mustered to
serve under his own standard; to destroy what God has built; Finally to
oppose and withstand the Counsel if God, is a most heinous sin, and a great
Sacrilege committed against him, who is Lord both of Heaven, and earth? And
yet all those Parents and others, who seek to dehort their Children, or their
friends from a Religious life (if so they were resolved to undergo that holy
Course) are interessed in all the former rehearsed Transgressions.

Let us produce the judgments of some ancient Fathers, touching the atrocity of
the Parents sin herein. We will begin with S. Chrysostom. l. 3. cont. vi.
cuperatvitae Monasticae.
Chrysostom, who reckoning up diverse degrees of malice, which are found in any
sin, wherein Charity is chiefly wanting, concludes; That the greatest want of
Charity is, voluntarily to ^ppose against a Man's Salvation. And thus in this
Fathers judgment, Parents (through a prepo^erous love borne toward their
Children, in diswading them from a strict service of God) ^o become their
Paricides; and do commit so much the more cruel and inhumane murder of their
Children, by how much the life of the Soul is better, and more dear then the
life of the Body.

S. Anselme (that holy Father, and Bishop o^ Canterbury) thus discourses of
the heinousn^ of this sin in these words: If he, Anselm. Ep. ad God^fr.
that separateth the precious from the base; that is, a Soul from the World,
be as the mouth of God; He then, who^ mouth and hand draws a Soul, that
adhereth ^ God to the world, what shall he be? Shall not that fa^ upon him,
which our Lord says: Luc. ^^.
He that gathers not with me, scatters; and He, that is not wit^ me, is
against me? Thus S. Anselme.

I will descend herein to the judgment of S. Bernard, who thus tragically
amplifieth himself upon this subject: Bernard. Ep. 111.
O hard-harted Father, O cruel Mother, O barbarous, and impious Parents; yea
not parents, but peremptory man-killers whose sorrows are the safty of their
Children, whos^ comforts their destruction; who had rather their Children
should perish with them, then reign without them. O strange abuse, etc. If
Parents care not for their own Salvation, what avails it them to persecute
their Children? What comfort can be that burns afford them that burn? Or
what comfort is it to the damned, to have fellows of their damnation* Thus
much (worthy Sir) for a taste of the former three holy Fathers, touching the
great impiety committed by Parents, in seeking to withdraw their Children from
the most blessed Course of a Religious and votary life.

In this next passage, I will descend to some few examples (omitting many
others, for greater expedition) wherein God has showed his reuengfull hand
against those, who have impugned a Religious life. S. Jerome Ierom. in his Ep
to L^ta.
recounteth, that one Praetextata, a noble Marrone, by commandment of her
husband, who was vn^le to the Virgin Eustochium who had devoted herself to a
Religious life, did change the said Virgins apparel for brauer clothes, and
cuiously did comb her hair after the fashion of the world; and all this to
withdraw Eusto^hium from a Religious life. But Behold (says S. Jerome) the
same night after Praetextata had done ^his she sees in her sheep an Angel
that came to her, breathing with a terrible voice to punish her in these words.
Were thou so bold as to prefer the Commandment of thy husband, before Christ:
How durst thou handle the head of the Virgin of God, with thy Sacri^egious
hands? Which hands shall even now wither away, that thou thus tormented may
feel, what thou have done; and at the end of the fifth month thou shall ^e
carried to Hell. Thus S. Jerome; and he relates for certain, that her hands
were presently then withered and dried, and that at the end of the time
prefixed, she died.

S. Ambrose records of a Noble Young Gentlewoman (who was then living, when he
wrote the relation) how that flying to the Altar, out of a great desire she had
to be Religious; diverse of her nearest friends were much against this her pious
determination, and one of them in a harsh and uncivil manner thus rebuked her;
Libde Virgin^^.
If thy Father were now living, do thou think he would suffer thee to live
unmarried. To whom the chaste Virgin thus mildly answered: Perhaps my Father
therefore dyed, that he might not hinder me. The end hereof was, that this
unkind friend of hers dyed within a short time, after he had thus reprehended
the Virgin; the rest of her friends ascribing the cause of hi^ unexpected death
to his rough words given to her. And thereupon all they, who before were ready
to diswade her from entering in t^ Religion, did after most willingly give their
a^sents thereto.

I will conclude this point of Example^ wherein Gods revenge has been
manifeste^ in punishing of those, who labor to impug^^ and resist his
Ordination of such, as desired t^ forsake the world, with the Example of o^^
called Pontianus, who was but a Bond slaue^ a cruel and barbarous Master.
This man through desire of living a Saintly life, fled unto a Monastery. But
his Master demanding him with great importunity, look him from thence. But
what was his punishment therefore? He was instantly strooken stone blind and so
by loosing his sight, he fully acknowledged his former sin, and was most
willing that Pontianus his slave should return unto the Monastery. Yet
notwithstanding hi^ consent thereto, his Master recovered nor hi^ sight, till
Pontianus had touched his eyes with his hands, that so it might more evidently
appear, that his former transgression and (...) was the cause of his blindness.
This History i^ relaied by S. Gregory Gregor Taro. in vita Pontia^i. c. 5.
of ^ours, a Venerable and Worthy Author.

To come to the third, and last point of the Subject before mentioned, that is,
to warrant with force of Reason, that Parents ought to rest content, and
satisfied with their Children ^o^ their entering into a Religious life. I thus
affirm, that when Parents do freely offer up some of their Children to the
peculiar service of God, they depart with nothing therein, which is truly and
soly their own, but only willingly restore to God, what was Gods before. And
thus God by demanding them, challenges but what is his right, and his own;
and therefore that Parent, who shall retain and keep back any of his children
from God, commits a horrible Sacrilege against his Divine Majesty; since it
is God, not the Parent, (who was but a secondary instrument under him, and this
only for the body) who gave the first fabric and making to the child; and who
a^one, without any concurrency of the Parents herein, infuseth the soul into
the new begotten Body.

Thus far (Worthy Sir) I have thought good to proceed for the better animating
and encouraging of you, to rest content, or rather greatly to rejoice at Gods
good pleasure in taking your two Daughters to his peculiar service, and
patronage. But now good Lady Gynecia, since you are a Woman, I will produce
(for your greater corroboration herein) two Examples of Women, showing most
admirable and spiritual fortitude in the loss and death of their Children;
Much more then, ought you to entertayne with all eauenues and quietness of mind,
the absence of your two Daughters, entering into a Religious Course.

The first shall be that Noble Woman, who was the mother of the most valiant
Machabe^^; who saw not one, or two only, but seven of her Sons put to most
barbarous death even in her own presence, because they would no^ violate, and
break the Law given to them from God; and yet she was so far from being
disanimated or grieved here with, as that (a^ the Scripture relates) the ^.
Machab. 7.
exhorted stoutly every one of her sons, to be constant in his Religious in
her own Country language, filled with wisdom, and instilling manly Courage,
to her womanish thoughts.

And here Madame, you are to take notize that this happened in the time of the
Old Law which time served but as a Type, or Figure o^ the time of the Gospel;
which, with reference to the time of the Old Testament, is (as the Hebr. 8.
Apostle (says) established in better promises. If the^^ a Woman in that
imperfect time, had such spiritual Fortitude, as to rejoice at her. Childrens
death, suffered for the Honor of) God, and to encourage them to persevere to
the end in enduring their torments; shall not a Christian and Catholic Lady
(such as you are) now in the time of the Gospel (which affoardeth far grea^ter
measure of Grace) fully be resolved with a^ resignation of Will and Judgment,
to forbear^ the corporal presence only of her daughters, deuoting themselves
to the more peculiar service of their Lord and Redeemer?

The second example, which I will present to your Ladyship, is of one Melania,
a most noble Matrone of Rome; of whom S. Jerome thus writes: Jerome in
Epitaph. Blessillae.
Sancta Melania nostri temporis etc. Saine Melania, being the true Honor and
Nobility among Christians of our time, when the dead body of her husband was
scarce cold, and not huried, did loose together two Sons. I am to relate
(says S. Jerome) an incredible thing, but I call Christ to witness a thing
most true. Who would not think, that this afflicted Lady would not after a
frantic manner, have for grief, torn her hair, cut asunder her apparel
and have stricken her breast with grievous knocks and strokes? Not one tear
did she sheed; she stood immovable, and prostrating herself at the feet of
Christ, as though she would take hold of him, she smyled, saying; O sweet
Lord, I shall hereafter serve thee with greater promptitude and readiness, since
thou have freed me from so great a burden. Thus S. Jerome, of this blessed
Woman.

And now good Madame, (since for your comfort and satisfaction chiefly, I have
produced these two examples of Women) I here demand of you, whether you be
persuaded, that either of these two Matrones, would have grieved at Gods
calling of their children into the state of Religion, who with wonderful
fortitude and magnanimity did endure even the deaths of them? I know you be
not. Why then will your self repyne, and grudge at Gods most merciful
proceeding, in causing your two daughters (Caelia, and Cosmophila) to forsake
this wicked world, and to oblige themselves (by solemn Vow) to a Religious
serving of his Divine Majesty?

Well, to proceed a little further (Worthy Knight:) You may think, what a
spiritual Treasure you have of your two daughters; Since when your self is
entangled and imbroyled in the thoughts of temporal business (which ever is
attended on with great anxiery and distraction of mind, and with no small hurt
to devotion) your two daughters (like two humble Suppliants) not only in the
day time, but even in the midst of the silent night (when your self does
take your swee^ repose and rest) shall even be siege the ears o^ God with
their forcible and irresistible prayers that he would vouchsafe to direct all
your Actions, to the honor of himself, and to your own Souls eternal
Salvation. O most inexplicable priuiledg, and highly to be prized by all
vertuou, Catholic Parents?

I will urge one short Reason more, and so end. If we believe, that so great a
number of Christians (even of those who profess a right says) do perish
eternally, according to that (l) Math. 20.
saying of our Lord and Savior; Many be called but few be chosen: Why then
should a Parent be unwilling, and withdrawing back his consent, that his
Children should enter into that state of life, wherein consists the greatest
hope and security of Salvation? And the rather, since the main reason, why so
few are chosen, and so many damned, is because by their living in the world,
and neglecting their Souls eternal Good, they become thrall to the vanities,
unlawful pleasures, sins, and deceits thereof? Is not then that Parent most
unkind, (or rather unnatural) that whereas there are two wales set down in
Scripture, the one the strait way, leading the Math. 7. Luc. 13.
Soul to life; the other the broad way (here in this world) bringing to 2.
Pet. 3.
destraction, and to the unsupportable torments of Hell-fyre, should
nevertheless persuade his Children (being the issue of his own body, and
deriuing their blood from his blood) to live and spend their days in this
Broad dangerous way, wholly dissuading and discouncelling them yea and this
sometimes with threats, and vn^ind usage) from entering into the Narrow way? God
grant, that many Parents in England be not interessed in this atrocity of sin!

And so Noble Sir, seeing this my letter to you grows long (I hope, through
your favorable acceptance thereof, not tedious) I will therefore conclude it
with the words of S. Basil, (a most ancient and learned Father) who gives his
wholesome and Christian Counsel, touching this subject in general, in these
words: Basil praepat. in Ascen.
Seeing so great rewards are offered them that follow the warfare of Christ,
let Fathers willingly permit their sons, and Mothers their Daughters to come
to him, and bring their Children with comfort and cheerefulnes unto him; And
let them rejoice at the hope of immortal Goods, whereof they shallbe partakers
together with their Children; and endeavor to have them their Patrones in the
sight of God Let us ^ake care (I beseech you) lest we show our selves to be too
straight-harted in this unseasonable love of our Children; and let not the
labors affright us, to which they seem to go; but rather rejoice, that they
shall meet with so great Glory. Let us offer to God that, which we have
received of him, that (...) may also have ^art of the glory and commendation of
our Children, offering our selves together with them. Thus far this ^earned
Doctor. Whose words (as I said) shall give a full close to this my Letter,
presuming that you both, will take this my labor charicharitably, since it
really proceeds from Charity; and so shall I ever rest at your command, in all
Christian and spiritual service.

N. N. Confessarius of the English Nun in Belgiopolis.


Sir Orthodoxus his Answer, to the forsaid Letter of the Confessarius.
VEry Reverend Sir: It is now two Months, since I received yours, and my two
Daughters Letters, as also your pious and learned Discourse, which you used
toward, my daughter Cosmophila. I was loath to return any answer to you, or
them presently, or upon the sudden, because such my answer might perhaps be
presumed to proceed from grief, passion, and a violent entertayning (at the
first sight) the Occurrences specifyed in those Letters.

Now therefore Tour Reverence may take notice hereby, that I have not only
read, but even studied your whole Discourse, with your letters sent unto me; as
also you may be aduertized hereby, that upon my more retired, and dispassionate
thoughts, I and my wife do greatly acknowledge our former error, in she wing
any reluctation, or drawing back of our daughter Caelia, from her already
undertaken life; or of our daughter Cosmophila from her entering into the said
Course. Your Arguments set down in your writings (I grant) convince me: Your
authorities drawn from the words of the ancient Fathers (whose judgment all
humble Christians ought to obey) do ^uersway me; Briefly, the force both of
your writings, and of my daughters letters, have how at the last wrought such a
Sovereignty, or Influence over both me and my wife, as that we give even
infinite thanks to the Almighty, for distilling into them those holy
Inspirations, which at this instant so strongly pre^ayle in their Souls.

And to lay open my self more plainly unto you, I confess, that since my
first receiving of your letters. I have perused some Authors treating of this
particular subject, controuer^ed in your Discourse and letters; and I
acknowledge, they wholly make against my former opinion therein. Therefore let
both my dear Daughters rest satisfied hereby. that I had ^ather dye, then
seek to pervert, or alter their ^ow settled determinations. No: God has chosen
them both to himself, and has chosen but what before was his own: And shall a
carnal Father, or Mother dislike, or repine at such a choice? O God forbid!
And truly besides the force of your Authorities in behalf of Religious life
(which, I grant, are strong with me) I have (as above I touched) lately perused
diverse others main Motives, conducing to the proof of the said point, before
by me impugned.

And first I find, that though Parents have a certain kind of authority over
their Children, yet this authority is but delegated, or by deputation from God;
as being but part of that authority, which God originally has in himself over
the said Children. Now I mu^^ needs say, that therefore if God command one
thing, and the Parents the contrary; the Child is obliged to obey God, rather
then his Parents. That this is most true, I grant is proved in that God
himself is he, from whom all Paternity (as the Ephesians. 3.
Apostle says) is derived.

I will infist in one only reason more, which is in part touched in your large
Discourse, and indeed very much commands me. It is this That, which we
receive from our Parents i^ very small, in respect of that, which we receive
from God; The euidency of which Assertion is thus made clear: Whereas Man i^
compounded of Soul and body; The Soul i^ much more precious then the Body:
Now the Parents have no hand in creating the Soul since it is only God, who
creates and infuleth it. Therefore it is usually taken, as a Principle with
the learned; That God by creating the Soul does infuse it into the body, and
by infusing it does create it.

And as touching the making of the Body Man only affords a little seminall
matter thereto; but how this seminall matter ought to be framed with all its
parts and lineaments the Parents know not, that being the work of God,
ordained in the first creation, or making of Man. Since then what we receive
from ou^ Parents, touching the being either of the Soul or the Body, is
infinitely inferior to that, which therein we receive from God: how
dishonorable then, wereit to his Divine Majesty, for the Parent to expect his
Child in any commandment to obey him, and thereby to disobey God? ^o far you
see by my speeches (Reverend Sir) is my judgment altered herein, from what
before it was. Therefore my desire is, that though my self be changed in
Judgment, yet let not my Daughters change theirs. O no! Let them in Gods holy
Name go forward with all spiritual alacrity and consolation, in their already
chosen Vocation.

But now to reflect upon my own state: I ^o unspeakably repent me of my former
Error (God grant not sin) in laboring to with ^raw my daughter Caelia from
her Monastical ^ife. His Divine Goodness interpose his mercy between me, and
that unlawful Act of mine; and let my tears already shed in that behalf
receiving their force and virtue from the ears of our Redeemer, spent for the
salvation ^f us all) absterge and wype away this my former fault.

And in very indeed I do apprehend my offense therein to be far the greater,
from this en^ing Consideration: We observe daily, that a man, who laboreth to
learn any Mechanical Art, or Trade, much more to get knowledge in my of the
seven Liberal Sciences, will not content himself with a competency, or
me^iocrity of learning in his Mystery, but will endeavor to arrive to all
perfection therein. If then a Christians designed Art, or Mystery (as I ^ay
term it) be to know, how to serve his Creator and Redeemer, in the highest
degree of Virtue and Piety; How great has my former oversight been (so mildly
to term it) in seeking to persuade my eldest Daughter to rest contented, in
leading an ordinary, and common life of other Lay-Catholikes; and by
endeavoring to withdraw her from aspiring to any higher degree of virtue, both
by my former letters, and by sending my Daughter Cosmophila over, to recall her
into England? Here I fully acknowledge my former weakness of Judgment.

But now (Good Sir,) I will more fully, even power out the secrets of my Soul
unto you. I freely grant, your Discourse to have had such working force upon
mine, and my wives understanding, as that we both acknowledge Gods most
merciful Goodness in the disposal of our two Daughters. Yea we further
proceed, and wish you to take notice herby, that for expiating, and redeeming
of our former offense, touching our said Daughter, and of all our other sins
during our whole life, we both are resolved for the time hereafter, not to live
together as man and wife, but to separate our selves, and both to lead a
Monastical and votary life; I, in some City of Belgiopolis, and in some
Convent there of the Capuchins (men most Blessed and Religious) of whom many
(as I am informed) have heretofore lived markably in the world; My wife in your
own Monastery of Nuns (if so she can procure the Lady Abbess, and your
Consents thereto:) And thus my wife for her spiritual good, i^ most willing to
become herself an humble sister, even to her own Daughters.

For Alas, Sir! What in true judgment should detayne us from taking this
Course? With three Children God has blessed us; One Son, and two Daughters,
and they all dead (as I may say) in our own life time. Our only Son, whom I
hoped would have been the Arch, as it were, and stay of my House, dyed
naturally; Our two daughters are also dead unto the world. Therefore I see
hereby (my wife being past Childbirth) that it is Gods good pleasure, that not
any of my own body shall inherit my temporal state: His blessed will be done.

And since God is the sole true Lord of the earth, and of all things therein, I
willingly and freely say with the Psalmist: Domins Psalm. 23.
est terra and plenitudo eius: The earth is our Lords, and the fulness thereof,
the round world, and all that dwell therein: Therefore I most humbly submit my
self to his only pleasure herein. And let them inherit my temporal means,
whom it shall best please his Divine Majesty to appoint. Though I could wish
(and accordingly, I intend to dispose, if so it may stand with his Gracious
Goodness) that the half of my Lands be given to him, who is nearest to me in
kindred of my Own Name (such a strong tie have humane and natural respects in
us) and the other half of my state be to be sold, and distributed to
spiritual uses, for the good of mine own, my wives, and my two Daughters
Souls.

This is all, that I can say, only (as above I have fully delivered my self)
you may certify my two Daughters, how joyfully I conceive of both their
Choyces, and withal to let them know, that I at this present do forbear
particularly to answer their letters, in that this to you (Sir) does
sufficiently satisfy the contents of theirs; as also, because both I, and their
Mother (God seconding our resolutions) hope to enjoy their sight and presence,
within these few weeks. Thus in the mean time, much acknowledging your former
pious care toward them, I end, ever remaining,

Reverend Sir, Yours in all respectfull Obseruancy, Orthodoxus.


The Conclusion, to the Reverend Superiors, and devout Sisters of all the
English Monasteries of Religious Women beyond the Seas.
Reverend Superiors, and you Virtuous Sisters, my pen here makes bold (in
place of a Conclusion to the former Treatise) to salute you all. What I have
above delivered in the Dialogue, proceeds from the great respect. I bear to
your blessed Course of life; and therefore I did hold my self partly even
obliged in Conscience, to promote and advance by my writings (what I could) the
Worth and Dignity of your even Heavenly State here upon earth; and to encourage
such others, who are careful of their Souls Good, and whose state of life is
compatible with a Religious Order, to impath themselves in that most secure
tract and way.

O what pity is it, to see many young Gentlewomen so to slight, and smally
regard their own happiness? And therefore God has bestowed upon you greater
measure of his grace; who breaking through all the worldly entanglements,
wherewith others remain shackled, have actually begun to tread the most safe
path to Heaven. If a man could by certain labors acquire, and procure to
himself a Thousands pounds, would he rest satisfied by seeking after a Hundred
only? Or what woman would be content to become a Maid of Honor to any
Princess, might she become a Princess her self? And yet no less is the
ouer^ight o^ such young Gentlewomen, who may purchase to themselves, not
transitory Goods, but an eternal Kingdom, and yet will not: and may without
attendance to any temporal Princess (how great soever) arrive to be Queens
themselves (for all women, that shall gain Heaven, shall be Queens in Heaven)
and yet do greatly show their neglect thereof.

Thrice happy therefore are you, most Virtuous, and Religious Sisters, who have
overcome your natural desires of temporal pleasures and dignities, and raised
your thoughts and endeauours to the gayning of that most blessed Kingdom,
which shall endure for all eternity! Happy (I say) you are, since by your
Religious (...) you fly from the world, and from all the dangers thereof: So
fully have you verified in your selves, that Sentence of the Royal Prophet:
Who will give me the wings, like a Dove, and Psalm. 54.
I will fly, and take my rest? So you by withdrawing your selves from the
world; are retired to a place, and state of security.

Of this flight S. Ambrose thus writes: Let us not be ashamed to fly; for it
is a glorious flight, to fly Ambros. de fuga saecul. c. 4.
from the face of sin. And indeed this holy Father speaks with good reason;
For, here to fly, is to overcome: And this not only because we keep our selves
safe and secure, in bearing a^ loose off, and far distant from the Enemy; but
also by reason we give the Enemy cause of discomfiture, even by our flight; we
being by this means far less subject to those his spiritual Stratagemes,
where with he overthrows so many Souls, living in the world. Therefore I may
conclude, that since a Religious State is most high in perfection, and above
the Earth and all Earthly things; it may be truly termed a Mountain. whereunto
the calamities and miseries of this world cannot ascend, o^ arrive. What
inexplicable consolation and joy then, do you all live in, who are securely
seated upon this high Mountain?

But now, my pen must take leave of you (during the space of some lines in this
Conclusion) to turn it self (by way of a warran table Digression) to such
young unmarried Catholic Gentle women, who have great portions left them by
their Parents, and yet cannot be induced by this my small labor, nor by any
other persuasions perhaps whatsoever, to enter into the state of a Religious
life; but are absolutely, and immoueably resolved, to live in the world, in
state of Lay persons. As also my open here speaks to such Catholic
Gentlewomen, and Ladies of Worth and Dignity, who aboud with a fluency of rich
estates, and remain Widows, and therein have full power to dispose at their
pleasure of their Temporalities; and yet cannot be drawn (either through
pretense of want of health, or greatness of years, or through some other self
conceited reasons) to spend the small remnant of their lives in a Religious
Course. To you all of both these several degrees, I direct these ensuing
lines: And hereby desire you all (even as you tender the good of your own
Souls) that if so you cannot brook to be Religious, in profession; yet at
least resolve to be Religious, in disposal of part of your temporal means. O
what spiritual treasure, and riches might you board up to your selves, by
distributing to good uses a reasonable portion of your worldly treasure?

How many Young Catholic Gentlewomen are there in England, who most gladly
thirst after a Votary life, and yet want sufficient portions for their
Admittance into Religion? Here now is presented to you all, a large, field
wherein to sow your wheat: Here is presented a most adua^tagious opportunity of
making Nuns, though your selves will not be Nuns. My meaning is, that you
would lay in wait to further, and second by your most large Charity such Poor
Gentlewomen, as would gladly take a Religious Course, and yet for want of
means, are debarred from thence. Here were true Charity, and here you might be
justly said to put your money out to Usury, even to God himself, according to
those words: Foeneratu^ Proverb. 19.
Domino qui miseretur pauperis: He, that has mercy on the poor, puts out
his money to our Lord.

Besides the state of these Poor Gentlewomen (whose temporal abilities are
not proportionable and suitable to their Religious designs) I here also present
to your Charitable view, the state of some of our already settled English
Monasteries of Women, who, resolving to rely only upon the providence of God,
have no certain temporal revenues belonging to their Houses, but receive all
their maintenance and allowance from the Charity of well disposed Benefactours:
Which Charities and Beneuosences (since they are merely voluntarily given) do
fall oftentimes short; so as the Poor Blessed Women suffer for the present
some want.

Now here again I say is offered to you a second way of making spiritual
interest of the superfluity of your states or riches; That is, so out of true
Christian Charity you would be pleased to open your purses largely, for the
better relief of such Virtuous Women, (who^ are both poor in Spirit, and
poor in State) as willingly suffer these pressures, for the love they bear to
the true service of God, O how most acceptable would this your charity appear
in the sight of God, being bestowed either of the two waves, (I mean) either
for the furthering of those most virtuously disposed young Gentlewomen, who want
means for their procuring to enter into Religion or for the better relieuing
of such English Monasteries of Nuns, who possess no certain proprieties,
but only rely upon the Charity of Benefactours, and other well disposed
Almes-giues?

If it be most pleasing to God, and a work meriting of Heaven, to dispose part
of ones Goods and substance to such poor people, who here live in the world,
and commonly ^ead but sorry, yea dissolute lives, according to our Saviors
words delivered without any reference to the lives of the poor: Come you
blessed Math. 25.
of my Father, possess you a Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of
the world; for I was hungry, and you gave me to eat; I was a thirsty, and you
have me to drink: I say, if this kind of Alms given only promiscuosly to men,
or women who are poor (not withstanding their ill lives) be grateful to God;
How worthy then, how Christian-like, how meritorious, through Gods merciful
acceptance thereof, must that Charity, and Almes-deed appear in the sight of
the Divine Majesty, which is bestowed upon the relieuing only of such blessed
women, who either without such Charity cannot profess a Religious life, or who
actually living in that most ^lessed state, do suffer somewant and ^enury? No
tongue of man or Angel can fully show Gods acceptablenes of such a Charity.
Why then, Worthy Gentlewomen (to whom I direct these my speeches) will any of
you be so strait-laced, or so niggard, in forbearing to employ a part of your
substance upon so fruitful ^ ground, at will affoard so great an harvest, and
gain to your Souls* Certainly you herby become even enemies to your own
selves.

Diverse of you (as experience she weth) ar^ well content to bestow great, and
unnecessary charges upon your apparel and attire (and this sometimes above
your states and calling: in like sort are ready now, and then to mak^ needless
iournies to London, to the exhausting from you of some hundred of pounds,
fruitlessly spent. And can you then, be so indulgent to your bodies, and so
rigorous to you^ Souls (the most noble and chiefest part o^ you) as to reserve
little, or nothing for procuring your eternal Felicity? O turn the channel
of these your wastfull expenses, and le^ every one of you adopt her own Soul,
as for her own Child; My meaning is, that yo^^ would aff^ord a Child's part (at
least) of your state and temporalities, to be given for the good of your Soul.
A poor and niggardly Inuitation (God knows) to prize your own Souls at so
little of worth, which Christ did buy and ransom at the high rate, of sheeding
his most precious blood? And far short thi^ your Charity is, from the Charity
of Zachaeus who as we read in the Gospel, even upon his first fight of our
Savior, Gave half of hi^ Goods to the poor. Luc. 19.


Now, if so you resolve to bestow upon your own Souls only so much, as I her^
propose; where then with greater spiritual Interest, or at fury, can you place
it, then upon these Virtuous women, above by me expressed who both by day and
night, will be ever ready to power out the Vialls of their Prayers, before his
divine Goodness, that he would vouch^afe to protect you with his Grace, that in
the End you may reign with him in his celestial Kingdom for ever? Here
then, to speak more particularly to you (Great Catholic La^ies, or
Gentlewomen of Worth,) who yet remain ^n state of your Widowhood; Now after
the death of your husbands, and before your second marriage, you may (if so your
Charity be answearable to Gods holy inspirations given unto you) even (so to
say) bring forth, and become Mothers to many Spiritual Daughters; I mean of
many Religious Women, by distributing part of your temporal state unto them.
And so your selves might be said (in a restrained sense) to be become Religious
persons by your Substitutes. O that you would deeply conceive, of the great
privilege, which you enjoy at this present. Therefore take advantage of the
time, when time is, and this before your second Marriage.

One most forcible Reason, for my fuller persuading of you to this spiritual
Charity, shall be taken from the doctrine of Purgatory, which you all (as being
Catholics) do firmly believe. Now here you are to take into your memory these
three points following. First, that the pains of Purgatory (though enduring
but for certain years) are most insupportable: of which pains S. Austin thus
writes (as is above showed in this Treatise.) Austin. l. de vera and falsa
poenitentia. c^ 18.
The fire of Purgatory (though it be not everlasting) yet it is passing
grievous; for it does exceed all pains, that man can suffer in this life.

Secondly, you are to call to mind, that considering Gods justice (who
punishes the least sins) even the greatest Saints, as S. Austin. S. Gregory,
S. Bernard etc. have stood i^ great fear and horror of these pains. I wi^^
content my self here with repeating the words of S. Bernard (a most eminent
Saint, ^ by institution. Father of many Religious Monks) above related of this
point, wh^^ thus meditateth hereof: O would to God some man (...). Sermon. de Six
tribulat. cap. 1^. and 55 in Cant.
aforehand would provide for my head abundance water, and for mine eyes a
fountain of tears; that (...) perhaps the burning fire should take no hold,
where running tears had cleansed before.

Lastly, you cannot but know, that if men o^ such extraordinary Holiness, as
these forme^ Saints were, did stand in dread of the (orme^nt of Purgatory; what
is then the case of all you who live in the world in fulness of pleasure
especially considering that God in his ^usties will ask an account of every
idle word, much more or bad Actions? How many of you do wast, and rauell out
several years in unnecessary charges of apparel, in spending diuer^ hours
daily in adorning and triming up your bodies to be gazed upon by men; and in
diuer^ other such vanities? As certain, as God is God so certain it is, that
you are to make satisfaction, either in this world, or in the next to endure
the fire of Purgatory, for a dessgned time, for the appeasing of Gods Justice
herein Where then; is there any wit or judgment in such of you, who may redeem
your smalle^ sins in this world by your Almsdeeds for thus we read the
Prophet Daniel to say: ^edeeme thy sins with alms, and thine iniquities Dan.
c. 4.
^ith the mercy of the poor) and yet will not, but solue to pay all those
debts in that raging and purging Fire?

If a man were indebted a Thousand pounds. and that were to be paid some very
few ^eares hence, and yet might redeem the said ^ebt by paying presently but
one Hundred ^unds, or less; would he not labor (it so he ^ad any brains) to
procure the hundred ^ounds, though presently, for the redeeming so far greater
a debt? Your case is here the ^^me. It is in your power to free your selves ^om
the torments of Purgatory (at least to shor^n the time of your sufferance
there) by your ^reat Charity, and Almsdeeds, now showed ^n your life time. If
you have not the cou^^ge to part with some of your goods, whiles ^ou live, you
must hereafter make infinitely a ^ore grievous satisfaction for your sins in
^urgatory. Therefore become nor vassalls and ^ues to your own Riches; but
distribute a ^ood part of them to spiritual uses, and to the ^enching of those
hideous flames, which ^therwise you are unavoidably to endure. and if so you
resolve to become friends to our own Souls by practizing of Charity, and of
relieuing such as most do need; you cannot more fruitfully lay out your Riches
(as ^boue I said) for the good of your Souls, ^hen either in furthering of
such young Virtuous ^entlewomen, who gladly would lead a Religious life, and
yet want temporal means for their placing them in that Course; or else for the
greater supply toward those English Monasteries beyond sees, who stand in need
thereof.

Thus far (worthy Catholic Gentlewomen, ^ Ladies) I have thought good to
proceed i^ exhorting you to such truly Noble Acts ^ Christian Charity. And
with this my pen taken leave of you. Only I cannot here forbear ^ relate the
unworthy custom of many worldly (yet Catholic) Parents; who will be content
most willingly to give fifteen hundred or two thousand pounds (and perhaps
(...) much more) with one of their Daughters, t^ place her in marriage, and yet
if the said daughter resolve to lead a votary, and vnmarie life, they will
seek to put her of into a Monastery, in bestowing upon her some three o^ four
hundred pounds at the most. Do no^ such Worldlings prefer a temporal Husband
before Christ? What Indignity (indeed wha^ Sacrilege) is this to the Savior
of the world That a daughter must fare far worse at he Parents hands, because
she had rather espous^ herself to Christ, then to a mortal man? Bu^ let such
Parents assure themselves, that the their disualewing of the service of God i^
their Children, will hereafter be attended o^ with due punishments, answearable
to their present neglect, and small respect they bear to a Religious and
Spiritual life.

Well my pen shall here stay it self from further discourse; And shall take
leave of yo^ all to whom this Conclusion is directed. Her then, for the last
Closure of all I most humble beseech you (Most virtuous and Religious Vota^^es)
that in regard of the Reverend and wor^y respect I bear to your most Blessed
State manifested according to my ability in this ^ecedent Treatise) you would
vouchsafe me our daily prayers to the Allmighty, for the re^ission of my
Sins. You practice your cont^nuall Charity in other your Actions: I be^^ech
you, extend the like Charity to this my ^ost earnest suyte. I speak not this
by way ^f form, or ceremony (as many writers are customed to do, wherewith to
close their ^pistles Dedicatory:) Noe. It is truly a most ^hirsty desire in me
to have such Blessed Souls as you are) to be Intercessours to his Divine
Majesty, in my behalf, yet Living (or hereafter ^ead. My feeble, old, and
languishing body. ^ttended on with diverse infirmities, cannot ^ould out long; O
pray then, (You Charitable ^elegious Women) that the time of my dissolu^^on may
be most happy to my Soul; that so may presently after enjoy the comfortable,
and ineffable sight of the most Blessed Trinity ^r ever. Thus in confidence of
your accomlishing this my Christian desire, I cease, ever continuing

Your humble, and devoted Servant in Christ JESUS. N. N.

FINIS.

