The Amorous Gallant.
Who had a Mistress lovely, fair and kind,
She gave him all things to content his mind;
But he unkind, when he had done his pleasure,
Would have forsaken this beloved treasure:
But by her charms, to Wife she made him take her;
And now he swears he never will forsake her.
To a pleasant new Tune, called, Jenny's delight.


HOw bouny and brisk, how pleasant and sweet,
were Ienny and I when my passion was strong
So eagerly each others flames we did meet,
that a Minutes delay did appear to be long,
The bows that I made her, she sealed with a kiss,
Till my soul I had lost in a rapture of bliss.
I vowed and I thought I should ever have loved,
where beauty and kindness together I found,
So sweetly she looked, and so sweetly she moved,
that I fancied new strength with my joys to abound
For the pleasures I gave she did doubly requite,
By finding out ever new ways to delight.
But when that enjoyment had put out my fire,
my strength was decayed and my passion was done,
So palled was my fancy, and so tame my dessre,
that I from the Nymph very fain would have gone.
Oh Ienny said I you have loved me in vain,
For beauty enjoyed turns love to disdain,
But when she perceived that my flames were expired,
and I for a while was quite dead with delight,
She never left kissing till my heart she had fired,
while I had not the power to depart from her sight,
My Dearest quoth she you quickly are cloi'd,
So soon for to leave what you sweetly enjoyed.
Such pretty kind words and her languishing eyes,
did tempt me again to encourage my flame,
Those charming embraces my thoughts did surprise,
they caused me with panting to Die in the same,
But the Death was so sweet, and so easy my pain,
Sweet Ienny said I let me Die once again.
As thus we sat dallying on the Bank-side,
our loves overwhelmed with a passionate joy,
Unfortunate we by a friend were espied,
his presence with fear did our blessings destroy;
Oh Jenny said I we are undone by this Man,
Let Us fly from this danger out of sight if we can.
The pretty sweet Nymph with fear all amazed,
stood affrighted, yet her senses she soon did regain,
But smitten with love on sweet Jenny he gazed,
and begged on his knees that she there would remain,
Oh let not my presence disturb you for I.
If that you forsake me with love I shall Die.
Oh let me but kiss that white hand and I Will swear,
by the powers above that i will never discover,
Let not your best friend your presence forbear,
for I like himself am a desperate Lover:
But give him your hand and let us frolic all three,
My humor with his and with yours does agree.
His vow being made then Ienny reply d,
if that you our shame and my blushes conceal
For I have been faulty it cannot be denied,
but pray don't our secret folly reveal;
Then let us be merry since the danger is past,
I am not the first nor I shall not be the last.
Then merrily, merrily, let us take our way,
where Hymen shall tie us in Marri^ge secure,
And that we be fruitly he will heartily pray,
my constancy to thee shall ever endure.
And though I have trangress d before I was thy wife;
Yet i will be thy sweet Jenny all days of my life.
Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, and I. Wright.


