Glasgow University Library Ferguson Collection 1921


THE HERMETICK ROMANCE OR THE CHEMICAL WEDDING*

Written in high Dutch By Christian Rosencreutz.

Translated by E. Foxcroft, late Fellow of Kings College in Cambridge.

Licensed, and Entered according to Order*



Printed, by A. Soul, at the Crooked-Billet in Holloway-Lane Shoreditch: And
sold at the Three-Kyed in Nags-Head-Court Grace Church Street, 1690.

The Hermetick ROMANCE, etc.
The First Book.
The First Day.
ON an Evening before Easter Day, I sat at a Table, and having (as my Custom
was) in my humble Prayer sufficiently conversed with my Creator, and considered
(...)
many great Mysteries (whereof the Father of Lights his Majesty had shown me
not a few) and being now ready to prepare in my Heart, together with my dear
Paschal Lamb, a small unleavened, undefiled Cake, All on a sudden arises so
horrible a Tempest, that I imagined no other but that through its mighty force,
the Hill whereon my little House was founded would fly in pieces. But in as
much as this, and the like from the Devil (who had done me many a spite) was
no new thing to me; I took courage, and persisted in my Meditation, till some
body (after an unusual manner, touched me on the Back; whereupon I was so
hugely terrified, that I durst hardly look about me; yet I showed my self as
cheerful as (in the like Occurrences) humane frailty would permit; Now the same
thing still twiching me several times by the Coat, I looked back, and behold it
was a fair Praeconissa*
and glorious Lady, whose Garments were all Skye-colour, and curiously (like
Heaven) bespangled with golden Stars, in her right Hand she bare a Trumpet of
beaten Gold, whereon a Name was engraven (which I could well read in) but am as
yet forbidden to reveal it. In her left Hand she had a great bundle of Letters
of all Lunguages, which she (as I afterward understood) was to carry into all
Countries. She had also large and beautiful Wings, full of Eyes throughout,
wherewith she could mount aloft and fly swifter than any Eagle. I might
perhaps been able to take further notice of her, but because she staid so small
a^t^^^e with me, and terror and amazement still possessed me, I was fain to he
content. For as soon as I turned about, she turned her Letter* over and over,
and at length drew out a small one, which with great Reverence she laid down
upon the Table, and without giving one word, departed from me. But in her
mounting upward, she gave so mighty a blast on her gallant Trumpet, that the
whole Hill ecchoed thereof, and for a full quarter of a hour after, I could
hardly hear my own Words.

In so unlooked for an adventure I was at a loss, How either to advise, or
assist my poor self, and therefore fell upon my Knees, and besought my Creator
to permit nothing contrary to my Eternal Happiness to befall me; whereupon with
fear and trembling, I went Epistolas
to the Letter, which was now so heavy, as had it been meet Gold, it could
hardly have been so weighty. Now as I was diligently viewing it, I found a
little Seal, whereupon a curious Cross with this Inscription, IN HOC SIGNO ^
VINCES, was in graven.

Now as soon as I espied this Sigh I was the more comforted, as not being
ignorant that such a Seal was little acceptable, and much less useful to the
Devil. Whereupon I tenderly opened the Letter, and within it, in an Azure
Field, in Golden Letters, found the following Verses written.

This day, this day, this, this



The Royal Wedding is.
Art thou thereto by Birth inclined,
And unto joy of God designed*
Then may thou to the Mountain tend,
Whereon three stately Temples stand,
And there see all from ^id to end.
Keep watch, and ward,
Thy self regard;
Unless with diligence thou bathe,
The Wedding cannot thee harmless save:
He Will damage have that here delays;
Let him beware, too light that weighs.

Underneath stood Sponsus and Sponsa.

As soon as I had read this Letter, I ^^ Nuptiis.
was presently like to have fainted away, all my Hair stood an end, and a cold
Sweat trickled down my whole Body. For although I well perceived that this was
the appointed Wedding, whereof seven Years before I was acquainted in a bodily
Vision, and which now so long time I had with great earnestness attetded; and
which lastly, by the account and calculation of the (...) I had must diligently
observed, I found so to be, yet could I never foresee that it must happen
under so Requisita in hospitibus Secundum. 7. Pondera.
grievious and perilous conditions, For ^^^^^eds I before imagined that to he a
wel-come, and acceptable Guest, I needed only be nearly to appear at the
Wedding: I was now directed to Divine. Providence, of which until this 1
Electio incerta.
time I was never certain. I also found by my self, the more I examined my
self, that in my Head there was nothing 2 Inscitia Ignorantia Caecitas mentis
but gross misunderstanding, and blindness in my st^^^^^^ things, so that I
was not able to comprehend even those things which lay under my Feet and which
I daily I conversed with, much 3. 4.
less that I should be born to the searching Natura Secreta.
out, and understanding of the Secrets of Nature; since in my opinion Nature
might every where find a more 5. 6.
virtuous Disciple, to whom to entrust her precious, though temporary, and
changeable Treasures* I found also that my bodily behavior, and outward good
Conversation, and Brotherly M^ndana affectio.
Love toward my Neighbor, was not duly purged and cleansed; Moreover the
tickling of the Flesh manifested it self, whose affection was bent only to Pomp
and Bravery, and Worldly Pride, and not to the good of mankind; And I was
always contriving how by this art I might in a short time abundantly increase
my profit and advantage, rear up stately Palaces, make my self an everlasting
Name in the World, and other the like Carnal designs. But the obscure Words
concerning the Three Temples did particularly afflict me, which I was not able
to make out by any after-Speculation, and perhaps should not yet, had they not
been wonderfully revealed to me. Thus sticking betwixt Hope and Fear, examining
my self again and again, and finding only my own Frailty and Impotency, not
being in any wise able to succor my self, and exceedingly amazed at the
forementioned threatening; at length I betook my self to my usual and most
secure course; after I had finished my earnest and most fervent Prayer, I laid
me down in my Bed, that so perchance my good Angel by the Divine permission
might appear, and (as it had sometimes formerly happened) instruct me in this
doubtful affair, which to the praise of God, my own good, and my Neighbors
faithful and hearty warning and amendment did now likewise fall out. For I was
yet scarce fallen asleep, when me-thought, I, together with a numberless
multitude of men lay fettered with Visio persemuium. Turris Caecita^.
great Chains in a dark Dungeon, wherein without the least glimps of Light, we
swarmed like Bees one over another, and thus rendered each others affliction
more grievous. But although neither I, nor any of the rest could see one jot;
yet I continually heard one heaving himself above the other, when his Chains or
Fetters were become ever so little lighter, though none of us had much reason
to shove up the other, since we were all Captive Wretches. Now as I with the
rest had continued a good while in this affliction, and each was still
reproaching the other with his blindness and captivity, at length we heard many
Trumpets sounding together, and Kettle Drums beating so artificially thereto,
that it even revived and rejoiced us in our Calamity. During this Noise the
cover of the Dungeon was from above lifted up, Illustratio.
and a little light let down unto us. Then first might truly have been
discerned the bustle we kept, for all went pesle, mesle, and he who perchance
had too much heaved up himself, was forced down again under the others Feet. In
brief, each one strove to be uppermost, neither did I my self linger, but with
my weighty Fetters slipped up from under the rest, and then heaved my self upon a
Stone, which I ^^pis pr^stdis.
laid hold of; howbeit, I was several times caught at by others, from whom yet
as well as I might, with Hands and Feet I still guarded my self. For we
imagined no other but that we should all be set at Liberty, which yet fell out
quite otherwise. For after the Nobles, who looked upon us from above through
the Hole, had a while recreated themselves with this our struggling and
lamenting, a certain Ma^ister Ca^^^^
hoary-headed Ancient Man called to us to be quiet, and having scarce obtained
it, began (as I still remember) thus to say on.

If wretched Mankind would forbear
Themselves so to uphold,
Then sure on them much good confer,
My righteous Mother would*
But since the same will not ensue,
They must in Care and Sorrow rue,
And still in Prison lie.
Howbeit, my dear Mother will Vide S. Bernhard. Sermon. 2. do 7. fragmentis.

Their Follies over-see,
Her choicest Goods permitting still
Too much in the Light to be.
Though very rarely it may seem
That they may still keep some esteem,
Which else would pass for Forgery.
Wherefore in honor of the Feast
We this day solemnize,
That so her Grace may be increast,
A good deed she will devise.
For now a Cord shall be let down,
And whose'er can hang thereon,
Shall freely be releast.
He had scare done speaking. when an Ancient Matron commanded her Servants to
let down the Cord seven times Magistrarestis. Septies.
into the Dungeon, and draw up whosoever could hang upon it. Good God! that I
could sufficiently describe the hurry and disquiet that then arose amongst us;
For every one strove to get to the Cord, and yet only hindered each other. But
after seven Minutes a sign was given by a little Bell, whereupon at the first
Pull the Servants drew Prima vectura. 4.
up four. At that time I could not come near the Cord by much, having (as is
beforementioned) to my huge mis-fourtune, betaken my self to a Stone at the
Wall of the Dungeon, and thereby was disabled to get to the Cord which
descended in the middle. The Cord was let down the second time, Secunda.
but diverse, because their Chains were too heavy, and their Hands too render,
could not keep their hold on the Cord, but with themselves beat down many
another, who else perhaps might have held fast enough; Nay, many an one was
forcably pulled off by another, who yet could not himself get at it; so
mutually envious were we even in this our great misery. But they of all others
most moved my Compassion, whose weight was so heavy, that they tore their very
hands from their Bodies, and yet could not get up. Thus it came to pass that at
these five times very few were drawn up. For as soon as the sign was given, the
Servants were so nimble at the draught, that the most part tumbled one upon
another, and the Cord, this time especially, was drawn up very empty. Whereupon
the greatest part, and even I my self, despaired of Redemption, and called upon
God that he would have pity on us, and (if possible) deliver us out of this
obscurity, who also then heard some of us: For when the Cord came down Sexta.
the sixth time, some of them hung themselves fast upon it; and whilst in the
drawing up, the Cord swung from one side to the other, it (perhaps by the will
of God) came to me, which I suddenly catching, got uppermost above all the
rest, and so at length beyond hope came out; whereat I exceedingly rejoiced, so
that I perceived not the Wound, which in the drawing up I Vulpus exturro
Caecitatis
received on my Head by a sharp Stone, till I with the rest who were released
(as was always before done) was fain Septima.
to help at the seventh and last pull, at which time through straining, the
Blood ran down all over my Clothes, which I nevertheless for joy regarded not.
Now when the last draught whereon the most of all hung, was finished; The
Matron caused the Cord to be laid away, and willed her aged Son (at
Magistr^^^lius.
which I much wondered) to declare her Resolution to the rest of the Prisoners;
who after he had a little bethought himself spoke, thus unto them.

Ye Children dear
All present here,
What is but now complete and done,
Was long before resolved on:
What er'r my Mother of great Grace
To each on both sides here has shown,
May never Discontent mis-place;
The joyful-time is drawing on,
When every one shall equal be,
None Wealthy, none in Penury.
Who er'e receives great Commands
Has work enough to fill his Hands.
Who er'r with much has trusted been,
It Is well if he may save his Skin.
Wherefore your Lamentations cease,
What it't to wait for some few days;
As soon as he had finished these Words, the Cover was again put to and looked
down, and the Trumpets and Kettle-Drums began afresh, yet: could not the noise
thereof be so loud, but that the bittet Lamentation of the Prisoners which
arose in the Dungeon was heard above all, which soon also caused my Eyes to
run-over. Presently after the Ancient Matron, together with her Son sat down
upon seats before prepared, and commanded the Magistr^ recenset (...) victos.
Redeemed should be told. Now as soon as she understood the number, and had
written it down in a Gold-yellow Tablet, she demanded every ones Name, which
were also written down by a little page; having viewed us all, one Stertar^^
after another, she sighed, and spoke to her Son, so as I could well hear her,
Ah how heartily am I grieved for the poor Men in the Dungeon! I would to God I
durst release them all, whereunto her Son replied; It is (...)
Mother thus ordained of God, against whom we may not contend. In case we all
of us were Lords, and possessed all the Goods upon Earth, and were seated at
Table, who would there then be to be bring up the Service? whereupon his Mother
held her peace, but soon after she said* Well, however, let these be freed from
their Fetters; which was likewise presently done, and I, except a few was the
last; yet could I not refrain, but (though I Oratitudo Auctoris evec^.
still looked upon the rest, bowed myself before the Ancient Matron, and
thanked God that through her, had graciously and fatherly vouchsafed to bring
me out of such Darkness into the Light: After me the rest did likewise, to the
satisfaction of the Matron. Lastly, Nummus ^^ re^^.
to every one was given a piece of Gold for a Remembrance, and to spend by the
way, on the one side whereof was stamped the rising Sun, on the other (as I
remember) these three Letters, D L. S, And therewith every Deus Lux Solis vel
Deo laus Semp. Mandatum Taciturr (...)
one had License to depart, and was sent to his own Business with this annexed
Intimation, That We to the Glory of God should benefit our Neighbors, and
Reserve in silence what we had been entrusted with, which we also promised to
do, and so departed one from another; But in regard of the Wounds which the
Fetters had cased me, I could not well go forward, but halted on both Feet,
which the Matron presently espying* laughing* at it, and calling me again to
her said thus to me, My Son, Disaeffus^^toris.
let not this defect afflict thee, but call to mind thy Infirmities, and
therewith thank God who has permitted thee even in this World, and in the
state of thy imperfection to come into so high a light, and keep these wounds
for my Vuinus ex compedibus.
sake. Whereupon the Trumpets began again to sound, which so affrighted me that
I awoke, and then first perceived ^^ rperge^^^^.
that it was only a Dream, which yet was so strongly impressed upon my
imagination, that I was still perpetually troubled about it, and me thought I
was yet sensible of the wounds on my Feet. Solati^^^
Howbeit, by all these things I well understood that God had vouchsafed that I
should be present at this (...) and hidden Wedding; wherefore (...) ^ ildlike
confidence I returned (...) to his (...)
Divine Majesty, (...) sought him, that he would further preserve me in his
fear, that he would daily fill my Heart with Wisdom and Understanding, and at
length graciously (without my desert) conduct me to the desired end. Hereupon
Praeparat^^ ^^ iter.
I prepared my self for the way, put on my white linen Coat, girded my Loins,
with a Blood-red Ribbon bound cross-ways over my Shoulder: In my Hat I stuck
four red Roses, that I might the sooner by this Token be taken notice of
amongst the throng. For food I took Bread, Salt, and Water, which by the
counsel of an understanding person I had at certain times used, not without
profit, in the like occurrences. But before I parted from my Cottage, I first
^^ this my dress, and wedding Garment, fell down upon my Knees, and besought
God, that in case such a thing were, he would vouchsafe me a good issue. And
thereupon in the presence Votum.
of God I made a vow, that if any thing through his grace should be revealed
unto me, I would employ it neither to my own honor nor authority in the World,
but to the spreading of his Name, and the service of my Neighbor. And with
this v^^^ and good hope I departed out of my (...) with joy.

The Second Day.
I was hardly got out of my Cell into Tripudium Creaturarum ob nuptias.
a Forest, when me thought that the whole Heaven and all the Elements had
already trimmed themselves against this Wedding. For even the Birds in my
opinion chanted more pleasantly then before, and the young Fawns skipped so
merrily, that they rejoiced my old Heart, and moved me to sing: wherefore with
a loud Voice I thus began:

With mirth thou pretty Bird rejoice,
Thy Maker's praise in-hanced.
Lift up thy shrill and pleasant Voice,
Thy God is high advanced.
Thy food before he did provide,
And gives it in a fitting side,
Therewith be thou sufficed*
Why should thou now unpleasant be,
Thy wrath against God venting*
That he a little Bird made thee,
Thy silly head tormenting*
Because he made thee not a Man,
O peace, he has well thought thereon.
Therewith be thou sufficed*
What is it I Would have poor earthly worm,
By God (as 'twere) inditing,
That I should thus against Heaven storm
To force great arts by sighting?
God will out braved be by none,
Who Is good for naught, may hence be gone,
O man b' herewith sufficed.
That he no Caesar has thee framed,
To pine therefore it is needless
His Name perhaps thou had defamed
Whereof he was not heedless.
Most clear and bright Gods eyes do shine,
He pierces to thy hear within,
And cannot be deceived.
This sang I now from the bottom of my Heart throughout the whole Forest, so
that it resounded from all parts, and Per Sylvam.
the Hills repeated my last words, until In Campum.
at length I espied a curious green Heath, whither I be took my self out of the
Forest. Upon this Heath stood three lovely tall Cedars, which by reason 3.
Cedri. 3. Templa.
of their breadth afforded an excellent and desired shade, whereat I greatly
rejoiced; for although I had not hither to gone far, yet my earnest longing
made me very faint, whereupon I hasted to the Trees to rest a little under
them, but as soon as I came somewhat nigher, Tabella Mercurialis. 1.
I espied a Tablet fastened to one of them, on which (as afterward I read) in
curious Letters the following words were written:

Hospes salve: si quid tibi forsitan de nuptijs Regis auditum, Verba haec
perpende. Quatuor viarum optionem 1.
per nos tibi Sponsus offert, per quas omnes, modo non in devias delabaris, ad
Regiam ejus aulam pervenire possis. Prima brevis est, sed periculosa, et quae
te in varios scopulos deducet, exquibus 2.
vix te expedire licebit. Altera longior, quae circumducet te, non abducet,
plana est et facilis, si te Magnetis auxilio neque ad dextrum, neque sinistrum
abduci patiaris. Tertia vere 3.
Regia est, quae per varias Regis nostri delicias et spectacula viam tibi
reddet jucundam. Sed quod vix millesimo hactenus obtigit. Per quartam nemini
hominum licebit 4.
ad Regiam pervenire, utpote quae consumens et non nisi corporibus
incorruptibilibus conveniens est. Elige nunc ex tribus quam velis, et in ea
constans permane. Scito autem quamcunque ingressus fueris, abimmutabili fato
tibi ita destinatum, nec nisi cum maximo vitae periculo regredi fas esse. Haec
sunt quae te scivisse voluimus; sed heus cave ignores, quanto cum periculo te
huic viae commiseris, nam si te vel minimi delicti contra Regis nostri leges
nosti obnoxium, quaeso dum adhuc licet per eandem viam qua accessisti domum te
confer quam citissime.


Now as soon as I had read this Writing, all my joy was near vanished again,
and I who before Sang merrily, began Via Autoris engenda.
now inwardly to Lament. For although I saw all the three ways before me, and
understood that hence forward it was vouchsafed me, to make choice of one of
them; yet it troubled me that in case I went the stony and rocky way, I might
get a miserable and deadly fall, or taking the long one, I might wander out of
it through by-ways, or be otherway's detained in the great Journey. Neither
durst I hope, that I amongst thousands should be the very He, who should choose
the Royal way. I saw likewise the Fourth before me, but it was so environed
with Fire and Exhalations, that I durst not (by much) draw near it, and
therefore again and again considered, whether I should return back, or take any
of the ways before Dubium.
me. I well weighed my own unworthiness, but the Dream still comforted me, that
I was delivered out of the Tower, and yet I durst not confidently Confirmatio.
rely upon a Dream; whereupon I was so variously perplexed, that for very great
weariness, hunger and thirst seized me, whereupon I presently Columba Alba
arbori Meteuriali insidens.
drew out my Bread, cut a slice of it, which a snow-white Dove of whom I was
not aware, sitting upon the Tree, espied and therewith (perhaps according to
her wonted manner) came down, and betook her self very familiarly to me, to
whom I willingly imparted my food, which she received, and so with her
prettiness did again a little refresh me. But as soon as her enemy a most
Co^^^^ Niger.
black Raven perceived it, he straight darted himself down upon the Dove, and
taking no notice of me, would needs force away the Dove's meat, who could no
otherwise guard her self but by flight; whereupon they both together flew
toward the South, at which I V^^^^ s Mori^^^^.
was so hugely incensed and grieved, that without thinking what I did, I made
have after the filthy Raven, and so against my will ran into one of the
forementioned ways a whole Fields length; and thus the Raven being chased away,
and the Dove delivered, I then first observed what I had inconsiderately done,
and that I was already entered into Author incidit i^ 2. Viam incogi^^^^^^.
a way, from which under peril of great punishment I durst not retire. And
though I had still wherewith in some measure to comfort my self, yet that which
was worst of all to me, was, that I had left my Bag and Bread at the Tree, and
could never retrieve them: For as soon as I turned my self about, a contrary
wind was so strong against the, that it was ready to fell me. But if I went
forward on my way, I perceived no hinderance at all: From whence I could easily
conclude, that it would cost me my life, in case I should set my self against
the Wind; wherefore I patiently took up my cross, got upon my feet, and
resolved, since so it must be, I would use my utmost endeavor to get to my
Journeys end before night. Now although many apparent by-ways showed
themselves, yet I still proceeded with my Compass, and would not budge one
Compassos.
step from the Meridian Line; howbeit the way was oftentimes so rugged and
unpassable, that I was in no little doubt of it. On this way I constantly
thought upon the Dove and Raven, and yet could not search out the meaning,
until at length upon a high. Hill afar of I espied Diversorium
a stately Portal, to which not regarding how far it was distant both from me
and the way I was in, I hasted, Occasus
because the Sun had already hid himself under the Hills, and I (by far) could
elsewhere espy no abiding place, and this verily I ascribe only to God, who
might well have permitted me to go forward in this way, and with held my Eyes
that so I might have gazed beside this Gate. To which (as was said) I now made
mighty haste, and reached it by so much Daylight, as to take a very competent
view of it. Now it was an exceeding Royal beautiful Portal, whereon were carved
a multitude of most noble Figures and Devices, every one of which (as I
afterward learned) had its peculiar Signification; Above was fixed a pretty
large Tablet, with Tabula inscriptionis.
these Words, Proculhinc, procul ite profani, and other things more, that I was
earnestly forbidden to relate. Now as soon as I was come under the Portal, ^^^^
or.
there straight stepped forth one in a Sky-colored habit, whom I in friendly
manner saluted, which though he thankfully returned, yet he instantly demanded
Literae ^^^ vocationis.
of me my Letter of Invitation. O how glad was I that I had then brought it
with me! For how easily might I have forgotten it (as it also chanced to
others) as he himself told me? I quickly presented it, wherewith he was not
only Satisfied, but (at which I much wondered) showed me abundance of respect,
saying, Come in my Brother, an acceptable Guest you are to me; and withal
entreated me not to withold my Name from him. Now having replied, that I was
a Brother of the Red-Rosie Cross, he both wondered, and seemed to rejoice at it,
and then Nomea Autoris.
pr^^^^ ded thus, My Brother have you nothing about you wherewith to purchase a
Token? I answered my ability was small, but if he saw any thing about me he had
a mind to, it was at his service. Now he having requested of me my Bottle of
Water, and I Hmitur aqua Tessera.
granted it, he gives me a golden Token whereon stood no more but these two
Letters, S. C. entreating me that when Sanctitate Consta^ ti^ Sponsus
it stood me in good stead, I would remember him. After which I asked Charus. ^
pes, Charitas.
him, how many were got in before me, which he also told me, and lastly out of
mere Friendship gave me Diploma.
a sealed Letter to the second Porter. Now having lingered some time with him,
the Night grew on: Whereupon a great Beacon upon the Gate was immediately
fired, that so if any were still upon the way, he might make haste thither. But
the way where it finished at the Castle, was on both sides enclosed The Castle.
with Walls, and planted with all sorts of excellent Fruit Trees, and still on
every third Tree on each side Lanthorns were hung up, wherein all the Candles
were already lighted with a glorious Torch by a beautiful Virgin, Virgo
Luc^fera.
habited in Skye-colour, which was so noble and Majestic a Spectacle, that I
The Lady Chamberl^^^ or Controul^ r.
yet delayed somewhat longer then was requisite. But at length after sufficient
Information, and an advantageous Instruction, I friendly departed from the
first Porter. On the way, though I would gladly have known what was written in
my Letter, yet since I had no reason to mistrust the Porter, I forbear my
purpose, and so went on the way, until I came likewise to the second Gate,
which although it was very like the Porta Secunda.
other, yet was it adorned with Images and mystic significations. In the
affixed Tablet stood Date and dabitur vobis. Under this Tabella.
Gate lay a terrible grim Lion chained, who as soon as he espied me arose and
made Custos Leo.
at me with great roaring: whereupon 2 Portitor*
the second Porter who lay upon a Stone of Marble, awaked, and wished me not to
be troubled or affrighted, and then drove back the Lion, and having received
the Letter which I with trembling reached him, he read it, and with very great
respect spoke thus to me; Now well-come in Gods Name unto me the man whom of
long time I would gladly have seen. Mean while he also drew out a token, and
asked me whether I could purchase it? But I having nothing else left but my
Salt, presented Tessers omp^ a sale.
it to him, which he thankfully accepted. Upon this token again stood only
Studio mere^^ is Sal humor sponso mitte^^ us Sal mineralis Sal menstrualis.
two Letters namely, S. M. Being now just about to enter discourse with him, it
began to ring in the Castle, whereupon the Porter counseled me to run apace,
or else all the pains and labor I had hitherto taken would serve to no
purpose, for the Lights above began already to be extinguished; whereupon I
dispatched with such haste that I heeded not the Porter, in such anguish was I,
and truly it was but necessary, for I could not run so fast but that the
Virgin, after whom all the lights were put out, was at my heels, and I should
never have found the way, had not she with her Torch afforded me some light; I
was more-over constrained to enter the very next to her, and the Gate was Porta
clauditur.
so suddenly clap't to, that a part of my coat was locked out, which I verily
was forced to leave behind me; for neither I, nor they who stood ready without
and called at the Gate could prevail with the Porter to open it again, but he
delivered the Keys to the Virgin, who took them with her into the Court. Mean
time I again surveyed the Gate, which now appeared so rich, as the whole World
could not equal it; just by the Door were two Columns, on one Pyramides Port^.
of them stood a pleasant Figure with this Inscription, Congratulor. The other
having its Countenance veiled was sad, and beneath was written, Candoleo. In
brief, the Inscriptions and Figures thereon, were so dark and mysterious, that
the most dextrous man upon Earth could not have expounded them. But Promissu^^
Auto^^s
all these (if God permit) I shall ever long publish and explain. Under this
Gate I was again to give my Name, which was this last time written down in a
little Vellum-Book, and immediately with the rest dispatched to the Lord
Bridegroom. Here it was where I first received the true Guest-token, which was
somewhat less than the former, but yet much heavier, upon this stood these
Letters S. P. N. Besides this, a new pair of Shoes were given Salus per
Naturan^ Sponsi praes^ ntandus Nuptijs.
me, for the Floor of the Castle was laid with pure shining Marble; my old
Shoes I was to give away to one of the Poor (whom I would) who sat in throngs,
howbeit in very good order, under the Gate. I then bestowed them * Com^ puer.
on an old man: after which two Pages with as many Torches, conducted me into a
litlte Room; there they willed me to sit down on a Form, which I did, but they
sticking their Torches in two holes, made in the Pavement, departed and left me
thus sitting alone. Soon after I heard a noise, but saw nothing, and it proved
to be certain men who stumbled in upon me; but since I could see nothing, I was
fain to suffer, and attend what they would do with me; but presently perceving
them to be Barbers, I entreated them not to justle me ^^ l^ eatores.
so, for I was content to do whatever they desired, whereupon they quickly let
me go, and so one of them (whom I could not yet see) fine and gently cut away
the Hair round about from the Capiliss deto^ sus asservatus.
Crown of my Head, but on my Forehead, Ears and Eyes he permitted my Icegrey
Locks to hang. In this first encounter (I must confess) I was ready to despair,
for inasmuch as some of them shoved me so forceably, and I could yet see
nothing, I could think no other but that God for my Curiosity had suffered me
to miscarry. Now these invisible Barbers carefully gathered up the Hair which
was cut off, and carried it away with them. After which the two Pages Pueri
bini.
entered again, and heartily laughed at me for being so terrified. But they had
scarce spoken a few Words with me, when again a little Bell began to ring;
which (as the Pages informed me) was to give notice for assembling; whereupon
they willed me to rise, and through many Walks, Doors and winding Stairs
lighted me into a spacious Triclinium.
Hall. In this Room was a great multitude of guests, Emperors, Kings, Princes,
and Lords, Noble and Ignoble, Rich, and Poor, and all sorts of People, at which
I hugely marviled, and thought to my self, ah, how gross a fool have thou been
to engage upon this Journey with so much bitterness and toil, when (behold)
here are even those fellows whom thou well know, and yet had never any
reason to esteem. They are now all here, and thou with all thy Prayers and
Supplications art hardly got in at last. This and more the Devil at that time
injected, whom I notwithstanding (as well as I could) directed to the issue.
Mean time one or other of my acquaintance here and there spoke to me: Oh
Brother Rosencreutz! art thou here too; yea, (my Brethren) replied I, the Grace
of God has helped me in also; at which they raised a mighty laughter, looking
upon it as ridiculous that there should be need of God in so slight an Impietas
hospi^^ m non re^^^ via ^^^^^sorum*
occasion. Now having demanded each of them concerning his way, and found that
most were forced to clamber over the Rocks, certain Trumpets (none of which we
yet savv) began to sound to the Table, whereupon they all seated themselves,
every one as he judged himself above the rest; so that for me and some other
sorry* Fellows there was hardly a little Nook left at the lowermost Table.
Presently the two Pages entered, and one of them said Grace in so handsome and
excellent a manner, as rejoiced the very Heart in my Body. Quidam preces
negligunt.
Howbeit, certain great Sr John's made but little reckoning of them, but f^
eired and winked one at another, biting their Lips within their Hats, and using
more the like unseemly Gestures. After this Commessatio.
Meat was brought in, and albeit none could be seen* yet every thing was so
orderly managed, that it seemed to me as if every Guest had had his proper
Ministri invisibiles.
Attendant. Now my Artists having somewhat recruted themselves, and the Wine
having a little removed Inebriatorum glori^^ io Vana.
shame from their Hearts, they presently began to vaunt and brag of their*
Abilities* One would prove this, another that, and commonly the most sorry
Idiots made the loudest noise. Ah, when I call to mind what preternatural and
impossible enterprises I then heard, I am still ready to vomit at it. In fine,
they never kept in their order, but when ever one Rascal here, another there,
could insinuate himself in between the Nobles; Then pretended they the
finishing of such Adventures as neither Sampson, nor yet Hercules with all
their strength could ever have achieved: This would discharge Atlas of his
burden; The other would again draw forth the three-headed Cerberus out of Hell.
In brief, every man had his own Prate, and yet the great Lords were so simple
that they believed their pretenses, and the Rogues so audacious, that although
one or other of them was here and there rapped over the Fingers with a Knife,
yet they flinched not at it, but when any one perchance had filched a
Gold-Chain, then would all hazard for the like. I saw one who heard the
rustling of the Heavens: The second could see Plato's Ideas: A third could
number Democri^^ s's Atoms. There were also not a few pretenders to the
perpetual motion. Many an one (in my opinion) had good understanding, but
assumed too to much to himself; to his own destruction. Lastly, there was one
also who would needs out of hand persuade us that he saw the Servitors who
attended, and would still have pursued his Contention, had not one of those
invisible waiters reached him so handsome a cuff M^ nistri invisibiles.
upon his lying Muzzle, that not only he, but many who were by him, became as
mute as Mice. But it best of all pleased me, that all those, of whom I had any
esteem, were very quiet in their business, and made no loud cry of it, but
acknowledged themselves to be misunderstanding men, to whom the Modastia
Proborum hospitum.
mysteries of Nature were too high, and they themselves much too small. In this
Tumult I had almost cursed the day wherein I came hither; For I could not but
with anguish behold that those lewd vain People were above at the Board, but I
in so sorry a place could not, however rest in quiet, one of these Rascals
scornfully reproaching me for a motly Fool. Now I thought not that there was
yet one Gate behind, through which we must pass, but imagined I was during the
whole Wedding, to continue in this scorn, contempt and indignity, which yet I
had at no time deserved, either of the Lord Bridegroom or the Bride; And
therefore (in my opinion) he should have done well to have sought out some
other Fool to his Wedding than me. Behold, to such impatience does the Iniquity
of this World reduce Impatie^tia ex iniquitate homioum.
simple hearts. But this really was one part of my Lameness, whereof (as is
before mentioned) I dreamed. And truly this clamor the longer it lasted, the
more it increased. For there were already those who boasted of false and
imaginary Visions, and would persuade us of palpably lying Dreams* Now there
sat by me a very fine quiet Man, who oftentimes discoursed Assessor modestus.
of excellent matters, at length he said, Behold my Brother, if any one should
now come who were willing to instruct these blockish People in the right way,
would he be heard? No, verily, replied I. The world, said he, is now resolved
(whatever Mundus vult decipi.
comes on it) to be cheated, and cannot abide to give Ear to those who intend
its good. See thou also that same Cocks-Comb, with what whimsical Figures and
foolish Conceits he allures others to him. There one makes Mouths at the
People with unheard of Mysterious Words. Yet believe me in this, the time is
non coming when those shameful Vizards shall be plucked off, and all the World
shall know what Vagabond Imposters were concealed behind them. Then perhaps
that will be valued which at present is not esteemed. Whilst he was thus
speaking, and the clamor the longer it lasted, the worse it was, all on a
sudden there began in the Hall such excellent and stately Music, as M^si^^.
all the days of my Life I never heard the like; whereupon every one held his
peace, and attended what would become of it: Now there were in this Music all
sorts of stringed Instruments imaginable, which sounded together in such
harmony, that I forgot myself, and sat so unmovably, that those who sat by me
were amazed at me, and this lasted near half an hour, wherein none of us spoke
one word, For as soon as ever any one was about to open his Mouth, he got an
unexpected (...)
blow, neither knew he from whence it came: Me thought since we were not
permitted to see the Musicians. I should have been glad to view only all the
Instruments they made use of. After half an hour this Music ceased unexpectly,
and we could neither see nor hear any thing further. Presently after, before
the Door of the Hall began a great noise sounding and beating of Trumpets,
Shalms and Kettle-Drums, also Master-like, as if the Emperor of Rome had been
entering: whereupon the Door opened of it self, and then the noise of the
Trumpets was so loud, that we were Faculae ad lectum.
hardly able to endure it. Mean while (to my thinking) many thousand small
Tapers) came into the Hall, all which of themselves marched in so very exact an
order as altogether amazed us, till at last the two forementioned Pages Virgo
Lucifera. The Lady Chamberlain or Controulor.
with bright Torches, lighting in a most beautiful Virgin, all drawn on a
gloriously gilded Triumphant Selfmoving Throne, entered the Hall. It seemed to
me she was the very same who before on the way kindled, and put out the Lights,
and that these her Attendants were the very same whom she formerly placed at
the Trees. She Albedo
was not now as before in Skye-colour, but arrayed in a snow-white glittering
Robe, which sparkled of pure Gold, and cast such a luster that we durst not
steadily behold it. Both the Pages were after the same manner habited (albeit
somewhat more slightly; as soon as they were come into the middle of the Hall,
and were descended from the Throne, all the small Tapers made obeisance before
her: Whereupon we all stood up from our Benches, yet every one staid in his own
place. Now she having to us, and we again to her, showed all Respect and
Reverence; in a most pleasant Tone she began thus to speak;

The King my Lord most gracious, Salutatoria ^o^ i^^n.

Who now is not very far from us.
As also his most lovely Bride,
To him in troth and honor ti'd;
Already, with great joy indu'd,
Have your arrival hither viewed:
And do to every one, and all
Promise their Grace in special;
And from their very Hearts desire*
You may it at the time acquire;
That so their future Nuptial joy
May mixed be with none's annoy.
Hereupon with all her small Tapers she again courteoussy bowed, and presently
after began thus:

In the Invitation writ, you know. Propo^^^^ Actionis.

That no man called was hereto
Who of God's rarest gifts good store
Had not received long before,
Adorned with all requisit's,
As in such cases it befit's.
How though they cannot well conceit
That any man's so desperate,
Under conditions so hard,
Here to intrude without regard;
Unless he have been first of all,
Prepared for this Nuptial*
And therefore in good hopes do dwell
That with all you it will be well:
Yet men are grown so bold, and rude,
Not weighing their ineptitude;
As still to thrust themselves in place
Whereto none of them called was:
No Cocks-comb here himself may sell,
No Rascal in with others steal;
For they resolve without all let
A Wedding pure to celebrate.
So then the Artists for to weigh, Probatis a^ti^^cu^.

Scales shall be fixed the ensuing day;
Whereby each one may lightly find
What he has left at home behind.
If here be any of that Rout
Who have good cause themselves to doubt,
Let him pack quickly hence aside;
For that in case be longer bide,
Of grace forelor'n, and quite undone
Betimes he must the Gantlet run:
If any now his Conscience gall,
He shall to night be left in the Hall
And be again releas't by morn,
Yet so he hither never return.
If any man have confidence,
He with his waiter may go hence,
Who shall him to his Chamber light
Where he may rest in peace to night;
And there with praise awaite the Scale
Or else his Sleep may chance to fail.
The others here may take it well,
For who aim's 'bove what is possible,
'Twere better much he hence had pas't,
But of you all we will hope the best.
As soon as she had done speaking this, she again made reverence, and sprung
cheerfully into her Throne, after which the Trumpets began again to sound,
which yet was not of force to take from many their grievous Sighs So they again
conducted her invisibly away, but the most part of the small Tapers remained in
the Room, and still one of them accompanied each of us. In such perturbation
it is not well possible to express what pensive Thoughts and Gestures were
amongst us. Yet the most part resolved to await the Scale, and in case things
sorted not well, to depart (as they hoped) in peace. I had soon cast up my
reckoning, Author humiliat (...)
and being my Conscience convinced me of all ignorance, and unworthiness, I
purposed to stay with the rest in the Hall, and chose much rather to content my
self with the Meal I had already taken, than to run the Risco of a future
repulse. Now after that every one by his small Taper had severally been
conducted into a Chamber (each as I since understood into a peculiar one) There
staid nine of us, and amongst the rest he also, who discoursed with me before
at the Table. But although our small Tapers left us not, yet soon after within
an hours time one of the forementioned Pages came in, and bringing a great
bundle of Cords with him, first demanded of us whether we had concluded to stay
there, which when we had with Sighs affirmed, he bound each of us in a several
place, and so went away with our small Pernoctatio tristis
Tapers, and left us poor Wretches in Darkness. Then first began some to
perceive the imminent danger, and I my self could not refrain Tears. For
although we were not forbidden to speak, yet anguish and affliction suffered
none of us to utter one word. For the Cords were so wonderfully made, yet none
could cut them, muchless get them off his Feet: yet this comforted me, that
still the future gain, of many an one, who had now betaken himself to rest,
would prove very little to his satisfaction. But we by one only Nights Penance
might expiate all our pr^sumption: till at length in my sorrowful thoughts I
fell asleep; during which I had a Dream; Now although Somnium ^ypicum.
there be no great matter in it, yet I esteem it not impertient to recount it:
Me thought I was upon an high Mountain, and saw before me a great and large
Valley, in this Valley were gathered What will be the Issue of the probatory
beam. He that climbs high has a great fall.
together an unspeakable multitude of People, each of which had at his Head a
Thread, by which he was hanged up toward Heaven, now one hung high, another
low, some stood even quite upon the Earth. But in the Air there flew up and
down an ancient Man, who had in his hand a pair of Shoers, wherewith here he
cut one's, and there another's thread. Now he that was nigh the Earth was so
much the readier, and fall without noise, but when it happened to one of the
high ones, he fell, so that the Earth quaked. To some it came to pass that
their Thread was so stretched, that they came to the Earth before the Thread
was cut. I took pleasure in this tumbling, and it joyed me at the Heart, when
he who had over-exalted himself in the Air, of his Wedding, got so shameful a
fall, that it carried even some of his Neighbors along with him. In like
manner it also rejoiced me, that he who had all this while kept himself near
the Earth, could come down so fine and gently, that even his next men perceived
it not. But being now in my highest fit of Jollity, I was unawares jogged by
one of my fellow Captives, upon which I Experg^^.
was awaked, and was very much discontented with him; Howbeit, I considered my
Dream, and recounted it to my Brother, who lay by me on the other side; who was
not dissatisfied with it, but hoped some Comfort might thereby be pretended. In
such discourse we spent the remaining part of the Night, and with longing
exspected the Day.

The Third Day.
NOw as soon as the lovely day was broken, and the bright Sun, having raised
himself above the Hills, had again betaken himself, in the high Heaven, to his
appointed office; My good Champions began to rise out of their Beds, and
leisurely to make themselves ready unto the Inquisition. Whereupon, one after
another, they came again into the Hall, and giving Colloquium sur^entium.
us a good morrow, demanded how we had Slept to Night; and having espied our
Bonds, there were some that reproved us for being so cowardly, and that we had
not (much rather) as they, hazarded upon all adventures. Howbeit, some of them
whose Hearts still smote them made no loud cry of the business. We excused our
selves with our ignorance, hoping we should now soon be set at Liberty, and
learn wit by this disgrace? that they on the contrary had not yet altogether
escaped, and perhaps their greatest danger was still to be expected: At length
each one being again assembled, the Trumpets began Cantus.
now again to sound and the Kettle Drums to beat as formerly, and we then
imagined no other but that the Bridegroom was ready to present himself; which
nevertheless was a huge mistake. For Virgo Lucifera. The Lady Chamberlain or
Controulor.
it was again the yesterday's Virgin who had arrayed her self all in red
Velvet, and girded her self with a white Scarf. Upon her Head she had a green
Wreath of Laurel, which hugely became her. Her train was now no more of small
Tapers, but consisted of two hundred Men in Harnis, who were all (like her)
clothed in red and white. Now as soon as they were alighted from the Throne,
she comes straight to us Prisoners, and after she had Saluted us, she said in
few words; That some of you have been sensible of your wretched condition is
hugely pleasing to my most mighty Lord, and he is also resolved you shall fare
the better for it; Solatur humiles.
And having espied me in my Habit, she laughed and spoke, good lack! have thou
also submitted thy self to the Yoke, I imagined thou would have made thy self
very smug; with which Words she caused my Eyes to run over. After which she
commanded we should be unbound, and cuppled together and placed in a station
where we might well behold the Scales. For, said she, it may yet fare better
with them, than with the Presumptious, who yet stands here at Liberty. Mean
time the Scales which were entirely of Gold were hung Libra aurca.
up in the midst of the Hall; There was also a little Table covered with red
Velvet, and seven weights placed thereon. 7. Pondera
First of all stood a pretty great one, next four little ones; lastly, two
great ones severally; And these Weights in proportion to their bulk were so
heavy, that no man can believe or comprehend Satellites.
it: But each of the Harnised men had together with a naked Sword a strong
rope; These she distributed according to the number of Weights into seven
bands, ^and out of every band chose one for their proper weight; and then again
sprung up into her high Throne. Now as soon as she had made her reverence, with
a very Shrill Tone she began thus to speak:

Who int' a Painters room does go
And nothing does of painting know,
Yet does in pra^ing thereof, pride it;
Shall be of all the World derided.
Who into the Artists order goes,
And thereunto was never chose;
Yet with pretense of skill does pride it;
Shall be of all the World derided.
Who at a Wedding does appear,
And yet was never intended there;
Yet does in coming highly pride it;
Shall be of all the World deried.
Who now into this Scale ascends,
The weights not proving his fast Friends,
And that it bounces so does ride it;
Shall be of all the World derided.
As soon as the Virgin had done speaking, Ponderantur Art^^ce^.
one of the Pages commanded each one to place himself according to his order,
and one after another to step in: which one of the Emperors 1. Caes^^.
made no scruple of, but first of all bowed himself a little toward the
Virgin, and afterward in all his stately Attire went up: where upon each
Captain laid in his weight; which (to the wonder of all) he stood out. But the
last was too heavy for him, so that forth he must; and that with such anguish
that (as it seemed to me) the Virgin her self had pity on him, who also
beckned to her people to hold their peace, yet was the good Emperor bound and
delivered over to the Sixth band. Next him again came forth another Emperor,
who stepped hautily into (...).
the Scale, and having a great thick Book (...)
under his Gown, he imagined not to fail; But being scarce able to abide the
third weight, and being unmercifully slung down, and his Book in that
affrightment slipping from him, all the Soldiers began to laugh, and he was
delivered up bound to the third band. Thus it went also with some others of ^
the Emperors, who were all shamefully laughed at and captived. After these
comes forth a little short Man with a curld brown Beard an Emperor too, ^
who after the usual reverence got up also, and held out so steadfastly, that
me thought, had there been more weights ready, he would have outstood them; To
whom the Virgin immediately arose, and bowed before him, causing him to put on
a Gown of red Velvet, and at last reached him a branch of Laurel, having good
store of them upon her Throne, upon the steps whereof she willed him to sit
down. Now how, after him it fared with the rest of the Emperors, Kings and
Lords, would be too long to recount; but I cannot leave unmentioned that few of
those great* personages held out. Howbeit sundry eminent virtues (beyond my
hopes) were found in many. One could stand out this, the second another, some
two, some three, four or five, but few could attain to the just perfection; But
every one who failed, was miserably laughed at by the bands. After the
Inquisition had also passed over the Gentry, the learned, and unlearned, and
the rest, and in each condition perhaps one, it may be, two, but for the most
part none, was found perfect, it came at length to those honest Gentlemen the
vagabond Cheaters, (...)
and rascally Lapidem Spitalausicum makers, who were set upon the Scale with
such scorn, that I my self for all my grief was ready to burst my Belly with
laughing, neither could the very Prisoners themselves refrain. For the most
part could not abide that severe trial, but with Whips and Scourges were jerked
out of the Scale, and led to the other Prisoners, yet to a suiteable band. Thus
of so great a throng so few remained, that I am ashamed to discover their
number. Howbeit there were Persons of quality also amongst them, who
notwithstanding Notales ^^hilominus o^^antur.
were (like the rest) honored with Velvet Robes and wreaths of Laurel.

The Inquisition being completely finished, and none but we poor coupled hounds
standing aside; At length one of the Captains stepped forth, and said, Gracious
Madam, if it please your Ladyship let these poor men, who acknowledged their
misunderstanding, be set upon the Scale also without their incurring any
danger of penalty, and only for recreation's sake, if perchance any thing that
is right may be found (...)
amongst them. In the first place I was in great perplexity, for in my anguish
this was my only comfort, that I was not to stand in such ignominy, or to be
lashed out of the Scale. For I nothing doubted but that many of the Prisoners
wished that they had stayed ten Nights with us in the Hall. Yet since the
Virgin consented, so it must be, and we being untied were one after another set
up: Now although the most part miscarried, yet they were neither laughed at, nor
scourged, but peaceably placed on one side. My Socius Autoris.
Companion was the fifth, who held out bravely, whereupon all, but especially
the Captain who made the request for us, applauded him, and the Virgin showed
him the usual respect. After him again two more were dispatched in an instant.
But I was the eighth; Now as soon as (with trembling) I A^tor 8
stepped up, my Companion who already sat by in his Velvet, looked friendly
upon me, and the Virgin her self smiled a little. But for as much as I
outstayed all the Weights, the Virgin commanded them to draw me up by force,
wherefore three men moreover hung on the otherside of the Beam, and yet could
nothing prevail. Whereupon one of the Pages immediately stood up, and cried out
exceeding loud, That Is HE: Upon which That Is he.
the other replied; Then let him* gain his Liberty, which the Virgin accorded;
and being received with due Ceromonies, The choice was given me to release one
of the Captives, whosoever I Probatissi^^^.
pleased; Whereupon* I made no long deliberation, but elected the first Emperor
Liberat 1. Caesarem.
whom I had long pitied, who was immediately set free, and with all respect
seated amongst us. Now the last being set up, and the Weights proving too heavy
for him, in the mean while the Virgin espied my Roses, which I had taken out of
my Hat into my Author rosam s^am donat Virgini.
Hands, and thereupon presently by her Page graciously requested them of me,
which I readily sent her. And so this first Act was finished about ten in the
Hora 10. A^^us.
fore-noon. Whereupon the Trumpets began to sound again, which nevertheless we
could not as yet see. Mean time the Bands were to step aside with their
Prisoners, and expect the Judgment. After which a Council of the seven Captains
and us was set, and the business was propounded by the Virgin as President* who
desired each one to give his opinion, how the Prisoners were to be dealt with.
The first opinion Judicium de reprobatis.
was, That they should all be put to Death, yet one more severely than another:
namely those who had presumptuously Vo^um 1.
intruded themselves contrary to the Express conditions; others would have them
kept close prisoners. Both Vo^um 2.
which pleased neither the President, nor me. At length by one of the Emperors
(the same whom I had freed) my Companion, and my self the affair was brought to
this point; That first of* the principal Lord's should with a befitting ^.
respect be led out of the Castle; others might be carried out somewhat (...)
more scornfully. These should, be stripped, and caused to run out naked; The
fourth with Rods, Whips, or Dogs, should be hunted out. Those who the day
before willingly surrendered themselves, might be suffered to depart without any
blame, And last of all those Presumptuous ones, and they who behaved themselves
so unseemly at Dinner the day before, should be punished in Body and Life
according to each Man's demerle. This opinion pleased the Virgin well, and
obtained the upper hand. There was moreover another Dinner vouchsafed them,
which they were soon acquainted with. But the Execution was deferred till
twelve at noon, Here with the Senate arose, and the Virgin also, together with
her. Attendants returned to her usual quarter. But the uppermost Table in the
Room was allotted to us, they requesting us to take it in good part till the
Business were fully dispatched. And then we should he conducted to the Lord
Bridegroom and the Bride, with which we were at present well content. Mean time
the Prisoners were again brought into the Hall, and each Man seated according
Prandium.
to his Quality; they were likewise enjoined to behave themselves somewhat more
civilly than they had done the day before, which yet they needed nor to have
been admonished, for (without this, they had already put up their pipes. And
this I can boldly say, not with flattery, but in the love of truth, that
commonly those persons who were of the highest R^^k, best understood how to
behave themselves in so unexpected a misfourtune. Their Treatment was but
indifferent, yet with respect, neitheir Ministri invisibiles* Visibiles.
could they yet see their Attendants but to us they were visible, whereas I was
exceeding joyful. Now altough Fourtune had exalted us, yet we took not upon us
more than the rest, advising them to be of good Cheer, the event would not be
so ill. Now although they would gladly have understood the Sentence of us, yet
we were so deeply obliged that none durst open his Mouth about it. Nevertheless
we comforted them as well as we could, drinking with them to try if the Wine
might make them any thing cheerfuller. Proborum Exaltatio.
Our Table was covered with red Velvet, beset with drinking-Cups of pure Silver
and Gold; which the rest could not behold without amazement and very great
anguish. But e're we had seated our selves, in came the two Pages, presenting
every one in the Bridegroom's behalf, the Golden Fleece with a flying Lion,
requesting us to wear them (...) a Sp(...) so.
at the Table, and as became us, to observe the Reputation and Dignity of the
Order, which his Majesty had now vouchsafed us, and should suddenly be ratified
with suitable Ceremonies. This we received with profoundest submission,
promising obediently to perform whatsoever his Majesty should please. Besides
these, the noble Page had a Schedule, wherein we were set down in order. And
for my part I should not otherwise be desirous to conceal my place, if
perchance it might not be interpreted to Pride in me, which yet is expressly
against the fourth* Weight. Now because our entertainment was exceeding
stately, we demanded one of the Pages, whether we might not have leave to send
some choice bit to our Friends and Acquaintance, who making no difficulty of
it, every one sent plentifully to his acquaintance by the waiters, howbeit they
saw none of them; and forasmuch as they knew not whence it came, I was my self
desirous to carry somewhat to one of them, Autori dene^atur communicatio erga
repro^^^.
but as soon as I was risen, one of the Waiters was presently at my Elbow,
saying, He desired me to take friendly warning, for in case one of the Pages
had seen it, it would have come to the King's Far, who would, certainly have
taken it amiss of me; but since none had observed it but himself, he purposed
not to betray me, but that I ought for the time to come to have better regard
to the dignity of the order: With which words the Servant did really so
astonish me, that for a long time after I scarce moved upon my Seat* yet I
returned him Thanks for his faithful warning, as well as in haste and
affrightment I was able. Soon after the Drums began to beat again, to which we
were already accustomed: For we well knew it was the Virgin, wherefore we
prepared our selves to receive her who was now coming in with her usual (...)
Virgo Lucifera The Lady Chamberlain or Controulor.
her high Seat, one of the Pages bea^ing before her a very tall Goblet of Gold.
And the other, a Patent in Parchment: Being now after a mavelous artificial
manner alighted from the Seat, she takes the Goblet from the Page, and presents
the same in the King's behalf, saying, That it was brought us from his Majesty,
and that in honor of ^^^ir Oba^^nb^^^^^
him we should c^^se^it to go round. Upon the cover of this Goblet stood
Fortune curiously cast in Gold, who had in her Hand a red flying Ensign; for
which cause I drunk somewhat the more sadly, as having been but too well
acquainted with Fortune's way-wardness. But the Virgin as well as we, was
adorned with the Golden Fleece and Lion, Ornatus Virginis
whence I observed, that perhaps she was the president of the Order. Wherefore
we demanded of her how the Order might be named? she answered, That it was not
yet seasonable to discover it, till the affair with the Prisoners were
dispatched. And therefore their Eyes were still held; and what had hitherto
happened to us, was to them only for an Offense and Scandal, although it were
to be accounted as nothing, in regard of the honor that attended us. Hereupon
she began to distinguish the Patent which the other Page held into two
different parts, out Reprobi (...)
of which about thus much was read before the first company.

That they should confess that they had Accusatio (...).
too lightly given Credit to false fictitions Books, had assumed too much to
themselves, and so came into this Castle, albeit they were never invited into
it, and perhaps the most part had presented themselves with design to make
their Markets here* and afterward to live in the greater Pride Affectibus
Mandaois
and Lordliness; And thus one had seduced another, and plunged him into this
disgrace and ignominy, wherefore they were deservedly to be soundly punished.

Which they with great humility readily acknowledged, and gave their Hands upon
it. After which a severe check was given to the rest, much to this purpose.

That they very well knew, and were in Alterius partis.
their Consciences convinced, that they had forged false fictitious Books, had
befooled others, and cheated them, and thereby had diminished Regal dignity
amongst all. They knew in like manner what ungodly acceitful Figures they had
made use of, in so much as they spared not even the Divine Trinity, but
accustomed themselves to cheat People all the Country over. It was also now as
clear as Day with what Practices they had endeavored to ensnare the true
Guests, and introduce the Ignorant: in like manner, that it was manifest to all
the World, that they wallowed in open Whoredom, Adultery, Gluttony, and other
Uncleannesses: All which was against the express Orders of our Kingdom. In
brief, they knew they had disparaged Kingly Majesty, even amongst the common
sort, and therefore they should confess themselves to be manifest convicted
Vagabond-Cheaters, Knaves and Rascals, whereby they desorved to be cashiered
from the company of civil People, and severely to be punished. The good Artists
were loath to come Confessio ^^vita.
to this Confession, but inasmuch as not only the Virgin her self threatened,
and swear their death; but the other party also vohemently raged at them, and
unanimously cried out, that they had most wickedly seduced them out of the
Light: They at length, to prevent a huge misfortune, confessed the same with
dolor, and yet withal alleged that what had herein happened was not to be
animadverted upon them in the worst sense. For in as much as the ^rousatio
Lords were absolutely resolved to get into the Castle, and had promised great
sums of Money to that effect, each one had used all Craft to seize upon
something, and so things were brought to that pass, as was now manifest before
their Eyes. But that it succeeded not, They in their opinion had dis-deserved
no more than the Lords themselves; As who should have had so much understandnig
as to consider that in case any one had been sure of getting in, he would not,
in so great Peril, for the sake of a slight gain, have clambered over the Wall
with them. Their Books also sold so mightily, that whoever had no other mean to
maintain himself, was fain to engage in such a Coufenage. They hoped moreover,
that if a right Judgment were made, they should be found no way to have
miscarried, as having behaved themselves toward the Lords, as became Servants,
upon their earnest entreaty. But answer was made them, that his Refutan^
Royal Majesty had determined to punish all, and every man, albeit one more
severely than another. For although what had been alleged by them was partly
true, and therefore the Lords should not wholly be indulged, yet they had good
reason to prepare themselves for Death, who had so presumptuously obtruded
themselves, and perhaps seduced the more ignorant against their will; As
likewise they who with false Books had violated Royal Majesty, as the same
might be evinced out of their very Writings and Books

Hereupon many began most pitteously Dolor de sententia.
to lament, cry, weep, entreat, and prostrate themselves, all which
notwithstanding could avail them nothing, and I much marvelled how the Virgin
could be so resolute; when yet their misery caused our Eyes to run over, and
moved our Compassion (although the most part of them had procured us much
trouble, and vexation) For she presently dispatched her Page, who brought with
him all the Curiassiers which had this day been appointed at the Scales, who
were commanded each of them to take his own to him, and in an orderly
Procession, so as still each Curiassier should go with one of the Prisoners, to
Executio Sententiarum.
conduct them into her great Garden. At which time each one so exactly
recognized his own Man, that I marvelled at it. Leave also was likewise given
to my yesterday Companions to go out into the Garden unbound, and to be present
at the Execution of the Sentence. Now as soon as every Man Spectatores.
was come forth, the Virgin mounted up into her High Throne, requesting us to
sit down upon the Steps, and to appear at the Judgment, which we refused not,
but left all standing upon the Table (except the Goblet, which the Virgin
committed to the Pages keeping) and went forth in our Robes upon the Throne,
which of it self moved so gently as if we had passed in the Air, ^ll in this
manner we came into the Garden, where we arose altogether. This Garden Hortos.
was not extraordinary curious; only it pleased me that the Trees were planted
in so good order. Besides there ran in it a most costly Fountain, adorned with
wonderful Figures and Inscriptions, Author promittit alta librum.
and strange Characters, (which* God willing I shall mention in a future Book)
In this Garden was raised a wooden Scaffold, hung about with d^rionsly painted
figured Coverlets, Now there were four Galleries made one over another, the
first was more glorious than any of the rest, and therefore covered with a
white-Taffata Curtain, so that at that time we could not perceive who was
behind it. The second was empty and uncovered. Again the two last were covered
with red and blew Taffata. Now as soon as we were come to the Scaffold, the
Virgin bowed her self down to the ground, at which we were mightily terrified:
For we might easily guess that the King and Queen must not be far off; Now we
also having duly performed our Reverence, The Virgin lead us up by the winding
Stairs into the second Gallery, where she placed her self uppermost, and us in
our former order. But how the Emperor whom I had released, behaved himself
toward me, both at this time, as Gratitudo Caesaris erga liberatorem.
also before at the Table, I cannot, without slander of wicked Tongues, well
relate. For he might well imagine in what Anguish and Solicitude he now should
have been, in cafe he were at present to attend the Judgment with such
ignominy, and that only through me he had now attained such Dignity Praecomissa.
and Worthiness. Mean time the Virgin who first of all brought me the
Invitation, and whom hither to I had never since seen, stepped in; First she
gave one blast upon her Trumpet, and then with a very loud Voice declared the
Sentence in this manner.

The Kings Majesty my most gracious Oration ad j^^^andos.
Lord could from his heart wish, that all and every one here Assembled, had
upon his Majesty's Invitation presented themselves so qualified, as that they
might (to his honor) with greatest frequency have adorned this his appointed
Nuptial and joyful Feast. But since it has otherwise pleased Almighty God, his
Majesty bai^^ not where at to murmur, but must be forced, contrary to his own
Inclination, to abide by the ancient and laudable Constitutions of this
Kingdom. But now, that his Majesty's innate Clemeney may be celebrated over all
the World, he has thus far absolutely dealt with his Council and Estates, that
the usual Sentence shall be considerably lenified. So that in the first place
he is willing Sententia. Magnatum
to vouchfase to the Lords and Potentates, not only their lives entirely, but
also freely and frankly to dismiss them; friendly and courteously entreating
your Lordships not at all to take it in evil part that you cannot be present at
his Majesty's Feast of Honor; But to remember that there is notwithstanding
more imposed upon your Lordships by God Almighty (who in the distribution of
his Gifts has an incomprehensible Consideration) than you can duly and easily
sustain. Neither is your Reputation hereby prejudiced, although you be rejected
by this our Order, since we cannot at once all of us, do all things. But for as
much as your Lordships have been seduced by base Rascals, it shall not on their
part, pass unrevenged. And furthermore his Majesty resolves shortly to
communicate with your* Lordships a Catalogue of Heretics or index
Expurgatorins, that you may henceforward be able with better judgment to
discern between he Good and the Evil. And because his Majesty e're long also
purposes to rummage his Library, and offer up the seductive Writings to
Vulcan, he friendly, humbly, and courteously entreats every one of your
Lordships to put the same in Execution with your own, whereby it is to be hoped
that all evil and Mischief may for the time to come be remedied. And you are
withal to be admonished, never henceforth so inconsiderately to covet an
entrance hither, least the former excuse of Seducers be taken from you, and you
fall into Disgrace and Contempt with all Men. In fine, for as much as the
Estates of the Land have still somewhat to demand of your Lordships, his
Majesty hopes that no Man will think much to redeem himself with a Chain or
what else he has about him, and so in friendly manner to depart from us, and
through our safe conduct to betake himself home again.

The others who stood not at the first, Sententia. 2.
third, and fourth weight, his Majesty will not so lightly dismiss. But that
they also may now experience his Majesty's gentleness, it is his Command, to
strip them stark naked, and so send them forth.

Those who in the second and fifth weight 3.
were found too light, shall besides Stripping be noted with one, two or more
Brandmarks, according as each one was lighter, or heavier.

They who were drawn up by the, sixth or 4.
seventh, and not by the rest, shall be somewhat more graciously dealt withal,
and so forward. For upto every combination there was a certain punishment
ordained* which were here too long to recount.

They who yesterday separated themselves freely of their own record, shall go
out* at* Liberty without any blame. 6.


Finally, the convicted vagabond-Cheaters who could move up tone of the
weights, shall as occasion serves, be punished in Body and Life, with the
Sword, Halter, Water and Rods. And such Execution of Judgment shall be
inviolably observed for an Example unto others.

Herewith our Virgin broke her Wand, and the other who read the Sentence,
blowed her Trumpet, and stepped with most profound Reverence toward those
Finis habiti (...)
who stood behind the Curtain. But here I cannot omit to discover somewhat to
the Reader concerning the number of our Prisoners; of whom those who weighed
one, were seven; those who weighted two, were twenty one; they ^^mm^
pon^^^^orum. 7. 21. 35. 35. ^^. ^1. 130. 125.
who three, thirty five; they who four, thirty five; those who five, twenty
one; those who six, seven; but he that came to the seventh, and yet could not
well raise it, He, was only one, and indeed the same whom I released. Besides,
of them who wholly sailed there were many: But of those who drew all the
weights from the ground, but few. And these as they stood severally before us,
so I diligently numbered, and noted them down in my Table Book; And it Va(...)
is very admirable that amongst all those who weighed any thing, none was equal
to another. For although amongst those who weighed three, there were thirty
five, yet one of them weighed the first, second, and third, another the third,
fourth, and fifth, a third, the fifth, sixth, and seventh and so on. It is
likewise very wonderful that amongst one hundred twenty six who weighed any
thing, none was equal to another; And I would very willingly name them all,
with each Man's weight, were it not as yet forbidden me. But I hope it may
hereafter be published with the Interpretation.

Now this Judgment being read over, the Lords in the first place were well
Reorum mores.
satisfied, because in such severity they durst not look for a mild sentence.
For which cause they gave more than they were desired, and each one redeemed
himself with Chains, Jewels, Gold, Moneys and other things, as much as they had
about them; and with reverence took leave. Now although the King's Servants
were forbidden to jear any at his going away, yet some unlucky Ministrorum
mores.
Birds could not hold laughing, and certainly it was sufficiently ridiculous to
seo them pack away with such speed, without once looking behind them. Some
desired that the promised Catalogue might with the first be dispatched after
them, and then they would take such order with their Books as should be
pleasing to his Majesty; which was again assured. At the Door Haustus
oblivionis.
was given to each of them out of a Cup a Draught of FORGETFVLNESS, that so he
might have no further memory of misfortune.

After these the Volunteers departed, who because of their ingenuity were
suffered to pass but yet so as never to return again in the same fashion; But
if to them (as likewise to the others) any thing further were revealed, then
they should be well-come Guests.

Mean while others were stripping, in Damnati.
which also an inequality (according to each man's demerit) was observed. Some
were sent away naked, without other hurt. Others were driven out with small
Bells* Some were scourged forth. In brief the punishments were so various, that
I am not able to recount them all. In the end it came to the last also with
whom somewhat a longer time was spent, for whilst some were hanging, some
beheading, some forced to leap into the Water, and the rest otherwise
dispatching, much time was consurned. Verily at this execution my Eyes ran
over, not indeed in regard of the punishment, which they otherwise for their
impudency well desurved, but in contemplation of humane blindness, in that we
are continually busiing our selves in that which ever since the first Fall has
been hitherto Sealed ^tionis expositio.
upto us. Thus the Garden which so lately was quite full, was soon emptied; so
that besides the Soldiers there was not a man left. Now as soon as this was
done, and silence had been kept for the space of five minut's; There
Entertainment at Night. Unicorca.
came forward a beautiful snow- white Unicorn with a golden collar (having in
it certain Letters) about his neck: In the same place he bowed himself down
upon both his fore-feet, as if hereby he had shown honor to the Lion, who Leo.
stood so immoveably upon the fountain, that I took him to be of stone or
brass, who immediately took the naked Sword which he bare in his Paw, Mathaera.
and brake it in the middle in two, the pieces whereof to my thinking sunk into
the Fountain: after which he so long roared, until a white-Dove brought a
Columba.
branch of Olive in her bill, which the Lion devoured in an instant, and so was
quieted. And so the Unicorn returned to his place with joy. Hereupon our Virgin
lead us down again by the winding stairs from the Scaffold, and so we again
made our reverence toward Discessus ab hoc actu.
the Curtain. We were to wash our hands and heads in the Fountain, and there a
little while to wait in our order, till the King through a certain secret
Gallery were again returned into his Hall, and then we also with choice Music,
Pomp, State and pleasant discourse were conducted into our former lodging: And
this was done about four in the afternoon. But that in the meanwhile the time
might not seem too long to us, the Virgin bestowed on each of us a noble Page,
who were not only richly habited, but also exceeding learned, so that they
could so aptly discourse upon all subjects, that we had good reason to be
ashamed of our selves. These were commanded to lead us up Discessus virginis
Luciferae.
and down the Castle (yet but into certain places) and if possible, to shorten
the time according to our desire. Mean time the Virgin took leave with this
consolation, that at Supper she would be with us again, and after that
celebrate the Ceremonies of the hanging up of the Weights, requesting that we
would in patience wait till the next day, for on the morrow we must be
presented to the King. She being thus Hospitum modi in delectamentis.
departed from us, each of us did what best pleased him. One part viewed the
excellent paintings, which they copied out for themselves, and considered also
what the wonderful Characters might signify. Others were fain to recruit
themselves again with meat and drink. I indeed caused my Page to conduct me
(together with my Companion) up and down the Castle, of which walk it will
never repent me Autoris.
as long as I have a day to live. For besides many other glorious Antiquities,
the Royal Sepulcher was also showed me, by which I learned more than is extant
in all Books. There in the same place stands also the glorious Phaenix (of
which two years since I Libellus de Phaenice.
published a particular small discourse) And am resolved (in case this my
narration shall prove useful) to set forth several and peculiar Treatises,
concerning the Lion, Eagle, Griffon, Falcon and other like, together with their
Draughts and Inscriptions. It grieves me also for my other Consorts, that they
neglected such precious Treasures. And yet I cannot but think it was the
special will of God it should be so. I indeed reaped the most benefit by my
Page, for according as each ones genius lay, so he led his entrusted into the
quarters and places which were pleasing to him. Now the Kyes hereunto belonging
Usus eorum quae Author vidit.
were committed to my Page, and therefore this good Fortune happened to me before
the rest; For although he invited others to come in, yet they imagining such
Tombs to be only in the Churchyard, thought they should well enough get
thither, when ever any thing was to be seen there. Neither shall these
Monuments (as both of us copied and transcribed them) be withheld from my
thankful Scholars. The other thing that was showed us two was the Noble
Library as it was altogether before the Reformation. Of which (albeit
^b^lotheca.
it rejoices my Heart as often as I call it to mind) I have so much the less to
say, because the Catalogue thereof is very shortly to be published. At the
entry of this Room stands a great Book, the like whereof I never saw, in which
all the Figures, Rooms, Portals, also all the Writings, Riddles and the like,
to be seen in the whole Castle, are delineated. Now although we have made some
promise concerning this also, yet at present I must contain my self, and first
learn to know the World better. In every Book stands its Author painted;
whereof (as I understood) many were to be burnt, that so even their memory may
be blotted out from amongst the Righteous. Now having taken a full view hereof,
and being scorce getten forth, another* Page came running to us, and having
whispered somewhat in our Pages ear, he delivered up the Kyes to him, who
immediately carried them up the winding Stairs; But our Page was very much out
of Countenance, and we setting hard upon him with Entreaties, He declared to us
that the King's Majesty would by no means permit that either of the two, namely
the Library and Sepulchers, should be seen by any Man and therefore he besought
us as we tendered his Life, to discover it to no Man, he having already utterly
denied it: Whereupon both of us stood hovering between Joy and Fear, yet it
continued in silence, and no Man made further inquiry about it. Thus in both
places we consumed three hours, which does not at all repent me. Now although
it had already stricken Seven, yet nothing was hitherto given us to eat,
howbeit our hunger was easy to be abated by constant Revivings, and I could be
well content to fast all my Life long Fastidium pulsum egregi^s spectaculis.
with such Entertainment. About this time the Curious Fountains, Mines, and all
kind of Art-Shops, were also shown us, of which there was none but surpassed
all our Arts, though they should all be melted into one Mass. All their
Chambers were built in semicircle, that Officinatum constitutatum finis.
so they might have before their Eyes the costly Clock-work which was erected
upon a fair Turret in the Center, and regulate themselves according to the
course of the Planets, which were to be seen on it in a glorious manner. And
hence I could easily conjecture wherein our Artists failed, howbeit its none of
my duty to inform them. At length I came into a spacoius Room (shown indeed
Globus terrenus.
to the rest a great while before) in the middle whereof stood a terestrial
Globe, whose Diameter contained thirty Foot, albeit near half of it, except a
little which was covered with the steps, was let into the Earth. Two Men might
readily turn this Globe about with all its Furniture, so that more of it was
never to be seen, but so much as was above the Horizon. Now although I could
easily conceive that this was of some special use, yet could I not understand
whereto those Ringlets of Gold (which were upon it in several places) served;
At which my Page laughed, and advised me to view them more narrowly. In brief,
I found there my native Country noted with Gold also: Whereupon my Companion
sought his, and found that so too. Now for as much as the same hapened in like
mannot to the rest who stood by, The Page told us of a certain that it was
yesterday declared to the Kings Majest'y by their old Atlas (so is the
Astronomer named) that all the gilded points did exactly answer to their native
Countries, according as had been shown of each of them. And therefore He also,
as soon as he perceived that I undervalued my self, and that nevertheless there
stood a point upon my native Couutry, moved one of the Captains to entreat for
us, that we should be set upon the Scale (without our Peril) at all Adventures;
Especially seeing one of our Native Countries had a notable good Mark: And
truly it was not without cause that He, the Page who had the greatest power of
all the rest, was bestowed on me. For this I then returned him thanks, and
immediately looked more diligently upon my native Country, and found more over
that besides the Ringlet, there were also certain delicate streaks upon it,
which Excellentia Patriae Au^oris.
nevertheless I would not be thought to speak to my own praise or glory. I saw
much more too upon this Globe than I am willing to discover. Let each Man take
into consideration why every City produces not a Philosopher. After this he
lead us quite into the Globe, which was thus made; On the Sea (there being a
large square besides it) was a Tablet, whereon stood three Dedications, and the
Author's name, which a Man might gently lift up and by a little joined Board,
go into the Center, which was capable of four Persons, being nothing but a
round Board whereon we could sit and at ease by broaddaylight Quid in ^^^b
(it was now already dark) contemplate the Stars, to my thinking they were mere
Carbuncles which glittered in an agreeable order, and moved so gallantly, that
I had scarce any mind ever to go out again, as the Page afterward told the
Virgin, with which she often twitted me: For it was already Supper time, and I
had so much amused my self in the Globe, that I was almost the last at Table;
wherefore I made no longer delay, but having again put on my Gown (which I had
before Reverentia in convivi^ exhibita Auctoris.
laid aside) and stepping to the Table, the waiters treated me with so much
reverence and honor, that for shame I durst not look up, and so unawars
permitted the Virgin, who attended me on one side, to stand, which she soon
perceiving twitched me by the Gown, and so led me to the table to speak any
further concerning the Music, or the rest of that magnificent entertainment, I
hold it needless both because it is not possible sufficiently to express it,
and I have above reported it according to my power. In brief, there was nothing
there but Art and Amaenity. Now after we had each to other related our
employment since noon (howbeit, not a word was spoken of the Library and
Monuments) being already merry with the Wine, the Virgin began thus: My Lords,
I The Lady Chamberlain or Controuler.
have a great contention with one of my Sisters: In our Chamber we have an
Eagle, Now we cherish him with such Perplexed Speeches, or intricate Questions.
diligence, that each of us is disirous to be the best beloved, and upon that
score have many a Squabble. On a day we concluded to go both together to him,
and toward whom he should show himself most friendly, hers should he properly
be; this we did, and I (as commonly) bare in my hand a branch of Laurel, but my
Sister had none. Now as soon as he espied us both, he immediately gave my
Sister another branch which he had in his Beak, and offered at mine, which I
gave him. Now each of us hereupon imagined her self to be best beloved of him;
which way am I to resolve my self? This modest proposal of the Virgin pleased
us all mighty well, and each one would gladly have heard the Solution, but in
as much as they all looked upon me, and desired to have the beginning from me,
my mind was so extremely Autoris (...) griphus.
confounded that I knew not what else to do with it but propound another in its
stead, and therefore said Gracious Lady, your Ladyships question were easily to
be resolved if one thing did not perplex me. I had two Companions, The Authors
counter-demand.
both which loved me exceedingly; now they being doubtful which of them was
most dear to me, concluded to run to me unawars, and that he whom I should then
embrace should be the right; this they did, yet one of them could not keep pace
with the other, so he staid behind and wept, the other I embraced with
amazement. Now when they had afterward discovered the business to me, I knew
not how to resolve my self, and have hitherto let it rest in this manner, until
I may find some good advice herein. The Virgin wondered at it, and well
observed where about I was, whereupon she replied, well then let us both be
quit; and then desired the solution from the rest. But I had already made them
(...)
wise. Wherefore the next began thus. In the City where I live, a Virgin was
lately condemned to death, but the Judge being something pitiful toward (...)
her, caused it to be proclaimed that if any Man desired to become the Virgins
Champion, he should have free leave to do it. Now she had two Lovers, the one
presently made himself ready, and came into the lists to expect his adversary,
afterward the other also presented himself, but coming somewhat too late, he
resolved nevertheless to fight, and willingly suffer himself to be vanquished,
that so the Virgin's life might be preserved, which also succeeded according.
Whereupon each challenged her: Now my Lords instruct me, to which of them of
right belongs she? The Virgin could hold no longer, but said, I thought to
have gained much information, and am my self gotten into the Net, but yet would
gladly hear whether there be any more behind* yes, that there is, answered the
third, a Stranger adventure has not been yet recounted then that which
happened to my self. In my Youth I (...)
loved a worthy Maid: Now that this my love might attain its wished end, I was
fain to make use of an ancient Ma^^on who easily brought me to her. Now it
happened that the Maid's Brethren* came in upon us just as we three were
together, who were in such a rage that they would have taken my Life, but upon
my vehement Supplication, they at length forced me to swear to take each of
them for a Year, to my wedded Wife. Now tell me my Lords, should I take the
old, or the young one first? We all laughed sufficiently at this riddle, and
though some of them muttered one to another thereupon, yet none would undertake
to unfold it. Hereupon the fourth began. In a certain City there dwelt an (...).
honorable Lady, who was beloved of all, but especially by a young noble Man,
who would needs be too importunate with her; at length she gave him this
determination, that in case he would, in a cold Winter, lead her into a fair
green Garden of Roses, then he should obtain, but if not, he must resolve never
to see her more. The noble Man traveled into all Countries to find such a Man
as might perform this, till at length he lite upon a little old Man that
promised to do it for him, in case he would assure him of half his Estate;
which he having consented to* the other was as good as his word. Whereupon he
invited the foresaid Lady home to his Garden, where contrary to her expectation
she found all things green, pleasant and warm, and withal remembering her
promise, she only requested that she might once more return to her Lord, to
whom with Signs and Tears she bewailed her lamentable condition: But for as
much as he sufficiently perceived her faithfulness, he dispatched her back to
her Lover, who had so dearly purchased her, that she might give him
Satisfaction. This Husband's integrity did so mightily affect the noble man,
that he thought it a sin to touch so honest a Wife; so he sent her home again
with honor to her Lord. Now the little Man perceiving such Faith in both
these, would not, how poor soever he were, be the least, but restored the noble
Man all his Goods again, and went his way. Now (my Lords) I know not which of
these persons may have shown the greatest ingenuity? Here our Tongues were
quite cut off. Neither would the Virgin make any other reply, but only that
another should go on. Wherefore the fifth, without delay, began. (...). 6.
My Lords, I desire not to make long work; who has the greater joy, he that
beholds what he loves, or he that only thinks on it? He that beholds it,
said the Virgin; nay answered I; hereupon arose a contest, wherefore the sixth
called out, My 7.
Lords I am to take a Wife; now I have before me a maid, a married Wife, and a
Widow; ease me of this doubt, and I will afterward help to order the rest. It
goes well there, replied the seventh, where a man has 8.
his choice, but with me the case is otherwise; in my youth I loved a fair and
virtuous Virgin from the bottom of my Heart, and she me in like manner: howbeit
because of her Friends denial we could not come together in wedlock: Whereupon
she was married to another, yet an honest and discreet Person, who maintained
her honorably and with affection, until she came into the pains of
Childbirth, which went so hard with her that all thought she had been dead, so
with much state, and great mourning she was interred. Now I thought with my
self, during her Life thou could have no part in this Woman, but yet now dead
as she is thou may embrace and Kiss her sufficiently; whereupon I took my
Servant with me, who dug her up by Night; Now having opened the Cossin and
locked her in my Arms, and feeling about her Heart, I found still some little
motion in it, which increased more and more from my warmth, till at last I
perceived that she was indeed still alive; wherefore I quietly bare her home,
and after I had warmed her chilled Body with a costly Bath of Herbs, I
committed her to my Mother until she brought forth a fair Son, whom (as the
Mother) I caused faithfully to be nursed. After two days (she being then in a
mighty amazement) I discovered to her all the forepassed affair, requesting her
that for the time to come she would live with me as a Wife, against which she
thus excepted, in case it should be grievous to her Husband who had well and
honorably maintained her. But if it could otherwise be, she was the present
obliged in love to one as well as the other. Now after two Months (being then
to make a Journey elsewhere) I invited her Husband as a Guest, and amongst
other things demanded of him, whether if his deceased Wife should come home
again, he could be content to receive her, and he affirming it with Tears and
Lamentations, at length I brought him his Wife together with his Son, and an
account of all the fore-passed business, entreating him to ratify with his
consent my fore-purposed espousals. After a long dispute he could not beat me
from my right, but was fain to leave me the Wife. But still the contest was
about the Son. Here the Virgin interrupted him, and said, It makes me wonder
how you could double the afflicted Man's grief. How, answered he, was I not then
concerned? Upon this there arose a dispute amongst us, yet the most part
affirmed that he had done but right. Nay, said he, I freely returned him both
his Wife and Son. Now tell me (my Lords) was my honesty, or this Man's joy the
greater? These words had so mightily cheared the Virgin that (as if it had been
for the sake of these two) she caused a health to go round. After which the
rest of the proposals wont on somewhat perplexedly, so that I could not retain
them all, yet this comes to my mind, that one said, that a few years before he
had 6.
seen a Physician, who bought a parcel of Wood against Winter, with which he
warmed himself all Winter long; but as soon as the Spring returned he sold the
very same Wood again, and so had the use of it for nothing; Here must needs be
skill, said the Virgin, but the time is now past. Yea, replied my Companion,
who ever understands not how to resolve all the Riddles, may give each Man
notice of it by a proper Messenger, I conceive he will not be denied. At this
time they began to say Grace, and we arose altogether from the Table, rather
satisfied and merry than glutted; and it were to be wished that all Invitations
and Feastings were thus to be kept. Having now taken some few turns up and down
the Hall again, the Virgin asked us whether The Lady Chamberlain virg. Lucif.
Gratiositas.
we desired to begin the Wedding. Yes, said one, noble and virtuous Lady;
whereupon she privately dispatched a Page, and yet in the mean time proceeded
in discourse with us. In brief she was already become so familiar with us, that
I adventured and requested her Name. The Virgin smiled at my Curiosity, but yet
was not moved, but replied, My Name contains Aenigma de Nomine.
five and fifty, and yet has only eight Letters, the third is the third part
of the fifth which added to the sixth will produce at Number, whose root shall
exceed the third it self by just the first, and it is the half of the fourth.
Now the fifth and the seventh are equal, the last and the first are also equal,
and make with the second as much as the sixth has, which contains just four
more than the third tripl'd. Now tell me, my Lord, how am I called? The answer
was intricate enough to me, yet I left not off so, but said, noble and virtuous
Lady, may I not obtain one only Letter? Yea (said she) that may well be done.
What then (replied I again) may the seventh contain? It contains 60. Sc. quot
Virgins.
(said she) as many as there are Lords here. With this I was content, and
easily found her Name, at which she was well Reddunter pondera choro Virginum.
pleased, with assurance that much more should yet be revealed to us. Mean time
certain Virgins had made themselves ready, and came in with great Ceremony.
First of all two Youths 2. Juvenos.
carried Lights before them, one of them was of a jocond Countenance, sprightly
Eyes and gentile Proportion. The other looked something angerly, whatever he
would have, must be, as I afterward perceived. After them first 4. Virgins.
followed four Virgins; one looked shame-facedly toward the Earth, very humble
in Behavior; The second also was a modest, bashful Virgin; The third, as she
entered the Room seemed amazed at somewhat, and as I understood, she cannot
well abide where there is too much Mirth. The fourth brought with her certain
small wreaths, thereby to manifest her Kindness and Liberality. After these
four came ^. Virgin,
two which were somewhat more gloriously Apparelled; they saluted us
courteously; One of them had a Gown of Sky color spangled with golden Stars;
The others was green, beautified with red and white stripes. On their Heads
they had thin flying Tiffaties, which did most becomingly adorn them. At last
came one alone, who had on her head a Coronet, but rather looked 1. Virgo
praestans.
up toward Heaven, than toward Earth. We all thought it had been the the
Bride, but were much mistaken, although otherwise in Honor, Riches and State
she much surpassed the Bride; the Duchess.
and she afterward ruled the whole Wedding. Now on this occasion we all
followed our Virgin, and fell down on our Knees, howbeit she showed herself
extreme humble, offering every one her hand, and admonishing us not to be too
much surprised at this, for this was one of her smallest Bounties, but to lift
up our Eyes to our Creator, and learn hereby to acknowledge his Omnipotency*
and so proceed in our enterprised course, employing this Grace to the praise of
God, and the good of Man. In sum, her words were quite different from those of
our Virgin, who was somewhat more worldly. They pierced even through my Bones
and Marrow. And thou, said she further to me, have received more than others,
(...) that thou also make a larger return. This to me was a very strange
Sermon; for as soon as we saw the Virgins with the Music, we immagined we must
presently fall to Dancing, but that time was not as yet come. Now the Weights,
whereof mention has been before Ponderum repositi in locum suum.
made, stood still in the same place, wherefore the Queen (I yet knew not who
she was) commanded each Virgin the Duchess.
to take up one, but to our Virgin she gave her own, which was the last and
greatest, and commanded us to follow behind; our Majesty was then somewhat
abated, for I well observed that our Virgin was but too good for us, and that
we were not so highly reputed as we ourselves were almost in part willing to
phantsie. So we went behind in our order, and were brought into the first
Reginae habitatio.
Chamber, where our Virgin in the first the Duchess.
place hang up the Queen's weight, during which an excellent spiritual Hymn was
Sung; there was nothing costly in this Room save only certain curious little
Prayer Books which should never be missing. In the midst was erected a Supellex.
Pulpit, very convenient for Prayer, where in the Queen kneeled down, about the
Duchess.
her we were all fain to kneel and pray after the Virgin, who read out of a
Book, That this Wedding might tend to the Honor of God, and our own benefit.
Afterward we came into the second Chamber, where the first Virgin hung up her
weight also, and so forward till all the Ceremonies were finished. Hereupon the
Queen again presented her Hand to every one, and departed thence with her
Virgin. Our President Virgo Lucif discedit cubatum.
stayed yet a while with us. But because it had been already two hours night,
she would no longer detain us; me thought she was glad of our Company, yet she
bid us good night, and wished us quiet rest, and so departed friendly, although
unwillingly from us. Our Pages were well instructed in their Puerorum comitum
Officium.
business, and therefore showed every Man his Chamber, and stayed also with us
in another Pallet, that in case we wanted any thing we might make use of them.
My Chamber (of the rest I am not able to speak) was royally furnished Autoris
thalamus.
with rare Tapistries, and hung about with Paintings. But above all things I
delighted in my Page, who was so excellently spoken, and experienced in the
Arts, that he yet spent me another hour, and it was half an hour after three
when first I fell asleep. And this indeed was the first night that I slept in
quiet, and yet a scurvy Dream would not suffer me to rest; For I was all the
night troubled with a Door which I could not Som^ium de porta difficili.
get open, but at last I did it. With these fantasies I passed the time, till
at length toward day I awaked.

The fourth Day.
I Still lay in my Bed, and leisurely Author longiuscule dormiens expergefit.
survieghed all the noble Images and Figures up and down about my Chamber,
during which on a sudden I heard the Music of Coronets, as if they had been
already in Procession. My Page skipped out of the Bed as if he had been at his
wits end, and looked more like one dead than living; In what case I then was,
is easily immaginable, for, said he, The rest are already presented to the
King; I knew not what else to do, but weep outright, and Curss my own
sloathfulness; yet I dressed my self, but my Page was ready long before me, and
ran out of the Chamber to see how affairs might yet stand. But he soon
returned, and brought with him this joyful news, that the time indeed was not
YET past, J^ privatur.
only I had over-slept my Break fast, they being unwilling to waken me because
of my Age; But that now it was time for me to go with him to the Fountain where
the most part were assembled* With this Consolation my Spirit returned again,
wherefore I was soon ready with my Habit, and went after the Page to the
Fountain in the before mentioned Garden, where I found that the Lion instead of
his Sword had a pretty large Leonis Tabula.
Tablet by him. Now having well viewed it, I found that it was taken out of the
ancient Monuments, and placed here for some especial Honor. The inscription
was somewhat worn out with age, and therefore I am minded to set it down here,
as it is, and give every one leave to consider it.

HERMES PRINCEPS. POST TOT ILLATA GENERI HUMANO DAMNA, DEI CONSILIO: ARTISQUE
ADMINICULO, MEDICINA SALUBRIS FACTUS HEIC FLUO. Bibat ex me qui potest: lavet,
qui vult: turbet qui audet: BIBITE FRATRES, ET VIVITE. (...) This Writing might
well be read and Scriptura faci^i.
understood, and may therefore fitly be here placed, because easier than any of
the rest: Now after we had first washed our selves out of the Fountain, and
every Man had taken a draught out Petus.
of an entirely Golden Cup, we were once more again to follow the Virgin into
the Hall, and there put on new Apparel, which was all of Cloth of vestitus*
Gold gloriously set out with Flowers. There was also given to every one
another Golden Fleece, which was set about with precious Stones, and various
Workmanship according to the utmost skill of each Artificer. On it hung a
weighty Medal of Gold, whereon were figured the Sun and Moon in opposition; but
on the other side stood this Poesy, The light of the Moon shall be as the
light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun shall be seven times lighter than at
present. But Clinodi^^
our former Jewels were laid in a little Casket, and committed to one of the
Waiters. After this the Virgin lead us out in our order, where the Musicians
M^si^.
waited ready at the door, all apparalled in red Velvet with white Guards.
After which a Door (which I never saw Access^^ ad Regis A^lam.
open before) to the Royal winding-Stairs was unlocked; There the Virgin led us
together with the Music, up three hundred sixty five Stairs, there we saw
nothing but what was of extreme costly and artificial Workmanship; and still
the further we went, the more glorious still was the Furniture, until at length
at the top we came under a painted Arch, where the sixty Virgins Laboratorium
arenatum 60. Virgins.
attended us, all Richly Apparelled; Now as soon as they had bowed to us, and
we as well as we could, had returned our reverence, our Musicians were
dispatched away, who were fain to go down the winding-Stairs again, the Door
being shut after them. After this a little Bell was tolled; then came in a
beautiful Virgin who brought every one a wreath of Laurel; But our Virgins had
Branches given them: Virg. Lucif.
Mean while a Curtain was drawn up; Where I saw the King and Queen as they sat
there in their Majesty, and had not the yesterday Queen so faithfully warned
me, I should have forgotten my self, and have equalled this unspeakable Regis
and Regins gloria.
glory to Heaven. For besides that the Room glistered of mere Gold and precious
Stones; the Queen's Robes were moreover so made that I was not able to behold
them. And whereas I before esteemed any thing for handsome, here all things so
much surpassed the rest, as, the Stars in Heaven are elevated. In the mean time
the Virgin stepped in, and so each of the Virgins taking one of us by the hand,
with most profound Reverence presented us to the King: Virgo Luoif, praesentat
hospites Regi.
Whereupon the Virgin began thus to speak. That to honor your Royal Majesty's,
(most gracious King and Queen) these Lords here present have adventured hither
with peri^^^^^ody and Life; your Majesty's have reason to rejoice, especially
since the greatest part are qualified for the enlarging of your Majesty's
Estates and Empire, as you will find the same by a most gracious and particular
examination of each of them. Herewith I was desirous thus to have them in
Humility presented to your Majesty's, with most humble suit to discharge me of
this my Commission, and most graciously to take sufficient information from
each of them, concerning both my Actions and Omissions. Hereupon she laid down
her Branch upon the ground. Now it would have been very sitting for one of us
to have put in and spoken somewhat on this occasion, but seeing we were all
troubled with the falling of Hospites ne^^iunt responde^t-Atlas respondet.
the Uvula, at length the old Atlas stepped forward and spoke on the King's
behalf; Their Royal Majesty's de most graciously rejoice at your arrival, and
will that their Royal Grace be assured to all, and every Man: And with thy
Administration, gentle Virgin, they are most graciously satisfied, and
accordingly a Royal Reward shall therefore be provided for thee; yet it is
still their intention, that thou shall this day also continue with them, in as
much (...) they have no reason to mistrust thee. Hereupon the Virgin humbly
took up the Branch again. And so we for this first time were to step aside with
our Virgin. This room Descriptio Laboratorij.
was square on the front, five times broader than it was long; but toward the
West it had a great Arch like a Porch, wherein stood in circle three Subscellia.
glorious Royal Thrones, yet the middlemost was somewhat higher than the rest.
Now in each Throne sat two persons, in the first sat a very ancient King with
1. Rex s^^ex Conjux Juven.
a gray Beard, yet his Consort was extraordinary fair and young. In the third
Throne sat a black King of middle 3. Rex et conjux senes
Age, and by him a dainty old Matron, not Crowned, but covered with a Vail. But
in the middle sat the two young Persons, who though they had likewise 2. Juveres.
Wreaths of Laurel upon their Heads, yet over them hung a large and costly
Crown. Now albeit they were not at this time so fair as I had before imagined
to my self, yet so it was to be. Behind them on a round Forn^ sat for Scam^^.
Assessores.
the most part ancient Mon, yet none of them (at which I wondered) had any
Sword, or other Weapon about him; [Qualesnam;] ^um ^llae virtutum?
Neither saw I any other Lifeguard, but certain Virgins which were with us the
day before, who sat on the sides of the Arch. Here can I not pass in silence
how the little Cupid flew to and again Cupid^.
there, but for the most part he hovered and played the wanton about the great
Crown; sometimes he seated himself in between the two Lovers, somewhat smiling
upon them with his Bow. Nay, sometimes he made as if he would shoot one of us;
In brief, this Knave was so full of his waggery, that he would not spair even
the little Birds, which in multitudes* flew up and down Aves.
the Room, but co^mented them all he could. The Virgins also had their pastimes
Virgins.
with him, but whenever they could catch him, it was not so easy a matter
for him to get from them again. Thus this little Knave made all the sport and
mirth.1 Before the Queen Supellex in Aula Altar. 1. Book.
stood a small, but unexpressibly curious Altar: wherein lay a Book covered with
black Velvet, only a little over-layed with Gold; by this stood a small Taper
2. Taper.
in an Ivory Candlestick, now although it were very small, yet it burnt
continually, and stood in that manner, that had not Cupid in sport, now and
then puffed upon it, we could not have 3. Sphaere.
conceived it to be Fire. By this stood, a Sphere or Celestial Globe, which of
4. Watch.
its self turned clearly about. Next this, a small st^^^ing Watch, by that a
little Crystal Pipe or Syphon-Fountain 5. little Fountain.
out of which perpetually ran a clear blood red Liquor; and last of all a
Scull, or Death's Head; in this was a white 6. Scull. Serpent.
Serp^^^, which was of such a length, that though she crept circle wise about
the rest of it, yet her Tail still remained in one of the Eye-holes, until her
Head again entered at the other, so she never s^i^ted from her Scull, unless it
happened that Cupid twitched a little at her, for then she stipt in so
suddenly, that we all could not choose but marvel at it: Together with this
Altar, there were up and down the Room wonderful Imagines.
Images; which moved themselves, as if they had been alive, and had so strange
a contrivance, that it would be impossible for me to relate it all: like wise
as we were passing out, there began such a mavelous kind of vocal (...)
Music, that I could not certainly tell whether it were performed by the
Virgins who yet stayed behind or by the Images themselves. Now we being for
(...)
this time satisfied, went thence with out Virgins, who, the Mus^ians being
already present, led us down the winding Stairs again, but the Door was
diligently locked and bolted as soon as we were come again into the Hall: one
of the Virgins began I wonder Sister, that you durst adventure your self
amongst so many Persons* My Sister, replied our President, I am fearful of none
Virgins ^^cantur de ^^nio Autoris.
so much as of this Man, pointing at me* This speech, went to the Heart of me*
For I well understood that she mocked at my Age, and indeed I was the oldest of
them all* Yet she comforted me again with, promise, That in case I behaved my
self well toward her* she would easily, rid me of this, burden* Mean time a
Collation was again Convivium (...) Vir^^^^ bus.
brought in, and every one's Virgin seated by him, who well knevv how to
shorten the time with handsome discourses: But what their discourses and sports
were I dare not blab out of (...) Convivales
School. But most of the questions were about the Arts, whereby I could lightly
gather that both young and old were conversant in the Sciences. But still it
run in my thoughts how I might become young again, whereupon I was somevvhat
the sadder; This the Virgin Author Maestus ob^^^ium.
perceived, and therefore began, I dare lay any thing, if I lie with him to
night, he shall be pleasanter, in the morning. Hereupon they began to laugh,
and albeit I blushed all over, yet I was sain to laugh too at my own
ill-luck. Jocosum solatium accipit Virgin.
Now there was one there that had a mind to return my disgrace again upon the
Virgin; vvhereupon he said, I hope not only we, but the Virgins too themselves
will bear witness in behalf of our Brother, that our Lady President has
promised ^ocio.
her self to be his Bedfellow to Night* I should be well content with it,
replied the Virgin, if I had not reason to be afraid of these my Sisters, there
would be no hold with them should I clouse the best and handsomest Virg. Lucif.
for my self, against their will. My Sister presently began another, We find
hereby that thy high Office makes thee not proud; wherefore if by thy
permission we might by lot part the Lords here present, amongst us, for
Bed-fellows, thou should with our goodwill have such a Prerogative. We let
this pass thus for a Jest, and began again to discourse together. But our
Virgin could not leave tormenting us, Ludiera electio ^^^dormientis.
and therefore began again, My Lords, how if we should permit Fourtune to
decide which of us must lie together to Night* Well, said I, if it may be no
otherwise, we cannot refuse such a proffer, Now because it was concluded to
make this trial after Mear we resolved to sit no longer at Table, so we arose,
and each one vvalked up and down with his Virgin. Nay, said the Virgin, It
shall not be so yet, but let us see how Fortune will couple us; upon which we
were separated asunder: But now first arose a dispute how the business
should be carried, but this was only a premediated device, for the Virgin
instantly made the proposal that we should mix our selves together in a Ring,
and that she beginning to count from her self, the seventh, was to be content
with the following seventh, whether it were a Virgin, or man for our p^^ts we
were not aware of any craft, and therefore permitted it so to be; but* when we
thought we had very well mingled our selves, the Virgins nevertheless were so
subtle, that each one knew her station beforehand: The Virgin began to reckon,
the seventh next her was again a Virgin, the third seventh a Virgin likewise,
and this happened so long till (to our amazement) all the Virgins came forth, and
none of us was hit; Thus we poor pitiful Wretches remained standing alone, and
were moreover forced to suffer our selves to be jeared too, and confess we were
very handsomely couzened. In short, who ever had seen us in our order, might
sooner have expected the Sky to fall, then that it should never have come to
our turn. Herewith our sport was at an end, and we were fain to satisfy our
selves with the Virgins Waggery. In the interm, the little wanton Cupid came
also in unto us; But because he presented himself on behalf of their Royal
Majesty's, and delivered A Health
us a Health (as from them) out of a golden Cup, and was to call our Virgins to
the King, withal declaring he could at this time tarry no longer with them, we
could not sufficiently sport our selves with him: So with a due return of our
most humble thanks we let him fly forth again. Now because (in the interm) the
mirth began to fall into my Consort's Feet, and the Virgins were nothing sorry
to see it, A merry dance
they quickly lead up a civil Dance, whom I rather beheld with pleasure, then
assisted. For my Mercurialists were so ready with their Postures, as if they
had been long of the Trade. After some few Dances our president Hospites
invitantur a virgin Lucif. ad comaedia^
came in again, and told us how the Artists and Students had offered themselves
to their Royal Majesty's, for their Honor and Pleasure, before their departure
to act a Merry Comedy; and if we thought good to be present at it, and to wait
upon their Royal Majesty's to the House of the Sun, it would be acceptable to
them, and they would most graciously acknowledge it: Hereupon in the first
place we returned our most humble thanks for the Honor vouchsafed us, not only
so, but moreover most submissively tendered our small service, which the Virgin
related again, and presently brought word to attend their Royal Majesty's (in
our order) in the Gallery, whither we were soon led, and staid not long there;
for the Royal Procession was just ready, Processus Regis ad Spoctandam
Comaediam.
yet without any Music at all. The unknown Queen, who was Yesterday with us,
went foremost, with a small and costly Coronet, apparrelled in white Satin,
she carried nothing but a small Crucifix which was made of a Pearl, and this
very day wrought between the young King and his Bride. After her went the six
forementioned Virgins in two ranks, who carried the King's Jewels belonging to
the little Altar: next to these came the three Kings. The Bridegroom was in the
midst of them in a plain dress, only in black Satin, after the Italian Mode.
He had on a small round black Hat, with a little black pointed Feather, which
he courteously put off to us, thereby to signify his favor toward us. To him
we bowed our selves, as also to the first, as we had been before instructed.
After the Kings came the three Queens, two whereof were richly habited, only
she in the middle went likewise all in black, and Cupid held up her Train;
after this intimation was given to us to follow, and after us the Virgins, till
at last old Atlas brought up the rear. In such Procession, through many stately
Walks, we at length came to the House of the Sun, there next to the King and
Queen, upon a richly furnished Scaffold, Statio Spectatorum.
to behold the foreordained Comedy: We indeed, though Separated, stood on the
right Hand of the Kings, but the Virgins on the left, except those, to whom the
Royal Ensigns were committed. To them was allotted a peculiar standing at top
of all. But the rest of the attendants were fain to stand below between the
columns, and therewith to be content. Now because there are many a Pr^^pu quae
agebantur* Actos. 1.
remarkable Passages in this Comedy, I will not omit in brief to run it over.

First of all came forth a very ancient Ring, with some Servants; before whose
Throne was brought a little Chest, with mention that it was found upon the
Water, Now it being opened, there appeared in it a lovely Babe, together with
certain Jewels, and a small Letter of Parchment sealed, and superscribed to the
King. Which the King therefore presently opened, and having read it, wept; and
then declared to his Servants how injuriously the King of the Moors had
deprived his Aunt of her Country, and had exstinguished all the Royal Seed even
to this Infant, with the Daughter of which Country he had now purposed to have
matched his Son. Hereupon he Swore to maintain perpetual enmity with the Moore,
and his Allies, and to revenge this upon him; and therewith commanded that the
Child should be tenderly nursed, and to make preparation against the Moore. Now
this provision and the discipline of the young Lady (who after she was a little
grown up was committed to an ancient Tutor) continued all the first Act; with
many very fine and laudable sports besides.

In the interlude a Lion and Griffon Inter^,
were set at one another, to fight, and the Lion got the victory; which was
also a pretty fight.

In the second Act, the Moore, a very Actus 2.
black treacherous Fellow, came forth also; who having with vexation understood
that his Murder was discovered, and that too a little Lady was cra^^^^ly
stolen from him; began thereupon to consult how by stratagem he might be able
to encounter so powerful an adversary, whereof he was at length advised by
certain Fugitives who by reason of Famine fled to him: So the young Lady
contrary to all men's expectation, fell again into his Hands: Whom, had he not
heen wonderfully deceived by his own Servants, he had like to have caused to be
slain. Thus this Act too was concluded with a mervelous triumph of the Moore.

In the third Act a great Army on the Actus 3.
King's party was raised against the Moore, and put under the conduct of an
ancient valiant Knight, who fell into the Moors Country, till at length he
forceably rescued the young Lady out of the Tower, and Apparrelled her a new.
After this in a trice they erected a glorious Scaffold, and placed their young
Lady upon it: presently came twelve Royal Ambassadors, amongst whom the
forementioned Knight made a Speech, alleging that the King his most gracious
Lord had not only heretofore delivered her from death, and even hitherto caused
her to be royally brought up (though she had not behaved her self altogether as
became her) But moreover his Royal Majesty had, before others, elected her, to
be a Spouse for the young Lord his Son; and most graciously desired that the
said espousals might be really executed in case they would be sworn to his
Majesty upon the following Articles. Hereupon out of a Patent he caused certain
glorious conditions to be read, which if it were not too long, were well worthy
to be here recounted. In brief, the young Lady took an Oath inviolably to
observe the same; returning thanks withal in most seemly sort for this so high
a Grace. Whereupon they began to sing to the Praise of God, of the King, and
the young Lady; and so for this time departed.

For sport, in the mean while, the (...)
four Beasts of Daniel, as he saw them in the Vision, and has at large
described them, were brought in, all which had its certain signification.

In the fourth Act the young Lady was (...) 4.
again restored to her lost Kingdom, and Crowned, and for a space, in this
array, conducted about the place with extraordinary joy: after this many and
various Ambassadors presented themselves, not only to wish her prosperity, but
also to behold her Glory. Yet it was not long that she preserved her integrity,
but soon began again to look want only about her, and to wink at the
Ambassadors and Lords; wherein she truly* acted her part to the Life.

These her manners were soon known to the Moore, who would by no means neglect
such an opportunity, and because her Steward had not sufficient regard to her,
she was easily blinded with great promises, so that she had no good confidence
in her King, but privily submitted her self to the entire disposal of the
Moore. Hereupon the Moore made haste, and having (by her consent) gotten her
into his Hands, he gave her good words so long till all her Kingdom had
subjected it self to him: After which in the third Scene of this Act, he caused
her to be led forth, and first to be stripped stark naked, and then upon a scurvy
wooden Scaffold to be bound to a Post, and well scourged, and at last sentenced
to Death. This was so woeful a Spectacle, that it made the Eyes of many to run
over. Hereupon thus naked as she was, she was cast into Prison, thereto expect
her Death, which was to be procured by Poison, which yet killed her not, but
made her Leprous all over: Thus this Act was for the most part lamentable.
Interludium.


Between, they brought forth Nebuchadnezzar's Image, which was adorned with all
manner of Arms, on the Head, Breast, Belly, Legs and Feet, and the like; of
which too more shall be spoken in the future explication.

In the fifth Act the young King was Actus. 5.
acquainted with all that had passed between the Moore and his future Spouse,
who first interceeded with his Father for her, entreating that she might not be
left in that condition; which his Father having agreed to, Ambassadors were
dispatched to comfort her in her Sickness and Captivity, but yet withal to give
her notice of her inconsideratedness. But she would not yet receive them, but
consented to be the Moore's Concubine, which was also done, and the young King
was acquainted with it.

After this comes a band of Fools, each (...)
of which brought with him a Cudgel, where with in a trice they made a great
Globe of the World, and as soon undid it again. It was a fine sportive Phantsie.

In the sixth Act the young King resolved Actus* 6.
to bid battle to the Moore, which also was done. And albeit the Moore was
discomfitted, yet all held the young King too for dead. At length he came to
himself again* released his Spouse, and committed her to his Steward and
Chaplain.

The first whereof tormented her mightily, at last the leaf turned over, and
the Priest was so insolently wicked, that he would needs be above all, until
the same was reported to the young King, who hastily dispatched one who broke
the Neck of the Priest's mightiness, and adorned the Bride in some measure for
the Nuptials.

After the Act a vast artificial Elephant Interludium.
was brought forth. He carried a great Tower with Musicians: which was also
well-pleasing to all.

In the last Act the Bridegroom appeared in such pomp as is not well to be
believed, and I was amazed how it Act. 7.
was brought to pass: The Bride met him in the like Solemnity. Whereupon all
the People cried out VIVAT Comaedo^^^ applausus erga Rege^^ and Regi(...)
SPONSVS, VIVAT SPONSA. So that by this Comedy they did with all congratulate
our King and Queen in the most stately manner: Which (as I well observed)
pleased them most extraordinary well.

At length they made some pasces about the stage in such Procession, till at
last they altogether began thus to Sing.

I
This time full of love Cantilena.

Loes our joy much improve
Because of the King's Nuptial;
And therefore let us Sing
That from all parts 't may ring,
Blessed be he that granted us all.
II
The Bride most exquisitely fair:
Whom we attended with long care
To him in troth's now plighted:
We fully have at length obtained,
The same for which we did contend:
He Is happy, that is fore-sighted.
III
Now the Parents Kind and good
By entreaties are subdued:
Long enough in hold was she ^^w'd;
In honor increase,
Till Thousands arise*
And spring from your own proper Blood.
After this thanks were returned, and Epilogus.
the Comedy was finished with joy, and the particular good liking of the Royal
Persons wherefore (the Evening also being already hard by) they departed
together in their forementioned order: Hospites invitantur ad caenam Regis et
Reginae.
But we were to attend the Royal Persons up the winding Stairs into the
forementioned Hall, where the Tables were already richly furnished, and this
was the first time that we were invited to the Kings table. The little Altar
was placed in the midst of the Hall, and the six forenamed Royal Ensigns were
laid on it. At this time the young King Rex Adolesc.
behaved himself very graciously toward us, but yet he could not be heartily
Merry; But howbeit he now and then discoursed a little with us, yet he often
sighed, at which the little Cupid only mocked, and played his waggish tricks.
The old King and Queen were very serious, only the Wi^e of one of the ancient
Rege^ Adulti*
Kings was gay enough, the cause whereof I yet understood not. During this, the
Royal Persons took up the Ordo discum^b^tium.
first Table, at the second we only Sat. At the third, some of the principal
Virgins placed themselves: The rest of the Virgins, and Men, were all fain to
wait. This was performed with such state and solemn stilness, that I am afraid
to make many words of it. Here (...).
I cannot leave untouched how that all the Royal Persons, before Meat, attired
themselves in Snow-white glittering Garments, and so sat down to Table. Over
the Table hung the forementioned great Golden Crown, the (...) Men^^^m.
precious Stones whereof, without any other Light, would have sufficiently
Illuminated the Hall. However all the Lights were kindled at the small Taper
upon the Altar; what the reason was I did not certainly know. But this I took
very good notice of, that the young King frequently sent Meat to the white
Serpent upon the little Altar, which caused me to muse. Almost all the Prattle
at this Banquet was made by little Cupido was (...)
Cupid, who could not leave us (and me indeed especially) untormented. He was
perpetually producing some Strange matter. However, there was no considerable
Mirth, all went silently on; from whence I, by my self, could imagine some great
imminent Peril. For there was no Music at all heard; but if we were demanded
any thing, we were fain to give short round answers, Sermones breves
and so let it rest. In short, all things had so strange a face, that the sweat
began to trickle down all over my Body; and I am apt to believe that the
stout-heartedst Man alive would then have lost his courage. Supper being now
almost ended, the young King commanded the Book to be reached him from the
little Altar. This he opened, Oration Regis Adolescentis.
and caused it once again by an old Man to be propounded to us, whether we
resolved to abide with him in Prosperity and Adversity; which we having with
trembling consented to, he further caused us sadly to be demanded, whether we
would give him our Hands on it, which, when we could find no evasion, was fain
so to be. Hereupon one after another arose, and with his own Hand writ himself
down in this Book. When this also was performed, the little Crystal Fountain,
together with a very small Crystal Glass was brought A Health.
near, out of which all the Royal Persons one after another Drank, afterward
it was reached ^o us too, and so forward to all Persons, and this was called,
the Draught of Silence. Hereupon all the Haustus de (...).
Royal Persons presented us their Hands, declaring that in case we did not now
stick to them, we should now and never more hereafter see them; which
Fidejubetur Virg. Lucif.
verily made our Eyes run over. But our president engaged her self and promised
very largely on our behalf, which gave them Satisfaction. Mean time a little
Bell was tolled, at which all the Royal Persons waxed so mighty bleak, that we
were ready utterly to despair. They quickly put off their white Garments again,
and put on entirely black ones; The whole Hall likewise was hung about with
black Velvet, the Floor Mors Regulorum.
was covered with black Velvet, with which also the Cieling above (all this
being before Prepared) was overspread. After that the Tables were also removed
away, and all had seated themselves round about upon the Form, and we also had
put on black habits; in comes our President again, who was before gone out, and
brought with her six black Taffata Scarffs, with which she bound the six Royal
Persons Eyes. Now when they could no longer see, there were immediately brought
in by the Servants six covered Coffins, and set down in the Hall, also a low
black Seat placed in the midst. Finally, there stepped in a very cole-black tall
Man, who bare in his hand a sharp Ax. Now after De collatio Regum.
that the old King had been first brought to the Seat, his Head was instantly
whipped off, and wrapped up in a black Cloth, but the Blood was received into a
great golden Goblet, and placed with him in the Coffin that stood by, which
being covered, was set aside. Thus it went with the rest also, so that I
thought it would at length have come to me too, but it did not; For as soon as
the six Royal Persons were Beheaded, the black Man went out again; after whom
another follovved, who Beheaded him too just before the Door, and brought back
his Head together with the Ax, which were laid in a Carnificis.
little Chest. This indeed to me seemed a bloody Wedding, but because I could
not tell what would yet be the event, I was fain for that time to captivate
my understanding until I were Hospites M^rent.
further resolved. For the Virgin too, seeing that some of us were faint*
hearted and wept, bid us be content. For, said she to us, The Life of these
stands Solatium
now in your hands, and in case you follow me, this Death shall make many
alive. Herewith she intimated we should go sleep, and trouble our selves no
further on our part, for they should be sure to have their due right; And so
she bad us all good night, saying, That she must watch the dead Corpse Cura
Noctur^ m^rtuorum.
this night: We did so, and were each of us conducted by our Pages into our
Lodgings. My Page talked with me of Hospites eu^t cubitum.
sundry and various matters (which I still very well remember) and gave me
cause enough to admire at his understanding: But his intention was to lull me
asleep, which at last I well observed, whereupon I made as though I was fast
asleep, but no sleep came into my Eyes, and I could not put the Beheaded out of
my mind. Now my Lodging was directly over against the great Lake, so that I
could well Cubiculum
look upon it, the Windows being nigh the Bed. About midnight, as soon as it
had struck twelve, on a sudden I espied on the Lake a great Fire, wherefore
Visio noctur^a.
out of fear I quickly opened the Window to see what would become of it; Then
from far I saw seven Ships making forward, which were all stuck full of Lights.
Above on the top of each of them hovered a Flame, that passed to and fro, and
sometimes descended quite down, so that I could lightly judge that it must
needs be the Spirits of the Beheaded. Now these Ships gently approached to
Land, and each of them had no more than one Mariner. As soon as they were now
gotten to Shore, I presently espied our Virgin with a Torch going toward the
Ships, after whom the six covered Coffins, together with the little Chest, were
carried; and each of them privily laid in a Ship. Wherefore I awaked my Page
too, who Cadavera avehuntur trans Lacum.
hugely thanked me, for having run much up and down all the day, he might quite
have over-slept this, though he well knew it. Now as soon as the Coffins were
laid in the Ships, all the Lights were exstinguished, and the six Flames passed
back together over the Lake, so that there was no more but one Light in each
Ship for a Watch. There were also some hundreds of Watchmen who had encamped
themselves on the Shore, and sent the Virgin back again into the Castle, who
carefully bolted all up again; so that I could well judge that there was
nothing more to be done this night, but that we must expect the day; so we
again betook our selves to rest. And I only of all my Company had a Chamber
toward the Lake, and saw this, so that now I was also extreme weary, and Author
solus (...) Vidit.
so fell asleep in my manifold Speculations.

The fifth Day.
THe night was over, and the dear (...) wished for day broken, when (...) I got
me out of the Bed, more (...) learn what might yet ensue, (...) sufficiently
slept; Now (...) my Clothes, and (...)one down (...)y, and I fo(...) the Hall,
wherefore I entreated my Page to lead me a little about in the Castle, and show
me somewhat that was rare, who was now (as always) willing, and presently lead
me down certain steps under ground, to a great Iron Door, on which the
following Words in great Copper Letters, were fixed.

(...) This I thus copied, and set down in Thalamus veneris sepultae.
my Table Book. Now after this Door was opened, the Page led me by the hand
through a very dark Passage, till we came again to a very little Door, that was
now only put too, For (as the Page informed me) it was first opened but
yesterday when the Cossins were taken out, and had not been since that. Now as
soon as we steeped in, I espied the most precious thing that Nature ever
created: For this Vault had no other light but from certain huge great
Carbuncles; And this (as I was informed) was the King's Treasury. But the most
glorious and principal thing, The saurus Regis.
that I here saw, was a Sepulcher (which stood in the middle) so rich that I
wondered it was no better guarded; whereunto the Page answered me, That I had
good reason to be thankful to my Planet, by whose influence it was, that I had
now seen certain pieces which no humane Eye else (except the King's Family) had
ever had a view of. This Sepulcher was triangular, Descriptio Sepulchri.
and had in the middle of it a Kettle of polished Copper, the rest was of pure
Gold and precious Stones; In the Kettle stood an Angel, who held in his Arms an
unknown Tree, from which it continually dropped into the Kettle; and as often as
the Fruit fell into the Kettle, it turned into Water too, and ran out from
thence into three small Golden Kettles standing by. This little Altar was
supported by these three Animals, an Eagle, an Ox and a Lion, which stood on an
exceeding costly Base. I asked my Page what this might signify: Here, said he,
lies Buried Lady Venus, that Beauty which has undone many a great Man, both in
Fourtune, Honor, Blessing and Prosperity. After which he showed me a Copper
Door on the Pavement. Aliud Triclinium.
Here (said he) if you please, we may go further down; I still follow you
(replied I) so I went down the steps, where it was exceeding dark, but the Page
immediately opened a little Chest, wherein stood a small ever-burning Taper, at
which he kindled one of the many Torches which lay by. I was mightily
terrified, and seriously asked how he durst do this? He gave me for answer, As
long as the Royal Persons are still at rest, I have nothing to fear. Herewith I
espied a rich Bed ready made, hung about with curious Curtains, one of which he
drew, where I saw the Lady Venus stark-naked (for he heaved up the Coverlets
too) lying there in such Descriptio corporis veneris donmie^ti^.
Beauty, and a fashion so surprising, that I was almost besides my self,
neither do I yet know whether it was a piece thus Carved, or an humane Corpse
that lay dead there; For she was altogether immovable, and yet I durst not
touch her. So she was again covered, and the Curtain drawn before her, yet she
was still (as it were) in my Eye. But I soon espied behind the Bed a Tablet, on
which it was thus written.

(...) I asked my Page concerning this Writing, but he laughed, with promise
that I should know it too. So he putting out the Torch, we again ascended: Then
I better viewed all the little Doors, and first found, that on every corner
there burned a small Taper of Pyrites, of which I had before taken no notice;
for the Fire was so clear, that it looked much liker a Stone than a Taper. From
this heat the Tree was forced continually to melt, yet it still (...)bus.
produced new Fruit. Now behold (said the Page) what I heard revealed to the
King by Atlas, When the Tree (said he) shall be quite melted down* Then shall
Lady Venus awake, and be the Mother of a King. Whilst he was thus speaking, in
flew the little Cupid, who at first was somewhat abashed at our presence, but
seeing us both look more like the Dead Mul^^^ facta hujus obambulationis.
then the Living, he could not at length refrain from Laughing, Demanded what
Spirit had brought me thither, whom I with trembling answered, that I had lost
my way in the Castle, and was by chance come hither, and that the Page likewise
had been looking up and down for me, and at last lited upon me here, I hoped he
would not take it amiss. Nay then it is well enough yet, said Cupid* my old
busy Gransir, but you might lightly have served me a scurvy trick, had you
been aware of this Door. Now I must look better to it, and so he put a strong
Lock on the Copper Door, where we before descended. I thanked God that he lited
upon us no sooner, my Page too was the more jocond, because I had so well
helped him at this pinch. Yet can I not (said Cupid) let it pass unrevenged,
that you were so near stumbling upon my dear Mother; with that he put the point
of his Dart into one of the little Tapers, and heating it a little, pricked me
with it on the hand, which at that time I little regarded, but was glad that it
went so, well with us, and that we came off without further danger. Mean time
my Companions were gotten out of Bed too, and were again returned into the
Hall* To whom I also joined my self, making as if I were then first risen.
After Cupid had carefully made all fast again* he came likewise to us, and
would needs have me show him my hand, where he still found a little drop Cupido
illudit Autori.
of blood, at which he heartily laughed* and bad the rest have a care of me, I
would shortly end my days. We all wondered how Cupid could be so merry, Mira
Cupidinis laetitia.
and have no sense at all of the yesterday's sad passages. But he was no whit
troubled. Now our President had in Praesidissae Vestitus lugubris.
the mean time made her self ready for the Journey, coming in all in black
Velvet yet she still bare her branch of Laurel, her Virgins too had their
Branches. Now all things being in readiness, the Virgin bid us first drink
somevvhat, and then presontly prepare for the procession* wherefore we made no
long tarrying* but follovved her out of the Hall into the Court. In the Court
stood six Coffins, and my Companions thought no other but that the six Royal
Persons lay in them, but I well observed the device. Yet I knew not what was to
be done with these other. By each Coffin were eight muffled Men. Now as soon as
the Music went (it was so mournful and dolesome a tune* that I was astonished
at it) they took up the Coffins, and we (as we were ordered) were fair to go
after them into the formentioned Garden, in the midst of which was erected a
wooden Edifice, having round about the Roof a glorious Crown, and standing upon
seven Columns; within it* were formed fix Sepulchers, and by each of them a
stone, but in the middle it had a round hollow rising stone: In these Graves
the Coffins were quietly and with many Ceremonies laid: The stones were shoved
over them, and they shut fast. But the little Chest was to lie in the reiddle.
Herewith were my Companions deceived, for they imagined no other but that the
Dead Corpse were there. Upon the rop of all there was a great Flag, having a
Phaenix painted on it, perhaps therewith the more to delude us. Here I had
great occasion to thank God that I had seen more than the rest. Now after
Hospites Vocantur ad labores provita Regum.
the Funerals were done, the Virgin, having placed her self upon the middlemost
Stone, made a short Oration, That we should be constant to our engagements, and
not repine at the pains we were hereafter to undergo, but be helpful in
restoring the present buried Royal Persons to Life again, and therefore without
delay to rise up with her, to make a Journey to the Tower of Olympus, to fetch
from thence Medicines useful and necessary for this purpose. This we soon
agreed to, and followed her through another little door quite to the Shore.
There the seven forementioned Ships stood all empty; on which all the Virgins
stuck up their Laurel Branches, and after they had distributed us in the six
Ships, they caused us in Gods name; thus to begin our Voyage, and looked upon
us as long as they could have us in sight, after which they with all the
Watchmen returned into the Virgins remanent in ^^^^.
Castle. Our Ships had each of them a peculiar device. Five of them indeed had
the five regular Bodies, each a several one, but mine in which the Virgin too
sat, carried a Globe. Thus we sailed on in a singular order, and each had only
two Mariners. Foremost went the Ship ^, in which, as I conceive the Moor lay,
in this were twelve Musuians, Diagram.




who played excellent well, its device was a Pyramid. Next followed three a
breast, b, c, and d, in which we were disposed, I sat in c. In the midst
behind these came the two fairest and stateliest Ships, e and f, stuck about
with many Branches of Laurel, having no Passengers in them; their Flags were
the Sun and Moon. But in the rear only one Ship g, in this were Forty Virgins.
Now being thus passed over this 40 Virgins comites.
Lake, we first came through a narrovv Arm, into the right Sea, where all the
Sirens, Nymphs, and Sea-Goddesses had Excipiuntur a Nymphis.
attended us; wherefore they immediately dispatched a Sea-Nymph to us to
deliver their Present and Offering of Honor to the Wedding. It was a costly,
great, set, round, and Orient Pearl; the like to which has not at any time
been seen, either in ours, or yet in the new World. Now the Virgin having
friendly received it, the Nymph further entreated that audience might be given
to their Divertisements, and to make a little stand, which the Virgin was
content to do, and commanded the two great Ships to stand into the middle, and
Diagram




with the rest to incompass them in Pentagon. After which the Nymphs fell into
a ring about them, and with a most delicate svveet voice began thus to sing.

I
There Is nothing better here below
Than beauteous, noble, Love;
Whereby we like to God do grow,
And none to grief do move.
Wherefore let us chant it to the King,
That all the Sea thereof may ring. We question; Answer you.
II
What was it that at first us made? 'Twas Love.
And what has Grace a fresh conveyed? It Is Love.
Whence was it (pray tell us) we were born? Of Love
How came we then again forlorn? Sans Love.
III.
Who was it (say) that us conceived? 'Twas Love.
Who Suckled, Nursed, and Relieved? 'Twas Love.
What is it we to our Parents owe? It Is Love.
Why do they us such kindness show? Of Love.
IV
Who get's herein the Victory? It Is Love.
Can Love by search obtained be? By Love.
How may a Man good works perform? Through Love.
Who into one can two transform? It Is Love.
V.
Then let our Song sound,
Till it is Echo rebound.
To Loves honor and praise,
Which may ever increase
With our noble Princes, the King, and the Queen,
The Soul is departed, their Body's within.
VI
And as long as we live,
God graciously give;
That as great Love and Amity,
They bear each other mightily:
So we likewise, by Loves own Flame,
May reconjoyn them once again.
VII.
Then this annoy
Into great Joy
(If many thousand younglings deign)
Shall change, and ever so remain.
They having with most admirable Autor^ perpracent Nymphae et cantus
concent and melody finished this Song, I no more Wondered at Ulysses for
stopping the Ears of his Companions; for I seemed to my self the most unhappy
man alive, that Nature had not made me too so trim a creature. But the Virgin
soon dispatched them, and commanded to set Sail from thence; wherefore the
Nymphs too after they had been presented The Nimphs are rewarded.
with a long red Scarff for a gratuity; went off, and dispersed themselves in
the Sea. I was at this time sensible, that Cupid began to work with me too,
which yet tended but very little to my Credit, and for as much as my giddiness
is likely to be nothing beneficial Autori desunt (...).
to the Reader, I am resolved to let it rest as it is. But this was the very
wound that in the first Book I received on the head in a Dream: and let every
one take warning by me of loitering about Venus; Bed, for Cupid can by no means
brook it. After some Hours, having in friendly discourses made a good way, we
came within Ken of the Tower of Olympus, wherefore the Virgin commanded by the
discharge of some Pieces to give the signal of our approach, which was also
done; And immediately we espied a great white Flag thrust out, and a small
gilded Turris Olymps.
Pinnace sent forth to meet us. Now as soon as this was come to us, we
perceived in it a very ancient man, the Warden of the Tower, with certain Custos
Guards clothed in white, of whom we were Friendly received, and so conducted
to the Tower. This Tower was Situated upon an Island exactly square, which was
environed with a Wall Structure.
so firm and thick, that I my self counted two hundred and sixty passes over.
Dies.
On the other side of the wall was a fine Meadow with certain little Gardens,
in which grew strange, and to me unknown, Fruits; and then again an inner Wall
round about the Tower. The Tower of it self was just as if seven round Towers
had been built one by another, yet the middlemost was somewhat the higher* and
within they all entered one into another, and had seven Storys one above
another. Being thus come to the Gates of the Tower, we were led a little aside
on the Wall, that so, as I well observed, the Coffins might be brought into the
Tower without our taking notice; of this the rest knew nothing. This being
done, we were conducted into the Tower at the 1. Concloave
very bottom, which albeit it were excellently painted, yet we had here littil
recreation, for this was nothing but a Laboratory, where we were fain to beat
and wash Plants, and precious Stones, Labores hospitum.
and all Sorts of Things, and extract their Juice and Essence, and put up the
same in Glasses, and deliver them to be laid up. And truly our Virgin was so
busy with us, and so full of her directions, that she knew how to give each of
us employment enough, so that in this Island we were fain to be mere drudges,
till we had atcheived all that was necessary for the restoring of the Beheaded
Bodies. Mean time (as I afterward understood) three Virgins were virginum
in the first Apartment washing the Corpse with all diligence. Now having at
length almost done with this our preparation, nothing more was brought us,
Cibus (...)
but some broth with a little draught of Wine, whereby I well observed, that
we were not here for our pleasure; for when we had finished our days work too,
every one had only a Mattress laid on Lectus. tenuis.
the Ground for him, wherewith we were to content our selves. For my part I was
not very much troubled with sleep, and therefore walked out into the Garden,
and at length came as for as the Wall; and because the Heaven was at that time
very clear, I could well Author Speculatur caelum prosomno.
drive away the time in contemplating the Stars; By chance I came to a great
pair of Stone-Stairs, which led up to the top of the Wall. And because the Moon
shone very bright, I was so much the more confident, and went up, and looked
too a little upon the Sea, which was now exceeding calm; and thus having good
opportunity to consider better of Astronomy, I found that this present Night
there would happen such a conjunction of the Planets, the like to which was not
otherwise suddenly to be observed. Now having looked a good while into the Sea,
and it being just about Midnight, as soon as it had struck Twelve, I beheld
from far the seven Flames passing over Sea hitherward, and betakeing themselves
to the top of the Spire of the Tower. This made me somewhat afraid; for as
soon as the Flames had settled themselves, the Winds arose, and began to make
the Sea very Tempestuous. The Moon also was Covered with clouds, and my joy
ended with such fear, that I had scarce time enough to hit upon the Stairs
again, and betake my self again to the Tower. Now whether the Flames tarried
any longer, or passed away again, I cannot say: For in this obscurity I durst
no more venture abroad: So I laid me down upon my Mattress, and there being
besides in the Laboratory a pleasant and gently purling Fountain, I fell a
Sleep so much the sooner. And thus this fifth day too was concluded with
Wonders.

The Sixth Day.
NExt morning, after we had awaked one another, we sat together Desine (...)
dub^ae opiniones.
a while to discourse what might yet be the event of things. For some were of
opinion that they should all be inlivened again together. Others contradicted
it, because the decease of the ancients was not only to restore life, but
increase too to the young ones. Some imagined that they were not put to death,
but that others were beheaded in their stead. We having now talked together a
pretty while. in comes the Old Man to us, and first saluting us, looks about
him to see if all things were ready, and the processes enough done. We had
herein so behaved our selves, that he had no Custors.
fault to find with our diligence, whereupon he placed all the Glasses
together, pyrotechnia hospitum laudatur
and put them into a case. Presently come certain youths bringing with them
some Ladders, Roapes, and large Wings, pueri armiteri.
which they laid down before us, and departed. Then the old Man began thus. My
Dear Sons, one of these three things must each of you this day constantly bear
about with him. Now it is free for you either to make a choice of one of them,
or to cast lots about it. We replied, we would choose. Nay; said he, let it
rather go by lot. Hereupon he made three little Schedules, in one he writ
Ladder, on the second Rope, on the third Wings; These he laid in an Hat, and
each man must draw, and whatever he happened upon, that was to be his. Those
who got the Ropes, imagined themselves to be in the best case, but I chanced on
a Ladder, which hugely afflicted me, for it was twelve-foot long, and pretty
weighty, and I must be forced to carry it, whereas the others could handsomely
coil their Ropes about them* and as for the Wings, the old Man joined them so
neatly on to the third sort, as if they had grown upon them. Hereupon he turned
the Cock, and then the Founrain ran no longer, and we were fain to remove it,
from the middle out of the way. After all things were carried off, he taking
with him the Casket with the Glasses, took leave, and locked the Door fast
after him, so that we imagined no other but that we had been Ascensus in 2.
Conclave.
imprisoned in this Tower. But it was hardly a quarter of an Hour before a
round Hole at the very top was uncovered, where we saw our Virgin, who called
to us, and bad us good Morrow, desiring us to come up. They with the Wings were
instantly above through the hole. Only they with the Ropes were in evil plight.
For as soon as ever one of us was up, he was commanded to draw up the Ladder to
him. At Restis difficult^s
last each man's Rope was hanged on an Iron Hook, so every one was fain to climb
up by his Rope as well as he could, which indeed was not compassed without
Blisters. Now as soon as we were all well up, the hole was again covered, and
we were friendly received by the Virgin. This Room was the whole breadth of the
Tower it self, having Six very stately Vestries a little raised above the Room,
and to be entered by the ascent of three Steps* In these Descriptio 2 Conclav.
Vestries we were distributed, there to pray for the Life of the King and
Queen, mean while the Virgin went in and out at the little Door a, till we had
done. For as soon as our process was absolved, there was brought in, and placed
in the middle through the little Door, by twelve persons (which were formerly
our Musicians) a wonderful thing of a longish shape, which my Companions took
only to be a Fountain. But I well observed that the Corps's lay in it, for the
inner Chest was of an oval Figure, so large that six Persons might well lie in
it one by another. After which they again went forth, fetched their
Instruments, and conducted in our Virgin, together with her she-attendants,
with a most delicate noise of Music. The Virgin carried a little Casket, but
the The little Casket.
rest only Branches, and small Lamps, and some too lighted Torches. The Torches
were immediately given into our Hands, and we were to stand about the Fountain
in this order.

First stood the Virgin Ordo chori.
Diagram.




A with her attendants in a Ring round about with the Lamps and branches c,
next stood we with our Torches b, then the Musicians a in a long rank, last of
all the rest of the Virgins d in another long rank too. Now whence the Virgins
came, or whether they dwelt in the Castle, or whether they were brought in by
night, I know not, for all their Faces were covered with delicate white Linen,
so that I could not know any Virgins unde.
of them. Hereupon the Virgin opened the Casket, in which there was a Quid in
ar^^^^.
round thing wrapped up in a piece of green double Taffata. This she laid in
the uppermost Kettle, and then covered it with the lid, which was full of
holes, and had besides a Rim, on which she poured in some of the Water which we
had the day before prepared, whence the Fountain began immediately to run, and
through four small Pipe; to drive into the little Kettle; beneath the undermost
Kettle there were many sharp points, on which the Virgins stuck their Lamps,
that so the heat might come to the Kettle, and make the Water Sees. Now the
Water beginning to Simper, by many little holes at a, it fell in upon the
Bodies, and was so hot, that it dissolved them all, and turned them into
Liquor. But what the above said round wrapped up thing was, my Companions knew
not, but I understood that it was the Moor's Head, from which the Water
conceived so great heat. At b round about the great Kettle, there were again
many holes, in which they stuck their Branches; now whether Rami lau^es.
this was done of necessity, or only for Ceremony, I know not; However these
Branches were continually besprinkled by the Fountain, whence it afterward
dropped somewhat of a deepee Yellow into the Kettle. This lasted for near two
Hours, that the Fountain still constantly ran of it self; but yet the longer,
the fainter it was. Mean time the Musicians went their way, and we walked up
and down in the Room; and truly the Room was somade, that we Deliciae in
Conclavi
had opportunity enough to pass away our time: There was, for Images,
Paintings, Clock-works, Organs, Springing Fountains, and the like, nothing
forgotten. Now it was near the time that the Fountain ceased, and would run no
longer: upon which the Virgin commanded a round Golden Globe to be brought. But
at the bottom of the Fountain there was a Tap, by which she let out all the
matter that was dissovled by those hot Drops (whereof certain quarts were then
very Red) into the Globe. The rest of the Water which remained above in the
Kettle, was poured out. And so this Fountain (which was now become much
lighter) was again carried forth. Now whether it was opened abroad; or whether
any thing of the Bodies that was further useful, yet remained, I dare not
certainly say: But this I know, that the Water that was emptied into the Globe
was much heavier then six, or yet Gravitas aquae.
more of us were well able to bear, albeit for its bulk it should have seemed
not too heavy for one man. Now this Globe being with much ado gotten out of
Doors, we again sat alone. But I perceiving a trampling over head, had an Eye
to my Ladder. Hear one might take notice of the strange opinions my Companions
had concerning this Fountain: For they not imagining but Author ^o^^, novit vere
quae ag^r^^ tur.
that the Bodies lay in the Garden of the Castle, knew not what to make of this
kind of working, but I thanked God that I awaked in so opportune a time, and
saw that which helped me the better in all the Virgins business. After one
quarter of an hour the cover above was again lifted of, and we commanded
Ascenses in 3. Conclave.
to come up, which was done as before with Wings, Ladders, and Ropes. And it
did not a little vex me, that whereas the Virgins could go up another way,
we were fain to take so much toil; yet I could well judge there must be some
special reason in it, and we must leave somevvhat for the Old Man to do too.
For even those with the Wings had no advantage by them but when they were to
mount through the Hole. Now being gotten up thither also, and the Hole shut
again, I savv the Globe hanging by Descriptio conclaves.
a strong Chain in the middle of the Room. In this Room was nothing else but
mere Windovvs, and still betvveen two Windows there was a Door, which was
covered with nothing but a great polished Looking-Glass; and these Windovvs
and Looking-Glasses were so optically opposed one to another, that although the
Sun (which now shined exceeding bright) beat only upon Art. ^ optic.
one Door, yet (after the Windovvs toward the Sun were opened, and the Doors
before the Looking-Glasses drawn aside) in all quarters of the Room there was
nothing but Suns, which by artificial Refractions beat upon the whole golden
Globe hanging in the midst; and for as much as the same (besides that
brightness) was polished, it gave such a Luster, that none of us could open
our Eyes, but were therefore forced to look out at Windovvs till Mirac. spee.
the Globe was well heated, and brought to the desired effect. Here I may
well avovv that in these Mirrours I have seen the most wonderful Spectacle
that ever Nature brought to light* for there were Suns in all places, and the
Globe in the middle shined yet brighter, so that, but for one twinkling of an
Eye, we could no more endure it than the Sun it self. At length the Virgin
commanded to shut up the Looking-Glasses again, and to make fast the Windovvs,
and so let the Globe cool again a little; and this was done about seven of the
Clock. Wherefore we thought good, since we might now have leisure a little
to refresh our selves with a Breakfast: This Treatment again was right
Philosophical, and we Prandium Philosoph*
had no need to be afraid of Intemperance, yet we had no want. And the hope
of the future joy (with which the Virgin continually comforted us) made us so
jocond that we regarded not any pains, or inconvenience. And this I can truly
say too concerning my Companions of high quality, that their minds never ran
after their Kitchen or Table, but their pleasure was only to attend upon this
adventurous Physic, and hence to contemplate the Creator's Wisdom and
Omnipotency. After we had taken our Refection, we again settled our selves to
work, for the Globe was sufficiently cooled; which with toil and labor we
were to lift off the Chain and set upon the Floor. Now the dispute was how to
get the Globe in funder, for we were commanded to divide the same in the midst.
The conclusion was that a sharp pointed Diamond would best do it. Now when we
Resolutio Globe.
had thus opened the Globe, there was nothing of redness more to be seen, but a
lovely great snovv-vvhite Egg: It most mightily rejoiced us, that this was so
well brought to pass. For the Virgin was in perpetual care, least the Shell
might still be too tender. We stood round about this Egg as jocond as if we
our selves had laid it. But the Virgin made it presently be carried Ovum
candidum.
forth, and departed her self too from us again, and (as all vvays) locked the
Door to. But what she did abroad with the Egg, or whether it were some way
privately handled, I know not, neither do I believe it. Yet we were again to
pause together for one quarter of an hour, till the third hole were opened,
and we by means of our instruments were come upon the fourth Stone or Floor.
In this Room we 4. Conclave
found a great Copper Kettle filled with yellow Sand, which was vvarmed
with a gentle Fire, afterward the Egg was raked up in it, that it might
therein come to perfect maturity. This Kettle was exactly square, upon one
side stood these two verses, Writ in great Leters.

O. BLI. TO. BIT. MI. LI. KANT. I. VOLT. BIT. TO. GOLT. On the second side
were these three Words.

SANITAS. NIX. HASTA. The third had no more but this one Word.

F. I. A. T. But on the hinder most part stood an entire Inscription running
thus.

QVOD. Ignis: Aer: Aqua: Terra: SANCTIS REGUM ET REGINARUM NOSTR: Cineribus.
Eripere non potuerunt. Fidelis Chymicorum Turba IN HANC URNAM Contulit. (...)
Now whether the Sand or Egg were hereby meant, I leave to the learned to
dispute, yet do I my part, and omit nothing undeclared. Our Egg being now ready
was taken out; But it needed no cracking, for the Bird that was in it soon
freed himself, and showed himself very jocond, yet he looked very Bloody and
unshapen: We first set him Pullus implumis.
upon the warm Sand, so the Virgin commanded, that before we gave him any thing
to eat, we should be sure to make him fast, otherwise he would give Vincitur.
us all work enough. This being done too, food was brought him, which surely
was nothing else than the Blood of the Pascitur. sanguine decollatorum.
Beheaded, deluted again with prepared water, by which the Bird grew so fast
under our eyes, that we well saw why the Virgin gave us such warning of him. He
bit and scratcht so devillishly about him, that could he have had his will upon
any of us, he would soon have dispatched him. Now he was wholly black, and
wild, wherefore other meat was brought him, perhaps the blood of another
Sauguine. alius Regis pascitur.
of the Royal Persons, whereupon all his black Feathers moulted again, and
instead of them there grew but Snow- white-Feathers. He was somewhat tamer too,
and suffered himself to be more tractable, nevertheless we did not yet trust
him. At the third feeding his Feathers began to be so curiously Iridescit.
colored, that in all my Life I never saw the like colors for Beauty. He was
also exceeding tame, and behaved himself so friendly with us, that (the Virgin
Liberatur. vinculis.
consenting) we released him from his Captivity. It Is now reason (began our
Virgin) since by your diligence, and our old man's consent, the Bird has
attained both his Life, and the highest Perfection, that he be also joyfully
Consecrated by us. Herewith she commanded to bring in Dinner, and that we
should again refresh our selves, since the most troublesome part of our Work
was now over, and it was sit we should begin to enjoy our passed Labors. We
began to make our selves merry together. Howbeit we had still all our Mourning
Clothes on, which seemed somewhat reproachful to our Mirth. Now the Virgin was
perpetually inquisitive, perhaps to find to which of us her future purpose
Primus ^^sus eius.
might prove serviceable. But her discourse was for the most part about
melting; and it pleased her well when any one seemed expert in such
compendious Manuals, as do peculiarly commend an (...)
Artist. This Dinner lasted not above three quarters of an hour, which we yet
for the most part spent with our Bird, whom we were fain constantly to feed
with his meat: But he still continued much at the same growth. After Dinner we
were not long suffered to digest our Meat, but after that the Virgin together
with the Bird was departed from us. The fifth Room was 5. Conclave.
set open to us, whither we got too after the former manner, and tendered our
Service. In this Room a Bath was prepared Avis balneum.
for our Bird, which was so colored with a fine white Powder, that it had the
appearance of mere Milk. Now it was at first cool when the Bird was set into
it: He was mighty well pleased with it, drinking of it, and pleasantly sporting
in it. But after it began to heat by reason of the Lamps that were placed under
it, we had enough to do to keep him in the Bath, we therefore clapped a cover
on the Kettle, and suffered him to thrust his head out through a hole, till he
had in this sort lost all his Feathers in this Bath, and was as smooth as a
nevv-born Child, yet the heat did him no further harm, at which I much
marvelled; for in this Bath the Feathers were quite consumed, and the Bath was
thereby tinged into blew; at length we gave the Bird air, who of himself
sprung out of the Kettle, and was so glitteringly smooth, that it was a
pleasure to behold it. But because he was still somewhat wild, we were fain
to put a collar, Vincitur.
with a Chain, about his Neck, and so led him up and down the Room. Mean time a
strong Fire was made under the Kettle, and the Bath sodden away till Bal^cum
conquitur in ^^pidem.
it all came to a blew Stone, which we took out, and having first pounded it,
we were afterward fain to grind it on a Stone, and finally with this color
to paint the Bird's whole Skin over: Now he looked much more strangely, for he
was all blew, except the head, which remained white. Herewith our work on
this Story too was performed; And we (after the Virgin with her blew Bird was
departed from us) were called up through the hole to the sixth Story: 6.
Conclave.
which was done too, there we were mightily troubled, for in the midst a
little Altar, every way like that in the King's Hall above described, was
placed. Upon which stood the six forementioned particulars, and he him self
(the Bird) made the seventh. First of all the little Fountain was set before
him, out of which he drunk a good draught, afterward he pecked upon the
white Serpent until she bled mightily. This Blood we were to receive into a
Golden Cup, and pour it down the Birds Throat, who was mighty averse from
it, then we dipped the Serpents head in the Fountain, upon which she again
revived, and crept into her Deaths-head, so that I savv her no more for a long
time after. Mean time the Sphere turned constantly on, until it made the
desired conjunction. Immediately the watch Struck one, upon which there was a
going another conjunction. Then the Watch struck two. Finally, whilst we were
observing the third conjunction, and the same was indicated by the Watch, the
poor Bird of himself submissively laid down his Neck upon the Book, and
willingly suffered his Head (by one of us thereto chosen A^^^ de^^^tur.
by lot) to be smitten off. Howbeit he yielded not one drop of Blood, till he
was opened on the Breast, and then the Blood spun out so fresh and clear as if
it had been a Fountain of Rubies. His Death went to the heart of us, and yet
we might well judge, that a naked Bird would stand us in little stead. So we
let it rest, and removed the little Altar away and assisted the Virgin to burn
the Avis comburitur.
Body (together with the little Tablet hanging by) to Ashes, with Fire kindled
at the little Taper; afterward to cleanse the same several times, and to lay
them in a Box of Cypress Wood. Here I cannot conceal what a trick I Jocus.
and three more were served* After we had thus diligently taken up the Ashes,
The Virgin began to speak thus. My Lords, we are here in the sixth Room, and
have only one more before us, in which our trouble will be at an end, and then
we shall return home again to our Castle, to awaken our most gracious Lords and
Ladies. Now albeit I could heartily wish, that all of you, as you are here
together, had behaved your selves in such sort, that I might have given you
Commendations to our most renowned King and Queen, and you have obtained a
suitable Reward; yet because, contrary to my desire, I have found amougst you
these four (herewith she pointed at me and three more) lazy and sluggish
Labourators, and yet according to my good will to all and every one, am not
willing to deliver them up to condign punishment; However, that such Negligence
may not remain wholly unpunished, I am purposed thus concerning them, that they
shall only be excluded from the future seventh and most Glorious action of all
the rest, and so too they shall incur no further blame from their Royal
Majesty's. In what a case we now were at this Speech, I leave others to
consider: For the Virgin so well knew how to keep her countenance, that the
Water soon ran over our Baskets, and we esteemed our selves the most unhappy of
all men. After this the Virgin by one of her Maids (whereof there were many
always at hand) caused the Musicians to be fetched* who where with Cornets to
blow us out of Doors with such scorn and derision, that they themselves could
hardly sound for laughing. But it did particularly mightily afflict us that the
Virgin so vehemently laughed at our weeping, anger and impatience, and that
there might well perhaps be some amongst our Companions who were glad of this
our misfortune. But it proved otherwise. For as soon as we Commod^^ ejoco.
were come out at the Door, the Musicians bid us be of good cheer and follow
them up the winding Stairs; They led us up to the seventh Floor under 8.
conclave.
the Roof, where we found the old Man, whom we had not hitherto seen, standing
upon a little round Furnace. He received us friendly, and heartily
congratulated us, that we were hereto chosen by the Virgin; but after he
understood the affright we had conceived, his belly was ready to burst with
Laughing, that we had taken such good Fortune so hainously. Hence said he, My
Dear Sons learn, That Man never knows how well God intends him. During this
discourse the Virgin also with her little Box came running in, who (after she
had sufficiently laughed at us) emptied her Ashes out into another Vessel, and
filled hers again with other matter, Virgo Lucif Iudit c^^^ros.
saving, she must now go cast a Mist before the other Artists Eyes, that we in
the mean time should obey the old Lord in whatsoever he commanded us, and not
remit our former diligence. Herewith she departed from us into the seventh 7.
Conclave.
Room whither she called our Companions. Now what she first did with them
there, I cannot tell, for they were not only most earnestly forbidden to speak
of it, but we too by reason of our business, durst not peep on them through the
Cieling. But this was our Verus labo^ ^u^^ ^^ct^.
work, we were to moisten the Ashes with our fore-prepared Water till they
became altogether like a very thin Dough. After which we set the matter over
the Fire, till it was well heated, then we cast it thus hot as it was into two
little forms or moulds, and so let it cool a little (here we had leisure to
look a while Labor sp^ri^^ in 7* conclavi.
upon our Companions through certain crevises made in the Floor) they were now
very busy at a Furnace, and each was himself fain to blow up the Fire with a
pipe, and they stood thus blowing about it, as if they were ready to loose
their breath. Howbeit, they imagined they were herein wondrously preferred
before us. And this blowing lasted so long till our old Man rouzed us to our
work again; So that I cannot say what was done afterward. We having opened our
little forms, there appeared two beautiful bright and almost Transparent
Ho^uuc^^ duo.
little Images, the like to which Man's Eye never saw, a Male and a Female, each
of them only four inches long; and that which most mightily surprised me, was,
that they were not hard, but limber and fleshy, as other human Bodies, yet had
they no Life: So that I do most assuredly believe that the Lady Venus's Image
was also made after some such way. These Angelically fair Babes we first laid
upon two little Satin Cushonets, and beheld them a good while, till we were
almost besotted upon so exquisite an object. Pas^^ntur sanguine avis.
The old Lord warned us to forbear, and continually to instill the Bood of the
Bird (which had been received into a little Golden Cup) drop after drop into
the Mouths of the little Images, from whence they apparently to the Eye
increased; and whereas they were before very small, they were now (according to
proportion) much more beautiful; so that worthily all Limners ought to have
been here, and have been ashamed of their Art in respect of these productions
of Nature. Now they began to grow so big, that we lifted from the little
Cushonets, and were fain to lay them upon a long Table, which was covered with
white Velvet. The old man also commanded us to cover them over up to the Breast
with a piece of fine white double Taffata, which because of their unspeakable
beauty, almost Pulchereimus.
went against us; but that I may be brief, before we had in* this manner quite
spent the Blood, they were already in their perfect full growth, they had
Gold-yellow curled Hair, and the abovementioned figure of Venus was nothing to
them. But there was not yet any natural warmth, or sensibility in them, they
were dead Figures, yet of a lively and natural color: and since care was to be
taken that they grew not too great, the old Man would not permit any thing more
to be given them, but quite covered their Faces too with the Silk, and caused
the Table to be stuck round about with Torches* Here I must warn the Reader
that he imagine not these Lights to have been of necessity, for the old Man's
intent hereby, was only that we should not observe when the Soul entered into
them, as indeed we should not have taken notice of it, in case I had not twice
before seen the Flames; However, I permitted the other three to remain in their
belief, neither did the old Man know that I had seen any thing more. Hereupon
he bid us sit down on a Bench over against the Table: presently the Virgin came
in too with the Music and Ves^^untur.
all furniture, and carried two curious white Garments, the like to which I had
never seen in the Castle, neither can I describe them, for I thought no other
but that they were mere Crystal, but they were gentle, and not transparent, so
that I cannot speak of them: These she laid down upon a Table, and after she
had disposed her Virgins upon a Bench round about, she and the old Man began
many Leger-demain tricks about the Table, which was done Spectatores luduntur.
only to Blind us. This (as I told you) was managed under the roof, which was
wonderfully formed, for on the inside Descriptio recti.
it was arched into seven Hemispheres, of which the middlemost was somewhat the
highest, and had at top a little round hole, which was nevertheless shut, and
was observed by none else. After many Ceremonies, stepped in six Virgins, each of
which bare a large Trumpet, which were rouled about with a green glittering and
burning material like a wreath, one of which the old Man took, and after he had
removed some of the lights at top, and uncovered their Faces, he placed one of
the Trumpets upon the Mouth of one of the Bodies in such manner, that the upper
and wider part of it was directed just against the forementioned hole. Here my
Companions always looked upon Usus tubarum.
the Images; but I had other thoughts; for as soon as the foliage or wreath
about the shank of the Trumpet was kindled, I saw the hole at top open, and a
bright (Forte ex ^^lo veni^^s)
stream of Fire shooting down the Tube, and passing into the Body: whereupon
the hole was again covered, and the Trumpet removed. With this device my
Companions were deluded, so that they imagined that life came into the Image by
means of the Fire of the foliage, for as soon as he received the Soul Homonculi
animatralio transferuntur.
he twinckled with his Eyes, howbeit he scarce stirred. The second time he
placed another Tube upon its Mouth, and kindled it again, and the Soul was let
down through the Tube. This was repeated upon each of them three times, after
which all the Lights were exstinguished and carried away. The Velvet Carpets of
the Table were cast together over them, and immediately a travilling Bed was
unlocked and made ready, into which thus wrapped up they were born, and so
after the Carpets were taken off them, they were neatly laid by each other,
where with the Curtains drawn before them, they slept a good while. (Now was it
also time for the Virgin to see how our other Artists de 7. concl.
behaved themselves, they were well pleased, because (as the Virgin afterward
informed me) they were to work in Gold, which is indeed a piece also of this
art, but not the most Principal, most necessary, and best: They had indeed too
a part* of these Ashes, so that they imaaginied no other, but that the whole
Bird was provided for the sake of Gold, and that life must thereby be restored
to the deceased) during which we sat very still, attending when our married
couple would awake, thus about half an hour was spent. For then the wanton
Cupid presented himself again, and, after Homunculi excitantur a cupidi^e.
he had saluted us all, flew to them behind the Curtain, tormenting them so
long till they awaked. This happened to them with very great amazement, for
^l^uer^nt. ^lli qui de^^lla ba^^ur.
they imagined no other but that they had hitherto slept from the very hour in
which they were beheaded. Cupid, after he had awaked them, and renewed their
acquaintance one with another, stepped a side a little, and permitted them both
somewhat better to recruis themselves, mean time playing his tricks with us;
and at length he would needs have the Music fetched to be somewhat the merrier.
Not long after the Virgin her self comes: And after she had most humbly saluted
the young King and Queen (who found themselves somewhat faint) and kissed their
hands, she Conjuges induunt vestiments ^^ se conspiciendos praebea^t.
brought them the two forementioned curious Garments, which they put on, and so
stepped forth. Now there were already prepared two very curious Chaires,
wherein they placed themselves: and so were by us with most profound Reverence
congratulated; for which the King in his own Person most graciously returned
his thanks, and again re-assured us of all Grace. It was already about five of
Clock, wherefore they could make no longer stay, but as soon as ever the
chiefest of their Conjuges vehuntur tra^^ mare.
furniture could be laden, we were to attend the young Royal Persons down the
winding Stairs, through all Doors and watches unto the Ship, in which they
inbarqued themselves, together with certain Virgins, and Cupid, and sailed so
mighty swift that we soon lost sight of them, yet they were met (as I was
informed) by certain stately Ships; Thus in four Hours time they had made many
Leagues out at Sea. After Mosick.
five of Clock the Musicians were charged to carry all things back again to the
Ships, and to make themselves ready for the Voyage. But because this was
somewhat long a doing, the old Lord Custos senex.
commanded forth a party of his concealed Soldiers, who had hitherto been
Turris custodita a militibus.
planted in the Wall, so that we had taken no notice of any of them, whereby I
observed that this Tower was well provided against opposition. Now these
Soldiers made quick work with our stuff, so that no more remained further to be
done, but to go to Gupper. Now the Table being completely furnished, the Virgin
brings us again to Coena. Hospites de 7. et 8. conclavi comestantur.
our Companions where we were to carry our selves as if we had truly been
in a Lamentable condition, and forbear laughing. But they were always smiling
one upon another, howbeit some of them too simpathized with us. At this
Supper the old Lord was with us too, who was a most sharp Inspector over
us: For none could Custos est inspector.
propound any thing so discreetly, but that he knevv how either to confute it,
or amend it, or at least to give some good document upon it. I learned most
Laus hujus senis.
by this Lord, and it were very good that each one would apply himself to him,
and take notice of his procedure* for then things would not so often, and so
untowardly Miscarry. After we had taken our nocturnal refection, the old Lord
led us into his Closets of Rarities, which were here and there dispersed The
old Man's Closets
amongst the Bulworks, where we saw such wonderful productions of Nature, and
other things too which man's wit in imitation of Nature had invented, that we
needed a Year more sufficiently to surveigh them: Thus we spent a good part of
the Night by Candlelight. At last, because we were more inclined to Sleep than
see many Rarities, we were lodged in Rooms in the Wall, where we had not only
costly good Beds, but also besides extraordinary handsome Chambers, which made
us the more wonder why we were the day before forced to undergo so many
hardships. In this Chamber I had good rest; and being for the most part without
care, and weary with continual Labor, the gentle rushing of the Sea helped me
to a sound and sweet Sleep, for I continued in one Dream from eleven Somnium.
prolixum.
of Clock till eight in the morning.

The Sventh Day.
AFter eight of clock I awaked, and quickly made my self ready, being desirous
to return again into the Tower, but the dark passages in the Wall were so many,
and various, that I wandered a good while before I could find the way out. The
same happened to the rest too, till at last we all met again Hospites deponunt
vestes lugubres.
in the nether most Vault, and habits entirely yellow were given us, together
with our golden Flecces. At that time the Virgin declared to us that we were
Knights of the Golden Stone, of Salutantur Equites.
which we were before ignorant. After we had now thus made our selves ready,
and taken our Breakfast, the old Man presented each of us with a Don^^tu^ a
sens.
medal of Gold; on the one side stood these Words, AR. NOT. MI. Ars natura
ministra
Temporis natura filia.
On the other these, TEM. NA. F. Exhorting us moreover we should entreprize
nothing beyond and against this token of remembrance. Herewith we went forth to
the Sea, where our Ships lay so richly equipped, that it was not well possible
but that such brave things must first have been brought thither. The Ships were
twelve in number, six of ours, and six of the old Lord's, who caused his Ships
to be freighted with well appointed Soldiers. But he be took himself, to us,
into our Ship, Navis 1.
where we all were together; In the first the Musicians Seated themselves, of
which the old Lord had also a great number, they sailed before us to shorten
the time. Our Flags were the twelve Vexilla 12. sign. Navis autoris libra.
Horolog.
Caelestial Signs, and we sat in Libra; besides other things, our Ship had also
a noble and curious Clock, which showed us all the Minutes. The Sea too was so
calm, that it was a singular pleasure to Sail. But that which surpassed all the
rest, was the old Man's discourse, who so ^acundia sents.
well knew how to pass away our time with wonderful Histories, that I could
have been content to Sail with him all Obviatio ^x arce.
my Life long. Mean time the Ships passed on amain, for before we had sailed
two hours the Mariner told us that he already saw the whole Lake almost covered
with Ships, by which we could conjecture they were come out to meet us, which
also proved true: For as soon, as we were gotten out of the Sea into the Lake
by the sorementioned River, there presently stood in to us five hundred Ships,
one of which sparkled with mere Gold and precious Stones, 500 Naves
in which sat the King and Queen, together with other Lords, Ladies, and
Virgins of high Birth. As soon as they were well in Ken of us the pieces were
discharged on both sides, and there was such a din of Trumpets, Shalms, and
Kettle Drums that all the Applausus.
Ships upon the Sea capered again. Finally, as soon as we came near they
brought about our Ships together, and so made a stand, Immediately the old
Atlas stepped forth on the King's behalf, making a short, but handsome oration,
wherein he wellcomed us, Atlas oratione excipit hospites.
and demanded whether the Royal Presents were in readiness. The rest of my
Companions were in an huge amazement, whence this King should arise, for they
imagined no other but that they must again awaken him. We suffered them to
continue in their wonderment, and carried our selves as if it seemed strange to
us too. After Atlas's oration our steps our old Man, making somewhat a larger
reply, wherein he Atlanti responde^ sene^.
wished the King and Queen all happiness and increase, after which he delivered
Regiis conjugibus donum affert Cupido.
up a curious small Casket, but what was in it, I know not; only it was
committed to Cupid, who hovered between them both to keep. After the oration was
finished, they again let off a joyful Volle of Shot, and so we sailed on a good
time together, till at length we arrived at another Shore. This was near the
first Gate at which I first entered: At this place again there attended a great
Multitude of the King's Family together with some hundreds of Horses. Now as
soon as we were come to shore, and disembarqued, the King and Queen presented
their Hands to all of us one with another with singular kindness; and so we
were to get up on Horseback. Here I desire to have the Reader friendly
entreated not to interpret the following Narration to any vain glory or pride
of mine, but to credit me thus far, that if there had not been a special
necessity in it, I could very well have utterly concealed this honor which was
showed me. We Honor delatus. Aut^ri Cum seen equitat j^x^a Regem.
were all one after another distributed amongst the Lords. But our old Lord,
and I most unworthy, were to ride even with the King, each of us bearing a snow
white Ensign, with a Red Cross: I indeed was made use of because of my Age, for
we both had long gray Beards, and Hair. I had besides fastened my tokens round
about my Hat, of which the young King soon took notice, and demanded if I were
he, who could at the Gate redeem these tokens? I answered in most humble
manner, Yea. But he Tesseras sol vit sale et aqua.
laughed on me, saying, There henceforth needed no Ceremony; I was HIS Father.
Then he asked me, Wherewith Pater.
I had redeemed them; I replied, with Water Tessers ^ovia sale and aqua.
and Salt: whereupon he wondered who had made me so wise; upon which I grew
somewhat more confident, and recounted unto him how it had happened to me with
my Bread, the Dove, and the Raven, and he was pleased with it, and said
expressly, That it must needs be, that God had herein vouchsafed me a singular
happiness. Herewith we came to the first gate where the Porter with the blew
Clothes waited, who bare in his Hand a supplication. Now as soon as he spied me
even with the King, he delivered me the supplication, most humbly beseeching me
to mention his ingenuity toward me before the King: Now in the first Primus
Custos fol* 26. quis. Ob visa^^ enere^ factus portitor.
place I demanded of the King, what the condition of this Porter was? who
friendly answered me, That he was a very famous and rare Astrologer, and always
in high regard with the Lord his Father. But having on a time committed a fault
against Venus, and beheld her in her Bed of rest, This punishment was therefore
imposed upon him* that he should so long wait at the first Ga^e, till some one
should release him from thence. I replied, may he then be released? Yes, said
the King, if any one can be found that has as highly transgressed as himself,
he must stand Author ejus them delicti reus proditur a porti^^re.
in his stead, and the other shall be free. This word went to my Heart, for my
Conscience convinced me that I was the offender, yet I held my peace, and
herewith delivered the supplication. As soon as he had read it, he was mightily
terrified, so that the Queen, who (with our Virgins, and that other Queen
besides, of whom I made mention at the hanging of the Weights) rid just behind
us observed it, and therefore asked him, what this Letter might signi^^. But he
had no mind that he should take notice of it, but putting up the Paper, began
to discourse of other matters, till thus in about three hours time we came
quite to the Castle, where we alighted, and waited upon the King Actos (...).
into his forementioned Hall. Immediately the Kng called for the old Atlas to
come to him in a little Closet, and showed him the writing, who made no long
tarrying, but rid out again to the Porter to take better Cognizance of the
matter. After which the young King with his Spouse, and other Lords, Ladies and
Virgins sat down. Then (...)
began our Virgin highly to commend the diligence we had used, and the pains
and labor we had undergone, requesting we might be royally rewardded, and that
she henceforward might be permitted to enjoy the benefit of her commission.
Then the old Lord stood up too, and attested that all that the Virgin had
spoken was true, and that it was but equity that we should on both both parts
be contented. Hereupon we were to step out alittle; and it was concluded that
each man should make some possible wish, and accordingly obtain it; for it was
not to be doubted, but that those of understanding would also make the best
wish: So we were to consider of it till after Supper. Mean Ludus Regis cum
Regi^^.
time the King and Queen for recreations sake, began to fall to play together.
It looked not unlike Chesse, only it had other Laws; for it was the Virtues and
Vices one against another, where it might ingeniously be observed with what
Plots the Vices lay in wait for the Virtues, and how to re-encounter them
again. This was so properly Ar^
and artificially performed, that it were to be wished, that we had the like
game too. During the game, in comes Atlas again, and makes his report in
private, yet I blushed all over. For my Conscience gave me no rest; after which
the King presented me the supplication to read, the Contents Supplicatio
portitoris traditum Auto^i.
whereof were much to this purpose: First he wished the King prosperity, and
increase; that his seed might be spread abroad far and wide: Afterward he
remonstrated that the time was now accomplished, wherein according to the Royal
promise he ought to be released. Because Venus was already uncovered by one of
his Guests, for his observations could not lie to him. And that if his Majesty
would please to make a strict and diligent enquiry, he would find that she had
been uncovered, and in case this should not prove so to be, he would be content
to remain before the Gate all days of his life. Then he sued in the most humble
manner, that upon peril of Body and Life he might be permitted to be present at
this Nights supper, he was in good hopes to spy out the very Offender, and
obtain his wished freedom. This was expressly and handsomely indicted, by which I
could well perceive his ingenuity, but it was too sharp for me, and I could
well have endured never to have seen it. Now I was casting in my mind whether
he might perchance be helped through my wish, so I asked the King, whether he
might not be released some other way? No, replied the King, because there is a
special consideration in the business. However, for this Night, we may well
gratify him in his desire* so he sent one forth to fetch him in. Mean time the
Tables were prepared in a spacious Room, in which we had never been before,
which was so complete, and in Triclinium precio^s^mum.
such manner contrived, that it is not possible for me only to begin to
describe it. Into this we were conducted with singular Pomp, and Ceremony.
Cupid Cupido iratus ob Venerum vilarn ab autore.
was not at this time present. For (as I was informed) the disgrace which had
happened to his Mother, had somewhat angered him. In brief, my offense, and the
Supplication which was delivered were an occasion of much sadness, for Etiam
Rex condoi^t.
the King was in perplexity how to make inquisition amongst his Guests, and the
more because thus even they too, who were yet ignorant of the matter, would
come to the knowledge of it. So he caused the Porter himself, who was already
come, to make his strict surveigh, and showed himself as pleasant as he was
able. Howbeit at length they began again to be merry, and to bespeak one
another with all Laetitia di^cumbentium.
sorts of recreative and profitable discourses. Now how the treatment and other
Ceremonies were then performed, it is not necessary to declare, since it is
neither the Reader's concern, nor serviceable to my design. But all exceeded
more in art, and human invention, than that we were overcharged with drinking.
And this was the last, and noblest Meal at which I was present. After the
Bancket the Tables were suddenly taken away, and certain curious Chairs placed
round about in circle, in which we together with the King, and Queen, both
their old Men, the Ladies and Virgins, were to sit. After which a very handsome
Page opened the above mentioned glorious little Book, when Atlas immediately
placing himself in the midst, began to bespeak us to the ensuing purpose. That
his Royal Majesty had not yet committed to oblivion the service we had done
him, and how carefully we had attended our duty, and therefore by way of
retribution had elected all and each of us Knights of the Golden Stone. That it
was therefore further necessary not only once again to oblige our selves
toward his Royal Majesty, but to vow too upon the following Articles, and then
his Royal Majesty would likewise know how to behave himself toward his liege
People. Upon which he caused the Page to read over the Articles* which were
these.

I. You my Lords the Knights, shall swear, that you shall at no time ascribe
your order either unto any Devil, or Spirit, but only to God your Creator, and
his handmaid Nature. II. That you will Abominate all Whoredom, Incontinency
and Uncleaness, and not defile your order with such Vices. III. That you
through your Talents will be ready to assist all that are worthy, and have need
of them. IV. That you desire not to employ this honor to wordly Pride and high
Authority. V. That you shall not be willing to live longer than God will have
you.
At this last Article we could not choose but laugh sufficiently, and it may
well have been placed after the rest, only for a conceit. Now being to vow to
them all by the King's Scepter, Privilegia.
we were afterward with the usual Ceremonies installed Knights, and amongst
other Privileges set over Ignorance, Poverty, and Sickness; to handle them at
our pleasure. And this was afterward ratified in a little Chapel (whither we
were conducted in all Procession) and thanks returned to God for it. Where I
also at that time to the honor of God hung up my Golden Fleece and Hat, and
left them there for an eternal memorial. And because every one was there to
write his Name. I writ thus;

Summa Stientia nihil Scire. Fr. CHRISTI ANUS ROSENCREVT* Eques aurei Lapidis.
Anno. 1459. Others writ otherwise, and truly each I am (...)
as seemed him good. After which we were again brought into the Hall, where
being sat down, we were admonished quickly to be think our selves what every
one would wish. But the King and his party retired into a little Closet, there
to give audience to our wishes. Now each man was called in severally, so that I
cannot speak of any man's proper wish, I thought nothing could be more
praiseworthy than in honor of my order to demonstrate some laudable virtue.
And found too that none at present could be more famous, and cost me more
Prouble than Gratitude. Wherefore not regarding Author op^at libera^^^nem
por^itoris e grati^^^^^
that I might well have wished somewhat more dear and agreeable to my self, I
vanquished my self, and concluded, even with my own peril, to free the Porter
my Benefactor. Wherefore being now called in, I was first of all demanded,
whether, having read the Supplication, I had observed, or suspected nothing
concerning the offender? upon which I began undauntedly to relate how all the
business had passed. How through Ignorance I fell into that mistake, and so
offered my self to undergo all that I had thereby demerited. The King, and the
rest of the Lords Aut^r reus con^itens.
wondered mightily at so un-hoped for confession, and so wished me to step
aside a little. Now as soon as I was called for in again, Atlas declared to me,
that although it were grievous to the King's Majesty, that I whom he loved
above others, was fallen into such a mischance, yet because it was not possible
for him to Transgress his ancient usages, he knew not how else to absolve me,
but that the other must be at Liberty, and I placed in his stead, yet he would
hope that some other would soon be apprehended, that so I might be able to go
home again. However, no release was to be hoped Audit sen^entiam.
for, till the Marriage Feast of his future Son. This Sentence had near cost me
my life, and I first hated my self and my twatling Tongue, in that I could not
hold my peace, yet at last I took courage, and because I considered there was
no remedy, I related how this Porter had bestowed a token on me, and commended
me to the other, by whose assistance I stood upon the Scale, and so was made
partaker of all the honor and joy already received. And Laus beneficij
portitoris.
therefore now it was but equal that I should show my self grateful to my
Benefactor: and because the same could no way else be done, I returned thanks
for the sentence, and was willing gladly to sustain some inconvenience for his
sake, who had been helpful to me in coming to so high place. But if by my wish
any thing might be effected, I wished my self at home again, and that so he by
me, and I by my wish might be at Liberty. Answer was made me, that the wishing
stretched not so far. However I might well wish him free. Yet it was very
pleasing to his Royal Majesty, that I had behaved my self so generously herein,
but he was afraid I might still be ignorant, Laud^^^^^^ Rege.
into what a miserable condition I had plunged my self through this my
curiosity. Hereupon the good man was pronounced free, and I with a sad heart
was fain to step aside. After me the Reliqui laeti evad^nt.
rest were called for too, who came jocundly out again, which was still more to
my smart; for I imagined no other, but that I must finish my life under the
Gate. I had also many pensive thoughts running up and down in Author
melancholisat
my Head, what I should yet undertake, and wherewith to spend the time, at
length I considered that I was now old, and according to the course of nature,
^p^^.
had few years more to live: And that this anguish and melancholy Life would
Metus.
easily dispatch me, and then my doorkeeping would be at an end: And that
Sol^^ium.
by a most happy Sleep I might quickly bring my self into the Grave. I had
sundry of these thoughts. Sometimes it vexed me that I had seen such galant
things, and must be robbed of them. Sometimes it rejoiced me that yet before my
end I had been accepted to all joy, and should not be forced (...) shamefully
to depart. Thus this was the last and worst shock that I sustained: During
these my Cogitations the rest were ready. Wherefore after they had received a
good night from the King and Lords, each one was conducted into his Lodging.
But I most wretched Man had no body to show me the way, and yet must moreover
suffer my self to be tormented, and that I might be certain of my future
function, I was Author de cipit An^^ lum.
fain to put on the Ring, which the other had before worn. Finally, the King
exhorted me, that since this was now the last time I was like to see him in
this manner: I should however behave my self according to my place, and not
against the order: Upon which he took me also in his Arms, and kissed me, all
which I so understood, as if in the morning I must sit at my Gate. Now after
they had all a while spoken friendly to me, and at last presented their Hands,
committing me to the divine protection: I was by bo^^ the old Men, the Lord of
the Tovver, and Atlas conducted into a glorious Author dor^^^^^t cum At^^^te et
seen ^^stod^ Turris.
Lodging, in which stood three Beds, and each of us lay in one of them, where
we yet spent almost two, etc.

Here are wanting about two Leaves in quarto, and he (the Author hereof)
whereas he imagined he must in the ^orning be Doorkeeper, returned (...)

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page Part of Page Line Read. (...) 4 4 m f have been 5 2 t h an hour 7 3 i o
naturae s^c 12 4 w f forceably pulled 13 4 r o turre eit cu^^^ 15 1 b t bitter
lament 19 3 A g tide 41 2 H ^ Now though 44 2 y n that none pr^ 46 1 m t
portended y^^ 54 4 t t step-aside 65 2 t a alium lib 73 3 v w Unicornu 90 1 s t
9 said ^ 91 4 f ^ reddantur 92 4 o h fauies which ^ 111 3 n r praecipu^ ^ 123 1
b i D^^ol^^tio 152 4 m w resolutio Glob^ 203 3 h t animati alio 212 4 m h
tesseras solvis (...) 213 1 213 etc. and aq^^ 213 ^ ^ b Tesseras solv.


