THE COPY OF A BARONS COURT: Newly translated by WHATS-YOV-CALL-HIM, Clerk to
the same.

Printed at Helicon, beside Parnassus, and are to be sold in CALEDONIA.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Publisher of the following Poem is credibly informed that the Author
thereof was the learned and facetious Mr. Patrick Anderson, Dr. of Medecin;
Who, besides his other Works, both Historical and Physical, wrote a Book in
latin, 8 vo. printed Edinb. 1635. entitled Grana Angelica, concerning the
Nature and Use of these famous Pills, which are now commonly sold by the Name
of Anderson's Pills.

BARON, BAILY, OFFICER. * Bail. GOD save your worship.


* Bar. Welcome Baily; How
Does Kate my Aunt, and Will my God-son do?
What News abroad? How sells the Bear I pray?

* Bail. The Prices rises every Market Day.


* Bar. Good News y faith: Come Sir, fill some Ale.


* Offic. He loves the Tongue that tells him such a Tale.


* Bar. Good Baillie, pull him home; It Is white: I think
You are not dry, or loves not well our Drink.

* Bail. O Sir it is strong!


* Bar. And yet our Browster says,
It is a fault comportable always:
And this I think my self; For now I see
Wine is a Stranger unto each Degree.

* Off. And long may it be so; For We could want it.


* Bail. You speak the Truth; I think the Lord will grant it.
But O! the tender Stomachs are oppressed
With Cruditys, and Mine among the rest.

* Bar. Drink Aquavitae Baily, that is no fault;
The Sp'rit of Drink is now confined in Malt.
As for my self I can as well be merry
With the Bear-Pickle as the Spanish Berry.

* Bail. But let me interrupt your Worship; Why
Did Jack your Foot Man call me hastily?

* Bar. Some Disappointments makes me malcontent,
I cannot live, and live not on my ^ent:
My Court and Jurisdiction is as free
As any not exceeding my Degree,
And you Sir Bailly know that I can do it,
My old Infestments lead me justly to it.

* Bail. Not to offend your Worship in Effect,
I dare be bold, it is your own Neglect;
Your Predecessors, of good Memory,
Did manage Matters with Audacity;
Your Power, Sir, is not a whit abreg'd,
Nor yet was theirs more amply priveleg'd.

* Bar. You're right indeed: And I forsooth resent it,
And possibly shall make some to repent it.

* Bail. Sir, Hold a COURT, that we may clearly see
Th'alledg'd Abuses of the Barony.
Go Officer, and warn the Tenants in,
And where We ended let Us now begin;
If with your Worships Pleasure it could rest
To countenance the Court, your self; 'twere best.

* Bar. Go to, Sir Baily, for I must confess
You are sufficient for the Bussiness;
I Will to the Hunting: Hey Dogs! Hey Dogs! Hey!
Great pity were to loss so brave a Day.

BAILY, CHAMBERLAIN, CLERK, Chapter GOod morrow Baily.


Bail. You're the Trout I wished
If for a great one I had all Day fished;
Whence came you last? If asked it may be.

Chamb. From compassing my Masters Baronie.


Bail. I cry for Mercy; I am thick of Hearing.


Chamb. Sir, You may mend it, by a double Spearing.


Bail. From Conquessing, I thought your Speech had been.


Cham. Play on your Friends.


Bail. Yet such Play has been seen;
But to the Purpose: Is your Book about you?

Chamb. A Psalm-Book Sir? Lo there is one! what doubt you
The Moon is at the Full.

Bail. So may some say,
The Lord was like for to go mad the Day;
It is your Book, Man, of Recepts, I mean.

Chamb. Excuse Me Sir, it was by me mista'ne;
What needs a Book of that Kind or Condition?
I have Discharges of my Intromission.

Bail. That Is not the Matter: I would only see
The Count of Rest, if any Rests there be.
The Lord complains, and has some cause I trow,
At Whitsunday his Worship has ado,
And yet his Mails and Dutys come not in
Till that the Kalends of the next year ^in.
This stains his Credit, damnifies his State,
And this Abuse is bred but of the late.

Chamb. The Rooms are rental'd to so high Avail,
The Tenants termly cannot pay their hail:
The bygone years (you know Sir) have been ill.

Bail. They do not so (you will grant) continue still.


Chamb. I cannot helped: I poyn'd, arrest, remove,
And all I do is for the Lairds Behoove.

Bail. But give me leave, he much condemns your Sleuth.


Chamb. You jest I hope: I pray Sir tell the Treuth?


Bail. And adds this more (for He envies your pelf)
Indeed He could be Chamberlain himself:

Chamb. Good CHAMBERLAIN y Faith! Even let him try
If He can gain more by that Craft nor I.

Bail. Lend Him but twenty Pieces, I Will be plain
Ye shall be Friends yet or the Morn again.

Chamb. He Is hungry: But my self shall never fill him;
Pay my Advancements, take my Office till him.

Clerk You Are Gentlemen of great Experience,
I humbly would entreat your Patience;
I wonder often at one thing; That Is to see
Such Alterations in this poor Country.
This Gentleman, whose Court We are to hold,
His Father conquest: But this Man has sold;
Yet at his Death he left his Living free,
And ten for one, He keept in Family,
Brave Gentlemen, with double Horse and Boys,
He filled the Causey with compleet convoys.
His Son has but a Footman and a Page,
To whom he pays but little or no wage,
And if He rid^ to any public place,
His Train is packt up in a leathern Case.

Chamb. It Is good to have the Grace of God ye know,
But here I halt, and let my Passion go

Bail. Good Chamberlain, this Text you should refer
For to be handled by the Minister:
We Will go no higher: Clerk but since you speer
The cause of this great alteration here;
I will not undertake to tell you all.
But some that seems to be m^st principal,
This Gentleman of whom we now discourse,
(For I have ever known him from his Nurse)
When that his Father yielded up the Gh^st,
He was of Age but fifteen years at most;
Then he began to rattle and to reel,
And kicked against the College with his Heel;
Horse, Hawks, and Dogs, with Guns, and such Munition,
Began to get his Morning Repetition.
And thus he lived till he was twenty Year,
His Tutors found his Pastime was too dear,
They did resolve to send him unto France,
To learn to parle, handle Arms and dance,
But what a Rank this rulelesse youth keept there
Will now be seen upon his son and heir.
He salted to the Rigs with Charges vain,
No Rain that falls can make them fresh again.

Lady, Baily, Chamberlain, Clerk, Officer. Off. MADAM, the Members of the Court
are met,
All is not right, the Chamberlain does fret.

Lady Where are they now?


Off. below into the Hall.

Lady Incontinent I will go see them all.


Bail. God save your Ladyship.


Lady And you Sir Baily,
The Lord ha^h won, and you must pay the Failzie,

Bail. What is the Matter?


Lady I did lay a Crown
You should not come before the Day at Noon.

Bail. But I durst lay the best Ox in my Plough,
Madam your Tenants think it soon enough.

Lady Good Baily, Fleg them, fleg them, fleg them Thieves,
They multiply upon us termly grieves;
It^s Lambmass now, and yet we want our Ferm,
My husband bought a fleet horse at the Term,
And I my self did se^l a score of Hoggs
To buy three couple of these English Dogs,
In case the Lord with Caption were pressed,
H^ may hunt on to Berwick with the best

Bail. God shield your Ladieship but too much Cares.


Lady I love not Hunting that brings home no Hares.


Bail. The Gentleman is generously disposed,
You need not think all that is in hazard loosed.

Lady This is a Fault remeediless in Men,
Which you sir baily perfectly do ken;
Find Me, amongst twenty, one in all this Life
That will take Council from his wedded wife.
Though Women be not edutat at Schools
I Am sure they are not all created Fools.
To make him free, I willed him sell a Town,
Though of the worth he would give som^what down;
It Is misery to see a man so set,
To rack his Rental, and obscure his Debt;
This is my Verdict till the Day I die,
A Man has no more Rent, nor he has free.
The Chamberla^n I trow is of my Mind;

Chamb. I never think to meddle in that kind.


* Lady I hope directly I did never wrong you.


* Chamb. I Will shift or one: Hereafter part among you.


* Bail. Courage Madam, redeem the Time bygone,
There Is Earth eneugh to build the Dyke upon.
You have a Son, a Son of Expectation,
A braver Youth is not in this our Nation.
Descended of the best of BARONS Blood,
His Tocher yet may make all matters good.

* Lady And mary with his equals too?


* Bail. No, no;
Your Ladyship did not hear Me say so.
Go match Him with some wealthy Merchants Child,
So that the VVench be beautiful and mild;
Thus shall you have some twenty-thousand Pound.
Which will relieve the burden of the Ground.

* Lady That were the pathway (God forbid) to wrong us,
There Is too much else of Burgess-Blood among us.
Away with all that is got with Perjury,
Light weights, false Measures, and with Usury;
E're I disgrace his Parentage a Jot,
I Will rather sell if 'twere until my Coat.

* Bail. I must confess, He is a lusty Lad,
But Money now is ill for to be had.

* Lady I scorn that ever my Posterity
Degener should from true Gentility.

* Bail. Gentility is nothing else, Madam,
But Wealth continued in an House or Name;
Empires beginning had, and Endings too.
So has the Race of ancient Barons now.
Fatalitys are sometimes so prepared,
That Lord turns no man, Merchant turns a Lord.
Barons, you see, of singularity
For Means do mix with Popularity.

* Lady We will advise.


* Bail. It Is good to advise indeed,
** ANGELS will breed you an immortal Seed. ** i. e. Gold.

BARON, LADY, BAILY, CLERK, OFFICER, TENANTS. * Off. SIr Baily, all the Tenants
are conveen'd.


* Bail. Clerk fence the Court.


* Ten. The great God be our Friend,
For any thing that we can see or say
No Mercy is for none of Us this Day.

Clerk, Silence: I fence, and I forbid in plain,
In the Behalf of our dread Sovereign,
And in the Name of the right honorable
The Lord and Baily, sitting at this Table;
That none presume to speak, Though for a Friend,
Unless that Leave be asked and obteen'd

Bail. Go forward quickly, and read on the Rolls,
That We may know the Rest of Farn-Years Bolls.

Clerk, John Petersen, John Paterson,
John Dennison, John Davison,
Tom Tailor, and his Brother,
Will Waker and his Mother,,
The o^d Good Wife, and her Son Gibbie,
John Johnson, and stin^ing Tibbie,
The over town, and nether-town,
The wester-town, and cotter-town,
The Foul-Foord, and the Miln-town,
Brank ^ornent him, and the Hiltown.
The Mutton-Hole, and reck thou there,
The windy-Walls, and Whissell-Bare.

Off. They are all present.


Ten. Here Sir Baily, Here,
We cannot run no faster to repeer.

Bail. John Davison, com tell Me what is your rest
For you are one I know can pay it best.

Io. Davison, Rest said you Bialy: Marry God be lo'ed.
My Neighbors kens I get but little o'ed,

Bail. Behold that Villain rightly understands,
And yet unrightly answers my Demands,
I must speak Scots, Swingeor, let it be shawen
Into the Court, what thou art justly awn,

John Davison, My awen, I thank you little or nothing,
Was ever mine since you began to reign.

Bail. Gods pity, how can flesh and blood abide him*
The Rascal has so many holes to hide him.

Off. The Lord is lighted, for it is more nor Noon,
And asked at Me if that the Court was d^ne.

Bail. Entreat his Worship humbly to ^^^e in,
He Is come in time, I pray thee fellow (...).
Your Worship's welcome, I have (...) full near,
Your Bail^; Sir, I think this twenty year,
And yet such Knav'ry did I (...)
Under Pretext of plain Simpli^i^ie;
John Davison as each man hears and sees,
He cuts me off with Am^^i^ologies.

Io. Davison, I (...) a boll? or yet a Peck? No, no!
I rather baily brake my Leg in two;
God bless the Lord! I trow his Worship knaws,
I am a man that has no Happer-Gaws.
To tell you Sir the clipped Verity,
I had a Stagg, a bonie beast to see,
Our good young Master, the young Lord I mean,
In a good time, He coft him here yestreen;
Whose Price he said his Father would allow,
And this compleets my bygone Mail^s, I trow.

Bar. Pass from him baliy, for this time, I swear
If that I chance to live another year
I Will teach them better manners. Clerk, call on;

Lady, A word my Heart, you's go again anon.


Off. behold the Ladys tender Love: I Will lay
She Is feared her Son shall get a Blow to Day.

* Bail. We will be doing till the Lord return,
Let them make Moan who have best Cause to mourn.
Tom Tailour, answer quickly and compear,
What are you resting for your bygone year?

Tom Ta: At Pasch I lent the Lady twenty pound,
In payment of the Duty of the Ground.
Before you all in public I protest,
I owe no more, and this compleats my Rest.

Bail, Call for the Lord, I do not understand
This form of payment that is from hand to hand.

* Lady, Go Officer, round in the Bailies Ear,
That he would pass from poor Tom Tailor there,

*Bail, It shall be so, Will Waker, what say you,
It Is not your fashion to advance I trow.

* W. Wa. God help me Sir: I cannot well deny,
And ye^ I have my Summer Meal to buy.

Bail. Go Off^cer, and poynd his house with speed,
He Is not so poor as he does peep indeed.
I moved the Lord to give him something down,
Yet notwithstanding he will play the Lown.
Call on the Tennents of old Whissel-bare,
How now? I think I see none of them there:
Cause note them absent. Windy-walls compear,
What are ye resting for the foresaid year?

* Tenn. More nor our room can pay, as you well ken,
If you exact't, we are but herried men.

Bail. I cannot let these crafty Villains pass,
I Will tell you Clerk the story as it was,
The Lord that is dead, a Baron of good worth.
Whose Conscience did bear his Credit forth,
In all his Conquesses, and in this too,
This Town I mean, which they do labor now,
The same Companions did give up that day
The Rental, which they now refuse to pay.
Go Officer, and poind them, Man by Man,
I Will meet their craft the best way that I can.

* Bar, I Am come again to see how matters falls.


* Bail. VVe're at the Tennents of the Windie-walls.


* Tenn. The Windie-walls, a place and name most fit,
And so is seen on us poor men in it.

* Bar. I know your shifts, so did my Father too.


Tenn. VVe're in your will, do what you list to do.


Bar. It Is notour, that I lent you money here,
To pay your debts, and pay a stronger Feet?
I Am born to set you Land, so that you pay,
But not to entertain you though I may.

Bail: Call on the Tenants of the Over-town.


Ten. Here Is our Discharges Bailie.


Bail. Lay them down,
They rest nothing indeed.

Bar. Go take them in,
And with the best Ale roundly pack their skin:
These are the Lads that I may lippen till,
Go to your Dinners, Eat and drink your fill.

* Off. The rest, Sir Bailie, have Discharges too.


Bail. That likes me well, we have the less ado*
Unlaw the absents, and see that ye poind
The Tenants resting, as you was enjoined.

* Clerk. Sir Bailie, please, you have not ended all,
There are some bills yet of complaint to call.

Bail. Be short then Clerk, I cannot stay, say on,

* Clerk. John Dunkison against John Davidson.


* Bail. That John Davidson he is a pakie Knave,
He does molest us more than all the lave.

Io. Da. I never had a pack in all my life,
But one, I wasted wooing of my Wise.

Bail. Your Worship hears, who can abide his mocks?


Bar. Go Officer and put him in the Stocks.


Clerk, As also Baily, here poor Maggie Beans
Upon Will Waggrels heavily compleans.

Off. That is a wonder, ask at Sandy Sim,
For she did on^y love John Dick and him.

Bail. What is the matter? Quickly Me^g say on.


Maggie Beans, Will Waggrels is the man I plean upon,
He promisd me good Bear to sow indeed,
Yet he conceived me sir, with rotten seed,
Hold you that reason Baily?

Bail. No:
It is a common cause, none will say so.
What say you Will?

Will Waggr. I swear by Saint Muff
In all my Stack I had n^ better stuff.

Bail. Without all question you must pay her Loss.


W. Wag. I Will do no less, because I am her Goss.


Lady, Now for my Interest Baily I compeer,
We have a kid Thief to our webster heae,
A greater Knave lives not I think nor He,
Cause punish him and that exemplarly.

* Web^^er, Baily! Now for the love of God but hear Me.


Bail. What would you say? Stand by let him come near me:

Webst. It Is not so much for any Imputation,
The Lady has unto my Occupation,
As for my Daughter, who but went away,
Out of her service the Last Whitsunday,
Who at her going, when she craved her Fee,
The Lady locked a gown up privily,
Which was into my Daughters Keeping, so
Her Fee thus poynded, she got leave to go:
Judge you sir Baily, for I cannot read,
If this be not a crying sin indeed.

* Bail. If you be true, I think Madam you wrong him.


* Lady, I know as much, sir Baily, as would hang him.

Bail. Into this Ground he shall no longer sit,
Wherefore I warn you presently to flit.

Webst. Must it be so, for any thing I see,
My Bounty's like unto my Daughters Fee.

Off. Go get you gone in time, if you be wise,
Lest you pass to the Knowledge of a Size.

Bail. To speak the truth, good Servants now are Scant,
Their Fees likewise are grown exorbitant.

Clerk, It is no marvel, sir, tho it be so,

Bar. Tell me the reason, Clerk, before you go.


Clerk. Where Barons wont to keep some four, some three,
They snedded have such Superfluity;
One serves the Cure perhaps of little Valor,
The Lord his Jackman is the Ladys Tailor,
The Stewart, Cook, and Browster now are one,
All gallant Fellows to the wars are gone;
In one man's person this plurality
Makes men indeed to crave a larger Fee;
And Ladys Gentle-women (as they call them)
A world of Gifts must now a Days befall them
To sow, to spin, weave Pearline, and knit shanks,
To page the Lord, and win the Stewarts Thanks:
She must be rare in all these handy trads,
Cast off her Gown, and syne go make the beds;
At all Occasions she must still be ready,
Or else she is not meet to serve my Lady.

Bail. Clerk, by your Leave, I Will teach the Lord a Trick,
Requests you see instead of press go thick,
Offer unto some Captain two or three
Of Yeomen, men within the Barony,
By Violence e're they aboard be brought,
They Will rather stay and serve the Lord for naught.

Ten. Baily, Forsooth your Counsel ay was good,
An heavy Curse we give you to conclude.

Bail. Your Worship will take you for Me I trow,

Bar. Such Casualitys belong to you.


Bail. Sir, I request you for the Clerk provide them.


Clerk Nay, rather, sir, betwixt you two divide them.


Lady, Clerks ay were Knaves: Take up your books, and gilt,
You fash the Lord, your Dinner, sir, is spilt.

Baron, Up stay the Pleugh, and let Us kill a Mouse,
I and the baily must have one Carouse.

Vivet post Funera VIRTUES.

FINIS.

