A Golden Trumpet, Sounding an Alarm to Judgment: the sound whereof was never
more needful, though evermore profitable.

Dedicated and directed unto all the Elect Children of God, which truly repent.

Newly published by John Andrews, Minister and Preacher of Gods Word.

The nine and twentieth Impression.



LONDON, Printed for Edward Wright, and are to be sold at his shop in
gilt-spur-street without Newgate, at the sign of the Bible, 1648.

The Author to the Reader.
SOund to Judgment this Golden Trumpet,
Into the ears of every one:
Early be ringing here thine own knell,
Or sound to- alarm, for time will be gone.
Weep for thy sins, and watch for the day
Here of the coming of Christ our Judge:
Each day and hour slips quickly away;
No time is set, therefore do not grudge.
Make this Trumpet to sound in thine ear,
A day of Judgment is almost come:
Delay no time, we all must appear,
Now still prepare for the day of doom.
A Golden Trumpet.
CHAP. I. The first Chapter treats of the sound of the Trumpet.
AS Adam sleeping securely in his transgression, had great need of that Trumpet
from GOD, to rowze him from the sleep of sin, Adam ubi es? Genesis 3.9
Adam where art thou? So necessary for every sinful Adamite, (to raise him up
from the sleep of sin) is this notable memento, this worthy sound of the Golden
Trumpet.

Wherefore if ever there were a time for Gods Ministers to have their hearts
like the Lions, their face of brass, and their voice of steel, to sound this
Golden Trumpet, that they might boldly in the face of the Congregation cry, and
lift up their voice like a Trumpet with the Prophet Esaias, Esaias 58.9
to show the people their transgressions: If ever there were a time for
Jeremiah to cry in the ears of Hierusalm, Ier. 50.2.
to declare amongst the Nations, and to set up a standard to proclaim the fall
of Babylon: If ever there were time for Lot To reprove the Sodomites, Genesis 19.7.
for Elias to reprove Achab, Nathan to reprove David, Jonah to cry to the
Ninivites, or Jeremiah to wish his head to be full of water, and his eyes to be
a fountain of tears: Yea David, Esaias, Jeremiah and Paul, to weep for the sins
of the people; Ie. 4.19. Act. 20.19.
then sure the time is now. Yet, nothwithstanding the Gospel has been long
taught amongst us, the sound thereof has filled our ears, but whose heart
has it pierced? Eze. 3.18. Eze. 33.7. Esa 56.1^. Ier. 2.1, 2 Ier. 48.10. Ez.
34.2, 3, 4 to the 10. Ier. 1.7, 8. Za. 11.8, 17. Malac. 2.7. Eze. 3 4.10 18.
Mat. 5.21. Mat. 10.17. Mat. 25.26 2^, 28. Mat. 9.47. Luke 10.2.
Whose life has it bettered? Sin is sharply reproved, but iniquity still
abounds. To the brief, I need not complain with the Prophet of those greedy
dumb Curres, which feacute;ed themselves, and starve the souls of their
flock, but only recite Gods threatenings against them in a few proofs of
Scripture and so I leave them, for the Lord to require their blood at their
hands. For I may boldly say (the Lord be praised for it) that we had never more
preaching, though never less following than we have now: There were never more
crafty worldlings, and greedy Nabals, that love an ounce of Give me, more than
a pound of Hear me, than be now. O I fear, that there were never more that
have sold themselves, and their very Souls for lucre sake, than be now.
Wherefore I doubt not but the very iniquity of the whole world is come to
maturitie.

Therefore it is now high time to sound the Golden Trumpet, and ring it with
alarm, that if ever they will be rouzed from the deadly sleep of sin to awake
and repent, now: for, Qui non est hodie, cras minus aptus erit. He that is not
ready to repent to day will be less ready to morrow.

Oh now therefore, Romans 10.18. Pro. 11.34. Rev. 3.10.
while the Gospel sounds, now while Christ calls, now while he knocks;
let us now repent, let us take this present time while we have it? time and
tide staieth for no man; the time past is irrevocable, which cannot be
recalled: the time to come is full of uncertainty for it may be it never shall
come: Only the present time is, ours, but it is momentarie: O therefore let us
take and make good use of it.

To morrow, some will say, I will a Convert be,
O when tell me I pray, shall I this morrow see?
Let never wise man say, to morrow mend I will,
Who is not fit to day, is l^sse and l^sse fit still.
Wherefore, holy men of God urge still the time present? Isa. 55 10. Ier. 25.15
Gal. 6.10. Heb. 3.15 Psalm. 95.8.
Seek ye the Lord while he may be found: Turn ye now from your evil ways:
Do good while ye have time: To day if ye will hear his voice, hearden not
your hearts.

Thus the converted heart seeks the present time, Psa. 51.17 Psalm. 51.4.
be cause it is a bleeding and a tender heart; Acts 2.36. Psalm. 6.99. Psa. 119
13 John 2.17. Titus. 2.14
It trembles at the word, it is pricked when it is rebuked, and inflamed with
burning zeal when it is instructed. O then take hold of this present
opportunity so friendly smiling on thee, and repent presently: Let the sound of
this Golden Trumpet be ever in thy ears: For as our Savior Christ said of
John Baptist, This is Eliah, if ye will receive him; M^^ 2 ^4.
So say I, this instant, this moment is the time of repentance; this is the day
of salvation this is the time of grace; this is the acceptable hour; O
therefore embrace it. We read that the Ninivites were coverted at these words
of Ionahs preaching, Jonah 3.4.
Yet forty days and Niniveth shall be destroyed.

The sound thereof caused not only the Subjects, but the very King of that
City to come from his Throne of Monarchy, Jonah 3.5.
to cast off his Robes, to put on sackcloth, and sit in ashes, with fasting,
weeping, and great mourning.

S. Peter at one Sermon converted three thousand souls unto Christ; insomuch
as they were so pricked in their hearts at his Doctrine, that they came crying,
Men and brethren, what shall we do to be saved? Acts 2 37.
In another Sermon he converted Cornelius the Captain, with a great multitude.
Acts 10.


S. John Baptist at one Sermon converted both Scribes, Pharisees, Luke 3.14.2.
Publicans, Soldiers and Sinners, insomuch as all that heard him preach, Mused
in their hearts whether he were not very Christ.

Paul converted many in Asia, Romans 15.15
and also in Europe, yea in all parts and quarters of the world: Christ himself
converted so many, Ioh. 12.19.
that it caused the Jews to cry out, Behold the whole world goes after him. O
where is any such Conversion in these our days? What drowsinesse is in us?
What carelessness? Nay, what madness is in us, that we cannot be converted
with all the preaching that is so often and continually preached amongst us?
Can we not remember? Luke 13.9. Esaias 59.2. Nabu. 1.2. 1 King. 10.1, 2. 1 Chr.
9.8.
Is our memory so short? or have we drunk so much of the River of
forgetfulness? That we remember not what our Savior says plainly, Except ye
repent, ye shall all be damned.

Let us consider with our selves, and descend into our own Conscience and see
whether there be any Reason* why God should spare us, Mat 12, 42 Luke 11 3.
and deal so severely with others: Saba the Queen of the South came from the
furthermost parts of the world, to hear the wisdom of Solomon: But many of us
which live in this evil declining age, are so over busied with worldly
affairs, that they have little or no time to come out of our doors, to bestow
one hour in the Church to hear the Wisdom of Christ.

The want whereof makes many which neglect their coming to Bethel, Ge. 13.19.
the house of God, to starve their Souls in Bethaven, the den of iniquity.
Yea, too too many to become so godless, Hos. 4.15
so graceless, so roo^ed in all sin, and so fully resolved to live therein,
Math. 3.2. Esaias 51.12 Psalm. 119.8. Ier. 4.19. Ier. 9.1. Acts 2.3.
that if John Baptist were to preach; Esaias to cry, King David, Jeremiah, and
Paul to weep for the sins of the people, Yet they are so frozen in their sin,
and so wedded in their wickedness that a Leopard may sooner change his spots,
and a black Moore become white: nay (as our Savior says (It is easier or a
Camel to go through the eye of a needle, Mat. 10.51.
than many to forsake their beloved sins to gain the Kingdom of Heaven.

What shall I more say? If Christ himself came from Heaven, to cry unto the
people, for to repent in these our days, it may be they would let him say what
he would, but I fear that too too many would do what they list: All his
preaching, and all his wonders would no more prevail with the wicked in these
our times, than it did in his time with the Jews,

To conclude then this point, if any seem to storm at my harsh writing, let
them amend their lives, and not dislike these my lines: For I openly protest, I
fear none but God whose truth I teach, and hate nothing but sin, which is the
ruin and destruction of the soul. I care not for my life, so it were lost in
the defense of the truth: I look not for preferment, the world is so
corrupted: I desire not the praise of men, it is but vanity: I aim not at my
own good, but to set forth Gods glory, the discharge of my own conscience,
and the benefit of Christ his Church and children.

CHAP. II Of the shortness and uncertainty of man's life.
Man's life is but a pilgrimage, Genesis 4.7. Psalm. 3.1. Sirach 40. Psalm 1.
a travel, and a way: and he is scarce entered into the world, but he is
admonished to remember to depart out of the same, for all the world is mutable,
and of all the things in the world man is most mutable. And as our days here
are short and evil, we ought always to be prepared for the Lord: Benard
For Nihil certius morte, hora mortis nihil incertius, as there is nothing more
certain than death, so there is nothing more uncertain then the hour of
death. We are all tenants at will, and know not how long we shall remain it
this earthly Tabernacle.

All creatures wax old with this aged world; this is even the last hour, the
world cannot continue long, Gen 6.27. Psalm 89.
Methusela lived 969 years. If in our age we reach to 80. it is with sorrow
and labor. Thou have made my days as it were a span long, Psalm. 40.6.
says David, All flesh is grass (says the Prophet) and all the glory thereof
as the flower of the field. Esaias 39.5.
The old world had 120. years given them to repent, Niniveh 40. days, Gen
6.5. Jonah 1.4. Psalm. 95.20
and Israel 4^. years, but thou O man know not how long thou have to live.

Some are wasted away by wantonness as Commodus, Claudius Nero, Alexander the
Great and such like, Some are shortened by ambition, many will never leave
climbing till they catch a fall. This climbing by ambition cut off the days of
Absalom, and brought Haman to the tree. 2 Samuel 18. Hester 7. 2 Kin. 22. Psalm
54.5.


Some God takes away; because the world was not worthy of them; and some
because they are not worthy of it. He cut off Josias, 1 Kin. 2 1. Psalm 54.5. 1
Kin. 22.
for his soul pleased God: therefore he made haste to take him away from the
iniquity of the world.

He cut off Achab, Agag and Herod, 1 Sa. 15.32 Mat. 2.19 20. Act. 12.32
because they were vile and ungodly men, therefore they did not live out half
their days.

Some God cutteth off suddenly, Genesis 7.11. Ge. 19.14. Exo. 14.27 Nu. 21.6. Nu.
16.3. Act. 12.23. Lu. 12 20. Acts 5 5. and 10. Judge. 3.21. 2 Sa. 3.27.
in so much as they have not time to think on God, or once to cry, Lord help
me. The old world not thinking on death, was suddenly drowned. The Sodomites
suddenly consumed by fire. Pharaoh with all his Host swallowed up in the sea:
the Israelites gnawne of dedly serpents. Corah, Dathan and Abiram eaten up of
the earth. Herod suddenly devoured with lice. The rich man suddenly smitten
with death. Lying Ananias and his wife suddenly fell down dead. Eglon the
Moabite, and Abner the Captain were suddenly murdered with the sword. To
conclude, all Histories in all ages are full of the like examples*

CHAP. III. Of the straight account we m^st give unto God at the day of
Judgment.
TO draw every man to a better consideration of his time, and of his accompting
day, our Savior adds a reason why we should be ready, and always prepared
to render our account; Matthew. 4.
for (says he) The Kingdom of God is at hand.

What will move a man to consider of himself, and of his accompting day, if
this will not? when he hears that the same is at hand.

Mortal men in their accounts they make to their Lords and Masters, will
gather their Scrowles, Bills, Papers, and other writings, from hundreths to
farthings, lest they be found unworthy men to be put in trust with such worldly
commodities.

If mortal men have such a care how to make their accounts to mortal
Auditors, what care, nay, what fear ought to be in all men and women, when
they are summoned by the eternal God to appear before him and his Angels, to
give account how they have spent their time from their birth until their dying
day?

Here we are summoded to the high Imperial Court of eternal doom. The time is
come; Mark. 1.15
and the Kingdom of God is at hand. O Lord who shall escape amercing here?
Nay, who shall escape damnation here? Seek up your Scrowles, search the Books
of your consciences: we are called to the Court, where every man's conscience
shall be laid open. Wherefore unless we repent; that our sins may be blotted
out with the blood of Christ Jesus, the Lord will call us to account, the
Books of our Consciences shall be laid open, and every sin both secret and
known shall be brought to light: and not one sin shall pass, but all our
sins, both past, present, and to come, as well our rebellious thoughts, Rev.
10.12
as sinful Acts committed. Whereupon S Bernard says, Omne tempus tibi
impensum requiretur a te qualiter fuerit expensum: Bernard,
All the time that God has given thee (except thou repent) shall be required
at thy hands, how thou have spent it. There shall inquisition be made for the
thoughts of the ungodly: There shall not a wicked thought pass in Judgment.
Wisd. 1.9.


CHAP IV. Now follows the manner of this account. I. Who must give account
II. Of what things they must give account. III. To whom this account must be
made. IV. When it must be made.

FIrst, the persons that must give account, our Savior Christ expressly shows
us to be men. M^t. 13.36.
But I say unto you (says our Savior) that of every idle word that men shall
speak, they shall give account at the day of Judgment.

And S. Paul says, We must all appear before the Tribunal Seat of Christ, 1
Cor. 5.30.
that every man may receive according to his works. For as Lingua est mentis
interpres, The tongue is the interpreter of the mind, so says our Savior, By
thy words (if thou do well) thou shall be justified, Mat. 12.37.
and by thy words (if thou do evil) thou shall be condemned. Thus we may see
Christ's true and just judgment, how that first by the evidence of their deeds
they shall be accused: Secondly, by the witness of their words convicted: and
thirdly, by the testimony of their own conscience condemned, Thus all men,
none excepted, of all ages, and of all nations, Kings and Princes, rich and
poor, yea all that have been from the beginning of the world, and shall be to
the end of the same, shall appear before the Tribunal seat of Christ, and
give an account every one for himself.

II Of what things they must give account. Mat. 12.29 2 Cor. 5.10 Eccl. 12.4.
Wisd. 1.9. Mat. 12.37 Romans 4.12. 1 Pet. 4.5.

THey shall give account not only of every idle word, work, and deed, but also
of every idle thought: yea, every man, and every member of man shall answer to
his default.

The King must give an account for himself, and how he has governed his
Kingdom.

The Ministers that have taken upon them curam animarum, the charge of Souls,
must give an account how they have fed their Flock, and how they have lived in
their calling: The Magistrate for his Justice: The Master for his servants: The
Parents for the children, and every Artificer for his trade, every man in his
own proper person, must render an account of his Talent, be it ten, four, or
one that he has received. And so strait shall this account be, that every
member of every body shall answer to his default: the Eyes shall give an
account what they have seen: the Ears what they have heard: the Tongue what
it has spoken: the Hands what they have felt: the Feet where they have been:
and the Heart of man what it has thought. To conclude, both Heart and Body,
with all the parts and powers thereof shall be indicted and arraigned before the
Tribunal Seat of Christ to render a straight account, Tam de dictis quam de
factis suis, both of their words and their deeds.

III. To whom this account must be given.
THe Judge to whom we must give our account is Christ. The Lord commands
(says David) to judge the World. Psalm. 56 13 John 9.22.
S. John says, ^he Father, judges no man, but has committed all judgment to
the Son. Genesis ^8 25
And Abraham gave God the style of the Judge of the world. There it is evident
that our Savior Jesus Christ is Judge of the world. He is verus Iudex and
Iustus, he is a true and upright Judge? yea, James 4.12
he is a Judge that is able to destroy both body and soul in hell fire for
ever.

Iud. 14.15.
But let us note, he comes* not alone, but brings ten thousand of his Saints
to execute judgment upon all; yea, he said to his Disciples, Ma. 25.34 Wisd.
6. Acts. 3 19.
Ye which have followed me shall sit upon twelve Thrones, judging the twelve
Tribes of Israel.

Unto the godly he shall say, Come ye blessed etc. They shall both with body
and soul receive a glorious kingdom and a beautiful Crown from the Lords
hand: for with his right hand shall he cover them, Rev. 21.6. Rev. 7.1^. Esaias
15.4.
and with his arm he shall protect them, Because it shall be a day of
refreshing, when all tears shall be wiped away from their eyes, and all sorrow
shall cease, and they shall live and reign with the Lamb for ever.

To the wicked (Christ says) Go ye cursed.
But first let us note, M^t. 15.4 Mat. 7.17 Psalm. 9.8
that he does not judge them after the manner of worldly Judges, whose knowledge
may be deceived with false and Sophistical pleas; whose justice may be
corrupted with fear, hatred, love and rewards; whose anger may be pacified
with pitiful words. Oh fearefall and terrible will the sight of this Judge
be to the wicked: for his power shall be invincible, his anger implacable, his
knowledge infallible and his Justice inflexible. First, tyrany and cruelty
shall not countervaile his power: Secondly, benignity of pitiful words shall
not appease his anger: Thirdly, liberality, nor rewards shall not bow his
Justice: Fourthly, subtilty of advocates shall not blind his knowledge.

Whereupon says S. Augustine Judex ille nec gratia praevenitur, nec
misericordia flectitur, nec pecunia corrumpitur, nec penitentia mitigatur.
Neither is this Judge prevented with favor, nor bowed with mercy, nor bribed
with money, neither mitigated by Repentance: Therefore when Christ says to the
wicked, Go ye cursed, he does not only curse them, but he bids them go,
Mat. 25 41.
he sends them to Gehenna, that dreadful dungeon of utter darkness, that
burning Lake and most fearful Tophet, yea, to that hollow cave and Chaos of
all confusion, to that bottomless pit of eternal perdition: whose burning
furnace is made by Gods Justice, his power upholds it, and it is blown with
the bellows of his wrath ever prepared for the Devil and his Angels. And as
Christ says, Go ye cursed, his curse is paenarum inflictio, infliction of
punishment, which is twofold, Paena Damni and Paena Sensus, the punishment of
loss, and the punishment of sense. The loss of God, of his glorious and most
blessed presence, his mercy, his favor, his bounty, his beauty, his grace, and
all his eternal goodness, the loss of heaven, the habitation of God, and of
all his holy and blessed Angels and Saints, the house and heaven of happiness,
with all the unspeakable joys, pleasures glory, riches, and treasures thereof
for evermore.

The punishment of sense which is hell and all the intolerable, everlasting,
and woeful torments thereof. As the blessing of God comprehends all blessings,
so this curse, Anathema and Maranatha, includes all crosses, Mat. 25.41.
Go ye cursed, etc. They shall be cursed of Christ himself, cursed shall
they be of the Angels, whose curse is conscientiae cruciamen vexation of
conscience. Cursed shall they be of the Devils, whose curse is paenarum
executio, the execution of their punishment, according to that of the Poet:

Minos examen, Radamanthus dat cruciamen;
Tertius, beufrater terti aiura tenet.
One Devil rippeth up the examination, another Devil tormenteth, the third
adds one torment upon another, For their desire is revenge, their devotion
cursing, and their blessing blasphemy. They be in a Sea of miseries, and in an
Ocean of calamities; Fire flameth about them; the worm of conscience gnaweth
within them; rage, madness, and irefull indignation among them, ugly visages
of black and fearful Devils affrighting them; Sulphur and hot burning coals
under them: the revenging hand of God over them, and pouring forth the vials of
his wrath full of variety of plagues without ceasing upon them.

They have penury, for gluttony: extreme thirsting, for excessive drinking:
burning, for lecherous lusting: want for ill gotten wealth: outrageous
madness, for blaspheming: for oppression, utter desolation; and a fearful
agony for bloody cruelty.

And S. Augustine speaking of Dives, says, Augustines saying of Dives, Romans 7.
Desideravit guttam, qui non dedit micam, he would not give a erum, he shall
not have a drop: a just recompense: as he denied the least comfort to Lazarus
living, so Lazarus shall not bring him the least comfort dead.

And Seneca says, Nemini bonus, sibi possimus, as he was good to none, so (let
it be his plague) he is worst to himself; thus the pain for sin answers the
pleasure of sin. Rev. 1.5. Psalm. 1.7
Their torments shall be both comfortless and endless. They shall be dying
always, yet never dead. They shall seek death, but never find it. They shall be
burning always, yet never burnt to death. Their meat shall be griping hunger,
Mat. 13.42 Mat. 22. 13 Psalm. 11, 7.
and famine intolerable. Their drink shall be lakes of fire and brimston. Their
music shall be howling and roaring of foul and ugly Devils, with savage
furies accompanied, and with barbarous torments cruelly handled.

Thus Heaven they shall have lost, which cannot be purchased. Hell they have
received, Rev. 18, 2
and the place must needs be endured. And look how many sins they have set on
the score, so many kinds of punishments are provided for them in Hell. O how
many causes of weeping and doleful crying shall those miserable wretches then
have? They shall weep because they cannot appeal from Gods dreadful
judgment. They shall weep, because their pleasures have brought them to all
these sorrows. They shall weep, because they shall see their miseries are past
all remedy, and their repentance too late. To conclude this point, they will
then curse the parents which begat them, and the wombs which bare them, the day
wherein they were borne, and the Air that gave them breath: and will cry, woe,
woe, that ever we were borne, O where is that Dives that would not believe this
before he felt the fire of Hell.

IV. The time when we must give this account.
WE must give an account at the day of Judgment, when Christ comes to judge
the world. But of that day and hour knows no man, Mar. 13.3.
no not the Angels which are in Heaven; neither the Son according to his humane
nature; but the Father. But according to his Divine nature, he knows as well
as the Father. Therefore says Christ. It is not for you to know the times and
seasons; which the Father has put in his own power. Acts 1.17.
But as Paul says to the Corinthians, Seeing we are they upon whom the ends
of the world are come, we ought to learn of our Savior, to watch, Mat. 24.42
for we know not at what time the Lord will come. And our Savior seeing the
iniquity of the world growing so fast to maturity, says; Except those days
should be shortened, there should no flesh be saved. Therefore says S. John,
Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. Mat. 14.24
And S. James cries out, Behold the Judge stands before the door, If they
looked for it to be so nigh in those days, now sure it cannot be far off.

Augustine in his book upon Genesis, against the Manichees said, that the world
should last six ages. And (according to his prophecy) we live in the last age.
Eliah also prophesied that the World should last six thousand years, two
thousand before the Law, two thousand under the Law. and two thousand from
Christ's his birth until his coming to Judgment. If his prophecy be true, the
World cannot last four hundred years. To conclude, let us be ready always
howsoever, although this day be like yesterday, and too morrow like to day, yet
let us not defer our repentance. Genesis 3.8. Genesis 19.1.
For God came not unto Adam before the evening, yet he came. Although the
Angels came not upon Sodom until the evening, yet they came. And so comes
Christ to Judgment, although he be not yet come, let us not think he has
leaden feet, and cannot come, lest we find he has iron hands when he does
come. To conclude, if there be any one thing in the Book of God, from the
Alpha of Genesis, unto the Omega of the Revelation, that is able to turn a
sinner from his sins to come unto God by repentance, it is the remembrance of
this general judgment. This is that kept David in so much awe, I have feared
thy Judgments. I have been mindful of thy Judgments, Psalm. 119.
thy Judgments were always in my sight.

O therefore let us speedily repent that we may be unblameable before the Judge
at that great general day of Judgment; and be clothed with the white Robes
of righteousness, Rev. 19.8.
and stand in the number of those, unto whom Christ shall say, Come ye blessed
children of my Father; Mat. 25.3.
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world. This
God grant (without whose help, all the labor of man is vain) even for his
dear Son Christ Jesus his sake, our Redeemer and only Savior, to whom with
the Father, and the holy Ghost, be all honor glory, praise, power and dominion
both now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

