

THE Scotch Counselor.

Communicating his advice to all that stand well-affected in ENGLAND to King
and Parliament.

With a reprehension of all those who refuse to help the Lord against the
mighty.

ALSO SHOWING WHAT SHALL BE THE EVENT OF THESE TROUBLRS.

Written by reason of an eminent person in this Kingdom diserting the Cause,
and flying: and now published for the common good.

Imprimatur. Ia: Cranford.

LONDON, Printed by R. Austine and A. Coe. 1643.

The Scotch Counselor, communicating his advice to his brethren in ENGLAND.
Beloved in the Lord,
THE great comfort and content that we have received each from other these many
years, by the intercourse of letters, having been of late detarded, did beget
in me a kind of jealousy, that either your love unto me was grown cold, or
your zeal unto the cause of God much abated; or else I suppose you could not so
long have kept pen from paper: But I having now at last (through my
importunity) exhausted as it were a letter from you, I find as much alteration
in you as my former jealousy deemed, which has filled me with great
discontent, especially when I find you minded to dissert the cause of God, and
fly for your own safety: And that for these reasons: 1. In regard of the
Distractions amongst you. 2. To preserve your Estate. 3. In regard of inability
to help. 4. Fear of the enemies great power. 5. Unlikelihood of Reformation.


Surely these reasons arise from your own conceit, being suggested by the
spirit of Error; the invalidity whereof I shall labor to show you by the
evidence of the truth of Gods word. But before I come to your reasons, I shall
speak something concerning your flying. This counsel arising from your self,
may cause the Lord so to forsake and fly from you, that you may eat of the
fruit of your own way, and be filled with your own devices, Pro. 1. 31. For
there is a way that seems right unto men, but the issues thereof are death,
Pro. 14. 12. You think to fly for safety from the Church of God now in
distress, and so strip your self naked of Gods protection, and lay your self
open to all dangers. But if you will fly, Fly unto the Lord, for with him
alone thero is safety, Prove. 18. 10. and put no confidence in the world, nor in
any worldly thing, no not in Princes, Psalm. 118. 9. It is a sign you never
had love to, nor found comfort in the Church your mother, when you sever your
self from the rest of her children, (your brethren and sisters) leaving them
to undergo what danger you fear; and not purposing (if misery come upon them)
to yield them any help or comfort at all. O do not so, but remember what a
bitter curse was pronounced against the inhabitants of Merez, because they came
not forth willingly to help the Lord against the mighty. What a curse then
think you would have belonged unto them, if they had fled from their help as
you resolve to do? Recant then (I beseech you) this your wicked error, and
give no such evil example unto others: For if you may fly, another also may,
and so two, ten, an hundred, a thousand, yea all as well as you, and so leave
the Lords Vineyard to be destroyed by the wild Boares of the Forest without
hope of recovery.

The Idolatrous Papists herein outstrip you in their blind zeal for
Antichrist: They are so far from flying, that they join themselves in
association, holding and flocking together like so many swarms of Locusts out
of the bottomless pit, not only in our own country, but come also from
foreign Nations, and join hand in hand with them to work wickedness,
endeavoring by all possible means again to establish their abominable
idolatry in this Kingdom. O let in never be heard in England, nor published in
our gates in Scotland, that this cursed brood of Antichrist should be more
zealous for the Pope and the Devil, then the children of God should be for
Christ and his Church. And so I come from your flying to your first Reason,
which is,

The great Distractions amongst you.
Alas! This should be no reason to make you faint in your way to Sion. It is an
ordinary thing to see distractions both in Kingdoms, Churches, Families, yea,
in all Societies, the envious Man is always so ready to sow the Tares of
dissension among the people of God, though never so much bent to peace, knowing
that a Kingdom once divided, is half overcome, and cannot long stand in
safety. What great distraction and amazement was there in the Kingdom of Judah
in the days of good King Hezekiah, with the threatening of Senacharib, and the
reviling of Rabshakeh, yet we read not that either he or any of his good
subjects fled to any but the Lord, who gave him victory over his enemies, and
stablished his Kingdom in peace, wherein he rejoiced, 2 King. 20. 19. The
Churches of God were not free from trouble and distractions even in the
Apostles times, as you may read in the Acts, chap. 15. yet it discouraged not
the Apostles from executing their offices, and afterward God gave peace unto
the Churches. Great distraction was in the family of good Jacob, when he
supposed Joseph had been torn in peaces with wild beasts: and when his Son
Benjamin was left behind in Egypt, and also when Simeon and Levi had massacred
the Shechemites, Genesis 24. None of Gods people are free from troubles and
distractions: For man is born to trouble as the sparks fly upward, Job. 5. 7.
Let not troubles then dishearten you, but walk before the Lord and be upright,
and he shall let you see your desire upon your enemies.

Another reason you allege, which is this, The preservation of your estate.
Here you show your self to be of the mind of Demas, to love the present world
more than the children of God, 2 Timothy 4. 10. Oh far be this from you! How is
it that I hear such a thing of you? If I had not had it under your hand and
seal, I should not have given credit thereunto. Mark how the holy Ghost
teaches you a way to preserve your estate, Prove. 3. 9, 10. Honor the Lord
with thy riches, and with the first fruits of thine increase: So shall thy
barnes be filled with plenty, and thy presses shall burst forth with new wine.
Our Savior Christ also says, that whosoever shall give but a cup of cold
water to a Prophet, shall not lose his reward, Matthew. 10. 41, 42. And he that
casts his bread upon the waters [that is, upon the afflicted] after many
days he shall find it, Eccles 11. 1.

Me thinks these precious promises, and many more which I could here set
down, should excite you not only to be liberal in parting with your
substance to the relief of the poor Church of God, now in great distress, but
even to give your life for the same, as our Savior Christ has done before
you, Ephesians. 2. 25, 26, 27, 29. Do but consider how many of your dear brethren
in the kingdom of England have been so far from preferring their worldly
treasure before the good of Gods Church, that they have not only liberally
contributed thereto, but even sacrified their lives in the cause against the
enemies thereof, whose memory shall be recorded with the just, when the name
of those that disert the same shall infamously perish in oblivion.

Consider again, I pray you, the pestilent sect of Papisticall Malignants, who
spare no cost they possibly can procure either by begging, borrowing, selling,
pawning, morgaging, filching, stealing, oppressing, and all to re-edifie the
Synagogue of Satan and Antichrist again in this Kingdom. This generation of
Vipers shall rise up in judgment against all those that come not forth to
help the Lord against the mighty. And so I come to your third reason, which is
your inability to help.

To which I answer, The help that is required in such a case as this, is
fourefold, viz. either in body, in purse, in counsel, or in prayer: and though
I nominate prayer last, yet is it to be joined with the first, and also with
all the rest; for no action can be well performed without it. But grant that
you are to be excused for the first, in regard of age and other infirmities
attending thereon: yet for the second you can have no such pretense to excuse
your self, God having blessed you with abundance to do good, either in this
or any other kind, if your heart be answerable thereto. And therefore remember
Salomons caution, Prove. 24. 25. He that spares more then is meet, shall surely
come to poverty. So then if you extend not your liberality in this business for
the public good of Gods Church, you spare more than is meet, and God is able
to send a thousand crosses upon you to diminish that which you so carefully
keep.

And if you be not able in body nor willing in your means, yet be not
deficient by good counsel to provoke and encourage others, and join with the
Church in hearty and unfeigned prayer, and you shall see God will send as
strange a deliverance unto the Church, as he did unto Peter at the prayers of
the Church: of which admirable deliverance you may read at large in the Acts
of the Apostles, chap. 12.

Your fourth reason is the potency of the enemy. O let not this discourage you:
For though their power be never so great, yet the power of God is greater: and
if he be on our side, [as undoubtedly he is] what need we fear what power is
against us? Romans 8. 31. And although they say in the pride of their hearts as
once the Egyptians did, Exodus 15. 9. I will pursue, I will overtake, I will
divide the spoil, my lust shall be satisfied upon them, I will draw my sword,
my hand shall destroy them. Mark what follows, the Lord did but blow with his
wind, and the Sea covered them, and they sanke as lead in the mighty waters.
And therefore I say unto you as Moses said to the children of Israel, Fear
not, stand still, and see the salvatian of the Lord, Exodus 14. 13. For of this
you may be sure, the more they prevail, and the stronger they grow, the more
they exalt themselves in the pride of their hearts, to the filling up of the
measure of their iniquities, and the sooner becoming the objects of Gods wrath
in their sudden destruction. For then the Lord shall speak to them in his
anger, and vex them in his sore displeasure. And their lofty looks shall be
humbled, and their haughtiness bowed down, Isai. 2. 11. And as a whirl wind
passes away, so shall they be no more, but the righteous shall be an
everlasting foundation, Pro. 10. 25.

And as they are by their pride exalted to their destruction, so are the people
and children of God by suffering perfecution, affliction and oppression under
them, fitted for mercy and deliverance: for when the afflicted cry unto the
Lord, he delivers them out of all their distresses, as you may comfortably
reed in Psalm. 107. Be therefore faithful and obedient, and you shall have
cause (in your happy deliverance) with holy David, to say, Other men would
praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the sons of
men. Fear not therefore their mighty power, nor their cruel oppression, For
the rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous: but God
shall send peace on Israel. And so I come to your last Reason, which is,
Unlikelihood of Reformation.

When it is most unlikely with man, yea when it seems impossible, then is it
most likely and possible with God. I will give you two instances herein. In the
second of the Kings and seventh chapter, when the famine was great in Samaria,
and the Prophet prophesying of the great plenty that should ensue the next day,
that the Lord on whole hand the King leaned, thought it impossible although the
windows of Heaven should be opened; yet it came to pass according to the words
of the Prophet, and he for his incredulity was not permitted to taste thereof.
Therefore trust you in the Lord always: for with him unlikelihood is likely,
and impossibilities are possible.

Another instance almost yet in the memory of some men living, viz. after the
death of that hopeful young King Edward the sixth, when Queen Mary got the
Crown, and had established Popery in your Kingdom of England, there was then
little likelihood of Reformation; but when she had strengthened her self by
marrying with a Popish Prince, there was then far less: yet here was some hope
left, that she might have died without issue. But when she had conceived with
child, then there was no hope left at all. And yet even then was the Churches
deliverances nearest at hand, when the Lord turned the storm of Antichristian
fury into a sweet and delectable calm of grace and mercy, till now of late
some of that viperous brood are again sprung up to disturb our peace. But be
you faithful, and continue constant in all obedience, and you shall see that
God will yet again build up the walls of Jerusalem, and repair all her
breaches. And thus I conclude with the Apostle John in his 2. Epistle and 12.
verse, Having many things to write unto you, I will not write with paper and
ink, but hope to come unto you, and speak face to face, that our joy may be
full.

Edinburgh, Nov. 6. 1643. Yours to love and pray for you, Geo: Anderson.

FINIS.

