Of Episcopacy. THREE EPISTLES OF PETER MOULIN Doctor and Professor of
Divinity. Answered By the Right Reverend Father in God Lancelot Andrews, Late
Lord Bishop of Winchester.

Translated for the benefit of the Public.

S. Clemens in Epist. ad Corinth. 1. (...)
Our Apostles understood by our Lord Jesus Christ, that there would be
contention about the name of Episcopacy.
Printed in the Year. 1647.

To the most Reverend Prelate, the Lord Bishop of Winchester, Peter Moulin
wishes all health and happiness.
THat Honorable man, your Predecessor, was taken hence, not without great
damage both to the Church and Commonwealth. The King lost a most wise
Counselor, and the Church a faithful Pastor; but I a Patron and a friend;
who, though he was most careful and desirous of my good yet, obliged me more
by his Virtues, then his benefits. I have his Letters by me, which he wrote to
me when he was sick, and his recovery was almost desperate; the very sight
whereof does exceedingly afflict me. But yet my grief was not a little eased,
when I heard that you succeeded in his room, whose learning I long since
admired, and of whose good affection I had great experience, when I was with
you. Indeed, his most judicious Majesty did not stick long upon his choice.
You were even then designed his Successor, in the judgment of all who knew the
wisdom of the King. May it, I beseech God, prove happy and fortunate to your
self, to the Church, and Kingdom. May He grant you, with increase of Honor,
increase of Virtue, and a fresh and lively old age: That his most Gracious
Majesty may long enjoy you for his Counselor, and the Church daily reap more
and more fruits of your industry and vigilance.

I wrote a Book touching the Calling of Pastors, wherein some passages greiv'd
the soul of your most wise King, as if they were averse to the Office of
Episcopacy. But, indeed, on the other side, our Countrymen complain not a
little, that I undertook the cause of Bishops; and condemnd Aerius, who, in a
matter anciently, and universally receivd, durst oppose himself against the
Practice of the Catholic Church. And they take it in ill part, that I said,
that it was generally receivd in the Church, even from the first successors of
the Apostles, that, among the Presbyters of a City, some one should have the
preeminence and be called the Bishop, But, though there be many things in my
Book, which the King set a dash of his dislike upon, which, as all things else,
he observed wisely and with an incredible sharpness of wit, yet, Three things
there are, which specially offend Him.

The First is, that, I said, that the Names of Bishop and Presbyter are
promiscuously taken, in the New Testament, for one and the same.

The Second, that, I affirmed, that there is Order of Presbyter, and Bishop.

The Third, and that the greatest, is, that I Priority or Superiority of
Bishops, not to be of Divine Right, nor a point of Faith, but to be a thing
wherein the Primitive Church used her liberty and prudence, when she judged the
Preeminence of One to be fitter for the mantaining of Order and conserving of
Peace, and that Unity may well be kept whole and entire between Churches,
though they differ upon that point.

I confess, these things were wrote by me: which, lest they be drawn to a wrong
sense, or be taken in the worser part, take, I pray, briefly my meaning in them.

Names of Bishop and Presbyter were taken for all one in the New Testament: But
I thought not that the Dignity of the Bishop was less'ned thereby, since I
spoke only of the Name, not of the Office only: and I have (beside clear places
of Scripture) the consent not only of Hierom the Presbyter, but also of the
most famous Bishops of the Ancient Church, Chrysostom, Ambrose, Theodoret, who
took it not as a wrong to them, or that any thing was abated of their honor, if
it were believed that the Names of Bishop and Presbyter were at first used in
the same sense.

Order, indeed, of Bishop and Presbyter was one and the same, that I said: For
so did the Ancient Church ever think; and the Church of Rome thinks so, to this
day: although there be in that Church an incredible difference betwixt the pomp
of the Bishops, and the meaness of the Priests. Thence it is that in the Roman
Pontifical there is set down the Consecration of Bishops, but not the
Ordination of them. Indeed, Order is one thing, a Degree another: for men of
one and the same Order may differ in Degree and Dignity; even as among Bishops
the Degree of Archbishops is the more eminent.

Howbeit, that this Episcopal Degree and Prerogative is by Ecclesiastical, not
by Divine Right, I confess it was said by me. For beside that to speak
otherwise then I thought, had not been the part of an upright honest man, you,
according to your wonted goodness, will easily judge, that a French man, living
under the Polity of the French Church, could not speak otherwise, but he must
incur the censure of our Synods, and under the danger ((...)) of degrading, be
forced to a recantation. For to think that our Churches do err in points of
Faith, and in that which is of Divine Right were, questionles, to brand them
with the note of Heresy, and to shake the conscience of many weak ones.

Truly, I came very unwillingly to the writing of this Book, but our Church
requiring it, and lately enforcing me, for to stop the insolency of our
Adversaries, who in this point insult over us out of all temper, and speak of
us as of so many doltish mushrums, newly sprung out of the earth, and as of a
company of base fellows who by force and tumult had got the Pulpit. But,
howsoever, I think, I have kept such a temper, that, in defending our own, I
have not struck at your government; nor by immoderate affection to a part have
inclined, more then was meet, to either side. Nor did I ever mention the
Bishops of England with out due honor.

These things I thought fit to write to you, Great Sir, by whom I chiefly
desire my papers may be approved. I had sent my Book to you before now, but
that I was told by diverse you understood not French. Now I send it, because;
since you enjoy a more frequent and nearer presence of His Majesty, I doubt
not but He may have some speech with you about it, and use you as an umpire in
the cause. And I shall most willingly stand to your judgment; well knowing that
the most learned are ever the most can did; and hoping that you will not lauce
too deep whatever may be salved with a fair interpretation. So think of me, as
of a man with whom the Authority of Antiquity shall be ever in great esteem; and
who shall think my self sufficiently armed against al opposite judgments, if
you shall not utterly disapprove what I have writ. God preserve you, Great
Prelate. Farewell.

Paris. Nones of Sept. 1618.

Your Honors most devoted Peter Moulin.

The Bishops Answer.
I Had wrote these in the beginning of March, and was about to send them
presently; when, lo, the indisposition of the King, in point of health, made me
lay them by, and hindered my sending of them. This sickness, contracted first by
grief, for the death of his most dear Consort, our most Gracious Queen, and the
neglect of all care of his body upon that grief, ended at last in a diseas; a
diseas, indeed, so intricat and doubtful, that the Physicians themselves were
at a stand what the event would be. Whereby I forgot that I wrote, and so
omitted to send to you. For all I had to do was to fall to my prayers, with
many more, who were sore perplexed, as then in jeopardy, for a most Gracious
King. But God lookd upon us, and restord Him to us, and in Him us to our
selves. And now, being returned to my self, I return to you, what I confess, I
have bin too long indebted to you in; so that, as a bad debtor, I was fain to
be called upon, by Monsieur Beaulieu, in your name. You will accept of this my
too just excuse, kindly, as you are wont; and promise your self, from me, what
good offices one friend can do another.

Now concerning your Book. You write that some passages therein greivd the Kings
Soul. And no wonder. For his soul is tender, and very sensible of any thing in
that kind that bites or stings. For, out of His Piety to God, He makes it not
the least of His cares to tender the Peace and Order of His Church here. And
therefore, in His great wisdom, He presently discernd, whether these Three
points tended.

The name of Bishop is not distinct from that of Presbyter. The Order is not
distinct, that is, not the Thing it self. And so the whole [matter] is not any
thing of Divine Right.
What could they, who lately made all the stirrs among us, mutter more,
possibly? Then, that 1. the Name is taken confusedly. that 2. the Thing is not
distinct. 3. Finally, that it is a Human invention: being settled by man may be
unsettled, and so stands or falls at the pleasure of the Commonwealth. These
Dictats are too well known to the King: He has been long usd to them: They
have long since on all hands been rounded in His ears. He knows that there are
still among us such, as will from your writings presently take a new occasion,
perhaps, not to pluck up this Order of ours, that for so many ages has taken
root but, surely, to defame and calumniat it.

And this so much the rather, because, at one and the same time, not by
agreement, I believe, but yet as though upon a compact, lo, one Bucer, a fellow
not hurt, nor meddled with by any, in a very unseasonable time, set forth a Book
in Latin, as it were, of the same argument. What King, that studies the Peace,
not only of His own Church, but, which He desires, and would purchase at a
dear rate, even of the whole Christian world, would not these things trouble?
Wherefore, if the King set a dash of dislike upon those passages, take it not
ill: I dare say, He had rather set many asterisks of commendation, then one
dash of dislike, specially upon what is your.

This, surely, is the Kings mind; and is (as it ought to be) the mind and sense
of us all. Wherein I appeal to your own equity. You were for manteining of Your
Churches Government, and the repressing of your adversaries insolency: should
you not do it, you should incurr the censure of your Synod, and be forced
either to recant, or fear to be degraded. In this We pardon you, and demand the
like pardon from you; that it may be lawful for us also to defend our
Government, as becomes upright honest men. For we likewise have froward
adversaries; and there are consciences, too, among us, which we may not suffer
to be shaken or undermind, as though they lived under another form of Church
Government, then was from the beginning, even from the very times of the
Apostles. And we are ready, if need be, and occasion shall serve, to make this
good to the whole Church.

How I wish therefore, that you had not so much as touchd upon our Church
Government. For who put you upon it? You might have turned your weapons against
those enemies (you speak of) and never have jerkt at us. There Is no such
complication of ours with yours, but that you might easily have passed by ours
with silence, And A faithful silence has its sure reward.


Or, if you were so set upon it, that you must needs be intermedling with Ours,
how I wish you had first imparted your mind to the King: and, whilst the coast
was clear, had seasonably taken His advice in that you had to say of His
affairs: (for Ours He accounts His.) You your self know (and, indeed, who knows
not since He has wrote so much, so admirably?) that, as He is most able in
respect of his other endowments of Wit and Learning, so also, in respect of his
acuteness and solidity of judgment, he is equal to the best, or rather goes
before them. No man living has in our Churches affairs a clearer insight, a
readier dispatch, then he. He himself, in any point, but specially in what
concerns his own Church could have answered you best: and have set you the
bounds, so far to go, but not beyond. Wherefore, if hereafter you shall go about
any thing in the like kind, pray remember this my advice, which proceeds from a
very good will to you; I knowing that the King is well affected to you; that he
has deserved well of you, (nor will you deny it,) and, I hope, will for the
future deserve better.

those Three points, if you demand (as you do) what I think, I shall give you
here this ingenuous answer; That the Names of Bishop and Presbyter are taken
promiscuously in Holy Scriptures: that at first, there was not so great force
in the Words, I shall easily grant you. Nor did his Majesty regard so much,
what you said, as to what purpose; as what others would catch from thence; who,
both in other parts, and here among us, too, are not rightly affected to this
our order: that these things were spoke to this purpose, as if the Names being
promiscuous, the Things themselves were so also. For to what end is it, of what
concernment, to speak of Words taken confusedly, when the Things are distinct.
No man, lightly, carps at the Name, but he that wishes not very well to the
Thing also.

1. And yet nothing here has befallen Bishops, which has not befallen those
other Orders also. For, in those very places, in those very Authors whom you
name, it is said in like manner also of Deacons. S Chrysostom in ed Philip c. 1.
Even a Bishop is called a Deacon: whereupon S. Paul, writing to Timothy, said
to him, though a Bishop, Fulfill thy Deaconry. From thence you may gather,
that the Names of Bishop and Deacon are taken for the same. Nay, the very
Apostles themselves call themselves sometimes Presbyters, sometimes Deacons,
and so their whole Office a Deaconry; and yet is not Deacon or Presbyter the
same that Apostle. Why therefore did you not add that too, that it might appear
that the other suffered as much as Bishops: and that, in the beginning, not only
the names of Bishops, but of other Orders also were taken, in like manner,
promiscuously; whereas the Things, the Offices themselves were distinct.

2. Whereas, then, in those very places, where the Fathers speak so, [ That then
they communicated in Names] they presently apply a remedy, and give this item,
that the Things themselves are otherwise. And instantly add [ Afterward the
proper name was given to each; of Bishop to a Bishop, of Presbyter to a
Presbyter.] By the rule of speech then, who would urge the common name, when
the proper had taken place? For no body would now call a King, a Tyrant; or a
Soldier, [ Latronem] as of old they were wont, a Robber: neither, sure, would
they call a Presbyter, a Bishop; as when S. Hierom wrote, had he called himself
Bishop, and S. Augustine Presbyter, you know, he would have been laughed at for
his pains.

3. Add further, that in those very places wherein the Fathers speak so, before
they speak, they are forced [(...)] to object by way of exception concerning
the use of names, and to premise some what that should put the thing out of
question. S. Chrysostom; What means this? were there then more Bishops of one
and the same city? by no means. No, not then when S. Paul wrote. Theodoret; It
could not be, that many Bishops should be Pastors of one City. S. Hierom; There
could not be many Bishops in one City. S. Ambrose; God appointed several
Bishops over several Citys. So that they do clearly show, the Offices were then
distinct, when they make the inference touching the name. I collect then; how
ere it was for the names, at first; Be it they then neglected the Propriety of
speech, yet that even then, there was but one Bishop, but one Pastor in one
City. And this holds among us, even at this day; but does it so among you?
Thus if you had prefacd touching the Thing it self, and had afterward inferred
touching the names, (though to what end is it to make any stir about the name,
when we are agreed on the thing?) that they were (a little while) taken one for
another; and had not spoken so loosly concerning the promiscuous use of the
names, his Majesty would not, I believe, have set his dash of dislike upon
that passage.

Order. Where, I pray, consider, whether they be to be called One and the same
Order, whose Offices are not one and the same. But that they are not the same
Offices, even they who less favor the Episcopal Order do confess, in that they
ever except Ordination. Again, whether they be to be called One and the same
Order, wherein there is not One and the same, but a new and distinct Imposition
of hands. For, that in all Antiquity there was Imposition of hands upon
Bishops, no man, I think, will deny. And, whether the Ancient Church were of
this opinion, let Isidore be the witness, who Etym. 7. 12.
in plain words calls it the Order of Bishopric.

To the Schole, indeed, if you referr it, they do not agree among themselves.
Your Altisiodorensis, our Major, and others are for the distinction of the
Order. But they who are most against it, though they will not grant it a
Sacrament of Orders (the whole force whereof they bound within the Eucharist)
yet an Order they grant, since an Order is nothing else, but a Power to a
special Act, (as, namely, to Ordain,) which is competible to Bishops only. For
what a thing were this, if that, from whence Ordination, and so all other
Orders proceed, should it self not be an Order?

For we pass not for the Church of Rome, or the Pontifical. If they please
themselves with the name of Consecration, let them enjoy it. Even the Church of
Rome it self did anciently speak otherwise. For instance; The Church of Rome,
(says Tertullian De Praescrip 32.
) gives out that Clement was ordained by S. Peter. Otherwise also the Fathers,
(even they, whom you allege,) even S. Hierom, De Script. 2.
who affirms, that S. James, the brother of our Lord, was presently after the
Passion of our Savior ordained Bishop. And of Timothy; In 1. ad Tim 4.
Timothy had the gift of Prophecy, together with his Ordination to Episcopacy.
S. Ambrose; In 1. ad Tim. 3.
For unlawful it was, and might not be, that the Inferior should ordain the
superior; (to wit, a Presbyter a Bishop.) S. Chrysostom; In Philip 1.
For Presbyters could not have ordained the Bishop. For the Latin word,
Ordination, is agreeable to the Greek, (...), and is often rendered by it: nor is
any word more frequent, where mention is of making Bishops, then that of (...).
Theodoret; Oecum in Praef. Ep. ad Tit.
Titus was ordained by S. Paul Bishop of Creet.

But, you say, an Order is one thing, a Degree another. Yet you know that, in
Holy Scriptures, these words are taken one for another, no less then those of
Bishop and Presbyter: where the Deaconry is called, (...), a Degree; 1. Tim. 3.
13.
which, notwithstanding, you will not, I know, deny to be an Order. You know
also that it is so among the Fathers; among whom you may often read that a
Deacon, or Presbyter may, (...), fall from his Degree, and be degraded, no less
then a Bishop. Indeed, every Order is a Degree; but not every Degree an Order.
But both are in Episcopacy; though in one respect an Order, in another a
Degree. A Degree, as it has a superiority even without any power; an Order, as
it has a power to a special act. For, were it a Degree only, it had been
enough to have used the word [(...)] the superlative, which denotes a Degree
superior to that of [(...)] Presbyter, the Comparative, neither would there
have been need to fetch in a new word [(...)] a Bishop, merely to design a
Degree. For as touching Archbishops it is quite another reason: They are not
endued with a power to any special act: For even they, if they were not Bishops
before, receive their Ordination from Bishops: And, as they are Archbishops,
they are not necessary to the Ordination of Bishops: for, by the Fourth Canon
of the Council of Nice, Three Bishops together have power to ordain a Bishop.

But we very well know, that the Apostles, and the Seventy two Disciples were
Two Orders, and those distinct. And this, likewise, we know, that every where
among the Fathers, Bishops and Presbyters are taken to be after their example:
That Bishops succeeded the Apostles; and Presbyters the Seventy two. That these
Two Orders were by our Lord appointed in those two. Cyprian; Epist. 65 ad Rogat.
Deacons must remember that our Lord chose the Apostles, that is, Bishops and
Prelates: But the Apostles, after the Ascension of our Lord appointed Deacons
for themselves, as Ministers of their Episcopacy, and of the Church. Nay, S.
Hierom; Epist. ad Ma^^el. ae Err. Mont. Epist. ad Evig. 1. c.
With us Bishops hold the place of the Apostles. All [Bishops] are successors
of the Apostles. And that is a famous place in him; in him; and S. Augustine,
too, upon the 44. Psalm. In stead of thy Fathers thou shall have children: i.e.
in stead of Apostles, Bishops. S. Ambros, in 1. Corinthians. 12. 28. God has set
in the Church [Caput Apostolos] first Apostles. Now the Apostles are Bishops:
the Apostle S. Peter giving us assurance of it; And his Bishopric let another
take. And a little after. Are all Apostles? He says right: for in one Church
but one Bishop. And in Ephesians. 4. The Apostles are the Bishops.

this Order be by Divine Right. Very glad I was to hear it from you, That the
Authority of Antiquity should be ever in great esteem with you. I love you for
that word: Nor will it be the least of your praises, if your deeds make your
words good. For my part it has been my opinion ever, I was ever of that mind.

But, or I am deceived in the whole story of Antiquity, or the Apostolical men,
i. e. the Disciples of the Apostles, or (as Eusebius calls them) (...), they
that conversed with them, both they who are not mentioned in Holy Scripture (as
Polycarpus and Ignatius,) and they who are expressly mentioned (as Timothy,
Titus, Clemens,) were Bishops, while the Apostles were alive; and were
constituted and ordained by the Apostles themselves. S. Hierom. de S^rip. 17.
Polycarp by S. John. Tertul. de Prasc. 32
Clemens by S. Peter. Oecum in Prafat. Titi.
Titus and S. Hier. de Scri.
Timothy by S. Paul.

I give you these witnesses. Concerning Polycarp: 3.3
Irenaeus; de Praese 32.
Tertullian; 3.35.
Eusebius; de scrip 17.
Hierom. Concerning Ignatius: 3.3.
Eusebius and de scrip. 16.
Hierom. Concerning Timothy: 3.4
Eusebius, de scrip 9.
Hierom, Praesat in 1. Tim
Ambrose, Phil. 1
Chrysostom, Haeres. 75.
Epiphanius. Concerning Titus; 3 4
Eusebius, Praef in Tit.
Ambrose, apud Oecum Praef in Ti.
Theodoret. Concerning Clement: de scrip 32.
Tertullian, 3. 14.
Eusebius, de scrip 15
Hierom. Not to speak of Eusebius. 3. 4 ex Dionys Corinth. and 4. 23. and Hier. de
scrip. 19.
Linus, (z) Dionysius, Eusebius. 3. 35 ex Ignatio
Onesimus, Theodoret in Philip. 1. 2. and 1 Timothy 3.
Epaphroditus, Origin in 16 ad Roman
Caius, Calv. Institut.
Archippus; concerning whom we have the like testimonies of the Fathers. And
not of these alone: even S. Mark the Evangelist, and that while the Apostles
lived, who saw it; for S. Mark dyed in the Eusebius. 2 24.
Eighth year of Nero, full Five years before S. Peter and S. Paul were crowned
with martyrdom. And not He alone, S. James also the Apostle. Witness for S.
Mark, de scrip and Praef in S. Matthew and S. Mar.
Hierom: for S. James, 2. 1.
Eusebius (out of Clement and Hegesippus) de Script c. 2.
Hierome. in. 15
Chrysostom. in Gal 1. 2.
Ambrose Haeres 66.
Epiphanius. con^a Crescentium. 2.37
Augustine.

Could any then take it ill, that you said, That Episcopacy was received, in
the Church, from the very next times to the Apostles? you said too little: you
might have said more, and, if you had, Antiquity would have born you out; that
it was received from the Apostles themselves: and that they, the Apostles
themselves, were constituted in the Episcopal Order. There was nothing in that
passage of yours that any could be offended with, unless, happily, that in stead
of [ was called the Bishop] you should have said, was the Bishop. For we do not
contend, about the Name; all the controversy is about the Thing.

This was done, or we must give one general dash through all the Ecclesiastical
Historians. And when was it done? After the Ascension of our Lord: says
Eusebius. l. 2 c. 1. l. 3. c 5.
Presently upon the Passion of our Lord; so S. Hierom. de script. 2.
Done, by whom? They were placed in the Office of Episcopacy by the Apostles;
de Praes. 32.
Tertullian. By the Apostles; so Epiphanius. By the Ministers of our Lord; so
l. 3. c. 35
Eusebius, Ordained by the Apostles; so de script. 2.
S. Hierom. Constituted by the Apostles; in 2. ad Gal.
so S. Ambrose. Will any man then deny, that S. James, S. Mark, Titus, Clemens,
were Bishops by Apostolical Right? Was any thing done by the Apostles, which
was not by Apostolical Right? By Apostolical, i. e. as I interpret it, by
Divine. For nothing was done by the Apostles, that the Holy Ghost, the Divine
Spirit did not dictate to them. Sure (if by the Apostles) by the same Right,
which those Seven were by, Acts. 6. whom, I am sure, you your self will grant
to be by Divine Right: Deacons the Holy Scripture does no where call them; that
is only a word of the Church. I hope, what the Apostles did, they did by Divine
Right: and that it cannot be denied, but their Deeds (of which we are certain)
not only their Words, or Writings, are of Divine Right. And not only those
things of which S. Paul wrote to the Corinthians, 1. Corin. 14
but those other also which He set in order at His being at Corinth, (if they
were known to us what they were,) were by the same right to wit, by Divine, all
of them; both these and they from the Holy Spirit, all. And yet, though they be
by Divine Right, we do not say these things belong to Faith. They belong to the
Agenda or Practice of the Church; to the Credenda, or points of Faith, it is but
improper to refer them.

It Is very strange therefore which you say, That your Countrymen openly complain
of you, both that you undertook the cause of Bishops; bylike, your Countrymen
are enemies to Bishops; would not have their cause pleaded, but are desirous it
should be lost: as also, that you condemned Aerius, who was anciently condemned
in Asia by Epiphanius; in Europe by Philastrius; in Africa, by S. Augustine;
whose name, all the world over, is in the Black-Book of Heretics; nor
undeservedly, seeing, He durst oppose himself (as you your self confess) to the
Consent and Practice of the Catholic Church. You should rather complain of
them, who for this complain of you.

As for that where you would not have your papers to be ripped up to the quick, I
know no body here that does it. Should any, he would have somewhat to stick
upon in the very Title; take which word you will, that of Pastor, or that of
Calling. They are both novelties; the word Pastor, (I Am sure, in this sense,)
and Calling, too; and not of any Age, but this last, nor of all that. For, I
pray, who of the Ancients ever spoke so? among whom you shall scarce find the
word Pastor used, but when they speak of Bishops: 1. S. Pet. 2 2^.
which form of speech S. Peter taught them, when he joined Pastor and Bishop in
our Savior.

Nor shall you ever read, that they, by that word, pointed out such as, either
in City or Country, had the care of some few persons distinguished by Parishes:
For that the Presbyters ( Urban, or Rural) were by the Bishop designed to that
employment. Who, indeed, at the beginning, were of the Bishops family, and did
live, as you very well know, of the Sportula [i. e. of the Oblations of the
Church] before the distinction of Parishes came up.

And the word Calling (in the sense you take it) is altogether as unknown. In
stead whereof they used the words Ordination or Constitution.

And the very name of Minister is of the same stamp: which they would never
have understood to be spoken of any but a Deacon: as it is derived, indeed,
from, no other fountain but, the Greek, (...) But we must pardon you: you must
speak the language of your Church, which has no Bishops; another kind of
Presbyters, [ Elders they call them,] another kind of Deacons; and, I add,
another kind of Calling, then ever the Ancient Church acknowledged. I, for my
part, in my best wishes for your Church, and so for all the Reformed do wish
this, (that you may keep constant in the other points of Faith, but for
Government and Order that God would vouchsafe to you no other but that which He
has vouchsafed Us, i. e. by Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons. Such as those we
read of in the Histories of the Church, and in the Councils, and the Ancient
Fathers: unto whom (or self-conceit shrewdly deceives me, or) most like are
Our: most like, I say, in their Order, not in their Worth; but would to God in
their Worth also. And that no Policy, no form of Government in any Church
whatsoever comes nearer the sense of scripture, or the manner and usage of the
Ancient Church, then this which flourishes among us.

These I entrust to you, that, if you please, they may be with you. But know
withal, that I have ever been, both by Nature and Choice, addicted to Peace.
And my Age now requires it of me, who ere long must be packing: but chiefly
living under a King, whose Word is that of our Savior; Blessed are the
Peacemakers. And, I assure you, I shall never incline to any immoderate or
harsh counsels: but shall qualify, as much as I may, your writings, with a
fair interpretation. For neither can we bragg of our happiness, more then
anciently S. Augustine did, whose saying it was; What we teach is one thing;
what we are fain to tolerate, another.

To the most Reverend Father, the Lord Bishop of Winchester.
MOst Reverend Prelate. I sent unto you my Book concerning the Calling of
Pastors: and with it some Letters, wherein I endevour'd to satisfy you touching
some points, wherein I seemed to your most Gracious King too ill affected to the
Order of Episcopacy. Which Letters if you have received, I doubt not but you
will judge of me, as of a man who both thinks and speaks honorably of your
Order. I am not so proudly arrogant as to oppose my self to all Antiquity; and
to reject that as a thing faulty and wicked, which has been received in the
Church from the very next Age to the Apostles. I was ever of this mind, that
concord might be kept whole and entire between Churches, living howere under a
different form of Ecclesiastical Government: so that Christ be preached, as he
is set forth in the Gospel, and the Christian Faith remain safe and sound. But,
among the rest of your Order, I ever highlyest esteemed you, for many causes,
which I had rather acquaint others, then yourself withal. As a witness of
which my affection I send you this new Book, which the command of the Church,
whom I serve, and the impudent insulting of a Court-Iesuite forced from me. I
desire that you would be a means to pacify the Kings anger against me: That He
would consider with Himself, and weigh it in an equal balance, that there can
be no place, in the French Church, for a Pastor that should teach the Primacy
of Bishops to be of Divine Right; without which there could be no salvation;
without which the Church could not stand. To affirm this, were, nothing else
but, to damn all our Churches to the pit of Hell, and to pronounce the sentence
of condemnation upon my own Flock. Which should I do, you your self would
account me a senseless ungracious fellow, and worthy to be spit upon by all. But
enough of this: For an overlabored Defense, specially to an understanding man,
and in a clear and manifest point, is altogether needless. God preserve you,
and prosper your endeavors, that they may redound to the edification of the
Church. Farewell.

Paris. XVI. Calends of December. 1618.

Your Honors most devoted Peter Moulin.

The Bishops Answer to the Second Epistle.
THe Post was not yet gone, he stayed here a day or two, but he had these
letters, here enclosed, sealed up as they are; when, lo, I received your
Second, by the hands of S. William Beecher, Agent for the King, lately come
from you. I presently recalled my former, yet opened them not, but, as they
were, enclosed them in these. For I would not so trespass as to commit the same
fault again; but rather make amends for my former tardiness with the quickness
of this Answer. You shall therefore with my First receive these Second; together
with my thanks for both: but [(...)] the First Second, as it were; to wit, in
these Second Letters my First thanks now, and in the First my Second, (as it
falls out.) Thanks, I say, both for that your Book, formerly sent; and this
Later, shortly, as I hope, to be sent. For S. William Beecher will deny either
that it was bound (when he came thence) or else brought to him; and in that
consideration he came the later to me: but he bad me look for it, for that I
should not look in vain.

As for pacifying the Kings anger against you, believe me, you need not much
trouble your self. There is nothing in Him, which needs pacifying: there are
ways whereby you may more and more gain him, and make him yours: and it would be
worth your labor, if you do it. And do it you may, if you take that course,
which you cannot learn better of any man living, then of himself. As for me, I
gladly acknowledge that you are more moderate toward us, then most of your men
commonly are: and, the more you convers with Antiquity, will be daily more and
more: nay, I add, and much more would be, if your Church would give you leave;
and I would to God, it would. It should seem that she has transferred the
faults of Persons upon Things; and, for some abuse, has taken away the lawful
use: a fault which you should by little and little unlearn Her. You, while you
follow and sway with it, follow not the bent of your own mind and judgment; for
Iiudg of your affection by your pen; which was so well inclined toward us, that
it had wrote (and, I think, not against your mind) that Our Order of Bishops
was a thing received in the Church even from the time of the Apostles. And
indeed your pen had wrote very right: Mary, you blotted out [ of the Apostles]
and, in leiu of it, put in [ next to the Apostles.] But this, I believe, you
did in favor of your Church. And, indeed, that was very true, which you put in
[ next to the Apostles] but that not a whit less true, which you blotted out.
For that Order was not only from the Age next to the Apostles, but even from
the very Age of the Apostles; or else all Antiquity deceives us, and there is not
a Church History left worth credit. That all Antiquity is for us, you your self
deny not; and whether We must yield more to any present Church, then to all
Antiquity, judge you. If I know you well, the more free and ingenuous I am in
writing thus to you, you will love me the better: and so shall I you, if you
deal as freely with me in it.

Hear me then I pray. This is not enough for us, if a man do not reject Our
Church Government, as a thing faulty or sinful, for this is it We stand upon,
that it may be clear and confessed by all, that the Government of our Church is
such, as comes most near to the form and manner of the Ancient Church, or (as
you grant) that, next to the Apostles, or (as you had once wrote, and we
contend for it) of the Apostolic Church. And, that you are of the same judgment
with us, I doubt not. If then, by your Churches leave, you would once speak
out, you should do us a courtesy; if you may not, no discurtesie, if for the
future you would let Our affairs alone. For, that way you are in, it will
scarce be possible for you, both to please your own, and not to displease us.
And yet, though Our Government be by Divine Right, it follows not, either that
there is no salvation, or that a Church cannot stand, without it. He must needs
be stone-blind, that sees not Churches standing without it: He must needs be
made of iron, and hard hearted, that denis them salvation. We are not made of
that metal, we are none of those Ironsides; We put a wide difference betwixt
them. Somewhat may be wanting, that is of Divine Right, (at least in the
external Government) and yet Salvation may be had. So that you shall not need
to damn them to the pit of Hell, or pronounce the sentence of condemnation upon
your flock. This is not to damn any thing, to prefer a better thing before it:
This is not to damn your Church, to recall it to another form, that all
Antiquity was better pleased with, i. e. to Our: but this, when God shall grant
the opportunity, and your estate may bear it. If we do but agree upon this
point, in all the rest we shall not fall out. But yet we wish not a concord,
that is but pieced and patched up, but an entire, absolute agreement, without
any piecing and patching: which, we doubt not but, you likewise wish with us.

If any thing remain, I remit you to my former: (for we are here, now, full of
business.) These I recommend to your favorable acceptance: and so I commend you
in mine, and desire you to recommend me in your prayers to God. Farewell.

London. December. 12. 1618.

To the most Reverend and most worthy Prelate, the Lord Bishop of Winchester.
GReat Sir. I received your Letters, full both of choice stuff, and of the
testimony of your good affection to me. For although you seem to be a little
more moved then ordinary, yet that great sweetness, which you temper your
reproofs with, puts me in hope that your goodwill is not lessned toward me, and
that you will readily accept of this my satisfaction. It is to my great profit
and honor to be taught by you; nor am I so senseless as to contend with a man of
so great learning and worth. Neither indeed did I write to that end, that you
should write to me again: for it is abundantly sufficient for me, if you take
my Letters in good part. Nor are my writings of any such value, that they
should beget you any trouble, or take you off from your more weighty affairs.
If therefore any thing was written by me amiss, I am much indebted to that my
error, which has drawn from you so learned and accurate Letters, that no gold
can value, and weigh against them; which I shall keep by me, while I live, as a
most precious (...) and threasure.

Nevertheless, because you seem to me not to have reached my meaning in some
passages of my former Letters, you will pardon me, if I endeavor in these to
explain my mind a little more fully.

I said that the Names of Presbyter and Bishop New Testament for one and the
same.

That the Order of Bishop and Presbyter is

That the difference between Bishop and Presbyter is but of Ecclesiastical, not
of Divine Right.

These things you wish had not been said by me. And you bring many Arguments to
the contrary, indeed, learnedly and accurately, but whereof a good part touches
not me. Briefly of each.

You deny not but the Names of Presbyter Bishop are promiscuously taken in the
New Testament. But, you say, to what purpose this? Forsooth, you think that I
tacitly insinuate thereby, that the Things likewise are promiscuous. For no man,
likely, carps at the Name; but he that is ill affected to the Thing. And you
add, that the Fathers, in those very places, wherein they teach that the Names
are taken in the same sense, do presently apply a remedy, and add, that this
afterward was otherwise, and that the Names, as well as the Offices, were and
are distinct.

Here it is easy for me to prove to you that I had no purpose to abuse the
passivity of the Names, thereby to confound the Functions. For there I presently
apply the same remedy, which, you truly say, was applied by the Fathers. For I
subjoin: Libri de Munere Pastorali. p 20 and ^.
Presently after the times of the Apostles, or even in their times, as the
Ecclesiastical History bears witness, it was decreed, that in one City, One
of the other Presbyters should be called the Bishop, who for avoiding of
confusion, which grows oftimes by equality, should have Preeminence among his
Colleagues. And this form of Government was every where received by all
Churches. These very words were added by me there, which do abundantly wipe off
that suspicion. Could I possibly wish ill to (...) Order, whereof I never spoke
without honor? as very well knowing that the Reformation of the Church of
England, and the ejection of Popery, next to God and your Princes, is chiefly
to be ascribed to the learning and industry of your Bishops: some of whom,
being crowned with Martyrdom, sealed the Gospel with their blood. Whose
writings we keep by us, whose acts and zeal we remember, as no way inferior to
the zeal of the most eminent Servants of God, whom either France or Germany
brought forth. Whosoever shall deny this, must needs be either senslesly
wicked, or (as envying Gods glory, or foolishly besotted) not see at high noon.
I desire therefore this suspicion may be wipid off from me: specially, when I
take notice that even Calvin and Beza, whom they usually pretend to, as
abettors of their peevishness, wrote many Letters to the Prelates of England;
and entreated them as the faithful servants of God; as men that deserved well
of the Church. Nor am I such a boldface, as to pass sentence upon those Lights
of the Ancient Church, Ignatius, Polycarp, Cyprian, Augustine, Chrysostom,
Basil, the Two Gregory's Nissen and Nazianzen, all of them Bishops; as upon men
wrongfully made, or usurpers of an unlawful office. The reverend Antiquity of
those First Ages shall ever be in greater esteem with me, then the novel device
of any whosoever.

One Order of Bishop and Presbyter. You contrary-wise are of opinion that the
Order of Bishops is another and diverse from that of Presbyters: and to that
purpose bring many testimonies from the Fathers; who speak of the Ordination of
Bishops: neither do I oppose; for the Antient's speak so, indeed. And although
the Roman Pontifical absteins from that word, yet the Ancient Bishops of Rome
did use it. Leo. then in his 87. Epistle, which is to the Bishops of the
Province of Vienna, commands, I that a Bishop, who is not rightly ordained,
he displaced and, in the same Epistle, he often uses the same word. Now
between an Order and a Degree you make this difference; that a Degree denotes
only a Superiority; but an Order is a power to a special Act: That therefore
every Order is a Degree; but not every Degree an Order. Very well. For though
many do not observe this difference of words, yet it is best to use proper
terms; that things which differ in substance, be distinguished in names, too.
But these do not prejudice me at all. For you should have considered with your
self, whom I have to deal with. I dispute against the Pontificians, who make
Seven Orders; Door keepers, Readers, Exorcists, Acolyths, Subdeacons, Deacons,
Presbyters: but the Order or character of Bishops they will by no means have to
be diverse from that of Presbyters. Could I, disputing with them, use other
words, then such as are received by them? Could I deal with them about the
Order of Bishops, which they acknowledge not? Should I have inveighed against
them for not making the Order of Bishops distinct from that of Presbyters, when
our own Churches make it not? He that should do this, should not so much
contest with the Church of Rome, as with our own. Then to what purpose is it to
insist so much upon the distinction of Words? since every Order is, by S. Paul,
called a Degree. 1. Tim. 3.13.
Nor can a Bishop be deprived of his Orders, but he must be degraded, and fall
from his Degree. I pray, weigh my words well: Lib. de Munere Pastorum page 144.
Every Bishop is a Presbyter, and a Priest of the Body of Christ; and of these
the Church of Rome makes but one Order. It plainly appears that I do not in
these words affirm, what ought to be believed, but what is the sense of the
Church of Rome.

But here somewhat falls in, which may beget a doubt. It is confessed by all,
that every Bishop is a Presbyter: but a Presbyter is not a Deacon. Hence it
comes to pass, that there is another manner of difference betwixt a Bishop and
a Presbyter, then betwixt a Presbyter and a Deacon. Since therefore a Presbyter
differs in Order from a Deacon, it seems to follow that a Bishop differs not in
Order from a Presbyter.

Nor is it without some doubt, that you say, that Order is a power to a special
Act. For a power to a special Act is given to many without Order; as to them
who are extraordinarily delegated to the performance of some special actions.
Then you deny that Archbishops are another Order from Bishops: And yet an
Archbishop has a power to some special actions; as namely, to call a Synod,
and to do other offices, which are not lawful for Bishops; and which are not
permitted to Archbishops themselves under the Papacy, but when they have
received the Archiopiscopal Pall from the Pope. You, out of your great wisdom,
will consider, whether it be apparent by these, that the power to a special
Action may be conferred, even by a Degree, without a Diversity of Order.

The Third point is still behind: to wit, Episcopacy is by the most Ancient
Ecclesiastical, but yet not by Divine Right. You on the other side resolve and
mantein that it is by Divine Right: and to that purpose produce many examples
of Bishops, S. Mark; Timothy; Titus; Clemens; Polycarp; S. James, Bishop of
Jerusalem; all who received the Order of Episcopacy from the Apostles
themselves. And you quote a great number of Fathers, who affirm as much.
(Learnedly all, and according to the truth of the Primitive Historys.) But what
then? Why, say you, if Bishops were constituted by the Apostles, plain it is
that the Order of Episcopacy is by Apostolical, and so consequently by Divine
Right. This indeed is to make your self master of the whole strength of the
cause. But that Axiom of yours [ All things that are of Apostolical Right are
likewise of Divine] seems to me (by your good leave) to be liable to some
exceptions. Many things were ordered about Ecclesiastical Policy, which even
the Church of England acknowledges not to be of Divine Right, by not observing
the same. S. Paul in 1. Timoth. v. would have Deaconesses appointed in the
Church: But this fashion was long ago out of date. The same S. Paul 1. Corinthians.
XIV. would that, at the same Hour, in the same Assembly, Three or Four should
prophecy, i. e. as S. Ambrose understands it, Interpret the Word of God; and
that the others should judge of what was spoken: which custom is long since
ceased. The Apostles command, touching abstinence from things strangled and
blood, was for many Ages observed by the Ancient Church: witness the Apologetie
of Tertullian, chap. IX. the Council of Gangra, Canon, II. and the Trullan,
Canon LXVII. and there is frequent mention of the same point in the Councils of
Worms and Orleance. yet S. Augustine, in his XXXII. Book against Faustus, chap.
XIII. says that Observing hereof was generally neglected by the Christians;
and that they who were possessed with that scruple were laughed at by others.
You have, not the Apostles alone, but even, that precept of Christ himself,
Touching shaking off the dust of the feet, against the refusers of the Gospel.
If any should now go about to lay the foundation of Christian Religion, among
the Tartars or Sinenses, were he bound to observe that Rite against the
refractory? Such things as appertain to Salvation and to Faith were ordered by
the Apostles, by a Divine Inspiration; but in the rest they did often use their
own prudence; as S. Paul intimates, 1. Corinthians. 7.25.

Nor are you ignorant, so often as examples are brought of Bishops placed by the
Apostles, in a higher degree above Presbyters, what is commonly answered: viz.
that they had not that preeminence, as Bishops, but as Evangelists: of whose
superiority above Pastors somewhat you may have in S. Chrysostom, on the IV. to
the Ephesians. Which reply of what strength it is, I had rather stand to your
judgment, then any man's. Indeed S. Ambrose, on that same place, makes
Evangelists inferior to Bishops, and without Seas. Yet, however you shall call
Titus, Timothy, and S. Mark, whether Bishops or Evangelists, it is clear they
had Bishops their successors and heirs of their preeminence.

You determine therefore that our Churches do offend against the Divine Right;
yet so, as you exclude them not from hope of salvation: but do think, that, in
our Church Government, men may attain to Salvation: for this you brought in, in
your Second Letter, that you might deal the kindlier with us. But in your
larger, you liken us, in this point, to Aerius; who, you say, was deservedly,
upon this ground, by the Ancients put in the black Book of Heretics. Herein,
Great Sir, I appeal to your equity. Think with your self, what streits you
drive me to. For, if I should have spoke, as you conceive it, I could not but
necessarily accuse our Church of Heresy; and so doing, be forced (...), to be
packing, to leave my station here, and to provide for my self as I could. Nor
could I say that the Primacy of Bishops is by Divine Right but I should brand
our Churches, (which have spilt so much blood for Christ) with Heresy. For,
questionless, to be obstinately set against such things, as are of Divine
Right, and peremptorily to gainsay what God commands, is downright Heresy,
whether it concern Faith or Discipline. Besides that I should have overthrown
that Principle, wherewith chiefly our Religion defends her self against Popery,
viz. That what things are by Divine Right are sufficiently and evidently
contained in the Holy Scriptures.

I hear what you will reply. That it had been safer and better for me, to have
been silent in these points, then itch to be writing so unseasonably. Because
thereby it comes to pass that I must necessarily offend our own Church, or your;
nay, happily, both. And to tell you truth, I had rather have been silent: for
very unwillingly I set my mind to write; nor did I write, but upon command.
Arnoldus the Jesuit, the Kings Confessor, publicly and in the pulpit, before
His Majesty, inveighed against the Confession of our Church, and further in a
pestilent book reviled it, wherein he mightily insults over us, in this
question, and odiously seeks to overthrow our Churches Government: This book
coming to be sold all over France, through the high ways and streets, at the
voice of a Crier, did greatly scandalize many. Nay, before this, the Pulpits,
the Markets, the Court, the Streets, and the very Barbers shops, rang with this
question. This is the field wherein wanton wits sport themselves daily. How
earnestly my Book was looked for, which should stop that insolency, it does
thence appear, that, in Four months space, it was nine times printed. I could
not therefore shun this task. Nor was it possible to write exactly of that
Argument, but I must begin with the signification of the words, Bishop and
Presbyter; and treat of the Original of the Office. But here I took occasion to
speak honorably of the Bishops of England. * * *
I derived the dignity of Bishops, from the very infancy of the Church. I
condemned Aerius. I said that S. James himself was Bishop of Jerusalem: from
whom in a long course, the succession of Bishops of that City is deduced. Only
this one thing was wanting, viz. that I did not say that our Church was
heretical, and did trample the Divine Right under her feet; which, indeed, I
neither could nor ought to do; yea, had I done it, you your self would have
noted that want of prudence in me.

This may serve for the Three chief points: To which you further add this (...)
or corollary; namely, your judgment touching the Title of my book, [which I
wrote for France,] Of the Calling of Pastors. These words, you say, are novell,
and never used by any of the Ancients in this sense. I acknowledge, indeed, that
the word Calling is unusual among the Ancients, nor taken in that sense. But we
Frenchmen speak otherwise: for as many as have wrote of that Argument, either
Our, or Papists use this word: which, with us, signifies somewhat more then
Ordination; for it is taken for the Office it self. If I had wrote in Latin, I
should have given this Title, of the Office and Ordination of Pastors.

Neither would you have all Presbyters and Ministers of the Word of God, to be
called by the name of Pastors. For this word, you say, belongs only to Bishops,
(and that the Ancients spoke so.) If this be true, Worthy Sir, the Churches in
France, Germany, Lowcountrys and Helvetia, are flocks without a Pastor. But S.
Paul, Acts the xx commands the Presbyters of Ephesus, pascere, i. e. to be
Pastors of the Church. v. 17. and 28. And S. Peter, in his 1. Epist. 5. chapter 1.
2. v. The Presbyters, who are among you, I exhort, -- Pascite, feed the flock
of God, which is among you, taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint but
willingly; not for filthy lucre: which exhortation to diligence, and shunning
filthy lucre, no doubt, belongs also to the inferior Presbyters. Now to think
that they ought not be called Pastors, whom God commands Pascere, to feed the
flock, I cannot persuade my self. But, if the Word of God be Pabulum, the food
of Souls, I see not why he should not be called a Pastor, who does administer
this food. S. Paul in the fourth to the Ephesians, verse, 11. makes an
enumeration of Ecclesiastical Offices: God gave some Apostles, some Prophets,
some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers. If Presbyters who labor in the
Word, whom we Frenchmen call Ministers, be not understood under the name of
Pastors, I see not what place they can have in this enumeration of the Apostle.
S. Augustine, in his 59. Epistle, says, that Pastors and Doctors, here, are
the same. The same thinks S. Hierom, upon this place of S. Paul. Vincentius
Lirinensis, expounding this place, makes no mention of Pastors, but
comprehends them under Doctors, whom he calls Treatisers, who certainly were a
different thing from Bishops. But that Bishops only are Doctors, I never yet
read any where. S. Ambrose is so far from thinking the name of Pastors to
belong only to Bishops, that he even calls Readers, Pastors. Readers, says he,
are, and may be Pastors, who fatten the souls of their Auditors with Reading.
The term Pastor is usual among the Prophets: Prophet Isaiah. 56. 11. Prophet
Jeremiah. 10. 21. and 22. 22. and 23. 1. 2. Prophet Ezechiel. 34. 2. and
Prophet Zachariah. 10. 3. Which places whosoever shall weigh in the even
balance of judgment, he shall find, that under the name of Pastors were
reckoned not only the chief Priests, or the heads of the Levites but all the
Prophets and Levites, upon whom the Office of teaching lay.

But the following matter, and my earnest desire to satisfy you, has carried
me beyond my bounds. I have too too much abused your leisure. Yet shall not
this my pains be ill bestowed, if you shall take notice hereby, how much I
esteem you, how desirous I am of peace, how glad I would be that all the
Reformed Churches, who are united by one Faith, were also united by one and the
same bond of Ecclesiastical Government. I beseech you, Sir, accept in good part
this my ingenuous liberty, which truly shall never detract from that observance
and honor, which, I shall ever profess before the world, I ow unto you. God
preserve You, and grant You a fresh and lively old age, with the increase of
all honor and happiness. Farewell.

Dated Paris.

Your Honors most devoted in all observance. Peter Moulin.

The Bishops Answer to the Third Epistle.
I Never could learn this trick of sawing, or (which is all one) of tossing
replys. No, not, when my years were fitter for it. But now old age, which of it
self is a diseas, and yet never comes without diseases attending it, plucks me
by the ear, and bids me get me out of this cockpit, and rank my self with them,
whose whole business is Prayer. Nevertheless, because in this skirmishing, it
has happened to us both alike, viz, that we have not reached one another
meaning, I shall, not unwillingly, more fully and plainly expound my mind to
you, as you did your to me.

That which I first meet withal is but a slight matter; for I do not
understand at all, how I was any whit more moved then ordinary. Neither do I
remember ought of yours, that moved me more then ordinary; nay that moved me at
all; but only that you said, that some passages of yours had grieved the Kings
soul. That word [greiv'd] greiv'd me somewhat, I confess, and moved me more then
ordinary: Besides, nothing that I remember.

His Majesty had made three dashes upon your Book. Touching them you would
know of me, what my mind was, what I thought. I answered, as was truth, where
the King had made them, they ought to be made.

The first place, noted by the King, was that, concerning the passivity of the
words, (as you speak.) I said it was justly noted. Here you did not reach my
meaning; for you take it for all one, as if I had said that you thereby did
tacitly insinuate, I know not what. But that came not into my thoughts. I did
not say, what you did thereby insinuate, but what others would snatch at from
thence. For, questionless, snatch at they will, as if you did insinuate, though
you did not, as men are, and stand affected. I, for my part, do not deny, that
those words are taken for one and the same; and so far you are right. This I
deny, that those things which are right may all of them, safely, by any man, at
any time, be committed to writing. For you must consider, not so much what you
might mean there, as what others would snatch from thence. Our writings must be
regulated by that of the Apostle, Not what is lawful, but what is expedient.
See you, whether this controversy be seasonable at this time; and whether it
were advisedly done by you; and whether it be not expedient, (...), to cut off
occasions from them, who earnestly snatch at all occasions of setting novelties
afoot. Perhaps, I fear what is safe enough, but I fear though, lest, an
occasion being taken from hence, those stirrs unhappily break out again, which
seemed wholly to be made up among us.

Nor was I ever of that opinion, I never wrote it, that afterward it was
otherwise done. That was not done otherwise afterward, which was done by the
Apostles themselves. It is S. Chrysostoms: were there many Bishops in one City?
by no means. It is S. Hieroms: For in one City there could not be many Bishops.
It is Theodorets: It could not be, that there should be many Pastors in one
City. Of what time are these to be understood? When were there not? When could
there not be those many Pastors in one City? What, when S. Chrysostom, S.
Hierom Theodoret lived? doubtless, when the Apostle wrote that to the
Philippians. I could not possibly say then, that that was done afterward, which
they said was done, even when the Apostle lived and wrote.

I said, that the remedy was there applied by the Fathers. You say that the
same was applied by you. Applied, I grant; but truly, neither the same, nor in
the same place.

For, 1. their [(...)] their preventive caution was premised before they spoke.
Your [(...)] yours is but a plaster laid on, after the wound is made.

2. What you say by way of disjunction, viz. either immediately after the time
of the Apostles, or even in their time, that would not they have said so; but,
as truth was, without any disjunction, without the former part. That it was
done, in the very time of the Apostles, and by themselves.

3. Then, no where do they say, that any constitution was made about it. Nor do
I think you will ever read of any such [(...) or] constitution, in any History.
We read, indeed, in the Acts, that the Order of Deacons was constituted by
them: of Presbyters, of Bishops, there was no constitution: for Bishops were
formerly instituted by Christ in the Apostles; and Presbyters in the Seventy
Two.

4. Nor only, that any was called Bishop, but that he was a Bishop. For there
were no Titular Bishops then: they had their Name from their Office: they were
called what they were; they were, what they were called.

5. Nor that should be only with preeminence, but that should be invested with
power: power, I say, of Imposition of hands, of commanding, of receiving
informations, of reproving.

6. Nor only to take away Confusion, which is contrary to Order, but also to
take away Schism, which is contrary to Unity. Nor for these two only, but also
for all other ends, for which, we said, that power was given.

You see that the Fathers had another gates remedy for this disease: and that
those speeches of yours, It was constituted; That should be called; should have
the preeminence; are too narrow; and I add, by your leave, too weak and dilute;
nor the same with those, which are the ingredients of that medicine, which the
Fathers made.

But yet I have a mind here to put the question; If Confusion commonly grows
from Equality, how comes it to pass, that there is no need of this remedy among
you?

Again; if it be true, that this Form of Government was received every where by
all Churches; that, which was every where received by all, why does not your
Ghurch receive? why does She only run counter to all the Churches, which then
were every where? For that is a most true word, you said, and deserved an
asterisk of commendation, That all Churches everywhere received this Form of
Government. Nor were there ever, before this Age, any Churches, which were
governed by any other, then by Bishops.

Wherefore there was no cause at all, that you should go about to wipe off that
suspicion, (for I had none of you,) that you were not well affected to our
Order. I shall never be induced to believe it; for I cannot but give credit to
you, affirming it in your Letters, that your Countrymen complain of you, for
favoring and wishing so well unto it. Indeed, that you wish well, I doubt not
at all; but thereto I am more persuaded by your word, then by your arguments.

For here you slip from the Order to the Persons of Bishops: of whose Learning,
Industry, Martyrdom, you speak much and excellently. But there were, as you
know, of old, men that hated the Tyrant, but not his Tyranny: and why not now,
men that love Bishops, but not the Government by Bishops. Pass by the men
therefore; it matters not for them; speak of the Order it self. For Calvin
himself, and Beza, if they wrote to our Prelates, know, that they wrote
likewise to them, whom you call peevish: and that their Letters, which these
pretend for their peevishness, are produced by them; and thus they often reply,
To what purpose do I hear Calvin's Words, when I see his Deeds? For the Order it
self, if it be such as you would have it seem, the Bishops of England cannot
make it better, nor of Spain worse. I advised you not to transferr the faults
of Persons upon Things; and to unlearn your Church that custom.

As for those Ancients, whom you worthily call the Light of the Church, and who
themselves were Bishops, though you say much, yet you say not enough. For this
is not enough, That you would not give sentence against them; That they were
not wrongfully made; That they did not usurp an unlawful Office: These are but
terms of diminution, Not give sentence against; Not wrongfully made; not
usurpers of an unlawful Office; speak out, speak as the truth is, That they
were lawfully made; (lawfully, if ever any) and did exercise a most lawful
Office: That our, at this day, are to be made after their example: That the
same Office is to be exercised by all Ours: These speak home to the Order, are
nothing to the Men.

But, whatever become of those passages, I cannot but commend your conclusion
there; nor shall I stick to set an asterisk of approbation upon it: I would to
God that might put an end to the whole controversy betwixt us. It is this: The
venerable Antiquity of those first Ages shall be ever in greater esteem with me
then the new upstart device of any whosoever. O would to God, that Antiquity
might be more and more in esteem with you with all: for if Antiquity might
prevail, if these new upstart devices were discarded, then, sure, the Cause of
this Order could not be in danger.

His Majesty, and very justly, was at that place, where you contend that the
Order of Bishop and Presbyter is one and the same. I have showed that it is not
the same.

Both, 1. Because the Offices are not the same. For a Presbyter does not
Ordain; no, not in S. Hieroms judgment.

As also, 2. Because there is not the same Imposition of hands, but a new one
in a Bishop.

Again, 3. Because, among the Fathers, Isidore clearly calls it the Order of
Bishops.

And lastly, 4. Because those Two Orders were distinguished by Christ in the
Apostles, and the Seventy Two.

Here you produce to us the Title of the Pontifical; which is concerning
Consecration, not Ordination. I showed that the Ancient Bishops, even of Rome
it self, spoke otherwise; otherwise the later Popes. Among the Ancient, that
the word Ordination was most usual, and most approved.

You appeal to the Schole. I acquainted you, in what sense the Schole calls
them the same, or not the same. The same in reference to the Body of Christ;
upon which they terminat their Seven Orders: About the Body of Christ a
Presbyter does as much as a Bishop. You your self say as much: Of these in
respect of the Body of Christ, the Church of Rome makes but one Order. Not the
same; if you respect the power to a special Act, viz. of Ordination, which is
peculiar to a Bishop. This is not mine, as you imagined, but the definition of
Orders, all the Schole over. Nor yet that difference, which afterward you put
upon me: both of them are from the Schole; both definition and difference.
These things, if you would speak Scholastically, were not to be denied by you,
who appealed to the Schole.

But to what purpose do you say, that you deal with or, that you dispute
against the Pontificians, who will not have the Order of Bishops distinct from
that of Presbyters? And yet presently you subjoin: Ought I to inveigh against
them, ( viz. the Pontificians) because they do not make the Order of Bishops
distinct from that of Presbyters, when Our Churches do not make it neither? He
that should do this, should not so much contest with the Church of Rome, as
with our own. You dispute therefore against them, but yet you will not inveigh
against them: you dispute against the Pontificians, and yet you allege their
Pontifical. You dispute against them, yet your own Churches do the self same
thing. Nor yet will you affirm, what ought to be believed, but what the Church
of Rome thinks: which thinks the very same that your Church does; and your
Church, I believe, you would have to be believed. You do not therefore contest
with the Pontificians; for, I trow you have no mind to contest with your own.
'Twere against your Religion so to do. Nevertheless your Church, as you
confess, does the same thing in this point that the Roman does.

You say it is best to use proper terms, that the things which differ in
substance be distinguished in Name: and yet in the same page, afterward, as if
you were somewhat angry, you ask, To what end is it, to stick so much upon the
distinction of Words? To what end then is it, to make proper words, which are
made proper for no other end, but for distinction? If this be to no end, it is
better, trust me, neither to use proper words, nor to make any words at all
proper; for we must use the better, both you, and we.

Notwithstanding this, why do you reject the distinction of words, here?
Because, every Order (you say) is a Degree. What then? Since every Degree is
not an Order, if we will use proper words. Deaconry, in S. Paul, is a Degree;
and the same is an Order with all men. But Archdeaconship is a new Degree, and
yet no Order. Nor can a Bishop be outed of his Order, but he must be degraded
(say you) or fall from his Order. Yea, but he may be degraded, though he be not
outed of his Order; for of his Order he can no way be outed. For after (that,
which they call) Degradation, there remains a power to the Acts of his Order:
the use of which power may be inhibited; the power it self cannot be taken away.

But here some scruples arise in your mind. The First is: that every Bishop is
a Presbyter: very true that, and confessed by all. But a Presbyter, you say, is
not a Deacon. Among you, happily, he is not, according to your novell device: But
with that Reverend Antiquity (which you speak of) he is: Nay, then, a Bishop
himself is a Deacon: Read S. Chrysostom, Even a Bishop was called a Deacon;
whereupon S. Paul, writing to Timothy, said, Fulfill thy Deaconry; to him, being
a Bishop. Whence also it is, that many Bishops now adays write, to my
Fellow-Presbyter, to my Fellow-Deacon. Read S. Ambrose, on the 4. to the
Ephesians. For all Orders are in a Bishop; because he is the first Priest, i.
e. the Prince of Priests. And, on the 1. to the Corinth: 12. Though Apostles be
Prophets too; for the first Degree has all other under it. I may truly
therefore infer the contrary; Seeing a Bishop differs not from a Presbyter, by
any other way of difference, then a Presbyter does from a Deacon; But a
Presbyter differs from a Deacon in his Order; therefore it is agreeable, that a
Bishop differ from a Presbyter in his Order. This ever seemed agreeable to the
consent of Antiquity. I wonder that these things escaped you; for I dare not
suspect, that what are so obvious to all are unknown to you. But the Deaconry,
in use among you, deceived you; a mere stranger it, I speak it boldly, to all
Antiquity (with whom Deacons were ever one part of the Clergy.)

The Second scruple. That Order is a power to a special Act, I say not of
myself; the whole Schole says so; it is the definition of Order received in
the Schools: speak you, if you have another; for I remember not that I have any
where read of any other. Your scruple here arises from them, who (say you) are
extraordinarily delegated to the performance of certain Acts. I rejoin: What
have they who are delegated without Order, to do with Order? The very word
Order requires that this be understood of ordinary power.

The Third Scruple. An Archbishop has a power to a special Act. What Act? To
call a Synod. I eas you of this scruple also. This Act is not special to an
Archbishop: for a Bishop exercises the same Act: He does as much call a Synod
in his Diocese, as the other does in his Province. Though, if we will speak
truly, the calling of Synods is a special Act to neither of them, but is by
Delegation from the Prince; by whose Laws there is special provision against
unlawful Assemblys. You, in your wisdom, see, that nothing appears here, why
either by a Degree any Power may be conferd, or by an Order may not be conferd.

The Third dash of dislike was upon your denying Episcopacy you grant it to be
of Apostolical. But that serves not you to make it be of Divine Right. No, not
among us, who do not observe certain things which were appointed by the
Apostles.

For, 1. not Widows. I read of no command there for the appointing of Widows:
but for Ephesus, and those Churches, which had Widows, there is a command
touching their Age. The institution of Widows, was left free to every Church.
For none were to mantein Widows, unless they would; and, indeed, they could not
be manteined among the poorer.

Not, 2. that Custom for three or four to prophecy at one hour. But that Custom
was, clearly, extraordinary; and the extraordinary gifts ceasing, that ceased
too.

Not, 3. to abstein from things strangled, and blood. Yea, but that was
temporary, not appointed by the Apostles, with any other intention, then, to be
in force, during the non-burial of the Synagoge; the Synagoge once buried, to
be free, to observe or not.

So your first instance was, not necessary; your second, not ordinary; your
third, temporary, not perpetual. These do not make a Divine Right.

But, that the Precepts of the Apostles may not be of Divine Right, you will
not have that of Christ, touching shaking off the dust of their feet, to be so,
neither. But, in truth, this is no Precept; but, if a Precept, of Divine Right.
For, I hope, you will not say that Christ commanded this, using his Prudence,
without Divine inspiration. No man ever understood that, (...), according to
the Letter; and that upon this ground; because it was sometime observed,
sometime altered, sometime quite omitted: not according to the Letter, I say,
but, (...), according to the mind of the speaker. Whose mind was, that such
were to be given for desperate, whether with or without using the Ceremony.

But, be more sparing, I pray, of that point, of the Apostles oftimes using
their prudence. For it cannot be said or writ without great danger, that the
Apostles in some things had Divine Inspiration, in the rest did often use their
own prudence; and that in their writings which are extant. For even that very
place, where (...) is, according to my judgment, you know, is concluded with
[(...)] But I think also that I have the Spirit of God. so that his very (...),
his judgment had the dictate thereof, from the Spirit of God. As for that place,
which you quote, if it were not written by Divine inspiration, but by humane
prudence, we are to score it for Apocryphal. How then? are we for making an
Index, and for Expurging the New Testament? For separate we must the precious
from the vile. What were dictated by humane prudence will never stand in
conjunction with those which were by Divine inspiration.

But, although there be weight enough to confirm this cause, from the Right and
manner of the Apostles, yet, you may remember, that I derived this distinction
of Orders higher, viz. from Christ our Savior in the Apostles, and Seventy-Two
Disciples. That it is every where among the Fathers, and clearly confessed by
them, that Bishops succeeded the Apostles, and Presbyters the seventy Two. I
cited Cyprian; But Deacons must remember, how our Lord chose Apostles, i. e.
Bishops and Prelates; but the Apostles, after the Ascension of our Lord,
appointed to themselves Deacons, as ministers of their Episcopacy, and of the
Church. That those Seven were instituted, Acts VI. by the Apostles; but no
Presbyters, but after the example of the Seventy Two; nor Bishops, but after
their own pattern. This Order therefore has the strength and sinews thereof, not
only from the Apostles, but even from our Savior himself.

Would you have me fetch it yet higher? even out of the Old Testament, and
there from the Divine Law it self? S. Hierom does: And that we may know that
the Apostolical traditions were taken out of the Old Testament; what Aaron, and
his Sons, and the Levites were in the Temple, that do Bishops, Presbyters, and
Deacons challeng to themselves in the Church. S. Ambrose does, in both those
places, 1. Corinthians. 12. and Ephesians. 4. speaking of the Jews. Whose tradition,
says he, has passed over to us. I omit Aaron; lest you should reject him, as
a Type of Christ. Over his Sons, the Priests, was there not in their several
families (...). i. e. a Prelate; or, as is said Number 4 16 Neh 11 9 P. Isai. 60
17.
elsewhere, (...) i. e. a Bishop. Over the Gersonites. Number. 3. 24. Over the
Kohathites. verse. 30. Over the Merarites. verse 35. Was not Eleazar there, even
while his Father was alive, (...), as if you would say, Prelate of Prelates.
verse 32. Who is elsewhere called (...) as if you would say, Archbishop. There
are therefore in the Law, (...), i. e. Prelates or Bishops, Priests, and
Levites: In the Gospel, The Apostles, the Seventy Two, and those Seven, Acts
VI. In the Apostles practice, which was taken from those Two [the Law and
Gospel] Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons. But do not, do not think, that this was
by Apostolical Right alone; if there be in the Gospel, if in the Law, any
Divine Right, this Government is not without example in both, it is founded on
both. Either then there is no Divine Right in the form of Church Government,
and then welfare Amsterdam, where so many humane prudences as there are, so
many forms of Government shall be set up. Or, if there be any Divine Right, it
is in Those Three, it is for us.

And now to your skirmishes of lighter consideration. That I know, what uses
to be answered, by the Vulgar, concerning Timothy and Titus. Add this too, that
I know, that many things are ill answered by the Vulgar. But what is answered
by the Vulgar? that they were Evangelists. Who affirms this? either the Vulgar,
or they that, out of some man's novel device, have spread these doubtful
speeches among the Vulgar. For none of the Ancients ever spoke so; no History
can witness it. But History does witness, that Timothy and Titus were Bishops.
Epiphanius, Chrysostom, Ambrose, Hierom, Theodoret say it. That they were
Evangelists no man ever said, wrote, or dreamed, before our Age. This Vulgar
answer is a Vulgar forgery.

Therefore, whether Evangelists were superior or inferior to Bishops, it is
nothing to us; since these, by no means, were Evangelists. Who says so? S.
Chrysostom. But I am to mind you, that he corrects what he had spoken, with
some diffidence, there, concerning Evangelists. For that nothing can be
collected out of that place, Ephesians. 4. concerning the Priority of any. But we
may fetch it from another Epistle. 1. Corinthians. 12. 28. where we have, (...)
first, second, third: But Evangelists appear not there. Besides that they, whom
you, with the Vulgar, would have to be counted Evangelists ( Timothy, and
Titus) are from thence placed among the Pastors, (...), entrusted with the care
of their several Provinces, and in general of all, but not among Evangelists.
Aquila and Priscilla are to him Evangelists: that I cannot but wonder, what you
meant to mention that place. For, from that place of S. Paul. 2. Timoth. 4. 5.
if you will hear S. Chrysostom, you shall as soon make Timothy but a Deacon,
from the fulfilling [(...)] of the Deaconship, as an Evangelist, from the work
of an Evangelist. Do not you therefore make such a disjunction, either Bishop,
or Evangelist. Evangelists they were never reputed by any, but some, I know not
who, two or three days ago, whom any upstart device pleases better, then
reverend Antiquity. Do we give credit to Antiquity? They were Bishops, they had
Bishops their successors, their heirs both in Superiority and Power.

You demand then, Whether your Churches sin against the Divine Right? I did not
say it; this only I said, that your Churches wanted somewhat that is of Divine
Right: wanted, but not by your fault, but by the iniquity of the times. For
that your France had not your Kings so propitious at the reforming of your
Church, as our England had: in the interim, when God shall vouchsafe you better
times, even this, which now you want, will, by his grace, be supplied. But, in
the mean while, the Name of Bishop, which we find so frequent in the
Scriptures, ought not to have been abolished by you. Though to what purpose is
it to abolish the Name, and to retein the Thing? (For even you retein the
Thing, without the Title; and they Two, whom you named, while they lived, what
were they, but Bishops in Deed, though not in Name) seeing, as he in the Poet
says excellently, there is scarce any man that would wish (...).
To be a Tyrant, and not to tyrannize.


That Aerius was put in the black book of Heretics (and worthily) whosoever
shall believe Epiphanius, Philastrius, or S. Augustine, must needs confess. And
you that condemn Aerius, upon what consideration do you condemn him? What,
because he opposed himself to the consent of the Catholic Church? He that is
of the same opinion does not he also oppose himself? and is to be condemned
upon the same consideration? But, if there be any error, so it be not with
obstinacy of mind, though he think as Aerius did, his cause will be far from
what the cause of Aerius was. Do not you therefore betake yourself to those
tragical expressions of damning to the pit of Hell, of giving sentence of
damnation against your Church, as against her that treads under foot the Divine
Right. There Is no necessity of that. Weigh only calmly what is spoken. To vote
that a thing were so, is not to devote, if it be not. A wish is no sentence of
damnation. To want somewhat that is of Divine Right, is not to tread under foot
the Divine Right. Let but obstinacy and perverseness be wanting, it will be no
heresy. And, if it be heresy, (being about a point of Discipline) it will not
be among those, which S. Peter calls (...), damnable heresies.

But far be it from me that I should drive you to any streits. For neither
would I have you hold your peace, being so provoked by the Jesuit. Nay, but
write, by all means write: but yet, when you write, so mantein your own, that
you pinch not upon, I say not, other men's matters which belong not to you; yes,
which somewhat concern you: (for our affairs are not mere strangers to you.)
And, see, here is a larg field for you, wherein you may show the sharpness of
your, wit, (which indeed is excellent.) But do not, do not hope that you can
(...), play on both sides. Your own will complain of you; Ours need no such
defense; So you will loose the thanks of either side.

But, although these things be evidently enough contained in Holy Scriptures,
to any whose eye is single, yet is not that Principle so, as you have laid it.
For, not what belong to Divine Right, but what belong to Faith, and Good
manners [are evidently enough contained.] But these are not adaequate to Divine
Right.

Howbeit, you might well, you might have wrote (as you speak) exactly, had you
begun, not where the words were promiscuous, but, where the Things being always
distinct, the signification of the words began likewise to be distinct. It was
possible for you to have absteined from words aequivocal, confused, and
promiscuously taken; nor did any necessity enforce you to begin there.

You might also have balk'd all occasion of diverting to us. Your design was
touching Bishops: you were to treat of them, and of the Office it self. Of the
Bishops of England to what purpose? Does England make that lawful, which out
of England is unlawful? The abuses of men, wherever they are, must be taxed:
the office it self, in what country soever, is the same; of it self, in it
self, by it self lawful: Nor, if the Bishops be not good, is the Office of
Bishops not good: Yea but let the Office of Bishops be, let Them be no Bishops,
unless they make good their Name.

But here, I know, the King would set an asterisk of approbation. When you
derive Episcopacy from the very infancy of the Church. When you acknowledge S.
James to be Bishop of Jerusalem; and a long succession of Bishops, there,
derived from him. When now again you condemn Aerius. * * *
See, you have Three asterisks for the Three dashes. For these things are most
true; and according to the judgment of the Ancients, even of Irenaeus, who
leads the train of the Ancients. The true profession is the doctrine of the
Apostles; and the ancient state of the Church, through the while world, is
according to the succession of Bishops, to whom They delivered that Church,
which is in every place; which has reached even unto us.

Somewhat I added, afterward, concerning the novel, upstart name of Calling: and
so of Pastors; (as they are now in use with you.) Touching that of Calling, you
do not deny but that it is unusual: you used, I suppose a (...), the figure of
extenution; for it is so unusual, that it is not at all. Calling, indeed, is
sometime used for the Office; for Ordination, never. But neither do you deny
what I observed touching that word, Pastors. Nor do you produce any, either
among those Ancients, or the later Writers, before our Age, that was so called,
viz. a Pastor, who was not, indeed, a Bishop. Only, I know not how, you heap up
many things together, but all beside the matter: that you seem not in them
neither to have reached my meaning. For, what if I grant all that you allege?
That your flocks are not without a Pastor; (as it seems good to you to style
him:) That all you say out of S. Paul, S. Peter, the Prophets is true: What are
these to me? who only say that the Ancients spoke thus; that that other name is
not from Antiquity. I recall you therefore to this; That, among the Ancient
Christians in former ages, you show me out of their writings, where the word
Pastor was ever used, and they spoke not of the Bishop: or, that it was used
(as with you it is) of a Parish Priest. Prevail thus far with your self, as to
show this; for, unless you do this, you do nothing to the purpose.

But yet see, of what force those things are, that you brought there. For S.
Paul does not say there, that Presbyters [did pas ere] were Pastors: this He
says, Wherein the Holy Ghost has made you Bishops [ pascere] to feed [to be
Pastors over] the Church of God. Saint Paul's Pastor therefore is a Bishop. And,
lest you should think that the name Bishop is to be taken, there, appellatively
(as if you would say, Such as have the Cure of) not properly; behold, the
Syriack Interpreter himself reteins the Greek word (...)
; when the Syriack wants not a word of her own, by which to express, [ Such as
have the Cure of.]

And so also S. Peter's Pastor. 1. Epist. 5. chap. 2. v. For I wholly doubt,
whether that place, of S. Peter, belong to inferior Presbyters. For He adds
there (as you know) (...), being Bishops over them: so that He also conjoins
[(...)] being Bishops, with [(...)] being Pastors. That word indeed I stand not
upon. That which follows there [ not Lording it over the Clergy] does plainly
evince, that they, to whom S. Peter wrote this, had (...), power and authority
over the Clergy: otherwise, that (...) that Domineering and Lording over them
could not possibly be applied to them. Wherefore S. Peter's Pastor must needs be a
Bishop. And who indeed can doubt of this, seeing the conjunction of those two
words took the first rise from S. Peter.

For, whereas you infer that the Word of God is [ Pabulum] food: that therefore
they, who administer this food, do [ pascere] feed: I shall easily grant you,
that feed they do, that is, (...), but not therefore (...), whence comes
(...), as you know, 1. e. Pastor; who, over and above the food of the Word,
administer somewhat else beside.

But what you bring from that place to the Ephesians, chap. 4. are either
uncertain; For 1. One will have Pastors and Doctors to be all one. 2. Another
makes no mention of Pastors. 3. A Third thinks that Readers are Pastors. I
shall speak of them all.

1. To S. Augustine, Pastor and Doctor are no otherwise the same, then Order
and Degree were, to us, a little before. Every Order a Degree, but not every
Degree an Order: so every Pastor is a Doctor, but not every Doctor a Pastor.
Who says this? Saint Hierom.

2. Of him, who makes no mention, there, of Pastors, nor will I make mention.
The Monks are better inclined, commonly, to Treatisers, then to Bishops.

3. For S. Ambrose, who understood Bishops in Apostles; Presbyters in Prophets;
Deacons in Evangelists; no wonder, if at last he fell upon Readers, when he had
none beside them, to whom, after those Three, he might referr them.

Thus, say I, either uncertain they are: or, when they are Certain they make
against you. By name, S. Chrysostom; Who defines Pastors to be they, to whom
was committed ((...)) the generality of the people. Are your so? And he adds
who were such, as Timothy, says he, and Titus; who were both Bishops in S.
Chrysostoms account: and, I believe, in your account, they were more then
Presbyters, laboring in the Word.

Yet remains what you glanced at, out of the Prophets. Which places if any do
accurately consider, he shall find, that not only the high Priests, but also
the Prophets and Levites, upon whom the Office of teaching lay, were called by
the name of Pastors. Doubtless, he shall. Add moreover; he shall find Princes
in the State, and Magistrates often, nay oftener, a great deal, to be called by
the name of Pastors, then all them put together, whom you set down. And yet we
do not call Princes by the name of Pastors. Nor do I think that at Geneva he is
called a Pastor who is the chief Magistrate. The Pastors therefore in the
Prophets reach not home to this. Tell me, who of the Ancients ever spoke so;
otherwise we are beside the cushion.

Lastly, that seemed to me a wondrous strange opposition. Indeed it is not by
the Ancients; but we Frenchmen speak so. For, must the Ancients speak as the
French; or the French as the Ancient Christians? And you run upon the same rock
again, afterward. The Presbyters who labor in the Word, whom we Frenchmen call
Ministers. For it is strange, how it became lawful for Frenchmen, to put upon a
Presbyter that name, which never any among the Ancients used, but for a Deacon.
I speak not this otherwise, but that even among us too, that bad fashion is
taken up, of calling them Ministers, and Pastors too. But these words were
brought in by them, who best relish any upstart fashion; but against their mind
who reverence Antiquity; and, as they may, disclaim these usages. For we
suffer, as I said, many things, which we teach not; and bear with that which we
cannot take away. But he, that but bears with a thing, loves it not, though he
loves to bear with it.

And now you have an Answer to your Letters, so far as my occasions give me
leave. For I have not the happiness of much leisure. But although I read none
of yours unwillingly, yet I read no passage more willingly, then that last,
wherein you profess, How desirous you are of peace, how glad you should be that
all the Reformed Churches, who are united by one Faith, were united by one and
the same bond of Ecclesiastical Government. Which is likewise my earnest and
hearty prayer: and I daily beg it humbly of God, that they may be united in
the same Form of Church Policy, by the bond of Ecclesiastical Government; but
that same which derives its pedigree from the very infancy of the Church; from
which, the Reverend Antiquity of the First Ages; which whosoever opposes,
opposes himself to all Antiquity; which Saint James the Apostle began in the
Church of Jerusalem, from whom the succession of Bishops in a long course
descended; which condemned Aerius, for daring to oppose himself against the
Consent and Practice of the Catholic Church; which all Churches every where
received.

I come at last to give you thanks. For, the Book, you promised me, shortly
after I had sent you my former Letters, was delivered to me. I do here both
acknowledge and thank you, that you were pleased to inlarg and enrich my Library
with your Two Books. And I entreat you, beg of God for me, that the remainder
of my life, which is to come, may be, rather good, then long. For as a Play so
our Life, it skills not how long, but how good, how well acted. In like manner,
I, wishing all happiness to you, (and in that I put this, That the Reverend
Antiquity of the First Ages may be in higher esteem with you, then the upstart
novell device of any whosoever,) do freely promise you my help and assistance
in any thing, that may, here, concern your interest. You will pardon me, if I
have spoke somewhat more freely; assuring yourself, that, though I am of a quite
different judgment in some points, yet my charity, and brotherly affection
toward you, is not changed awhit; nor by the grace of God) shall ever be.

FINIS.
S. Ignatius in Epistola ad Magnesianos.
(...).

As our Lord does nothing without his Father; so neither do ye without the
Bishop; neither Presbyter, Deacon, nor Layman. Let nothing seem reasonable to
you, against his liking: For whatsoever is so, is against the Law, and
offensive to God.


