ANGLIA Rediviva: OR, ENGLAND Revived. AN Heroic Poem.

London, Anno M.D.C.L.VIII.

To his Highness OLIVER Lord Protector, etc.
My Lord,
ALL I can hope, when your Highness reads this Piece, is only your Pardon for
my writing it: which I did upon a double impulsion; the Excellency of your
Person, and the forcible inclination of mine own Genius, to Honor, Admire, and
Celebrate all that is Excellent.

If things happen as I have Imagined them, I am both Poet and Prophet too: If
not, I am a Poet only, who has more liberty than the Historographer, and his
likelihood (most commonly) is more worth than tothers Truth.

Mean time (my Lord) it is my ambition, not yours; you have glory enough in
refusing the Crown, and it should be ours in urging you to the accepting it,
which all should do, who understand the public Interest: for those who do
not, I should be glad to teach them this verity, that (things standing as they
do) no Faggot with its band broke, would sooner fall in pieces; Nor Edifice
without foundation, sooner fall to ruin and destruction, than we should, were
you a way, (which God defend:) It Is the hearty prayer (my Lord) of one, who has
no particular Interest of his own, being so wholly unknown unto your Highness as
it were superfluous for me to subscribe my self by any other name, than only

Your Highness most faithful Honourer and Admirer.

Canto 1.
The Argument.
By Themis in full Parliament's declared
The Kingdoms state, and want of King, which heard,
All opinat with general Consent
For King again, and Kingly Government.
NOw the great Body of the State to frame
From several parts, its several Members came,
Just as the Sultans Ingeniers, Canons make
In several pieces, they asunder take
Till Warlike execution's to be done,
When all the pieces are conjoined in one.
And now the Members all inbodyed, strait
Assume again, their often assumed debate,
The State o'th'Kingdom rightly understood,
Which most conduced unto their present good,
Which most their future dangers to prevent,
Or popular, or Kingly government.
Much for the first by popular spirited men
Contested was, and much for the last again
By such, who though they were not Kings, at least
Had Kingly spirits reigning in their breast.
Nor could it be determined more than when
Now Eurus blows now Aquilon again,
To whither part the impulsed waves in fine
Equally 'twixt both suspended should incline.
Until at last (a) Themis the sage arose,
Themis the just, they had for Speaker chose,
Than whom a sager, nor a juster man
Athens nor Rome never bred, and thus began:
When 'th politic Body's sick which (as you know)
Has as the Natural, its sickness too,
(Faint languishings, and strong Disterp'raturs,
Cold Lethargies, and burning Calenturs)
It fits the Statists, as Physicians care,
Well to examine what the Causes are,
What the effects, what every circumstance
May the cure retard, or malady advance,
As with their utmost diligence to explore,
Its state of health, and Regiment before,
That so (those known) they better might apply
To every Ill convenient remedy.
For ours, what most perturb'd us has of late
Are some disquiet humors in the State
Occasioned by unskilfulness of (b) some
More skilled in stirring, than in purging them.
Of consequence so dangerous, as just
As the Hedg-hog of its prickly brood, at first
Might be delivered with little pain
Till too indulgent to its ease, whilst fain
It would escape, by shrinking up its womb
At last 't dos so intolerable become,
Without huge torment 't can delivered be
Without huge jeopardy of life. So we
So long deferred have the cures of them
They almost are incurable become
By 'indulging them we gaining nothing else
But ruin and destruction of our selves.
As for the rest, who is it that does not see
Our former state of health was Monarchy?
As that, which did maintain that state again
In vigorous health, was Kingly Regimen;
Nor may we ought expect but crassy health
Whilst we remain in state of Commonwealth,
More than our Bodies but continual pain
Till its dis-joynted Joints be set again.
There being a certain Innate quiet in things,
Which once disturbed, as great disquiet brings:
So the Mariners needle by some tamp'ring hand
Turned from its North, mark how't dos wavering stand
In restless agitation and pain
Till it return unto its North again.
Vice-nature Custom rendering all things light
And easy to us. With it there is no weight,
No pain: without it, ease, repose there is none,
But all is trouble, pain, vexation,
All is impediment, let, and hinderance,
There is no clog but in-accustumance.
This if we know, there is hope of remedy,
If not, more dangerous is our malady,
Since those sick's healths are most despaired of still
Imagine they are well, when they are ill.
For but compare our Countries former state
And welfare, with 'ts condition of late;
At home its plenty, and its opulence,
Abroad its reputation, when (c) France
With none than us more feared war, and Spain
With none than us more wished peace again,
When we in all the Christian worlds affairs,
Were absolute Arbiters of peace and wars,
And all, not passion-blind shall see themselves
Happier in Kingdoms than in Commonwealths.
But some perchance will say, t'had nothing don
Or too much rather Kings had overthrown,
If now we should decree (to their disgrace)
TO advance a new some others to their place,
As if it had been against the lawful use
Of Kingly government, and not the abuse
They Had tan up arms and so much blood had shed,
Which mighty workat last accomplished
What rests there, but the abuse away being tan
The lawful use of Kings should still remain?
So when we bend t'on ways a rod or wand,
That the other ways did too much bended stand,
It Is to redress, and straighten it again,
Not that it crooked so, should still remain.
(d) For Parlaments which some cry up again,
Rare helps of Government, whilst Kings did reign
As formerly with Members all complete,
But not as now, all maimed and mutilat,
We as of fire and water well may say
That they command ill, though they well obey.
Nor is it just the odium they have cast
On names of latter Kings, should longer last
Than Love and Reverence we are obliged to bear
To names of former Kings who reigned here.
(e) Edgar as far extending our command
By Sea, as our third Edward did by Land,
Or our fifth Henry, glories of their name
And ours, and Englands everlasting Fame.
As for the Peoples, Angel, Liberty
And Friend, Oppression and Tyranny
They err, suppose this found with Kings alone
Proudly and sternly seated on their Throne,
Bout which a barbarous crew of Lectors stands
With visages as bloody as their hands
Violently keeping all like slaves in awe
With nothing but their wills and lusts for law.
You 'll find as well with the popularity
Who proudly mincing Kings authority
Either as rigid, fell, and cruel are
As ever yet Sicilian Tyrants were
Or else (oth' contrary) remissive grown,
Each seeks their private good, the public none.
So whither Kings, Liberties Banks restrain
Or these or' flow them, still the harm's the same;
And to the State alike pernicious it is
Where all is lawful, or where nothing is,
Only of every domination,
Whether of many, or of one alone,
(Of King or People) this we may conclude,
The nobler Lord, the nobler Servitude.
For Liberty, which some, un-skill'd to make
Their right distinctions, for license take,
As there no difference were between the thing
They freedom call, and Shrovetide ryotting;
It Is true, amongst mortals it was found at first,
Whilst nothing they desired but what was just,
Whilst virtue only kept their minds in awe,
And every one was to himself a Law.
Till Lawless grown, and Vice their minds possessed
Expelling Virtue and Justice from their breast,
From Cities, Courts, and Villages it fled,
Man's habitation quite abandoned,
Making to desert wilderness repair,
And ever since has lived an Hermit there,
Choosing (so great aversion 'thas from men)
Rather to live amongst wild Beasts than them.
Only there still remains a bastard one
Begot 'twixt Power and Moderation,
That Fantosm or Fools-Paradise 'ith' air
With vain endeavor some seek here, some there
When all is sought at last you will find alone
In well obeying, just dominion.
Where one, or more must govern; if one, he
Is then the King, what ere his Title be,
If more, w'ave got by alteration
But only this, 'thave many Kings for one:
Less care for doing well, whilst each one has
So many to participat the praise,
Nor ill, whilst they so many have again
Participating the reproach and shame.
Let levelling Spirits then, go equal all
At home, and we will allow them, so withal
They can as well equal and level too
Our Neighbors all abroad, which till they do
They for our honors should provide but ill
To lessen us, and leave them greater still.
For Times are changed, and Commonwealths no more
In such high reputation, as before
When Romain Citizens to Kings gave Law,
And Commonwealths their Kingdoms kept in awe.
Now petty Provinces may cantonize
And call their Weaknesses, their Liberties,
Whilst mighty Kingdoms common notion
Is many Provinces conjoined in one.
If then the Kingdom you would again restore
Unto the royalties it possessed before,
The public to their honor and their wealths,
The private to their freedom, and themselves,
Nobility its splendour, Law its course,
Justice its awe, Authority its force;
Make us a Kingdom, give us Kings again,
May date from this day their first year of reign,
As we our first of happiness, happy alone
May choose our King, and be enforced to none.
By suture times so shall you equail'd be
To those first founded have our Monarchy.
Since it is as great a work, and greater too
To raise from ruins, as to build a new.
So all things settled as they were before
None e're shall seek for innovation more,
Nor e're shall count more reformation fit,
For rightly ordering or our selves, or it;
So shall our foes, and those to them adhear
No longer hope, and we no longer fear;
So wars, dissentions, factions, all shall cease,
And we enjoy an everlasting peace;
So Heaven shall bless you, and men look upon
Your work (in fine) as work of Heaven alone,
And all shall bless and praise you, (as it is fit)
As Heavens sole Iustruments in doing it.
At this unanimously all arose
(Just as in Forests when Favonius blows
With gentle breath, and all one ways inclines
The heads and murmurs of the lofty pines)
Inclining all with gentle murmuring
To Themis vote, for Kingdom, and for King.
But as when this great Fabrique began,
God first did make the world, and then made man:
So they enough of business did suppose
For first days work, the Kingdom to have chose,
Leaving to an other day their choice of King,
As we to an other Canto for to sing.
FINIS CANTO 1.
ANNOTATIONS Upon the first CANTO.
(a) WIth good reason Themis or Justice is introduced, voting for the
postliminary Restitution (as I maysay) of ENGLAND to its former Royalties
again, and state of Kingdom, which immemorable Time before it had been
possessed of, without disputing whether Monarchy or Democraty be the better
form of Government, it being best for every one to continue in the state they
have always been, and Justices part to give to every one their own.

(b.) The Bishops chiefly, who when they perceived Sectaries grown dangerous,
forbad them the public Pulpit, without prohibiting them their private
conventicles: by which means those peccant humors droven inwards apostumed,
and wext afterward more dangerous.

(c) France more feared war with us, than with any other Nation, experiencing
always by their losses, that they always lost by it; And Spain was so
desirous of peace with us, as it became an ordinary Proverb with them Pace co
l' Ingleterra e con toto il mondo guerra, not caring so they had peace with us,
though they had war with all the World besides. For our arbitration of the
Christian worlds affairs, we need look up no further than to the times of King
Henry the 8th. and in no other Author than every Chronicle.

(d) The Parliament of England is neither an imperious Master, (as in some
Countries are their Assemblies of States) nor an abject Vassal (as are the
Parlaments in other Countries) but only in nature of an humble Friend, to
propose unto the Sovereign Majesty what they imagine most expedient for the
Kingdoms good and theirs. Nor is the Sovereign power more bounded and limited
by them, than is the Ocean by its shore, preserving it only from effusion and
dissipation, and not so much bounding and limiting it, as not leaving it
altogether boundless and limitless, there being certain things which seem
onerous and burthensom (as the wheels of Chariots, wings of Birds, and such
like) which on the contrary more lighten and alleviat the load. The Sovereign
Majestrate then in England can do all things without Parliament, but only ruin
the Kingdom and himself, a restriction no more derogating from his Sovereign
power, than it does from Alm. God's, the not being able to sin and do amiss,
which on the contrary is one of his most Godlike attributes. And all this be
spoken by the way for the better information of some, who count nothing great
but what is excessive, and imagine how to reign courteously as they do in
England, is only to reign at others courtesies.

(e) Edgar of whom thus Daniel writes, Edgar re-edified and set forth a Fleet,
consisting as some write of 1600 sail, others a far greater number, which he
divided and placed in four parts of the Realm, making his progress yearly with
part of this mighty Navy round about the Isle.

Touching Edward the 3d. and Henry the 5th. none I suppose is so much a
Stranger to our Countries Histories, as not to have read of the Battles of
Cressy, Poictiers, and Agincourt, where he took the French King Prisoner, and
conquered France.

(f) Of their furious and fanatical deportments, I need only mention the
Anabaptists at Munster, under title of the Spirit tyrannizing and perpetrating
such horrible Actions, and acting such bloody Tragedies, as no Spirit but that
of the Devil could e're suggest, and just such an other Commonwealth we should
have in England, if your fifth Monarchy-men, and such like Rabble of other
Sectaries might obtain but their desires.

Canto 2.
The Argument.
All generally Oliver for King do choose,
He modestly the Kingdom does refuse,
Until in forced, his Shoulders he bows down
To the Royal Roabs, and Head unto the Crown.
NOw morn appeared, and yet you could not say
By the doubtful light, whether it were night or day
As black and white do both in mixture meet,
And different sexes in the Hermophodite:
And now as soon as twilight they discerned,
All have to the House, both curious and concerned:
These Votes to give, and those their Votes to hear,
Still greater part in all Assemblies were,
As in our Theaters, the Spectators are,
Than Actors always numerouser far:
All certain of their choice, or if there were
Any oth' choice were yet uncertain there:
Themis with pondrous Reasons thus inclines
The balances of their suspended minds.
Since all (I know) come with prepared breast,
To choose for King, the fittest and the best,
And easy is that choice, that has some one
More eminent than the rest to fix upon;
Most easy will be ours, have such an one
Proposed to day to our Election:
So Eminently worthy, 'bove the rest,
So absolutely, fittest and the best:
Where he pretends to the first, he scarcely has
Any may but pretend to the second place:
One at all parts of body and of mind,
We well may call the unique of his kind:
One, that who doubts where he deserves the crown,
But stand with him in competition;
And they shall soon unto their shames confess,
If he deserve it not, themselves much less:
If they, than he much more; so every one
Must needs conclude him worthiest alone.
Oliver I mean, our great Protector, who
Is both our Glory and our wonder too;
How one man's valor could alone suffice,
TO have gained so many mighty Victories;
Or one man's wisdom could suffice alone,
So many mighty Affairs to have undergone.
Whose modesty perchance I might offend,
Whilst thus his valor and wisdom I commend:
But he is so friend to modesty I know,
He Is greater friend to Truth; which being so
I Will boldly add for Royal dignity;
Never was any worthier than He;
Never was any worthier the esteem
Of being made for th'Crown, and th'Crown for him;
Whom Heaven instructs with every Kingly part,
The Serpents prudence, and the Lions heart,
Guarding us from our own and others harms,
By's prudent Councels, and victorious Arms.
The Eagles providence and peircing eye,
All practices against the State to epsy,
And so divine a faculty again
When once espied, for preventing them:
It Is Heaven elects that man for King, not we
Pointing as it were with the finger this is he:
To which so clear election of Heaven,
Long since we all our suffrages have given:
(a) If who protects us, in effect's the same
With King, by giving him Protectors name:
Who put in the scale with others to compare,
He Will hoist them all like feathers into air;
For Kingly parts, we may oppose alone,
To all the Kings, that e're possessed the Throne:
As his famed temperance and clemency,
(b) To his libidinousnesse and cruelty, Hen. 8.

Of either vice, it was truly said, he never
Man in his wroth, woman in's lust did spare:
And his admired frugality again Rich. 2.

To the prodigal waste, and riotousnes of him:
Who for a feast, or Revels short delight
The Treasury of the Land exhausted quite;
Not to compare his judgment and his wit
With his, who for a wanton Favourit Edw. 2.

Engaged so far, in fierce and bloody strife,
Cost him at last his kingdom and his life.
(c) Here one just like a Child, or Baby goes
Wrapped up in Purple as in Swathing clothes,
Never in council, never in field appears,
Till dying a child at last of fourscore years,
This finally unto all-judging Heaven
Of's long-short life, is all th'accompt is given,
He eat, and slept, and dyed, the Sapless Tree
Is not more stock, is not less King then he;
Whilst ours like an Intelligence in his sphere
Or orb, does every thing, is every where,
Actuats, puts life in business, commands,
In council, is all head, in Act all hands,
Perpetual fast, perpetual vigil keeps;
And when affairs exact, scarce eats or sleeps.
(d) Another yet more shame to kingly state,
Becomes by niceness so effeminate;
Like Nero Castrated we well may call
Half man, half woman, and whole monster all;
For getting so themselves by flattering them
They think they are Gods whilst they are scarcely men
We well the pest of humane kind may call,
They Are so puffed up, and so do swell on all:
Whilst ours (with masculin virtue) pride dos take;
(e) Only great states, of little on's to make,
So civil, courteous, debonaire to all
We him delight of humane kind may call,
One neither froward with his honors weight
Proud of their store, nor giddy with their height,
Giving the praise of all he has (in sum)
Only to heaven from whom all honors come.
And lastly whilst another you shall find
So weak of spirit, impotent of mind,
As giving's passion every thing it craves
H' unkings his Reason, and himself inslaves,
Living like Lions in their dens at home,
Fearful to all when they abroad do come
Ours hear, not Lord but (f) Father we may call,
In private studies the obliging all
In public, like the cheerful sun appears
To all men's comforts, but to no man's fears,
Bravely commanding o'rs his passions so
When he bids stay, they stay; when go, they go,
And all in such subjection does bring
Where Kings are slaves, he there dos reign a king,
Then let us choose him king, we are sure can tell
By well obeying, to command as well;
And who (with all) we are sure will as he does
Command more strictly over himself than us.
At this like Instruments tund unison
Each cord resounding at the found of one,
To be the first, each one did make such have
To second him, scarce any one was last,
Nor ever was there louder consort known
Nor more concordant voices joined in one
When who had seen glad England that had been
In mourning long, just like some widowed Queen:
Finding her self unable all alone
To weyld the scepter, and support the Throne;
Had chose some princely husband well she knew
Could weyld the one, support the other too;
Might frame the Image of a joy too great
For man's expression, or for man's conceit.
But see the force of modesty, can stay
Kingdoms in full speed like some Remora:
Whilst he Importuned was by every one
With force and prayers to accept the crown
Prouf'gainst those importunities of theirs;
H' opposes force to force, and prayers to prayers;
Knowing so well the pondrous weight o'th'crown
He would not stoupfort tho'twas thrown him down
What others would have dived the deepest maine
And clim'd aires highest Region to obtain;
Saying to 's silent thoughts, h'ad nothing done
Or coming, should he now be overcome:
And he should loose in this one Victory over
Himself, all the victories he had gained before:
No, no, (quoth he) 't shall never be said that I
Ambitious was of Sovereignty:
Nor shall the People ever say again,
That I had Conquered for my self, not them;
For me, I Am ready, when their dangers ask
To put my Armor on, and heavy Cask,
The Royal Ornaments and Crown (said he)
Let who is list take, who is list put on for me;
Resolved to live and dye with this Renown,
It Is gloriouser to win, than wear the Crown.
Let those with glittering things so pleased be,
They even are pleased with glittering misery,
Be taken with it, for me, I think 't heavens will
For such as those to guild the bitter Pill;
And bait the Inward hook, with outward sweet,
None else would be so fond to swallow it;
Such is the happiness of uncrowned heads,
They find soft rest even in the hardest beds:
While such is their unhappiness wear the crown,
They hardly rest even in their beds of down.
Nor did he this now out of sluggishnesse,
Like some love honor, but more love their case,
Contented still the greatest part to share
Oth' Kingdoms troubles and the kingdoms care;
Whilst freely he resigned to others, all
By falser Titles, they Illustrious call.
So the Libidinous may refuse a Wife
For incommodities of marriage life;
But when that incommodities are none.
But they refuse for Continence alone,
From all the Rags of Interest, stripped and free.
Their single life than shows most gloriously.
But be it our vice or virtue to become
More vehement by opposition,
Or modesty, to merit adds a grace
Makes it appear twice worthier than it was;
Or Honor has our shaddows property,
To fly who follows, follow those who fly;
This his refusal rendered them but more
Eager to press him than they were before;
Counting him now doubly for honor fit
Both for deserving and refusing it.
When seeing all refusal was in vain
To those, wear full resolved to obtain,
Forced, his unwilling shoulders he bowd down,
To the Royal Roabs, and head unto the Crown;
Especially since so great consentment showd
The voice oth' People was the voice of God;
From whom then, by their hands delivered him,
He did accept the Royal Diadem:
At which the numerous multitude aloud,
With voices heaven, as they the earth did crowd,
Made the middle vault with acclamations ring
In joyfully proclaiming him their King:
Whilst one more eloquent amongst the rest
In's one voice thus, the voice of all expressed.
Even such a person, such a mind as thine
Brave Hero Emperors had in ancient time;
When choosing men for Empire only sit,
The bravest mind and Person carried it;
Till by a Tenor worse than Gavel-kinde,
They Empire gave to the body, not the mind,
Kings in cold blood, their Active heat quite gone,
Becoming such chil passive things alone,
No wonder they and the Throne together fall
"Where men do nothing, Titles cannot do all.
But pity (alas!) rather than envy those,
For others virtues, not their own are chose;
It Is Fortune to be Kings as others be,
But only virtue to be one like thee.
And who now doubts whe're he be King or no
The people generally have proclaimed so?
Or who so selly is, to doubt again,
Where he or no legitimatly reign;
The Laws confirm, together with the applause
Of the whole Kingdom, that confirms those laws.
FINIS CANTO 2.
ANNOTATIONS on the Second CANTO.
(a) OF Sovereign Titles, some are Military some Civil; that of Imperator, or
Emperor, ( as Dux or Duke) most properly taking its denomination from the
wars; the one signifying one who has Sovereign Command over the Army, the other
one who leads an Army, though since promiscuously used, and appropriated to
Civil government as military conquerers appropriated to to themselves the
Countries Conquered. That of Rex or King most properly signifies a Pacifique
Ruler or Governor, whose Office being chiefly to Defendand Protect the People.
King and Protector are but Titles convertible (in this sense) and signify but
one and the same thing; though in England the papular ear, be more accustomed
to the sound of the one than the other, and their minds to a more awful reverence
of the name.

(b) Henry the 8. is reported in disparing manner at his death to have said (to
one who put him in mind of Gods mercies) How can he have mercy on me, who never
spared man in my wrath, nor woman in my lust? A fearful example to all such as
he, if it be true, as like enough it is, considering the libidinousnesse and
cruelty of his life.

Richard the 2. Is famous in History for his magnificence even to profusion and
prodigality, which proved his ruin in the end; for what Princes spend
prodigally one ways, they injuriously extort of the People the other; of which
whilst they complained (who are always most insolent over necessitous
Princes) that quarrel begun, was never ended but by his untimely end.

There is nothing in our Chronicles more notorious than Edward the 2s.
immoderate favor to Pierce Gaveston, and the Spencers, which cost them all
their lives at last. The too great favor of weak Princes not able to defend
them from the hatred of the people, and envy of the Nobility, proving always
fatal to their Favorites in the end, if not unto themselves (as it did to
this unfortunate Prince) the counterblow of the blow given the Favorite, most
commonly lighting upon them at last.

(c) Such a shadow of a King was Arideus, Alexanders umbratile successor,
according to Plutarch and others.

(d) There are but too many examples of such Princes, taught so long by their
Flatterers to remember their Authorities as they forget themselves: even to
suffer themselves like Herod to be cried up for gods, whilst the poor miserable
man (like a painted Sepulcher) all glorious without, was all consumed within
with worms and vermin.

(e) Alluding to that saying of Themistocles, who requested to touch I know not
what Instrument of music (a quality then much in vouge and fashion amongst the
nobler and better sort) answered; He could not Fiddle, but he could make a
great City of a little one.

(f) So they style Titus Vespasian, and deservedly, it being his usual motto,
that none should ever depart a Princes presence disconsolate and sad, whence he
never denied them any boon they asked; and if perchance he remembered at night
that none that day had asked him any, he was accustumed to say, in sighing to
those about him, that He had lost a day; counting his life more by giving than
by living, and living more for others than for himself.

(g) Pater patriae, or father of their Country was a title more ambitioned by
the ancients, then that of King or Emperor, it speaking somewhat more of
gentleness than the other; and consequently more of lastingnesse, for nihil
violentum diu, nothing violent can last.

Canto 3.
The Argument.
In passing forth to's cornation
His Triumphs, Trophies, in first Arch are shown.
His Battails, victories gained every where,
All speaking him a mighty conqueror.
ANd now that day more gloriously shone,
Made gloriouser by's Coronation:
When Envy pale companion of night
And darkness, dazzled with so great a light,
To caverns subterren Inhabited
By guilt, and mischief, all astonished fled,
Where it absorping its own venume lay,
With grief and anguish, quite consumed away.
Mean time the coronation pomp set on
Assisted by the joys of every one:
Old men in blessing time, they had lived to see
The joyful day of that solemnity;
Children and Babes rejoicing they were come
In time to see it from their mothers womb;
The streets they past all paved with feet, the air
All canopy'd with heads, (assembled there,)
And windors glazed with eyes; whilst Oliver
Did all in gallant Equipage appear;
His noble courser prauncing as he rod,
As it were proud, and glorious of its load:
Nor long h'ad rid, e're he espied (a far)
(High raised) the first Triumphant arch of war
By four fair (a) dorick pillars was sustaind,
As many large compartements contained,
The several monuments of his victories
To take the curious, and the wondering eyes.
Above, and all about, disposed are
In various bordurs, Instruments of war,
Drums, trumpets, Clarions; as wars utensils.
Swords, pickes, and guns, in sheavs, and by themselves;
Neither the Idumenian Palms did want,
Branching from Crowns, for greater ornament;
Than to afford the sculpters art more scope,
The Front was highly raised, and on the top
In a fair Nich, England triumphant sat,
Victory over head, each side for greater State,
Two Sister Kingdoms ranckt beneath her stood;
She could have used like Captives if she would:
As in a scedule there annexed was sed,
Oliver for England these had conquered.
A wood of Laurel then environed her,
As planted by the hand o'th Conqueror:
And in that wood disperced all about,
Trophies of several Battails he had fought,
Which striving to express at every part,
The sculpter had exhausted all his Art.
The bases of its pillars did contain,
The several Towns and Fortresses h'ad tan;
The razed so figured as they seemed to ly,
Now level with the ground, once stood so high:
Others as they their sieges, scares did bear,
Seemed as their Rampards all demolisht wear.
Twixt them, the two compartments below,
As many of his famed exploits did show;
His Irish first, where against his activeness,
Nothing availed its boggs and fastnesses:
Nor do their swiftness more advantage them,
Than 'twould against (b) Atlante's self, against him.
Nothing so Invious but he over-runs,
Nothing so Arduous but he overcoms;
Grieved that Resistance he not found enough
To put his noble valor more to proof;
For victory, just like ware too cheaply prized
By the victor is conte^ed and despised:
So here the Irish at so cheap a rate,
Did sell their Lives, their Liberties and State:
He well might say, he (c) came, saw, overcome,
So soon they fled, so soon was Ireland wone.
Poor land its fall by rising deer bought,
Whilst inauspiciously it freedom sought:
Now must thy kerns forsake their native land,
And forced by their Conquerours command;
In foreign Countries banished and exiled,
Add style of Vagabond, to that of wild.
Now may they answer, as the hebrews did,
When they to far captivity wear led,
And urged to their suspended Harps to sing
"Songs ill become our plaints and sorrowing;
"Those won our Harp, far better it becomes,
'Than us(alas!) to sing triumphant songs.
Then passing unto Brittany again,
To seek more victories over the watery main:
(The porch betwixt, all waved as the sea;
Here vessels sail, and there the dolphins play)
Returned, he finds new matter for his sword
To work on, brought by the Hamiltonian Lord,
Who both to's own, and to his Countries cost
Invaded England with a numerous host;
Who whilst in number only they conside
With nothing of the soldier beside:
Lay so disordered, and so scatteringly
They afforded us too cheap a Victory,
And at so vile a rate did sell themselves,
They seemed the victors sport and nothing else.
So when a flock of filly heartlesse sheep:
Over which the Sheapheard careless guard dos keep,
In The pasture straggling goes, some Lion comes,
And in a moment all the flock over runs:
Here one is slain, another there dos fall:
His sport or pray, till h'as destroyed them all.
Unquiet and ambitious Hamilton,
Dear did thou pay for thy Ambition,
Dear for disquiet, fomented by thee,
Both in Religion and in Monarchy.
Now, all the harm in Scotland thou have bred
In England justly falls upon thy head:
Heaven so ordaining, things wherein w' offend
Should ever prove our punishments in the end.
But since it is fit some Epitaph thou have,
This be the Epitaph written on thy grave
By Ignis fatuus of State, misled,
Who near did rest alive, rests now he is dead:
And he who grieved his head did want a Crown,
To such ambitious height his mind was grown,
By one days chance of war, so low did fall,
He wanted both a Crown, and Head and all.
Dunbar is next in prospective appears,
Than which no fight more numerous trophies bears
Unto the Conquering side; than which no field
More wreaths of Laurel, did to th'conqueror yield
(Though gained from those, were neither Laureat,
In Arts nor Arms, Religion nor State.)
Here (in effect) their ruin first began,
Was finished after, just as the battring Ram,
When once the walls and lofty Towers it shakes,
And for the soldier breach and entrance makes,
Upon the Town, they pell mell on do fall,
And in a moment pill and sack it all.
So in the next fatal Wosterian fight,
That ruin here began, was finished quite;
Victory no less did to'ther victory Crown,
Than taking the fort, dos taking of the Town.
Here those were overthrown, who did in vade
Scotland to England's tributary made
Here all its glorie's lost, and in this field
St. Andrews, to St. Georges cross dos yield,
The Royal Scottish Lyon's, almost taken,
And his Engraile converted to a chain;
Here th'Scotch Nobility all are overcome,
Routed and slain, and here was Scotland won.
Go now and boast you never Conquered were
Nor ever taught the servile yoke to bear:
Oliver in this one Action has done more
Than Rome, or England e're could do before,
Outdoing Caesar's by his conquering you,
And all our Edwards and our Henry's too.
Nor grieve fort, for by him it is a degree
Next unto Conquering, conquered to be,
As to be civilized, is no servitude,
But Liberty, for the Barbarous and rude:
So it is for you abuse your Liberty
Far better now to serve than to be free.
For now no more (an Art ye know too well)
You shall against your King, nor Church rebel.
Who disobedience learn to Monarchy,
By disobedience unto Hierarchy.
Now shall your Castles all unrased stand
More rased by yours, than by your Conquerours hand.
Now all your broyls and deadly feud shall cease,
And you be taught by War, to live in Peace.
Nor ought ye of our Justice to complain,
Who thus repay the war you lent, again,
It was no free, but mercenary war,
You Covenanted to be paid, and so you are.
Next this in midst of all the Arch appeared
Oliver's Equestrian statua highly reared,
In complete Armor mounted on his steed,
Joy to his friends, terror to's foes did breed,
Above his head suspended every Crown
As ever yet won Conqueror renown,
(e) Castrensick, Murick, and above them all
That far more glorious one, they Civick call.
While saving one of's own, he more did prize,
Than killing thousands of his Enemies.
So careful was he of them, as he would
Scarce leave to Fortune, power to spill their blood,
Their Arms so strong, Death's darts could hardly pierce,
This made them so courageous and fierce,
For nothing can a Soldiers heart dismay,
When fear of death, and danger is away.
How much does England ow him for this care?
Who strove to make it an unbloodyed War,
Whilst others cared not so they Conquered
How much of English blood they spilt and shed.
An other score, she ows him for no less
Was his perpetual care and wachfulness
For the Sun never rose, but he was up before
The countenance of the Enemy to explore,
Their marches; and advantages to find
Of joining battle; when the battle joynd
Never was greater resolution shown
(Cesars was Cesars but his own's his own)
With such celerity following (f) Victory
Such vigor, such Impetuosity,
Maugre her wings, even from the Enemies host,
He Would fetch her back to's own, when she was lost,
Like Thunder, or a threatening Ruin just
Falling o'th'foe, and crushing them to dust.
Now after having given you hint of these,
We might conduct him to the Arch of peace,
There to repose his wearied Limbs at last
After so many Toyls and Labors past,
But that amongst all the rest of's Triumphs, was
By th'skilfull Artist left one vacant space
There to insert an other victory,
Over a far more puissant Enemy;
Over a far more pertinacious one
Than all the rest whom he had overcome,
The Envy of his high Felicity,
Honors, and Dignities, an Enemy,
Even Hercules after all his Labors past
Had much ado to overcome at last.
Such yet's his modesty in bearing u'm,
That too (no doubt) at last he'ill overcome;
As what so ever other Enemies,
Shall dare against him in Rebellion rise.
FINIS CANTO 3.
ANNOTATIONS on the Third CANTO.
(a) TO say nothing of the Tuscan (or basis of all the rest) there are three
orders of Pillars, the Dorick, Jonick and Corinthian, which (besides their
proportions) are chiefly distinguished by their Acanthes or Coronements, the
Crown of the Dorick more massive plain, and therefore attributed by the
Ancients to more masculine uses, as building the Temples of their gods: The
Corinthian more flowery and flourishing; and therefore accoumpted more feminine,
and chiefly employed in the Temples of their goddesses; observing which decorum
or distribution, I make the Arch of War sustained by Dorick Pillars, as
afterward that of Peace by Corinthian.

(b) Atlanta was feigned so swift and light of foot, as she would run over
heads of standing Corn, without ere laying, or depressing them.

(c) Alluding to the motto of Cesars Victory over Pharnaces King of Pontus,
Veni, vidi, vici, whose incredible Celerity and Felicity in Conquering, his
Highness in all his Expeditions (as in all his other Military virtues) seems
to equalize.

(d) The boast of Galgacus a Scottish General, recorded by Tacitus (in the
life of Julius Agricula) in these words; We the flower of the British
Nobility, and therefore seated the farthest in, never beheld the Coast of
Countries in servitude, etc. the whole Oration being richly worth the reading,
and observing.

(e) The Romans answerable to their several merits, rewarded their Soldiers
with several military Crowns; The Castrensick (otherwise the Valaris) was
bestowed on them who had expugn'd the Enemies Camp, the beams or Radii of which
Crown, were several pales or palisads affixed to the Wreath or Circle, as the
battlements of walls were to the Murick Crown, bestowed on those who had first
scaled the walls of any Town or place: And both these were of gold; but the
Civick Crown, (the reward of him, who had saved the life of any Citizen, or
Soldier) was the honourablest of all, though composed only of Oaken leaves,
they wisely seting the price of their rewards, more in the honor, than the
richness of the Crown.

(f) Victory that is figured wavering and hovering betwixt the two Armies, in
the beginning and prosecution of the fight, is always taken down, and brought
to the Lure as 't were, of that Army which in the end has its force entire: And
blind Fortune (the Mistrice that predominates most in War) is ever mastered by
him at length who has his eyes most about him; this his Highness wisely
considering, did always keep a Reserve of Army entire, for the last, the
supreamest point of skill in a General, as it is in a Gamster not to set all
his rest at one stake: a Merchant not to venture all his wealth in one bottom,
and a Prince not to hazard all his Fortune in one Enterprise: And by this
admirable Providence of his, his Highness won all his batails, or recovered
them when they were lost; as well those in which he commanded in chief, as
those under others commands, by his Auspice were obtained.

Canto 4.
The Argument.
The next Triumphant Arch, dos represent
The Excellency of Peaceful Government,
And Oliver as accomplished declares
In The Arts of Peace, as in the Arts of wars.
AS War dos end in Peace, so now they are
Ariv'd to th'Arch of Peace, from that of War;
Which Oliver no sooner came unto,
(O the The Ensign of Peace.
Olive has both name and Omen too,)
But that magnanimous fever in his breast,
Whose ardent heat, no more would let him rest
Beholding's own, than could Themistocles,
Beholding Trophies of Meltiades,
Began to quit his bossom, and relent,
At sight of what, next Arch did represent.
So when the wind's allayed that raised so high
The Oceans troubled billows, presently
A gentle Calm dos serenat its breast,
As when the peaceful Halcion builds her neast.
The scene all changed then, and with the scene
The minds and dispositions of men;
The Arch of War, now disappeared quite,
And only that of Peace, appeared in sight;
Of gentle Peace, that every breast inspires
With cheerful thoughts, and pleasantest desires,
Its fabrique fair Corinthian pillars rear,
The bordurs all with Flowers crowned were;
A hundred festons, hundred frutages,
Depending from its Corniches, and freez;
The Niches filled with Curious Imagry,
All representing the felicity
Of Peaceful days, Peace in the midst dos sit
With Olives crowned, and Oliver over it
Enthroned in state; her right hand dos adorn
Her sister Plenty, with her fruitful horn;
Her left Content, and smiling Cheerfulness,
Inseparable companions of Peace;
(a) Whilst sullen and repining Discontent
Offended still with present Government,
Rumor, and popular murmurings to boot,
Oliver nobly tramples under foot,
As knowing never brave Action was done
By those who feared, or apprehended u'm.
So having well resolved what to do,
As resolutely going through with it too,
He his conspicuous courses still holds on,
Just as at midnight, the Celestial Moon,
Her constant motion never dos intermit,
For all the midnight dogs that bark at it.
Who out do all detraction can do,
Far worse then Calumny, or Envy too;
For Calumny adds some ill unto our name,
Detraction takes away some good from Fame,
Envy with heavy weight, hangs on the feet
Of Worth, to weigh it down as low as it;
But discontent 's a far more Rabid beast,
A far more venomous Serpent than the rest,
And dos not only bark, but rend, tear, bite,
Hisses and stings, blasts and impoysons quite.
This Monster then, he under-foot dos tread
As Hercules the barking Cerberus did,
In noble posture setting of his foot
Wholly to quell it, on its barking throat.
By him was Order, and Equity, the one
And the other main supporters of his Throne;
Who every thing, by War disordred was,
Compose and apt unto their proper place;
And persons too, compose and order so,
Each one his proper rank and place dos know;
So in the general Confusion
Of things, when this great Machin first begun,
The Universal Genius, did sit
On the rude Chaos, so composing it
The whole, owed all its Ornament, and Grace,
To the apting every part, to 's proper place:
Nobility then he dos again restore
Unto its state, and dignity before,
And to the Honor, and the Reverence too,
That to its state and dignity is due.
Purging the drossy, polishing the rude,
New fashoning the Rough-hewn multitude,
From all Estates banishing abuse, for what
Corruption is in natural Bodies, that
Abuses are in manners, nor can we
From the one and the other totally be free,
Though it is the Princes, as Physicians care
To endeavor purging them, where ever they are.
Then since both King, and Subject it becomes
To know their several relations;
(Like Masters, and like Fathers those to sway,
Like Servants, and like Children these obey.)
A mistique Janus that supports the Throne,
In form of Fear and Love conjoined in one,
Declares how kingly, Throne never stood secure
Where to one and the other was unmixt and pure,
For fear alone brings hatred, and that hate
Brings sudain ruin to a Princes state,
And Love's too high and too Etheriall,
In low ignoble bossoms ere to fall,
As vulgar bossoms too ignobly low,
So high, and so Etherial fire to know,
Their Love's ith Belly and the Eyes, so they
For sports Pane and Circense
and bread a Nero would obey,
And on the least Capriccio again
Rebel against Trajan, or the best of men:
Others, by other ways then; Kings, alone
Grow popular by Admiration.
Since the people them never hate, where they Admire,
He to this admiration dos aspire,
By tempering so the Rayns o'th Government,
They might be both obedient, and content,
With entire servitude could nor agree,
Nor capable were of entire Liberty.
So the excellent Rider gently does force
The stuborn neck of the unruly Horse,
The byt sometimes and curb employing too,
When gentle hand, and snaffle will not do;
(b) For nothing's more untractable and rude,
(They Are furies up) than the wild multitude,
As nothing is more tractable and tame,
Their furies once allayd, than they again;
All in extremes, as those who never know
Reason, nor ground for any thing they do:
Now as Tempestuous as the Sea instorme,
And now again (the Tempest ceas't) as calm,
To rule which, is so difficult a work
A God's imployd in it with his triple forke;
Mean while to steer the bark of Government,
No Poet God enough could ere invent:
So difficult a task have they who sit
At helm of State, to Rule and Govern it.
Especially in peace, they find it far
More hard to Rule, and govern, than in war,
Where common danger makes them all agree,
Ill humour's purged on the Enemy.
Of discontent, or murmur, not a breath,
To disobey, or mutin, present death;
Here, they fall fowl on friends, humerous with ease
Are discontented out of wantonness,
Murmur, and mutin, against those who sway,
Counting it gallantry to disobey.
Peace then is a machin of more subtle frame,
Though War do bear the more Robustous name.
This Oliver knowing, (ignorant of naught,
But what is not worth his knowledge and his thought)
The outward building framed, dos straight begin
To bend his care to furnishing 't within,
And more by example, than by precept rules
(For Princes always are the noblest Schools)
Teaching them moral virtues first, and then
Their duties toward God, as toward Men,
Reducing their devotions from the mien,
Or outward face, unto the heart within;
The minds, and Consciences of every one,
True channel where devotion should run.
To show Concatination then of things
How Kings are linked to Gods, Subjects to Kings,
Down from above a golden chain dos fall,
In mutual links, binds and combines them all,
And he is no longer part of the universe
Who dos substract himself from this commerce.
So stones once laid, the Mason straight dos come
And with his Cyment so conjoyneth u'm,
None from the rank they are placed in dos swarve,
But every one to's proper use dos serve.
Last, to declare how every power below,
To highest heaven dos all Allegiance ow,
Midst golden beams came streaming from a cloud
(As it some bright divinity did shroud)
A hand extended forth, a Crown dos bear,
Sent (as it were) from Heaven to Oliver,
By me Kings Reign, fair written over head,
By which Inscription's clearly signified,
How Crowns not by the peoples power are given,
Nor by our own, but only sent from Heaven;
And heaven it is that dos transfer them still,
By only right of its supreamest will;
As clearly in our British one is seen,
Observe how often't has transferred been,
Unto the Romans from the Britains, then
Unto the Saxons from the Romans, when
T'had straight another turn to th'warlike Dane,
In diverse Battails wonn and lost again,
Until at last the Norman Conquerers,
Conquers them all, and makes all England theirs.
Just as when many for the prize do run,
Amongst the brave Concurrants, here some one
The others quite outstrips, another then
As far the foremost dos devance again,
Until at last the most succesfull makes
The Garland his, and claims all the stakes.
So goes the world, whilst in your private cause,
Men's differences decided are by Laws;
But th'publique, by the sword, who has most might
(c) To Empires always has the greatest right,
So much't imports, great Monarks, if they will
Conserve their Kingdoms, to go armed still;
And as in Kingdoms, and in Monarchies,
So it is in Royal Lines, and Families,
Their Capets line, dos Charlemain exclude,
Plantaginets here in Tuders dos conclude,
This famely to that famely dos pass,
One race succeeds unto another race,
One house is lost in the other, and in fine
One Line's extinguished by another Line.
So it is O Heaven! O justest Heaven so it is,
In thy divine, Adorable decrees,
None may grow proud when they exalted are,
And none when they are deprest again, despair,
Heaven so at pleasure changing state of things,
It Kings of Subjects makes, Subjects of Kings.
That each one this important Truth might know;
All change and alter in this world below,
Who change and alteration do not love,
Must leave this world, and go to that above.
FINIS CANTO 4.
ANNOTATIONS on the Fourth CANTO.
(a) FOr discontented persons, thereare, have bin, and ever will be such, in all
new Governments; neither is the sovereign Magistrate to expect other Fortune in
Governing it, than God himself in Governing the World, who can never please
every one, men's minds and dispositions are so opposite and diverse; one would
have fair weather, another rain; one this another that, none thinking himself
happy, great, nor rich enough; only (as one said facetiously) every one
imagins himself sufficient and wise enough, though in that they are the most
deceived of all: and this indeed is the main cause of all their discontents,
whilst (for want of judgment) they weigh things without their counterpoise;
look on effects without their causes: know not the ways which self
preservation obliges States to take; are never contented with their present
condition: besides a natural envy most men bear, to all advanced in dignity
above themselves: when did we but judiciously consider things, and look upon
them with unpartiall eyes, we should perceive our selves at present like men
waded through many dangers, and even arrived to the brink of safety; when to
offer to return again, what were it but to plung and ingulph our selves into
new dangers, and be always beginning, and never make an end? Or if we consider
the Body of the Kingdom, in good convalency from its former sickness, we
should easily perceive their ingratitude to the Physician; who should rather
blame him for that they had not recovered their former health, than thank him
for recovering them from their late Malady. I need make no application of this
unto his Highness Person, who certainly preserves us daily from as great or
greater dangers than those we have already past; and has so far advanced us on
the way of health, as we might easily be well, if we would but commit our cures
to him, and not permit such Empericks and Mountebanks to tamper with us, who
propound ways altogether destructive to it, and us.

(b) Some aptly compare the vulgar to the Sea, then which nothing is more calm
and quiet (when unmoved) nothing (when moved once) more unquiet and turbulent;
they assign therefore no less than a God to govern it, with his trident, or
triple Scepter, of force, gentleness, and knowledge how to temper them. And as
Neptune (in Virgil) reprehends Eolus' for stirring them up unto commotion; so
Princes are always to be jealous of popular persons; especially such as from
the Pulpit preach the People up to such a height of Rebellion, as even to wrest
the trident out of their hands, and involve all in tumult and confusion. All
Books therefore teaching them any thing but obedience to the Magistrate,
(which includes that to God) are to be prohibited them; their reading, even the
best (of late) having occasioned more harm than good, (the corruption of the
best being always the worst of things) through their corrupt and preposterous
interpreting and understanding them. Others, no less aptly compare the Vulgar
to a Horse, which well managed is most ruly and serviceable, but ill, the most
unrulely and unserviceable beast of all. The Prince therefore is to suffer none
to manage them besides himself, which when he does (through weakness, or
ignorance) those whom he imploys in it, are rather Princes than himself; of
whom finally we may say, that those who could run away, and cast their Rider,
when they were ridden only with a Snaffle and gentle hand, should be rid
hereafter with a Byt and Curb (by my consent) but there is great difference to
be observed, betwixt peoples natures and disposition; some as Tiberius said, of
the Romans, seeming only born for servitude, others (such as the English)
neither patient of entire Servitude, nor capable of entire Liberty: All in
general (for the shame of mankind; I grieve to say it) being of the lowest
sort of men, and nighest unto the Beast: Hating and envying all wiser and
better than themselves, the less judgment they have, the apter to judge every
one; their common trade being to speak ill of all, and sell others sames, at
price of their own reputations, like savages staring and offended with every
one that is not of their own heard and crew; doing nothing well but follow, and
never leading but they do ill: of so ignoble natures, they are only to be
rull'd by fear, incapable of so noble a passion as Love: Whence those who when
they are up, whole Armies cannot lay, One Constable with his staff can awe,
when they are down; No matter for their grumbling them, who always do things
unwillingly, but do them as well as if they did them willingly, when they must
needs: nor are these by birth, but manners to be distinguished from the better
sort; your Nobles themselves not being exempted from them, when once they
degenerate and do ignoble things.

(c) This being so, let whose list admire Catos unseasonable constancy,
struggling so long against Authority, till he was plucked out of the public
Assembly by violent hands, and laid violent hands on himself for sinal remedy:
Or, Cicero's as unseasonable eloquence, who talked so long against the
Conquering side, till he was proscribed, and lost his head at last. I hold him
far the wiser man, who thankt God, he was made of Willow, and not of Oak, that
could yield and bend in storms, whilst the other got nothing by its resistance,
but only to shatter its branches and break it self: and if any think them
worthy reprehension, who are always contented and pleased with the present:
certainly they are more reprehensible, who are always discontented and
displeased with it; foolishly loosing the present (the only moment they have
to live in here) with vainly dreaming of the past, or future (no part of their
lives at all.)


