HIS MAJESTY'S RESOLUTION Concerning the setting up of HIS STANDARD.

TOGETHER, With the Resolution of certain Noblemen, who were present with His
Majesty at York. Who when His Majesty resolved to set up His Standard at
York, did dissuade him from it; and rather then they would countenauce His
Majesty in that Resolution, left His Majesty, and would have come for London.

ALSO, Sir John Banks his Persuasion, for His Majesty's Return to London. His
Majesty's consent at the first, but afterward His refusal.

Together with an Order from the House of Peers c^^^^^ning the stopping of all
kind of Ammunition.

JOH. BROWN Cler. Parl.

(...) 18. Printed for I. Tompson and A. Coe. 1642.

Die Sabbathi, 11. Junii, 1642.
IT is this day ordered by the Lords in Parliament assembled That a strict
search and Examination be made by the Justices of peace M^^or, Bailiffs,
Constables, and other his Majesty's Officers inhabiting, or near adjoining to
all, the Northern Roads, for the stopping and staying of all Arms,
Ammunition, Powder, Light horses, or horses for service in the Wars, and
great Saddles that are, or shall be carried toward the North parts of England,
but by the privity and direction of one, or both Houses of Parliament; And that
the said Officers shall stay them accordingly and speedily give information
thereof unto one of the Houses of Parliament.

Die Mercurii, 15. Iun. 1642. Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, That this
Order shall be printed and published. Io. Brown, Cler. Parl.

WOYTHY SIR,
OUt of the long and continual love and affection, and also in respect of your
continual expressions of kindness and courtesy extended unto me, where by you
have obliged me unto a necessary gratitude, I could not neglect my service unto
you, whereby you may as well taste of our joy and comfort, as you have formerly
understood of our jealousies and fears, justly conceived in these parts;
occasioned here amongst us by reason of his Majesty's absence and alienation
from the Honorable House of Parliament, and by reason of his abode amongst us
here in these Northern parts: For since his Majesty's residence amongst us, we
have had continual rumors of Civil Wars in this Kingdom, no discourse
almost stirring, but what has possessed the Subjects hearts with fear and
terror, by reason of the continual expectation of blood and mischief. But now
we hope all things are at the worst, and that the blessed Sun of peace and
prosperity, which has long slept under a discontented cloud, will break
forth, and with its happy and cheerful beams, warm the benumbed estate of
this distracted State and Kingdom. I may indeed truly call it distracted, and
distempered, when a general malady had overrun and overspread the whole
body, so that one continual grief had disquieted the Head, and all the
members, both Head and members suffering a most grievous and terrible malady,
which daily did beget in all true hearts, the fear and expectation of ruin and
destruction, which must of necessity ensue the disagreement of the King and
Parliament. I doubt not but you have heard of the Declarations which have been
published on both sides, both by his Majesty and the Houses of Parliament,
which have taken but small effect, so that the malady of this Kingdom yet
remains unrelieved.

Upon the seventh of June last, since His Majesty gave answer unto the last
Declaration of the House of Parliament, his Majesty at an Assembly of the
Peers and Council which were then present with him at York, declared his last
intentions unto them, and resolved them that this his last and absolute
determination, was to set up his Standard, and that since he could not win and
persuade the Houses of Parliament to consent unto his desires, that he would
defend himself by his sword, and by that means secure his Crown and Royal
prerogatives; which he said he well understood they had an aim and intention to
abridge and deprive him of.

This Resolution was diversely received and entertained among the Nobles, some
being resolute to hazard all, both their persons, lives and fortunes, in this
His Majesty's Resolution, and to endeavor by all means to justify his
undertakings; Others upon more mature consultation and deliberation, were of
another mind, and thought that by this means they could not acquit themselves
of the fidelity imposed upon them for the general good and benefit of the
whole Kingdom.

So that induced by these and other faithful and mature considerations, as in
duty, and by oath they stood bound, they did apply themselves to divert his
Majesty from this his intention and determination, whereby his Majesty did
perceive his Majesty might bring a ruin unto this Nation, and also that it was
impossible by this means to effect his determined purpose without the danger
and loss of those who were most near and dear unto him, and in whose
fidelity his Majesty did repose his trust and confidence, and also out of their
loyalty and care informed his Majesty, that they feared that those who had
possessed his Majesty's ears and breast with this evil and destructive
counsel, they did very much fear would at the time of most hazard and danger,
be backward and unwilling to put his will in execution. These persuasive
reasons could not alter his Majesty's resolution for the present, but he seemed
to be somewhat displeased with their advise; Whereupon some of his counsel
whose hearts and integrity stood well affected to the State, left his
Majesty, viz. the Earl of Dorset, the Earl of Salisbury, the Earl of Clare,
with one Lord more whose name for the present I cannot remember, took their
leave and would have come for London. Afterward Sir John Banks endeavored to
persuade His Majesty to make His return to London; Which at first seemed as
pleasing to his Majesty as to the Subject desirous of this most happy union,
and it received such welcome entertainment with His Majesty, that he was
graciously pleased to prepare himself for London. This was most welcome news,
and gave a general and ample satisfaction to all, but those whose aims are
the difference between His Majesty and the loyal Subject. Much joy was at the
first conceived and expressed, and and in this joy and comfort the night was
spent. But joy and grief have their continual succession, and seldom is joy of
a long continuance, for now when the morning was come, and the accomplishment
of their conceived joy was expected, a sudden cloud overspread their
cheerful breasts, and a new discontent was spread through those parts, for
His Majesty's resolution was quite altered from what he had over night
determined, which did cause a general sorrow in all true hearts; the cause of
this so sudden change, is not as yet made known, but it is supposed that His
Majesty was moved thus so suddenly to alter his resolution, by the wicked
advice of some malignant and dangerous spirits, who are near His Majesty's
person.

Thus have I informed you of the last proceedings that have happened amongst
us, God in his good time settle all things, that this Nation again may
flourish: So I humbly take my leave, and rest

Your faithful Friend to serve you* THOMAS ANDREWS.

FINIS.

