THE Yearly Intelligencer; OR A PERFECT CHRONOLOGY: OF ALL The Battles,
Sieges, Conflicts, Actions, Exploits, and all other Signal and Remarkable
Passages, which have happened in the World.

From September the 29th. 1671. to September the 29th. 1672.

Collected by William Andrevvs, Student in ASTROLOGY.

With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by E. Crowch, for T. Vere, at the Angel without Newgate. 1672.

TO THE READER.
Gentlemen,
YOu have here presented unto public view, an Annual Chronology: or a
Particular Account, in a Chronological way, of all the most material Actions
and Passages, etc which have happened in most Parts of the World, for one whole
Year last past; which we hope will prove acceptable unto you.

The work it self, I presume, may not only be useful and necessary, but also
very delectable unto many; there being therein clearly set down, not only what
public matters have happened in the said Year past, in His Majesty's
Dominions: but also even in all, or most parts of the Inhabitable World:
diligently Collected from the public Writings of others, and from such
Informations as are unquestionable.

What either through the Printers, or my own Inadvertency, has therein
happened Erroneous, we beseech you to pardon: Considering there are, and will
be mistakes and defects in the best of Humane Actions: However, I have been as
careful in my Collections as possible, and I hope the Printer and Corrector
will be as careful in what belongs unto them, concerning it, in the Printing
and Correcting thereof.

If this present Chronology, shall find your kind acceptance, it may animate me
hereafter (Deo permittente) to carry on from Year, to Year, the like for the
future: And none shall more oblige me, then such, as shall for time to come,
give me real and true Information, of any material matters, etc. which shall
hereafter happen: warrantable for their entry. In the interim, I remain,

Your very humble Servant. William Andrews.
Radwinter, near Saffron-Walden in Essex, October. 31. 1672.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THe Letters N. S. in the several Columns of the Days of every Month, signify
Stilo Novo, New Style, or the Foraign Account.

THE Yearly Intelligencer; OR A PERFECT CHRONOLOGY: OF ALL The Battles,
Sieges, Conflicts, Actions, Exploits, and all other Signal and Remarkable
Passages, which have happened in the World. From September the 29th. 2671. to
September the 29th. 1672.
September. 1671
John Hubbarts House at Bleching: after dinner his Majesty parted to Sir Robert
Pastons at Oxney: and her Majesty returned to Norwich.

George Waterman was chosen Lord Mayor of the City of London for the ensuing
year; and Alderman Jonathan Dawes, and Alderman Robert Clayton, were sworn
Sheriffs of London and Middlesex,

Robert Pastons at Oxney: after which his Majesty, together with his Royal
Highness, parted thence to the Lord Townesends at Raynham, and arrived there at
night, and her Majesty returned again to Norwich.

Her (...) removed from the Lord Henry Howards at Norwich, for Enston, where
her Majesty lodged this night.

Henry Bridgeman, was in the Quire of the Cathedral Church of Chester,
consecrated Bishop of Soder and Man.

Townesends at Raynham, and arrived at Newmarket.

Enston, and arrived and lodged at Audleyend this night.

Cambridge with his Royal presence, attended by many of the Nobility from
Newmarket; conferred at Cambridge the Honor of Knighthood upon Charles Caesar
Esquire, Son of Sir Henry Caesar, and in the evening returned again to Newmarket.

A sharp dispute happened about the Isles of Bayon, between the Swallow, a
Merchant-Man, English built, Captain John Baddisson Commander, and an Algerine
Pirate, in which the Captain was shot in the Cheek, his Boat-swain, and two
others killed, the Carpenter and fourteen more dangerously wounded: yet by the
courage of the said Captain, the Vessel was saved from the Turks.

Falmouth: in which some Vessels were lost, and many driven ashore.

Certain news from Dublin, of the safe arrival of the Lord Berkely, (Lord
Lieutenant of that Kingdom) there.

d'Ossuna, N.S.
wife to the Governor of Milan.

October.
Danemark instituted a new Order of Knighthood, under the name of the Danne
Broge, (or the Danish Colors) and Created twenty four Knights, in remembrance
of a great Battle given heretofore, by Woldemar the second King of Danemark,
against the Swedes: upon the sight (as is said) of the Danish Colors displayed
in the Heavens, etc.

Danemark was delivered of a young Prince.

Whitehall from Newmarket.

Plymouth the flying Falcon of Amsterdam, from whence she went the first of
January 1669. upon Discovery, the Master whereof affirmed, that he was 50.
degrees Southward, that he made the main Land, and discovered two Islands in
the South Sea: on which were men of an extraordinary Stature, being eleven foot
in height and all hairy, that he sailed out and home 12900 Dutch leagues.

Baddisson with the Swallow arrived in the Downs.

Hague at night by Torch-light, N.S.
between the Here vander Mile, and the Count de Warfuse, on the one side, and
the Counts de Donah, two Brothers on the other, in which the Here vander Mile
was desperately wounded.

Baddisson came to London, and was presented to his Royal Highness, and by his
Royal Highness to his Majesty, who was pleased to order him a gold Chain and
Meddal, for his great valor and courage, in saving the Swallow from the
Algerin Pirates.

Robert Southwell, his Majesty's Envoy Extraordinary to the Count de Montery,
took leave of his Majesty, in order to his Journey to Brussels.

Guildhall London, as also his Royal Highness, and his Highness Prince Rupert,
etc. where his Majesty, conferred the honor of Knighthood upon Jonathan
Dawes, and Robert Clayton Esquires Sheriffs of the City.

November.
United Provinces, N.S.
by a Placaet, forbad all persons whatsoever within the Territories of the
seven Provinces, to import any French Wines, Vinegar, Canvas, Paper, or
Chestnuts, etc. upon forfeiture of the same, etc.



Paris Julie Lucine d'Angeness, N.S.
Duchess of Montansier, in the 64. year of her age.

Metz the Princess Palatine (daughter to the Elector Palatine) to the Duke of
Orleans. N.S.


Lindenow Envoy for the King of Danemark, in an Audience, acquainted their
Majesty's with the Birth of the Prince of Danemark; and at the Lady Williams
House, in the Palace-yard Westminster (entertained several) of the Nobility,
etc. at a very noble Supper, with other demonstrations of joy.

Brussels Sir Robert Southwell Envoy Extraordinary of his Majesty of Great
Britain. N.S.


Letters from Sir Edward Spragge dated September 30. N. S. in Algiers-Bay,
signifying great disorders there: and an alteration of Government among those
people.

Robert Southwell had Audience of the Count de Montery at Brussels. N.S.


Sunderland, his Majesty's Extraordinary Ambassador to the Crown of Spain, went
to Dover in order to his journey for Spain.

Don Francisco de Melo, Ambassador from the Crown of Portugal, made his public
entry at London.

December.
Don Francisco de Melo, Ambassador from the Crown of Portugal, had his public
Audience of their Majesty's, and afterward of his Royal Highness.

George Downing, his Majesty's Ambassador to the States General of the United
Provinces, began his journey for Holland.

The City of Astracan was surrendered to the Commander in chief of the Czars
Forces.

Katherine, his Royal Highness's youngest daughter, being about ten Months old.

Henry the 7th. Chapel.

Dyed his Grace William Duke of Somerset, in the 20th. year of his age, leaving
his Uncle, the Lord John Seymour Heir of his Honor and Estate.

Christ Church, near Paris Garden in Southwark, built by John Marshal late
Inhabitant there, was Consecrated by the Right Reverend Father in God, the
Bishop of Rochester.

Christophers, relating to some matters there acted by Sir Charles Wheeler,
touching the former Inhabitants, and Proprietors in that Island, etc.

Certain news of an Agreement made by the Elector of Cologne and that City.

George Downing, his Majesty's Ambassador to the States General of the United
Provinces arrived at the Hague. N.S.


January.
Ralph Montague Esquire was sworn one of his Majesty's most honorable privy
Council, and took his place accordingly.

Several accidents of fire happened at Venice, which did some considerable
damage.

George Downing Ambassador from his Majesty of Great Britain, N.S.
had his public Audience of the States General of the United Provinces.

N.S.
between the Elector of Cologne and that City.



Certain news of the arrival of a very considerable body, both of Horse and
Foot of the French Forces, in the Electorate of Cologne.

John Cousin, Lord Bishop of Durham, and Count Palatine there, in the 77. year
of his age.

United Provinces, by the command of the States General, for the averting those
evils, which seemed to threaten them from abroad.

Certain news from Captain Heart, from aboard the Rupert Frigate in Aligant Road,
of Sir Edward Spragges having concluded an honorable and advantageous Peace
with Argiers.

Joseph Williamson sworn Clerck of the Council in Ordinary, and his Majesty
conferred on him the honor of Knighthood.

February.
de Conti, N.S.
being embalmed and enclosed in a Box of Silver, was carried to the great
Convent of the Carmelites, where it was received with the usual solemnities.

George Downing his Majesty's Ambassador at the Hague, arrived at Whitehall.



Germany was brought to Bed of a Daughter in the Morning, N.S.
which was Christened in the Evening by the Popes Nuncio, by the name of Maria,
Anna, Apolonia, Josepha, Antonia, Scholastica.

Westminster Doctor Guy Carleton Bishop of Bristol, by his Grace the
Archbishop of York.

His Majesty Constituted Sir Gilbert Gerrad Knight and Baronet, High Sheriff of
the County Palatine of Durham, and appointed Sir Francis Goodrick Temporal
Chancellor of the said County: to be Keeper of the Great Seal of the said
Bishopric and County Palatine of Durham.

Thomas Ingram, at his house at Thistleworth.

Robert Carr Knight and Baronet, to succeed Sir Thomas Ingram, as Chancellor of
the County Palatine, and Duchy of Lancaster, and Keeper of the Seals of the
same: who was thereupon sworn of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council,
and took his place accordingly.

Astorgas, the new Vice Roy at Naples, N.S.
took possession of that Government.

Spain Don Jayme de castle Blanca, N.S.
a Nobleman, Sentenced thereunto by the Royal Council there, for many enormous
crimes, by him committed for 40. years together.

Vienna the young Emperial Princess. N.S.


Thomas Lord Leigh in the 77. year of his Age, leaving his Grandchild Thomas
now Lord Leigh, Heir to his Honor and Estate.

Vienna. N.S.


Amsterdam.

N.S.
The States General of the united conferred on his Highness the Prince of
Orange, N.S.
the Commander of Captain General, and Admiral of their Land and Sea Forces.

Orange, N.S.
entertained the States of Holland at a very noble and splendid Feast, in the
great Hall, where the said States usually assembled.

de Donah by a Court of Justice in Holland, N.S.
sentenced to loose his Command, he had in the service of that State, and his
goods within those Dominions to be confiscated, for killing in a Duel Monsieur
vander Mile.

Lincoln's Inn Sir Francis Goodrick, with his presence at dinner, accompanied
with his Royal Highness, and his Highness Prince Rupert, conferred there the
honor of Knighthood upon Mr. Pedley, and Mr. Stote, two former Readers there:
as also upon Mr. James Butler, and Mr. Francis Dorrel, of the same Society.

March.
Germans Madam Marie Therese of France, N.S.
in the fifth year of her Age.

York, Lord High Admiral of England, etc. to Sail and Navigate their Ships with
one third of their Seamen and Mariners, being Foraigners, without any
hinderance or molestation, etc.

Wight, and the Dutch Smirna Fleet, which continued till night.

of the Dutch richest Merchant Men were taken, and their Ree Admiral borded by
Captain John Holmes in the Gloucester Frigate, who took her, which afterward
sunk in his possession. Captain de Haes, Admiral of this Dutch Smirna Fleet,
was killed in this Engagement.

England, in its Doctrine, Discipline, and Government, as it is established,
and for indulging of Non-conformists, and dissenting persons in matters of
Religion.

United Provinces.

And also ordered his Proclamation to be issued for a general fast, throughout
this Kingdom, for the imploring the blessing of Almighty God, on his Majesty's
Naval Forces, to be kept in London and Westminster, etc. on Wednesday the 27th
of this Month, and throughout the rest of the Kingdom, on Wednesday after
Easter week.

Sir Edward Spragge, late Admiral of his Majesty's Fleet in the Mediterranean,
arrived at Whitehall.

de Valparacio was shot at Madrid, N.S.
by an unhappy accident, which fell out between the Carpenters of that place,
and the Marquis's Gentlemen

Brussels, between the Magistrates and the Commonalty, at a Meeting there of
the Commonalty, N.S.
called the nine Nations, about giving their consent for the raising of 300000
Florins more, etc.

Rupert went to Chattam, whether his Royal Highness went before early this
morning.

Essex, between 5 and 6. of the Clock after Noon, was seen to the Southward of
the Sun, and at a pretty distance from him, an unusual appearance of a Rainbow
color, giving a light resembling that of the Sun, (which was then to be seen)
which seemed to be a Mock-Sun, the fourth of this Month in the morning, 'twas
seen before though not so plainly.

Here Grotius Ambassador from the States General of the United Provinces, N.S.
had his last Audience of his most Christian Majesty at Versailles.

1672.
News of the continuation of the great scarcity of Corn at Naples, Palermo,
Zant, Cephalonia, and Corfu, etc. to the great distraction of those places,
etc. and that at Is^hia, an Island lying about 150. miles from Naples, the
Inhabitants had been several days without bread.

London and West-minster.

Cologne the Count of Hohenfelt, N.S.
with the Emperors Ratification of the Treaty concluded by that Elector and
that Town.

United Provinces in London and West-minster.

ordinary and usual places of abode, etc.

Another Proclamation for calling home all persons of his Majesty's Subjects,
living in the service, etc. of the States General of the United Provinces.

April.
Paris Madam Marguirette de Lorraine, N.S.
Duchess Dowager of Orleans, in the 57. year of her Age.

Britain had Audience of his most Christian Majesty, N.S.
about some matters relating to their Province.

Orleans, N.S.
was conveyed to St. Dennis, where 'twas Interred with the usual solemnities.

A Proclamation for the better clensing of the streets in Westminster, and
other adjacent places in the County of Middlesex.

Paris the most Christian Kings Declaration of War against the States General
of the United Provinces. N.S.


Durant, a French Captain of Horse in the service of the States of Holland, N.S.
was by their order taken into custody.

Hague the Here Meerman, N.S.
Extraordinary Ambassador of the States General of the United Provinces, to his
Majesty of Great Britain.

N.S.
and afterward in that of the Council of State.

Manifesto of the Elector of Cologne, N.S.
wherein he declared to be Neuter, during the war between his most Christian
Majesty, and the States General of the United Provinces.

etc.

del Fr^s^o Ambassador Extraordinary, from his most Catholic Majesty to his
Majesty of Great Britain, made his public Entry at London.

Here de Groot late Ambassador of the States General of the United Provinces at
the Court of France, N.S.
arrived at the Hague.

Venice, N.S.
and at some other places, as at Rimini, Pesaro, Cesen, etc. where it appeared
violent; especially at Rimini, where (as was reported) many of the Inhabitants
were killed, and most of the Houses ruined, with one of the principal Churches,
and the Bishop and Clergy of the Place, etc. killed in the same thereby.

Marquis del Fresno Ambassador Extraordinary from his most Catholic Majesty
had his public Audience of their Majesty's, and afterward of his Royal
Highness.

Westminster, according to their former Prorogation of the 22. of April 1671.
And further prorogued, in pursuance of his Majesty's Proclamation of the 22. of
September last, till the 30. of October 1672.

Was Created the right Honorable John Earl of Lauderdail, Duke of Lauderdale;
Henry Lord Arlington, Earl of Arlington, and Viscount Thetford; Anthony Lord
Ashly, Earl of Shaftsbury, and Baron Cooper, etc. and Sir Thomas Clifford,
Baron Clifford of Chudleigh.

Henry, Marquis of Worcester, Arthur Earl of Essex, George Viscount Hallifax,
were sworn of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council, and took their
places accordingly.

Lauderdail was Elected a Knight Companion of the most noble Order of the
Garter.

Jonathan Dawes Sheriff and Alderman of the City of London, in the 46th. year
of his Age.

John Cousin, late Lord Bishop of Durham, from Sir Gilbert Gerrads House in the
Pell Mell near Saint James, in order to the Interment of the said Bishop, at
Bishops Auckland near Durham.

Paris an Ordonance, N.S.
granting six months time to all Subjects of the States General of the United
Provinces in France, to withdraw themselves and their effects with leave and
liberty to Trade and Trafficque during that time, but no longer.

Montague Ambassador from his Majesty of Great Britain had his Audience of
leave of their Majesty's at St. Germans, N S.
and Mr. Sidney Godolphin arrived at Paris from England, in quality of Envoy
Extraordinary.

Germans toward Nantevil, N.S.
where he lodged this night.

May. 1672
Thomas Osborne Baronet, was sworn of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Counsel, and took his place accordingly.

Count d'Estrees Vice Admiral of France, was with the Squadron of French Ships
arrived at St. Helens in the Isle of Wight.

Rimini so violent a storm, N.S.
as to throw to the ground all the Houses the Earthquake, which had not long
before happened there, had left standing.

At Bologna and Ferrara most of their Vines were ruined, and their Corn
blasted, to the undoing of those Inhabitants.

Madrid the Cardinal de Moncada, N.S.
Duke of Montalto.

Whitehall for Portsmouth, and his Royal Highness passed with his Majesty's
Fleet by Dover westward, in order to a Conjunction with the French Squadron.

Whitehall toward Deal^.

Charle^o^, N.S.
accompanied with the Duke of O^^^ans.

Dutch Fleet was riding in Dover road.

Portsmouth to Whitehall.

And her Majesty from Dover.

A fire at Hamb^row, which beginning in a Merchants-House, in some hours diverse
considerable Houses, where thereby consumed.

Charleroy. N.S.


Dutch Fleet stood for Calais, where it Anchored this night.

etc. that the Act of Parliament made in the 12th. year of his Reign, for the
encouraging and increasing of Shipping and Navigation, etc. should be suspended
totally, etc. concerning or relating to any Ships or Vessels, their Masters or
Mariners, their Guns, Furniture, Tackle, etc. or to any Goods or Commodities
Imported or Exported to or for Norway, or the Baltic Sea.

Dutch Fleet was seen at the back of the Goodwin.

The States General of the United Provinces, published a Placaet, forbidding
their own Subjects to Trade for England or France, from any Countries
whatsoever, etc. as likewise all Strangers, though not inhabiting within the
said United Provinces, to transport any Goods or Commodities out of their
Territories, for the said Kingdoms, etc.

Dutch Fleet was plying too and again N. N. E. off the North Forelands.

Charleroy, N.S.
accompanied with the Duke of Orleans, with all his Troops, who marched in
three bodies, and lodged this night at Tongres.

Pirove, N.S.
two leagues and a half from Tongres, where his said Majesty Encamped.

The Viscount Turrenne arrived with his Forces at Luden.

Pirove, N S.
and arrived at Bran^on.

Gloucester with ten of his Majesty's Fregats, came to an Anchor below the
Gunfleet.

Dutch Ships.

His Royal Highness appeared with his Majesty's Fleet within fight of Dover.

grand Hach, N.S.
where they Encamped upon a large Plain.

Britain commanded and ordered, that the Ships, Goods, and Marchandizes of the
Subjects of the States General of the United Provinces, seized in any of his
Ports, before the Declaration of War, should be forth with set at liberty, etc.
and that all Dutch Merchants, or others, who neither in their Persons or Goods
were under this Detention, might freely depart this Kingdom, etc.

A Releasement was also made by the States General of the United Provinces, of
all English and Scotch Vessels stopped in any of their Territories, before the
said Declaration of War, etc.

French Army removed from Grand Hach, N. S.
and marched to Friar.

The Inhabitants of Ma^eyck persuaded to take in French Forces, in order to the
fortifying thereof.

Arrived at Tongues 80. Wagons laden with Corn, for the use of the French,
bought up in the parts about Viset.

Falls.

Jonathan Dawes, Sheriff and Alderman of the City of London, was honorably
Interred in Saint Katherines Creed Church.

etc. Encamped with his Army in the great Valley near Viset, N.S.
all along and beyond the Meuse.

North-sand head, standing Northwards.

Those of his Majesty's Fregats, under the Command of Captain Coleman in the
Gloucester, came to an Anchor in the Buoy of the Gunfleet.

The Dutch Fleet after the return of their Squadron out of the River, weighed
out of the Gunfleet and in the Evening appeared in sight of Alborough, and came
to an Anchor within four or five leagues thereof.

Maestricht almost blooked up by the French.

Coleman, set Sail in order to a Conjunction with his Majesty's Fleet.

Dutch Fleet, about eight leagues E. S. E. of the Gunfleet.

Southwould Bay, and came to an Anchor about four leagues thereof.

Lillo were opened, N.S.
and all the Polders set under water, as were likewise the Lowlands about
Bergen-op-Zoom.

etc. as they could or might have done, if no restraint or imbargo formerly had
been made, etc. and that all passes and protections for Ships and Mariners
formerly granted, should be in full force and effect.

Copenhagen his Grace the Duke of Richmond, N.S.
Extraordinary Ambassador from his Majesty of Great Britain.

Rhyne was wholly finished, N.S.
at or about Keysarwaert, where the French Army quickly after passed over.

Viset, N.S.
and passing the Meuse over a Bridge of Boats, encamped about half a league
from Viset aforesaid.

Liege came to complement his most Christian Majesty upon his arrival in those
parts. N. S.


Tower, doing considerable mischief.

News that at Zant, Zeffalonia, and Corfu, the Inhabitants were in so great
want of Corn, that several men did daily sell themselves to the Galleys, only
to have a small sustenance for life.

Southwould, Laytoff, etc. between his Majesty's Fleet, under the Command of
his Royal Highness, and the Dutch, in which the Royal James was burnt.

John Trevor, one of his Majesty's principal Secreraries of State, and one of
his most honorable Privy Council, in the forty seventh year of his Age.

London, with great demonstrations of public joy, etc. a new Conduit of a
noble and beautiful Structure being opened in the Stocks Market Place, near
Lumbard street, running Claret for diverse hours, etc. erected at the sole
charge of Sir Robert Viner, etc.

'Twas also Celebrated at Lyn, with great demonstrations of public joy.

Henry, Marquis of Worcester, the Earl of St. Albans, and the Earl of Bedford,
were Elected Knights Companions of the most noble Order of the Garter.

His most Christian Majesty having with his Army passed the Rhyne at
Keyserweart, arrived at Holtzen, a small place not far from Nuis, where his
Majesty was met by the Elector of Cologne.

June.
His most Christian Majesty with his Army marched toward Rhyneberg.

John Trevor at St. Bartholomews in Smithfield.

Sole Bay.



d'Enguine was brought to Bed of a Son at Saint Germans. N.S.


Lauderdale, by a Proxy, the right honorable Henry Marquis of Worcester, the
Earl of St. Albans, and the Earl of Bedford, were enstalled at VVinsor Knights
of the most noble Order of the Garter.

Rochester Monsieur Rabiniere tres le Bos, Reer-Admiral of the French Squadron,
who dyed at Chattam of the wounds he had received in the late Engagement.

Great troubles began to seize upon the people of the United Provinces, by the
appearance of the French Armies, who Besieging Rhyneberg, Orsoy, VVesel, and
Burick, were quickly possessed of them.

Madrid with much Thunder, N.S.
which broke down a part of the Tower of the Covent of the Holy Trinity; The
Lightning scorched one of the Fathers, and killed three men without the Gates.

Harwich) of the States General of the United Provinces, on his way to the
Dutch Ambassador at London.

Edinbergh his Grace the Duke of Lauderdale, his Majesty's High Commissioner of
Scotland.

Sandwich was discovered floating on the Sea, by one of his Majesty's Ketches,
and brought up to Harwich.

His most Christian Majesty's Armies appearing before Rees, quickly made that
and Emmerick their own; as the Bishop of Munster did Doetechem, Groll, and
Borkelo, after the taking of Rees and Emmerick the French proceeded to
Skenkscance of the Rhyne, in order to a passing the River about Tolhuys.

Low Countries, as should come into his Kingdom, etc.

His Grace the Duke of Richmond, his Majesty's extraordinary Ambassador to the
Crown of Deumark, made his public Entry at Copenhagen.

A Proclamation, forewarning and straightly commanding all his Majesty's
Subjects, etc. not by writing or speaking, to utter or publish any false news
or reports.

France was brought to Bed of a young Prince. N.S.


Paris, on occasion of his most Christian Majesty's good success against the
Dutch. N.S.


Hague, the people throwing stones at the house of the Here van Mombas. N.S.


Paris, and other demonstrations of public joy, N.S.
for the birth of the young Prince.

Henry, Earl of Arlington, elected a Knight Companion of the most noble order
of the Garter.

News that the French had passed the Rhyne into the Betuwe, that Utrecht had
yielded to his most Christian Majesty, and that the French Troops were advanced
as far as Amersford, and that the Bishop of Munster had taken Swoll and
Breefort, the French Knotzenbergh, and that Culenbergh, Tiel, Buren, etc. had
yielded to the French, that Ravestine was demolished by them, and that
Scenckscance, and Arnhem were also taken, and that the common people began to
be very rumultuous at Middlebourgh; and that at Amsterdam they were lately in
danger of being plundered by the commonalty, and that the Country there
abouts, as also at Dort, etc. was set under water for some leagues together, to
hinder the approach of the French; as also at Rotterdam, Leyden, and Delf, that
the common people were very unruly and tumultuous.

Tillions two brothers, N.S.
were Assassinated at Mons by seven or eight Spaniards, as they were coming out
of the Church.

Daesburgh. N S.


Dort amongst the Inhabitants, N.S.
in which the people would have been killing and plundering their Burgemaster,
and other chief Officers of the Town, had not the Lords presently declared his
Highness the Prince of Orange their Governor and Stadtholder.

Bucks, the right honorable the Earl of Arlington, the Earl of Shaftsbury, and
the Lord Clifford went to the Deputies of the States General of the United
Provinces at Hampton Court.

Doesburgh yielded to the French.

N.S.
The Count Conningsmark, Ambassador Extraordinary from the Crown of Sweden, had
Audience of his most Christian Majesty.

Arlington, was at Windsor, by a Proxy, enstalled Knight of the most noble
Order of the Garter.

Bucks, and the right honorable the Earl of Arlington, began their journey for
Holland, as his Majesty's extraordinary Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries.

Katherine and Henrietta Yachts from the Buoy in the Nore.

Deventer, N.S.
and that Swoll, Campen, Elborough, Arderwick Hatten, Hasselt, and Ommen, etc.
had yielded upon summons.

His Majesty had an account of the taking also of the Forts of Voorne and St.
Andre.

Bucks, and the right honorable the Earl of Arlington arrived at the Maes,
Landed at Maesland Sluice, and in the evening arrived at the Hague.

Strasburgh arrived at the French Camp, N.S.
and had Audience of the most Christian King.

Munster arrived there, N.S.
had (after his Majesty had had some conference with him) a Cross of Diamonds,
of very great value, presented unto him by his most Christian Majesty, and so
returned to his Army.

The Baron de Metemiche, Envoy from the Elector of Treves, had likewise
Audience of the said King.

And this night came news to his most Christian Majesty, of the surrender of
Zutphen.

Biloni toward Amerongen. N. S.


Amerongen. N.S.


The Sieur de Groot arrived in the French Camp with ample power, etc. from the
States General of the United Provinces.

Rome Cardinal Francisco Mancini, N.S.
in the 66. year of his age, and 15th. of his Cardinalato.

Harwich.

Holland.

Dort his Highness the Prince of Orange, N.S.
by an Act was made Stadt-holder.

Brill.

July.
Holland concluded, that the perpetual Edict of their never admitting of a
Stadt-holder, should cease, etc.

Grave yielded to the French.

Zealand made his Highness the Prince of Orange, Stadtholder of that Province,
etc.

His Highness was also made Stadtholder of Holland quickly after, and declared
Stadt-holder at Amsterdam.

Sandwich, (which was taken up at Sea) was magnificently Interred in King Henry
the 7th's Chapel, in the Vault on the North side of the Quire.

Henry Coventry Esquire sworn into the place of his Majesty's principal Secretary
of State, in the room of Sir John Trevor deceased.

Sworn also together with Sir Robert Long Knight and Baronet, of his Majesty's
most honorable Privy Council, and took their places accordingly.

Buckingham, and the Earl of Arlington, arrived at Utrecht from the Hague.



Arrived at Utrecht the Viscount Hallifax, Envoy extraordinary from his Majesty
of Great Britain.

N.S.


Nimmegen taken by the French.

The Commonalty at Rotterdam plundered the house of one of their Magistrates,
and beat out the windows of another, and several Articles were presented by the
Citizens to the Burgermasters and common Council of the same, etc. relating to
the Prince of Orange.

Hague to his Highness the Prince of Orange. N.S.


N.S.
decamped from Zeyst, and took his way toward Boisleduck by the way of
Arnehem, Nimmegen, etc. leaving the Duke of Luxemburgh, with a considerable
Force in the Province of Utrecht, which Province was now wholly possessed by
the French.

French Army Encamped half a mile from Rhenen. N.S.


Arnehem.

N.S.
Happened at Venice a violent storm with Thunder and Hail, of an extraordinary
bigness. N.S.


Rhyne, N.S.
and Encamped within half a league of Nimmegen.

Covoerden surrendered to the Bishop of Munster. N.S.


Vienna the Prince d' Anhalt from Berlin, N.S.
with full power to conclude a Treaty with the Emperor and the Elector of
Brandenburgh, for the defense of the Empire.

Certain news of the continuation of the difference between the Duke of Savoy,
and the States of Genoua, a War being begun between them some time before. The
Duke of Savoy's Troops, taking (or attempting upon) Pieve.

Harwich from his Majesty's Fleet, giving an account that the said Fleet was in
a good condition upon the Coast of Holland, and that his Royal Highness was in
perfect health.

Pelnitz arrived at the Hague, N.S.
on the part of the Elector of Brandenburgh.

The English Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries lodged at Nimmegen.

Waal, N.S.
and than it marched to Grave.

Grave. N.S.


N.S.
to a place called Boxtel.

Crevecoeur taken by the French.

English Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries, N.S.
parted from the French Camp at Boxtel toward Antwerp, and lodged at Turnhault.

Antwerp. N.S.


Bumstead of the Tower in Essex, that most accomplished and aged Gentleman, Sir
Thomas Bendish Baronet, formerly for very many years together Ambassador in
Turkey.

Bommel surrendered to the French. N.S.


Bucks, the Earl of Arlington, and the Lord Viscount Hallifax returned to
Whitehall.

His Majesty conferred the honor of Knighthood upon Henry Ford Esquire Secretary
to the Earl of Essex, as likewise on Captain John Edgeworth.

Essex, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, began his journey toward that Kingdom.

Cambridge and Bristol Frigates, met the Dutch East India Fleet, ten or twelve
leagues to the Westward of Heylige Landt, where they hotly engaged them.

A Proclamation that no person or persons whatsoever, should import, or cause
to be imported into England, Wales, or Barwick upon Tweed, any kind or sort of
Painted Earthen Wares, whatsoever, except those of China, and stone Bottles,
and Jugs, etc. upon pain of being grieviously fined, etc.

Boxtel, N.S.
for the Abbey of Postel, parted from thence toward Berningnen, proceeded to
Lummen, where he lodged this night.

Mombas made his escape out of Prison at the Hague. N.S.


Was brought to the Hague Prisoner from Dort, the Sieur de Wit, Ruwaert van
Putten.

News that Groningen was close Besieged by the Bishop of Munster.

St. Germans. N.S.


August.
N.S.
and general Defense of the Empire.

Euston was married to the only Daughter of the Earl of Arlington.

Pelnitz, Envoy from the Elector of Brandenburgh, N.S.
took his leave of the States General of the United Provinces, in order to his
return home.

de Wit was in the Assembly of the States of Holland, N.S.
endeavoring to clear himself of several matters whereof he stood accused.

The Dutch Fleet Northward of the Maes.

Essex, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, arrived at Dunlary, and about three in the
afternoon arrived at Dublin.

Middleburgh, N.S.
between the Magistrates and Burghers, etc.

Te Deum was sung in the Churches at Genoua, N.S.
for the Victory their Forces had lately obtained over those of the Duke of
Savoy at Castello Vecchio.

Maestricht more then ever blocked up by the French, by their lying quartered
round about it.

French Ambassador at London, the Ratification of the Treaty concluded by his
Majesty's late Plenipotentiaries in the French Camp, etc.

French passed on both sides the River, N.S.
near the Fort of Navaigne, with a very considerable Army toward Maestricht,
and quickly after as it were quite surrounded Maestricht, and drew a line of
Circumvalation between on Ravens House, and a small Village called Scharen, to
defend themselves against the Sallyes of that Garrizon.

News of Oneglia's surrender to the Genoueses.

etc.

Delf.

N.S.
Mr. Cornelis de Wit, ancient Burghermaster of the Town of Dort, N.S.
and Ruward of the Lands of Putten, was Sentenced by the Court of Holland and
West-Friesland, to be banished out of those Provinces, and to loose all his
Dignities and Employments possessed by him, etc.

He and his Brother the Pensionary de Wit killed by the people at the Hague, in
a most notorious manner, and their dead bodies hanged upon a Gallows by the
heels, being used in such manner as scarce the like has ever been heard off.

Madrid in the Placa Mayor a very great fire, N.S.
which in few hours burnt to the ground all the Pile of Buildings, called the
Planadera, with many other dwellings, etc. containing as was supposed 2000.
Families, whereof some were killed and burnt, and others hurt in quenching of
the fire.

Certain news that the Here de Groot was with drawn, etc. also that Sieur
Mombas and he was at Cologne.

Egra in Bohemia, N.S.
who quickly after marched from thence toward Halberstadt, in order to a
Conjunction with the Brandenburgh Forces, etc. Arrived there.

Monmouth, was brought to Bed of a Son.

Amsterdam, N.S.
of a menacing nature, and the people much dissatisfied, urging for a further
reformation in the Magistracy, in imitation of Rotterdam and Delf.

The Here Fagel elected Pensionary of Holland.

The Turks invade the Ukrain.

Dutch Army Colonel d'Ossery, N.S.
late Governor of Rhynebergh.

The Turks take Cominiec.

The Bishop of Munster raised his Siege at Groningen.

The Dutch Fleet arrived again before Shoonevelt.

French Army, which had for some time been encamped before Maestricht, N.S.
broke up from thence and marched toward the Rhyne.

September.
Zouteland Prisoner at the Hague, N. S.
made his escape out of Prison, but was retaken.

Brill had displaced all their old Magistrates.

Blockzeil retaken by the Dutch.

Luxemburgh's Forces, N.S.
and the Dutch about Woerden.

Delf drove their Magistrates from the Townhouse. N.S.


The Bishop of Munster returned with his Forces into Westphalia.

Middleburgh the Soulders under the command of Captain Soutland, N.S.
came in an unruly manner to the States, demanding their Arrears.

Charles Earl of Duncaster, his Grace the Duke of Monmouth's son was Christened
by his Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury.

Poland much disturbed and alarmed at the approach of the Grand Seignours
Forces, now having entered into those parts, acting vigorously against that
Kingdom.

Amsterdam, N. S.
where the Commonalty, would have been plundring Lieutenant Admiral de Ruyters
House.

Genoua Monsieur Gaumont, N.S.
the French Envoy.

N.S.
making some Propositions, in order to a Peace between that State and the Duke
of Savoy.

Turenne passed the Rhyne about Wesel with his whole Army, N.S.
in order to his attending the coming down of the Imperial and Brandenburgh
Forces.

His Highness the Prince of Orange wrote a Letter unto the Burghers of
Amsterdam, N.S.
in order to their desire in their changing of their Magistrates.

The Here Kievit made Pensionary of Rotterdam, in the place of the Here de
Groot.

Halberstadt General Montecuculi, N.S.
having left his Troops at Mulhausen.

Dutch Fleet off of Zealand, and many of their great Ships ordered to be laid
up for this Winter. N. S.


Bernards Cloister at Antwerp. N.S.


October 30. to the 4th. of February next.



Certain news, that many of the Dutch great Ships and men of War were gone in.

Brandenburgh took up his own Quarters in the English Monastry at Lambsping.
N.S.


Brandenburgh Forces arrived at Leeuwen. N.S.


Count Montecuculi left the Brandenburgh Court, and went to the Imperial Army.

Eysenach, N.S.
and took up their chief quarter at Herleshausen.

Heringen.

N.S.
To Kirckhassel a league from Heunfeldt.

The Imperial and Brandenburgh Troops at or about Heuxter, and made toward
Francford.

Durham, one of whom John Usard, at the place of Execution, confessed he was in
the plot in the year 1663. showing his hearty sorrow and penitence for the same.

Blesserbrugh, N.S.
between Steenwick and Wolviga, between a party of the Dutch, and some French
and Cologne Troops.

Robert Hanson was chosen to be Lord Mayor of the City of London, for the
ensuing year.

Pritchard and James Smith Esquire sworn Sheriffs of London and Middlesex.


