The Right GOVERNMENT OF THOUGHTS: OR, A Discovery of all vain, unprofitable,
idle, and wicked THOUGHTS; With Directions for the Getting, Keeping, and
Governing of good THOVGHTS. Digested into Chapters for the ease of the READER.
Whereunto are added four Sermons: By the Reverend JOHN ANGEL, sometimes
Lecturer at Leicester.

Prove. 4. 23. Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it, are the issues
of life.

London, Printed for Nath. Ekins, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the Sign
of the Gun in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1659.

CHRISTIAN READER.
THe Almighty wise God has in diverse and sundry manners spoken unto men, that
they might know him and his Son Jesus Christ, and knowing, might believe in,
him, and worship him according to his will, to the saving of their souls: To
this purpose we have the Scriptures, which are Gods written Rule of Faith, and
Life unto us; the ministry of men (not of men, but by men) as a standing
Ordinance in the Church until Christ come; and the writings of godly and
industrious men, as adjutory helps. But men have sought out strange inventions,
and that natural imagination (bordering betwixt sense and reason) which is in
all men, works out it self in various ways of opposition to revealed truth.

This discourse aims, to give a stop to our walking contrary unto God, in our
first settings out to Sin; which (on this side natural corruption) begin at
our thoughts.

I have sometimes wondered to see how busy Satan is in his instruments, whose
Fancies comply with his suggestions, to subvert the truth once delivered to the
Saints. But I check my self again, when I consider that he is Satan, an
adversary to God and Christ, and the salvation of men, and that men's
imaginations are fruitful wombes, impregnated by Satan, and numerous in their
births, as the Serpents in their spawne. Amongst other his wiles, I would
immind every good Christian, that in nothing, to my apprehension, the enemy and
his party have prevailed more against the truth, and with the fancies of men in
our late times, then by disputing the many doctrines of the Gospel, in Pulpit,
in press, in open, and private Assemblies, and that in an irregular way,
betwixt weak defendants, and wrangling Sophisters (it may be) Jesuits, or men
of Jesuited principles; for in an orderly way, by them that know how to
distinguish, and before them that are wise, I am no opposer of disputations,
that the truth may be manifested, and not subverted. But otherwise, these are
the Civil wars raised in the Church, and fomented by the seditious, to
divide the Kingdom of Christ against it self, and bring it to nothing. By this
way of contention (especially before them that are weak) we have seen heaps
upon heaps: It Is time to grow wise for the cause of Christ, and for our selves,
lest we suffer these stumbling stones to lie so long in the way of weak
Christians, that at last they be bedded, as in their proper place, and will not
be removed with all our might: Ye have sometimes seen a stone cast into a
poole, move a little Circle at the fall, which after multiplies, and widens it
self to the bank side. We sometimes find the original of error to be very
small, like a very Center, which inlargeth it self to a circumference, such as
imagination will make it; and such strange thoughts are lodged in men's minds,
by these means, that they are haunted ever after with them, as some houses are
said to be with spirits of the night. Sober men wish that some provisions were
made, for the safety of souls against these spirits: its possible, if they
that are in power, would be careful in such a work, their own lives might be
bound up in such a provision.

But, Gentle Reader, Thou shall not need to fear any such questions of doubtful
disputation in this short Treatise: here is nothing but sober and
uncontroverted truths, such as may administer Grace unto thee, by the blessing
of God upon thy reading: Thou shall have nothing here leading to a strange God,
or another worship, but that which may be profitable to all Christians, though
of divided interests, whose minds are not blocked up with prejudice against the
sober writings of men. This tract teaches the government of thy own thoughts
aright; a government of principal concernment to all men; for hence arise, as
from their springhead, both words and works of men, and the whole frame of
Christian Conversation: if therefore this fountain be clean, the issues will be
more pure, and if any can so purge himself of all filthiness of flesh and
spirit, that his very thoughts are just, it must be granted, that such an one
has a Virgin-soule, and is perfect, pro statu viatoris, as a travailer to
heaven, though not as one actually possessed in heaven. And for this end I
commend this book to thy reading, and meditating thoughts. Besides, it is an
argument rarely handled in print (for ought I know) some indeed have brief and
accidental notions upon it, but purposed tracts of this subject, are few in our
English Tongue; and therefore let it be thought the rather useful to the Church
of God, and a subject more fit for that accomplished servant of Jesus Christ,
to appear by in the world again: now he is absent from the body, and present
with the Lord.

The Author of this small Tract was Mr. John Angel, who had been twenty years
together Lecturer at Leicester, and approved by all that knew him, to be a man
mighty in word and doctrine, though at last clouded by some malevolent aspects
upon him, occasioned (as it is said) not for vice or heresy, but
non-engagement; yet Governments, as men, have their mortalities; and God, who
knew to use his servant in several places, stirred up the hearts of a religious
people at Grantham in Lincolnshire, to set him up a Candlestick there, where he
shone as a burning light, until God translated him, to shine above as a star
for ever and ever.

Here, moreover, are no high swelling words to amuse the Reader, but a grave
and a plain style suited to all, but especially to them that are of lower forms
in the School of Christ, for the government of their thoughts. I commend it?
therefore, to thy reading for the Authors sake, and for thy safety in the
reading of it; as also for the rarity of the subject, the general concernment
that it is of, and for the plainness of the matter and method thereof. And I
leave thee to the Grace of God the Father, and of our Lord Jesus Christ.

By him who is a Servant of the Lord Jesus Christ, and of all that love him in
sincerity, T. B.

THE CONTENTS.

CHAP. I. Containing the Preface, Division, Interpretation, and scope of the
Proverb. fol. 1. CHAP. II. The Argument or matter subject of the whole, that a
man ought to have good thoughts, and to be the Master and Governor of them. 8.
CHAP. III. The needfulnesse of good thoughts: Eight Reasons. 13. CHAP. IV. Of
the Errors of thoughts, which are, Dullness, Levity, Wickedness, whereof
Dullness, and Levity 26. CHAP. V. Of the wickedness of Thoughts, drawing in
the will to complacency in wickedness, and the understanding to devise
mischief. 43. CHAP. VI. General remedies of evil Thoughts. 50. CHAP. VII.
Particular remedies against evil thoughts, and against dullness. 70. CHAP.
VIII. Remedies against Levity, or vanity of Thoughts. 76. CHAP. IX. Remedies
against wickedness of thoughts. 89. CHAP. X. Get good thoughts, and keep them;
Reasons; Rules, to get good thoughts. 98. CHAP. XI. Govern good thoughts
gotten; Reasons: Rules ten: for the right government of good thoughts. 122.

The right GOVERNMENT Of THOUGHTS.
CHAP. I. The thoughts of the Righteous are just: Prove. c. 12. v. 5.
THis Son of Wisdom, who carried away the Birthright, and blessing, from all
the sons of Adam, who are now, or have been before him: took as sufficient
notice of the orders, ranks, and dispositions of men, as he did of the
natures, qualities, and operations of Herbs, Plants, and Trees: and accordingly
fitted to every particular, both men, and things, suitable Proverbs, describing
what they were, or declaring what they should be: wherein he uses a kind of
unimitable brevity for memory, and a frequent opposition for perspicuity. So
here, the thoughts of the righteous are just; but the counsels of the ungodly
are deceit.

Now this wise Discourser upon Gods secrets revealed, and of natures under God,
directs his Proverbs unto men, either marshalled into ranks in general, as good
or evil; or branched into diverse particulars, as the diligent and the sluggard,
the humble and proud, etc. And according to this direction of the
matter-subject unto persons, the Proverbs are either general, or particular.

This Proverb in regard of persons to whom it is directed, seems to be a
general spoken to good men under the name of Righteous. For I observe, that
Solomon speaks to the better sort of men under the names of good men, righteous
men, wise, just; as he does to the worser sort of men in opposition; the evil
man, the wicked man, the unrighteous, the fool.

Three things in the text offer themselves to be unfolded.

1. Who is Salomons Righteous man. 2. What be his thoughts. 3. How they are
said to be just.
First, if ye ask who is Salomons Righteous man; I answer, as before, he that
is a good man, a just man, a wise man.

But further, when in Scripture a man has the denomination of a Righteous one;
it is either from the justice of Christ imputed, which is absolute in
perfection, though relative in apprehension; or from that inward and inherent
renovation of soul and body, whereby God makes a man righteous in himself
habitually, and in his course of life, suitable in kind, though not in measure,
unto that primary justice which was in Adam. Or thirdly, a man is called
righteous in appearance, because he is apprehended by himself in his own
thoughts, or judged by others, to be righteous, by his words and deeds.

This Proverb though it exclude not the just man by imputation, yet it
especially points out him that is just by renovation, and in appearance, who is
not only really accounted such, in the righteousness of Christ; but also made
such by the spirit of Christ, and known by himself to be such by his habituated
thoughts, and appearing to the world to be such by his words and deeds. This is
Salomons righteous man, a man righteous in Gods acceptance, a man made
righteous by renovation, a man righteous in his own persuasion, and in the
worlds reputatation.

The second thing to be unfolded is, What the thoughts of the Righteous be. I
answer, God, the first producer of all things, who made the mind of man, uses
it also to bring forth all reasonable and humane actions, as a free agent under
himself; and to this end, has ordained in it a power to frame thoughts and to
dispose them toward action; that by these the soul might move it self
continually toward the chief good, and by them may communicate her self with
earthly things, natural and humane. The mind inclined and moved by God the
first cause has motions within it self, called thoughts; and of these there
are two sorts, whereof the first receive their determination within the soul,
and in the same have their perfection, being therein produced, and reflecting
upon the mind, put themselves forth no further.

The other sort are the immediate forerunners of actions; whether it be that
the soul lift up it self to communion with God in divine contemplation, that
she may utter her self in prayer or praises: or communicate her self with the
creature in lower resolutions, and actions. These private stirrings of the soul
within doors, are the thoughts of men; and when they are just, they are the
thoughts of the Righteous.

These thoughts of men are various and infinite, according to their variety of
objects about which they are conversant; But when their first mover is God, and
Gods glory their end propounded, and a wise man the disposer of them, they are
just thoughts.

And thus we are led to the third particular, which is, How the thoughts of the
righteous are said to be just.

Ans. Things are said to be right or just many ways.

First, that is right which has rectitude from it self, and is the cause of
rectitude in every other thing; and so God only is righteous.

Secondly, things are said to be right which have rectitude from another; yet
there is in them such an equity conferred, that they are made infallible rules,
for men to square all their actions by them; and thus the Law, and the whole
revealed will of God is righteous.

Thirdly, things are said to be righteous, which are ordered and done according
to this rule; whether perfectly as the righteousness of Christ God-man, which
answered fully to the rule of Gods will revealed, both for kind and degree; or
proportionably and acceptably, whereby something is done according to rule,
though not fully and without aberration, yet well in comparison of what wicked
men do, and holding some proportion to the rule, and finding acceptance with
God, who supplies the want^ of such righteous men from the fullness of Christ.

In this sense the thoughts of the righteous are just (viz.) comparatively with
the thoughts of wicked men, though not fully according to the rule, yet holding
some proportion with it, and having acceptability with God.

Thus having unfolded the words, observe that the scope or special intention in
this Proverb, is to deliver to the world the true ground of all pious and
honorable and just actions, which is next and immediately under God, the
thoughts of the righteous.

CHAP. II. THe thoughts of the Righteous are just.
Ye have heard the Proverb expounded: and it appears to be a Doctrine of it
self, affording a stable and sufficient ground unto a holy course of life in
word and deed. The Argument and matter-subject of this Treatise, is this, To
show, that he which is a righteous man in Gods acceptance, by the spirits
sanctification, in his own persuasion, and the worlds reputation, ought to have
just thoughts, and to be the Master, or Governor of them; he must endeavor to
get them into his mind, and having gotten them, it is required, that he rightly
govern them, for the orderly and seasonable producing of their effects in words
and deeds.

The government of his thoughts is a righteous man's great business, of great
necessity, and of much difficulty. It Is day work, and night work, with him: his
meditations are always upon it; he so delights in the Law of the Lord, that he
meditates in it day and night. Psalm. 1. 2. Some are careful of their actions,
that by them they give no offense to the weak, nor lay stumbling blocks in the
way of them that are without. These are commendable amongst the godly: others
go further, they keep their lips as it were with a bridle, and they are
purposed that their mouths shall not transgress; Psalm. 39. 1. Psalm. 17. 3. yet
few people go so far as to take heed to their thoughts. It seems all men are
not aware of it, that their inward thoughts may be very wickedness: but a wise
man thoroughly instructed, and sanctified by the Spirit of God, loves the Law
of God with such vehemence, that he hates those floating vanities of his
thoughts, which rise in opposition to it. I hate vain thoughts, (said that
righteous man) but thy Law do I love. Psalm. 119. 113.

And every just man does so govern his thoughts, that they are generally good.
I do not say that every particular thought of a righteous man is just: David
had his exorbitancies in thoughts, or else they had not so much appeared in his
doings; and yet his heart was right with God for the main. And so it is with
many of Gods dear children, they have excurrent and sinful thoughts, the
knowledge whereof, give many a secret prick upon their consciences; though they
have good meanings, and good hearts generally. It is written of Asa, that the
high places were not taken away out of Israel in his days; nevertheless the
heart of Asa was perfect all his days. 2 Chro. 15. 18. A righteous man may
sometimes think foolishly, as well as speak unadvisedly with his lips, or put
his hands unto wickedness; Yet as his words and works are for the main end,
regulated by the word of God, so are his thoughts. A righteous man is the
master of just thoughts. And though Master-workmen may sometimes mistake in
their lines and measures, and sorting their materials; yet not like them that
have no skill in building. If a righteous man meditate in Gods precepts, he
will have respect unto Gods ways. Psalm. 119. 15.

Take the reason of the righteous man's practice, on this behalf.

First his thoughts are moved upon by the Spirit of God; though God be not in
all the thoughts of the wicked; yet the righteous, God leads by his Spirit, and
guides by his counsel. There are many that are after the flesh, and these mind
the things of the flesh; (...) they cannot think of higher things, because they
have no higher principle of life within them; but there are some that are after
the spirit, and these mind the things of the spirit; for they have received,
not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit of God; Romans 8. 5 and therefore
mind and think upon the things of God; and their thoughts are just.

1 Cor. 2. 11. Secondly, a righteous man has an holy principle of good
thoughts within; he has grace inherent, the new man is put upon him: and he is
renewed in the spirit of his mind: and Ephesians. 4. ergo, though he was sometimes
darkness, yet now he is Ephesians. 4. 8. light in the Lord. O the sweet and secret
interviewes and consultations, held betwixt God and the souls of his beloved
ones: they think upon God in the night-season, while others lie upon their beds
and sleep securely. Their thoughts enter into his Pavilion, while other men's
thoughts rove and wander abroad amongst many vain things, and know not where to
make any stay, to fasten themselves; the spirit of life which is in them that
are Christ's, quickens their minds to think upon that which is just. Romans 8. 2.

Having thus far proved that the thoughts of righteous ones are just, and
that he which is a righteous man, must have good and just thoughts; my method
shall be,

1. To show the necessity or needfulnesse of this government of the thoughts.
2. The errors and exorbitances of men's thoughts. 3. The remedies against these
exorbitancies; Generally, Particularly.
4. The means to get good thoughts. 5. Rules to govern good thoughts gotten.
CHAP. III.
FIrst, the needfulnesse of the government of thoughts appears, because
thoughts are the fountain or spring of all humane actions, whether they be good
or evil. A man ordinarily first thinks, and after speaks out with his mouth,
or works outwardly with the members of the body. My heart was hot within me
while I was musing, the fire kindled, and I spoke with my tongue: Psalm. 39. 3.
So the wicked devise devices against Jeremy, and then smite him with the
tongue. Jer. 18. 18. Pharaoh thought to deal wisely, and then commands to
destroy the Hebrew children; wherefore seeing actions good or evil issue from
our thoughts, we ought to take notice of that wise advice; Keep thy heart with
all diligence. Prove. The soul retains so much of its spiritual nature, and
native perfection, that after the similitude of God, it is in continual action,
though it be its imperfection to be in doing either good or evil. Thoughts
pass in the mind as currently, as water in the livelyest fountain; it is not
like a watch in thy pocket, which will not run without winding up; it is a
natural mover, and is in uncessant motion toward good or evil. Gods thoughts
are good eternally; but the best men's thoughts are to good and evil; were they
only good and not evil, the less care of prevention would serve in this
government of thoughts. But it is the misery of our souls, that the imaginative
faculty, whose perfection is always to think, should be taken up, too often
times with thinking evil. The Holy Spirit notes this with a black coall "The
imaginations of natural men, are evil continually, though the thoughts of the
righteous be just. Genesis 6. 5. Genesis 8. 21. Grace and nature mix in the
regenerate man, and because of these different principles, his thoughts move
within him to good and to evil, as he said; I delight in the Law of God after
the inward man; but I see another law in my members warring against the law of
my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin which is in my
Members. Romans 7. 22, 23. This is one reason, why our thoughts have need of
government.

Secondly evil thoughts are sin, Prove. 24. 9. The thought of foolishness is
sin, not the action only, but the thought also is sin: it is a loose opinion,
and strikes at the root of godliness; That thoughts are free, or that they are
sins not much markable, or of heinous consequence, yet let me speak the truth,
as it is in Christ. Evil thoughts are sins of special note, and dangerous,
because they are primary sins;ns; and leaders of other sins in and out: out of
the heart proceed evil thoughts, Mat. 7. 18. as the thoughts of Adultery,
Murder, etc. The best action in the world, if it proceed not from a
well-ordered and disposed thought is not commendable, and doubtless an evil
work premeditated, and thought upon, is so much more sinfulnful and damnable;
Simon Magus did not give money for the holy Ghost, though he offered it,
because there were none that would receive it; yet Peter perceived him in the
gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity: yet Peter denounces, Thy
money perish with thee, because thou have thought, that the gift of the holy
Ghost may be purchased with money: Act. 8. 18. 23. others sins are sinsns at
second hand, and (as some think) so far forth dangerous, as they have residence
in the heart.

3. Evil thoughts are the occasions of sin, and therefore require a strict hand
to be kept over them; wicked doings, and wicked sayings, begin at wicked
imaginations: An unjust man devises mischief upon his bed, and then sets
himself in a way that is not good: Psalm. 36. 4. when God gave up the Gentiles
to a reprobate mind, they did things which were not convenient, they were
filled with all unrighteousness: Romans 1. 28, 29. if the heart be filthy
within, the mouth will speak out of the abundance thereof; it cannot be, but a
foul heart and mind should be attended with a foul life, or a very
hypocritical: The Gentiles (of whom even now) had vain minds, and they walked
in the vanity of their minds. Where there is vanity in the mind, there will be
wickedness in the walk. Ephesians. 4. 17.

4. God will punish evil thoughts. Solomon pronounces, The thoughts of the the
wicked are an abomination to the Lord, but God will punish abominations. Prove.
15. 26. Our Savior brings the thoughts of unadvised anger, and the desires of
Adultery within the compass of sin, and of judgment too. The actions of the
soul, though discontinued from transiency, into apparent aberrations, are both
sinful and punishable by the Law of God: indeed the laws of men, in their
animadversions and punishments, reach but to word or deed? but here is the
breadth and purity of Gods Law, that it forewarnes and punishes the evil of
thoughts: wherefore look to your thoughts, And if but any of those inward parts
be wickedness, pray that the thoughts of your hearts may be forgiven. Acts 8.
22.

5. Good thoughts are pleasing unto God; My son give me thy heart, says
wisdom: Prove. 23. 26. without the heart, all the works of thy hand are nothing
worth with God: God loves the spiritual sacrificer, one that worships him in
spirit and in truth: and what more spiritual service unto God, then to offer
him our thoughts, these are the firstborn of our souls: Joh. 4. 23. the prime
productions of the mind, whereinto no eye pryes, but that which is ten thousand
times brighter than the Sun in his clearness. This close sacrificer is by so
much more pleasing unto God, as he is without base respects, to impair his
worth. There is no witness of what passes betwixt God and a thinking soul,
none present but God, taking and accepting and the soul-offering; In these
attendancies of the soul upon God, there is no Law-enforcements by punishments
or shame, which carry them forward: nor censure of enemies, nor flatteries, or
rewards of the world. And when God finds a pure progeny of holy and unforced
thoughts proceeding freely from himself their progenitor, and directed to him
as their chief good; God takes the persons to him, as Jacob did Ephraim and
Manasseh, and bestows upon them the privilege of having his name named upon
them. Gen 48. 16. A righteous man whose thoughts are just, is so pleasing unto
God, that God keeps a Bill of his name, that he may remember him in due time.
God keeps a book of remembrance before him, wherein are written, They that fear
the Lord, and that think upon his name. Malac. 3. 16.

6. Good thoughts unite us unto God, so many good thoughts as we have, so much
acquaintance we have with God: so much as our thoughts are turned unto God, so
much is God turned unus: holy thoughts and heavenly meditations are our
Communions with God. A man in divine meditations if fixed, and active; is in a
sort slipped out of the world, and his own body, to keep company, and to speak
with God. Happy soul, whose thoughts immediately carry him unto God, or but
immediately thinks of God in the creatures! we should let no thought pass,
unless God be at one end of it, or have reference to it; the Apostle James
says of speeches; can one fountain send forth both sweet water and bitter?
Jam. 3. so of thoughts let me speak, can one heart send out thoughts uniting
unto God, and at the same time thoughts tying us unto the Devil, make us one
with the world, and heaven, with the spirit and the flesh? no, in no sort,
therefore look that your thoughts keep correspondencie one with another, and
all with God.

7. Good thoughts are comfortable to our souls, and therefore we had need to
govern our thoughts justly: our thoughts in some sort are more comfortable then
either good words or works, a man may take the truest measure of his gracious
stature, by his own thoughts. It is our joy and Crown of rejoicing before men
and Angels, if we can say with Paul, we have lived in all good conscience
toward God. Acts 23. 1. To have such an even course in morality, honesty,
charity, as gives satisfaction to the good, and stoppes the mouths of
gainsayers, and to have such a government of words as may teach many, hurt
none, profit all, is a great mercy: yet this will not satisfy nor give true
warrant of comfort to the soul, no nor make our outward obedience acceptable to
God, till we have purified our hearts, and set in order our thoughts from
whence words and works, do arise: A man may keep a fair Quarter with the world,
obtain a good reputation for commendable morality, be well esteemed for outward
rites of Religion, yet have thoughts as black as hell, filthy as Sodom: he that
said, hail Master to Christ, and kissed him, was the Traitor among the twelve,
and while a soul is so filthy within, what comfort can she have of any thing
outwardly done? Oh when a soul is stung with fiery Serpents, and the great red
dragon has wrapped the poor wretch under him, Where shall he find comfort and
peace? Do thou think to find comfort in thy works? Comfort is not there, for
they were done but in formality and hypocrisy; pass to thy words. Comfort is
not there, for words are wind, masked too often according to the judgment of
thy betters, the sway of the times, thy own projects and designs in hand: most
men minding to put on a seemingnesse of good intentions, as Herod did to
worship the babe Christ, few walking in the uprightness of their hearts, and
according to the simplicity of the Gospel.

If therefore thou would find peace and comfort in times of temptation, turn
into thy own thoughts, if thou find them swept and garnished, sweet and well
disposed, thou may assure thy self Christ has been there: Blessed is the
man in whose spirit there is no guile: Psalm. 32. 2. a spiritual, guilelesse
mind, is a comfortable evidence of Christ, being in us. So a man which would
know the cleanness and virtue of a water, comes to the nearest issues that may
be found, because the lowest streams may be altered by the Channel or
inundation of other sloods, or foiled by the trampling of beasts: so, would
thou know thy self, whether Christ dwell in thy heart or no? Search thy
thoughts and thy affections, these are the immediate issues of thy soul, and
such as these are, such is thy state of grace or nature.

8. There is great need thou govern thy thoughts, for God knows all the
thoughts of men; when David prayed, give ear to my words O Lord, consider my
meditation, Psalm. 5. 1. he prayed in faith, knowing that God did what he prayed
him to do. God hears the words of his servants praying, and considers the
very meditations of the heart: it is the Psalmists confession, that God tries
the heart and reins: Thou Psalm. 7. 9. know my down-sitting, and my uprising,
Psalm. 139. 2 thou understandest my thoughts afar off: those voces inconditae,
unformed, and embryon actions of the soul, are known unto God: Thou, even thou
only 1 Kings. 8. 39. O Lord know all the hearts of the children of men.
There is nothing so inward and hidden in man, that God should not see it
openly. Many miraculous believers came to Christ at Jerusalem, upon the
Passover in the feast day, but Jesus would not trust himself with them; why?
but because John 2. 24, 25. he knew all men, he knew what was in them. If the
Scribes speak but within themselves, Jesus knows their thoughts, and reproves
them; wherefore think ye evil in your hearts? Beloved, remember what Job
answers the Lord, I know that thou can do every Mat. 9. 4. thing, and that no
thought can be withheld from thee. Such a consideration Job 42. 2 as this
will make you wary in the government of your thoughts, nothing runs or stays
in your minds, and hearts, but God looks on it. The good or evil of a man's
thoughts lie in the dark to the eyes of other men, unless evidenced by some
further production of it in words or gesture, or deed: but God with whom we
have to do, sees all things as clear as in the day; for night and day are to
him alike: what avayles then to hide from men, while God looks on, who will one
day be our judge?

And thus much concerning the great need, which we have of the right government
of our thoughts: They are the fountains of all actions, good or evil: evil
thoughts are sin, and the occasions of sin, and God will punish for them.
But good thoughts are pleasing unto God, they unite us unto God: they are
comfortable to our own souls, and God knows all our thoughts; therefore let
us labor to be the Masters of good thoughts, and to govern them aright.

I might add that a man has a good companion, yea many good companions toward
Heaven, that has always good thoughts with him; others sit solitary, and
complain for want of company, but a man of a large heart, and good thoughts, is
never less alone, then when alone. Those hours are comfortable, and full of
contentment, wherein the thoughts entertain God, the chiefest good; and those
dependancies which bring us to the enjoying of him.

CHAP. IV.
I Have proved that the getting and governing of his thoughts is necessary to
the well-being of a just man's life; let me proceed to declare the common
errors and exorbitancies of the Christians thoughts: which though it be a
thing difficult considering the variety and multiplicity of the souls unkind
progeny of evil thoughts: yet by Gods grace, I will adventure in the humility
of my soul, to give you my thoughts in this matter.

The soul is the nobler part of man, fitted of God unto the greatest works; to
wit, the contemplation of himself, and of heavenly things; or the framing of
our actions to earthly subjects, with reference to Gods glory, and its own
salvation; yet sometimes, it leaves off its noble work, and contrary to her
essential being, thinks of nothing at all, or contrary to its well-being,
thinks of that which is unprofitable: in both these respects, the thoughts of
men and women, are not just.

The first common error of our thoughts may not unfitly be called, dullness or
drowsinesse of thoughts, when imagination is dull and thinks of nothing at all,
or but sleepily: it sometimes happens that the minds of men are as it were
dead within them; a spirit of heaviness comes upon them; Isa. 61. 3. so Ezra
sat astonished until the evening sacrifice, like a clock that stands when the
plummets are down, or as a man in a deep sleep, or amazement; Ezra. 9. 4. 5.
the soul thinks not of what it has to do. A Christian has business at home
in himself, and abroad in the world, yet oftentimes he forgets himself, and
thinks not at all, or but sleepily of what he has to do, say (beloved) Is it
not sometimes thus with you? Do you not sometimes find a damp upon your
spirits, so that ye had need to pray unto God to quicken them? My soul cleaves
to the dust, quicken me according to thy word. Psalm. 119. 27. This is a fault
of imagination, against the nature of it, which tends to its perfection by
continual action.

The second error of our thoughts, is when our imaginations are busy, but
they act not to any profitable end to our selves or others, for prevention of
evil, or attainment of good; and too often they act to wicked ends, to the
harm of our selves and of others. The first of these two we may call the
vanity of thoughts; the other the wickedness of thoughts.

First, there is a very vanity in some men's thoughts; so the Gentiles became
vain in their imaginations, having their foolish hearts darkened, Romans 1. 21.
they could not know God as God, and therefore they conceive him in their
minds, in the similitude of four-footed beasts, of creeping things, and of
flying fowls. This I may call a vanity of mind, in regard of object, or the
thing thought upon. The Apostle notes it a fault, in that he forbids it. Refuse
vain and old wives fables, and exercise thy self rather unto godliness. 1 Timothy
4. 7

It would be an endless labor to tell you in what variable manner the minds
of men are inclined to six their thoughts upon matters, according to their
disposition, education, place, or company; nothing possesses the brains of
some, but toys, fancies, humors, fashions, discourses of Robin-Hood, tales of
Southamptons Beavis, etc. or that Athenian disposition, and unwearied desire to
hear news of others, with an idle invention how to utter the same
complementally to others; some minding gameing and sports, hawking, hunting,
etc. Others new fashions, good-fellowship, mirth, and jestings, which are not
convenient.

These vain thoughts are especially appropriated to the worser sort of men and
women; yet the best of Gods children want not some out-runnings in this kind.
But it would be considered that these thoughts are vain imaginations indeed;
for they neither lift the soul to communion with God upward, nor have reference
to the settling of the souls peace inward, nor direct the soul to the
performance of any warrantable action in its course downward. Such are all the
daughters of this imaginary vanity.

If it be here objected, that God has granted thoughts recreatory for the
souls weariness, as well as exercise for the bodies relief; it is true indeed;
but these thoughts must be squared by these rules, or else they be not exempted
from vanity.

1. The object of recreatory thoughts, must be things that are in their own
nature truly indifferent; for we are herein subject to be partial, our thoughts
blinded by affection, rather than led by judgment out of the Law of God. What
we think to be no hurt, may be, and often is, no less poisonful than Hen-bane.

2. We must admit them as underlings, to our better and more necessary
thoughts, lest servants ride on horseback, and Princes go on foot.

3. They must not take up over much time, lest instead of fitting the mind
thereby to better thoughts, they exclude good thoughts altogether.

4. We must be wary, lest under pretense of these indifferent things for the
minds recreation, Satan do not fasten upon us some deadly temptation; for
these recreatory thoughts are not seldom the bands to bring in some other
filthy sins; wherefore if those which thou call recreatory thoughts be
sinful, if they take up a disproportionable time, if they fasten upon thee any
wicked temptation, if they enfeeble thy mind from better thoughts; be thou
assured, they have a measure of vanity in them. What though some plead for
these things? as are the thoughts, so is the man. The servants of Christ shall
find, that when they give way to such thoughts, the holy courses of their souls
are interrupted; their peace which ought to be dear unto them is endangered,
their precious and unredeemable time spent, and their inward man seldom sends
them away without disturbance. Let the thoughts therefore of vain matters pass
for vain thoughts.

The second vanity of thoughts is the unstayednesse or levity of them; which is
a kind of shuttlenesse or sicklenesse of our thoughts; the mind in this
respect, whether conversant about good or evil, may not unfitly be compared
unto the unstable eyes of the Adulterer, which be in every corner of the house;
now in heaven soaring aloft, immediately in hell diving beneath; or like the
lightning, which flasheth in a moment out of the East, into the West. These may
be called wandering imaginations, our minds being naturally subject in this
manner, to stray out of their appointed limits, as Dinah out of her fathers
house, with no less danger than she found shame. This vanity the Apostle seems
to note unto us, when describing the blindness of the Gentiles hearts, he
tells us, That they walk in the vanity of their minds; having their
understandings darkened, being alienated from the life of God, through the
ignorance that is in them. Ephesians. 4. 7. 18. They had walking imaginations, but
they were in the dark, and therefore wandered in uncertainties. Such roving
unsettled thoughts there was in the people of Israel, when sometimes they were
in their thoughts for Egypt, sometimes for Assyriah: which occasioned the
Prophet to complain of them: Why gaddest thou about so much to change thy way?
thou shall be ashamed of Egypt, as thou wast of Assyriah. Jerem. 2. 36.

This Error, as all others; began from the fall of Adam, before which, the
mind being assured of its chief good, was moved in a stable manner about that
Center, as the Stars equally about the Pole; but thenceforth losing her
enjoyment of the chief good; and instead thereof having the fruition of
infinite seeming goods, it became like a Planet, or wandering Star, carried
unstayedly, or uncertainly about the same.

These Roveings are especially in sanguine men, and such as are most removed
from undistempred melancholy; for doubtless melancholy persons in their best
temper, have the most solid and fixed imaginations, as the sanguine and
choleric the most moveable: but the wanderings of imagination, they breed a
disturbance in every action about which the mind is employed, a disturbance
sensible to any who carry about them an observant eye. Yet Gods servants find
the most apparent harm by such thoughts, when they set themselves about
heavenly business; suppose prayer, or meditation, or hearing, etc. Genesis 15. 11
If Abraham be about his sacrifice, the birds come down and trouble him, till
they be frighted away: so while we are about Gods worship, these kind of
thoughts do most; of all molest us. It is a hard matter to keep the soul to a
stable motion of thoughts: but most difficult when it is exercised about
supernatural duties; For now the Devil who envies our good, and the glory of
God in such duties, casts into our minds vain and impertinent thoughts.
Besides our minds themselves are unhandsome and indisposed to such work
naturally; and though where grace is, there may be a willingness of spirit,
yet there is also a weakness of flesh.

But it may be some will be so far from accounting this an error, that they
will rather call it variety of invention, quickness of wit, sharpness of
understanding: and the contrary, no better than dull melancholy, or blockish
stupidity.

I answer these; There is a wide difference betwixt this unstayed course of
thoughts, and true, and quick, or sharp invention, or wit: For first this
levity of thoughts is from an intercourse of impertinent imaginations,
hindering, if not frustrating the maine intendment; whereas variety of
inventions, and quickness of wit, truly so called, is a quick minding and
managing of thoughts suitable to the project intended. Again unstayed thoughts
disable the heart from resolutions propounded for bringing forth actions. But
quickness of understanding is the best Midwife for speedy delivery of the soul
from the hard labor of unresolvednesse, into an estate of liberty to act
freely and stoutly.

The third vanity of thoughts is, when as to the end propounded, or which ought
to be, they are unprofitable. Some have working imaginations, never idle,
always busy; but as good never a whit, as never the better. Some think
themselves to be wise above other men; but they imagine vain things, and the
Lord knows the thoughts of those wise men that they are vain. Psalm. 2. 1. 1
Cor. 3. 20. The Jews in Paul's time were wholly bent to the maintenance of Moses
Ceremonies; which yet the Apostle taxes as unprofitable to those that were
occupied in them: for (says he) there is a disanulling of the Commandment
going before, because of the unprofitablenesse thereof. Heb. 7. 18. Those
foolish Questions about the Law edify not; but rather turn to the subversion
of the hearers, and by consequence are not profitable in Apostolical judgment.
There are that trouble themselves about Questions, and strife of words; 1 Timothy
6. 4. but mark what Mark the Apostle puts upon them: They are proud, knowing
nothing, men of corrupt minds: ver. 5. if their minds were not corrupt, they
would not trouble themselves about such matters.

This error is most common in these forward times, wherein the most refined
wits, and sharpest inventions, are unprofitably taken up with needless
disputes, fruitless, and curious, if not cursed arts, foolish speaking, witty
jeastings, and a thousand such unnecessary impertinencies, not destinated unto
any good end, the accomplishment whereof never brings any true content to the
party, nor any profit to the brethren. This fault, howsoever many make small
account of, as thinking it a great glory to be accounted knowing or witty: or
thinking it a sufficient perfection, not to be idle, or in the intention of
their thoughts not to be hurtful; yet those that know all their actions should
be respective unto some good, and content not themselves with a bare negation
of evil, cannot but abhor the unprofitablenesse of their thoughts.

And is it not pity to see men spend such precious time, and lay out such
unvalueable gifts, as some have acquired, in purchasing that which profits
nothing? Its pity such wine as is contained in some vessels, should run at
waste, and do no man good. And this is so much the more to be regarded and
pitied, because where this unprofitable vanity of the mind reigns, it fills the
apprehensions of men with such vain delight, in their frothy undertakings, that
they become utterly incapable of any course of study, or endeavor to do good
unto the Church of God. Of our thoughts therefore as of our actions, let this
be a general rule: They must be destined unto some good end: for it matters not
with what earnestness or with what eagerness we pursue them, unless
directly, or by consequent they be in some way profitable.

The fourth vanity of our thoughts appears, in the disorderlinesse, or
confusion of them; it sometimes happens that the Devil cannot fasten upon us a
deadness of thoughts, nor lodge vain imaginations in our hearts, nor cause us
to wander in uncertain cogitations, nor cast our minds into the mould of
unprofitable inventions: but that by the grace of God we are in some measure
freed from all these; and then he labors to make confusion and disorder
amongst our most profitable and necessary inventions, and resolutions: for
though the thoughts of a good man be warrantable in themselves, and intended
for a good end; yet the order of them may be so confused, that the good
intended is impeded, if not disappointed. As in a course of speech long and
often parentheses, darken the speakers meaning, and hinder the apprehension of
the hearer: So in thoughts, and in things of continued action, impertinencies
and out-runnings, disgrace the course and speedy performance. When the thoughts
of a man's mind are double, the man is a tottering thing: and therefore if Satan
can bring a man to double-mindednesse, he knows he will be unstable in all
things, political or religious: for a double-minded man is unstable in all his
ways: Jam. 1. 8. and then he has gotten much advantage of him, by this wile.

Behold this thing in thy self: first what an unpleasant accident, in thy soul
(when formerly well settled) is this confusion of thoughts, though good in
themselves: as when amongst thy divine meditations and spiritual cogitations,
there creep into thy mind thoughts of profit, lawful pleasures, or necessary
labors, which howsoever they be not only permitted, but also commanded of God
to have a place in our thoughts, at their times, and in their order; for there
is a time for all things: yet rushing in at the time of thy devotions, they put
all out of order.

further as they are unpleasant, so they are disturbant: A devoted heart cannot
endure interruption in spiritual duties, by worldly attendance, or other
occasions from without. While Christ was about his Fathers business, he likes
not the importunity of brothers or sisters, that stand without to speak with
him. Suppose a soul upon some extraordinary occasion, resolve upon a course of
thoughts to humble himself; How troublesome are cogitations of joy and
rejoyceing? Who would not now shut the door upon them, as intruders unsent for,
and unwelcome; like water in a ship, or like snow in harvest?

3. God requires a season for our thoughts; and therefore likes not a hudling
confusion of them: as the Lord has appointed labor to fit every person, and
to fit every time; so he has appointed suitable thoughts for every occasion.
When we are about Sacrifice, God has appointed one sort of thoughts to
possess our minds, and when we are about our Callings another. Our minds must
have their changeable suites, as well as our bodies: the working day has his
thoughts, and the Sabbath his: vain thoughts are no more lawful on the Sabbath,
than vain words are. He that said, Thou shall not speak thine own words, nor do
thy own works, said also, Thou shall not think thine own thoughts. Isai. 58.
13.

What we are about, if it be warrantable and seasonable, God would have our
hearts and hands to intend it: otherwise disorder cannot be avoided. The
fancy of men that is but natural, left to its own wild way of working, and
not moderated by reason, will make strange compositions and mixtures, and
locations of things presented to it by the senses, as we see in dreams: and if
grace moderate not, there will be strange confusions in the thoughts of men. If
therefore our thoughts be confused: I cannot reckon them among the thoughts of
the Righteous, whose thoughts are just.

CHAP. V.
HItherto I have discovered some errors of thoughts, as dullness, and vanity:
which last appears. First, when the mind is busied about vain objects.
Secondly, when the mind it self is loose and unstayed. Thirdly, When the mind
propounds no profitable end. Fourthly, When the thoughts are disordered or
confused.

I shall now speak of some other vanities of our thoughts, which go far beyond
these hitherto mentioned; because they have not error only joined with them,
but also apparent wickedness. Those already spoken of are native infirmities,
in all men; and therefore also the best of men are faulty more or less in
them: but there remain yet two other exorbitancies of thoughts which are
incident to the minds and thoughts of the worst men, especially; and from which
regenerate persons are in a great measure set free.

Let us come to speak of the first sort of these wicked thoughts. I call them
wicked, for they have not only vanity in them, but also sin: and this is, when
thoughts of evil draw in the will and affections to a complacency, to a wishing
and longing, and sometimes a fainting desire to enjoy some unlawlfull thing:
suppose an unlawful pleasure, or some unjust gain, ungodly honor,
unwarrantable victory, bloody spoil, or such like. Genesis So Eve saw the
forbidden fruit, as a thing to be desired: so Amnon lusted after his sister
Thamar, till he became as one of the fools of Israel. So Ahab coveted Naboth's
vineyard, till he was sick with desiring, and wicked in gaining the possession.
So Absolon thought of a kingdom, and is and so ambitiously covetous of it, that
he attempts to usurp the Crown, though by unnatural rebellion against his
Father: This is that which the Apostle calls the lust of the flesh, the lust of
the eyes, and the pride of life: 1 John 2. 16. which are the three great idols
of the world.

This wickedness in thoughts so far pleases some, that when they cannot
enjoy the thing desired, yet they account it a speculative happiness, to have
the thing desired in their minds, though it be but an image thereof: it
pleases the covetous man to dream of his Bonds, Bills, Morgages, Assurances,
days of payment; and this earthly mindedness, will let him mind nothing else:
so another tosseth fleshly pleasures from one thought to another, and from one
desire to another, and when the power of the flesh perishes in them, they grow
to feed their phansies with contemplative fornications; in the like case the
contentious man dreams of wrangling suits, the man of blood of fire and
faggots, swords and battles. Thus the great man's thoughts are taken up with his
honors, revenues, attendancies; the Gallant with his gay clothes, the old man
pleases his phansy with remembrances and discourses of what he has been, and
what he has done, the young man with what he may be: his hopes and
possibilities delight him, as if they were present enjoyments: thus the
imagination of things that are not, work upon us the same affections, as if
they were. Jacob does as feelingly grieve for the supposed death of Joseph, as
if he had been dead indeed, and so men take the same delight in their supposed
wickednesses, as if they were really effected.

These and such like thoughts in the heart, are the things which defile a man;
whether they be proud imaginations, or covetous thoughts, thoughts of revenge
against others, or thoughts of Blasphemy against God; of what kind soever our
thoughts are, if they draw in the will to consent unto their evil, they are
wicked thoughts; they are wicked, suo genere, in their own nature: but when
they work the will into co-partnership, they are higher in the degree of
wickedness; it is sin but to think that which is evil, but to think of it with
liking and consent, is a greater degree of sin: God reproves him, and sets
his sins in order before his face, who saw the thief and consented unto him,
and was partaker with the adulterer. Psalm. 50. 18. 23.

The second sort of wicked thoughts come to pass, when the thoughts having
gained upon the heart to delight in evil, and with a kind of roveing desire to
expect it; the understanding also is drawn in, by an opinion of an imaginary
happiness to plot and bestirre it self unto the furthest of its natural or
acquired invention, to produce by all means the evil thought upon, into action.

This in every kind is the height and extremity of evil thoughts, this person
so devising to do mischief is probably the man whom Saint John puts into the
Devils mouth, saying; He that com-commits sin, is of the Devil: 1 John 3. 8.
That is, not only thinks of it, and delights in it, but also plots for it; so
the Devil sins from the beginning, desiring, plotting, contriving, acting it
himself, and tempting others to it: of such a remarkable person, the wise man
says, he that deviseeth evil, (that is, by resolved devising all means, and
leaving no stone unturned) men shall call him the Author of sin, Prove. 24. 8.
or a mischievous person, against these thoughts, and the thinkers of them; the
Prophet Micha exclaimes, Woe unto them, that devise iniquity, and work evil
upon their beds, when the morning is light, they practice it, because it is in
the power of their hands. Micah 2. 1. Such are the thoughts of the men of this
world, their hearts are filled with an hidden treasure of evil inventions how
to do mischief, and when they have done it, they lay plots how to dawb over
their unanswerable actions and endeavors with witty and deceitful Apologies,
to prevent the evil opinions and speeches of men; for though the thoughts of
the just are Righteous, yet the counsels of the wicked, are deceit.

These wicked thoughts have much of their Father the devil, in them; for he is
full of devices or wiles, whereof the righteous are not ignorant, 2 Cor. 2. 11.
and so are all wicked men; and more, when they are men of parts and place in
the world; Solomon notes, that there is a a man of wicked devices, that is, one
that desires and plots wickedness, Prove. 12. 2. so the Churl devises wicked
devices to destroy the poor. Isa. 37. 2. And David speaks of his enemy, that he
devised mischief upon his bed; Psalm. 36. 4. if that enemy there meant was Saul,
it is manifest, that he oftentime thought in his heart to kill David, and laid
many snares for him to take away his life: some ignorantly think that nothing
is sinful, that is not acted by the bodies instruments, but alas, it is but
their ignorance, and therefore also the vanity of their thoughts; for a Prophet
records it for a truth, the heart of a vile person will work iniquity: Isa
(...). in sin there is heart-work, and head-work, as well as hand-work.

CHAP. VI.
ANd thus I have also discovered those evil thoughts which surpass the
dullness, and vanities of them, being in themselves evil; and infecting the
heart with wicked complacency, and the understanding with wicked inventions.

Having thus far proceeded in searching out the errors, and wickedness of
men's thoughts. I shall now endeavor by the assistance of God, to prescribe
some remedies or means of redress: and the Remedies will be of two sorts: the
first equally oppose all errors of our throughts, whether dull, or vain, or
wicked: the second are more particular fitted to cure some kind or other, and
not so much respecting all.

First, the mind that travelleth, and feels it self heavy laden with any of
the former encumbrances and would be refreshed with the rest of God: must make
a conscience of his thoughts; contrary to the common opinion of Carnalists, and
time-serving Formalists, who think, and often say it, That Thought is free, and
that if they can refrain such words and works as are of evil report and
punishable, then their peace is sound, and themselves just, though their
thoughts be black as hell, and conform to the works of the Devil. And indeed,
thoughts are free from punishment by the Laws of men, which only reach to the
outward man; and a man is not bound by Law, or any duty, to reveal all his
thoughts unto another. Solomon tells us, That a prating fool, or a man of
foolish lips shall fall: Prove. 10. 8. But the good man must persuade himself
that the Lord takes notice of, abhors, and will punish evil thoughts, as the
breaches of his Law, therein extending more than the laws of men. It is a known
distinction among all, that there are sins of thought, as much as sins of word
or of deed. We read of some that err, because they imagine evil: of some that
sinned because they tempted God in their hearts: Prove. 14. 22. Psalm. 78. 18.
Psalm. 58. 2. of others that did work wickedness in their heart. Our Savior
gives a check to the Scribes for their evil thoughts; Wherefore think ye evil
in your hearts? Mat. 9. 4. Yea in the Court of Conscience, and in Gods sight,
evil thoughts are in some respect, more sinful (or less excuseable) than
either words or deeds. What is that condemning sin of unbelief: what that of
hypocrisy, whose punishment in Hell is the pattern how other sins shall be
punished? They are not sins of word, they are not sins of work; but sins of the
inward parts, of the mind, and of the heart. Consider further upon this matter,
and ye shall perceive.

1. That evil thoughts are Ringleaders to other sins: all other uncleanness
begin at the heart, Mat. 15. 18. whether they be blasphemies, or
false-witnessing, which are sins of the tongue, or murders, and adulteries,
which are sins of deed. From contemplative wickedness, we go on to actual: so
lust (within, when it has conceived, at temptation without) brings forth sin.
Jam. 1. 15 Imagination is the great wheel of the soul: if that move amiss, all
the whole man runs at random: for as the fancy conceives, the judgment
concludes, the will chooses, the affections pursue, or eschew, and the members
of the body execute. Wherefore in regard of precedence, or causality, sins of
thought are more sinful, or inexcuseable, than either words or deeds.

2. Our thoughts are more at liberty than our words or actions: there is less
byas hanging upon our thoughts, than upon our outward man. As these are more
free from the shame of the World, the censure of enemies, the punishment of
outward laws, the reprehension of godly brethren: so they are less swayed by
hopes of favor from such we love or reverence, or hope to rise by. In evil
times especially, many things may afford excuse for miscarriages in our words
or deeds. Many dangers are following them that are of free language and open
works which in this frailty of the flesh, may put on our outward faults a
mincing infirmity; but none, nor any of these, can any way diminish the fault
of our thoughts. For notwithstanding all these, our thoughts are freed from the
byas of fear or favor. Jonathan could love David as his own soul, though he
went in his Father Saul's Army, which hunted him as a Partridge upon the
mountains. Obadiah thought reverently of the Lords Prophets, and preserved many
of them from the cruel rage of Jesabel: though he lived in Ahabs Court: But if
the inward parts be wickedness, there is no faithfulness in those sinners:
There is no faithfulness in their mouth; their inward part is very wickedness.
Psalm. 5. 9. Its possible, God may have some whose hearts are right with him in
evil times, though they halt in their words and outward behavior: But if the
thoughts of the heart and mind be evil, whatsoever the outward appearance is,
there is no believing of such.

3. The temptations of Satan have not such power over our thoughts, as they
have in our outward man, in as much as the Devil is no searcher of hearts, and
therefore cannot so easily puddle these fountains, as he does, by Gods
permission, our words and deeds. I do not say Satan has no power, but not such
power. The Devil knows the constitution and temperament of men's bodies, and can
move the humors, and by them he can stir up the affections: he can represent
false species by the senses unto the cogitative faculty: and thereby disorder
the thoughts: But he has not such an immediate illapse, or entrance into the
heart, as into our outward senses: and by how much our thoughts receive less
violence and opposition from Satan, by so much the sins of our thoughts are
less excuseable: as he is less a sinner that sins by temptation, than he that
sins without.

But thou will say, Our words and deeds bring more damage unto others, and
breed a greater scandal amongst the good, than our thoughts do. I answer, Yes:
and therefore God condemns outward actions that are sinful: But the evil of our
thoughts are as filthy in our selves, and as open to the eyes of God, as our
actions are: and God who especially respects our spirits, whether in
mortification to sin, or in quickening to righteousness: has equally forbidden
our thoughts, as our words or deeds. He that said, Thou shall not bear false
witness, Thou shall not steal, said also, Thou shall not covet.

Wherefore we ought to have a conscientious care of our evil thoughts, as of
our evil deeds; we must account them sinful, and punishable: and take heed how
we receive in thoughts, hand over head. Good thoughts indeed should be welcomed
when they come, lest we be found to resist the Spirit of God; for in a motion
upon thy thoughts the Spirit of life may come into thy soul. But on the other
hand, if evil thoughts do offer themselves, we ought to keep them out.

I have insisted upon this remedy the longer, because until this be cleared up
to the judgment that thoughts are sins, and punishable, and we ought to make a
conscience of them, all other remedies of evil thoughts will be unprofitable,
and the mind will be pestered with them.

The second General Remedy against evil thoughts is. Let a man judge and
condemn himself for evil thoughts: there is no man living can say his heart is
clean: and it is meet that a Christian feel a trouble and heaviness within him,
wrought by that disorder and trouble that is in his thoughts. Paul is our
pattern, crying out, Oh wretched man that I am. Romans 7. 24. Let us think it
expedient for us to cry out against that body of evil thoughts within us, that
God may deliver us from them: Ps. 51. we shall never have true and sound peace
in our selves, unless our hearts be clean created within us. The Pharisee
which cleanses the outside of the platter, has no true comfort while his
inward parts are full of ravening and wickedness. Luc. 11. 39, 40. For he that
made that which is without, made that which is within also. There is no
sweetness in that soul, which is a whited tomb without, and rotten bones
within. Do thou look at that which is without? and do thou condemn thy self
for any uncomelinesse there? Thou do well: for God made the outside, and
Christ purchased the outside: but forget not to look at that which is within;
and if any sinfulness be there, judge and condemn thy self for it: for God
made the inside, and Christ purchased the inside. It is a Wise man's counsel: If
thou have thought evil, lay thine hand upon thy mouth: Prove. 30. 32. evil
thoughts should be stopped before they get out upon the tongue: Surely the
churming of milk brings forth butter: Prove. 30 33. and the meditation and
agitating of evil thoughts will bring forth sin. Stop them up therefore, and
condemn thy self for them: that they break not out, to thy shame, and danger.

Thirdly, set your selves against evil and vain thoughts, and be not quiet till
ye have in some measure cleansed your minds of them. Evil thoughts are not
worthy to pass into your minds; much less to keep house there. Oh Jerusalem,
wash thine heart from Jer. 4. 14. wickedness: how long shall vain thoughts
lodge within thee? Evil and vain thoughts are bold intruders, they will come,
yet let them not stay to take up lodging with thee. There are many birds that
are unclean, and some of them are swift of wing; but they are not for
sacrifice. Thoughts are as swift as the birds of the air; they fly more
speedily, and thou can not hinder them from coming and hovering in thy mind:
yet it is thy duty to keep them from building and nesting themselves if they be
of an unclean kind. If thou can keep evil and vain thoughts out from getting
entrance, thou shall quit thy self like a man: but if they break in upon thee,
gather thy strength together, and strive to beat them out again. If men did
begin betimes to enter combat with their sins, whilst they are but thoughts;
how many wickednesses would be prevented upon the knees? many of Satan's
temptations would be taken up, and wasted betimes, which suffered to grow into
actions, become strong and spreading wickedness. Friends, set your selves in
opposition against the evil of your thoughts: this is the way to be more than
Conquerors. Know this, he that thinks to waste gross sins which waste the
peace of his soul, must begin to fight them within doors, even in his own
thoughts, but he that thinks to beat sin out of action, and leaves it in his
thoughts, begins at the wrong end; it is an easy thing for sin to pass from
the thought into action: he that cuts off this passage, may be secure of this
conversation outwardly: if therefore thou meet with any evil thoughts within
thee, declare thy self an enemy, and cast them out.

A fourth general Remedy against evil thoughts, is: Have respect unto Gods
word; he that would hedge out evil thoughts, must look into Gods word: this is
it which sets bounds to all vain thoughts; the Psalmist propounds a question:
how may a young man cleanse his way, Psalm. 119. 9. Psalm. 119. 9 a hard matter
for any man, but more hard in a young man, who by reason of his perturbation
and violence of affections, the Philosophers accounted unfit for their Schools,
yet the means is prescribed by taking heed, according to thy word: the word of
God gives wisdom unto the simple, if they will hear it, and give attendance
thereunto; if the law of God be in a man's heart, none of his steps shall slide:
Psalm. 37. 31. men may account the word of God a weak defense and shelter
against any annoyance: but hear what the Apostle speaks of it, from experience:
the weapons of our warfare, are not carnal, but mighty through God, to the
pulling down of strong holds, casting down imaginations, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. (mark
that) and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God,
and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ: high
imaginations fall down before the word, and before it every thought goes into
captivity.

The fifth general remedy against vain and wicked thoughts, is prayer; pray
against evil thoughts. This is a general remedy against all evils, and we
have need to make use of it against the exorbitances of our thoughts, because
they are so continually working to bring forth sin: the body grows weary in
acting those sins, which require a concurrency of the members of the body, but
the mind is never without its contemplative wickednesses, in one kind, or
other, and therefore we always stand in need of prayer, to help those
weaknesses of our thoughts: if a clock be not every day wound up, it will
stand, and not tell you the time of the day; and so will our thoughts fall upon
lower and looser objects, unless they be pullyed and lifted up unto God by
prayer: the Apostle therefore bids us to pray continually; 1 These. 5. 17. not
that we should do nothing else, (for the life of a Christian is a busy life,
and full of variety of work) but that in all our business, the thoughts of our
hearts should have their short ejaculations, and quick prayers unto God, which
hinder not, but forward us in our labors with better success: the mind of man
is of that speed in actions, that the body cannot keep pace with it, and
therefore in all our bodily labors, gain time to dispatch a speedy prayer
unto God: but morning and evening do more especially require our prayers unto
God, that God being first in our thoughts in the morning, may bar out all
vain thoughts from entering in all the day, and being last in our thoughts at
evening, we may lie down and take our rest, while the Lord is entreated to
sustein us by taking upon him our protection.

Sixthly, set your selves in Gods eye, I have set the Lord always before mine
eyes, he is at my right hand: Psalm. 16. 8. if men would set themselves always
in Gods sight, and be persuaded that God is about their beds, and about their
paths; and spies out all their ways: many a vain and wicked thought would not
be so bold to make their appearance. Bring your unruly and untrusty thoughts,
like unfaithful servants into the presence of God; it may be, and it usually
happens, that an evil servant has private haunts to his Masters damage, yet
in the eye of his Master, he will behave himself demurely and orderly; though
Absalom have a traitorous heart, and ambitious plot upon his Fathers kingdom:
yet in the presence of his Father, he will carry himself as one of the Kings
sons. God thought upon, as present, awes our otherwise unruly, cogitations,
into a kind of quiet behavior.

Do not think within thy heart, Tush, God sees not; there is no impotency in
Gods omnisciencie, his eye is brighter then the Sun, and breaks into the most
secret corners of thy cogitations, it is a Sun above thy head, which never sets;
a Candle in a room which never goes out: God can no more be separated from a
perpetual view of our thoughts, then from his own immeasurable infiniteness.
Wherefore think thy self continually in the presence of God, and be not blind
like Balaam, whose ass was more quick-sighted, to see God, then himself: the
soul which apprehends God looking upon him, (unless moved by sensuality, to
think God like unto himself) will stand in awe, and not sin: the presence of
God is like Sun, and wind that scatters all the fogs of evil, and corrupt
thoughts that arise. This stubble cannot endure the day of Gods coming. The
Prophet when he brings in the Atheist, with a heart set within him to do
wickedly, renders a reason out of his own mouth, saying; Tush, God sees not,
how does God know? Is there knowledge in the most high? Psalm. 73. 11 as if he
would tell us, that a main ground of that profaneness which is in men's
hearts, and lives, arises from a supposition of Gods not regarding what is
done upon earth by the sons of men: and in another place it is written, the
transgression of the wicked says within my heart, that there is no fear of God
before his eyes; Psalm. 36. 1. as if he should say, the transgressions of wicked
men have a language whereby they speak, if not to my ear, yet unto my
understanding, and they persuade me to believe in my heart, that there is no
fear of God in them: now if the not seeing of Gods presence give rise unto sins
of deeds, which have many other restraints upon them; how much more shall the
non-observance of Gods presence open a door for corrupt thoughts, to enter;
whom no eye, but God can espy; upon which there are no restraints, but the
fear of God: if the Ancients of Israel, who make laws, and rule others, think
the Lord sees not; the Lord has forsaken the earth: they will do abominable
things in the dark, in the chambers of their imagery. Ezekiel. 8. 12

Wherefore that ye may restrain evil thoughts; believe that your selves and
your thoughts are continually before God: for this know, an evil thought can
no more endure the look of God, then a runagate servant, the frown of his
Master: and set God always before your eyes: in all times, and in all places,
when you are in the midst of Gods Temple, think of his loving kindness: I have
thought of thy loving kindness in the midst of thy Temple; Psalm. 48. 9. I,
that is no wonder, what should a soul do else in Gods Temple, whither the Tribes
of the Lord, the Tribes of the Lord go up to give thanks to the name of the
Lord? Psalm. but hearken again, I have remembered thy name oh Lord in the night,
even in solitary places, and times, a righteous man's thoughts have recourse
unto God: Psalm. 119. 55. and mark the benefit of such recourses, I have
remembered thy name oh Lord in the night, and have kept thy law: when our
thoughts are fixed upon God, his presence withholds us from sin, and keeps us
to his Law.

7. Remedy against evil thoughts is, search thine own conscience, for the evil
thoughts and purposes of thy life, which are passed: what is written there? how
read thou? what has been the issue of such thoughts, what success have
thou had from them? have not evil thoughts drawn thee in to sin against God,
to injure men, to defile thine own body? what fruit had thou in those things
whereof thou art now ashamed? suppose God had not kept thy sins from the ear
of the world, what a confounded creature had thou been: how ashamed to look
men in the face? if God had not remitted them in the censure of his own
justice, and given thee some hope of forgiveness, what a wretched man had
thou been? what fears and horrors had been upon thy soul? or what if those
sins be forgiven thee: think what it cost thee to sue out thy pardon, and to
get Gods seal upon thy conscience; what if here thou shall make inquest after
thy Master-sin, and consider how evil thoughts have made their way into thy
practice; consider how often, how upon slight occasions, how after many vows
made unto God to the contrary, thou have dangerously, scandalously, cowardly,
and filthily yielded up thy self as a vassail upon base conditions to think and
do wickedly.

Let a man always carry this remedy with him as an Antidote in his pocket, and
hang it upon the file of his heart, and when evil motions at any time begin to
creep into the mind, then cast this bush in the way, which will so astonish the
present working of our thoughts, that it will either confound them, or turn
their course into some better channel. It were a happy thing, if we could thus
make a virtue out of a vice, and turn that sin into a remedy, against evil
thoughts, which it self had not been a sin upon the file of our consciences,
but that evil thoughts conceived it, and brought it forth. Some apply this
receipt against the incursion of proud thoughts, against the breaking in of
heady and heedlesse passions, against the breaking out of lust, revenge, etc. I
commend it unto every Christian as a sudden remedy against all evil thoughts: a
subject it is, whereabout if a mind be seriously busied, it will give him
little joy to think ill or idly: Accept this with a Probatum est, as the
remembrance of some one monstrous sin not forgiven, is insupportable to a
wicked man: so the remembrance of a foul thought, or other sin, though
pardoned through Gods mercy, is very profitable to a righteous man, to keep him
from evil thoughts, and to make his thoughts just.

CHAP. VII.
I Have hitherto discovered General Remedies against the errors and
wickedness of men's thoughts: Let me now prescribe some particular helps to be
used against the several maladies.

And first against that error of idleness, deadned drowsinesse, or
unthoughtfulnesse of the mind before mentioned, the remedy will be: after due
observation and mourning for the same; that the Righteous man do endeavor to
keep himself, and his thoughts in some bodily or mental employment: and if
that be within the compass of his Calling, it will be the more prevailing
remedy: so when servants are idle, wise Masters set them their taskes, and hold
them to their works, out of respect to their own profit, and their servants
good. So wiser Parents buy their children Horn-books, and send them to school;
not so much to learn, as to keep them from harrnes, while they have nothing
else to do. It fares so with our minds, like wandering children, or worthless
servants, they will do nothing, or (which is worse) shrewdly, unless they be
held to employments. It had been better with that sweet Singer of Israel, if he
had been employed in Kingly affairs like himself, when his eye deceived his
heart to follow filthy lusts. The Apostles would not have younger widows
received to minister as widows in the Church, to lodge strangers, and to wash
the Disciples feet, as their manner was, lest they learn to be idle, and wander
about, become tatlers, and busybodies. 1 Timothy 5. 13. Idleness, or that which
is worse, creeps into the practice of those that are not well, or fitly
employed: so it does upon the mind. Standing waters will puddle, and the mind
not employed stands, and breeds verminous and evil thoughts. We make draines to
cleanse standing waters, if we mean to keep them wholesome; and we must find
issues for our thoughts about some bodily or mental labor, if we mean to keep
them just, as the thoughts of the Righteous are:

And that ye may the rather make use of this Remedy against idle thoughts,
Consider:

1. It is against the nature of man's mind to be out of action: in sleep the
senses both outward and inward are bound up: yet even then, the fantasy has
her dreams of actions. The heart of the Spouse was awake while she slept: I
sleep, but my heart wakes: Cant. 5. 2. So in the very drowsinesse and heaviness
of a Righteous soul, all is not, all his thoughts ought not, to be bound up:
there are, or ought to be, some excurrencies of the thoughts to Christ.

2. The body not employed, grows resty, and carries on the man headlong, not
only to that which is besides, but also to that which is contrary to the
course of goodness. Idleness is the hour of temptation, wherein Satan joins
with our imagination to plot or attempt the production of some, or much
mischief.

3. Employment and action has the promise: This is the warrantable way wherein
so long as the mind is found walking, the labor thereof shall not be in vain.
It is the Righteous man's portion to enjoy the good of all his labor which he
takes under the Sun: 1 Cor. 15. Eccles. 5. 18. So then, if ye respect the
nature of the mind, which is always in action, or the disposition of the body
not employed, or the blessing of God over both, while they are in action
according to his will, ye cannot but make use of this Remedy for the cureing of
the minds idleness.

But before I pass from hence, I must admonish, that thoughts employed about
bodily labor, is not enough, nor all: there are employments of our thoughts
which are more mental, and almost abstracted from the body, and these are very
needful: such as contemplation and meditation of heaven and heavenly things: a
soul thus employed, whether he be in the body, or out of the body he cannot
tell: such a neighborhood or indistance he apprehends betwixt God and his mind.

Again, I admonish that labor, whether it be about bodily things, or such as
are more the work of the mind; yet it must be about that which is good,
otherwise the remedy may be worse than the disease. Its better, says our
Proverb, to be idle, than ill employed. The Apostle would that every one should
labor, but he that labors bodily, must labor the thing that is honest: and
he that labors with the mind must study to show himself approved unto God, a
workman that need not be ashamed. Ephesians. 4. 28. 2 Timothy 2. 15.

Further, I admonish, that your thoughts be employed about those things
especially which are within your Callings: he that moves in his Calling, though
but slowly, though not so fast as others, shall in the end find comfort: But I
cannot hope to gather grapes of thorns, nor figs of thistles: Every tree must
bring forth his own fruit; the Magistrate has his thoughts, the Minister his,
and the honest Husbandman and Tradesman theirs.

Once more I admonish, that your thoughts of employment, be in such things as
are proportionable to your strength and parts. Jether the firstborn of Gideon,
was too weak and fearful to rise up and slay Zeba and Zalmunnah: Judge. 8. 20.
And the Apostle thought judiciously, that a Novice or young Christian, newly
come to the Faith, would not be a meet man for the office of a Bishop; lest
being lifted up with pride, he should fall into the condemnation of the Devil.
1 Timothy 3. 6When men take upon their shoulders burdens that are too heavy for
them, they reel to and fro like drunken men, sometimes they are brought to
their wits ends, and sometimes they fall with shame to themselves, and injury
to others that come near them. Its so also when any are puffed up in their
fleshly minds, and take upon them to meddle in things that are above them.

CHAP. VIII.
I Shall stay no longer upon this Remedy against idle and sleepy thoughts: by
urging to bodily or mental employment. The next error of thoughts (as I have
observed) to be remedied, falls in here, which is a lightness or vanity of our
thoughts, in busying themselves upon vain objects: such as old wives fables,
fictions of Poets, nothings, or things that are nothing worth.

The Remedy is, to choose out real and better things for imagination to work
upon: for as are the thoughts, so is the man. The body grows into likeness
with those things whereon it usually feeds: So do souls into similitude with
those things which the imagination daily thinks upon: that man must needs be a
vain man, whose studies and cogitations are vain: Wherefore as he that would
expel wind out of the stomach, must feed upon some wholesome nourishment, which
has virtue in it to expel wind: So he that would expel windy phansies out of
his mind, must propound to his consideration some serious truths worthy of his
Christian thoughts. In this case, some have thought meet to propound to our
consideration those quatuor novissima, Death, the day of Judgment, the joys
of Heaven, and the torments of Hell, to remedy our vain imaginations; and
doubtless, thoughts upon such serious truths as these, would take off our
minds from vain things. What if I should beseech you to think upon the
infiniteness of God, the love of Christ, the comforts of the Holy Ghost? What
if I should entreat you to think upon those great works of God, Creation,
Providence, Redemption, Sanctification, Preparation and Donation of the Kingdom
of Heaven? Would not the thoughts of these things force out of your minds, the
thoughts of strange gods, strange religions and worship? What should the
thoughts of heathen gods, as Baal, Moloch, or Ashtoreth do among these: what
should Christians study Romances, Plays, Interludes, Fashions, vain histories,
who have Bibles to look into, and the mysteries of salvation to study, and the
duties of Religion to learn and practice: hear the Apostles advice, Phil. 4. 8.
and receive it as an Antidote against all vain imaginations: whatsoever things
are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever
things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good
report: if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these
things: all things that are true, and honest; and just, and pure, and lovely,
and of good report: virtuous, or praiseworthy, are objects of a righteous man's
just thoughts.

The next vanity of our thoughts to be remedied, is the unstaiednesse, or
wanderings of the mind, whereby these actions of the mind are unsettled, and
whirling from one thing to another without any certainty, like men that shoot
their arrows at rovers. The remedy hereof is to fix the mind upon that which
is good; when the things we think of are meet for meditations, and
contemplative thoughts, the soul must make a stay upon them: it is true, that
too much poreing upon one thing, puts our meditations and inventions upon
impertinencies, and barrenness, but light and short thoughts vanish into
nothing, and never produce good effects: this vanity is not so easily perceived
in things natural or civil, as it is when the mind is about things divine; as
prayer, hearing of the word of God, meditating thereon, receiving the
sacraments. In these things it is most difficult to keep to the point, or stand
at the mark; both by reason of Satan's cunning and craft, and the ungainness and
indisposition of the mind unto the business, therefore let the wise Christian
endeavor to fix his thoughts upon spiritual occasions. So when the Psalmist was
purposed to sing and give thanks, he says, My heart is fixed oh God, my heart
is fixed: Psalm. 57. 7. Many heard the shepherds relating what was told them by
the Angel concerning the Babe Christ; and they wondered at the words that were
told them, but Mary kept all these things, and pondered them in her heart: Luke
2. 18, 19. it is not enough to wonder at Gods words and works, we must let him
have some reasonable time to stay upon our minds, that they make impressions:
transient views, and hasty sights of things that pass by, leave no species or
fashion of things upon the eye, to transfer to the fantasy; no more do our
sudden and hasty thoughts of things, carry any true intelligence of them to
the understanding, or represent them, as they are to the will: the eye that
sees things truly, must be held to its object, and the mind that profits by
things spiritual, must make a competent stay of the thoughts, upon the matter
in hand.

And thus when a Christian can in things divine reclaim the mind from wanderings
in some measure, and keep his thoughts to the point, he shall by Gods grace
prevent with ease this error of unstayednesse, in the matter of his calling:
wherein these outrunnings, of the thoughts are not so dangerous, nor so worthy
observation.

Here let me put in a Caveat, while I labor to remedy the unstayednesse of
thoughts, I do not in any wise patronize a deadness or drowsinesse of mind,
either in devotions, or in matters civil, I have condemned that as an error
already: living and active thoughts are needful in prayers, and all duties to
God; and working imaginations do more often produce honest and honorable
actions among men: stayednesse of thoughts is not deadness of them, but
restraint laid upon their wildenesse.

The third vanity of thoughts is, when they are busied, but to no profitable
end; many there are whose thoughts are wonderful busy about the things they
intend: yet all to no purpose. God is not honored, the brethren are not
edified, themselves are no way nearer heaven for all their labors: and this
vanity appears not only amongst wicked, and worldly minded men, but also
amongst them that would seem to be religious, and too often among them that are
truly gracious: this may appear in the meetings, and communions of the best
men, and women, who account their fellowship to be good, if harmless; though
otherwise unprofitable for public or private good: and if this fault through
the cunning of Satan do creep so slyly into our outward communions, how much
more into our inward cogitations: it is a vanity amongst all kinds of people
more or less; to dig to themselves Cisterns, that hold no water, to sow the
wind, and to reap chafe.

For the remedying of this evil of thoughts, look over and examine your
thoughts how they look at Gods honor, the good of men, the benefit of thy own
soul; whatsoever thoughts make not out toward one, or some, or all these ends,
directly, or by consequent, they are not just thoughts: here is much spiritual
wisdom required, that a man may see to the end of his thoughts, and know what
profit is like to come in by them: the Preacher notes it, Eccles. 2. 14. that a
wise man's eyes are in his head, but the fool walks in darkness: ignorant and
wicked men, follow their own imaginations, and as they that are in darkness,
they walk on, and know not where they shall fall, but a Righteous man turns
again upon his own thoughts, and Questions, Cui bono? to what end are these
thoughts within my heart? will they bring in any glory to God, any good to the
Church, any peace or comfort to my self, here or hereafter: if none away with
them, why should my unprofitable thoughts cause me to offend? if they will be
honorable to God, and Religion, profitable to myself, and others: my heart
shall stay upon them, and I will pursue the accomplishment of them unto the end.

Wherefore when thoughts arise in thy mind, examine them, whither they would,
if they be bound for heaven let them go on, yet look to them, that they keep
the way: for many set out toward heaven in their morning thoughts, but lose
themselves and their way before night; it will not be amiss oftentimes to
demand of thy self (whether in the risings or progressions of thy thoughts) are
these thoughts such as make for my salvation: shall I be of the same mind,
hereafter as I am now: is God of my mind, is my opinion now according to the
rule of Gods word: would I judge thus, think thus, be of this mind; if I were
now to answer, and give up my last account unto Jesus Christ, the righteous
Judge of quick and dead, who will render unto every man according to the things
done in the body: those thoughts which will not endure this arraignment, suspect
them that they will prove unprofitable to thee in the end; and resolve them
into better.

Saint Paul says, that charity thinks no evil, 1 Cor. 13 5 a righteous man is
a charitable man, and therefore will not imagine or devise any thing that is
unprofitable, or hurtful to his brother: the thoughts of the righteous are
just, and therefore he devises liberal things, for God, and for them that are
Gods; his thoughts are just to God, giving him honor, just to man, giving to
every man that which is his due: just to himself; not so much taking care Mat.
6. 31. 33. for what he shall eat, or drink, or wherewith he shall be clothed, as
seeking the kingdom of heaven, and the righteousness thereof.

But here an admonitition may be seasonably put in (though by what has been
said already; the judicious may take cognizance of it) which is, that righteous
men must not think only how they may profit themselves: he that thinks in his
thoughts to please himself only, will not truly endeavor in his course to
profit all men: in this case it is good advice, Phil. 2. 4. look not every one
of his own things, but every one on the things of others: so the Apostle more
purposely. 1 Cor. 10. 33. I please all men in all things; not seeking mine own
profit, but the profit of many, that they may be saved.

Again, let others be admonished, that they do not think their endeavors and
studies to be unprofitable unless they be singular, and above others of their
own rank. Surely, if we would labor to know with sobriety, we should be more
profitable to others, and less troublesome unto our selves: an affectation of
singularity, is but the pride of a man's heart, and such usually to get applause
for something of rare invention neglect the more profitable employment of their
thoughts, about their calling.

And now we will proceed and prescribe a remedy to the fourth vanity of
thoughts, which appears in their confusion and disorder.

The remedy must be to suit and order our thoughts according to our business,
with respect to time and place, and persons, the imagination is infinitely
fruitful: and to order all her conceptions, conservations, compositions,
seperations, creations of new species, productions of them into thoughts and
propositions of them to the mind and will, would be a labor too busy for me
to meddle with, in this case I must leave the work to every judicious
Christian, to consult with the rule of Gods word, according to the emergencies
of his thoughts, yet I humbly conceive that this remedy prescribed against the
confusion of thoughts, may be of much use and benefit.

Consider then what is the business thou art about, humane or divine; and let
thy thoughts be composed to attend upon it: divine thoughts suit with divine
works: and humane thoughts with humane business, while all things are done to
the glory of God: to this purpose, refer that of Solomon; Eccles. 9. 10.
whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might.

Consider the time, whether holy by divine appointment, by public or private
destination, or permitted to common labors of thy calling.

Let not Sabbaths and days of humiliation be profaned with common thoughts;
holy thoughts are for holy Sabboths: thoughts of mourning are for days of
fasting and prayer; thoughts of rejoicing in the Lord, for days of feasting,
and thanksgiving: and thoughts of thy calling, for days of work, and trading.

So for holy places and assemblies, holy thoughts are suitable, and in all
things which thou have to do, consider thy own calling, and chiefly mind thine
own business, 2 These. 3. 11. a busy body in other men's matters, is of no good
report in the Scriptures; the thoughts of such persons are as confused and
disorderly, as the business of their lives; attend what thou do, and what is
meet for thee to do, in time and place, and I am persuaded thy thoughts will be
less confused and more orderly.

CHAP. IX.
THus I have spoken of Remedies for the two first errors of thoughts (to wit)
the dowsinesse and vanity of them, in regard of object, in regard of
unstayednesse, in regard of unprofitablenesse, and in regard of confusion. I
shall now also say something for remedy against the wickedness of thoughts,
which happens when our thoughts draw in our affection and will to desire, and
like of wickedness, and our minds to devise to bring it to pass. I will not
here give the remedies to these two errors severally, but together, and at
once. Expect not a remedy for every kind of wicked thoughts apart, as
erroneous, heretical, covetous, ambitious, revengeful, proud, etc. for the
objects of the affections are almost infinite, and the evil imaginations of the
mind working toward the accomplishment of wickedness, are so various, who can
know them? Yet something I shall say to these; for it will be expected by the
Reader, and I am bound to it by promise in this undertaking: Here again I must
leave much for the judicious to do of themselves in their own occurrencies of
thoughts: Yet thus for a help unto them that are weak.

Have thy thoughts drawn in thy likeing of that which is sinful, and is thy
mind plotting to accomplish it? First give stop to these wicked affections and
devisings at their first beginnings: Sero medicina paratur: Long and confirmed
diseases are stubborn to yield unto medicine: an infant-thought may take a
check; but if it grow man by continuance, all the wit and strength thou have
will hardly bow him back. The fancy will take fire at a temptation before we
be aware, like tinder, which kindles at the least spark falling into it, and
it is a mover as quick and spreading as fire. The lightning is not quicker than
thought: we had need therefore to be speedy in giving stop to our wicked
thoughts. Job knew this, and therefore made covenant with his eyes, not to
think upon a maid. Job 31. 1. What the eye sees, or the ear hears, the
heart may desire; but unknown, undesired. If it be possible keep wickedness
from the eye and ear; these are the two principal gates by which sin enters
into our hearts: if the watch were kept more strictly at these gates, we should
not so often find our enemy within us. If David had looked better to his eyes,
adultery had not gotten into his thought: nor could the whorish woman have come
into the young man's heart, had he kept her out of his ears: it was with much
fair speeches that she caused him to yield. Prove. 7. 21 The eye and the ear,
are the outworks of the soul: he that would keep out evil thoughts, must
barricadoe these gates.

Let evil thoughts receive a check at their first offer to enter; for he that
gives way to his imaginations, shows that he would give way to wicked actions,
if they were as free from shame and punishment.

And a man may know much of his gracious state by his own using of his
thoughts: he that forbears evil, out of a conscience of sin, will forbear also
to imagine evil in his heart: but men of corrupt minds, are not men of renewed
spirits.

2. If thou can not stop them in their beginnings, then thy care must be to
divert them to some more profitable or pious object. When the water has gotten
in upon us, we make draines and watercourse to carry it some other way: and
so likewise must we do with our evil thoughts: if they have broken in upon us,
we must turn them aside to some other matter. As suppose, coveteous, or
envious, or proud thoughts, be got into thy mind, thou may divert them to
liberal, merciful, humble thoughts. Joh. 4. 12. The woman of Samaria, was a
great admirer of Jacobs Well, ver. 20. and the mountain of Samaria, the one for
water, and the other for the worship of God: Christ diverts her opinion of
Jacobs Well, by telling her of a Well of water springing up unto everlasting
life: ver. 14. and her opinion of Gods worship in Samaria: by resolving her
that salvation is of the Jews, and diverting her to think of a worshipping of
God in spirit and in truth. ver. 22, 23. If I should prescribe one object in
the multitude of your evil thoughts to turn them unto: it should be God, who
is infinitely long and broad, and wide, beyond the extent of the souls desires
or thoughts: Kingdoms cannot satisfy ambition; Gold as the dust of the street
cannot satisfy covetousness: pleasures to satiety and loathing, content not
the flesh: and the mind is as unsatisfied with thinking and knowing; only God
is of that infiniteness, and of that excellency that all thoughts and desires,
are terminated in him; and all thoughts and desires that turn themselves unto
God, are bettered by looking upon him.

3. If evil thoughts still press in upon thee, if they will not be stopped nor
diverted, break them off with some violence; if they be unreasonable and justle
out better thoughts, lay hands upon them; 1 Cor. 9. 27. if the body grow
unruly, it must be kept under and brought into subjection. Some thoughts are so
wicked, that they will not be cast out (like those Devils) without fasting and
prayer. If any thought within thee shall cross Religion or reason, resolve to
cross it. There are some cursed imaginations which are the mother-roots of a
multitude of sins: as those which move Questions seriously of Gods Essence,
Personality, Mercy, Justice, Power, Providence; and whether the Scriptures be
the word of God: whether the souls of men be immortal; whether there be a
Heaven or a Hell: such thoughts as these should not be disputed withal,
muchlesse allowed, but expelled or killed: if but such thoughts as these be
suffered and allowed within, they will make a soul as desolate of grace, as a
City is without an inhabitant; he that has no rule over his own spirit,
(certainly it is true in this case) is like a City that is broken down, and
without walls. Prove. 25. 28. I shall never marvel that he is a wicked man, whom
I know to allow himself or others, in such thoughts as these: but I shall think
grace is ruined in that man, that disputes these things, and determines them
against the Scripture.

4. If wicked thoughts will not begone yet, thou have this remedy left: call in
help against them: pray them away, pray God in to thy help against them: pray
for a change of thine own nature, of thine own thoughts: Was not this the thing
which David prayed for? Create in me a clean heart, and renew a right spirit
within me. Psalm. 51. 10. It Is plain it was. Let us lift up our hearts in prayer
against all our sins in thoughts: but especially against them that are wicked
ones: heavy thoughts and vain thoughts are errors, and not excuseable from
sin: but wicked thoughts are of a worser generation, we must purge our selves
from these with greater diligence: I know foolishness is bound up in the heart
of a child, an evil heart cannot but think evil: Prove. 22. 15. What can I look
for from an Adder but her poison and her sting: yet we may pray out foolishness
out of our hearts. And I believe Paul often used this help against the evils of
his own heart; for he says, When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I
understood as a child, I thought as a child: but when I became a man, I put
away childish things. 1 Cor. 13. 21. It may be thou art a child in thy
speaking, in thy understanding, in thy thinking: pray that thou may become a
man, and be able to put away childish things.

Thus much of the evil of thoughts, and how we may by Gods assistance, remedy
the same. I beseech you Brethren apply these remedies to the several errors
of your thoughts, and they will do you much good.

Object not an impossibility for any to remedy the infirmities and sinfulnesses
of thoughts: what nature cannot do, grace may, and what man cannot do, God can.
Every Christian who has the spirit of God, is enabled by that spirit within
him, to do all things Evangelically, or with a Gospel allowance, whereunto he
is called of God. If God would have the thoughts of a righteous man to be just,
God has not made it an impossible work: what nature within thee is averse to
do, and what grace within thee cannot do, that the spirit within thee can do,
and the Righteousness of Christ without thee has done: wherefore despair not
of the work, but go about it.

CHAP. X.
ANd now Beloved, I am come to speak of good thoughts with the means how to get
them, and the manner of their government.

In the handling of this so needful a duty, and so fruitful a subject, I must
premise some introductory particulars: to show the possibility and necessity of
this work: it is necessary, or else God would not have commanded it; it is
possible, or else God would not have promised assistance to performance.

1. Hear how God commands this duty: O Jerusalem, wash thy heart from
wickedness, that thou may be saved; how long shall thy vain thoughts lodge
within thee? Jer. 4. 14.What is that great Commandment in the Law? is it not to
love the Lord thy God? But how? Mat. 22. 37. is it not with all thy heart, and
with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength? Unless
the mind and heart be in our love and obedience, there will be no strength in
them, nor acceptance with God of them.

2. God has promised mercy unto all who willingly endeavor to turn away from
all their evil thoughts, and turn unto him with all their hearts. God requires
a heart washed from iniquity, that the soul may be saved (as ye read but now)
and God promises not only to be abundant in mercy to pardon what is past; but
also to perfect the work begun: Isa. 55. 7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and
the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord and he will
have mercy upon him, and to our God for he will abundantly pardon.

I may add, that it is a part of our regeneration to be renewed in our
thoughts: the Apostle urges it: Be ye renewed in the spirit of your minds.
Ephesians. 4. 23.

And further, that Gospel Light requires Gospel-thoughts: it was prophesied of
these days: At that time they shall call Jerusalem the Throne of the Lord, and
all the Nations shall be gathered unto it, to the name of the Lord to
Jerusalem: neither shall they walk any more in the imagination of their evil
heart. Jer. 3. 17. When God makes the Church his Throne and the Nations gather
into it, to worship the Lord, then shall they leave off their wicked thoughts,
and walk no more after them. We live in these happy times of the Gospel,
wherein, though every one has not Eagles eyes, yet he may see a glorious light
risen and shining, (though through some clouds.) I suppose in former times such
strict observance of our thoughts might have been slacked with less sin, than
now; for God winked at those days of ignorance: but now, excuses for evil
thoughts are as unpleadable, as for evil deeds. If now we walk in an evil way,
in a way that is not good, after our evil thoughts, God that spreads out his
hands unto a rebellious people all the day long: Isa. 65. 2. will stretch out
his arm against a wicked people to punish them, because they will not be
persuaded to amendment; for they that will not be persuaded to rectisie their
thoughts, by the actions of Gods hand, shall be confounded at the last by the
force of his arm.

And now we are come to the Point: where we shall first declare the means how
we may attain good thoughts into our souls: and after that the government of
them. All that has been written hitherto, may be referred hither: And
therefore where I shall have occasion to fall upon the same things again, I
shall either pass them over briefly, or enlarge them with variety, to avoid
tediousness, and nauseousnesse from the Reader.

1. For the getting of good thoughts into thy mind, it is needful that thou
cleanse the mind of all vain, and evil, and drowsy thoughts, so much as
possibly thou can: he that would have good thoughts like the pillars of fire
and smoke, to lead his actions day and night in this dangerous wilderness,
must in some measure cleanse the heart of its native corruption, and of its
contracted foulness: for as we have no reason to expect sweet liquor out of a
fusty vessel, or good water out of a bitter fountain; figs from thorns, or
grapes from thistles: so we have as small ground to expect that an unmortified
and unchanged heart, should send forth a current of clean and purified
thoughts. The good man out of the good treasure of his heart brings forth good
things, and the wicked man out of the evil treasure of his heart brings forth
evil things: so all fruits are of the nature of the tree whereon they grow. Our
Savior, who knew how to refer every effect to his proper cause, does affirm,
That out of the heart comes thoughts of Murder, Adultery, Blasphemies, and
sins of all sorts: For the heart is evil above measure, and casts into the
thoughts continually that poison, which either makes them black as Hell, or
muddles them with mire and dirt of fearful perplexities, and worldly cares.

Wherefore as many as intend to get good thoughts into their minds; let them
give all diligence that the heart be cleansed from all evil ones.

But here I admonish him that will set upon this work, that it is a work of
more difficulty than many account it, not so soon done, as thought on. It Is not
a few sighs, and superficial groans: it is not a few proverbial notions: nor yet
the subduing of some notorious sin, which is punishable and shameful in the
world; but a total and universal change of all the faculties and powers of the
soul: It is in the words of the Apostle, A putting off concerning the former
conversation, the old man which is corrupt according to the deceiveable lusts,
and a renovation in the spirit of our minds, by putting on that new man, which
after God is created in righteousness and true holiness. Ephesians. 4. 22, 23, 24.
And though we cannot attain the full measure and furthest degree of this
cleansing at the first, nor yet feel such a sensible apprehension of the same
as we desire; yet let us not give over endeavors, nor be discomforted and
disquieted in our souls, if God give us a first fruits, he will in time give us
a harvest. Jam. 5. 7. The Husbandman waits with long patience for the precious
fruit of the earth, until he receive the former and the latter rain: and if we
be patient, and stablish our hearts, God will give unto us hearts cleansed in
some measure of all filthy thoughts. In this case we are not without a promise:
After those days, says the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward parts, and
write it in their hearts. Jer. 31. 33. And if we be once made masters of some
good thoughts, God will make us masters over more; for him whom God finds
faithful over a few things, he will make Lord over many things: and to him that
has, it shall be given, and he shall have abundance.

If any would know how to cleanse and purify the heart, he may consult Authors
purposely written upon that Subject. There are Treatises written thereof for
more ample satisfaction: wherein he shall find, that God ordinarily in his first
appearance to the soul uses the outward ministry of the Word, and by his
Spirit inwardly, gives and applies that which is spoken unto the heart of the
hearer, whereby the heart sees its own corruption and misery, and thereupon
loathes and abhors it self, and as a stomach surfeited with evil humors, would
willingly disgorge it self, so it desires to be delivered of its sin, and eased
of its misery. Then hearing and attending to the Promises of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, it conceives hope by Christ, that new and living way: not only
to be discharged of sin and misery; but also to be received into favor with
God: and then lies groaning at the footstool of grace, till God come in by
his Spirit, and say, unto the poor soul, I am thy salvation: and thereupon it
believes and purifies the heart of all noxious thoughts, words, and actions,
and beholding Christ in the glass of Gods Word, it is transformed into the
image of Christ, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord: 2 Cor.
3. 18. but this briefly; because I would not make too large an excursion (if
yet it be one) out of my way.

2. He that would have good thoughts in his mind, let him attend the means of
grace in Gods several dispensations: let him give up his heart unto that form
of Doctrine which has been delivered unto the Saints: and subject his soul in
all humility unto the whole will of God revealed, and openly urged (by such as
are sent) upon his understanding, will, and affections, in the Ordinance of
Preaching; which being rightly managed, is the power of God unto salvation.

Here I must admonish them that hear the Word of God, that they would be
patients, to take what God prescribes for the cure of their thoughts. That man
will never make a good Disciple, and follower of Christ, that is not content to
deny himself; a novice that is proud, is not far from the condemnation of the
Devil. Naaman had almost lost the cure of his Leprosy, by despising the waters
of Jordan, and preferring his own Rivers of Abanah and Parphar. We must not
quarrel at Gods way or method of cureing our thoughts, nor at the persons of
Gods sending, to administer spiritual help unto us. In this matter, we should
say with Samuel, Speak on Lord for thy servant hears: 1 Samuel 3. 10. or as that
devout Cornelius to Paul; We are all here present before God, to hear all
things that are commanded thee of God. Act. 10. 33

3. He that would have good thoughts, let him pray: let him entreat the Lord to
enrich his soul by his sanctifying spirit; for by multiplied acts, the spirit
does renew our minds. God saves us, but not by works of Righteousness, which
we have done, but according to his mercy by the washing of regeneration, and
renewing of the holy Ghost: pray for that, therefore, that ye may be wased and
saved. Tit. 3. 5.

The fourth means to get good thoughts into thy mind, is to accompany Gods
Saints, be thou as much as conveniently, and without prejudice of thy calling
in the company of them that are godly, whose communion will edge the good
motions that are upon thy spirit, as Iron sharpens Iron. 2 Pet. 3. 1. Peter's
Epistles had power in them to stir up the pure minds of holy men; there is a
power also in the interloquutories and familiar conferences of holy persons,
when they meet face to face; Paul had a great desire of many years, to see (not
so much the City of Rome in her then glory) as the brethren at Rome, Romans 15.
23, 24. that he might be filled with their company, we believe a communion of
Saints, and shall we not desire to be assistants one to another, to impart and
receive some spiritual gifts, interchangeably? God himself is seen in the
congregations of holy men, and therefore as Manoah and his wife, when they had
seen an Angel, thought they had seen the face of God. So when we shall see the
face of Gods people, let us think we behold the face of God in them, for they
are the liveliest pictures of Gods image, their conversation will administer
thoughts of imitation, their conferences will season our unsavory meditations,
their discourse will draw out waters of life, so that we may perceive the deep
things of our salvation, flowing out of their bellies unto us: and though Satan
in the company of wicked men, do beget upon their imaginations, a company of
wicked thoughts, yet the spirit of God is as plentiful in producing good
motions in godly minds by the company of sanctified men: do but observe the
issues of thy mind after thy fill of their company, how barren do thou return
from the tables of those, where thou have not seen the face of God, nor heard
any talk of heaven, and if amongst them, Satan have but whistled an horn-pipe,
how is thy soul dulled or grieved, or turned out of the way; or unfitted for
heavenly thoughts. But on the contrary, when thou have been praying, fasting,
mourning, or it may be feasting with Gods Saints, how cheerful will the soul
be? it seems to have fed upon some dish (like Elijahs meat) in the strength
whereof thy thoughts go a long journey in holy meditations, therefore be sure
of a holy man to thy friend, and the more the better; and make much account of
him or them, it is a wonder to see what force is in the company of godly men, to
stir up good thoughts: and lamentable to see how Satan strangles good
thoughts in some, when they are ready to appear in action by evil company, so
that those thoughts never live to see the light.

5. He that would get good thoughts, and store his heart with them, must make
much of them, when they come: they are quick movers, they come suddenly, and
they are gone as soon; if they be not kindly entertained: they will not stay
long at the door knocking, nor scraping for acquaintance, they are the
messengers of Gods Spirit, and they bring good news to the soul that bids them
welcome, but the non-entertainment of them, or the slight entertainment of them,
is a grieving of the holy Spirit of God, that sent them. If David's messengers
be unkindly entreated by Nabal, or frowned upon, they will back to their Lord,
and acquaint him with their usage, and do not thou think but. thy carriage
toward holy thoughts will be carried to Gods ear: But if thou give kind
entertainment to good thoughts, they will stay with thee, to counsel and
comfort thee; and they will bring with them home to thine heart, many more of
their own kind to lodge with thee: for God himself will send them in plentiful
manner, who loves to furnish such an host with the best comers. Good thoughts
in this respect are something like unto riches, they come to them in most
plenty, who esteem them most: the world must be courted, and gracious thoughts
must be much made of,

And consider, good thoughts are worthy entertainment, they are to be reckoned
amongst our better friends, a man can hardly make too much of them: Ps. in the
multitude of these thoughts, the comforts of God refresh our souls.

Make much of them, for first they are good in themselves, the births of
gracious minds begotten upon them by the Spirit of God, for we are not able of
our selves to think a good thought.

Secondly, these have been kind to us, and done us many a good turn, witness
our solitary nights, and tedious hours of sickness, imprisonment,
afflictions, travailes from place to place, while no comforters have been our
companions, but God and our good thoughts. We may say with David, We have
remembered thy name in the night, and have kept thy Law: Psalm. 119. 55. our
solitary and night thoughts have benefited us, for the keeping of Gods Law, and
have administered unto us songs, in the days of our pilgrimage 54..

Thirdly, our good thoughts are likely to do us good hereafter, and it may be
at such a time, when we shall have more need of them, then ever we have had
yet; it was Hezekiah's great comfort in his sickness, to think how he had
walked before God, in truth, and with a perfect heart, and he beseeches the
Lord also, that he would remember him in this behalf: 2 Kings ^. 3. if bonds or
afflictions remain us, if we be cast into the Dungeon, or be wounded in
battle, or lie upon sick-beds; good thoughts will be unto us our sweetest
companions.

Make much of good thoughts, they will season the rooms where they come, and
make the heart the house of God: But here a word of admonition to them that
have not good thoughts, or rather to them whose good thoughts make offer of
departure. Suspect (beloved) your entertainments of them have been harsh, or
distastful: use them more kindly, entreat their stay, offer them violence, keep
them by force, (if it be possible) that they go not over the threshold from
you. Imitate herein Jacobs bold wrestling with God; hold them fast, let them
not go, lest ye lose a blessing.

6. He that would get good thoughts into his mind, must have a great care to
keep his mind off from evil objects, wicked persons, places of iniquity, things
that are sinful in themselves, or occasionally; for though wicked men make no
matter to offer themselves to these temptations, as nakedly as madmen run into
the tents of their enemies: yet the children of God who have observed what
foyles other men, or themselves have formerly received by such fool-hardines,
will wisely keep themselves at a distance; this made him pray, turn away mine
eyes, Lord, lest they behold vanity; he that has no care in this case, may
find great disorders creep into his thoughts, before he be aware.

It Is the nature of imagination to receive the species or shapes of things from
the outward senses, and laying of them up a while, till she has judged of
them; then to report them to the understanding: and from what she has
received, she can also create new species, and non-entities, of which kind are
the usual fictions of Poets: it behooves a man therefore to take heed with what
objects, or matters, he has to do, lest by them something get into the mind to
disorder and dissettle the government of his disposed thoughts, or being
themselves in possession, keep out better things then themselves from entering;
keep off therefore from things that are in themselves simply unwarrantable, and
from those also which are such by accident, and circumstantially, as were those
things whereof the Apostle speaks, Idols Temples, and meat sacrificed unto
Idols.

Why? but Paul does not condemn such things as unlawful, but notes them
indifferent true; but to him that is persuaded in his own mind, not to him that
doubts: to him that walks in charity, not to him that gives an offense to a
weak brother, for whom Christ died.

Why? but it is lawful to make sin it self the object of our thoughts, we may
think of it: we may think of Adams sins, of our own sins; we may think of the
misery of man by sin, we may consider from whence we are fallen: what was our
purity of nature, our prosperity in Paradise, and what Countenance we had from
God in that state, and how sin has now taken up the room wherein God kept; and
curses have succeeded in the stead of blessings: alas, our case is now so
miserable, that we have not a labor without weariness, a pleasure without
satiety, or pain; a meat without poison, a way without a Serpent, a friend
without weakness: these things we may think of, else why are we called upon to
repent our selves of our sins, to confess them, to pray pardon for them: to
walk humbly, and to fear, because of the terrors of the Lord. Yea further we
may think of the workings of Satan against us, with what trains and subtilties
he seeks to entrap and ensnare us, that he may bring us to destruction, both of
bodies and souls, whiles our flesh confederates with him against us, like a
kingdom divided in it self: and the world conspires with both, by frowns and
favors to separate us from God: Else why are we so often called upon, to
beware of the wiles of the Devil, to subdue our own flesh, to take heed of the
world, lest our hearts be pierced through with many sorrows: and if so, What
need is there to have a care to keep our minds from evil objects?

I answer, it is lawful to think of our own sins, of the malice of the Devil, of
our own miseries, of the deceitfulness of the world, and of our own flesh:
while the thoughts of these things convey them so to the understanding, that it
disproves them, to the will that it abhors them so far as they are evil; and
thereupon set our hearts upon thoughts of mortification: but if the thought of
these things shall draw in the will to like of them, and the understanding to
plot a forwarding of such wickedness as these propound, then the thinking upon
these things, become evil thoughts. And thus we must have a great care to keep
our minds from evil objects: lest too much poreing upon them, do secretly and
closely conveigh some of their malignity into our minds and affections.
Wherefore think not of sin, but to loath it, think not of the Devil, but to
resist him, think not of thy flesh, but to subdue: nor of the world, but to
hate it so far as the love of it is enmity against God: But take off every
thought concerning these things which draw in the will to like, or the
understanding to devise, mischief.

7. That ye may get good thoughts into your minds, propound something of worth
and usefulness to your considerations. Imagination will create and multiply
good thoughts from a subjectof worth and excellency: and here thou may take
up into thy thoughts the four Cardinal Works of God. First the Creation is a
useful subject to think of: the matter out of which all things made their
appearance at the first was nothing: the power by which God wrought them, was a
word: the variety of creatures produced, were all things in Heaven above, in
the Earth beneath, or in the Waters under the Earth. All things were brought
out of nothing by the Creators word. If thou cast thy thoughts upon thy self
only, thou may say with the Prophet, I am fearfully and wonderfully made.
Pass hence to the wonder of man's Redemption, and when thou look into the
mystery hereof: leave off thy marveling at the frame and furniture of the
World, the Sun, the Moon, and Stars, which he has made: What wonder I at the
Leviathans greatness, taking his pleasure in the Deep, or at the small
dimensions of the Wren and Pismire? all these things are light in comparison
when I think of God, made Man, and descending from Heaven in the Son, a Babe
born of a Virgin, swadled and laid in a manger: proclaimed by Angels, yet
spitefully used by his creatures: dying and lying in the grave, and from thence
rising again, and ascending back into Heaven from whence he descended before:
This the Apostle commends unto us in the Gospel, 1 Timothy and calls it, The great
Mystery of Godliness: God manifested in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit,
seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the World, received
up into Glory. When thy heart has somewhat filled it self with the work of
Redemption, thou may for variety sake lawfully call up into thy thoughts the
wonderful work of Gods providence: how manifold are Gods works: how in wisdom
does he govern them all. Any of Gods works of providence may sweeten the
labors of the longest day: and shorten the tediousness of the longest night:
Even Gods special care of thy particular self, in the several ages of thy life,
when seriously thought upon, is no less than wonderful; How many dangers of
thy childhood, of thy youth, of thy age, has God discovered unto thee? and
sometimes prevented them, sometimes carried thee through them, and yet
delivered thee from them? How many mercies has he prepared and performed for
thee, which never came into thy mind? Or if thou will, Consider that gracious
work of Regeneration, whereby the Spirit of God which breaths where it lists,
takes up a poor creature already dead in sins and trespasses, and breaths into
him the breath of Life, sets him on his feet, and teaches him to go, and holds
him by his arm, that he should henceforth fall no more for ever. I do but show
you some things of worth and usefulness to think upon: not to consine a larger
soul to these subjects only. I know every particular work of God carries
wonder in it: yet if thy soul do but climb, like promonts, to these mentioned,
thy understanding will have so much in view, that thy thoughts need never be
idle, nor ill employed: but find a matter to raise a good thought upon, and to
multiply invention. Even every visible and objective thing, is a book laid open
before thy eye, wherein thou may read something of Gods worth, and thy own
duty.

Reader, take these courses for the getting conserving and increasing good
thoughts in thy mind. It may be some of these directions may seem useless unto
thee; yet thou have my offer of love to thy soul: and they may be unto thee,
though unseen at the first, like Minerals under ground, which lead to and fro
with a thousand veins, enriching the Miner.

CHAP. XI.
I Forbear further rules for getting good thoughts, and shall now speak of the
rules more particularly whereby we must govern good thoughts once gotten. If it
be expected by any, that I should have been most large, or only, upon this
point, for the right governing of a just man's thoughts. Let it also be
considered, that all that has been hitherto written, has been but directions
to the same purpose. He that would govern his thoughts aright, must know not
only how to rule them being gotten, but how to remove hindrances of them;
which I have done by discovery of the evils of thoughts, and the remedies
thereof, general and particular. He must also know how to get good thoughts,
which I have done, by directing means for that purpose; and therefore when I
have also given you rules for the governing of your good thoughts being gotten,
I shall think I have discharged my duty in this undertaking, according to the
measure of the gift of God bestowed upon me, for the edifying of his Church.

And that I may stir up your pure minds to this great Work of governing your
good thoughts being gotten, Consider:

1. Its honorable and praiseworthy, for a man to govern his own thoughts
well: It was Salomons praise, that when God bid him ask and have: that leaving
out riches, and long life, and honor, out of his petition, as things less
desirable, he did earnestly desire, Lord give thy servant an understanding
heart to judge thy people. 1 Kin. 3. 9 It is no less praiseable in a Christian
being made a king over a state as disordered, as people, as mutinous, viz. his
thoughts, and having the same promise which Solomon had, to ask and receive,
and particulary to ask wisdom of God who gives it, Jam. 8. if he beg of God
that wisdom which is from above, whereby his heart may be guided to settle his
disordered (if not rebellious) thoughts in peace and security.

Certainly it is a work of great wisdom to govern our thoughts aright, and if
they be accounted wise who helped by power and cunning, can rule a multitude
well; they are also to be reputed wise, who can rule their own thoughts, which
are a great people for number, and as apt to mutiny as men are: surely such who
rule well within, are to be accounted worthy of double honor, as they that
rule well without.

Further, when we consider the difficulty of governing thoughts well, we must
needs think them worthy praise, who can do it: some are born Kings, and many
have made themselves Kings over Countries, and Nations of people, which yet
could never conquer their own thoughts, but continued slaves to their own
wills, a man may conquer others by strength of arms, and policy, but a man can
never conquer his own thoughts truly; until nature be helped by sanctifying
graces: in as much therefore as grace superadded to nature, makes it in every
thing more illustrious, by so much is the Christian rightly ruling his own
thoughts, more honorable then other men.

But notwithstanding what can be said for the praise of them that govern their
thoughts aright: yet there are many in the world, and they men of no mean
parts, who admire, and by their endeavors, advance the government of Houses,
Churches, and Kingdoms, who yet decry the ordering of the heart, the
government of the thoughts as needless, or impossible.

But needless it is not, as ye may perceive by our prefixed discourse,
concerning the needfulnesse of the government of thoughts, and this that
follows.

The inward government of the soul, is the president for all external
governments among men, and the Heathen knew this who called man a little world:
if Moses had not seen the form of the Tabernacle in the mount, he could never
have made it, to Gods mind, and if men do not frame a form of government in
their own minds, they will hardly be able to form a government acceptable to
men, as he that will govern the Church, must first learn to govern his own
house: so must he begin to rule well in that private little place of his own
heart, that minds to govern others: the best men are the best Kings, and the
most conquering their own hearts, are the greatest Worthies.

Again, he that governs his thoughts well, God will subdue all his enemies
under him, all the rebellions of his own flesh, shall yield to him, all the
strivings of the world against him, cannot prevail; he rides on conquering all
things, and not to be conquered: but he that is of a loose and disordered
carriage toward his own soul, shall find his thoughts and actions as loose to
him, as his care is over them.

Impossible it is not, for a Righteous man to govern his thoughts aright:
though I must confess that to nature unreformed, it is impossible; as also
that where nature is renewed, the highest perfection of this gift is not
attainable, before the enjoyment of glory.

Yet notwithstanding the meaner degrees may and ought to be expected from God,
and are attained unto by every good Christian in this life: for God has
promised to give unto his servants a new heart, and that his grace shall be
sufficient for them. Jer. 31. Wherefore seeing nothing is impossible, to whom
God has promised possibility; let not us be discouraged from prescribing, let
not others be discouraged from receiving rules for government of our thoughts,
being a work both possible and necessary.

Rule 1. It will be the wisdom of every Righteous man to lift up the head of
some just thought into place of Eminency, and Command in his mind; whereunto
all the rest must be subject, which must have both coercive and coactive power,
like that Centurion in the Gospel, and say to one thought go, and to another
come: parity, if but in thought, is next to mutiny; orderly government amongst
equals, is a soloecisme in Politics.

But where may we find such a Saint among the people, such a thought among the
cogitations, as may overtop all the rest? what if thou shall set up the thought
of Gods fear upon the throne of thy heart, holding up the Scepter of Gods word,
and taking up the Regency of thy whole man, as of the multitude of thy
thoughts. I conceive, the fear of God taking it in the Scripture sense, pro
toto Dei cultu, for the whole worship of God, is most meet to be a Master, a
Prince over all our thoughts; for what but religion should be the main scope of
a Christians whole life? and what rather then this should command all the
company of our thoughts into order amongst themselves, and into the obedience
of Christ?

What is it which the Psalmist chiefly promises to teach his children, but the
fear of the Lord? Come ye children, hearken unto me, and I will teach you the
fear of the Lord: psalm. 34. 11 many would be accounted wise and prudent, but
none are truly wise, but they that set up the fear of God in their hearts. Even
a scorner seeks wisdom, but finds it not: Prove. 14. 6. alas, wisdom lies not
in the scorners way, nor amongst their great men, and wise men of the world,
whose wisdom is but foolishness with God. 1 Cor. 3. 19. Where lies it then,
but amongst them that are religious? The fear of the Lord is the beginning of
wisdom. Prove. 9. 10. Doubtless they have a good understanding that do
thereafter; the praise of it endures for ever. And set this further upon your
hearts; consider that they which despise that wisdom, which the fear of the
Lord teaches, are but fools for their labor; The fear of the Lord is the
beginning of wisdom, but fools despise wisdom and instruction: Prove. 1. 7. my
advice is therefore, that ye set this fear of the Lord, as Regent over your
thoughts.

If ye please to look amongst the men of this world, ye shall see a Master
thought higher then the rest, in every unregenerate man, at whose beck all the
rest as underlings bow, and give obedience, not unsitly compared to the Master
Be in the Hive, whose rising or settling carries with it the whole swarm. Thus
the thought of covetousness in Judas, of fame in Magus, of idolatry in
Jezabel, of adultery in Herod, of honor in Nebuchadnezzar, of revenge in Cain,
of nigardize in Nabal, of self-preservation in the unjust steward, were as the
Pole-starre, about which, all the rest of their thoughts moved respectively.

In the thoughts of a wicked man, the thoughts of some sin takes the throne, in
whose government he delights: this thought drives out all good ones that stand
in his way and oppose him, and if any be received in, it is but with reservation
of power to remove them again at pleasure. And even evil thoughts themselves
which are not of the same kind with the principal, are so far countenanced as
serviceable to the Regents purpose: so the thought of ambition, brings in all
other thoughts of revenge; Covetousness, Pride, Envy, etc. to be her
servants: so that a man may say, such Master, such Servants; such Mistress,
such Maids: and when they cease to be serviceable to their Masters main design,
he casts them off, and takes in others.

If wicked men be thus wise in their generations, let the children of light
learn to be more wise then they; and let them also enthrone the thought of Gods
fear, and delight in her government, and then evil thoughts will vanish as the
mists before the morning Sun: this will take in all thoughts of such virtues,
and words, and works, as may be serviceable to the worship of God, and make
even those inferior thoughts about things indifferent, and the lawful
businesses of our calling subservient and profitable to her main design of
honoring God: and when they cease to be so serviceable, the fear of God
enthroned among the thoughts, will cast them off.

The second rule, Let all thy thoughts be ordered according to Gods word, for
if the fear of God be Regent, the word of God is her known Law, by which she
governs; The testimonies of the Lord, as they were the delight, so they were
the Counselors of the holy Prophet. Thy Testimonies are my delight, and my
Counselors, Psalm. 1 19. 24. they must be Counselors to every soul that lives
under the fear of God: Religion has no Law above Scripture, nor equal with it:
and that man cannot have set up the fear of God in his heart, who undersets the
Scripture, or speaks against it, or behaves himself frowardly toward the rule
thereof. That man cannot have a good thought in his heart, who has an evil
heart to the Scripture: But as when Moses took the rod into his hand, the
waters stood on heaps, and divided themselves above and beneath: So when the
heart which fears God takes into consideration the word of God, the thoughts
that come from above, and the thoughts which come from below, divide
themselves, and start asunder: in which sense, the word is called a discerner
of the thoughts and intents of the heart: Heb. 4. 12. Wherefore that evil
thoughts may divide from thee, and good thoughts may stay with thee; let all
thy thoughts come before the word of God: Religion will allow no thoughts under
her government, but such as will be ruled by her Laws.

And this rule I have given the more willingly, lest any thoughts arising out
of zeal and affection to Religion, and not according to the word of God, should
usurp amongst you the name of Good thoughts. In this kind I observe Gods
children commit great errors, packing many unwarrantable and unseasonable
actions upon seeming good affections to the fear of God. I love those persons
whose good meanings and good affections make them zealous of Religion: but I
love and honor that soul more, whose affections are zealous, yet will not allow
that for Religion, which is not according to Gods Word: if any other opinion
get the stamp of men upon it for religious: its more than I know that it has
Gods Image and Superscription upon it.

3. That thou may govern thy thoughts aright: Consider thine own standing,
and qualification, in the Church of God; for every several standing and state,
require several thoughts. The Apostle marshals Christians into three ranks: 1
John 2. 13. Children, young Men, and old Men. Like thoughts become not every
age, no more than like apparel does. Joseph's party-colored Coat, became him,
while he was his father Jacobs wanton; but when he was Pharaohs Counselor, he
must put on his graver habits. While the Apostle was a child, he spoke as a
child, he understood as a child, he thought as a child; but when he became a
man, be put away childish things. It may beseem a child to hang upon the
mothers breasts, to stand at her knee, to be carried in her arms, to play away
time, and trust all to the care of father and mother, and cry for what he
lacks: But young men who are strong, must think of fightings and battles, and
overcoming the wicked one: and old men who have known him that is from the
beginning, 1 John 2. 13. must be grave, sober, examples unto others, and
teachers of others, filled with the fullness of God, beyond the unstayed
thoughts of the child, or distempered motions of young men. What an unnatural
thing it is, to see children ruling their fathers, old men hanging upon the
Paps, and young men in their full strength leaning upon the Crutch? The
thoughts of a King, become not the state of a beggar: the poor man must think
how to speak supplications: the rich man how to distribute: the minister to
divide the Word aright, and to feed the flock of Christ: the tradesman not to
defraud or circumvent his brother in any thing. When men's thoughts are suitable
to their own standing in the Church, and their own Calling in the world, there
is a harmony in their societies, and they are mutually helpful. In Martial
affairs, if the common Soldier run upon the Captains office: in
houshold-government, if the servant will do the Masters business: in
Corporations, if the Common man will act as Lord Mayor, their communions are
but confusions: but where every one takes, and keeps his own place, how
pleasant is the whole action? Let every man consider his own standing and
qualification in the Church of God, and let no man think of himself above that
which is fitting, but let him think soberly.

4. Rule: Take a view of all thy thoughts, as that Master did who took an
account of his servants: so do thou call thy thoughts together, and take notice
of what kind they are, of what worth they are, of what usefulness they are, to
the service of the fear of God: Its probable thou may find some evil
servants among them that appear to be good; some unprofitable ones among them
that seem to be useful; some less serviceable among them that seem to be most;
and some more serviceable among them that seem to be less: It will be thy
wisdom to know the state of thy thoughts; and as the mouth tastes meat, and the
ear tryes words, so let the heart try her own thoughts; bring them to the
trial of Gods Word, as gold to the Touchstone: and accordingly as they endure
this touch, so account of them for current or base silver: For as in a great
house, there be vessels of gold, and vessels of silver, and vessels of wood,
and of stone: so are the thoughts in a man's heart, some for honor, and some
for dishonor, some for nobler, and some for meaner employments, and some not
useful at all.

5. Having thus viewed thy own thoughts, what thoughts are found to be of an
evil kind, lay them aside, how precious so ever they were in thine eyes. Our
servants though of a good appearance, yet if they want worth and be
unserviceable to us, must seek them new masters: so should our thoughts do.
That thought which is found not to fear God, let it not tarry in thy sight: if
Gold want weight, or be embased, it passes not for current: if meat be never
so well cooked, yet if it be not sweet, it will not down with us. And shall we be
wise for our bodies, for our estates, for our houses? Let us be much more wise
for our souls: and if thou have once cast out an evil thought pernicious and
wicked, let it not be entertained again, no not though it might do thee some
appearing service. Every man is not serviceable that looks like a man, and can
hold a trencher: Its possible a wicked thought accomplished may stand thee
instead for the world, such thoughts are not serviceable to the fear of God,
nor thy salvation.

6. Having cast off those which are evil: keep such thoughts as are
serviceable, and make much of them. I have spoken of this already as a rule for
getting good thoughts, I need speak the less of it here: only this: goods are
kept as they are gotten: he that makes not much of little which he has, will
hardly get any more: and he that makes not much of that which he has, loses
it by carelessness. There Is much good husbandry within doors in saving that
which we have, as without doors, till we have got it in: a good huswife at
home, is as needful, as a good husband abroad.

7. Those thoughts which are retained, let them have their due place: some
thoughts are about things purely religious, other are about things indifferent,
and some about businesses of our lawful Callings: all may have their place, and
their seasons; but much wisdom is required in giving these thoughts what
belongs to them: they are all useful, and none of them to be contemned if they
keep their places. Martha is needful in the house, as well as Mary: But Mary
must have the first place, because her part chosen is the better: the younger
children in the family must have portions provided; but first-borns must have a
double portion: our Divine thoughts must have the preeminence; for the
excellency of dignity belongs unto them: Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and
the Righteousness thereof: yet worldly thoughts are needful in their places. I
like not that Monkish pretense to thrust all worldly and recreatory thoughts
out of the mind, as too base to come into their Cloisters: for thus they make
themselves unprofitable to the societies of men, and dissenters from the rule
of Christ, who would not that such as are devoted to his worship, should go out
of the world, John 17. but be kept from the evil of the world. And I account it
an error on the formal Protestants part also, to thrust out better thoughts,
for the entertainment of worse: whereas it should be a Christians care rightly
to subordinate the lower thoughts to the higher, the baser, to the better: I
can think that worldly thoughts are needful servants, though they be bad
masters. Zibah did his Master Mephibosheth good service, till he got above him:
but then a servants allowance will not content him; he will be pleased with no
less then the whole inheritance. Even so our inferior thoughts may do
religion good service, while they keep their subordination, but if they justle
out religious thoughts themselves; it is time for a righteous man to put them
again into their own place.

The eigth Rule is: Let the Righteman wisely mix his spiritual and other
lawful thoughts together; it is a part of the cogitative faculty to intermixe
the species of things received, and it is the office of a wise Christian to
intermixe his thoughts together, so as they may be helpful one to another, to
forward the worship of God: a man's thoughts should be agreeable to his present
state, and condition, which being the state of a travailer betwixt earth and
heaven, he should be like the Pilot in his ship, oculus ad coelum, manus ad
clavem, lifting up his eyes to heaven, and laying his hand upon the Card: when
the husbandman can at the same time lay his hand on the Plough; and ad stivam
aliquid Davidicum, sing David's Psalms with David's heart, there is a sweet
mixture of thoughts in him: God indeed has allowed unto man one kind of
thoughts for his work, another for his devotion; yet when we are at our labor,
we may easily perceive our minds are more nimble to think, then our hands to
work; so that in all the business of our calling, there are certain spaces for
holy thoughts: so Abraham's servant was sent out to take a wife for his young
Master, and stood watering the Camels at the Well, he found a space for that
prayer: Oh Lord God of my Master Abraham, I pray thee send me good speed this
day, and show kindness unto my Master Abraham. Genesis 24. 12.

9. Rule; Let the Righteous man's thoughts have their seasons and successions:
there is a time for mixtures, and yet the season of every thing must be
regarded, all thoughts of mirth make us secure, all musing upon judgment is
the high way to desperation. All our thoughts upon privileges and enjoyments,
may possibly lift us up, and all thoughts of sin and judgment may make us
unprofitable to men, and uncomfortable to our selves: here mixture is
convenient, yet seasons must be observed, and successions. There is a time for
all things, and he that is able to discern the time and season of his thoughts,
is a wise man: the mind is an active Agent, and has almost infinite things to
think of; yet being it self of a finite and limited possibility, must of
necessity take seasonable opportunities, as the means to produce actions in an
orderly succession, where thoughts have not their allotmenss of suitable time,
they will be disorderly, confused, interrupted, and impertinent.

Where this is not observed; two inconveniences do usually trouble the
righteous man.

First, when he should mind the duties of holiness, the thoughts of his
calling break in upon him.

Secondly, when he should tend the business of his calling his religious
duties, are to do; which should have been done before, both these
inconveniences are avoided; by setting our thoughts to their time, and keeping
them to their orderly successions. But here I must commit the Reader to his own
spiritual wisdom, which may direct for the time and season of his own thoughts,
and which should be first, and which should be last, better then any other can
do.

Yet herein I will give my advice; let him imitate wise Statesmen, who hear
and dispatch businesses of greatest concernment first, and then those that are
of lesser concernment; usually spiritual thoughts are meet to be dispatched
first, for they are of the highest concernment, next the thoughts of our
calling; and lastly, thoughts of recreation: yet I confess this advice is not
general for all purposes, and for all persons: general Rules have their
exceptions, and so has this: heavenly thoughts are without controversy our
best thoughts, yet worldly thoughts and recreatory thoughts, have their use;
and in case of extreme necessity of the body, must have the first place, and be
done first: if my neighbors Ox or his Ass be fallen into a pit, I must lift
him out, though it be on the Sabbath day. If my house be on fire, I must think
to quench it, rather then to go into my Closet to prayer, or into the Pulpit to
preach, or into the Church to hear. If my brother be ready to starve for want
of clothing, to famish for want of food, my alms is more seasonable then my
Counsel; my cloth then my good word: go and learn what that means. I will
have mercy, and not sacrifice.

10. Rule: In the government of all thy thoughts, be careful thou have no
violent passion, of what kind soever, upon thy spirit: a passionate man cannot
be a just governor of his own thoughts: passion of what kind soever, if
violent, is the great enemy to a welsettled order of good thoughts. Who, that
saw David in his unlawful love to Bathsheba, in his grief for Absalom, and in
his rage against Nabal, would have called him a man after Gods own heart, or a
man of composed thoughts? Passions disorder the whole man, as the sudden
incursion of a wing of Horse, dis-ranks a Company of Footmen, and puts them
into such confusion, that every one is ready to fall foul upon his fellow. Do
passions break in upon thy thoughts? what an altered man thou art? thy mind
like an Eden before them, replenished with variety of good thoughts, but behind
them, a barren Wilderness, uneaven, and rough, and overgrown with unpleasant
and unprofitable intentions, and resolutions, tending to evil. Oh the miserable
estate of our souls when they are hurried along upon the wheels of passion, and
how unperceived are a man's descents to wickedness in those his fits? and after
the storm of them is a little over; what a trouble it is to look back upon his
miscarriages? what a labor to gather up his scattered good thoughts again?
Wherefore if thou desire to settle the government of thy thoughts in peace and
safety, look well to thy passions, that they be not too strong for thee.

I may not say all passions are utterly unlawful in a Christian, we are all men
of passions: and even Elijah that great Prophet, was a man subject to like
passions as we are, Jam. 5. 17. said a great Apostle. Prophets and Apostles had
their passions, and Holy and Just men, have them still; and I could tell you,
that they are sometimes of great use, to carry on Religious desires; as zeal in
Christ himself, moved him to whip buyers and sellers out of the Temple: But I
must not follow this Precept to the full, lest I should insert another
discourse. I will therefore commit this rule, and all else that has been
written in this matter, to your Christian care; in the use of them, and your
souls to the direction, and protection of God, who lives for ever.

FOUR SERMONS,

Viz.
The Right ordering of the Conversation; Being two Sermons on Ps. 50. verse.
ult. A Funeral Sermon on Ps. 39. 5. A preparation to the Communion, on 1 Cor.
11. 28.
By John Angel.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, The Lady, Elizabeth Darcye, BARONESS, At her house
at Aston in Yorkshire, these humbly presented.
Dear Madame,
I Present you the Notes transcribed with mine own hand of the two Sermons
preached before you, and your Honorable Husband at Fulbeck, wherein I hope I
have at once, both fulfilled mine own promise, and satisfied your Ladyships
desire; they came unto me later then I purposed, but they are drawn out more
fully and largely: according to the Original draught, as you heard them
delivered. I doubt not of your favorable acceptance of them, such as they are.
Your Honor will find, that amidst the whimsies of these times, this will prove
a sure Card, to steer your course by unto the heavenly Jerusalem. There was
more force and vigor I confess, in the lively voice, when you heard them; but
you will find more opportunity to make use of them in a serious review, while
you have them by you upon all occasions. As your hearts were warmed in the
hearing of them at first, so I wish, that the living and quickening of the
blessed spirit of God, may be on you, in the reading, and perusing of the same.
My desire is, that the several particulars of this short abstract out of
Scripture, were written in your Noble heart, in golden characters; with the
point of a Diamond. I humbly beseech your Ladyship, that your conversation may
be a legible Express hereof before the world, to the comfort of your own
conscience, praying for the happiness both Temporal and Eternal, of you and
yours. I remain,

From Grantham. Sept. 9. 1654. Your Honors much engaged and humbly devoted in
all Christian service, JOHN ANGEL.

THE Right Ordering Of the CONVERSATION.
PSALM. 50. ult. The Text at Fulbeck
And to him that orders his conversation aright, will I show the salvation of
God.
THe subject of my Text is a The nature of the subject.
matter of the greatest importance that can be, whether you respect the duty on
man's part, or the promise on Gods part, depending thereupon.

Man's conversation, or Gods salvation, Division of the Text.
the ordering of the one, and the showing of the other, the difficulty of the
former, and the excellency of the latter: or else in the third place, if you
look to the connection and knitting of the one to the other, for the duty or
qualification required: It is general, full, comprehensive, and includes all
particular duties elsewhere required; for he that orders his conversation
aright, must direct all the passages and steps thereof holily, in the several
kinds thereof: And for the promise annexed, it is also as large, and full, and
compriseth all the particular promises in the word, both concerning this life,
and that which is to come; safety, succor, supply, protection, deliverance,
yea glorification; and what not, are contained under the salvation promised in
my text.

Before we proceed let us view a little The context.
the context, or coherence, wherein take notice of these two particulars.

First, how careful God is even where he denounces the extreme judgments
against sinners, yet even there to add the sweetest promises to the consolation
of his people: for verse 21. he tells the wicked he will reprove them, and set
their sins before them in order (as it were in battle array) and verse 22.
speaks of tearing of them in pieces, so that there be none to deliver them: yet
here verse 23. annexeth the promise of salvation to his people, lest they
should be discouraged; and declares, that his severity to the one, should not
hinder his bounty and mercy to the other.

aright, will I show the salvation of God.

Which words are an entire, full and substantial doctrine in themselves, take
them asunder, and these particular propositions, or doctrinal truths, are
contained.









But all these particulars will fall under the handling of the full textual
doctrine, which is this.

To every one that orders his conversation aright, God will show his salvation;
If we be agents in the former, God will surely make us patients in the latter.
For the opening of which doctrine, I will stand a little upon the explication
of the words in the Text. What is meant by conversation.


First, what we are to understand by conversation, that is the way or course of
his life, both in his thoughts, words, and actions, wherein he converseth with
God, man, or his own self. It is a word of a large extent, it reaches to man's
whole life, and all the several passages and businesses thereof, some men can
demean themselves pretty well in some business, and in some company, and on
some occasions; but if you look to the general frame and course of their lives,
it is naught: but the promise in my text, is made to a man whose conversation
is right. That is the whole and all the parcels thereof, the tenor of his life
is right, (for the main) both in his general and particular calling in his
works of mercy to the needy. Secondly, of justice toward all. Thirdly of piety
toward God. Fourthly of sobriety toward himself. Again, it is the orderly
composing of our selves in all estates of adversity or prosperity, whether
Phil. 4. 12.
we be abased or abound, Phil. 4. 12. and in all his relations or references
that carries himself well; whether he be a Magistrate or Minister, Master or
Servant, Child or Parents.

Lastly in all occurrences of divine providence, here lies the business of
the conversation in all these by which you may perceive, that it is no easy
matter to compass.

Secondly what is to order the conversation. First to order is a word of What
it is to order.
wisdom. It is a point of wisdom, and requires a great deal of skill and art,
methodically to dispose of our ways. God said before verse 27. That he would
set the sins of the wicked before them, as it were marching in array; and he
requires of good men to order their conversation aright.

It is a word of diligence as well as wisdom, and speaks a great deal of pains
and diligence in the disposing of the variety of our business, yea and
watchfulness too, in bringing out every thing beautiful in its season: to
order a family, to order a state, to rule a kingdom is a mighty matter: even so
it is for a man to rule his own mind; which who so does, is better and stronger
then he that overcomes a City, Prove. 16. 32. art may do the one, but Prove. 16.
32.
only grace can effect the latter, he that overcomes a City, vanquisheth but
men, but he that rules his own mind, his passions, etc. the little
Commonwealth of himself, overcomes devils principalities, and powers.

Thirdly, ordering is a word of perseverance, and implies bringing about of
things to an issue, and a continuation unto the end; for what is order, but a
Ordo est dispositio a primo ad ultimum per media.
disposition of things from the first to the last by means conducing thereunto.

Fourthly, in the next place we are to consider what it is to order aright or
straightly: now a thing may be said to be right.


First, that has rectitude from himself, and is the cause of rightnesse in all
other things, and so God is only right.



Thirdly, things or persons may be said to be right, which are neither the
cause of rectitude in others, nor yet properly a rule to square other things
by, yet are they rightly fitted to the true rule, and of this are three kinds.



prevent discouragement in weak Christians, so that we may well expound the
meaning of my text, by that 119. Psalm. 119. 133.
Psalm. 133. order my steps in thy word. And to order in thy word, is as much as
rightly to dispose it, the word of God being the rule of right, it must have
warrant from the word; and be conformed to it from the word; and to conclude,
thus then is a matter ordered aright, when it holds proportion to the rule,
and is carried sutably.

Tim. 1. 5. even a pure heart, a good cause, and faith unfaigned.

Thirdly, when it is carried on upon a right ground and motive: as, suppose the
love of God, conscience of duty, etc. and discharged in a right manner, in
sincerity, in humility, in the presence of God, to be approved of him. 1 Cor.
10. 13.


And lastly, when it is directed to a good end, which is the glory of God.
Opposite hereunto are the indirect crooked turnings and windings of all
graceless persons, who pervert their ways. See Proverbs 10. 9.

Now for the promise annexed on Gods What Is meant by salvation.
part, it is as full and large, all blessings are couched under salvation:
Salvation is as much as protection, safety, deliverance in this life, and that
which is to come: the salvation of God is a singular salvation: for the
addition of (God) in my Text, notes the excellency of it, as the mountains of
God are excellent mountains: and the salvation spoken of, is either ordinary or
extraordinary; and both, that which is begun in this world, as also that final
receiving the end of our faith, even the salvation of our souls.

First, that he will give us a glimpse and sight of it in this world, by
manifesting of it to our souls, and assuring us of it, say unto my soul, I am
thy salvation; says the Psalmist. Psalm. 35. 3. he shall see himself saved.

Secondly, the enjoying and possessing of it, Psalm. 85. 7. Having thus taken
the words asunder, and explained them, I will now join them together, and prove
the truth of the entire proposition.

Nothing is more clear in Scripture Proof of the point.
then this, that God has linked together sanctification and salvation in an
unseparable and Adamantine chain, never to be broken: all the Bible throughout
witnesses that holiness ever ends in happiness: What is it to order our
conversation aright, but to lead a godly life? And has not godliness the
promise of this life, and that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4. 8. yes, and the
performances too: the accomplishment of the said promises, those that have
their fruit in holiness, shall have Romans 6. 22
their end everlasting life, and they that go to heaven, are said to receive an
inheritance among those that are sanctified: many and precious promises are
scattered throughout the world, some to persons that fear God, some to those
that love God, etc. but all belong to those that order their conversation
aright, see Psalm. 91. 10. 11. This also may be proved negatively on the other
side, that none shall see the salvation of God, but they that order their
conversation aright; without holiness, says the Apostle, no man shall see the
Lord, Heb. 12. 14. And does not our salvation consist in the vision of God:
mark well these three particulars. First for holiness. Secondly, without
holiness no man shall see the Lord. Thirdly, with holiness, none but he shall
see the God of his salvation: this is also proved reciprocally on both sides,
both affirmatively and negatively, Romans 8. 13. If ye live after the flesh, ye
shall die, but if ye through the spirit mortify the deeds of the body, ye
shall live.

Next for the showing us his salvation, What Is meant to show us his salvation.
or making us know our interest in it, that is also true sooner or later, more
or less, he that orders his conversation aright shall see it. Yea it holds
proportionably, the more exactly the conversation is squared, the more clear
assurance is given to such a person. See for this how confidently David affirms
of himself, Psalm. 27. 1, 2, 3, etc. and Paul, 2 Timothy 4. 17. I have fought a
good fight, I have finished my course, from henceforth is laid up for me a
Crown of righteousness. It is the promise of our Savior Christ, John 14. 21.
He that has my Commandments, and keeps them, (there is the right ordering of
the conversation) I will love, and manifest my self unto him.

The Reasons of the Point.
The grounds of this truth: the first lies in Gods free grace, and depends
on the faithfulness of his promise; for there is no proportion betwixt our
conversation for a short time, and Gods salvation for ever, to be joined:
betwixt our imperfect sanctification, and Gods perfect salvation: but God has
engaged himself by promise to us. It is a Reward of favor, not of debt, as the
Apostle distinguishes, Romans 4. 4. It is not from the merit of our works, but
from the mere mercy of God:

all the promises are yea and Amen, 2 Cor. chapter 1. ver. 20. to the glory of God,
by us.

seed of glory, as they are of the same kind, and near of kin, Gal. 6. 8. He
that sows to the spirit, shall reap of the spirit life everlasting: and all
this is, that so God might Crown his own gifts in us: not our merits: and that
he might honor himself, as well as pleasure us.

To improve this Point to our best advantage: first we may use it by way 1 Use
of Exhortation.
of encouragement, to excite and stir up all sorts of persons to be willing to
set upon this Duty, and to make conscience of the ordering of their
conversations aright. Oh be exhorted (beloved) to resolve to set upon it
forthwith, and henceforward to make it your business to walk worthy of the
Lord, in all well-pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, 1 Col. 9. and
ever hereafter, to order your thoughts, words, and actions, according to the
Rule of Gods sacred Word.

The pressing Considerations to set home the Exhortation on our souls, may be
these that follow.

First because it is a thing so highly 1 Consideratio prima.
pleasing to God, that he has (in my Text) annexed so great a recompense of
reward to the performers of it: that they shall see the salvation of God. If
salvation be dear unto us, let us then go on kindly, and strongly under the
expectation of it, against all difficulties whatsoever that lie in the way to
hinder us. Oh salvation is a sweet thing, and for ever: our pains about our
conversation will be but for a short time. It were our duty to order our
conversation aright, though no salvation followed it: How much more then, when
we know our labor shall not be in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. ult.

The second encouragement I will use, Consideratio secunda
shall be this; because this will denominate us blessed persons, even while we
live; and who is there that would not be blessed? Psalm. 119. 1. Blessed are
they that are undefiled in the way, and walk in the way of the Lord, etc.
Without this, all our profession of Christianity will prove but vanity: our
faith will be but a mere fancy; and all our devotions, but as so many glorious
suns, only in the way of holiness lies the beauty and comeliness of all our
perfections; This is the Diamond in the Ring, that graceth all our other parts
and accomplishments: no true peace, safety, comfort, or security, is elsewhere
to be found, either in our life or death: 2 Cor. 1. 12. All the ways of
wisdom, are ways of pleasure, and all her paths prosperity, Prove. 3. 17. and
the fear of the Lord, is the only wisdom: experiment it who pleases. In other
ways he shall find a great deal of cragginesse, and bitterness in the end of
all.

Thirdly consider Gods ways to us: Consideratio tertia.
all his ways are mercy and truth, to those that fear him, Psalm. 25. 10. It is
not said, some of his ways are mercy; and some of his ways are truth: but all
his ways are both mercy and truth: mercy in promising, and truth in
performing. And why then should you think it much that all our ways and
dealings should relish of holiness and obedience toward God? all his ways
are to pleasure us: and in equity, all our ways should be to please him. Or
consider Jesus Christ himself, Phil. 2. 7, 8. he came down from heaven to
accomplish the work of our Redemption: and shall not we come out of the world
for his sake, and have our conversations in heaven? Christ emptied himself for
us, and took upon him the form of a servant, and humbled himself, and became
obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross; and all for our sakes. It is
written of him, that he pleased not himself, Romans 15. 3. And shall we so ill
requite our Lord and Savior, as to order our courses to please others, or
humor our selves, to follow the guise of the times, and so content our own
lusts? and not rather to please him in every thing we do? I pray you lay this
meditation close to your hearts.

This in the fourth place, is the one Fourth Motive.
thing necessary in all our life: Luke 10. 42. this is that good part, which
whosoever chooses, it shall never be taken from him: All other things are
superfluous, in comparison of this: He that keeps his way, keeps his soul,
says Solomon, Prove. 16. 7. The very life and soul lies at stake in this
business. Suppose thou can rightly weild an estate, or drive thy trade well,
so as to be master of it: Suppose thou can manage thy actions fairly before
men: Suppose thou were able to marshal an Army, or to rule a City, a Nation, or
Kingdom: Suppose thou can govern a family, and order thy servants under thee;
Heathens have done all these, and a man may go to hell that does them: But to
manage thine own heart and life aright, is a far more excellent thing, and it
will certainly bring thee to Heaven; it being such a thing as accompanies
salvation. This is to live the very life of God himself; to walk in the way
that is called holy: hereby the life of Christ appears unto us. I conclude
this, with that of the Apostle James, 3. 13. Who is a wise man, and endued with
knowledge amongst you? let him show out of a good conversation his works with
meekness of wisdom. Mark; first the frame of his conversation must be good:
secondly his works must flow out of the same, and be made apparent: thirdly the
manner of the carriage of his works: It must be in meekness of wisdom. What
should I need to press you any further, either that so doing you shall
beautify your Profession, and adorn Religion? or that hereby you shall stop the
mouths of enemies, and put them to a stand, that they shall not be able with any
face, to speak evil of you, or of godliness; but all their pretenses shall be
taken away: or that hereby you shall much honor the work of God in your own
hearts; that that grace we speak so much of, is not an empty sound, or mere
notion, but there is a reality in it, a life and power which will make us do
something more than the common sphere of mankind is able to effect. You are in
Covenant with God, and being so, are a Law to your selves: Oh I beseech you,
let your actions be suitable to your principles: you see the beauty of
holiness: You are a holy nation, a royal priesthood, a precious people,
therefore show forth the virtues of him, that has called you out of darkness,
into his mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2. 9. Let your conversation be such, Phil. 1.
27. as becomes the Gospel: such as may bring holiness into credit, and
fashion: and herein labor to exercise your selves to keep a clear conscience
void of offense, both toward God, and toward men, Acts 24. 16.

The Second SERMON.
PSALM. 50. ult. And to him that orders his conversation aright, will I show
the salvation of God.
THe first Use was exhortatory, and Second Use.
did serve to work men's hearts to a love, and willingness to the duty: The
second is Directory, and serves to make persons able and skilful in the right
ordering of their conversation. For this lies upon us Ministers, not only to
convince you of the necessity of your duties, and to press upon you the
discharge thereof: but also to show you how, and by what means you may be able
to put them in practice: and not to leave you to shift for your selves, after
we have acquainted you with the commands of God: but to labor to guide your
feet in the way of peace. Now these Directions that I shall give you, are either
more general, and introductive to the business, or else more special.

And first of all, It is to be supposed First Direction.
and premised, that a man must first be a true Convert himself, before it be
possible for him to order his conversation aright; the inward frame of his soul
must first be rightly set within him; which is the principle from whence issues
the course of his thoughts, words, and actions: He must first have a right
spirit renewed in him, before he can have a right conversation: Psalm. 51. 10.
this made David pray, Renew O Lord in me a right spirit: the instrument must
first be stringed and set in tune, before the music it yields will be sweet:
a wicked man, and one that is unregenerate, can never order his life aright, a
good man, out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth good things,
and an evil man, out of the evil treasure, brings forth evil things.
Matthew. 12. 33, 34.


First he must be a good man; the tree must be good, and then the fruit will be
good.

Secondly, he must have a good treasury, and his heart must be the storehouse
of holy graces; the mind must be renewed with saving knowledge, which must
guide him: his heart must be seasoned with sanctified affections, and so
enabled to follow the minds directions, and therefore the groundwork of all,
must first be laid right; and we must labor for the grace of regeneration, that
so we our selves may be Gods workmanship, created again in Christ Jesus to good
works, which he has prepared for us to walk in. Ephesians. 2. chap. 10.

This being premised, the next preparation The second direction.
to the work, even in Converts themselves; is in the right way to go to work,
and that is, being sensible of their own inability to compass so great a
matter: It being more difficult to govern the little world, (a man's self) then
to rule a City: he must therefore begin the work at self-denial, Jer. 10. chapter
23. O Lord, I know that the way of man is not in himself, It is not in man that
walks to direct his own steps, in whom then does it lie? In God: therefore
with David, we must seek to him. Psalm 119. 133. do thou order my steps in thy
words, this direction is fully given us both negatively and and affirmatively,
Prove. 3. 5, 6. negatively, Be not wise in thine own eyes; lean not to thine own
wisdom: affirmatively, but acknowledge God in all thy ways; and then thirdly,
we have his promise, that he will direct our steps: this shall be health to thy
Navel, and marrpw to thy bones: the sum is, that we must not enterprise this
business out of a conceit of any self-wisdom, or of our own sufficiency, to
effect it; but being sensible of our own folly and impotencie, we must
acknowledge God in all: and commend our selves and actions to his direction in
the beginning, to his inabling in the prosecution, and to his benediction in
the success in faith and confidence relying upon him for all, in humble
prayer, begging all from him, according to that of the wise man; Proverbs 16.
3. Roll thy ways on the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be established, or
ordered; this is a silly direction, as it seems to flesh and blood; the wisest
Moralists amongst the Heathen, would but laugh at it: humility is not within
the lists of their moral virtues. Seneca, one of the wisest of them, has such
strange expressions as these, in one of his Epistles. Beatae vitae causa and
fundamentum, etc. The cause and foundation of a blessed life, is in our selves;
to trust in our selves, to be confident in our selves. Turpe (says he) est
Deos fatigare. It is a shameful thing to weary the Gods with our prayers; for
that which lies in our own power. He goes on; Quid votis opus est? fac te
faelicem: what need supplications, when thou can make thy self happy? I blush
to speak this, but this was the wisdom of these Moralists; but we must learn a
better lesson from the word of God, even to become fools to our selves, that
we may be wise in God: and I am sure David makes it his business, to
solicit God in prayers, all over that 119. Psalm. Both for his direction, and
enabling; Open mine eyes (says he) that I may find or see the wondrous things
of thy Law. And again, Make me to understand the way of thy precepts, direct me
the way that I shall go, and I will keep thy word even to the end. And again,
Order my steps in thy word, etc. 119. Psalm. Yea, and whosoever does not this,
stumbleth at the very Threshhold; and never let him look for good success. It
is just with God, to leave honest hearts to themselves, as he left Peter: to
show them their own weakness, when once they rely on their own strength, and
abilities; and Solomon is bold to say, he that trusts his own heart, is a
fool: we must know, that all our sufficiency is of God. 2 Cor. 3. 5. the
beginning, progress, and end of all, depends upon him; who works the will
and the deed in us; of his own good pleasure: Phil. 2. 13. and he will have the
glory of all to himself: 1 Cor. 1. 30, 31. that whosoever gloryeth, should
glory in the Lord. It shall therefore be our wisdom in the way of Gods
Commandments, and our own spiritual duties to draw virtue and power from him,
by pleading his Covenant, and resting on his Promise: who has engaged himself,
to put his Spirit in us, and to give us a new heart, and to cause us to walk in
his ways, and to keep his statutes: as is clear, Ezekiel 36. 27. and by this
that has been spoken, you may by the way see the necessity of a morning
sacrifice, of prayer to be offered to God; for the better direction of us in
the ordering of our conversation all the whole day afterward, and that thereby
we may fetch in the help of heaven to enable us, through our several duties.

Is first to eschew evil, then to do good; first to cease to do evil, then
learn to do well, Esaias 1. chapter 16, 17. This is the order of the Scripture; first
to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, then to live righteously, soberly, and
godly in this present world; Titus 2. 11, 12. otherwise no ordering aright of
our ways; but either our confusion, or a jumbling of things together
promiscuously, the race of a Christian in this life, Is a passage from sin and
corruption, to grace and holiness: from mortification, to vivification. We
must not make the first last, nor the last first. Adam in his innocence had but
one task, to wit, to live holily; but we have two. First to awake from sin, and
then to live righteously: yea one thing more I will add, we must not only
cease from evil, and then learn to do well, but we must begin to adhorre that
which is evil, and cleave to that which is good. Romans 12. 9. We must not only
leave sin in outward action, but abhor it in the inward affection; not
only do that which is good, but cleave to it, and affect it: otherwise we
shall never be constant and cheerful in the doing of good: and also we shall
quickly return with the dog to his vomit, in the falling upon that which is
evil: thus a man walking in his calling, must first loath the sins incident to
his calling, and then love to put in exercise the practical duties of the same,
otherwise his faults will mar his duties, but his duties will not mend his
faults; when men make conscience to avoid sin, that will facilitate, and more
easily introduce the service of God: and here also it must be your wisdom to
pitch your resolutions not to give way to harbor any sin, be it never so
small; for whosoever breaks one, keeps none of the commandments. Jam. 2.
10. some think, that though they allow themselves in one thing that is evil,
yet they may order their conversation aright in other matters; but what says
Solomon, Eccles. 10. 1. dead flies cause the ointment of the Apothecary to send
forth a stinking savor; so does a little folly him that is in reputation for
wisdom and honor: so then as we must make conscience to refrain our feet with
David, from every evil way: Psalm. 119. 101. that so we may keep Gods word; so
especially from our darling, bosom, and predominant corruptions, such as our
natural inclination or custom, our profit or pleasure, have made as dear to us
as our right eye, or right hand, Matthew. 5. 29.





Psalm. 119. 6. some men make conscience to be just in their words and deeds,
but little care of the duties of piety to God, or mercy to wards the poor, but
the fruit of the spirit is, in all goodness and righteousness; so says the
blessed Apostle, 2 Pet. 1. chapter 5, 6. and 9. Yea further, we must make
conscience of the most uncouth and harshest duties, such as by nature we are
most averse from, as loving our enemies, blessing of those that curse us,
praying for those persecute us. Matthew. 5. 44. so likewise of secret duties.
Matthew. 6. as of private prayer, liberality to the poor, which give the soundest
testimonies to our own souls, of our sincerity toward God, Luke 14. 13. now
that we may do all this,

what that perfect good, and acceptable will of God is, Romans 12. 2. and be much
verst in Scripture, where the rules and directions for ordering our
conversations aright, are delivered; we must have a care that the word of God
dwell plenteously and richly in us. Col. 3. 16. else we shall never be able to
order our steps in the word, which is only the directing of them aright. I
remember the similitude of Peter Martyr, in a Sermon of his, which was the
means of the conversion of that noble Italian Galeacius, Caracciolus, Suppose
says Peter Martyr, a man were upon the top of an hill, and casting his eyes
down to the valley, should there behold a company of persons, frisking, and
skipping, would he not think they were mad, and out of their wits; but
afterward descending, and coming nearer and nearer unto them, and hearing the
music, and marking how they danced according thereunto, and kept their
measures and proportions, he is much taken therewith; and esteems that
admirable, which before he counted folly: even so does the conversation of Gods
people, looked upon at a distance, and and by it self considered, seem to many
madness and folly; and they think it strange, that you run not with them into
the same excess of riot: and therefore, they speak evil of you. 1 Pet. 4. 4.
but viewing their conversations more closely and exactly, and comparing the
several steps thereof, how sutably it is carried to the word of God, and how
men dance according to the harmony of that music; then they begin to be much
taken with that which before they disliked, and do verily think that this is
the most glorious life and conversation in the world. It pleased God so to
affect the heart of that Noble Marquess, forementioned, herewith, that he
resolved to study the Scriptures, and to order his conversation thereunto, and
so was converted from Popery, to the true Religion, and left his own Country,
and came to Geneva, (in Calvin's days) where he lived holily, and ended his
days happily. So much for the general directions, I come now to the spicial
ones, and will give you some of the principal of them, as they are to be found
in the word of God.

As first the rules for our carriage in Directions in relation to men.
relation to men. First that golden one delivered by our Savior himself, Mat.
7. 12. Whatsoever ye would that other men do to you, the same do ye to them.
Mark, it is not said, What others do to you, the same do ye to them, for that
is not always right, but some times crooked: but it is said, Whatsoever ye
would that others should do to you, set your selves as it were in their rooms,
and do ye the same to them; that is not what you would, or are content in your
passions that others should do to you; but whatever in right reason upon due
deliberation and sound judgment, when you are most your selves, you would that
others should do to you, do ye the same to them.

Secondly, remember the Apostolical rule, serve one another in love, for it is
written, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, Gal. 5. 13, 14. We must
seek not every one his own, but one another welfare. 1 Cor. 10. 24. A golden
rule to be observed in contracts and negotiations to keep us from over reaching
any man, 1 These. 4. 6. and not merely to do things out of respects to our
selves, but to join the welfare of our neighbor to our own benefit, and what
we do to them, to do it out of love.

Thirdly, let nothing be done out of contention, or vain glory, but in
lowliness of mind, let each esteem others better then themselves, Phil. 2. 3.
and let the same mind be in you, that was in Christ Jesus, verse 9. he never
did any thing in all his life out of contention or vain glory; and indeed, be
the matter of our actions never so fair or good, yet either of these two,
contention or vain glory will fly-blow them, and corrupt the action.

Again, in all our businesses in relation Special rules for our services in
reference to God.
unto God, we have these rules.

First for the end, that the glory of God be made the white at which we aim in
all our natural, civil, or religious actions; according to that of the Apostle,
1 Cor. 10. 31. Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the
glory of God; this must be the Butt that we all must shoot at.

Secondly for Christ, Whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of
Christ Jesus, giving thanks to the father by him, Col. 3. 17. that is, what
others do as men, do ye as Christians, you must do all in Christ his name; that
is, upon his authority and his warranty, in the strength of Christ, in
confidence upon him, for acceptance of the service, and praying, and
invocating the father in his name, and giving thanks to God by him.

Thirdly, whatsoever we do to men, or toward our selves, to do it to the Lord;
and for the Lords sake, looking beyond men, and further then our selves: so in
our almsdeeds, to give to Christ, in giving to such a man, or woman; Verily,
in as much as ye did it to the least of these, ye did it to me, Mat. 25. 40. So
likewise the Apostle prescribes to servants this duty, Col. 3. 23. Servants be
obedient to your Masters, and whatsoever ye do, do it heartily to the Lord, and
not to men, knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of
inheritance: and this rule is not to be appropriated unto servants, but it
reaches to all masters also, yea to all ranks of persons, for all the duties
of the second table are to be performed to others, must flow from our obedience
unto God, commanded in the first Table, so Christ told Peter that his
ministerial discharge in feeding of his sheep, John 21. 15, 16, 17. ought to
spring from the love he bare to Christ himself.

Next for our selves take these directions Rules in relation to our selves.
out of Scripture; do nothing with a regreet of heart, or reluctance of
conscience, but labor first to have a warranty out of the word for your
conscience to rest upon, a warranty, I say, at the least of God his allowance
of it, if not of his command; For what ever is not of faith is sin, Romans 14.
23. that is, if it be done out of persuasion of heart, that it is lawful for
the warrant of the action; we must do nothing with the check or renitency of
our consciences, against the dictates of the same: blessed is he that
condemns not himself (in his conscience) in that which he performs, to wit
in his actions, verse 22.

Secondly the end of the commandments is love, out of a pure heart, a good
conscience and faith unfeigned. 1 Timothy 1. 5. where we are to observe, that for
the matter of our obedience, it must be love, love to God; and love to our
neighbor; and for the fountain and spring of love in our actions, it must
issue from a pure heart, a good conscience and faith unfaigned, otherwise the
streams will never be clear.

Thirdly, the prescript of the word is, Thou shall not do that which seems
good in thine own eyes, but what the Lord thy God commands thee, Deuteronomy. 12. 8.
32. If any thing at the first blush presents it self unto thee with a show of
good, presently begin to suspect it, as fearing there is some evil couched
under it, and see what God says of it in his holy word, from which thou may
not turn, to the right hand or to the left.

Fourthly, for the manner of our performing the word (aright) in my text, all
must be done in humility, and sincerity, and carried on sutably to the duty
which we have in hand: it must be done understandingly, feelingly, fervently,
if we pray, if any man preach, he must speak as the Oracles of God, 1 Pet. 4.
11, approving themselves to God and the consciences of the hearers, so you
shall find several directions for several discharges, Romans 12. 8. He that
gives, let him do it with simplicity, he that rules with diligence, he that
shows mercy with cheerfulness, etc. so every one in their relations must
mainly look to the Cardinal virtue which turns about all the rest: as, let
the wife see to it, that she reverenceth her husband, Ephesians. 5. ult. according
as she looks to that, all her other duties do either ebb or flow, in her, so
the husband must be careful of the main of all, that he loves his wife, as
Christ loved his Church. Ephesians. 5. 25. In one word, order your steps so, as
where God has laid the fullest and the stricktest charge, there be sure to
show your greatest care: as in the substantials of religion, before the
circumstantials or ceremonies, mercy before sacrifice, and the great
commandment of loving the Lord with all our hearts before the rest, Matthew. 22.
35, 37, 38. To end this, let all our outward discharges spring from an heart
rightly disposed, else it will prove formality or dissimulation; nothing is any
further accepted, then as it comes from the heart; whatsoever we do in our
particular calling, let it spring from our general calling of Christianity, and
let us exercise our general calling in our particular, Let worldly things be
used by us with heavenly minds, and as stars to mount up toward heaven, 1 Cor.
7. 31. not as the main, but as things upon the By, still use them with
spiritual references to better matters, and then you shall have your
conversations in heaven, Phil. 3. 21. Take one rule for the regiment of your
thoughts, and keeping of them within their bounds. Phil. 4. 8. Whatsoever
things are truth, whatsoever things are honest; that is, fair, grave, and
venerable: whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
are of good report; if there be any virtue, or if there be any praise, think on
these things; where you have eight boundaries to confine the subject matter of
your thoughts unto you: take another direction for your words and actions out
of the Apostle James 2. 12. So speak ye, and so do ye, as they that shall be
judged by the law of liberty. The closing direction, the last direction which
shall close all, is this, That we are to call our selves to an ordinary account
of our ways, and the leading of our conversations, a duty pressed upon us in
the Word of God, Lament. 3. 40. Let us search our ways, and turn again unto
the Lord our God, Psalm. 4. 4. Examine your selves upon your beds, and be still.
The Prophet commands it, Haggai 1. 5. Consider your ways: he means an after
consideration of them, as appears by the circumstances of place. On the other
side, the opposite neglect of this is blamed, as the cause of many and great
evils, Jer. 8. 6. I hearkened and heard, and no man said what have I done, etc.
Look as a curious Limner, or he that draws a picture exactly, and to the
life, often reviews what is done, where it agrees, where it misseth, often
compares it, and mendeth it as he sees occasion: even so must we that are to
give an account of all our actions unto God, take an account of our selves and
our own ways, and where we find any thing out of place and order, there to
place it aright, and to undo it by true repentance, that so our after paths may
be made straight; This was David's practice, Psalm 119. 59. I considered my
ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies; nor indeed can there be any
accurate leading of our lives without this self-reflection, out of all which
there resulteth one Use more of the Doctrine, which time will not give leave
now to prosecute, namely a Use of Discovery upon the examination of our selves,
and our ways, to wit, that if we find that the course of our lives has been
drawn, (though imperfectly) according to the forementioned rules, that the bent
of our hearts was that way: and though we find not any absolute exactness in
our carriages, without any swerving; yet if our consciences bear us witness,
that we did shoot at this mark; this was our aim, and that we were sorry when
we missed it, if we find a sutableness and correspondency in our lives unto
Gods word, and humility of heart in our performance, we may assure our selves
that we are right Christians, and that we shall see the salvation of God. Gal.
6. 16. as many as walk according to this rule, peace be upon them, and upon the
Israel of God.

A Sermon preached at the FUNERAL of the Right Honorable, JOHN Lord DARCYE.
August 27. 1636.
Psalm. 39. 5. Surely every man at his best estate, is altogether vanity: Selah.
THe sweet Singer of Israel, the Man after Gods own heart, having in the former
words desired of God, that he would make him to know his end, and the measure
of his days: what it was, how frail and fleeting the condition of his life
was, and thereupon duly acknowledging that his days were but a span long, of
four fingers breadth, and his very age was nothing respectively to God.
Immediately thereupon, infers this doleful conclusion out of the former
premises: Surely every man, etc. Giving us to understand thereby, that the more
any man does seriously discern the frailty and fragility of his life, the more
certain and assured he will grow of man's vanity. The Text, I confess, is a
most unpleasing, but not unprofitable Subject, it being a disgraceful
deciphering of every man in his best condition: and we love not, you know, to
hear of any thing that tends to our disgrace, or the vilifying of us in our
own conceits; yet it is very wholesome and medecinable: the apprehension of our
misery being the first step toward immortality. Twice it is repeated in this
Psalm for failing; verse 5th. and the 11th. and in both places hemmed in with
an asseveration of certainty; Surely: and a pathetical Selah of animadversion
prefaced with the one, pointed and sealed with the other; the one prefixed to
remove our incredulity in this matter; for it is hardly credited: The other
annexed to prevent our negligence in the consideration hereof; for it is but
smally regarded: both of them added to work a deep impression of the matter
upon our souls. Now for this Seraphical Selah, the seal of this Divine
Aphorism, it imports in the true support thereof elevation: as you would say
elevate: or loftily: which because it is only used in the sacred meeter of the
old Testament: some would have to be only a musical note, for the strayning
and lifting up of the voice in singing, as Ela is with us. Others not confining
of it to the extension of the voice, take it to imply, a deeper attention of
the mind, in pausing upon the thing delivered: Selah, as you would say: See,
Lo, Attend: and Tremelius renders it Maxim, as if it were a true and sure
Maxim in Law. The Chaldee Paraphrase, and some of the Hebrews, have translated
for ever, noting the matter contained, to be of eternal and perpetual verity to
the end of the world, for ever and ever. You may, if you please, take in all
three, and join them together, and then are all instructed, that the matter
averred, is a thing of weight and necessary consequence, of infallible
certainties, not to be questioned, and of most intentive consideration,
seriously to be meditated on: and Gods Ambassadors may be encouraged to speak
hereof confidently: Surely: as a point of undeniable infallibility: and with a
Selah too: loftily lifting up their voices like trumpets, for the better
rousing up the secure hearts of the children of men, that are so much set upon
vanity.

The words are in themselves, an entire Proposition, very short, but exceeding
full: the Proposition is universal in both parts, both in respect of subject,
and of the predicate: Omnis homo est universa vanitas: so the vulgar: or Omni
modo vanitas: so Tremelius: man and vanity are convertible, all man is all
vanity; and all vanity is in all and every man: Every word in the Text is a
gradation, each of them one step or degree further than another: the whole
Climax runs thus: I man 2 every man 3 every man in his best estate 4 every
man in his best estate for the present, not may be for the future, or was for
time past: 5 every man in his best estate is vanity, 6 every man in his best
estate is altogether vanity. Thus he is 7 Surely, 8 and with a Selah too: eight
steps each above another, for the whole creation of inferiors to be subject to
vanity, Romans 8. 20, 22. as the Apostle notes, is not much: but for man the
noblest of all, endued with reason and understanding, for man to be vanity,
that is a great matter.

Secondly, were some sorts of men, and those of the baser rank only vanity,
that were the less: but for vanity to overspread every individual, and that of
all kinds: for every man without exception, Noble, or ingnoble, rich or poor,
male or female, just or sinner: as St. Jerome glosseth on my Text; without
difference, to be vanity; this is more.

Thirdly, though it were the condition of every particular man: yet were this
vanity confined to him in his infancy only, and childhood: or in his old age
when he reaches fourscore years, when his days are but trouble and sorrow, or
at his death alone, when all his thoughts and projects perish, and dust
returns to dust: this were but a small matter: But for every man in his best
estate, even in the consistency of his age, as some render the words, in the
vigor of his strength, the meridian and height of his glory; in the maturity
and ripeness of his judgment, in his best qualifications, to be vanity: this
is a thing that may justly put us all to a stand, and work amazement in us.

Fourthly, were every man in his best estate but vain in the concrete; this
were the less: but for them all to be vanity in the abstract; this is more
full, more home.

Yet fifthly, this is more, that not only vanity; but altogether vanity; that
not a piece of vanity, but whole vanity in all the parts, kinds, and
particulars thereof, (as lightness, emptiness, changeableness, falsity,
deceitfulness, etc. should be wholly predicated of him.

Sixthly, were it only affirmed, that when he is in his best estate, he might
upon the exchange of his estate become altogether vanity for the future, this
were nothing so much: as for him even de presenti, and whiles his best estate
remains to be altogether vanity. And

Seventhly, which is one degree further, and worthy consideration; the Psalmist
does not speak of man collectively, but distributively: He does not say, that
all men, take them together jointly, make all vanity, a piece of vanity being
conferred by one, and a piece by another, and what is wanting in one, is in one
whole lump supplied by the rest: But every man in and by himself, single them
out one by one, and every one of them is an universe of vanity: and thus he is
with a Surely: all seeming probabilities to the contrary notwithstanding: and
lastly with a Selah, too: a Noverint universi, Be it known to all men, and
considered by them: So that these words are a compendium, and sum of all the
particulars, and of the worst of evils, that are through the body of the
Scripture affirmed of man corrupted. But let us consider more punctually of
vanity: and of man, as also of the Surely, and confirmation, That every man is
altogether: even at his best estate but vanity.

Vanity, faith righteous David, is that which is not any thing, or which soon
Vanity, what it is.
cease to be: as the breath and vapors which soon vanish. It is the
emptiness of the creature, and the Apostle explaineth it, by the bondage of
corruption, Romans 8. 20, 21. It is a word of large signification, and contains
under it many particulars:

As first, emptiness opposed to fullness, man wants his filling up, there is
nothing in him, but voidnesse.

Secondly, it imports lightness opposed to weight, and solidity: whence is
the phrase, Psalm. 62. 9. That the children of men are lighter than vanity.

Thirdly, changeableness and mutability, opposite to constancy and perpetuity:
as if the Psalmist had said; Man is of a vanishing and fleeting condition, ever
changing, never remaining at one stay, Psalm. 144. 4.

Fourthly, it implies falsehood and deceit, opposed to verity. Aulus Gellius
writes of a vain Grammarian, who professed great skill in Salust. Apollinaris
meeting with him, and meaning to try his cunning, Demanded of him, what Salust
meant by that speech of his concerning Caius Lentulus that it was a question
Stolidior-ne esset an vanior: Whether he were more foolish, or more vain? The
conceited Grammarian answered, That the knowledge which he took upon him, was
in ancient words, not in those that were trite and vulgar, worn by use; and
that he was more foolish than Lentulus, that did not know that these two words
in Salust, vain and foolish, did import one and the same thing: Apollinaris
replied, That in ancient Learning, those were called vain, not which were
dullards and fools; but such as were given to lying and treachery: And so in
Scripture phrase, vanity and a lie, are all one, Psalm. 62. 9. and Jonah 2. 4.
the epithet of lying is ascribed to vanity, they are styled lying vanities. Nor
is vanity a mere privation, or a bare want; but a positive disquieting evil; or
at the least, unprofitablenesse and disquietment are the attendents upon
vanity: Eccles. 2. 11. All is but vanity and vexation of spirit, and there is
no profit in them under the Sun: where you have all three of them joined
together. By this it may appear what is affirmed of man, when he is said to be
vanity. Every man in his best estate, etc.

Secondly, Every man is vanity: What Christ and all, says an Interpreter on my
Text? not so: but as it is in the Hebrew, every Adam, from himself, to the very
last person that shall descend of him, according to the course of ordinary
propagation: be he high or low, rich or poor, male or female: so far forth as
he springs from Adam; and so far forth as the old Adam remains in him, he
is but vanity, 1 Cor. 1. 30. But if you consider him in the Second Adam, who of
God is made unto us, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption: and
in whom he is renewed unto the Image of God, wherein he was formerly created,
then the case is quite altered, and he is one of an holy excellency. Col. 3.
10. 3die, every man at his best estate is vanity; consider him passing through
all his ages; not only in his infancy and childhood, not only in his old age,
when the years draw nigh; that he says, I have no pleasure in them; but vanity
he is in his flourishing youth, and ripe and mature manhood, vain in his life,
vain in his death, and dissolution. Consider him in all his conditions, in all
his employments: a very emblem of vanity; not only Haman in his decay and
downfall, but Solomon* in all his royalty, is but vanity; inferior to the very
Lilly in the judgment of our Savior. Fourthly, altogether vanity; all that is
in him, or is his, is but vanity, and all vanity is in him, all the sorts and
kinds of vanity whatsoever: from the very crown of his head, unto the soles of
his feet, there is nothing in him, but wounds and putrified sores, full of
corruption: his heart is a Sea of vanity, deceitful above all things, his
ratiocinations, his imaginations vain, and even evil from his youth up, and
continually; his very tongue is a world of iniquity, all his parts and powers
composed as it were of vanity: the holy Prophet making a full distribution of
all humane good things, and referring them to three heads.

1. The goods of the mind.

2. Of the body.

3. Of fortune as they are called, or of the external condition lays a kind
of vanity upon them all, and exempteth them all, from our glorying, or
rejoicing in. Jer. 9. 23. Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, yet is that
the best estate of the mind? let not the strong man glory in his strength; yet
that is the best estate of the body: neither let the rich man glory in his
riches; yet that is the best estate of fortune, as the Philosophers call it:
but let him that glories, glory in that he understands, and knows me that
I am the Lord.

Now for the surety or confirmation of this, it is as certain, and as sure as
the Scripture can make it, the second son of man, that was born into the world,
did carry the very name and appellation of vanity; for he was called Habel;
that is, vanity: but the truth of the thing it self agrees to every mothers
child, no less than unto him; every Adam is Habel in my Text: I might refer
you for the proof of this point unto the whole Book of Ecclesiastes; where
again and again, and yet the third time; of all things, of all persons; it is
avouched, that vanity of vanites, they are all but vanity, there is no profit
in them under the Sun: but the most pathetical to this you have in Psalm. 62. 9.
where you have a Surely fixed before it too. Surely men of low degree are
vanity, and men of high degree are as a lie: to be laid in the balance, they
are altogether lighter then vanity; where not only the sons of Adam, and those
of an inferior rank, but even the sons of Ish: of Noble and potent persons,
both sorts of them, are vanity: if there be any odds or difference betwixt
them, herein it consists, that the greater, the better, are in the worst
case; by how much a lie is worse then vanity: poor men's vanity is engraven in
their wants, written with greater characters in their outward miserable
conditions, so that every one may read it, they appear to be what they are; but
for great and noble persons, (by reason of their glorious outside,) they seem
to be otherwise, but are indeed no less vanity than the other; their vanity is
not so transparent, but disguised and hidden under outward pomp, and in this
respect, as also because we promise our selves (in our selves) so much from
them, and our expectations are so often, and so foully disppointed, they are
rightly said to be a lie. And mark what follows; to be laid in the balance,
they are altogether lighter then vanity; vanity, which is lightness it self,
does over-weigh them; and that by reason of sin in them, which being a moral
vanity, and the cause, must needs turn the scales, and lift up the natural
vanity, which is the effect: this point may be further confirmed by the
manifold resemblances in Scripture; man being still compared to the vainest,
emptiest, lightest things that are. Whether heavenly, earthly, or humane; of
all the heavenly things, he is resembled to the wind, which is but a blast, a
fume, a vapor, a mist: to a cloud, and darkness; so likewise compared to the
basest of all earthly things, to a beast that perishes, to a shadow, a bubble,
the frost, things most flitting, and amongst humane things to a tale, a
sheperds tent, a post, a weavers shuttle, a dream, than which nothing is
vainer. Yea it is said, that all the nations of the world put them together,
are less then nothing, respectively to God, in whom is no darkness, nor
degree of vanity: many such allusions do every where almost occur in the
sacred page: the truth of which, our daily experience does plentifully ratify:
for howsoever in prosperity, men are so made drunk with sensual pleasures, that
neither they do discern, nor feel themselves vanity; yet in afflictions and
miseries, they begin to open their eyes, and to confess, that all is but
vanity: the heathens, though ignorant of the true cause of this, yet by the
very light of nature saw a glimpse hereof, whence some of them delivered, that
it was best for men not to be born, and the next soon to dye. And do we not
come weeping and wayling, into the world? Do we not live in it toyling and
moyling; eaten up with care, distracted with fears, and perplexed with a
thousand griefs. Dye we not groaning, has not vanity seized upon all estates,
conditions, enterprises; our bodies they are weak, our form fragile, our
healths uncertain, our lives flitting and posting away, our hopes often
disappointed; our friends inconstant, or or mortal at the best; our honors
feigned, or failing; our understandings blind, our wills perverse, our
affections turbulent, our senses subject to many deceits; our whole man
depraved; our offices burdensome, our profits bewitching, our strength vain,
which must become as water spilt upon the ground: Is not favor deceitful, and
beauty but vanity: Proverbs 31. 30. which must be turned into rottenness, and
loathsomeness; our pleasure mixed, and unsincere: yea, our very thoughts and
imaginations which are the very sirst-born of the soul, and are the hinges,
upon which all our other operations do turn: the Lord knows the thoughts of
the children of men, that they are vain; yea, all over man is vanity, as empty
as the wind; as flitting as the mist in the air, so vain a thing is man; that
he cannot add one inch unto his stature; nor alter the color of one hair of
his head, nor keep off one judgment of God, nor protract his time one minute.
Vain in himself, and all other things vain to him; who being a microcosme, or
little world, yet contains within himself the whole great world of vanity. So
that all the several vanities which are dispersed here and there throughout the
other creatures, are in him united in one, and so do meet in him, as in their
common center; and first original: he is a very map of vanity.

But how comes this to pass, did The ground of the point.
not the Almighty at the first creation, make all things good, and saw them to
be exceeding good in their kinds; whence then are these laws? how came in
this vanity? Surely the envious enemy has done this, for vanity is not the
fruit of Gods creation, but the consequent of man's prevarication: God made Adam
in his own image, and planted him as a noble vine, but he turned into the
degenerate plant of a strange vine; it came in then through the wiliness of
the old Serpent, and by Adams sin, In whom we all sinned; and so the excellency
becomes blasted, wherein we were first created; and vanity has seized upon
man first. Romans 8. 21. And secondarily upon the other creatures. The Creature,
says the Apostle, is subject unto vanity: not of its own will, that is, not by
any voluntary defection, or sin in it self, but by reason of him who has
subdued it under hope; that is, by the just judgment of God; who for the sin
of man, has subdued it into vanity: under the hope of restitution and freedom
from this vanity, which there the Apostle calls the bondage of corruption;
but now on the other side, man is subject unto vanity of his own will, and by
his voluntary falling away from God: from whence it follows, that man is
vainer then all the other creatures; not only because he was the best and
noblest of them, and Corruption optimi est pessima; as the sweetest wine becomes
the sowrest vinegar, but also because he was the cause of the vanity in the
other creatures; and that which makes other things so, that must needs be more
so in it self: the vanity of the other creatures is but natural and sinlesse,
as being not capable of it: the vanity of man is moral, the other creatures are
sensible of their vanity, and groaning under the burden, by the very instinct
of nature seek out for a remedy, Romans 8. but man, though he be the vainest of
all creatures, yet is not affected with his vanity, feels it not; and so
seeks no redress from under it, but even sports himself in it, as if vanity
were his felicity, the vanity of other creatures extends but to time at
farthest: it ends in their death or dissolution, but the vanity that is in
man, presses him down to hell, and (without Gods great mercy interposing)
reaches to eternity, and even then begins most; when the other creatures
vanity does cease. And, to conclude, besides the proper stock which he has of
his own, he communicates in the several vanities of all particular creatures,
and may justly be styled, vanity of vanities.

But it is full time, (me thinks) to First use.
look homewards, and to reflect upon our selves, we will therefore make a pawse
here, and affixe the Selah: It is a high point of wisdom to get some good even
out of that which is evil, and hereby we approach nearer unto God in
perfection, we therefore derive the Sovereign virtue of this truth unto our
own souls, in the sundry and several occasions thereof; and first this may be
useful to take down all proud conceits in man, that advance themselves against
Christ, to abate our lostinesse of spirit, to avile us all in our own
apprehensions, and to lay us low in our own eyes; even unto selfe-abhorrence.

Methinkes the serious consideration of this point and the grounded belief of
the truth hereof, that vanity is fixed even in our very natures, that it sticks
not in notorious sinners, and deboshed persons alone, but spreads it self to
all Adam, to every Mothers son, not one excepted, no not those that have the
best natures, and sweetest dispositions; methinks I say that this should deeply
humble us in our selves, and take away that self-admiration, which undoeth many
a soul.

Secondly, this is useful for to provoke, to set a higher price on all the
blessings of God bestowed on us, and to endeare his bounty and goodness
toward us, and so consequently, to set an edge upon our thankfulness:
considering our own little worth: and that we are but vanity: and surely then
there can be no desert of his savours, Psalm 144. 3. what is man Lord that thou
take knowledge of him, or the Son of man that thou make such account of
him? and there the Prophet shows the grounds of his wonderment: man is like to
vanity, his days are as a shadow that passes away, etc. and certainly, Gods
gifts are never so right valued, when they are considered alone by themselves,
as when they are viewed jointly together, with our own wretchedness. I am
less: says Jacob: then the least of all thy mercies; his own indignity did
set a luster upon Gods smallest mercies: Et dare non dignis res mage digna Deo.

Thirdly, from hence the inference of the Scripture is forcible, and very
prevailing; that seeing every man is vanity, that therefore we settle not our
trust, or repose our confidence in any son of man, be he never so great; for
then we do but make falsehood our refuge, and under vanity are we hid: we lean
on broken reeds, that will pierce us through. See for this at large, Psalm 62.
6, 7, 8, 9. and Psalm 146. 34. where the charge is set on with many enforcing
considerations, which for brevities sake I omit. Even Princes themselves are
not to be trusted in; the duty that we owe to our superious, is faithfulness
and obedience, not trust and confidence.

It shall be found true, that never any persons smarted more in the
disappointment of their expectations, then those that relied most strongly on
moral men. Again, gather we some sweet out of this sour, that every man in
his best estate is altogether vanity. Use we this truth to our consolations, as
well as our humiliations; and the comfort lies especially in three particulars.

First, when we have potent enemies, which are too strong for us, and threaten
our undoing; when we begin to be terrified, and dismayed, this consideration
may be a stay to us, and clear our spirits then, be they never so great; yet
at the best they are but vanity, and can do neither good nor hurt of
themselves: thus the Prophet at large. Esaias 51. 12, 13, 14, 15. Who art thou
that thou should be afraid of a man, that shall dye; and of the Son of man,
that shall be made as grass, I, even I, am he that comfort you, etc. it is
pressed there more at large.

Secondly, this may comfort us in respect of our own infirmities, and humane
weaknesses; for by this vanity of ours, and frailty, we become fit objects for
Gods pity and commiseration; for what glory shall he get by contending with us
that are too weak for him; thus holy David, Psalm. 103. 13. 14. that the Lord
knows our mould, and frame, that we are but dust; and thereupon, as a Father
pitieth his child, so has the Lord compassion on them that fear him.

Thirdly, to accommodate this to the present occasion, this may serve as a
Cordial to moderate our grief in the loss of our dearest and noblest friends,
for who are they that are dead and gone? Surely, whether they were of high or
low degree, they were but vanity: and now they are dead, there is an end of
their vanity, rather then of themselves; their vanity is gone, but their
excellency remains with them: there is but one, and that is the last piece of
their vanity which remains, which is the captivity of their bodies under the
grave, and the turning of it into rottenness, but yet they are insensible of
it, and feel no pain; and being for ever blessed in the presence and fruition
of God himself; they do live in the certain and assured expectation of the
reunion of their bodies, with their souls: and therefore I say with the
blessed Apostle, in the very same case. 1 These. 4. 18. Comfort your selves one
another with these words: and so for a time I will lay aside my Text and betake
my self to the present occasion; of which, that very spectacle does mind us.

And now give me leave for a conclusion of my Text, a little to invert the
words; and what the Psalmist speaks of every Adam, by way of contraries, to
apply to every true Christian; and that is this: Every true Christan, even in
his worst estate, is altogether excellent; this is the difference of our being
in the first and second Adam; In the one altogether vanity, in the other
altogether excellent; excellent in their life, excellent in their death. Romans
14. 8. for if they live, they live unto the Lord, and if they dye, they dye,
unto the Lord; whether then they live or dye, they are the Lords: take them in
their worst estates, even in afflictions, and there they rejoice under the hope
of the glory of God: and their affliction which is but for a moment, works a
far super-excellent, and an eternal weight of glory: 2 Cor. 4. 9. afflicted on
every side, but not forsaken, cast down, but they perish not; come what can
come, come what may; yet are they in all things more then conquerors, and every
thing turns to their good. Romans 8. 23. And, as it follows in the same
place, neither life, nor death, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate them from
the love of God; which is in Christ Jesus our Lord: and therefore as Solomon in
his Ecclesiastes, after his large discourse of vanity, for a conclusion of all;
Ecclesiastes 12. 13. brings in the remedy; and the counterpoyse of vanity, even
so say I with him: let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God and
keep his Commandments; for this is the whole duty of man. Assure your selves,
there is nothing that eats up vanity, but grace only: and so much the more
grace, ever so much the less vanity: All things under the Sun are vanity, but
only grace: and therefore let all our prayers and endeavors be set on this;
to have Grace to serve God in this world, that we may have glory, the reward of
our service in the world to come.

Now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, be rendered all
Honor, and Glory, both now, and evermore. AMEN.

A PREPARATION For the COMMUNION.
1 Cor. 11. 28. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread
and drink of that cup.
THe things whereof we are to examine our selves, may be referred to two heads,
our Sins, and our Graces.

The necessity of the examination of our sins appears in this, That sins
unexamined are unespied: being unespied, they will be unrepented; being
unrepented, we shall bring them with us to the Sacrament: and being brought
along with us to the Sacrament, or the Lords Table, they will be a Bar to the
confirmation of Gods Covenant with us, whereof the Bread and Wine is a Seal,
and also to our reaping the comfort, sweetness and benefits of that Ordinance:
for where there is no searching and trying of our ways: there can be no
turning unto the Lord, Lam. 3. 40.

Now there are four principal helps to further, us in the examination of our
sins.

1. A distribution of our lives into certain portions, according to our ages of
childhood, youth, manhood, old age, and it will be useful for us severally, to
remember: So much of my time I spent in my fathers family, under the government
of my parents: so much time abroad, under the care and tuition of others, and
these and these sins committed, during that same time: such a quantity of time
spent in the service of others; and such a portion being a free man, at my own
liberty: so many years passed over in a single estate, so many in Matrimony or
Wedlock. This distribution of our lives into certain portions, will help us to
a discovery of our particular sins, and the aggravation of them from our
nativitie to the present moment, wherein we begin to examine our selves.
Whereas without this our apprehensions and view of them will be but confused,
only in gross and in general. But when we have thus quartered our lives, and
considered those special sins, that have been committed by us, in those several
divisions, the main sins of our lives will appear in a kind of order before us.
Yet we are still to remember, that besides those greater and more eminent sins
of our lives which appear; there will be many unknown sins: many omissions of
good duties, many slender performances of our best duties discharged, which
will escape our search.

The second help will be to set before us the glass of Gods Law sum'd up in
the ten Commandments, for by the Law is the knowledge of sin. Romans 3. 20. in
which glass we must consider the latitude and extent of every commandment, how
far it reaches in the several prohibitions of evil, and precepts of good, for
Gods Commandments are exceeding broad, Psalm. 119. 96. if thus we shall do with
heedfulnesse, then we shall see our faces in the glass of Gods Law to the
full, and our own spots and wrinkles, and we shall find those things upon our
review, to be sins, which in acting of them, (it may be) we deemed to be none:
and understand what Paul meant, Romans 7. 7. I had not known sin but by the Law,
for I had not known lust, except it had been said, thou shall not covet.

The third help is, a consideration of the heightning circumstances of sin, the
aggravating conditions, whereby our sins may appear unto us (as too often they
are) exceeding sinful, for we ought to examine the heinousness of our
impieties, as well as the multitude. This will cause our humiliation to be
deeper, our sorrow to be heartier, and engage us more feelingly to be thankful
unto God for his great love in pardoning of them through Christ. See this
pra^tise by Peter upon his denial, Mark 14. 72. Peter called to mind the word
that Jesus said unto him; before the Cock crow thou shall deny me thrice: The
aggravating circumstances of his sin helped on to draw out his tears with
bitterness: The holy man might think with himself, What have I done? How great
is my sin? Did I not lately promise never to forsake my Master? no not if all
men else should forsake him, yet I would never leave him? And am I the man that
denies him so soon? I that am so near related to him, as his Disciple, so
eminently preferred by him as his Apostle; not compeld by any in authority, but
frighted to it by the demand of a woman servant? Was not my sin great enough to
deny him once? but have I done it twice and thrice? Might I not have denied him
barely with sin enough, but must I forswear him too? I was not surprised at
unawares, but forewarned, and but even now forewarned, by my Lord and Master,
whose words I ought to have remembered, etc. Thus he called to mind the word
that Jesus said unto him, and he went out and wept bitterly.

Now the aggravating circumstances of sin are such as these.

First, the dignity of the person offending, the more eminent the person, the
more vile the sin. Now the dignity is either external or internal: external in
respect of some high place, preferment, authority, employment or trust,
whereunto a man is advanced, as to be a Magistrate, Minister, Father, Master:
and should such a man as I fly? said that good Magistrate Nehemiah: its
intolerable in one of my rank or place; the Lord will look to be sanctified in
those that draw near him in place and digninitie: so likewise an internal
dignity, of grace or gifts, heightens the sin of any person, a lighter sin in
them whom God has made his sons by adoption, is (in sme sot) greater then in
unregenerate men, though Israel play the harlot, yet Judah must not offend,
Hos. 4. 15.

The second thing that aggravates our sins, is the specialties of Gods favor:
where God is more bountiful, the sin is more inexcusable, in that he is not
drawn with the cords of Gods love: and this you may see 2 Samuel 12. 7. Nathan
brings in a Catalogue of Gods mercies and favors showed to David, God anointed
him King over Israel, delivered him out of the hands of Saul, gave him his
Lords house, and his Lords wives into his bosom, and thereupon infers the
grievousnesse of his sin, v. 9. Wherefore have thou then despised the
Commandment of the Lord to do evil in his sight.

The third circumstance of aggravavation is outward scandal given by our sins,
when we have not only sinned personally, but given offense unto others; if we
sad the hearts of the righteous, strengthen the hands of the wicked; if we give
occasion to the enemies of God to blaspheme, cause our profession to be evil
spoken of, corrupting some men's manners, indangering others, laying a stumbling
block before the weak, troubling their consciences, perverting their
judgments, subverting them from the truth, and these things make our sins
scandalous. Now this is certain, the further corruption spreads, and the more
the sent thereof poisons others, the more odious it is to God, and should be
more odious unto men: no sins more damnable then theirs, who enter not into
the Kingdom of heaven themselves, nor by their wills would suffer others to
enter: who allow others to go to hell which way they will, and suffer them not
to go to Heaven that way which they should.

The fourth thing which adds to the weight of sin, is continuance and delight
in sin: unto some sins we give fuller consent of will, we please our selves in
them more, we lie longer in them without repentance: such were the sins of
David in his murder and adultery, he committed many other sins, but these his
conscience did not chide him for, of a long time: these put his soul into a
distemper, and made such a spoil and havoc of his graces, that he stood in
need of a new Creation, a new and fresh infusion of grace, Create in me a clean
heart, and renew a right spirit within me, Psalm. 51. 10. and they stripped him
of the joy of the holy Ghost, v. 12. Restore me unto the joy of thy salvation.
Continuance and delight in sin, break down the fences of grace, and lay all
wast, so that the whole man is out of frame, he cannot set himself upon good
duties, but lies open unto sin.

To these may be added as aggravations of our sin.

1. Our own profession that we have made formerly.

2. Our covenants and promises made unto God in baptism, and many times since
upon occasions, of deliverance from danger, of being heard in our requests, of
hope of mercy in our low estate: this makes our trespasses double iniquity, as
being not only sins against Gods precepts, but also breaches of our own
promises.

3. The means of grace received; for where grace is offered more plenteously,
and rejected, sin is more sinful, Luke 12. 48. these means are partly inward,
as wit, memory, knowledge, capacity, and the like, partly outward, as the
preaching of the word, and other ordinances of God, the light of good examples
and other restraints from the laws of Christian Magistrates.

The fourth help to further us in the examination of our sins, is, to pray unto
God to give us his spirit to be our remembrancer to call to our minds those
sins which are slipped out of our memories, to recall the sins of our youth, and
other ages, which we have attained unto: and as he showed to the Prophet by
degrees greater and greater abominations of the house of Israel, Ezekiel 8. 6. 13.
15. even so that he would discry to us by little and little the abominations of
our own lives: so prayed that holy man Job 13. 23. How many are mine iniquities
and sins, make me to know my transgression and my sin.

Thus much of the first head, the examination of our sins, now follows the
second head concerning the examination of our graces. The necessity whereof
appears.

First, because we must bring grace with us to the Sacrament, or else we shall
scarsely bring grace from thence: we must come to Christ's Table to have graces
confirmed and enlarged: now it behooves us to have them in us before hand, for
there is no confirmation of that which is not resident in us.

Secondly, because otherwise we may take the semblance of grace for substance,
and may be deceived with counterfeit shows and shadows for current graces.

Now the principal graces whereof we are to examine our selves are four.

Knowledge. Faith. Repentance. Charity.
We are to examine our knowledge, first for the substance of it: secondly for
the sincerity of it.

First for the substance: Whether we know God, whom to know is eternal life,
John 17. 2. whether we apprehend by faith what we cannot comprehend by reason
the unity of the Godhead in Trinity of persons, John. 5. 7. Whether we know
his essence and essential properties, Exodus 34. 6. What we know of Christ in
whom we believe, what of his natures, as God and Man, of his Person, as the Son
of God, of his Offices, as King, Priest, and Prophet; of his Life, Death, and
Resurrection, etc.

Secondly, We are to know our selves first as originally created in Adam,
invested with Gods image, Eccles. 7. 31. God made man righteous. Secondly as by
sin and disobedience we are by nature children of wrath, and that the frame and
thoughts of our hearts are only evil, and that continually, Genesis 6. 5.
Thirdly, as by grace and regeneration we are renewed in holiness and
righteousness, after the image of him that created us, Ephesians. 4. 24.

Thirdly, We must know the Covenant of grace, and how it is distinguished from
the Covenant of works, by this God requires perfect obedience. Cursed is he
that continues not in all things, that are written in the Law to do them, Gal.
3. 10. But by the Covenant of grace, The just shall live by faith. Gal. 3. 11.
in this Covenant of Grace God promises life, if we obey as in the other
Covenant, but withal he gives faith and obedience that we may live: he
promises to put his fear in our hearts, and that he will not depart from us,
and that we shall not depart from him. Jerem 32. 40. and chapter 31. 33.

Fourthly, we are to know the nature of a Sacrament: That it is a visible sign
of invisible graces represented thereby: That it is a seal of the Covenant
betwixt God and us. Romans 4. 11. for it is there called a seal of the
Righteousness of faith: so was Circumcision, so is Baptism and the Lords
Supper. Again, we must understand the Analogy and proportion betwixt the
outward sign, and the inward graces signified. That the Bread signifies the
Body and Blood of Christ, and being set apart for holy use, they also signify,
the designment of Christ by God the Father, unto the Office of Mediator, John
6. 26. for him has the Father sealed: the Bread broken, and the Wine poured
out, the actual crucifying of Christ. The tradition of it by the Minister unto
us, signifies both the delivery of Christ to death by the Father, and the
reaching of him out unto us in that Ordinance; and that by Bread and Wine,
whole Christ is represented with all his graces and benefits. It is our duty
further to understand the ends of the Celebration of the Sacrament, both
principal that it must be done in remembrance of him for the showing forth of
his death until he come, Luke 22. 19. 1 Cor. 1. 23. Less principal that we may
have sealed unto us all the benefits of his death as ours, Romans 4. 11.

Whosoever is a stranger unto these things, cannot be a good Communicant, he is
not able to discern the Lords body, 1 Cor. 11. 29. Nor is his heart right
without this knowledge, there will be some evil unespied, and lurking in the
heart.

And when we have examined our knowledge for substance, we must secondly
examine the sincerity of it: it is not sufficient that we know, unless our
knowledge be sanctified, which must be tried by these grounds:

First, A sanctified knowledge humbles the Owner, it makes our spots and
blemishes perspicuous to our selves: the more we know, the more we discern our
selves to be ignorant. This is clear in Paul; there was not a man more rarely
accomplished with all kind of knowledge than he: there lived not upon the face
of the earth, a more humble soul: he was in his own judgment, the least of all
Saints, Ephe. 3. 8. the greatest of sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 16 The Scribes and
Pharisees on the other side, knew much, and were great Scholars; but their
knowledge was not sincere, because it puffed them up, 1 Cor. 8. 1. they scorned
to learn any thing of others: John 9. 34. Thou art, said they, altogether born
in sin, and do thou teach us? Again, they slighted others that were ignorant;
and therefore they say, This people that know not the Law are accursed. It
seems they were highly conceited of their own knowledge.

Secondly, Where knowledge is sincere, the mind is impartial to all truths:
such a person does not hood-wink himself, and will not see some truths; as
Peter speaks of some that were willingly ignorant of some truth, 2 Pet. 3. 6.
they would not see some things to be sin, because they resolved to continue in
them. This is a deteining the truth in unrighteousness, Romans 1. 18. whereas a
man of a sanctified knowledge, is like Cornelius, Act. 10. 33. ready to hear all
things commanded of God; though they cross his opinions, or affections,
interrupt his pleasures, or draw some inconveniency upon him.

Thirdly, A holy and sincere knowledge, may be known by the end propounded:
practice is the end of sincere knowledge: Psalm. 9. 10. They that know thy name,
will put their trust in thee. Some desire to know, and only to know, and that
is vanity: some desire to know, that they may be known to know, and that is
curiosity: some desire knowledge to make a gain of it, that is mercenary
coveteousnesse: But some desire knowledge that it may be a guide to their
affections, a directive of their actions, and that they may communicate their
light to others: and this is true Christianity.

The second Grace to be examined, is our faith. Faith is a resting on Gods
Promises, and Christ's merits for salvation. In a justifying faith, there are
four acts included. The first is knowledge of the word, which Christ would have
his give credit unto: as this, Whosoever believes on Christ, shall be saved.
2, An assent of the mind unto the truth which God speaks. Of these somewhat
has been spoken before. The 3d. act of faith whereon consists our
justification, is a resting of the heart upon Gods word, especially his
promises of salvation by Jesus Christ, a clasping about them with our
affections, resolveing to cast all our hopes upon them. And hence it is, that
the Scripture describes faith under such terms as imply a rolling our selves
in Christ: hence a soul goes out of it self, and puts on the Lord Jesus Christ,
and desires to be found in him, Philip. 3. He is willing to be naked as to the
righteousness of the Law, and to be found in the righteousness of Christ.
This is hard work for natural men; for such think that for their good
intentions, and good meaning, and their unblameable civility, they shall go to
Heaven; though in words they profess they look to be saved only by Christ.
Moreover, he that rests upon Christ fot justification and salvation, will rest
upon Christ for direction; for he believes Christ is wisdom unto him, and he
will rest upon him for sanctification also; for he believes Christ has
purchased holiness for him, and will give it him; because Christ is made unto
us of God, both wisdom to teach us, and righteousness to justify us, and
sanctification to hallow us, and redemption to save us, 2 Cor. 1. 20. Finally,
faith rests upon Christ in all estates, in adversity as well as in prosperity.
When we cannot discern God a loving Father by things that are seen, faith goes
beyond things visible, unto those things that are not seen, and fetches
evidence home to the soul, Heb. 10. 1. Presumption will be confident in
prosperity: but faith will rely and rest upon God when God seems to kill: when
sense and reason can see nothing but death and hell: yet faith will believe God
a Father, and Heaven prepared for the poor soul. The 4th act of Faith is
application: by it we do appropriate Gods general promises unto our own souls,
and claim a particular right and interest in Christ's blood: saying with Paul,
Gal. 2. 20. Who loved me, and gave himself for me; with Thomas, My Lord, and
my God, Joh. 20. For the trial of our right application, take this one Rule. A
right application does not only bring home Gods grants and promises unto us,
but the conditions also that are required on our part: He that will be saved,
must not only believe with the heart, but also confess with the mouth, To.
10. that without holiness, no man shall see God, Heb. 12. 14. The want of this
was the fault of the Pharisees, Mat. 3. 8, 9. They laid hold on Gods Covenant
made to Abraham and his seed: but never observed Gods conditions imposed upon
them. The Baptist advises them not to say they had Abraham to their father;
but to do the works of Abraham, to perform the condition on their parts, and
to bring forth fruits meet for Repentance.

Thus must our faith be examined, and there is great need so to examine our
selves: because, 1. God enjoynes it 2 Cor. 13. Prove your selves whether that
ye be in the faith. 2. Because without it, there is no pleasing of God, Heb.
11. 6. 3. Because it is the chief instrument we are to use in the Sacrament,
for the applying of Christ and all his benefits. It is the eye by which we see
Christ, the hand by which we receive him, the mouth and the stomach by which we
feed upon him.

The third Grace to be examined, is Repentance, a needful grace to be examined:
First because we come to the Lords Table to receive by seal, as it were, the
forgiveness of our sins; and therefore it is fit we repent of them, and be
sorrowful for them: Prove. 28. 13. He that covers his sin shall not prosper,
but whosoever confesses and forsakes them shall have mercy. 2. Penitents find
acceptance at Gods Table, as those that are dressed and apparelled for a Feast:
and usually according to the measure of our humiliation, do we receive the
measure of consolation. 3. Repentance will quicken our appetites for the Lords
Table, and the use of it, as sower herbs did for the Passover.

Now in Repentance we shall find two parts: first a mournful recantation of
our former errors: secondly a cheerful reformation of our future lives: It
begins in sorrow, it ends in joy. The first part is set down Joel 2. 9. A
turning unto the Lord with weeping and mourning: The second part, Mat. 3. 8.
Bring forth fruits meet for repentance. Humiliation without Reformation, is a
foundation without a building: Reformation without Humiliation, is a building
without a foundation.

And where sorrow for sin is sincere, it has these 4. properties, it is, 1.
Godly for the nature; 2. Hearty, for the measure; 3. Constant, for the
continuance; 4. Quickening, for the effect.

Concerning the first, there is a godly and a worldly sorrow, as the Apostle
distinguishes, 2 Cor. 7. 10. It is termed godly sorrow, because respect unto
God causes it. When grief in us does spring from this, that we have offended a
God that is most holy in himself: as a God that has been so many ways good
and gracious unto us: Whereas worldly sorrow is occasioned by some worldly
respect of shame, or fear of danger.

Secondly, It must be hearty for the measure: the heart must be rent, Joel 2.
the spirit must be broken, Psalm. 51. 17. We must lament for our sins, as a man
mourns for the loss of his own child, Zech. 12. 10, 11. a slight and
superficial grief, will not serve the turn.

Thirdly, It must be constant, for continuance, not for a time, but renewed
every morning and evening: David's sins were ever before him, Psalm. 51. 3. yea,
if it were possible, we should so grieve for sins past, that we should never
sin hereafter; but spend our lives in sorrow and contrition for sins already
done.

Fourthly, It must be such a sorrow, as quickens to holy duties, as prayer,
hearing of the word, and the like. Worldly sorrow makes us lumpish; but
spiritual and godly sorrow suppleth the heart, and makes it nimble to run the
ways of Gods Commandment: 2 Cor. 7. 11. Behold this same thing, that ye
sorrowed after a godly sort: what carefulness it wrought in you? yea, what
clearing of your selves? yea, what indignation? yea, what fear? yea, what
vehement desire? yea, what zeal? yea, what revenge? Mark, here are seven
gracious effects of sincere Repentance.

Further, we may try our Repentance by those ordinary steps or stairs of
Repentance, by which Gods children ascend to this grace.

1. The searching and trying our ways, Lam. 3. 40.

2. Sight of sin after searching, Psalm. 51. 3. I know mine iniquities.

3. Feeling of the burden of them after sight: this is to be weary and heavy
laden, Mat. 11. 28.

4. Humbly confessing of them, with grief of heart, and shame of face, Dan. 9.
4, 5, 6, 7.

5. Hateing and detesting them, resolving never to commit them any more: so
Hosea 4. What have I any more to do with idols?

Lastly, Power and conquest over them for the time to come: Psalm. 18. 23. I
kept my self from mine iniquity.

The fourth Grace to be examined is Charity. The necessity of our examination
of this Grace appears:

1. Because God will not have us offer the Sacrifice of Piety upon his Altar,
until Reconciliation be made with our brother, Mat 5. 23.

2. We are forbidden to keep this Feast with the leaven of malitiousness; but
with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth, 1 Cor. 5. 8.

Now for the right examination of our Charity.

First, It must be especially affectionate to the soul of our brother: My
hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel is, that they may be saved, Romans 10.
1. Be we never so rich in almsdeeds, courteous and inoffensive in our outward
carriage: yet never truly charitable to men, till we affect and seek their
spiritual good.

Secondly, True charity is to the outward man, as well as to the inward: It
joyneth beneficence to benevolence: it does not only wish well, but do well:
it is bountiful externally, as well as inwardly affectionate: Jam. 2. 15, 16. If
a brother or sister, be naked and destitute of daily food: and one of you say
unto them depart in peace, be ye warmed, and filled, notwithstanding ye give
them not those things which are needful to the body; What does it profit?

Thirdly, True love is affirmative as well as negative (that is to say) doing
good, as well as doing no harm. The affirmative part of charity is thus
described: It suffers long, and is kind: it rejoices in the truth, it
bears all things, believes all things, hops all things. The negative part
is: Charity envyeth not, vaunts not it self, is not puffed up, does not behave
it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no
evil, rejoyeeth not in iniquity, 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5, 6, 7.

Fourthly, The ground of true Charity, is not other men's carriage toward us:
for this is heathenish love, to be friendly to those that are friendly to us,
Mat. 5. But Gods Commandment, who has enjoined us to love our neighbors as
our selves: and therefore though we never: received any good from them; yea
though we have sustained much wrong by them; yet Gods Commandment must make us
love them, and do them good.

Lastly, Where true Charity is the Character of Gods Image in any man, it is an
Adamant to draw out our dearest affections toward him; our goodness cannot
extend to God; yet to the Saints that are in the earth it may, and ought; and
our delight must be upon them that are excellent, Psalm. 16. 2, 3. There must be
no confining of stinting our benevolence unto a few persons, and not to others.
We must love all, and do good to all: yet the Household of Faith, must have the
Principality, both in our benevolence, and beneficence.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and are to be sold by Nathaniel Ekins, at the Sign of the
Gun in Paul's Churchyard.
A Astrology restored, being an Introduction to the general and chief parts of
the Language of the Stars in four Books, by William Ramsey Gentleman; Student
in Astrology and Physic. fol. The Epitome of the whole Law by William Shepherd
Esquire. fol. Pseudodoxia Epidemica, or enquiries into vulgar errors, the third
Edition, with much Addition throughout: by Thomas Brown Doctor in Physic. fol.
A most excellent Commentary on the Hebrews by Doctor Lushington. fol. Another
Commentary on the Galathians, by Doctor Lushington. fol. A most excellent
History of the blessed Angels, with the fall of Lucifer, by T. Heywood. fol.
Morton on the Sacrament, by a Reveverend Father of the Church. fol. Orlando
Furioso. fol. The Commentary upon Original Writs, where most of the Cases in
Bractons Book of Entries, the year or Term-books, from K. Edw. the second to
these times, with the Plaints, Pleadings, Demurrers in matters of Law, Debates,
Opinions, rule of Courts, and resolutions of Judges therein, with several other
things, being collected out of the Books themselves, by William Hughes of
Grayes Inn, Esquire, the second Impression. A complete Commentary on the whole
N. Testament by John Trap. fol. A most rare and elegant History of Naaman the
Syrian, by Dan Rogers. fol. An excellent Commentary on the whole Book of Job,
Psalms, Ezra, Esther, Nehemiah, by John Trap. fol. Pollyolbion by Michael
Drayton Esquire. fol. Homilies of the Chapter of England. fol. A Survey of the County
Judicatures, commonly called the County Courts, Hundred, and Court-Barrons by
William Shepherd, Sergeant at Law. Octavo. Natures Paradox, a pleasant
Pollirian history, made English, by Major Wright. 8o. Johan. Seldeni, de Mare
Clausum. 8o. Brightman on the Revelation, with an Exposition on Daniel. quarto.
History of Queen Elizabeth. quarto. Dan. Rogers of Matrimonial honor. 4o.
Howels Dodona's Grove. quarto. Draytons Poems. quarto. The Saints dangers,
deliverances, and duties, by Nath. Whiting at Aldwincle. 4o. Boyer on
Church-Reformation. 12o. Doctor Pestles Sermons, with a Treatise of Duels.
Octavo. Leonards Reports, and Law cases, the first part. fol. The second part
of Leonard is now in the Press, and will suddenly be finished. Bishop Andrews
Lectures. fol. Holyock's doctrine of life. Master Biddles confession of faith
examined by Nicholas Estwick, B. D. late Minister at Cwarktown in
Northamptonshire. Baxters Call to the unconverted. His crucifying the world by
the cross of Christ. His Treatise on justification. His Disputations on the
Right to Sacraments. His making light of Christ. The Works of learned Hugh
Broughton, are now printing in one entire Volume, in Folio.

FINIS.

