Of the Right of TITHES.

A Divinity Determination in the Public Divinity Schools of the University OF
CAMBRIDG.

By the Right Reverend Father in GOD Lancelot Andrews: Late Lord Bishop of
WINCHESTER. When he proceeded Doctor in Divinity.

Translated for the benefit of the Public.

1 COR. 9. 13. Do ye not know that they which minister about holy things, live
of the things of the Temple? And they which wait at the Altar, are partakers
with the Altar?

Verse. 14. Even so has the Lord ordained, that they which Preach the Gospel,
should live of the Gospel.

London, Printed for Andrew Hebb, at the Bell in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1647.

TITHES
Ought not to be abrogated.
THat such anciently were the manners of men, and such the times, wherein the
condition of the Priesthood was sumptuous, and most flourishing, not only with
those truly excellent Ornaments of Learning, but also with those of Riches and
Preferments, History the witness of Truth is a sufficient evidence: Among the
Heathen, Theophr^stus is my Author, L. 9. de Plantis, c. 4.
That in stead of the Tithe (wherein notwithstanding we take our selves to be
very bountiful) the thirds were paid. Among the Jews, Philo reports, That the
wealth of the C^rban was oftimes the object of envy to the neighboring Kings.
Among the Christians, as in other Nations, so truly in this our, it is certain,
That the desire to increase the Revenue of the Clergy proceeded to such a
height, that it was greatly to be feared, lest the Church should swallow up the
Commonwealth: That therefore it was seasonably taken into consideration then,
(and so is now, when there is little need of caution) that no Lands should be
bequeathed in Mortmane, i. e. to sacred uses, without the Royal Patent. Such
anciently were the manners of men, and such the times. While men's manners, and
the times were such, a disputation touching the right of Tithes was nor
doubtful, nor necessary. But at length in this our age, when, as commonly old
men so, the world growing old, is wholly set upon money, there is a general
chiragra, an epidemical Gout in the hand. There are no improvements to the
Clergy, would that were all: there are frequent impairings. I say, frequent
impairings; and I wish it might only be said, there are; and that there might
never be cause of using the future tense. But to this humor of the present age,
(wherein, what for that unholy hunger after gold, there is nothing esteemed
Holy) we may add another Error, That those Worthies, not to be named without
all honorable respect, whose help God made use of for the Reformation of
Religion, were very solicitous for the Reformation of Doctrine, but less
attended the Churches Patrimony; and almost said what the King of Sodom did to
Abraham, Gen 14^ 21.
Give us the souls, and take the rest to you. But as they, who thought they
should find the Baptist in Kings Courts; Luke 7. 25
so they, who thought they should find Abraham there, were both deceived.

Which Error, though a small one, (and a small one indeed it is, if we compare
it with those great and famous acts performed by them) yet, we may justly fear,
will lie heavy upon succeeding Ages; an which true-hearted honest men (from
that of Solomon, Prove. 14 4
Where no oxen are, the crib is clean) presage Barbarism, or somewhat worse,
which I will not speak of; falsely perchance, and I pray God it prove so. but
not rashly, I am sure, not without cause. And indeed they ought to have
withstood the beginings (as we say) and have snatched this sweet bit from this
eating and drinking Age, which perverts all to most detestable use; and have
taken care not only of increasing the light, but also of allowing oil. Which
because not done, this evil spreds daily more and more, and the devourers of
Church-Revenues whisper up and down in corners, as most an end the manner is,
that the Church may be impleaded and sued for the remainder of Tithes; and
thereupon find out new quirks to put Her in a worse condition; then, talk of a
stipend: Finally, so turn themselves on all sides, that the Clergy may at last
say it to their sorrow, Their sowing or their mowing is nothing to us. To pass
by other things, as lost and gone by prescription, I shall make bold to plead
for Tithes and shall thereupon challenge them, who are otherwise minded, and
prove that the Tithes, of the yearly comings in, are by the highest equity due
to the Clergy; and that no Parliaments, no Lords or Commons can settle that
affair more wisely, then it was of old provided for by the Sacred Law; then
God, the Lawyer himself. (so absolute, that Justinian is no body to Him) had
proclaimed many ages since.

I am to treat of a hard point, nor is there any by whose candle I shall light
mine: wherefore it will be your part, Reverend Brethren, if I shall compass my
design, to do as you do; but if I shall fail, or come short of it, to
vouchsafe your pardon, as is meet, to me the first that make experiment.

Tithes ought not to be abrogated.
I Need not explain terms. Who knows not, what the Tithe is, one part of ten?
Or who doubts, what it is to abrogate? Either, to unsettle, what is settled by
Law: or, in stead thereof, to appoint a stipend. Let us therefore set about the
business.

What Christ did in the cause of Div^rc^, I conceive to be of great
con^ernment. First of all to inquire, how any matter stood in the beginning. In
the flux of time many things are changed: The beginning is the most certain Rule
and Judge.

I demand therefore, Argu. I. Gen 14. 20 Heb 7. 2. (...)
who was the first that received T^^he? That great man Melchisedek, to whom
Abraham gave the T^he of all. Melchisedek received Tithe from Abraham; but were
they free, or due? Voluntary, or by Law? If free and voluntary, the Argument is
of no force, and the Apostle puts a trick upon the Hebrews, when he compares
the Levites with him. For the reason is not alike: The Levites require their
Titbe by Law, for they have a commandment to take Tithe of the people: Heb. 7.
5.
Melchisedek his, because Abraham would, not because he ought. Again, if this
service were voluntary and free, Melchisedek were no with better then Abraham.
For what hinders but that I may debase my self, and do voluntary honor (if I
please) even to my inferi^^? My civility indeed would be the more commended.
But if, upon both these considerations, this were absurd, it follows that he
paid Tithe not as a voluntier, but as they were due by Law. Concerning the Law
then, I demand again; By what Law? Not of Sacrifice; for he offered none: of
Blessing then, it is clear. For there is a coherence betwixt these two;
Melchisedek blessed, and Abraham paid Tithe. Now I assume. Tithes are due to
Mel^hisedek blessing. The same right remains under Christ. How can that be
made to appear? Out of the 12. verse of the 7. Chapter to the Hebrews. There is
no change of the Law, but by the change of the Priesthood. But there is the
same Priesthood of Christ, and of Melchisedek; for which, if need be, God
himself will give us his oath. Ps. 110 4.
Therefore there is the same right under both. Tithes therefore are due to
Christ, in whom, and from whom, and by whom we are all blessed: He himself
blessed for ever. Which, it is but equal, that they should receive in the name
of Christ, who bless us in the name of Christ. For even Melchisedeks blessing
was but from man, though in the person and name of Christ. Therefore the right
of Tithes remains under Christ.

I had not thought there had been any born with so unfortunate a genius, under
so unhappy a planet, as to say, that Tithes were paid to Melchisedek as a King.
But I have found one that says so; see you, how without all reason. 1. The
Levites have right to Tithes: They have, as Gods Vicars: It Is true, they are:
But are they Gods Vicars: as God is a King? O what a multitude of Kings should
we have! 2. Moses says not that Tithes were paid to him as making a royal
banquet, but as blessing; which not with standing should have been said, if
they had been paid to him, under that notion, as symbols of that power. 3. The
Apostle, upon that payment of Tithes, grounds not his Kingdom, but his
Priesthood. 4. Lastly, there are as many Adversaries to that opinion, as
Interpreters: even the R^bbins themselves, whose that gloss is [ because he was
a Priest] therefore Abraham gave him Tithe. You see the force of the Argument:
And this you likewise see, that, whatever is brought against it, comes
miserably short.

I shall pass from Abraham; Argu. 2.
and yet not far. My next reason shall be from ^^^ob, who was also the Father
of the faithful, from whom we received the surname of the Israel of God: and of
whom, I doubt not, but, what Saint Peter concerning Sara, 1 Pet. 3. 6.
(as she obeved) the like will you conclude. Gen 28. 20, 21, 22.
He therefore, vows a vow. If the Lord will be with me, and keep me, and will
give me bread to eat, and taiment to put on: Then, of all that he shall give
me, I will surely give the Tithe to him. You will grant, I know, that this was
no Will Worship; for then Jacob should have vowed, what the Lord had disavowed.
Therefore, doubtless, he relied upon the Divine Will: the command is the
interpreter of that will. Moreover, the reason of the command must necessarily
be this: On whom the Lord shall bestow such favors, as he did on Jacob, he must
be bound to the Lord by the same law: For, unless it were so, the reason of the
command would be uncertain; and so the command; and so the consequence; and so,
finally, the vow it self. But if this reason be full of reason, and the equity
thereof, as is meet, extend it self to all; is there any man will deny this Law
was made for him, who shall confess, both, that he received all from God^ and
ought to return them to God again?

And this reason may satisfy any private man, why he should pay; Number. 18. 31.
and that assigned by God, why the Clergy should receive Tithe; Ye shall eat it
in every place, ye and your households, Because it is your reward for your
service: As also that of King Hezeki^h, 2 Chronicles. 31. 4.
That they might be incourage^ in the Law of the Lord. The conclusion in both
places is this, Let them receive Tithe: which in both places would be weak, if
the major proposition be not universal. Tithe is the reward of service; Tithe
belongs to them who attend the explication of the Law. Otherwise the Patriarch
Jacobs If, (...)
and the Prophet Moses's Because, and King Hezekiahs That, would all totter.
But if they do not, then, doubtless Tithes are the reward of the Priesthood.
Let all, that give themselves to the exposition of the Law, receive Tithes. The
reason is evident.

I add this further: Since Gods blessing of his goods is the medium that
Jacob; the reward of the Priests service the medium that Moses; the study of
the Law the medium that Hezekiah uses; and these three are perpetual, nor
circumscribed by place, nor defined by time, but belonging as well to
Christians, as to ^ews; there will be the same condition of the precept: For it
is truly and wisely determined by the Lawyer, As is the reason of the precept,
such is the precept, it self.

The third reason is taken from the Prophet M^lachy, Argu. 3.
where the observation of this Precept is established with a solemn blessing,
Cap. 3. v. 9, 10.
and the violation with a severe and bitter curse. And indeed if Tithes were
ceremonial, as some are very earnest to have them, the Prophets would cast them
away; would never urge them so carefully; they would suffer them to wax cold;
would never speak of them so highly. This is not their usual manner: but, if the
ceremonies were never so carefully looked to, not to promise so great
happiness; nor, if neglected, to threaten so sore judgments. And least any
should think this reason to no purpose, the Fathers used no other in the
Council of Tribur. Cap. 13.
Tithes are to be paid, that God being appeased by this our devotion, may more
plenteously bestow those things that are necessary. The Fathers in the Synod of
Mentz no other. Cap. 11.
Tithes are to be paid; for it is to be feared, that if any take away what is
due to God, God will, for his sin, take away necessaries from him. Hom. lib.
50. c. 48.
Saint Augustine, a substantial Author, no other. Our forefathers abounded with
wealth (and it is not perfunctorily to be passed by that he says ( our
forefathers) Tithes therefore are ancienter then Saint Augustines time) because
they paid their Tithes to God: but now because our devotion to God is
decreased, the comings in to the Exchequer are (...) eased: We would not part
with the Tithe to God, therefore now all is taken away. The Exchequer takes
away that, which Christ does, not receive.

I pass by Saint Jerome, as too prolix, who yet was the first who prosecuted
this Argument in his Annotations on the Prophet.

But, because it is an easy matter to find Tithes under the Law, and the
credit of the Old Testament is in this point suspected, go to, let us seek in
the New, and set our foot on that ground which seems most slippery to contest
on.

And first of all I object that place of Saint Matthew, Argu. 4.
the words of Christ himself: Matthew. 23. 23.
These ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone. This place I
do not, (for why should I assume that to my self, which is none of mine?) the
ancient Church urges thus. Tithes, which Christ himself has commanded not to
leave undone, the decrees of Princes ought not give order to leave undone. Now
who knows not the assumption? But this Reason has the greater strength,
because, when, in some places before, the discourse first; and afterward the
practice of washing of hands, of rubing the ears of Corn, and other ceremonies
had been fallen upon, Christ, not unwarily, omiteth those particulars, defends
their omission of them, and, which is more to be wondered at, does himself
authorize the people to omit them. But, concerning this of Tithe, his words are
express, Ye ought not to leave them undone.

Nay, which is of more weight yet, when the discourse was of matters of
greatest importance, of mercy and judgment, and that in the same Paragraph (as
I may say) he makes a law, as for the doing of the one, so, for the
non-omission of the other. What seek ye more? No man can easily imagine, in how
great esteem this Argument was with the Primitive Church.

I shall give you two of many. One whereof shall speak for the Greek Church,
the other for the Latin. Saint Chrysostom, his words are these: Worthily does
our Savior add, These things ought ye to do; for Alms is a Tithe. Homil 73.
in ^. Matthew.
Now Alms cannot hurt possibly. For we ought not to do them, as observers of
the Law; neither does he say we ought; But these things ought yet to do. For
when formerly he disputed of clean and unclean, He added not there, these
things ought ye to do: but manifestly he overthrew them. Wherefore, Brethren,
he speaks of Tithe, These things ought ye to do; but concerning their
Washings he speaks not so: The words, as you see, are a little differing, the
sense is not differing.

Now hear Saint Augustine in his Enchirid: to Laurentius, cap. 76. Woe be to
you, Pharisees, who Tithe every Herb: As if he would say: Indeed I exhorted you
to give Alms, by which all things would be clean unto you; But woe to you who
Tithe Herbs. For these I knew to be your Alms, think not that I admonished you
concerning then. And a little after (for it would be troublesome to put in
all:) But lest he should seem to refuse those Alms, which are given of the
fruits of the earth, These (says he) ye ought to do, that is, Judgment and
Charity; and yet, nevertheless, not to omit the other, that is, Alms of the
fruits of the Earth. I need add no gloss.

I study brevity: and put you in mind of one thing, (though there be no need,
I know, ye observed it) that Tithes both by S. Chrysostom and S. Augustine are
refered to the commonplace of Alms. Some are of another opinion: I will not
greatly contend; for I had rather it should be accounted a sacred Tribute, then
Alms. But this place is safe enough: And by it they gain thus much, that Tithes
ought not to be abrogated.

I proceed now to the fifth: Argu. 5.
And, or I am much deceived, it may be concluded from S. Paul, That Tithes are
to be retained even under Christ.

In the sixth chapter to the Galathians, verse sixth, Let him that is taught in
the Word, communicate to him that teaches in all good things. (...)
Which words seem to me to sound like those in the seventh chapter to the
Hebrews, verse the second, (...)
He gave the tenth of all, like those, Genesis 14. 20. of all, in all, what
difference? that it may be no light conceit, that the Apostle does allude to
that of Genesis: and that he does covertly insinuate that communication, which
was used by Abraham, who is to be imitated in all things, as much as may be, by
the children of his Faith. But what if so? That precept, which does best
provide for communication in all good things, is not to be antiquated; And
there is no question to be made, but that was a Law for Tithe. For by that,
there is a true, and (if by your leave I may, I will say) a (...) communication
of all good things, both of Fruits, and of all other productions, of the Earth,
of Plants, of Beasts; you may by your selves make up the rest of the Induction.
Substitute in place thereof a stipend, payment by the Poll, or a rate upon
Houses, there will be many Errors; part will be concealed, part will be
subtracted; I dare say, there will be no communication in all good things.
Lastly, though all possible caution be used, the communication of a Pension
will be only Analogical: But I have learned long since, and nature, law and
reason persuade thus much, that, where we may have the Thing it self, we should
not trouble our selves about the Analogy: Wherefore in the communication
betwixt the Pastor and his Flock, if the truth it self of the Thing, of the
Communication, may be had in all good things, (and it may be had) those
stipendiary proportions are not to be sought after, or rather (for that is too
little a great deal) are utterly to be rejected.

Further, Argu. 6.
Let this be a sixth Argument. That Political Law concerning Tithes did sometime
bind the Church: it cannot be denied. But it was never made void: Therefore
it binds now too. What things were abolished, the Apostle shows, Ephesians. 2.
14. Those things which were the middle partition wall, first, betwixt God and
man; secondly, betwixt man and man, i. e. the Jews and Gentiles. We are
excluded from the first member of the Division; for God commanded Tithes:
therefore they do not displease him. And also from the latter; for there was
peace on all hands, in the point of Tithes; which the Heathen did pay annually
to their, (as I shall show anon) as well as the Jews to their Priests. But that
the other part of the Political Law was excepted, this may be an Argument,
because it is esteemed by King David, Psalm. 147. 19, 20. a great blessing: And
I shall hardly be brought to believe that the death of Christ deprived us of
any blessing. Besides, if it were wholly cancelled, Saint Paul offended against
the Rules of Law, when in the 1 Cor. 9.13. he brought a testimony from Deuteronomy.
18. 1. that is, from an antiquated Law. But that controversy runs into
another: I will not prosecute it.

But this I will, Argu. 7.
out of the seventh to the Hebrews verse eighteenth, which shall be my seventh
Argument. And it is if I mistake not, as a most fair place, so, most apposite
to this Controversy. There is verily a disanulling of the commandment going
before, for the weakness and unprofitableness thereof. So that no Law is to be
antiquated or disanulled, which is not either weak or unprofitable. The Law
concerning Tithes is a Law going before, an ancient Law: Let any man show me
either the weakness or unprofitableness thereof, I will join hands and grant
the cause; let this Thesis pass the sponge for me. But this Law has strength,
as much as any Law, ever had, is like to have, can possibly have, from the
Author, consent, multitude, custom; and that, lastly, not the mute or silent,
but the express and clear approbation of all Ages. And its use too: for it has
a long time been employed, without complaint of any, to that use, to which it
was appointed: and, unless the sinews of it had been cut by certain Improper
Proprietaries, it had been better employed, neither would the Church have ever
complained in that point.

On the other side, Argu. 8.
(which shall be my eighth Argument) with how unhappy success has it been
changed in some places? And where stipends are substituted in lieu of Tithes,
how many deceipts, difficulties, complaints? How many weaknesses and
unprofitablenesses? This, where Tithes are yet entire, may easily induce us to
this opinion, That they ought not to be repealed; and where they are repealed,
that they ought (unless it be wholly impossible) to be revoked. Geneva pays
forty pounds, a poor matter, God knows; yet it is Calvin's complaint in many
places of his Commentaries (modest enough, as became him, but loud enough) that
the stipends were but niggardly paid. In the sixth to the Galatians, and the
forty seventh of Genesis.

Scotland also has exempted it self from Tithes. There is in print a complaint
of John Knox, exhibited in the name of the Ministers to the Parliament at
Edinburgh, Anno Domini 1565, December 25. When I read the eighth leaf of it, it
pities me for them: I say no more, but what the Boys use to sing, Felix quem
faciunt, etc. Happy they, whom other men's harms make to beware.

Those Fathers, Argu. 9.
whom I lately named, provided much wiser in this point, both for themselves
and us. I come to them. We have had Arguments enough from holy Scriptures: And
there is none of you (I hope) but will willingly admit the Practice of the
whole Church for an Argument. I touched it lightly before: now I apply my self
wholly to that. I say, of the whole Church: I change not a word. And, first, of
the Aphrican: for which let Saint Augustine the glory of Aphrica speak, in his
219 Sermon, de Tempore, which is wholly and professedly upon the point of
paying Tithes. He begins thus. By the favor of Christ (Christian Brethren) the
days are now at hand, in which we ought to gather in the Harvest, and
therefore let us give thanks to God who gave all, and think of offering, or
rather paying our Tithes: (and a little after:) For we offer Tithes of Duty,
and he that will not pay them, takes by force that which belongs to another.

You shall have at once both the Practice of the Church, and the opinion of the
Fathers touching this matter. Of the Italian Church: but for that let Saint
Ambrose, the Bishop of Millan speak, in his Sermon of Lent, (as it is quoted in
the Decrees) Whosoever shall call to mind by himself, P. 2. C. 1^
that he has not paid his Tithes faithfully, Q. 2. 7.
let him now amend what he did amiss. But what is it to pay faithfully, but not
to offer either worse, or less then is due of your Corn, Wine, Fruits, Cattle,
Garden, Trade, Hunting? For he that will not pay to God the Tithes, which he
holds, nor restore to man what he has unjustly taken away, does not as yet
fear God, and is ignorant what true Repentance is. Let these su^^ice for the
Western Church.

And Saint Chryso^tome for the Eastern, Hom^.^^ in Epis^^ ^d^ ph^s.
If this were the manner under the Old Testament, how much more under the New?
For what did not they do? They paid Tithes, again and again, to the Orphans, to
the Widows, to the Proselytes. But some happily may wonder and say, Such a man
paid Tithe: what a shame is this? if that which was no wonder among the Jews,
should be a wonder among Christians. If there were danger in it to leave Tithes
unpaid then, consider what it is to leave them unpaid now.

For Saint Jerome I am in suspense, which Church to attribute him to, but will
not exclude him though: For he will be a most full witness, as being one who
had seen most men's manners and most places. Thus he on the third of the Prophet
Malachi. (For I pass by his Epistle to Nepotian, where he says that he lives
of Tithes.) The words are these. What we said concerning Tithes, which
anciently were paid to the Priests and Levites; understand that the same ought
to be done by the people living in the Church under the Gospel, to whom it is
commanded, not only to pay Tithe, but also to sell all and follow the Lord.
Which if we will not do, let us at least imitate the Jews in this, to give part
of all, and give that which is due unto the Priests. Which whosoever shall not
do, is s^fficiently convicted to de^raud and suppl^nt God, and is cursed with
sc^rcity and want of all things.

Very well, all this is true, they say. But the Church was now in peace, and
began to set her mind, too much, on Riches. But what say you of that other,
under the Cross? Of that, which was so full of glorious Martyrs? Although it be
an unjust demand, that the Church should be in no better condition when
flourishing, then when afflicted, yet they shall not escape so: To that I apply
my self. The same did the Church ever think concerning Tithes, both when she
suffered persecution, and when she was free from it.

For the Western Church let Saint Cypri^n speak. E^ist. 66. ^d F^rnit.
Which very reason and form (...) now held among the Clergy, that they who by
Clerical Ordination are promoted in the Church of God, should not depart from
the Altar and the Sacrifices, but receive Tithes of the fruits of the earth
under the honorable name of the Brethren who live of the Sportula, i. e. of the
Oblations of the Church.

For the Eastern, ^om. 11. in 18. Number ^.
let Origin who was ancienter then S. Cyprian. How then does our righteousness
exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, if they dare not taste
of the fruits, before the Tithes be set apart for the Levites, and I, doing no
such thing, so abuse the fruits of the earth, that the Priest knows not, the
Levite is ignorant, and the Holy Altar partaketh not, of any such performance?
And then he concludes: This we have spoke to this end, affirming that this
command (concerning Tithes) ought to stand even according to the Letter.
Stromat. 2. Ed^^. V^rone^s. ^ol. 155.
And before Origin, S. Clement of Alexandria (who was nearer to Christ's time,
and almost touched upon the first Century) speaks full to this. The paying
Tithes of our Fruits, and of our Cattle, teaches us Piety to God, and not to
be altogether in love with gain, but to make the Priests partakers of our
loving affection, and charity.

Now I think these passages may satisfy the desires of the most unreasonable,
to show the intent and custom of the Church. But if any shall object, and say,
private men thought so indeed, the sentence of particular men is oftentimes
sudden, and, what the heat of their brain shall suggest to them, that they set
down in writing: No news of any deliberation, disputation, determination all
this while: All these are indeed in Councils: Show it there if you can. I will
take them at this challenge; and only wish they would be bound to stand to
them.

And to begin with a Council in Englan^, Arg. 10.
in the year 670 and 73, under Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury. In the second
Canon thereof, provision is made concerning Parishes; now Parishes and Tithes
(if we may believe the Canonists) are reciprocal. But this is more yet, That
they wholly subscribe to the Council of Chalcedon, in which Tithes are
confirmed. Which two things do sufficiently prove, That both the payment of
Tithes, and the division of Parishes were anciently among us, and that they are
not such upstarts, as some fondly have imagined. About the same time also was a
Council summoned at Mentz, in the seventh Chapter whereof, we read thus. We
admonish and command, that Tithes, which God has appointed to be paid to him,
be in no case omited to be paid: and they add this Penalty, Whosoever shall
after due admonition neglect to pay Tithes, let them be excommunicated.

The second at Matiscon, almost 200 years before that, Cap. 5. The Divine Laws
have commanded Tithes to be paid, which Laws all Christians have a long time
kept inviolate. And it concludes thus: We do therefore ordain that the ancient
custom of the faithful be restored. But if any shall be obstinate, let him be
for ever separated from the Members of the Church. Before that, the first at
Aurange, cap. 17. Concerning Tithes thus we ordain, that every year the
Fourths, or every Fourth year the whole. Tithe be paid to the Bishop. I pass by
the second at Toledo, and the third at Arles: I come to that at Chalcedon, one
of the Four first and principal. Touching which, we read thus in the fourteenth
Chapter of the Council at Tribur. It has pleased this Council, That Tithes and
all other their possessions be preserved to the ancient Churches, as was
decreed in the Holy Council at Chalcedan, cap. 17.

You have heard the Councils speak: and that upon mature deliberation,
disputation, determination; that they did establish, not define; confirm, not
appoint, Tithes; that they were formerly granted by private consent, and
suffrage of the Fact, as they speak; before they went to the Councils. For
subscription in the first Council; Admonition in the second; Prescription of
long time in the third; Conservation and penalties in the fourth; do import
rather an approving and ratification, then an indiction or appointment of them.

But now forsooth, Argu. 11.
all the Question is about the Ius, or Law; and thence we must derive either
the Institution or the Abrogation of them: thither therefore they betake
themselves: and truly I will not b^lk the Law, nor the Policy of either Body,
Canonical or Civil.

For even from thence I have collected a few passages to this purpose:
sparingly indeed as becomes a Divine; but abundantly enough to our purpose. Nor
indeed shall ye need to fear that we will take any from the Decretals; we shall
be very scrupulous how we meddle with those dregs. Only some few passages we
shall make use of from the more sound Decrees; and those too before the year
400. Cap. 16. Q. 1.
The Decree of Symmachus the first. Whosoever shall dispose of the Tithes
without the consent of the Bishop, let him be Anathem^. Again, of Anastasius
the first, Whosoever shall detain his Tithes, let him be suspended from the
Communion. In the 29. Chap. of the Decrees of ^^^^sius, it is meet that there
be Four parts made as well of the Revenues of the Tithes, as of the Oblations
of the Faithful, as was long since decreed with great reason. But if Parishes
and Tithes, Bishops Stipends and Tithes, Clergy and Tithes be reciprocal, as
the experienced in those Laws are of opinion, then we may carry up this point a
great deal higher, even to the second Epistle of Calixt^s the first, to the
first Epistle of Urban the first, up to the very times of Justin Martyr.
Although, were there none of all these, yet the Canon which is Did 12. (Let
that C^sto^e, which is not known to ^surp any thing against the Catholic
Faith, stand firm,) Ad Casulan. Ad Luci^.
Especially being supported with the judgment of Saint Augustine, and Saint
^erome, (whose opinion it is, that as the prevaricators of the Divine Laws, so,
the contemners of Ecclesiastical Customs are to be curbed) may be strong
enough against the Abregation of Tithes.

As for the Civil Law (that we may satisfy our Politicians;) Arg. 12.
that is so far from the opinion that they may be abrogated, that it frees them
from all injury by Prescription, which, nevertheless, by it self alone, in
other cases cancels Laws. For so we have it in the seventh Book of the Code.
Tit. de praes^riptione, ^^ge An^sta^ s^^ 1
Tithes by the command of God are set apart for the priests, that they, who are
accounted of the Lords Inheritance, should live of his inheritance. They cannot
therefore by Privilege of any be granted to Laymen, lest the authority of the
supreme Magistrate should prejudice the Divine command. And also in the
Authenticks, in the same Title: Thus ^ustinian. But if any Private man shall
possess Tithes, either without Title, or with Title, he cannot be secure by any
prescription of time. For those things cannot be strengthened by tract of time,
which, by Right, could be of no effect at the beginning.

I have other Testimonies at hand; but I promised brevity. The Em^erors (as you
have heard) are of opinion, that the things which belong to God may not be
abdicated.

The Scriptures, Arg. 13.
the Fathers, the Councils, both Laws, are with and for us. Now, unless Reason
be against us, we are safe. To that, therefore, we come in the thirteenth
place. But, there, to proceed distinctly, I shall divide this one Question into
three Members. First, Whether Reason will that there be a c^rtain allowance to
the Ministers of the Gospel? Secondly, Whether this ^^t of the ^eerly profits?
Thirdly, Out of what part?

^ Cor. 9.
The business is long since brought to this pass by Saint Paul. The Ministers
of the Gospel have a power to eat and drink, and not to work: the Reason. Every
Laborer is worthy of his hire. Whether he cut his own Vine, or feed his own
Flock: and, the Ox must not be muzzled that treads out the Corn. This is one
degree. Secondly, But if any Laborer, much more Laborers in the Commonwealth.
Every Soldier warreth at the public charge, not at his own. They that assist
the Commonwealth are to be assisted by the Common -wealth. But a Minister of
the Gospel is a Laborer and assistant of the Commonwealth. This is a second
degree. Thirdly, But if he must be maintained, who is any way profitable to the
Commonwealth; He, whose help she uses in spiritual and eternal things, much
more; In Prytanaeo.
and, if it might be, with such additions of Fortune, as they use to be honored
with, who have deserved well of the Republike. For all Reward is beneath the
merit of this, and there is no comparison betwixt Spiritual sowing, and Carnal
reaping. Wherefore, without doubt, Carnal things are due to them who sow
spiritual.

I come to the second Member; Whether out of the De Orbis concordia. l. 3. c.
10.
Postellus, a man of great learning, is of this opinion, That this is a common
principle engrafted in all by nature, viz. That a certain portion of the yearly
profits be paid to the Ministers of the Holy things. For it is just and
agreeable to reason, that there be a yearly sacred tribute, wherewith we should
sacrifice to God, for the increase of our estate, as we use to keep anniversary
solemnities in thankfulness. And there is all the Reason in the world for it:
but whether should this be out of the profits of the groun^, or by a pecuniary
reward? Reason would the former. For in all created things there is the image,
and (as I may so speak) the superscription of God, as there is in Coins of the
King. The tribute is distinguished by the inscription. Wherefore the Kings
fifteens, and subsidies (as they call them) have the Royal impression. The
Divine tribute is not silver or brass stamped with the image of a man, but of
God himself; as there is in all Creatures a Character of the Divine power,
wisdom, and mercy. Of that therefore let the sacred tribute be.

Would you have another? Reason will, that the Minister of the Gospel should
receive his reward that way, wherein there may be equality of fortune, wherein
the mutual participation of plenty and want, of joy and grief in common with
the people may redound to him. It is expedient it be so. For is he sustained
with the annual profits? Is it fair weather? He is glad, he rejoices, he sings
praise to God no less willingly, then any husbandman: for he has his share in
that fair weather. Is it tempestuous? He sighs, he groans, he falls to his
prayers, no less fervently, then any husbandman: for he has his share too in
that tempestuous weather. Sympathy, and Communion, that great bond of nature,
of the Commonwealth, and of the Church, is conserved and maintained. On the
contrary: Is he sustained by an yearly stipend? Be there seasonable showers?
the people rejoice; he rejoices not: for (as we said in the beginning) their
sowing or their mowing is nothing to him. Comes there an unseasonable drought?
The people mourn; he mou^^eth not: for their sowing or their mowing is nothing
to him. Sympathy, that great bond of nature, of the Commonwealth, of the
Church, is dissolved. This ought not to be so: Wherefore that Reason is the
better, which pleads for the fruits of the earth.

Positive Law (for that is their expression) is the determination of the Law of
nature. The Law of nature determines the death of a murderer: but the
Positive Law, the kind of death. Again they say, the Law of nature determines
a stipend to him that ministers about holy things: but the Positive Law, the
measure of the Tax. Yes, happily in things pertaining to the Commonwealth, there
is a limitation by the Positive Law: But in Divine, in Taxing for the Church,
we grant it not. God is as careful for our sustenance, as he was for the
Levites: there was nothing then reserved to the Positive Law; nor therefore
now. This whole point may be dispatched by Reason. The Levites had right to
Tithes: But the Ministry of the Gospel, 2 Cor 3. 8, 9.
as it is more excellent in nature, and more eminent in dignity, so, is more
profitable in its use, then was theirs. Our people receive more and greater
benefits from us; therefore they ought to pay more, Reason presently
insinuates. What a shame is it, that Christians, who owe more, should not pay
as much? If therefore men would hearken to Reason, we might possibly receive
more ample fruits; not, likely, less.

For Tithe has all the points of Equity in it. It was chosen by God; and so
not without great reason; and therefore not, without great reason, to be
rejected. What is alleged to the contrary? One or two, I know not what, scarce
worth the name of reasons; not so much as a shadow of what we may call great
reason, nay indeed not of any poor and mean.

Most equal and reasonable it is in respect of the constitution. Excellently
Saint Augustine: For what if God should say, Thou art mine, O man; this Earth,
which thou tillest, is mine; these Seeds, which thou sowest, are mine; these
Beasts, which thou imployest, mine; the Rain and Showers, mine; the Sun and
heat, mine; all mine; thou which lendest only thy hand, deservest only the
Tithe; but I grant nine to thee, give me the Tithe. If thou will not give me
the Tithe, I will take away the nine: If thou will give me the Tithe, I will
multiply the nine. Could a more reasonable Speech possibly be made?

Most equal and reasonable, in respect of the payment. Out of the second to the
Corinthians, the eighth Chapter and the thirteenth Verse. For then is any thing
most equally disposed, when one is not eased, and another burdened, when it is
not too loose for one, too stra^t for another. By this, there is a most exact
equality: the Rich are not spared, the Poor are not oppressed: which is the
common complaint of the Edicts of Princes; the Crow, there, better then the
Dove.

Most equal and reasonable, even by the very light of nature; I say, by the
very light of nature, such as the very Gentiles had; that is, by that lost,
rased, deformed, not renewed Law. By what Law did ^braham pay? Sure by no
politic constitution (who can possibly persuade that?) no, nor by any
ceremonial law. For there is no congruity betwixt a ceremony and the eternal
Priesthood, such as was Melchisedeks: Therefore by the law of nature. But to
return to the Gentiles.

Votive Tithes are frequent in their Histories. Not only by prime men in their
several Commonwealths, Pausanias the Atheni^n, ^. 3. rerum Graecarum.
Agesilaus the Spartan, as Xenophon reports. Cartalon the Carthaginian,
Camillus the Roman, as Plutarch: But also by every Commoner, Stichus in
Plautus; (...) Q 18.
by every householder as we read in Plutarch. How so? who declared to them the
measure of the Divine portion? who was his Accountant, who so exactly registered
it in his Notes, that eight parts belonged to the family; six whereof were to
be employed, two to be laid up; that the ninth was for Seed against the next
year; and the tenth was ((...)) the Divine Tribute.

But indeed they did not only Vow them, neither was their T^^hing only by
Vow, or but ever and anon, but it was their annual ^olemn Rite and Custom.
Alexander ab Alexandro no contemptible Author reports, Geni^l. dierum li^. 4.
cap. 10.
that the ancient Romans were wont to pay T^thes of Corn, out of their fields,
and new broken up grounds. Theophrastus says as much of the Egyptians, De
Plantis 8. sub in^t.
that they had the like usage. Diodorus Siculus as much of Sicil^a, when she
was her own Mistress, and not a Provinc^. And that this was the very manner of
the Athenians, we may be convinced from this, because the poorest Citizens were
called Thetes, and that from the letter Theta, the note of the number Nine;
because, having by estimation, but nine parts only, they were exempted from
paying Tithe. Finally, it may be collected from the same Authors, that those
Tithes were never employed to discharge their wages, who executed any Temporal
or Lay Office in the Commonwealth; that, at first, and as long as any thing
was held religious or holy, they were so too: but afterward were swallowed up
in the stomach of the Commonwealth.

Of what credi^ it is, I know not, but I remember that Musculus relates, In
Genesis c. 14.
that, in the first beginings of the Church, the right and use of Tithes was
taken away from the Idol-Priests, and instated on the Presbyters of the Church.
But this is most certain that the places of Payment and Accounts of Tithes,
though in declining times they fell into the power and possession of Kings and
Princes, did at first belong to the Priests. For when in the beginning the same
men were both Kings and Priests (as Plato reports of the Kings of Egypt, and
Virgil of Anius, King Anius, King of men, Apollo's Priest) the Priesthood being
afterward, as too hard and troublesome a companion, transferred from themselves
to others, they did notwithstanding retain the Tithe as a dowry to themselves.
But that rather by Custom then Law, and that a corrupt Custom too. 1 Samuel 8.
15.
For that in the Prophet Samuel is no description of a good King, but a Tyrant.
Which makes me wonder the more at them, who would have the Levites Tithe to be
part of the Kings Inheritance; and that Kings did part with their own Right,
when Tithes were conferred upon the Church. But this falls to the ground by the
example of Mel^ hisedek, who surpasleth the antiquity, and faith of all
Histories; who, both persons, of King and Priest, meeting in him, did not
receive Tithes by right of his Kingdom, but his Priesthood.

I should offend against the time, and against you, if I should produce any
more of these men's trifles in this presence; nor would any pleasure accrue,
from thence, to you, nor advantage to the cause. Nor do I allege any new
Writers, because they for the most part do rather touch upon some heads, and
not apply themselves home and strongly to the cause. Any, even the most learned
Author, is otherwise to be esteemed of, when he does but salute a Question, and
touch it lightly; otherwise, when he takes it to task, and thoroughly dis^usseth
it. And in truth, if I would never so fain bring them forth, yet the scales
would hang even, in suspense. For (to my thinking) Luther, Melancthon,
Brentius, would be for us: Calvin, Martyr, Bucer, go another way. Wherefore I
will dismiss and leave you to your selves: Here shall be an end.

Two Patriarchs, as many Prophets, CHRIST, his Apostles, the whole Church,
Fathers, Councils, History; both Laws, ( Civil and Canon) Reason, the imperfect
pieces and fragments of the Heathen, and finally, Experience it self have
brought in their evidence for Tithes. Which if they seem to you to deserve your
vote and suffrage, and to have spoken home and good Reason, be you, if you
please, with me, of the same mind and judgment.

That Tithes ought not to be abrogated.

S. MATTHEW. 23. 23. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye pay
Tithe of Mint, and Anise, and Cumin, and have ^mited the weightier matters of
the Law, Judgment, Mercy, and Faith: these ought ye to have done, and not to
leave the other undone.

FINIS.
December. 15, 1646. Imprimatur, JOHN DOWNAME.


