ANIMADVERSIONS Upon those Notes which the late Observator has published upon
the seven Doctrines and Positions which the KING by way of Recapitulation (he
says) lays open so offensive.
POSITION I. THat the Parliament has an absolute indisputable power of
declaring Law: so that all the right of the King and People depends upon their
pleasure.

To this the Observator says, It has been answered, That this Power must rest
in them, or in the King, or in some inferior Court, or else all suits will be
endless, and it cannot rest more safely then in Parliament.

ANIMADVERSION I. THe Observator has contracted his Majesty's words, but has
kept the sense in more general terms, and seems (though but faintly) to
justify the Position, by approving (I know not whose answer) That this Power
can rest no where more safely, then in Parliament. He means the Parliament
without the King; If he had allowed the King his place in Parliament, I know no
understanding man but will easily subscribe, That the King in Parliament, or
the Parliament with him, have an absolute undisputable power, both to make and
declare Law; and to end all Suites of what kind soever, determinable by humane
law within the Kingdom. And here is the most safe resting of this Power (and
here it has ever rested) and not in the King alone (who claims not that
Power, but is willing to govern his Subjects according to the known Laws)
and much less in any inferior Court. But that such an absolute undisputable
Power of declaring Law, as has lately bin assumed, by the Major part of the
present sitting Parliament, should be resting in them, is neither necessary for
the ending of Suites, nor can be safe, either for King or Subject. If they may
declare that for a Law, a fundamental Law, which never yet was Enacted, or had
any being; and deny the plain undoubted Laws that have been Enacted, or
frustrate them by some unheard of interpretation, (as if such interpretation
had been some mental (or rather Parliamentall) reservation laid up within the
Parliament walls, to be produced upon emergent occasions, by their successors)
they will have so full an Arbitrary power, that the right and safety of King
and People must wholly depend upon their Votes. Which power can never be safe,
either for King or People, nor can they produce one president that may warrant
such a Power. But they are not bound or limited by such presidents. That's the
second Position.

POSIT. 2. That Parliaments are bound to no Presidents.

OBSERVE: Statutes are not binding to them, why should then Presidents? Yet
there is no obligation stronger then the honor and justice of a Parliament.

ANIMAD. 2. If Statutes be not binding to them, there is no reason that
presidents should be. And he says true, Statutes are not binding to them, that
is, de facto, they are not (for they in some things go directly against them)
but de jure, they are; that is, they ought to be binding to them, till they be
repealed by the same power they were made, that is, by Bill orderly passed both
Houses, and ratified by his Majesty's Royal assent. And unless they can show
better reason then their bare Assertion: Presidents (as they are the best
warrant, so) they are, and ought to be the limits and bounds of their
proceedings. He might have said as truly, That Oaths are not binding to them:
and therefore neither Statutes nor Presidents. But the Observator tells us (Page
44.) That the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance are not endangered, by making
the Kingdom, and not the King, the proper subject of Power, And he yields
reason for it. For (says he) he that ascribes more to the whole Universality,
then to the King, yet ascribes to the King a true Supremacy of Power and Honor
above all particulars. I wonder what he means by a true Supremacy of Power
and Honor above all particulars. Surely, he means nothing but priority of
place, and height of Title; for he is allowed little power over some
particulars, namely, over the Members of either house, and whom else they
please to exempt (as they did Sergeant Major Skippon for his Power and
Commands.) But this distinction helps them: The Members of either House are
sharers in that Supremacy which is in the Universality and above his; and by
the power of that Supremacy they can exempt whom they please from the power of
this, Inferior (pardon the ph^se, absurdities cannot be expressed without a
Solecisme) Supremacy. Very good. But, in good sober sadness, does the
Observator think this distinction was thought on by the Framers and enjoyners
of that Oath, or that the Members of the House, at their entering the House, did
take their Oath to the King, as to the Supreme over all, with exception of
themselves, or reservation of an higher Supremacy to themselves, when they
should be entered? It is hardly credible; Nor do all (that desire to tender all
due honor to the Parliament) believe that they are so the Universality, or the
Kingdom, as the Observatour presumes. They are trusted by the Universality and
Kingdom, and we pray, that they may dischardge that trust, not knowing, but
that a multitude of men subject (every one of them) to error, may fail in
their judgment, and being not exempted from the common condition of the
sinful Sons of Adam, may possibly, not rightly dischardge the trust
committed to them, as well, as the King, who is blasted with foul sailings,
anderrours, and judgment. Me thinks, men that so much detest Popery, should
not borrow the grounds of their reasoning from them: and I shall as soon
believe the Council of Trent, telling us that they are the Universal Church,
and therefore cannot possibly err, as that the Parliament is the Universal
unerring and unpervertibly just body of the Kingdom. And surely, the Spirit of
declaring must needs reside in a strangely large measure in them, who have
power, thus to declare not only Law, but Oaths too; a greater, then which the
Popes flatterers never gave him; and hardly ever any Pope assumed so great: Quo
te constringam mutantem protea nodo? How shall these men be bound to do
right, who so easily unty the knots of these sacred books of Law and Oaths?
why, yes; There is a bond that will do it; The obligation of the Justice, and
honor of a Parliament. But can any man be sure, that they whom neither Law,
Custom, and Presidents of their Ancestors, nor Oaths can bind, will be
always held in by the obligation of Justice and Honor? Is it not possible,
that they may (in time) find a power in themselves of declaring that obligation
void, as well, as have done the other? The same obligation of Justice and
Honor, is as strong upon Kings, (and has ever been held more powerful and
obstrictive in them, then in any state managed by a Community; and yet they
dare not trust his Majesty, though so obliged. The Observatour then must pardon
me, if I desire, they may rather be held in, (and hold themselves so to be)
by the old obligations of Law, Presidents, and Oaths, rather then that the
Kings liege-people should be put wholly to confide to that single obligation
of the Justice, and Honor of a Parliament.

POSITION 3. That they are Parliaments, and may judge of public necessity
without the King, and dispose of anything.

OBSERVE. They may not desert the King, but being deserted by the King, when the
Kingdom is in distress, they may judge of that distress, and relieve it, and
are to be accounted by virtue of representation as the whole body of the State.

ANIMADVER. 3. His Majesty sets down this Position in more words, but these
are much to the same purpose, and upon these the inference which His Majesty
makes follows undeniably, That then the life and liberty of the Subject, and
all good Laws made for the security of them, may be disposed of, and repealed
by the Major part of both Houses, at any time present, and by any ways and
means procured so to be: And His Majesty shall have no power to protect them.
They see nothing, that see ^ot the misery, which may follow upon such a vast
transcendency of arbitary power, if it were invested in the Parliament, which
(I dare boldly ^^y) was never claimed by any Parliament, though in conjunction
with (the ^ead of it) the King. Every (the meanest) Subject has such a right
and propriety in his goods, that without Law, they cannot be taken from him,
though to be employed for the public good. And though the safety of the
people, be the highest Law, and that do (many times) give a power above other
Laws, and against them, to the supreme Magistracy in a State, to dispose of
private men's estates, yet the unchangeable rule of Justice, must have place,
even in that highest Law, and that requires a compensation to be made to those,
whose states or goods are so disposed of; and never gives power to uphold the
public good with private injury. Nor can it be imagined, that a State upheld,
by such helps, should not be able to make a just compensation to those, by whom
it was upheld. But let us hear our Observatour. They may not (says he)
desert the King. Gramercy, for that; I am glad to hear they have yet any
obligation upon them to tie them to the King. Yet I know not well what he
means by deserting the King: if he mean it in that sense, which he does the
Kings deserting of them, which (out of question) is his not assenting to
whatsoever they shall think fit; Then in reason, they should not, by their
disallowing all his Proposals, have driven him to dissent from theirs, and so
to have disserted them. Well; But being deserted by the King, when the Kingdom
is in distress, they may judge of that distress, and relieve it. Al their
power then is upon supposition of the Kings deserting them. So that if it
appear, that His Majesty has not deserted them (as many good men believe he
has not, in the redress of any real grievance,) then they have no such power.
And however, they claim this power only when the Kingdom is in distress; but
how, if the Kingdom be not in distress, or (at least) that distress be only
or principally, caused by their claiming of that power which cannot consist
with the Honor and Royal Estate of His Majestly; which all men (by their late
Protestation) are bound to defend. If it beso, we may easily discern how far
they may stretched this power, which they claim only in order to distress; and
that they may make as much use of it, as the Pope does of his power in
temporals; In ordine ad spiritualia. He claims no more, though (some have
said, he has right to more;) and the Parliament will need no more, to do as
much as he takes upon him to do with Christian Princes and States. But they
must have a right to their power in this case of distress; whence have they
that? why, they have it as the whole body of the State, and that they are, and
must be so accounted, by virtue of representation very good. But let us
consider his words a little more. There is no understanding man, but must and
will acknowledge (unless he wilfully derogate from them,) that the Parliament
represents the body of the State, for those ends, for which they convene, as an
Ambassador does the Prince that sends him, in the manage of that business
for which he is sent; But this is not an absolute representation to all
intents and purposes. Besides, whom do they represent? The Body (says he) of
the State. Be it so: but it is only the body, without the head. And if they
were not by representation only, but really, the whole body of the People (if
it were possible, they should convene together) they are all but an assembly of
Subjects, of men to be governed, not to rule, to be commanded, not to command
their Head and Sovereign: and then there can be no virtue of representation
that can advance them to the power, which the Observatour ascribes to them,
when such power was never in the whole body, which is represented. No? never
such power in the whole body? I know the Observatours stomach will rise here.
Did not the Peoples consent, at first make Kings and conveigh power into their
hands? Truly Sir, not solely; but grant it, what then? Marry, he says then it
is a principle in nature. Quic quid efficit tale est magis tale; In English,
Page 2.
If the People make a King, they are more King themselves, or if they give
power, they have more power: and may resume and exercise that power when they
please. Excellent learning, and well applied, I believe he learned this piece
from Suarez the Jesuit. But the Observatour, may know, that that rule admits
many limitations; and surely, it holds only in causis totalibus, which the
People are not in the constitution of Kings. But suppose their consent, did at
first give power to Kings; when their consent is given for them and their
Successors to a King and his Heirs, can the succeeding People cut off the
entaile, and retract the consent their Ancestors have given? By what right?
with what justice? I know not, but the People may contract for them and their
Successors in the conveyance of Sovereign power (if ever they had it in their
hands to give) as any man may in the conveyance of his lands or goods: and that
such conveyance may be as binding to Successors in the one as in the other:
and then I am sure, they cannot have power at all times, and in all succeeding
ages, to resume what they have so given. Our Kings right (so far as it is
derived from the People) is of this kind. And if he had no other grounds for
his claim of Sovereignty, (as it is most certain, that he has) such a
consent once granted, were sufficient to bind the People, that it cannot ever
be lawful for them; by a major part of them (coming in with their Nolumus
hunc regnare super nos) to deprive him of that right. But surely, they would
never make so absolute a grant of their power to Princes as to divest
themselves of it. Good Sir, show me that proviso in their grant. But it seems
to you unnatural they should: I do not wonder it should seem so to you, who
make it agreeable to the Clearest beams of humane reason, and the strongest
inclinations of nature; Page 3.
(and by consequence, as you would persuade the World, justifiable;) For every
private man to defend himself by force if assaulted, though by the force of a
Page 16.
Magistrate, or his own Father, and though he be not without all confidence
by flight, etc. I wish whilst you have such recourse to nature, you would not
forget Christianity, which teaches subjection and obedience, and gives no
liberty; (either to private men, or the major part of the communalty) of
resistance, but says, they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation.
And Romans (...)*
if the Observatour be a Gentleman, he should tender how he has recourse to
nature in point of right, least he give occasion to some Wat* Tyler's
Chaplain, to preach again upon that text: When Adam dolve and Eve span,
Who was then a Gentleman.
He may find a goodly Sermon upon that Text, set down by John Stow in Richard
the second, and such Doctrine delivered upon it, the use, of which would shake
his title to his inheritance, and the name of Gentleman.

POSITION 4. That no member of the Parliament ought to be troubled for
Treason, etc. without leave.

OBSERVE. This is intended of suspicions only, and when leave may seasonably
be had, and when competent accusers appear not in the impeachment.

ANIMAD. 6. His Majesty has said so much of this and so little of it has
been answered, (or indeed is answerable,) that I shall not need to say much.
Only I observe the modesty of this Observatour; that he does not absolutely
say, they are not to be troubled for those crimes; out not upon suspicion
only, etc. I know not what he may call suspicions, but I believe, the best
evidences, may easily be held for bare suspicions, if they may not have liberty
to speak out; and that they cannot have, unless the accuser be first in safe
custody, and brought to trial, where they may legally be produced. And, I
believe, few wise men will think it reasonable, that the grounds of suspicion
of treason, should necessarily be opened before trial.

POSITION 5. That the Sovereign power resides in both Houses of Parliament;
The King having no negative voice.

OBSERVE. This power is not claimed as ordinary, nor to any purpose; but to save
the Kingdom from ruin, and in case, where the Kingdom is so seduced, as that
he prefers dangerous men, and persecutes his loyal Subjects.

ANIMAD 5. His Majesty infers upon this Position. That himself must be subject
to their Commands. This sounds, but harshly in the cares of loyal Subjects;
That any posture wherein they can be put, can raise Subjects to a capacity of
Sovereignty, and reduce their Sovereign to become their Subject. But he
comforts us here, and tells us, this power is not claimed as ordinary, nor to
any purpose, etc. This is but poor comfort, it is not: but it may be in good
time, if they please. He does not say, they shall not hereafter, or cannot
claim it as ordinary, and to other purposes then that he names. So that there
may be other causes, that may make them claim this power, as well as this.
But indeed, they need no other, if it be in their power to declare that to be
the case of the King and Kingdom when they please. But they will never do it,
but where there is a just cause for it; and the truth leads them to it. Truly,
I believe honorably of the Justice and Wisdom of Parliaments; but I do
believe, that they are not either infallible, or that they cannot possibly do
amiss. And the Observatour must bring better arguments; (and I fear, he
cannot bring so good to make me believe otherwise,) then ever yet were brought
for the infallibility of a general Council. But I have said enough for the
present of the residence of Sovereign power in the Parliament, and the ground
of their claim to it, by the virtue of representation in my third
Animadversion. I shall here only give the Reader a brief gloss upon the
language here used by the Observatour. To save the Kingdom from ruin, (that
is, from Monarchy or being governed by the King. The King is seduced,) that is,
he is persuaded (by his own understanding, and other evil Counselors,) not
to part with his Sovereignty, nor to become a Subject to his Subjects. He
prefers dangerous men, (that is, such as would have him still to be their
King, prosecutes his loyal Subjects,) that is, such as would rule him, and the
people at their pleasure.

POSITION 6. That the levying of forces against the personal commands of the
King, (though accompanied with his presence) is not levying of war against
the King: but war against his authority, not Person, is war against the
King.

OBSERVE. If this were not so The Parliament seeing a seduced King, ruining
himself, and the Kingdom, could not save both, but stand and look on.

ANIMAD. 6. I Thought this Position so strangely Paradoxall, and so apparently
contrary to reason, and common sense, that no man would have appeared in the
defense of it. Yet this Observator never blushes, nor blinks at it, but
affirms it stoutly. But for all that, I shall believe very slowly. That the
Kings Person can at any time be without the King, or without his Authority: Or
that they may destroy the Kings Person, to preserve the King. My Faith is not
strong enough to believe these sublime points, and mysteries of State: I shall
subscribe thus far, That war against the Kings Authority, (though in the
absence of his Person) is war against the King: But that the King and his
Person should be in two places, will never (I fear) down with me. But however
I Will see his reason: What Is that? Why else the Parliament seeing a seduced King
ruining himself and his Kingdom could not save both, but must stand and look
on. Surely this reason is full of weight, and ready to burst, it is so big with
probability. I suppose the Reader understands his language here, by my former
gloss; But if we should take the words as they sound, the reason would seem as
strange, as that which it is brought to confirm. The King ruining himself and
his Kingdom, a mad King, or an Idiot (he means) and then 'twere fit the
Parliament appointed him a guardian. Ruining himself and his Kingdom. It is
Possible; That the King should ruin himself and his Kingdom. What? The King
alone? Is he alone able to do it without the People? It is hardly credible? If
he have the people on his side, and a prevailing Major party, I think the
Observator (standing to his own Principles) will not deny that he has
Sovereign power with him, and that it is unnatural to think the Community
should destroy itself. But the Community (he will say) is to be looked at in
Parliament. Well, But good Sir, may not the people withdraw the power of
representation, which they granted to the Parliament; was their grant so
absolute, and so irrevocable, that they dispossessed themselves wholly of taking
or exercising that power, their own proper persons? Remember your principles
about the conveying of Sovereign power into the hands of Kings, and if you can
show no better Cards for their power of representation, then the Peoples
revocable consent, (and I would feign know why it should be more revocable from
Kings then men) you will find their tenure in it very tickle.

POSIT. 7. That according to some Parliaments they may depose Kings.

OBSERVE. It Is denied that any King was deposed by a free Parliament fairly
elected.

ANIMAD. 7. I like this note better then all the rest, and am wholly of his
mind: That never any free Parliament, fairly elected, deposed any King: and I
hope (whatsoever his principles seems to insinuate) they do not believe they
have power to do it, and pray that they may never attempt, (at least, not be
able) to depose the King, or destroy Monarchy.

The Authors Protestation.
HAving finished these sudden Animadversions: I do protest in the presence of
Almighty God, with my life, power, and estate, to maintain and defend, so
far as lawfully I may, The true Reformed Protestant Religion, His Majesty's
Person, Honor, and Royal Estate, The just Liberties of the Subject, and the
Power and Privileges of Parliament (so far as I shall be able to know or
understand them) and to do all other things contained in the late
Protestation. And this I do sincerely, and from my heart, believing my self
to be under the guilt of Perjury, if I fail in any one thing here protested.
And therefore shall never hold my self absolved, by observing one, if I
violate it in any other part. I shall ever defend His Majesty's Person, Honor,
and Royal Estate, as my sole Sovereign, and the Parliament (next under him) in
the highest capacity of Subjects as the Supreme Indicatory, the great Council
and Body Representative of this Kingdom, And I pray, that all those that do
not join with me, may either speedily be converted or confounded.

Faxit Deus.

LONDON, Printed for William Sheares, 1642.


