AN ANSWER IN Just vindication of some religious and worthy Gentlemen of
Pembrokeshire.

Against a scandalous Pamphlet published in print by one John Poyer late Mayor
of Pembroke.

Set forth by such as have been eyewitnesses of of the affairs of that County,
from the beginning of these unnatural wars, who love Truth and Justice, hate
Oppression and Falsehood.

Auritis denis oculatum testibus unum
Cur praefers? audis nam, Poyer, ipse male.
As also the Petition of Mr. Nathaniel Cradock, a very godly Preacher to the
Honorable Committee of the House of Commons in Parliament concerning plundered
Ministers, of intolerable abuses done him by the said John Poyer, with several
Orders, Certificates, and Letters concerning that business.

London Printed, 1646.

To the Reader.
THe following Vindication was drawn up and finished within three days after
sight of the Relation, and was presently intended for the Press; but there
being a rumor of a second part to be set forth by another hand within few
days, it was thought fit to expect that also for preventing trouble of a
second Impression. This second has not yet appeared, and therefore it is
requisite no longer to defer the dis-abusing of them that have seen and read
the Relation, who by this time perchance have passed their verdict, and taken
all for granted, because not gainsayed. The Author of the Relation has had
notice of this Answer: and the Reader is moved in arrest of Judgment to peruse
the Vindication before sentence. It Is hoped this motion will easily be granted
by the moderate Intelligencer, who this week has begun to deliver his
opinion in this matter upon hearing of one side. It is presumed the case being
truly stated, and both parties with their proofs heard, will both alter his
opinion in this matter, and keep him within the limits of moderation, which is
very much desired.

An Answer, in just vindication of some Religious and Worthy Gentlemen of
Pembrokeshire.
IN pursuance of the Relation, as it lies, this following Discourse must pass
through these two Stages, Truth, and Impartial Dealing, (both which are bawked
by the Relator in every line) so that if the Reader please to cast his eye upon
the Relation first, and then peruse this Vindication, he will find every thing
in charge either convinced of untruth, partiality, or both. It was long after
the beginning of these unhappy differences between King and Parliament, that
the Marquess of Hertford came to Carmarthen, the Battle of Edghill being then
fought in October. 1642. at which time the Gentry were by him first summoned to
appear; nor were the Summons otherwise then by particular Letters directed,
only to some few Gentlemen of that County; whereby it is evident, no general
appearance was intended. The Marquess declared, his Majesty had received
Supplies of Men, Arms, and Money, out of all other Shires of Wales, except
that County, and therefore required the like Compliance. To which answer was
returned by the Sheriff (a discreet man, now a Colonel in the Army,) and
those few Gentlemen present, That the Irish Rebels did daily infest their
Coast, and therefore neither men nor Arms could be spared; and to the Money
they pleaded losses by Sea, and non ability. With which Answer, the Marquess
not satisfied, commands the Sheriff to summon the Country to Haverford, where
Contribution being motioned by the Sheriff, in pursuance of his Lordships
Commands, nothing was concluded, all Parties declined, and the Marquess went
for England. That negotiation thus finished, a calm continued several months
after; nor was there any such laboring or entreaties for gayning parties to
either side, as the Relator pretends, nor was there any party at all, or
division for a long time after; nor any Commission of Array published or
executed; nor Master Elliot Commissioner, or Master Lort, Treasurer of that
Committee, there being then no Committee in that County. Neither was there any
such thing executed by them, or any such Warrants thundered forth, as is
injuriously related: the said particulars being no other then a fardle of
untruths. And here does the Relator (to save his credit) slip over a great
hiatus and intervall of time (almost a whole year) without mentioning one
syllable of a Treaty, Agreement, and Subscription to an Association with
Carmarthen and Cardigan Shires; wherein to prevent the Lord Herberts Command
over those Counties, (who was a notorious Papist, and had Commission from the
king to be Lord Lieutenant of South Wales) the Earl of Carbery was made
Commander in Chief by the consent and Subscription of all the Justices of
Peace, and Gentry of that County, except only two or three Officers of the
Soldiery, who kept within the strong Town and Castle of Pembroke. And now see
how the Design was laid and carried; some of these Gentlemen who had
subscribed the Association, betook themselves into Pembroke about May* 1643.
and (not intending at first to be seen in the head of any Party themselves)
they set up one Poyer, a man of mean birth and education, brought up by Master
John Mevrick, Customer of Milford, first a boy in his Kitchen, then Groom of
his Stable, after in the Trade of a Glover, one of such impudent rudeness,
that few Gentlemen (though desirons to have served the Parliament, and have
made their abode in that Town) could endure his insolency. Now was Poyer made
forthwith Deputy-Mayor of Pembroke, (though the Mayor himself resided in
Town) he commands all, first violates the Peace, goes with some Horse to
Tinby, a Town then well affected, and (pretending a friendly visit) seizes
upon the Ordnance, drives the Townsmen into the Steeple, then departs jeering
at their distracted fears, without any Guard left for preserving the Town for
the Parliament. Hence the source and fountain of that Counties calamity, and
of Poyers rising. Hereupon the Mayor and Aldermen of Tinby (thus affrighted)
call a Council, where is resolved, that two of them, (viz.) Thomas Wyat Mayor,
and Evan Long Alderman, should ride to the Earl of Carbery, who accordingly
did the day following, and procured him to send down two Companies of Foot,
which are received, and Tinby Garrisoned for the King. All this was so suddenly
done, in the midst of Harvest, 1643. that the whole County stood amazed in
great perplexity; the occasion whereof proceeded merely by that ill carriage of
the Deputy Mayor of Pembroke, yet by the Relation injuriously cast upon Master
Lort and Master Elliot, who were then many miles absent, and in no wise privy
to any part of the design. After this, not many days passed before the Earl
of Carbery and Judge Jenkins came with Supplies of Horse and Foot to Tinby, the
Judge being sent (as was conceived by many that knew the Earls carriage and
inclination) of purpose to observe the others actions and demeanor: The Judge
frames the Warrants, and the Earl subscribes the Summons, first to the Gentry,
after to the rest of the County. Some of the Gentlemen (that had formerly
subscribed the Association) appear either there or at Haverford; some few of
the Subscribers keep in Pembroke, yet with correspondence, relation of
friendship, and presents to the Earl at Tinby. In October following, Poyer
(raised from his deputation to be Mayor Paramount) subscribes an Instrument,
whereto he affixes the Town Seal, in haec verba. (viz.)

WE the Mayor, Bailiffs, Burgesses and Inhabitants of the Town of Pembroke,
whose names are subscribed, do sincerely, on the faith of loyal Subjects,
declare, That we will, with our lives and fortunes, defend his Majesty, his
royal person, Crown and Dignity; and for the Town and Castle of Pembroke, we
do further declare on the like faith, That we shall to the utmost of our
endeavor, preserve and defend the same, against all such as shall force a
Garrison on the said Town and Castle, and all other Forces under the name of
King and Parliament, or any other. And we do further declare, That we will keep
the Town and Castle for his Majesty, and no other; And we do heartily desire
the wonted Trade and Commerce with the County and Towns therein, and our
neighboring Counties and Towns, as also a free Trade and Commerce by Sea and
Land. For assurance whereof we have fixed, etc.

Which Instrument was by him sent to the said Earl at Tinby, to be presented
his Majesty, which was done accordingly. Thus was the state and condition of
that County in October, 1643. before the Oxford journey, which is not mentioned
in the Relation, till after a preposterous insertion of some of the Mayors
vain glorious acts and achievements; by which method, as well as by the style
of the Relation, partiality of the discourse, and by the dispersing the Books
with his own hand to his acquaintance in London, the reader may perceive, the
late Mayor of Pembroke does appear himself to be the notorious Relator.

To proceed, therefore to unveile the naked truth, and wipe off the fucus he
has put upon his seeming glorious actions. Whatsoever the Relator says to the
contrary, Pembroke had both Walls and Gates repaired long before, Tinby,
Haverford West, and Carew, were secured; nor were those places secured, but by
the said Earls and Judge Jenkins means, and by their Forces, after the taking
of Tinby. Nor were the said Walls or Gates repaired at the charges of the said
late Mayor, the mentioned Ship being not his, but properly belonging to one
Jenkins of Cowbridge, and the decayed Walls were repaired by the Inhabitants
respectively, as every part fronted their Burgesses.

Captain Swanley, at his first coming, paid for what Victual he had of the
Country, and was forced to depart for want of more. The Ship so much discourst
of in the Relation, for the rare manner of surprisall, was indeed no prize at
all, but the Vessel afterward restored (by Order) to the owners, and the
valiant surprise was in truth by drinking the Captain drunk, which the
Relation attributes to Gods blessing and the Mayors virtue. Then follows the
second adventure upon another small Ship without Guns, related to be taken by
Vollyes of two small Pieces of Ordnance and Musketeers in two Boats, which
indeed was a remarkable piece of gallant service: This Vessel (now furnished
with men and Arms, having none before) takes another, laden with Salt; and all
this his own every groat, no part accounted for to the State, either of Ship
or Goods, yet has he the face now to petition the Parliament, for no less
then four thousand pound disbursments, which is desired may appear in
particulars, that the State be not cozened; as also what Receipts in balance.
But to proceed, The Relation sets forth these gallant actions, done before the
going of Sir Richard Philips, Master Lort, Master Elliot, and Master Bowen, to
Oxford, which is as true, as that they had presented the King with great sums
of money, and desired a Commander in chief, etc. then which never was printed
Story of less truth; for these Gentlemen, with Sir Hugh Owen, Burgess of the
Parliament for Pembroke, and Master Lewis Barlow, (whom the Relator partially
mentions not) were compelled much against their frequent and earnest desires,
with threats of present imprisonment, and loss of their Estates (then in the
Enemies power) to go with the Earl in nature of disaffected persons to his
Majesty, as appeared by the Kings confinement of them at first sight, and their
great expense and long continuance at Oxford, before they could be discharged,
having not carried with them so much money as did defray their eating charges.
Where, during their abode, they were all frequently reviled openly, called
Traitors and Roundheads, and otherwise abused; and yet they would not pay any
Fines, nor take pardons as some others of that County did, and importuned them
to do the same.

And touching a Commander in chief, the Association long before Subscribed, had
determined that, and the Earl of Carbery was Commissioned accordingly, and did
execute the place some Months before the Oxford journey; but the sending of
Shipping with Ordnance and Ammunition from Bristoll to secure the Harbor of
Milford, was done by Sir John Pennington, one whom they never knew, nor had any
knowledge of, nor action in, that design, as the Relator falsely and
maliciously suggesteth. And now the Relator mentions Mr. Lorts House
garrisoned, which in truth was no other then by his own Servants, not a
Soldier of the Kings party there; and this defense made for preservation of
his Goods, occasioned by the Mayor of Pembrooks threats of plundering and
actual taking away of his Cattle.

Mr Bowens House was not garrisoned by him, but by the Earl of Carbery, yet
charged upon Mr Bowen in the relation: which is as true as that five hundred
pound was proffered for the Mayor of Pembrooks head: Credat Judaeus Apella: for
those that knew the Mayor can assure the Reader, the Enemy might have had him
theirs soul and body better cheap. Now comes Captain Swanley into the relation
and Harbor the second time, at whose arrival (and not before) the Relator
begins to mention Major General Laugharns first motion in the Parliaments
service, and his Commission of Colonel from the Earl of Essex, who joining
with the Relator (mark the arrogance) and some few Seamen, stormed the Houses
of Stackepool and Trelloyne. Thus the Relation. But the truth is, Admiral
Swanleys arrival (whom the Relator slightly mentions here, and disgracefully
elsewhere) was the prime isntrumental cause of the Parliaments Successes in
those parts. And his Seamen under the Command of Captain Whitty had the
mannagery of the active part of the Service in taking of the two mentioned
Houses, and Pill, and Tinby. Nor was there any achievement in those times
wherein the Seamen had not at least their equal share of Honor: witness the
Relations in Print. As for the Author of this new Relation, he was not at the
taking either of the Houses, or the Pill Fort, as is untruly by him alleged,
but was then safe within the walls of Pembrook Town and Castle: indeed at Tinby
Siege he at last appeared, where when he saw the Enemy give fire, he was
observed to duck his head. But the Relation proceeds to Trelloyne House, which
was taken not by Storm, as is related, but by Composition; nor was the House
of Mr Lort Stormed; but taken by a wyle, and plundered while Mr Lort was in
Tinby detained, and confined within that Town by the then Governor thereof;
because he would not declare himself for the King against the Parliament, and
admit a Garrison of the Kings Soldiers into his House of Stackepool.

Shortly after the advance to Carmarthensheire, Laugharn Castle taken by the
Mayor of Pembrook, is related as a special note of his Service done in absence
of the General (a most valiant piece) there being then neither Enemy nor
resistance. And now from Laugharn at the March to Carmarthen, he wonders where
the Pembrooksheire Gentlemen are, when surely he cannot, without malicious
blindness, but see all present that were able to march. And Sir Richard
Phillips with his two sons: and Mr Elliot in the head of a Reserve of Horse at
the conflict, before the Town was gained: only Mr Lort being extremely
plundered of his Horse, and Arms, etc. was before the advance bound for London,
with Admiral Swanley, who was then sent for home by the State. Here the
Relator maliciously upbraids Captain Swanley for feasting and entertaining Mr.
Lort a Shipboard after his voluntary coming in, according to the Declaration
of both Kingdoms, and taking the National Covenant, who since that time has
served the Parliament with all faithfulness and integrity, and in conformity
to their Ordinances and Commands: Whereas the Mayor of Pembrook in September
last did feast the Cavaliers upon a Fast Day, and drink himself and them drunk
in a beastly manner, but must be past by in filence. He proceeds to relate the
coming down of Gerrard, where he inserts himself as well in the defensive as
the active part of that War, whereas in truth he seldom stirred out of
Pembrook, (where the Enemy came not all that Summer) nor did ever charge any
Enemy in his own person. He talks of buying Arms at unreasonable rates out of
the Ships for the men he entertained, which Arms he afterward compelled the
poor Country Neighbors to pay for, at more unreasonable rates then he bought
them. A little after he falls upon Captain Swanley again, and Captain Smith,
enviously jeering at their Gold-chains, falsely and arrogantly terming himself
the Actor, them but Assistants to the service of those parts. All which, how
varying from truth, let the reducing of Pill-Fort, and Tinby demonstrate, with
the Action wherein Captain Smith was slain.

In the same page with the like impudence, he charges Mr Elliot, Mr Lort, and
Mr Bowen, with the chiefest delinquency in that County. And first says they
were sworn to the Kings party; whereas in truth they never took any Oath at all
but the National Covenant, and as Committees of Parliament since these Wars
began. Secondly, that they were the causers of all the bloodshed of those
parts; which is a thing so notoriously false, that an invention purely hatched
in Hell cannot add to the forgery; nor can any instance be given, wherein any
of them were at any time the cause of shedding blood. The succeeding Narration
is hammered in the same forge; he tells the Reader that (after Captain Swanleys
last arrival) the new Committee questions him at Haverford, by what Authority
he raised the Forces in Pembrook: Whereas this Question was never raised by the
new Committee at Haverford or elsewhere; but by the old Committee at Pembrook
(long before Captain Swanleys last return) upon the motion and desire of the
General there in person. To which the Mayor replied, that the Committee had no
power to examine him, or to sit in that Town; and though the Ordinance of
Parliament was then read, and showed unto him, he would not obey. Whereby the
Committee were compelled to depart, and to keep their residence at Haverford,
within three miles of Gerrards head-quarter. Whereupon the Major General
collecting the Relators aim to be independent to his Commission, makes
Lieutenant Jones Captain of the Troop which formerly went under the Relators
Command.

And now he sets forth in his Relation that the troops of Horse and Dragoons,
with the Arms, were his own proper Goods; whereas the contrary is a known
truth, that both Horses and Arms were taken up by him out of that County
without any consideration given (to this day) by him or any other. And for the
payment of these men, their proportion did many times exceed the other
Soldiers pay, even to the hazard of mutiny. As for the Committees carriage in
that County, it has been without self ends, their attendance in the Service
being hitherto wholly upon their own private purse, and not upon the public
Charge. They have not been backward in laying sums upon themselves
particularly for the public use, besides the payments of their proportion
respectively in every General rate with the Country. Nor has any Committee
in England more willingly engaged their estates for the maintenance of this
Cause; as appears by several great sums borrowed by them of several persons
in London, and elsewhere, for the service of the State. For which already some
of them have been imprisoned here, and others (if not prevented by the State)
like to suffer. What Committee of other Counties have willingly given so much
free quarter in their own Houses as they have done to the Soldier in that
County? This and much more will be made appear, to the shame of the false and
scandalous aspersions of the impudent Relator.

Upon the second advance to Laugharn it is also most untrue, that the
provisions sent from Pembrook to the Army were any other then the Country
Store. The Ammunition likewise related to be purchased by the Mayors purse, was
of Captain Swanleys Ship provision, and the States goods; whereof the Relator
has yet great quantities left unspent, and none hitherto accounted for; and
though he has been by Warrant sent for to that end by the Committee of
Accounts, yet has he contemptuously disobeyed, run out of Town, and made no
appearance.

In the next place, one falsehood again appears in the neck of another: First,
he says Laugharn Castle was taken by Storm: how was it then, that the
Governor and Soldiers departed upon quarter? Secondly, the Relator says he
marched to Cardigan with the Army, and there took both Town and Castle by
Storm; How came it then to pass that he did not come within twenty miles of
the Town and Castle of Cardigan from the first to the last of that Seige? but
perfideously attempted to draw the Soldiers home to Pembrook from the Major
Generals Army, because he was not permitted by the Soldier to carry away the
plunder he had engrossed at Laugharn. As touching the Committees sending to the
Relator to deliver up Carew Castle to Sir Richard Phillips, it is answered,
they did it upon good grounds, and by consent of the Major General; but that
Sir Richard had formerly delivered it up to the Enemy is most abusively false.

In the next Section he acquaints you, that he had exhausted his own Stock by
clothing, paying, and maintaining his men. His own stock before these Wars
could not be exhausted, being no visible thing, either in Land or Goods; and
the truth is, the clothes his men had, were received by him of the Committee,
and the money which he paid them (if any) was out of Rents belonging to the
State collected by him, and refused to be accounted for; which was the cause
that (by general Vote of the Committee) he was stayed by Captain Swanley: yet
to this day has he obstinately refused to account. Concerning the stopping of
his man and Letters to the Parliament, there was no such stop or directions
from the Committee, but both man and Letters did pass without contradiction;
Nor had Captain Swanley reason to deliver him clothes and Salt, or what else of
the States Goods by him desired, without Order of the Committee, which was by
the Relator scorned and despised: yet now the Relator desires, whatsoever has
been acted by him without order (though maliciously, and of set purpose) may
not be interpreted by the Parliament to be done in contempt of their power; but
rather to impute it to his want of knowledge and necessity: and then appeals to
his Actions (which if you will believe him) were chiefly for the public good;
when in truth his endeavors were for self ends merely, and to color rapine.

Thus has he brought the Story down to Gerrards return in April last, and
skipping over his loss of Carew Castle, falls upon the Committee (his old
friends) who instead of assisting him (he tells you) some ran to the Enemy
(these would be known) others ran a shipboord (these could do no less) the
Relators abusing of them a little before, and the drunken rule he kept in
Pembrook, was motive sufficient to avoid coming thither: but more of that anon.
The correspondence with Gerrard, and the Committees leaving word at their
Houses, that they were prisoners aboard the Ships, with Captain Swanleys not
affoording Ammunition, while to be spared, is the Relators own fiction. But
that some of the Committees aboard betook themselves to London, seeing the
Country fired by the Enemy, is confessed, yet not acknowledged an offense,
because they had the consent of most of the rest of their fellows to go
thither, and to represent the sad condition of the County to the State, who did
accordingly solicit for relief and procured it. Good reason had they (at their
coming to London) to complain of the Relator for beating, and thereby expelling
their Ministers out of the Country, and for other public and personal
abuses; his tyranny over the well affected being not inferior to Gerrards
cruelty.

Now follows in the Relation the Seige and defense of Pembrook, where assuming
all to himself, he mentions not the Major General until Colby-moore Victory,
and there would share in the honor of that Action too, although many miles
absent from the place. After this he tells you of the reducing of some places,
and leaving his men with the Major General (no small favor you will say) passing
many dangers in his journey, he at last arrives in London; where no sooner
come, but he presently boggles at the Committee of Pembrookesheire. Then he
talks of (he knows not whom) but still they are of the Committee, that sure,
'twas they that called him out of his name at the Parliament-doore, though none
of them there: yet resolved it is, it must be they or no body. And the Lord
Mountnorris, a person of known eminent integrity and impartialitie in the
ways of public Justice, and opposition of tyranny and oppression (because
father in law to Mr Lort) is brought in by the Relator in a parenthesis stuffed
with untruth; wherein he falsely sets down that Mr Lort was forced by him to a
compliance with the Parliament; whereas the Relator appeared not in any Service
out of the Town of Pembrook until after Mr Lort took the National Covenant,
who came in voluntarily to Captain Swanley, and was received by the Admiral
and Committee, according to the Declaration of both Kingdoms, in Febr. 1643.
But the Relation sets forth that the thing objected by the Committee, and their
friends here against the Relator, is, that he is a mean man, and has acted
without Commission, not fit to be trusted; which whether true or false, let the
impartial Reader pass sentence upon perusal of this vindication. And now for
a farewell, he bids defiance to his accusers in proving any disservice to the
public, though he confesses some faults, but in implicit terms. Here shall
issue be joined with the Relator, and now having run through the substance of
the whole Relation, the Reader is desired to peruse the Epitome of the Relators
behavior in that County laid down briefly thus.

The manner of his Rise is already set forth; his endeavor since has always
been to ingrosse plunder in all places to the advance of his private interest,
whereof nothing has come amiss of what kind soever, though contrary to Order,
(viz.) Arms, Iron, Lead, etc. in August 1644. great store of Wheat, Malt, and
other provision brought into the Garrison of Pembrook, he converts it into
Biscuit and drink, sels it to his own use. The like he did with Corn brought in
by the Country for provision of Carew Garrison, and when he had sold it,
billetted the Soldiers of that Garrison abroad on the poor adjacent
Inhabitants upon free Quarter. If at any time he heard the Committee had
sequestered (according to Ordinance of Parliament) any Malignants estate near
Pembrook, thither would he go with Armed men, carry away, and sell the wood,
corn, cattle, etc. in mere contempt of Parliament, and for his own private
unjust gain. If he could learn where any Money was to be had in the
neighborhood, he commands the party, though well affected, into Pembrook,
imprisons him until he pays what sum he imposes. This has he done since a
Committee settled there by Ordinance, and thereby has gotten great sums of
money. At other times he plays the Freebooter, takes away all he can lay hands
upon, makes men buy their Freedom, then takes them the second time, terms them
Bumkins, and puts them to ransom as often as he pleases. Abuses the Committee
of Parliament, calls them Common thieves, imprisons five of them at once, one at
another time, runs at them with his Sword, strikes Admiral Swanley to the
effusion of his Blood, while he was in Command there by Ordinance of
Parliament; shamefully beats two Orthodox godly Ministers preserred to two
Livings in that County by this Parliament; stirs up the Soldiers to mutiny
against the Committee, for Money, who with Pistols, Spans, and Matches lighted,
threaten to have their hearts blood, and after abuses their persons in several
places of the Country; He feasts the Cavaliers prisoners in Pembrook upon the
Fast Day in September last, receives the Sacrament, and drinks himself drunk
with the prisoners the same day. Another time rides up and down the Country
between Haverfordwest and Pembrook, and presents his Pistols at all the poor
people he meets in his way, compels them to fall down upon their knees and beg
their lives of him, then rides on in triumph; These are some of the Relators
Services, who before these Wars began had neither Lands nor Goods of value, now
has near 400 head of Cattle, and is grown rich; yet demands four thousand
pound more of the Parliament, and so would injure and deceive the Parliament as
he has done the Country. All which particulars are truths that will be
manifested by clear and apparent proofs upon oath, and have been with many more
misdemeanors presented in Articles by the public Agent of that County to the
Honorable House of Commons in July last, and shortly after to the Honorable
Committee of both Kingdoms. Now let the Reader judge whether this man has made
good his defiance of any disservice done by him to the State.

In the conclusion of his Pamphlet the Relator blushes not to term himself the
mouth of that County to the Parliament, and desires if he has done amiss, the
Country may not be blamed, who have hoped they have served the Public in
serving him, Os durum, A mouth indeed! who can read this without blushing or
indignation that knows the person or qualities of the man? There is a Gentleman
(whom he pleases to traduce in his Relation) Mr Elliot by name, who is by
general consent of the Committee of that County chosen Agent for those parts
(whose merit transcends the Relators obloquy) having lost his whole Estate in
Service of the Parliament, his house (a fair mansion) with his household stuff,
together with eight houses of his Tenants burnt to ashes in August, 1644. At
Gerrards first coming with his Army into Pembrookesheire, himself and his two
sons taken prisoners by the Enemy, and (himself being afterward exchanged) his
eldest Son was indicted of Treason for bearing Arms against His Majesty, and
adjudged at Carmarthen by David Jenkins to be hanged. This Gentleman served the
Parliament faithfully, and has been one of the Committee of the three Counties
of Pembrook, Carmarthen, and Cardigan-shiers for almost three years, and has
had two Sons constantly in the Service of the Parliament, under Command of
Major General Laugharn. The Baronet (whom the Relator traduces) gave
sufficient testimony of his integrity, and good affection to the Parliament,
at the time the Earl of Carbery with his Forces was possessed of the whole County
of Pembrook, except Castlematen Hundred and Pembrook Town, by sending a private
Message to the prime Gentlemen then in Pembrook, to desire them speedily to
send some Foot to garrison his Castle of Pictown, intimating his Gates should
be open to receive them, and that they might with convenience come up by water.
Which being neglected, shortly after the Enemy took possession thereof for the
King without his privity or consent. To conclude, this Noble Barronett, with
Mr. Elliot and the other two gentlemen, (viz.) Mr. Lort, and Mr. Bowen, so
often mentioned in the Relation, did jointly lay hold of the Declaration of
both Kingdoms in February 1643. and took the National Covenant, contributed to
the service of the Parliament proportionally to their abilities, and were made
of the Committee for that and other Counties; wherein they have served the
Parliament with all integrity, and for that Service have had their Houses
burnt by Gerrards Forces, and lost their personal estates to a greater value
then any ten of the Gentry in those parts. Now let the world judge whether in
these times of professed and Covenanted Reformation, this Relator, quondam
Mayor of Pembrook, be a man fit to have any trust, power, or authority over any
who desire to be called Christians; and let them who have countenanced and
defended him peruse this following Scripture:

Prove. 17. 15. He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just,
even they both are abomination to the Lord.
At the Committee of the House of Commons in Parliament, concerning plundered
Ministers, November. 29. Ann. Dom. 1644.
IT is this day ordered by the said Committee, that Nathaniel Craddock, Master
of Arts, a Learned and Orthodox Divine, shall preach twice every Lords day in
the Parish Church of Pembrook, in the County of Pembrook, and shall have for
his pains therein fourscore pounds per Annum out of the profits and revenues of
the Bishopric of St Davies to be quarterly paid. The first payment to begin
at the Feast of the Annunciation of St Mary the blessed Virgin next: And the
Farmors and Tenants of the said Bishopric are hereby required to pay the said
fourscore pounds per Annum to the said Master Craddock, as they will answer the
contrary at their perils, and the Committee for the said County are required
to see this Order observed.

John White.

To the honorable Committee of the House of Commons in Parliament, concerning
plundered Ministers,
The humble Petition of Nathanael Craddock, Minister of Gods Word.
MOst humbly showing, that your Petitioner having for above twenty years
continued a constant Preacher of Gods word, in the parish of Egloyskimmin in
County of Carmarthen in South Wales, upon the lands of the Right Honorable
the Lord Viscount Valentia; in which place the Petitioner did according to his
poor abilities, faithfully discharge his duty, to the good contentment of all
his Parishioners, and adjoining neighbors, as he hops, until he was by the
cruel Enemy plundered of his books, and all his other goods, and forced to fly
(for safeguard of his life) into Pembroke-shire, where this Honorable
Committee taking notice of his distressed condition, were pleased by their
Order dated the 29 of November 1644, to appoint him to preach twice every
Lords day in the Parish Church of Pembroke, and to have fourscore pounds per
annum out of the profits and revevenues of the Bishop of St. David's, to be
quarterly paid unto him, as by a Copy of the said Order hereunto annexed may
appear: and this Petitioner making his repair the 24 of April 1645, to Mr.
John Poyer then Mayor of Pembroke, and in all respectfull manner acquainting
him with the Parliaments designing him to be Lecturer there, desiring his
countenance and protection of him, the rather (with which I acquainted him) in
that the day before I riding through the Town, had a great stone of about three
pound weight purposely thrown at me, which striking my horse, I narrowly
escaped: He at the very first charged me to be a mischievous worker in the
Kingdom, revileth me, calling me stinking Rascal, and stinking Scab, using
many other reproachful and menacing speeches, pulls me from off my horse,
not only trampling my hat under his horses feet, but used his uttermost
endeavor to ride over me; not herewith contented, he draws his sword, and
with his whole might smites me on the head, and then over the shoulders, and
held the point of his naked sword for some while to my throat, swearing and
threatening to kill me, if I would not go along with him; by which means,
being in fear of my life, he enforced me again to take horse, and swearing,
rageing, and reviling of me, he labors my horse with his naked sword, and
thus drives me as fast as my horse was able to go before him, inscornfull and
reproachful manner to Pembroke. Being thither come, I took Sanctuary in a
private house, for safety of my life, from his fury; from thence,
notwithstanding all possible mediation of friends, that he would forbear me
till the next day, being then very faint, sore, and feeble by his evil usage,
he sends, and fetches me to his house with his Soldiers in most
disgraceful manner: Being come before him, and giving him all due respects,
and standing in humble wise uncovered before him, he threw my hat twice at
several times about the House, calling me again stinking Scab, with a furious
and wrathful countenance, using many other ignominious and threatening
speeches, to my great terror and public disgrace; and at last by mediation I
was dismissed, and being forced for some time after, to keep my bed, and not
able to write, I used the hand of another, to show my sufferings to the
Parliament-Committee of that County, praying relief, but could get none
there; but was necessitated to depart thence by shipping to London, where your
Petitioner has, and does still continue in a distressed and miserable
condition, being by the cruel beating and barbarous usage of the said John
Poyer, ever since very greatly disabled in body and mind, not only unto the
public Ministry, but likewise unto his private studies, and thereby
unfitting for public employment, becoming thereby (unto his more than
ordinary grief) very little useful for the present in the Church of God;
and however your Petitioner, most innocent of the least offense, suffered all
these injuries, and many more too tedious and irksome to relate; yet the
authority of Parliament was herein most affronted, in as much as the only
cause of all his being thus cruelly used, was his signifying unto the said then
Mayor of Pembroke, the Order of Parliament for his being Lecturer there.

Wherefore he holds himself bound in duty, to make known to this Honorable
Committee, these both so great contempts of so high Authority, and so violent
outrages and disgraces causelessly offered to him, Gods poor and persecuted
Minister, to the great scandal of Religion and public Justice, so much
wanting in those parts; and humbly beseeches, that in Gods holy Name, fear
and way, there may be such proceeding against so notorious a Delinquent, and
for vindication and reparation of your poor Petitioner, as you in your
Wisdoms and Justice shall think fit.

And he shall ever pray, etc.

A brief relation of John Poyer late Major of Pembrook, his beating Mr. Evan
Roberts a godly Minister.
MAster Evan Roberts coming into Pembrook Ferrie-boat, he sitting in one end
of the boat, and John Poyer in the other; after the boat had passed some part
of the Channel, high words passed between M. Poyer and the boat-men, a while
after before the boat came near the shore, Poyer did strike one of the
boat-men diverse blows, so that he drew blood out of the man's brow with his
cane, which M. Roberts seeing, entreated M. Poyer not to contend with the men
in the boat, least they should all miscarry; and told him, that if they offered
him any injury, he might soon right himself when they came to shore: so soon
as M. Roberts had spoken thus to him, he presently struck M. Roberts two or
three blows with his cane, which he warded as well as he could, but not
without some hurt, and great fear; and hasting to go out of the boat, the said
Poyer struck him again a blow on the head, thereupon M. Roberts was compelled
to hasten away from him, for fear of further danger.

The copy of a Letter written by a godly person to M. Nathanael Craddocke from
Pembrook, the 28. of October, 1645.
WOrthy Sir, I salute you in the Lord, I hope of your kind acceptance of these
my rude lines, though you might marvel, having no acquaintance with you, yet
your goodness being such, as will not refuse any friend, that desires the
furtherance and enlargement of the Gospel of Christ, and the suppressing the
Enemies thereof: you were of late given us for our Pastor by that pious House
of Parliament, but opposed by that vicious man who hates all goodness, and
good men, that he fears will reprove his wicked courses, which is
abominable, and rather grows worse then any way mends; for he that hates to
obey God and his Word, will surely hate Gods Servants, and Ministers, he has
many times rejected the good admonitions of our reverent late deceased M.
Jesop, he showed his wickedness toward him to the end. I need not repeat it,
for you know it, and for your abuses, it was not only to you, but to us who
have had a great loss by his wickedness (I mean John Poyer) he is the
subject of my discourse, who drove you from us, and now we are left without a
Teacher, and have not had a Sermon in four or five weeks, but one the last
Wednesday in September, which was used to be our Fast Day, according to the
command of Parliament, but was left quite by Poyer long since; but as I said
before, on the last Wednesday in September, he going out of his Office
shortly, would leave some show of piety, he thought, caused warning thereof the
Lords day before, of the Fast, and a Sacrament on that Wednesday, and brought
Mr. Rud a notable Cavalier, to preach, who commended them for keeping the Book
of Common Prayer, and not using the Directory that was out, and wished them to
hold fast that Book: So Sermon being ended, and the Sacrament, he forgot his
humiliation and feasted his Preacher, but especially some Cavalier Captains,
and Commanders, that are prisoners here, them he kept until it was very near
night, drinking Sack and strong Beer, (as they themselves reported) but were so
drunken, that they could scarce go, but did reel in the street and ready to
fall, scarce able to get to their lodging from Poyers house: It was a great
grief to me, and some of my friends that saw it, how Gods Word and Ordinance,
is made a cloak for his villainy, and now he is going for London to get to be
Governor of this Town, which if he gains, not any that bears the name of an
honest Christian shall be able to live here. Therefore I beseech you in the
name and for the mercies of Jesus Christ, withstand it as much as you may, and
acquaint the Parliament of his unjust carriages, and we shall not fail in our
prayers for you, and that you may be given us to the building of us in Christ,
which the Lord of mercy, for his Son Jesus Christ's sake grant us, and keep you
and us, to whose almighty tuition I leave you, and rest,

Pembroke, 28. October. Your loving Friend in the Lord.

I Francis* Viscount Valentia, do hereby testify to all to whom these
presents shall come, that I have known M. Nathanael Craddocke to be a constant
painful Preacher of Gods Word, upon my Lands, in the Parish of Egloyskimmin,
in the County of Carmarthen, above twenty years, and that he has always had
the reputation and esteem of as powerful, religious, and godly a Preacher,
both in his own Parish, and in other places, as any in those parts: a man of
an humble and meek spirit, and of godly life and conversation, beyond all
exception; and for such a one esteemed by all honest men, who know him. He was
plundered of all his books and other goods by the enemy, and forced to fly,
for the safety of his life, into Pembrokeshire, where the Committee of
Parliament for plundered Ministers recommended him to be Lecturer in the Town
of Pembroke, but he was there so inhumanely beaten, vilified, and reproached,
as he was enforced to take shipping for London, where he now remains in much
want and misery, being (by the cruel beating and barbarous usage which he
received in Pembroke-shire) ever since very greatly disinabled, not only unto
the public Ministry, in the exercise whereof he was very laborious, but
likewise unto his private studies, and thereby fitting of himself for public
employment, becoming thereby (unto his more then ordinary grief) very little
useful for the present in the Church of God; for whose relief in his
distressed condition, I am an humble suitor to those who have power and means
to grant it, and do conceive it cannot be better placed upon any Divine within
the Dominion of Wales. In witness whereof, I have hereunto subscribed my hand,
this first of October. 1645.

Fra. Valentia.

The Certificates of the honorable Sir Robert Harley, Knight of the Bath, Mr.
Stephen Marshall, and Mr. Richard Vines concerning Mr. Nathaniel Craddocke.
I Have long known M. Nathanael Craddocke, and am persuaded that he is a godly
man and a good preacher.

To. Harley.
BEing desired to certify my knowledge of Nathanael Craddocke, I can do no
less then certify all whom it may concern, that I have been acquainted with
him above twenty years, and that while he lived in these parts, he was a
godly, painful humble man, and have often heard, that he so continued and
walked, since his going into Wales.

Stephen Marshall.
I Do know M. Nathanael Craddocke, to be a very godly man.

Richard Vines.
Imprimatur. Gilbert. Mabbott, Deputat. Joh. Rushworth.


