A LETTER OF Remarkes UPON JOVIAN.

By a Person of QUALITY.

LONDON, Printed for H. Jones. M.DC.LXXXIII.

A LETTER OF Remarkes ON JOVIAN.
SIR,
I Must quarrel you for the Promise you extorted from me of giving a short
account in writing of my free and Impartial Thoughts of the long expected
Jovian. You know we are now under such unhappy Circumstances, that whatsoever
is said or done against any false Pretender to the Service of the Crown, is
looked upon as an Act of Disloyalty. And I may by some be thought an Enemy to
the Imperial Crown, if I go to show wherein one who talks high for it, has
really disserv'd it; But since I am satisfied, that whatsoever mischief is in
this, lies only in the Opinion of those Men, whom I need not value; I shall not
for their sakes, deny my Promise, or my Friend.

I shall not concern my self in the Merits of the Cause between him and his
Adversary.

I shall only show wherein it has suffered for want of a better Advocate.

But thus much is obvious, that if the Prince makes no claim to his Power, in
such manner as he ascribes it to him; this Author is guilty of a foul
mis-representation of him, in putting out such a labored Piece, as it were, on
purpose to promote Fears and Jealousies. But then, if he both is so Invested
with his Power, and will have it known that he will use it accordingly, as he
sees Occasion, a weak and partial proof of it ought to be punished as
treacherous.

For this Minister of London, as he styles himself, who will not allow the
Church of England to be a true Church, Jov. Pref.
unless we own the Church of Rome to be so too. I shall in short make it
appear, that he has in this Book of his, shown himself neither, 1. Logitian,
Nor 2. Good Historian, Nor 3. Fair and Equal Writer; 4. Besides that, he
Undermines the force of all that he would seem to say, by his Concessions and
Contradictions. And then judge what Reward he deserves for his very great pains.


1st. Not Logitian, because he does not, as he should, state the Question. The
Paralelism in Julian, is not, between the State and Condition of Christians
under Pagan Emperors, who Governed dispotically while the Christians lived
precariously, and were always under the Bow-string Law, as now in Turkey; and
those Communities of Christians, who upon mutual Stipulation upon Oath, agree
to keep such Laws as were then made, or after should be generally agreed unto,
according to the Established Legislative.

Neither Secondly, Was it the Question what was to be done to Crowned Heads,
but what might have lawfully been done to prevent the Succession of one of
dangerous or suspected Principles: So that what followed was only
Circumstantial. And if it did not show what might be done by Christians in the
like Case with those under Julian; at the least, it showed what was the nature
of those Prayers and Tears, the acceptableness of which, some would think, God
Evidenced by his miraculous Destruction of that Tyrant.

2dly, He shows himself no good HISTORIAN. For which I shall take notice of but
four Particulars.

1. (In which he has likewise betrayed great Indiscretion) his producing the
Scotch Act of Parliament for the Sacredness and Unalterableness of the
Succession, without knowing any thing of that scurvy Story of Elizabeth Mure,
or offering at any Disproof of it. 2. His Vouching the Solemn Recognition of
King James his Title in Parliament, Pref.
as an Argument that King Henry the Eigths Limitation of the like Authority,
was void: Crown by the Burnets Hist. 1st. Part.
When if he had read the History of the Reformation, he might have known that
the Limitation he mentions, was by an Inauthoritative Will, the direction of
the Parliament not having been duly pursued. 3. His carping at the Relation of
Sir Simon Dewes, in the business of the Queen of Scots. King James being more
concerned for the fame of his Mother, than of our glorious Queen, caused Mr.
Camdens Papers to be seized, and delivered into the hands of the then Earl of
Northampton, who struck out what he pleased in that Matter; which made the Poor
man lament with Tears, as can even at this Day be sufficiently proved. This and
the Index Expurgatorius. Sir Simon might well know, who being a Man of
consummated Knowledge in all kind of Literature, and Antiquity ought not to be
controlled by one, whose utmost effort, after the Corrections and Helps of all
his Friends, ends in this dispicable Trifle. 4. But then without the least
Judgment or Knowledge of the various Acceptance of the Word. Estate both in
Records and Histories, he falls foul upon the Lord Hollis, and would have it
Treason, because he calls the King a Third Estate. This may be false, but
surely no Treason, except he had said, The King had but a Coordinate Power,
and might be overrul'd by the other. He would suggest, as if the ascribing that
Letter about the Bishops Voting in Capital Causes to that Lord, were a wrong
and scandal to his Memory. Jov. p. 236.
That it was his is past all doubt, he having owned it in his Life time, and
after continued the same Subject, which was Printed after his death, with other
Contracts to the same purpose by others: and if the Dr. had been a man
conversant in that Learning, he could not but have found by them, Jov. p. 185.
that the most Learned and Worthy Author of the Graud Question, is so far from
having made good any Imputation upon the Candor and Veracity of that noble
Lord, that how much soever he may have Obliged the Age by his many Learned
Works, yet he may beconcern'd to vindicate himself against the Considerations
upon his Book long since Published.
3. I shall very briefly make good my Charge of his being no Fair nor Equal
Writer: For this I might instance in his partial Quotations of Bracton, Fleta,
and Fortescue, concerning our English Government, which it lies upon Mr. J. to
show more at large: but I believe this Author would be loath to receive all
their Sayings for Law, though backed with the Authority of the old Mirror to
boot. I shall only evince him to be guilty of a little Impiety in his Quotation
of Acts of Parliament, p. 234.
according to his own acceptance of the word, when he would apply it to
others. You must understand that he splits the Hair very curiously between the
Imperial and Political Laws of the Realm, by one of which, it seems, a man may
be hanged, or loose what he has, when he is Justifiable by the other;

In all Sovereign Governments, Subjects, [he says, p. 245.
] must be Slaves, as to this Particular; they must trust their Lives and
Liberties with their Sovereign. But the Engglish Realm is a Perfect Sovereignty
or Empire, and the King of England, by the Imperial Laws of it, p. 208.
is a complete Imperial and Independent Sovereign, to whom the foresaid Rights
of Sovereignty do inseperably belong, VIZ. As he had before enumerated them.

1. To be accountable to none but God. 2. To have the sole Power and Disposal
of the Sword. 3. To be free from all Coercive and Indicative Power. P. 202. 4.
To have the Legislative Power, or the Power that makes any Form of Words a Law.
Now he chooses rather to prove that our King is an Absolute Sovereign; and
therefore has these Incidents, than that he has all these in an Absolute
Manner, and therefore is an Absolute Sovereign.

But it falls out unluckily, that when in some Cases, the very Enacting Parts
of Statutes, shall signify nothing to Him; yet the most tolerable Proof that
he brings, to show that all the Civil Rights of the Nation are in the Kings
Hands, to do as he pleases with any particular Person, especially (THOUGH THE
PERSONAL ORDERS BY WHICH HE TOUCHES THIS OR THAT, OR THESE OR THOSE MEN, ARE
NOT DRAWN INTO PRESIDENT, AND EFFECT NOT OTHERS:) p. 193. The best Proof of
this (I say,) is drawn from the Preambles of Acts of Parliament about
Ecclesiastical Affairs, most of them against the Usurpation of the Roman See,
upon this Imperial and Independent Crown; and the strongest of them very
unfairly cited.

Intending here but a taste of his Dis-ingenuity, I shall give but two Examples,
and that in 24. H. 8. c. 12. and 25. H. 8. c. 21. He tells us.

P. 108. By the whole Parliament, 24. H. 8. c. 12. it was Resolved, and so
declared, that by sundry Authentic Histories and Chronicles, it is manifestly
Declared and Expressed, that this Realm of England is an Empire, and so has
been accepted in the World, Governed by one Supreme Head and King, having
Dignity and Royal Estate of the Imperial Crown of the same.

P. 213. After the words before cited, it follows, (says he) unto whom a Body
Politic -- been bounden and owen to bear next unto God, a natural and humble
Obedience, he being instituted and furnished with plenary, whole and Entire
Power, Pre-eminence, Authority, etc.

Thus far he. But methinks, if he had intended fairness, he would at least have
Answered the Objection from the following words, which some may take as
Restrictive, Viz. Prerogative and Jurisdiction to RENDER and YIELD Justice and
Final Determination to all manner of Folk, Resiants, or Subjects within this
his Realm, in all Causes, Matters, Debates and Contentions, happening to incur,
insurg, or begin within the Limits thereof, without Restraint or Provocation to
any Foreign Princes or Potentates of the World.

Then the Statute 25. H. 8. c. 21. has no more Plous Treatment than the former.
The words he has occasion for, are these.

P. 212. That this your Graces Realm, Recognizing no Superior under God, but
only your Grace has been, and is free from Subjection.

Now methinks, this is a strange kind of Breach: to say that this Realm is
under God and the King, and yet free from Subjection, sounds a little odly;
wherefore we must look further for their meaning: The Act goes on thus,

TO ANY MAN'S LAWS but only such as have been Devised, Made and Ordained within
this Realm, for the Wealth of the same, or to such other as by Sufferance of
your Grace, and your Progenitors, THE PEOPLE OF THIS YOUR REALM HAVE TAKEN AT
THEIR FREE LIBERTY BY THEIR OWN CONSENT, to be used amongst them; and have
bound themselves by long Use and Custom, to the observance of the same, NOT AS
TO THE LAWS OF ANY FOREIGN PRINCE, POTENTATE, OR PRELATE, but as to the
Customed and Ancient Laws of this Realm by the said Sufferance, Consent and
Custom, and NONE OTHERWISE. It stands therefore WITH NATURAL EQUITY, AND
GOOD REASON, that in all and every such Laws humane, made within this Realm, by
the said Sufferance, Consents, and Custom, your Royal Majesty, and your Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons REPRESENTING THE WHOLE STATE OF YOUR REALM,
IN THIS YOUR MOST HIGH COURT OF PARLIAMENT, have full Power and Authority not
only to dispense, but also to authorize some Select Persons to dispense with
Those and all other Humane Laws of your Realm, and with every one of them, as
the Quality of the Persons and Matter shall require, and also the said Laws,
and every of them to ABROGATE, ADNUL, AMPLIFY, OR DIMINISH, as it shall seem
good to your Majesty, and the Nobles. and Commons of your Realm, as by diverse
good and wholesome Acts of Parliaments Made and Established as well in your
Time, as in the Time of your most Noble Progenitors, it may plainly and
evidently appear.

Now who can help it, if some unlucky Fellow, observing these gross Omissions,
should retort that Saying of the Worthy Prelate, That if he might use the
Scriptures as this Author has used the Statutes, Jov. p. 184.
he could prove there was no God; for leave out, The Fool has said in his
Heart, and then it follows, There is no God.

4thly. HE IS CONTRADICTORY in his Principal and Fundamental Points, or at
least yields enough to destroy them, which are these three.

1. To show that the Parallel between Julians Succession and the Doctor's here
will not hold. 2. That the Succession is Sacred and Unalterable by Humane Law.
3. That the Author of the Life of Julian is out in his Notion of Passive
Obedience; and that It Is as much a Duty when ever the King exerts his
Prerogative, or Imperial Law, as when he has declared any Law in Parliament,
according to the Politic Constitution of the Nation
For the 1. He tells us that it is absurd in J. to suppose that the Empire was
Hereditary in Julian's Time. Pref.
Because limited Inheritances came not in till after, with the Feudal Law; and
not with us till the Normans. and yet he cites Dio, who says, that the Empire
was decreed BY THE SENATE UNTO JVLIVS AND THE SONS OF HIS BODY. Page 9.
Nay, he tells us, Page 78.
that this is an Entailed Kingdom by the Original Constitution of the
Government: that is, it was Entailed before there was any such thing as a
Limited Fee. But it seems, with him, nothing is an Inheritance, but what is
claimed by an ancient Intail: thence he supposes that the Empire was not
Hereditary, because the Emperors sometimes gave it to Adopted Sons and
disposed of it as an Inheritance of their own Purchase or Acquisition: Page 65.
he further will have it, that it is the nature of an Entailed Estate, that it
can by no means be dock't, and the Limitations defeated: which no man can
suppose that the Author of the Life of Julian ought to prove against himself.

2dly. He is to prove that it is not in the Power of an Act of Parliament to
defeat the Right of him who in ordinary Course should succeed to the Crown of
England: the force of all his Arguments for this, is that it is the nature of
Birthright and Inheritance, Jov. p. 78.
which is not founded upon the Statutes, but upon the Original Custom and
Constitution of the English Government, and the Laws of the Government being
Established by the Laws of the Gospel. P. 203. Pref.
Thence God alone is the Author of this Hereditary Succession to the Crown,
Whence some will argue, that if according to the Laws of the Government, the
King may Adopt another in Parliament, God himself would be the Author of this
Adoption. But the main Question is, how this London Minister shows this to have
been the Original Custom and Constitution of the Government. Is it because
this Custom has been derived down without Interruption? That he does not go
about to prove: or does he show how it comes to pass, that Interruptions in the
Succession to the Empire, are an Argument that that was not Hereditary, and yet
are no Obstacles here? Nay, does he not own that this was not the Original
Custom and Constitution, in saying, that it first came in with the Normans?
Pref.

3. He undertakes to show that the Author of the Life of Julian, is out in his
Notion of Passive Obedience; and that it is as much a Duty when ever the King
exerts his Prerogative, or Imperial Law, as when he has declared any Law in
Parliament, according to the Politic Constitution of the Nation: or to use
this London Minister's own Words, That Passive-Obedience is due by the Gospel
to the Sovereign Power, P. 164.
when the Sovereign Persecutes contrary to Law. It is observable that his
Antagonist never speaks of the least resistance to be made to the Sacred Person
of the King, but to Ministers or Officers, acting without, or contrary to the
Authority of his Laws, by which he speaks to his Subjects in a way not to be
questioned, much less controlled: and truly I am much deceived, if this Man says
less in his Lucid Intervals, after some vain Ravings, he has these words, If
by an inevitable necessity of defending themselves, P. 279. P. 280.
he understands sudden and private Defense against an Assassin sent by the
Kings Order, as his Malice seems to suggest, then it is nothing to his purpose,
because the Kings Law, which is his most Authoritative Command allows us (as I
suppose) that benefit, and if it do, it, does not in the least contradict the
Doctrine of Passive Obedience, which allows a Man to resist or use the Sword to
defend his Life, when the Laws (from which I except all Laws destructive of the
Kings Crown and Regality) Authorize him so to do.

This sort of Resistance, you see, is not here excepted as Destructive of the
Regality, but here he yields, 1. That the King in his Parliament speaks to us
with greater Authority than out of it, or that the Political Law is above the
Imperial Law; for by the Imperial Law Subjects must be so far Slaves, P. 242.
they must trust their Lives and Liberties with their Sovereign. Yet this, it
seems is wholly frustrated by the Kings Laws for their Preservation, which may
Authorize the using one that acts under, or by virtue of the Imperial Law, as
an Assassin. 2. By just consequence from what is here granted, it follows, that
if one acting barely under that Authority has no legal or sufficient Warrant,
then he is guilty of a Breach of the Kings Peace, and a Constable, who by his
Office is to keep the Peace, may assist the Party that is set upon, and require
Numbers to join with him, and so they may go from Parish to Parish in fresh
Pursuit. 3. This does not in the least contradict the Doctrine of Passive
Obedience. 4. To the three foregoing Heads, you may add a fourth from another
place of his.


P. 192. Even where an Emperor has Absolute Power over his Subjects Lives and
Estates, as to do what he pleases with particular Persons, he has not thereby
right to enslave the whole People, by altering the Constitution of the
Government from a Civil into a Tyrannical Dominion; or from a Government
wherein the People had Liberty and Property into such a Government as the
Persian was, and the Turkish now is, where the Subjects are the Princes Family,
and all that they have is his by Law.

To tell you plainly, I am almost as sorry as the Authors own Friends can be,
that he should raise all men's Expectations to so little purpose, as any one may
observe by this Just, though General Censure. It Is a hard case that a man
should run the hazard of a Judicial and more Authoritative Censure, and yet do
no Service to any Interest, or to his own Reputation. But thus it often happens
when Clergymen will be hooking in Civil Rights in ordine ad Spiritualia; and
if they meet with the Fates of their Predecessors Sybthorp and Manwaring, they
can be but pityed at the most by

SIR, Your Humble Servant.

ERRATA. Page 6. l. 14. r. Despicable. ib. l. 29. r. Tractats. p. 8. l. 12. r.
Vindicative.


