PATER NOSTER, OUR FATHER. OR, The Lord's Prayer explained.

The Sense thereof, and Duties therein, from Scripture, History, and Fathers,
Methodically cleared, and Succinctly opened, at EDINBURGH, BY Will Annand, M.
A. one of the Ministers of that City, late of Univers. Coll. OXON.

LUKE XI. II. And he said unto them, when ye pray, say, OUR FATHER WHICH ART IN
HEAVEN. August. ad Prob. Cap. 10. Absit enim ab Oratione multa locutio, sed non
desit multa Precatio, si servens, perseverat intentio. Edinburgh, Printed by
George Swintoun and James Glen, and are to be sold at their Shops, in the
Parliament-yard. Anno Dom. 1670.

To the Right Worshipful, Sir ANDREW RAMSAY of Abbots-hall, Knight, Lord
Provost of the City of Edinburgh, etc.
My Lord,
BOoks and Mapps of Navigation, represent a long tract of Rocks in the Eastern
Seas, called the Pater Nosters, they putting the Pilot to his prayers, Sea
Mirror, lib. 1. Demonstrat 4.
I here present a gift of the same name, for the same end, but differing in the
moving cause, there being here no hazard, but security in bearing up, and good
Anchorage; yea, the bearing off from what is here offered in our late times, is
to be feared, was one great cause, why so many made shipwreck, first of faith,
next of a good conscience: conceiting themselves able to make way against, and
weatherout the Rule, So pray ye, And when ye pray, say, yet harbor in the
Haven of bliss, by other gales then those from Heaven; which was foreseen,
Wither Cant. 4. ^.
nay, foretold by a Poet, then almost (because not in this) their own, who
advising for the use of the Lords Prayer, in his Vox Pacifica, hinteth at that
Malady thus, Lest that which might of bliss a means have been,
A means become of letting curses in.


I concluded to have published these sheets without designation of a Patron,
Dedications being now so customary, that they are near to be interpreted
vanity; yet reflecting that at least with Divines they are no younger then St.
Luke, and that Charity and Candor are as cold as were the nights in which most
of them were composed; it was deemed rudeness to suffer this Stripling to
travel without some recommendation to some excellent Theophilus, were it but
for one nights lodging (for, I trust he is better bred then to be troublesome)
After which resolve, let me declare it, your Lordship had no Rival, your
Goodness, Care, Industry in your House, Office and Authority, to, about, and
for the Ministry of this City in general, and to my self in particular,
encouraging me, and promising a courteous acceptance, and enforcing upon me
this Epistle so much the more, that by many it is accounted a vice reverently
to mention the name of a Loyal Levite, whereas your Lordship (more God-like)
will Advocat their cause: Upon which it was judged disobedience against the
Law, and temerity against natural affection, to address my Pater Noster to any,
save to your Lordship, as a common Father of my Brethren, for whose settlement,
as at first you were a Patron, so still continues to be, and that in Solidum.

Your wonted affablility emboldens to crave protection for this little one,
under your Roof and Patronage, where virtuously disposed, if otherwise found
faulty, let it be corrected in judgment, but not in wrath, so shall its Parent
be more encouraged to join in the hearty Antiphonies of this ancient and
honorable Cities Ministry, for your Lordships prosperity and happiness
jointly with your Brethren, the Baliffs and Councillors, adding this as mine
own Hymn, that our Father which is in Heaven, may assure you all of his
Kingdom, Power, and Glory, for ever, Amen; which shall industriously be
pleaded-for at the Throne of Grace, by

My Lord, From my Study, June 15. 1670. Your Lordships Son and Servant in the
Lord Jesus, WILL. ANNAND.

TO THE READER.
IN the composing of these Sermons there were imitated two famous Preachers,
viz. Solomon and Christ, because of the first, sordid, irreverent, and unseemly
expressions, (the Rhetoric of too many) were studiously avoided, being
en^moured not so much with plainness, as to conclude nothing such, but when
both Charity and Divinity must be strained, yea racked, and vehemently
squeezed, to strain the position, and offer it for usefulness.

With the second, the people is not spoken unto without a parable, not to
darken, but enlighten the discourse; and indeed since I knew the right hand
from the left in Pulpit-affairs, such methods of explication were approved, yea
much improved, by that comparison of a reverend Divine, Full. Holy State lib.
2. c. 9
and Historian, lately fallen asleep, attesting that reasons are the Pillars of
the Fabric of a Sermon, but similitudes give the best lights, the Parable of
the Virgins, of the Talents, of the History of Siloams Tower, discovers the
duty of watchfulness, charity, and self-condemning, most emphatically, and
heats the soul in personal application, servidly.

With St. Matthew als, for the most part, I show where it is written, for if I
but light my Candle at another Torch, or borrow one beam from another Wood,
or a rough Stone from another Quarry, for perfecting my building,
notwithstanding of polishing and carving, in gratitude to my Benefactor, his
name is insculped, yea, if from a teeming word, my fancy be so raised, that
with the Lark it soar, may be, higher then my Author attempted, yet as far as
my small notes could allow me, I go not out of sight, until it be known whence
that word came: Toilsome I confess was this search unto me, but if it prove
profitable to any one, I have sufficiency of reward.

To show that importunity of friends, and pressings of my Hearers, occasioned
the Pressing of these Papers, or that my self was pressed until I yielded
their publication, were to cause all intelligent to smile, that complement (not
to say rant) being now so threed-bare, that its deformity (I had almost writ
vanity) is beheld with scorn.

The true cause of my publishing was this, viz. that I found no Act of
Parliament discharging me to scrible, and that my solitary life created some
hours of Melancholy, especially in long nights, the tediousness whereof I
comfortably evited, in blacking paper, on several subjects, and did really dote
so much upon this my Pater Noster, that (pardon the boast) I verily thought it
might do the world as much good, as half a score Books I have se^n; withal
finding few of our country write upon this Subject, and of these few could
never see one, that Treatise of Mr. Wisharts excepted, (which came not to my
hands, until I was within few leagues of shore) To the Printer went I, who, it
may be, was of my mind, and we agreed; Yet for all this, my papers sleep'd a
full year by me, and then growing bulk some (not to say troublesome,) they were
aired, and dressed, as thou, Reader, now sees them. Thy humor I know not, yet
charity enforces me not to conceit thee uncourteous, or uncharitable, but
kind, and Christian, which will induce thee, either, to forbear reading (...)
papers altogether, as unprofitable for thee, ^^on being a Giant in these
matters, or if that offend, a Gamaliel in things Divine, or to peruse them,
with judgment and brotherly-Kindnesse; which is done when thou forgives us our
trespasses, that is, correct the Printers faults with thy Pen, for he Errs, and
the Authors with thy love, for he also is a Man. Farewell.

The Author to his Pater Noster.
AWake my drowsy Sheets, arise you Sons of Day,
Accost with peace, run you to the Highway;
Plead not for Faction, Strife, Debate, but rather
Entice to Concord, Peace, that all my say, --
-- OUR Father.
Unmask this Gypsy Earth, that doting Man
May loath her Blackness, and in loathing scan
Her Comforts shortness, see her paths un-even,
Next, love, respects, the things --
-- which are in HEAVEN.
Th'exchange-bells rings, to Truck, for Trade, they run;
Pride here, Lust there, Attempts to overcome:
He walks as Herod, Centers in Vulgar Fame,
Teach them Hosan', to sing in --
-- Hallowed be THY NAME.
Sad Rueful Projects Harrasseth the Mind
Of plodding Earthlings; God and Christ pretend,
Them boldly check, be pressing, nor be dumb,
They Seek their own, Forgets --
-- THY KINGDOM come.
Some Talk, but Do not, Some Do neither well,
Unfold the Cheat, endure their Anger Fell;
The Edger Disputant, at last wants Breath,
And then persuade him to, --
-- THY WILL be done in Earth.
The Crooked and Untoward Rules men take
(...) Measures by, For Glories Crown forsake;
Move not for Pin-sleev'd Faith, be driven
By neither side, But do --
-- As it is DONE in Heaven.
A narrow Heart's a plague; an idle Hand's accursed;
A doubting Prayer's unheard; a Nabal's Heart shall burst;
Ply you your Plough; I Will say to it God speed,
That Is move to Work; Then pray, --
-- GIVE us our daily BREAD.
Much God bestow's, what Man receives is lent him;
And what Man cancells, God scores out at Reckoning:
Review the Bill, Pardon, ere you be Called for,
Teaching, --
-- FORGIVE our debts, as we FORGIVE our debtor.
Destroying Grins, has Hells black Master found,
T'ensnare poor foolish Man; But Grace has Bound
His fiercer Hands; And to avoid Seduction,
Religious Care does sense, --
-- LEAD'S not into TEMPTATION.
Sin lies at Door, our Eyes are Bent upon It,
Our Hearts respect It, yet our Death is in It,
Nor Power have we t'ward Hands, Tongues, or Devil,
Despond not though, Pray, --
-- But DELIVER us from evil.
As Subjects besecure, if Foiled, yet Conflict on,
While Trump of Glory sounds, --
-- For THINE is the KINGDOM.
Fear not to Prosper, watch the Praying Hour,
Lift up your Eyes, when saint, Receive --
-- THE POWER.
Of Conquering Triumph, promised the Heavenly Liv^^
The Humble Saint, That is, --
-- The GLORY for ever.
That ^nowledge of your Rules, prove no Man's Baine;
^erswade the World with me to Say, --
-- AMEN.
PATER NOSTER, OUR FATHER; OR, The Lords Prayer explained, etc. Tolboot^
Church, Novem. 17. 1667,

MATTHEW. VI. IX. After this manner therefore pray ye: Our Father which art in
heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth as it
is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our debts, as we
forgive our debtors. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil:
For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever. Amen.
AS the Sacrifices in the Jewish Temple did in general signify Christ, and the
Christians duty, so those called the daily ones, Dan. 8. 1^
in the opinion of Divines, did intimate the indispensible duty of prayer, and
praise, Heb. 13* 15.
in which a believer is to be daily, because continually exercised: every
morning, and every evening, Number. 28. 3.
one Lamb at the least was to be offered, and the time of that Sacrifice under,
Acts 3. 1
and in, the Gospel, is called, the hour of prayer; Acts 10. 3.
which Peter and John, and Cornelius observed; and about that time also was the
vail of the Temple rent, a [symbole] of the abolishment of all Jewish rites,
and of that future confidence which all Nations might have in their immediate
access unto God; in which the believers delight, and the penitents comfort,
Jonah 2. 11.
has since stood, which made our Saviors Disciples desire to be instructed in
that duty, by their Master, and are advised not to go to Jerusalem, Luke 11. 2.
but look upward where ever they be, and say, Our Father, etc. And what he said
to them in private, he said here publicly to the multitude, After this manner
pray ye, Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

Purposing to enter upon a discovery of some of those grand truths folded up in
the Lords Prayer, It may prove advantageous to imitate men in the opening of a
curious Cabinet, first view the carved out-work, and then the particular
excellencies of each single Drawer: and therefore it is proper to speak of
Prayer in general, which shall open our understandings, the more prosperously
to apprehend the [fecundity] and special rarities locked up in the Lords Prayer
in particular.

In pursuing of which design, we shall in these following Sections consider, 1.
what Prayer is, and its being. 2. Its effects and concomitants. 3. Its
obstacles and hindrances. 4. Its duty and necessity. 5. Its root and trial.

SECT. I.
THe object, Alsted Theol. Cat. S. 3. c. 13.
or person prayed unto, altering the nature of a prayer, has induced the
learned to frame a distinction betwixt a civil and a religious one, the first
being that by which in courtesy something from our neighbor is demanded, Genesis
24. 17.
as Abraham's servant of Rebekah, saying, Let me, I pray thee, drink a little
water of thy pitcher, whereas the latter is the devout entreaty of a religious
soul, for attaining of grace and mercy, from God in his heavenly designs and
undertakings, which from Authors has received several definitions.

It is called a Religious [Invocation] of God, by which we ask necessary good
things for soul or body, and [deprecats] the contrary judgments; thus Abraham
prayed for Sodom, Moses for Isreal's sin, Psalm. 51. 11.
and David against Saul's punishment.

It is said to be a religious exercise proper to rational creatures, Aquin. 2
2dae Q. 83.
by which they reverence God as their Superior, and owns him to be the
fountain of all their good, Art. 1. and Art. 10.
therefore it is truly said of an Ancient, Chrysostom. de O. rand. lib. 2.
that in many things men differs from the Angels, as in Nature, Wisdom,
Knowledge; yet in calling upon God, and speaking to him in duty, there is no
diversity at all, so that Prayer separats us from bruits, and unites us to the
holy Angels.

It is known that Christ is said to pray, John 15 16.
yet it is also to be understood, that he does it according to his Humane
Nature, in which respect he has a superior; and though the Spirit be said to
pray, yet it is by a Trope, because he helps us to pray, Rom, 8. 26.
and aids men in uttering their desires. But when the Beasts and Fowls are said
to cry unto God, Iona. 3. 8
it is not to be imagined they pray, but in a very improper, as well as in a
large sense, that duty being peculiar to Angels and men; and the man who does
it not, seems not to be reasonable, being in that particular more ignorant than
the bruits, in neglecting so profitable, Romans 12. 1 Chrysostom. de Orand. lib. 1.
(I add, so rational) a service, that qui non orat, he that prays not, is
dead in one sense, and mad in another.

It is represented to be a manifestation of the hearts fervency before God,
Bucan. loc. Com. 35.
by which through faith in Christ, we beg for obtaining of mercy, and for
avoiding of ill, or give thanks for benefits accepted, whether in words,
groans, or sighs; whence it follows, that the ten Commandments, and the Creed,
are not given to us, nor to be used by us, as forms of Prayer, which many
ignorant Protestants does conjecture; Luke 1. 28
nor the Ave Maria, or Hail Mary, as the Romanists generally practice.

And that the weakest Saint might be cherished, Greg. Moral. lib. 32. c. 27.
Prayer is held forth to be the bitter groanings of a heart-broken soul, or the
sound of incomposed words therefrom; sor have we not in Scripture as well a
weeping Peter, and a muttering Hannah comforted, as a roaring David pardoned
and blessed? Psalm. 32. 3.


We shall call, and prove Prayer to be a hearty calling upon God, for good
things we, or others want, or deliverance from, the evils they, or we, fear or
feel, by and through Jesus Christ. In which description, there is the Root of
Prayer, it must be hearty; the Beauty of Prayer, it must be a calling; the true
Object of Prayer, it must be a calling upon God; the matter of Prayer, for good
things, the charity of Prayer, for our selves, or others, the only means of
acceptance through Jesus Christ.

1. It must be hearty, if the frame and structure of all our petitions be not
builded on this rock, they will fall as did Silo's Tower upon our selves, Luke
13. 4.
and crush us to death; for if the heart be not good, the very evils we pray
against, will flee the more swiftly toward us, and the kingdom we pray for,
will hasten the more to our amazement; the Pharisees washed their bodies, Mark
7. 3
face and hands, but there must be a clean heart, Heb. 10 21
before there be enjoyed a clear conscience for endeavoring to be seen of men,
is to be debarred from Gods presence, Mat. 6. 5
and frustrate of his approbation.

If with Ieroboams wife we counterfeit gravity and be sober in the Temple, from
the face only, we may hear from the Angel, with her, but sad, and heavy things
though perhaps in no worse language then, Mat. 22 12
friend how came thou in hither.

If Delilah complained of Samson in abstracting his heart from those signs he
gave her of endeared affection, Judge. 16 15
how shall not the furnace of incensed wrath, be seven times more heated, when
God shall get such words, Ier. 18 12
as, Thy will be done, by him who not only demurrs, but impudently resolves to
give it a resistance; the good man is said to have cor simplex, a simple, that
is a soul without solds, being stretched to the full length, that the searcher
of hearts may know, and remark he is prepared to do his will, Ephesians. 6. 6
in its just extension from the soul.

Si lingua, Chrysostom. Hom. 30 in. Genesis
if the tongue utter words, (of righteousness) and the heart wandering about
worldly (not to say hellish business) there is no certainty of profit, and
probably (without a peradventure) the greater condemnation, said one: It not
being the tongue or the throat, Bucan. loc. Com. 35
but the soul whence prayer must ascend, said another, Prayer being serium
animi cum Deo colloquium, a serious discoursing of the soul with God, Are^.
loc. Com. 72
said a third, of which seriousness Agatho had earnest thoughts of; who being
interrogate, Lonicer. Theat. Hist. in Exempl. tert.
what might be the hardest thing in the world? praecep. Hos. 11. 8
replied, to pray as we ought.

2. It must be a hearty calling, as we have a soul to reflect upon the things
we wish, or want, so we have a tongue to call for both; and as God is said to
have a heart to pity us, so he is said to have an ear to hear us, Psalm. 5. 1
when complaining, for which Abraham's praying is called a communing, Genesis 18 ^7
(i. e.) a speaking with the Lord.

Heart speaking is indeed simply necessary and without it no prayer, and by it
alone in some cases there may be a holy petition darted upward, the soul having
naturally a loud voice, yet outward calling is exceeding useful, heart
speaking is Ecclesiastica plane operatio, the Churches work, Beda.
being conform to her Redeemers Precept of praying in secret; Expos. 1 In Sam.
c. 12
but to withdraw the tongue from Gods Altar, Mat. 6* 6
is a defrauding him of his just right, and detains from the supplicant
himself, many auxiliaries, whose accession to his already mustred forces, might
give him abundance of spiritual courage, to fight against all temptations that
assaults him in his militant condition: It does not only more forceibly lay
bonds upon himself, 2 (...) Quaest. 8 Art. 12
not to act against what he prays for, or against committing those follies he
has repented of after prayer, but hinders distraction in prayer, and
vehemently excits devotion, Psalm. 100 10.
even to that ardency, which may constitute a joyful noise; It lets Satan and
the holy Angels know our holy purposes, and resolutions; it provokes to a good
example, and has great influence in discharging of that debt we owe to God for
our bodies. 1 Cor. 6 20


However care must be taken, that the heart speak before the tongue, for
avoiding battology, by the tongue; and to both of these we must join a holy
life, by which we speak both to God, and man; to God, with a Remember now I
beseech thee, Isa. 38 3
how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart; 1 Cor. 11, 1
And to man, with a follow me, as I follow Christ, in doing of which we may be
applauded and rewarded, for praying continually.

3. It is a hearty calling upon God, he alone is a very present help in
trouble; Psalm. 46 1.
and neither Saint, nor Angel, can clear our souls from, or deliver us from
evil to come; as he only is our Father, so he only is to be requested, for our
daily bread, and he being the only King who has immortality, his kingdom is
only to be violently seized upon, 1 Timothy 6 16
and importunatly sought after, and being the Lord our God, Mat. 4. 10
he is only to be worshipped.

4. It is a calling for good things, that is, such things as cannot naturally
have a tendency to ill, as Faith, Love, Hope, Knowledge, sufficiency, for to
ask to be rich, or honorable, may ( as too often they prove) be unhappy mediums,
to extinguish heavenly heat, and cause the germinating grace of God, which was
rooted in us, by the Spirit, to be eradicated and made to languish, under the
most favorable aspects; improving grace no more, then the thorns in the
parable, did advance the the growing of that good seed of the Word. Mark 4 ^9


A Philosopher advised his Pupills, to ask only of God, Val. Max. lib. 7. c. 2.
Exter.
bona, good things, because (thought he) God knows the particular good our
souls has most in pursuit; yet our Savior, a far better teacher, encourages
us in begging, to hold out our finger, and point out the sore we would have
healed, the mercy we desire to possess; Brom. Sum: Praed. de orat.
for Good is either that of glory which we ask for, in Thy Kingdom come, or of
grace, and that either of preventing ill, demanded in Lead us not into
temptation; or removing of ill, which is sued for, in deliver us from evil, or
of grace against doing ill, in Thy will be done, or of nature which we have
grounded, in give us this day our daily bread. Two of which I question if they
were known to that Oraculum sapientiae humanae, Socrates the wise, who prompted
his Disciples to that, as he thought, important advice.

The promises and precepts of God, are to be the main Pillars, to support the
Arches of our requests in the Church, which is the house of God, lest with
Zebedees wife, we ask things incongruous: Damas. orth. fid. lib. 3. c. 24
hence one calls Prayer, Ascensio mentis ad Deum, the ascending of the soul
toward God, for asking some seemly or decent things from him; And should the
incomprehensible treasure of Gods inaccessible greatness, to be set before us,
with a proffer of all our hearts desire, to ask with Solomon wisdom to
discharge our Callings, or with Moses to number our days, Psalm. 90 12
were more beneficial, then Elisha's desiring to die, 1 Kings 10. 14
or the two Disciples to have the right and left hand in the Kingdom of our
Father: Hilar. in Psalm. 53 enarr.
for to the former he never proved negligentem auditorem, an unwilling hearer;
but to the other has, despiciuntur enim orationes leves, Ib. in Psalm. 54
frothy prayers being always rejected: Ber. in Quad.
But for a heavenly Petition, priusquam egressa sit, before it pass from the
mouth, Ser. 6
it is recorded in his Book; and though it be an abstruse point, exactly to
draw an Inventory what good things are to be asked, or to decipher their just,
sinless, and convenient number, yet the ordinary general prescribed Rules are
these, viz.

To pray for heavenly things mainly, and for worldly things modestly: Matthew. 6
33
The first by our Saviors rule is first to be done, that is, Principaliter hoc
unum, Hug. Card. in loc.
this one thing is to be our chief care, in which we are still to continue,
because Time is still running from us, and therefore the most necessary thing
to be most regarded; the glory of God, in Hallowed be thy Name, must preceed
our daily bread, or, forgive us our debts: and therefore first in time, and in
dignity, and in love, are we first ( that is Principally) to be active in the
acquisition of Heavens Kingdom, and its righteousness.

The things below are neither vera, nor nostra, neither things, Genesis 41. 20
nor truly ours, but flying shadows; yet these are the lean kine in Pharoh's
dream, devours the fattening thoughts of attaqueing Heaven, Byerl. Prom. Moral.
in Fest. S. Cath.
which I find one in sickness would not so much as occasion, when after long
lying on his back, it was judged convenient he should be turned, called out,
Sinite fratres, Sirs, Suffer me to behold Heaven rather than a wall, that my
soul may be directed for its journey to my God.

While we are upon the earth, we are to labor, Ioh. 6. 27
but not for the meat which perishes, but for that which endures unto life
eternal; Cajet. in loc.
which meat consisting in vero, and bono, good things, and true things,
endures, because they lead to eternal life.

To pray for earthly things modestly, Matthew. 26 39
is also a commended circumstance in devotion, and fiat voluntas tua, If it be
thy will, must be a curb to our otherwise too heady, too greedy appetites. Pro.
23. 1
It is in order before our daily bread, Thy will be done, etc. Teaching us to
entertain our own thoughts with a dutiful succumbency to the hand of his
providence, Pro. 23. 3
in affording us little, or much, and therewith to feast our selves, even to a
satiety; for when we pray for health, for food, for strength, we must do it as
men ought to set out for a journey, i. e. if the Lord Will. Iam 4. 15
For, tota Fidelium salus, the salvation of all Believers, Aug. de vera Innocen.
and the strength of all their patience, must depend upon, and be stored up in
him who does all things wonderfully, Sent. 33
I add wisely; therefore he, and not our selves, must carve our portion for us,
and say with David, Let God do with me, 2 Samuel 15 26
give unto me what seems him good.

5. The charity that is requisite in our Prayers, will have us pray for good
things, Romans 12 20
both for our selves and others: Necessity prompts us to the first, but piety
oblidgeth us to the other, however men stand in relation to us, whether they be
Kinsmen, Matthew. ^ 44
or Strangers, Foes, or Friends, the Knowing, or Ignorant, Godly, or Debauched.
So David prayed for his enemies, Christ for his persecuters, Act. 7. 60
Peter for Dorcas, and Stephen for those who stoned him.

We have a large Precept to pray for all men, 1 Timothy 2. 1
and he whose charity comes short of that Law, is so much short of a
Christian, and ought to take care that in this sense, there be a cubit added to
his stature. All having temptations, all being subject to failings, and all of
us by pursuing what is too much our own, Phil. 2. 21
forgetting the love we owe to our neighbor, Romans 13 8.
gives an occasion of offense, and really scandalizes one another, which alone
ought to make us rack our selves, and part* with much of our too much beloved
opinions (as Abraham Genesis 13. 9
did the half of his promised possession) that there may be lodging found for
the too long extruded Christian Amity. The party that says the Lords Prayer,
must in that small word, Us, include the large mass of Mankind, and Humanity,
were it but for his own security; he being concerned in the whole number of
Adam's succession, must say, Deliver us from evil, Chrysostom. Hom. 30 in 11. Genesis
Prayer being that Magnus Thesaurus, the best armor of soul-defence, the best
security in spiritual assaults, the greatest treasure in abounding poverty, the
quietest Harbor in tempestuous times, and the surest place of refuge in all
calamity. Which if serious^y considered in evil times, might persuade us not to
say me or he, but Father deliver us from evil.

It was this that gave great consolation to a Ship-wracked King, Brom. ut supra.
who enquiring in a hideous storm, Sect. 29
the time of the night, it was told it was past midnight, called to his
disconsolate associats, Be not afraid, for all the good Subjects of my Kingdom,
and of all other parts of the world are rising and praying for us, and by their
prayers we shall be delivered; and sicut credidit (says my Author) ita
contigit ei, it happened unto him according to his says.

It is without debate, that he who is conscious to himself of his own mediating
before God, Luke 6 33
for others, may in distress comfortably reflect, Psalm. 35 13
and infer that there are holy ones interceeding for him, whose supplications,
together with his own, being uniformly devout, Chrysostom.
shall no doubt act vigorously for securing him from irreparable ruin. Hom. 1.
de Cr^^ (...).
And what before I close, if it be told you, that melius est, it is better to
pray for our enemies than for our friends, the one having a blessing, the other
no reward.

It not being always fair weather with the Saints, not only praying for good
things, but also for the removing of ill, Psalm. 6. 3
must our devotions be mingled, James 5 14
evil things filling up so great a place in our little time here allotted us,
wherefore in our definition of Prayer, we have added

6. Deliverance from those evils either feared or felt: Evil is either of sin,
or punishment, it is either past, present, or to come; and therefore as we pray
for forgiveness of sin past, in Forgive us our debts, 2 Timothy 4 8
so for deliverance from evil to come, or present, in Lead us not into
temptation, etc. But all must be

7. Through our Lord Jesus Christ: His merits is that Incense that must
persume, Rev. 8. 3
which must capacitate our accesses, to become his purity, lest they should be
nauseated by his Holiness; This is the salt that must season every sacrifice,
Genesis 27 27
and except we have the garments of this our elder Brother, we shall not smell
as that field which the Lord will bless, but have with Jacob rather occasion to
argue the partaking of a curse. Act. 4. 12
For in all communing with God, that would be pondered, that he says of Jesus,
as Joseph's did of Benjamin, Genesis 43. 3
except ye bring him, ye shall not see my face.

It is to be noted, Mat. 6. 6
that this calling upon God is either public, Psalm. 107 32
or private, it eyes either mercies received, and then it is called
Thanksgiving, or wished for to others, and then it is called Intercession,
E^^h. 4. 16
or for avoiding of ill, and then it is called Supplication, Psalm. 55 2.
or if either of these for our selves, it is called Prayer; for into these four
is Prayer divided by St. Paul, and each of these are espoused to, 1 Timothy 2. 1
and to be found in the Lords Prayer, and in each Petition thereof.

In the first Petition, Hallowed be thy Name, we pray for knowledge of the Word
of God in our selves, Psalm. 119. 18
supplicate for all Christian Brethren in tribulation, Acts 12 5
we interceed that the fins of our Brethren in seeking their own name be not
imputed, 2 Timothy 4 16
and gives thanks if God has made us instruments in honoring at any time
his. Acts 20 24.


In the second, 2 Timothy 4 8.
Thy Kingdom come, we give thanks for our hopes of Heaven, and pray for the
advancing of his Church, 2 These. 3 11
we supplicate to be strengthened by his grace, and interceed that all may be
blessed by the Word and Sacraments. 2 Pet. 3 18


In the third, Acts 20 36
Thy will be done, etc. We interceed for a through conformity with the Angels,
Psalm. 119 5.
we pray for a subjugating of our wills, we give thanks for the enlightening of
our minds, Phil. 2 12
and supplicat for ardency and zeal. 1 Cor. 14 18


In the fourth, 1 Cor. 12 31
Give us this day our daily bread, we supplicat against poverty and want, we
pray against impatience, Prove. 30 8
and discontent, and interceed for ability and strength, Heb. 13 5.
to gain our bread, and gives thanks for our calling and employment. Act. 9. 33


In the fifth, Genesis 27. 3
Forgive us our debts, etc. We give thanks for the imputation of Christ's
righteousness, Genesis 27. 3 Phil. 3. 9 Psalm. 143 3.
we supplicat against a trial by Law, Romans 10. 1
we interceed that all may be saved, Ephesians 4 32
and pray against malice and revenge. Psalm. 69. 5


In the sixth, Lead us not into temptation, we bewail our bypast sollies, Sam.
25 34
give thanks for our former conquests, interceed for safety to our brethren,
Psalm 122. 7
and prays for the spirit of discerning to our selves.

In the seventh, 2 Timothy ^. 26
Deliver us from evil, we pray for a binding up of satan, Rev. 20. 2
interceed for assistance against natural corruption supplicate against hell,
Romans 7. 15.
and death, and give thanks for our hopes of a joyful Resurrection; and the
reason of all is, Prove. 15. 14
his is the Kingdom, and the Power, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17.
and the Glory, for ever.

SECT. II.
THe effects of Prayer follows in our former proposed order, Alsted Theol.
Cate. Sect. 3 c. 13
which he thought many and good, who called Prayer, Clavis coeli, the Key that
opened Heavens Gate unto us, the Stair by which we ascended to the company of
the firstborn, to the society of Angels, to the enjoyment of our Savior, and
to the bosom of the Father. It is the Arms of the Christian, for by fervent
prayer Moses overcame the Amalakites, David Goliath, Ezekiah Senacheri^, and
Esther Haman.

What needs more? It heats the soul, Hug. Cardin. Matthew. 6 2 King. 20. 6
becalms the heart, keeps off evil, obtains a pardon, procures long life,
restores health, pacifieth God; creats wisdom, infuseth grace, purchases
plenty, delivers from judgment, increases courage, conserveth peace; 2 Chronicles.
20. 16
and shows us what should be done.

Let us see its holy workings for, and upon those three great ones, Conscience,
God, and Satan.

1. It purifieth the Conscience, by opening its sores; the impostumated matter
therein, by long contracted guilt, becomes feverish, and when headed, will
make the stoutest, through pain, cry with the Prophet, Ier. 4. 19
My bowels, my bowels, woe is me, I am pained at my very heart: or with the
Apostle, Romans 7 24
O wretched man that I am! but prayer, as a lance, opens the boil, and by
confession, the putrid matter is evacuated, as in David, thus and thus have I
done, and with the Prodigal, Psalm. 51. 4
I have sinned against Heaven; yea, by the same orifice of acknowledgement, is
the precious balm of a Fatherly Absolution poured in, 2 Samuel 12. 13
in a God has taken away thy iniquity, thou shall not die, Isa. 56. 7
by which the late dejected spirit, is made to rejoice in Gods house of Prayer.

Saint Paul's thorn was so painful to him, that he prayed thrice against it, ^
Cor. 12 8.
and by prayer was strengthened to enduce, and had comfort in the smart of the
same; to teach us that when conscience heats or ulcers, it is excellent to
retire our selves, and with Daniel cry, O Lord, Mat. 6. 6
hear, O Lord, forgive, O Lord, hearken, and do, Dan 9. 19
confideing in mercy upon, and for his answer, Dan, 10. 19
Fear not, peace be unto thee, be strong, yea, Joel 2 32
be strong, assuring thy self, that whosoever calls upon the Name of the Lord
shall be delivered. 1 These. 5 17


The Apostle enjoyneth Prayer without ceasing; it is pressed by a Father,
Chrysostom. Hom. 30 in Genes.
both day and night, yet magis noctu, rather in the night when free from
encumbrances, visits, and most apt to enjoy our selves, then are we fittest to
open our sores Animarum Medico, to the Chirurgian of Souls, in recollecting
what we have been doing, Theod. in Psalm. 4.
and what thinking in the daytime; that by compunction of Soul and Spirit our
misdoings and our negligences may be remitted, and the wounds they made,
healed, spending a solitary night, as Pyrrhus spent his solitude and time; for,
being found alone, and demanded what he was doing, replied, Eras. Apo. lib. 7.
in Pyr. Psalm. 119. 62
I am studying to be good. Which act of communing with our own heart was of no
small account in the eyes of David.

2. It dignifieth God, by depending upon his love: By this we reason with him,
not being dashed for all our scarlet-sins, Isa. 1. 1^
nor desperate, though we have played the Prodigal, because we return to him
who is our Father; it evidencing his acceptance, and his goodness, that we
presume to call for our daily bread; his liberality, that he forgives us our
debts; his omnipotency, that he defends us from Devils; Ioh. 4. 2^
his ubiquity, that we can call in every place.

In confession, we own the justness of his Law, 1 Ioh. 5^ 7
by prayer from the Spirit through Christ to the Father, we believe, and
conefesse the three Persons of the Godhead, and by that submits and sets to
our seal, 1 Timothy 3. 16
that God is true, and the Articles of the Christian Faith, to be glorious,
because, or though, mysterious.

Aurelius warring against the Germains, was in hazard to have a great Roman
Army destroyed, Eusebius. Ecc. Hist. L^b. 5. c. 5
and himself with it, by reason of thirst, for want of water: after five days
the Emperor was told, that the Christians (of whom he had a great number in
his Army) could obtain of their God what they pleased; at the Emperor their
Prince his request, they kneeled in the midst of the Army (then afflicted and
wondering at this gesture) and beholding the Enemy (who had them as it were in
a po^nd) so prayed, that to the honor and dignity of the Christian Religion,
there was not only a plentiful shower for themselves, but hail, thunder, and
rain, to the dissipating of their Enemies, to the admiration of the heathen;
evidencing thereby, ^ert. ad Scap.
that the God of the Christians, was Deus deorum, and the Emperor named that
Legion afterward, the thundering Legion, for perpetuating the memory of that
miracle. And search all the Records of Antiquity where there have been fervent
and hearty prayers, Psalm. 18. 6
God has in answering of them, taken and gotten much glory to himself, and
Praise in the house of Prayer daily waits for him upon that account. Psalm.
65. 1


3. It restricteth Satan, for it resists his Power; Rev. 12. 9
that old Serpent is charmed, and that evil spirit is made to depart by the
music of a penitent's complaint, that Enemy is beat out of the field by these
arrows of the Lords deliverance. 2 King. 13 17
For,

1. It strengthens Faith, by Christ's approach. It was not so much Joshua's
spear, Exodus 17. 11
as Moses prayer that discomfited the Amalekits: if the cross be too heavy for
the Christian, if he call, Christ will be sure to take the heaviest end, Isa.
45. 11
ask and call, and the promise, Here I am, shall be verified, and again,
command thou me, Psalm. 56. 2
shall be expounded, by which thy Faith being confirmed, their needs no fear
what hell can do against thee.

2. It begets experience of the divine love, by the Fathers condescendency.
Psalm. 811 10.
God has always the largest morsel for the widest mouth, and his hand is
fullest to be emptied in his lap, who calls loudest for mercy, for
forgiveness; in which experience causes hope, Romans 5. ^
that as deliverance has come in six, so there shall be help in the seventh
trouble; the most desperate danger, the tenth wave; but once more prayer is
prevalent,

3. In acquiring habits of lively utterance by assistance of the Spirit. Job.
6. 25
How forceible are right words flowing from such, whose frequent practice from
their youth, has made them to be acquainted with this excellent piece of
Christian Armor, Job. 1. 20
Prayer. Jobs accustomed Devotion being the object of the Devils envy, by grace
did so far corroborat it self, that all hells malice made him, but bless God
with his mouth nearer the earth then before.

In short, it made Satan certainly look black, to hear David concluding from
the rescue of a Lamb, 1 Samuel 17. 36.
to the fall of Goliath: despond not then of Satan's recoyling, Iam. 4. 7*
when the sense of the Love of God, by the long tract of glorious experience is
shed abroad in thy soul, O Christian! That famous Fabius Maximus, Coup. Chro.
lib. 2
is said in his Childhood, so to exercise himself in Arms and Arts, when
young, that in age, after times he became excellent, fortunat, victorious, and
five times triumphed. Let a man acquaint himself with God, and he shall have
peace; for, in this sense, to him that has shall be given, Matthew 25 ^9
and from him that has not (i. e. that uses not his Talent) shall be taken
from him, even that which he has. It is not to be ommitted what is added by a
venerable person, B^da lib. in Ezr. c. 10
that, cum aliquid magnae virtutis incipere volumus, etc. In the acquiring of
some singular and important mercy, it is not to be once disputed, that the
just, joining fasting unto Prayer, shall not only receive, but have the desired
blesssings copiously from Gods hand transmitted to him.

SECT. III.
THe necessity of the continual performance of this duty of Prayer, calls and
invites us to give attendance to it at this time, and it is sufficiently
perceptible, that there is a twofold tie binding believers to this exercise: 1.
In respect of God. 2. In respect of themselves.

Our evincing its necessity upon the account of God, is not to be so construed,
as if we suggested, that the narrowness of his power, or shallowness of his
wisdom did indispensibly crave our words, or our postures, to signify our
desire of having supply, for that were blasphemy against his power, unto which
there is nothing too hard: Ier. 32 17
But its held needful, by virtue of the Precepts of God, whereby it is under
the pain of damnation pressed; all other means being as ineffectual for the
attaining of a blessing, 2 King 4 31
as the Prophets staff for the remanding back the soul of the Shunamites child.
And the wrestling for a mercy without this, may cause us with Jacob get a
halting, Genesis 32 31
but never with Israel prevail with God. To be particular, Prayer is
peremptorily required of the sons of men, and must not be neglected upon the
behalf of God. For,

1. His Precepts require Prayer: Psalm. 50 15 Iam. 1. 6
As we are gratefully to laud him for things possessed, so we are required to
call for things desired: And in Scripture these two are joined together; yea,
we are not only commanded to pray* but recte desiderare, to pray after this
manner, Give us this day our daily bread. Forgive us our debts this day. Lead
us not into temptation this day, but this day deliver us from evil, Aug. Dom.
15 post Trinit. Ser. 1
etc. Hence that of a Father, Oration justi est clavis Coeli: Ascendit precatio,
descendit Dei miseratio, Let Prayer go up, Gods mercy shall come down. Albeit
the Earth be low, and the Heavens high, yet God hears the tongue of the
complainer, if there be in his breast a clean, a tender conscience; for as
without the last, he will not regard a Prayer, so without a Prayer he has not
promised a gift. Psalm. 66 18


2. His judgments are denounced against the prayerless. And because of these
shall every one that is godly pray unto him. Psalm. 32 6
For the wicked shall be turned into hell, and all that forget God. Psalm. 8. 17
Such as invoke not therefore the protection of God, uncover the roof of their
habitation, and expose their very Beds, Cups, Garments, their Wardrobs to a
curse; and make that Prayer of the two zealous Prophets, Psalm. 79 6
to receive full satisfaction, Pour out thy wrath upon the Heathen, and upon
the Families that call not on thy Name: Ier. 10 25
where it is observed, Glos. ord.
that wrath is desired to be poured out, as out of a vessel, fury being still
to be dropped upon them as from a vial; he may be angry at his sons, and
wrathful, but pours out wrath only upon his adversaries and foes.

And truly upon the opening of our mouth depends the enlarging of our
Tenements, and if we be straightened in our houses, it is because we are first
straightened in our bowels, not thinking upon God so much as in a dream with
Pilats wife. Since this large promise sounds in our ears, Psalm. 81. 7
Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it, Glos. Interl. and Hug. C^rd. in loc.
that is, enlarge it by desire, confession, and by love, it shall be filled
with my self, and my glory.

3. His truth is only engaged to the prayerful. Heaven may be as equally
expected without holiness, Mat. 7. 7
as mercy can be imagined to come without a duty: And when we seek, then only
have we reasonably a ground to hope; Lyra,
the Precept being Ask, seek, knock, which is done by praying first, next by
welldoing, the third by persevering to the end, which last crowns our devout
performances. Rev. 2 26


The door of the Tabernacle was not of hard Cedar, nor massy silver, but a
vail, easily penetrable, so is Heaven; yet it had a vail, so has Heaven, which
by prayer we must draw aside, enter in, and pleased for atonement; for which his
house is not called a house of strength, Psalm. 73 17
though we be there confirmed, nor of knowledge, though we be there instructed,
nor of justice, Luke 19 46
though acquitted; but of prayer, because in that God will be reconciled.

That man stands constantly bound to this kind of officiating, and advocating
for himself, or others, before the Bar, and sight of God, is clear beyond a
demonstration. For,

1. His indigency makes him look out for help: Job 28 34
He knows he must pay, and again he knows he cannot pay his debts, nor deliver
himself from evil. Can he creat one drop of rain for removing thirst? or form a
morsel of bread to abate hunger? He is, to speak ingenuously, Amos 7. 2
so poor, that ability, wisdom, health, consolation, life, has he none, but
what he must beg for, at the Gate of Heaven.

The Centurion can command his servants to go, Mat. 8. 9
and do this or that, but cannot order his disease to remove, or say to the
Palsy, be gone. When King David had a multitude of sins, he repairs not to the
number of his Troops, but addresses to his Savior for a multitude of tender
mercies: Psalm. 51. 1
All the Royalty of his magnificence being insignificant to allay the pain of
his broken bones, without the aid of Heavens skilful, yea, alsufficient Artis^.

2. There is no other way found out whereby he can get help. When Seth called
his son Enos, Genesis 4. 26
that is, miserable, men began to call upon the Name of the Lord; Christ as man
took no way to be freed of his bitter passion, then a Transeat calix iste,
Father, if it be thy will, Luke 22 42
let this cup pass from me. The Saints being wise men, had but confession and
lamentation, to procure to themselves the best things of Heaven. When Peter was
in prison, prayer was made, Act. 12 15
and Peter miraculously liberated: Cajetan.
hinc clare apparet, says one, It is manifest by this, how successful Prayer
is, when a Pope is in prison; but we say, no less briskly, and far more truly,
it is by this demonstrable, how prevalent Prayer is, when a Church is
afflicted, and a member thereof in distress.

It is true that Dives found out in a pinching strait, another medium for
salvation, by desiring some to be sent from the dead: Luke 16 ^8
But as I intend not to detect his folly, so I trust I need not discuss the
vanity of that surmise; yet remember he took Prayer as the most adapt mean for
the accomplishing the thing contrived. I have not a friend, said a poor woman
in extremity, but I can pray, and that never failed me: All other instruments
without this, are like Jobs friends, Physicians of no value, Job 13. 4
whereas Prayer is like Goliah's sword, None to that. 2 Samuel 21 9
Say therefore, Give it me.

3. No way to have a sanctified use of what is given him for help: Mercies,
Crosses, Sacraments, Miracles, are only by Prayer fitted for us, 1 Timothy 4, 5
and applied by us for good; All is sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer;
that is, by Christ through Prayer; Aquin. in loc.
the Word sanctifying for, and procuring a blessing, to every enjoyment.

Sin makes not only our actions, but our possessions to send forth a stinking
savor, whereas Prayer causes all, as incense, grateful to the nostrils of the
Almighty, Psalm. 141 2
and puts him in love both with us and ours; for which the Church is compared
to Mountains of Myrrh, and unto Hills of Frankincense: By Mountains,
understand the strong fixed and resolute determinations of mortifying sin and
corruption, Cant. 4. 6 Greg. Mag.
and by the Hills, learn to be humble in Prayer, yet fervent, and the soul may
be acertained of a visit from, and cohabitation with, Christ; for unto the
soul thus qualified, the Bridegroom gets him, until the day break, and shadows
flee away; holding forth the perpetuity of his residence, for we may English
that, Aquin. in loc.
until Time shall cease, and Eternity appear.

And that all our forecasts, or designs, may daily imbibe the favorable
influences of prosperous goodness; Cause. Holy C. and Diar. 3 Sect.
it is a pertinent advice of one, to begin every day, with the duties of
Adoration, Thanksgiving, Charity, Contrition, Petition; to press which, upon
other considerations, do but reflect upon Prayer in its easiness, sweetness,
and suitableness.

1. The easiness of it upon our part. Prayer makes the soul keep always
Holy Day, and save for it, Phil. 4. 6
we are to be careful for nothing. There are many dark thoughts in some about
the issues of death, the fruits of sin, the weakness of flesh, the remissness
of duty, the vexations of the world; but Prayer husheth all, by making request
of God, and pouring forth the sense of the spirit before him, and says to such,
as the three Children to that Heathen King, Dan 3. 16
We are not careful to answer thee, or you, in this matter. Fox Act. and Monn.
in Laur. Saunders
Pray, pray, (said an English Martyr to his Wife) I am merry, and I trust I
shall be merry, maugre the teeth of all the Devils in hell; Pray* pray, pray,
etc. This mean made the holy Martyr, in lingering flames, to cry, Welcome life,
welcome everlasting life.

Daniel fought not with the Lions, but prayed, Dan. 6 23
and he was in the Den; Hezekiah purged not for his disease, and he was in the
bed; Luke 23 42
the converted Thief strugled not for life, but prayed, and he was on the
Cross. And where ever the Christian be, he can erect an Altar for himself,
Chrysostom.
yea, though he bow not the knee, Hom. 79 ad Pop. Antio.
not list up his hand, nor smite upon his breast, yet if he list up his soul,
he offers an acceptable sacrifice; which the Servant can do in the Market, the
Page upon the Road, the Butler at the Binne, Neh. 2. 4
and the Cook in the Kitchen. God requiring the heart at all times, in all
places, provided, the Petitioner put not off his devotion to these places and
times.

2. The sweetness of it upon Gods part; He is our Father, a word of delight;
which is in Heaven, a place of pleasure, to which our prayers ascending, Cant.
3. 6
are compared to pillars of perfume, and they refresh the soul; to Music, and
that delights the ear; Binch.
to Noah's Dove, Mel.
that brought the Olive branch; to Moses Rod, Theol. loc. 29 c. 8
that procured water in time of thirst; to the Cloudy Pillar, that directed
Israel to Canaan; to Sampsons Iaw-bone, that slew the Philistines; to Jacobs
Ladder, by which we exhilerat the Angels, and ascend to their God and our God;
1 Samuel 16. 23
and to David's Harp, by which we make the evil spirit depart from us,

The famine in Canaan made Jacob send to Egypt for corn, Genesis 42. 1
and that gave him tidings of his sons great honor, and it revived the spirit
of the old man, that Joseph was alive, and in him he had the good of all the
Land of Egypt before him: So has the Christian, through Christ in Heaven; and
Prayer must be sent, Genesis 45 20
as a Messenger, to return some of the fruits thereof, that we die not.

3. The suitableness of it upon all parts, if you eye the Christians Head, the
Believers Lord, the Souls Bridegroom, Ioh. 17 19
the Churches Spouse, Gods Son, Salvations Captain, the Worlds Messiah; Prayer
is the only path he traveled in, and therefore the road we ought to observe,
and the main tract in which the Chariot-wheels of our zealous desires ought to
run, and the sole coin to be told down, when we take up mercy: Luke 6 12
For when our Lord choosed his Apostles he prayed, when he left his Apostles he
prayed: it is fit therefore when we pitch upon an enterprise, Ioh. 17 11
to pray, and having perfected our labor, Phil. 4. 6
it is decent to make our requests known unto God with thanksgiving.

If you eye Satan, Revel. 12 I0
the Brethrens accuser, the Fleshes tempter, the Chruches adversary, the Souls
deceiver, Man's ensnarer, Prayer is so suited to all of these, that it breaks
his snares, detects his fallacies, Act 16. 16
scatters his forces, answers his arguments, and by confession of sin, pleading
guilty, and sueing for mercy, stops the mouth of that accuser, and puts that
invisible foe by this impenetrable piece of Armor, Ephesians. 6. 18
of all Prayer, to a silence, to a retreat, to a soil.

And the truth is, Satan has many stratagems, traps and devices, to charm the
sinner to a security in his killing embraces, Psalm. 14. 4
and to withdraw a heart-broken creature from his God; but among all these, an
utter neglect of, Job 2. 9
or a prejudice against, Prayer, has done him many, and most high
achievements. But this belongs to the next Section.

SECT. IV.
TO give an account particularly of the obstructions, Satan, and Flesh, lays at
the root of a structifying vigorous soul, impeding its buding, or sprouting
forth toward Heaven, in a fervent desire, were a task as easy as numbering
the Stars, or exactly to reckon the sand upon the Sea shore; yet walk along the
Garden of thine own heart, Reader, and these following will be conspicuous;
among many others,

1. Desponding or doubting of Gods freeness, Therefore, let us have faith,
justice and judgment being the habitation of Gods Throne, Psalm. 73. 14.
may and does make some tremble to aproach; And if this alone be considered,
Who will not fear that King of Saints? But since it is, Psalm 89 4
that mercy and truth go before his face, we doubt, because we have little
faith, by which there is assurance of good and not evil in our access to his
presence, mercy going before him, and truth which promises that mercy
succeeding, that may cause emulation in each petition to be its first partaker.
There going before, Theod. in loc.
not only because promised to former Ages, but to assure us who are now
existent, that until mercy be neglected, and truth questioned the Generation
to come, and this present, may have confidence, not to be condemned in the
Throne of Judgment.

The Lord being good to all, Psa. 145. 9.
and his tender mercies being over all his works, made a holy Bishop so highly
press the duty of repentance, that he was (as is recorded) reprehended by
Satan, Sphinx. Theol. Philo. c. 18. de Martin. Ep. Turon.
as vilifying grace; yet that good man thus answered the charge, O miserabilis!
O miserable creature! If thou shall once defist from tempting man, and repent
thee of all thy wicked deeds, I should, trusting in the mercy of the Lord,
promise mercy, and forgiveness unto thee.

What ever, O man! be thy thoughts, or doubts, Know, it is of the Lords mercy
thou art not consumed. Lam. 3. 22.
Despair not therefore, of his tender mercies, but call, and thou shall not be
destroyed, imitate the Leper, and thou shall be confirmed: He creyed, and cry
thou, Lord, Matt. 8. 2.
if thou will, thou can make me clean. In which words, as in a glass, thou
may see the face of thy own prayer, and beauty and deformity of thy
affections. Thou have first, his knowledge, Lord, next, Binch. ut sup. c. 5.
Art. 1.
his patience, If thou will, next, his faith, thou can, his humility, make
clean.

2. Ignorance of Gods condescendency, therefore, let us study Providence. What
dishonest shifts will not some brains sorge, for obtaining a piece of bread,
upon the suppositions, that their being mean, makes them accounted as abjects:
Psalm. 73. 5.
Inferring, that GOD sending the fruits of the Earth, into another barn, is a
passing by them as unworthy of such morsels, when yet God cares for the birds
of the Air, Matt. 10 29.
and they have from him their Harvest, Seedtime, and their Raiment. Let such as
so conclude, suppose themselves to be as one of them, they then shall learn,
that not a feather of their wing, a hair of their head, falls to the ground
without his knowledge, but being men, they are better then many Sparrows.

Let not thy Age, Poverty, Family, question his Providence, for, but for that,
how often had thou been choked in thy Drink, stifled in thy Cradle, Darkened in
thy Eye, overlaid by thy Nurse, Psalm. 22. 9.
bruised in thy slips, dismembered in thy Quarrels, deformed in thy birth, and
damned in thy sin? which put together, Gods filling another house with good
things, argues not his slighting of thine; Nay, hark, thy great and immoderat
desire to have such Trash, possibly keeps them from thee: Study therefore
Providence, and seek the Kingdom of Heavens righteousness, Matt. 6. 33.
and these things, may be, will be cast toward thee; and if not, be regardless
of it, they may be but burdensome, and be content if thou have thy food, 1.
Tim. 6. 8.
though not dainties, and thy raiment, though not gaudy Apparel, with a Selah,
for a poor soul with a morsel of bread, shall as soon arrive at Heaven, though
barefoot, as he who feasts with Belshazzer, Acts* 8. 28.
or rides in his Chariot with the Eunuch.

3. Defect of Christian Unity, and oneness, let us learn Amity. Where strife
and debate are intimates, Iam. 3. 16.
prayer and supplication will not lodge; And it is to be feared in this divided
Age, that not only the horrid clamours of our Tavern-quarrels, but our
pretended religious cursings, Amos, 6. 6.
our inward sinful heart-turnings, our zealous promoving of selfish opinions,
has not only stocked the root of true holiness, that it cannot grow in some,
but has grub'd it up in others, and laid it above ground, withering, being
scorched with the suffocating heat of intestine [supposed heavenly] yet really
hellish broils.

In spite of that Gospel-rule of Amity, Matthew. ^ 44
we can curse, backbite, accuse those that are of not only the same Country,
but of the same Faith with our selves, believing in the Lord Jesus, Acts 16 31
that they may be saved from hell which is below, yet this is not a guard
sufficient, to blunt the edge of those deadly arrows, even bitter words, which
from the bent bow of studied malice, and the most exact aim of time,
probability, and place, is from the arm of prejudice, caused to flee to the
very whit, to the very heart, of them whom contrary to the character of a good
man, they love to malign. Psalm. 15 3


Because they cannot have the Kingdom of God come according to their vitiated
platforms, prays not for its advance at all, and because of that will pray for
their daily bread, that they may live to revenge conceited faults, purposing
never to forgive, groaning under a surmised evil, so heavily, that God has
not, nor shall not have, any glory by its sending, in regard they suffer not
patiently, nor soberly, because they walk not charitably, Tert. Apo. c. 32
as the Primitive Christians did, when they had really Heathens to be their
persecuters; at which time, pro omni statu, they prayed for all men.

How much better Raimundus, who dwelt so much about, Cause. Holy Court Pas. Sec.
13
and delighted so much in love, that he answered all questions by it, as whence
he came? from love, Whither he was going? to love, etc. O! let us desire that
brotherly love might begin, Heb. 13. 1
O! let us desire that brotherly love might begin and next study that it might
continue, I may say with one, Iam saepe dixi fratres, S. Max. Hom. de Sanct. 1.
and frequentius dicere debeo, I have often said, and must oftener attest, let
none defraud, let none deceive himself; he who hates any one man in this
world, let him do for God what he pleases, all is in vain: For Paul did not
lie when he professed, 1 Cor. 13 3
though he gave his body to be burned, it should profit him nothing if he
wanted charity; without which, neither Alms nor Prayer does avail: For in
Prayer, we must observe the pattern in the Mount, and say, not my, but, Our
Father which art in Heaven; which, as the rule of all Prayer, is next to be
enstated in your meditations.

SECT. V.
THe Precept being to pray after this manner, we must eye our copy, and he has
no eyes that sees not, or covers them, that perceives not by this rule, that
we are to pray pertinently, modestly, briefly, and Heavenly.

1. Pertinently for matter. Observe this Prayer, and there is not only no
superfluous word, but each syllable beautifies, and every Petition depends upon
another. First, we ask for our Fathers glory, in Hallowed be thy Name, and then
for our own salvation, in Thy Kingdom come; which shall come to our comfort,
when we do his will on earth, as it is in heaven, which we shall have strength
to do, when we have our daily bread; and having been refreshed thereby, there
is a necessity of praying against sin past, in Forgive us our trespasses; and
in regard the vessels of uncleanness will, or may fill, as soon as any other,
it is expedient to pray against sin to come, in Lead us not into temptation,
which may avail much to deliver us from much evil; and all this is a reasonable
service, because it is the Father we pray unto, whose prerogative is, the
Kingdom that should come, and the power by which we must expect it, shall come
for our delivery; and therefore the glory should be his, for applying all these
things unto us.

Thus has he showed thee, O man, what is good; Mic. 6. 8
nothing lawful, nothing needful, nothing honorable, is here committed. More
then these we should not ask, and less then these we ought not to ask, being to
pray after this manner.

2. Modestly for expression. The word, Fathers, the phrase, Kingdom, have
couched in them great mysteries; the small expression, bread, comprehends many
different things, according to the supplicants place, station, and calling;
With a Soldier, it will signify victory; with a Traveller, safety; with the
weary, rest; with the feeble, strength; with a King, Majesty; with a
Counselor, wisdom; with the fruitful, it will signify good children; and with
the barren, it imports a fruitful womb.

Study then the meaning of the words first, and the application of them unto
thy case next; and in the enlargements of thy soul, let thy words be always
modest and moderat, lest in asking abundance, Luke 21 34
thou be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness: Neither limit the Holy
One of Israel, by asking thus much, or thus much, now and then, but be content
with the portion given, and satisfied with the quantity and quality thereof.

3. Briefly for time. Our Savior in this form advises against two faults,
Mat. 6. 6
espied in the prayers of some, viz. Hypocrisy and Verbosity; and had Solomon
been in our days, and had heard the tedious length, unto which some Zelotes
had drawn their impertinent prayers, and the vain repetitions with which they
were filled, with the vain bablings to which they were to a nauseating length
extended, to pass their other scandalous behavior, he had enlarged himself
upon that advice, Eccl. 5 2
Let thy words be few, the obeying of which may prevent those heartless
digressions, wild and idle discourse, of such pretended extempore petitioners,
who were forced through emptiness, to go backward and forward, like Hounds at a
loss, and being word-bound, knew not how to make an end: Be not therefore as
that babbler Battus, non-sensically reiterating the same words again, and again,
unto whose practice, in probability, the Holy Ghost has an excellent allusion,
(...) Trap. in Mat. 6 7.
discharging vain repetitions, or more wording then matter requires, and
therefore discharges an imitation of him in his loquacity.

Not but that the zealous may (his heart not staggering or recoyling) mount
further, that is, nearer Heaven, by extending his prayers, the length of a
winters night, or Summers day, as David or Christ did: But the distinction
betwixt private, and public Prayer, may inform the intelligent, that this rule
is necessary, in requiring short, and full petitions, before others, but with
themselves they my use long, yet ought to offer still hearty, servent, and
pertinent supplications. For when words perturb the spirit of man, it is more
than time to break off; Ly^a in loc. Chrysostom. Hom. 19 in Mat.
Sed doles animo, etc. the groanings of the soul making the more ehement cry,
as did the heart of Moses, the lips of Hannah, the blood of Abel.

4. Heavenly-mindedness all along: From the Dan to the Beersheba of this
Prayer, there is nothing minded but Heaven, from Our Father, to its Amen, there
is nothing as earthly suggested; Our daily bread not being asked, but as it
relates to the doing of his will, the coming of his Kingdom, the hallowing of
his Name, of his Name on earth, as it is in Heaven: we begin at Heaven, and end
at glory, by our Amen.

Among other fond reformations aimed at in this Age, rich Amen was reduced to a
beggarly So be it, when yet there was as great difference betwixt them, as
between the garments of Tamar the harlot, Genesis 38 14
whom Judah defiled, and the Virgin-like apparel of Tamar the Princess, whom
Ammon ravished: It is the only Hebrew word in this Prayer, and not interpreted
by our Savior, nor the Evangelist; Aug. in Johan. tract. 41
nec Graecus interpres, neither durst the Latin nor Greek Interpreters
translate it, lest it should be contemned by being made naked, since no
Language can express its full sense, whereof almost all Nations, as they say
Jesus Christ, though Originally Greek and Hebrew, says Amen, as sufficiently
understood.

Is is an oath, that what you pray for is your hearts desire; it is a wish,
that what you pray for may be your portion; it is your assent, that what you
hear prayed for, it your judgment: and therefore in Amen, we wish, swear,
believe, that the Prayer for forgiving sins, of deliverance from evil, of
giving daily bread, is from the power and goodness of your Father, and that the
Kingdom of his glory and grace is to be advanced by the same power; and when by
it, you are brought to do his will, you resolve to hallow his Name in the
first, and give him the glory in all for ever, through Christ, who is the Amen;
Rev. 3 14
and therefore when you pray, mind Heaven with Moses, let all the people with
you say, Romans 16 17
Amen. And I say, To God only wise be glory through Jesus Christ, for ever.
Amen.

After this manner therefore pray ye, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.
HAving viewed at a distance the outworks and general form of Prayer, it is now
seasonable, to enter in and behold the special rule of Prayer, and the several
parts of that called the Lords Prayer; unto which the unseasonable, and cloudy
weather, that may be both felt, and seen in the Firmament of our Church, urges
our meditation, having visibly, Exodus 9 24.
as once in Egypt, in it showers of hail, and fire mingled with the hail; hence
prudentially we are enforced both to make more haste to it, and carry longer in
it.

It is called the Lords Prayer, because by our Lord composed, Mat. 6. 9
in this expression, After this manner pray ye, and by him also imposed, in
this Precept, when ye pray, say, Our Father, etc. and to difference it from the
Prayers of other holy men, Psalm. 90
as of Moses, David, Asaph, Heman, from which it is as really diversifi'd, as a
week day from the Sabbath; for though the Spirit of God made both, yet the Holy
Ghost has eminently sanctified, and commanded us in Prayer to remember it, in
this Mandat, When ye pray, say, Our Father, etc.

We have by our Savior a living and new way, Tert. de oratione
a new Command; it was thought also by his inscrutable wisdom fit to give us a
new Prayer, as new Wine, for our new Bottles, Pray after this manner.

As the Temple of old, so this Gospel-structure consists of three parts, 1. a
porch, or gate, which may be called Beautiful, in the words of the Preface, Our
Father which art in Heaven. 2. A holy place, consisting of the several
Petitions in the Body of the Prayer, as Hallowed by thy Name: Thy Kingdom come,
etc. In which the lights of the Lamps lead us orderly from one Petition to
another, from wherein his Kingdom is concerned, to that in which our obeying
the Laws of that Kingdom is related in, Thy will be done, by which we see the
Table of the Show- (our necessary) bread; Lev. 5. 12
whence we go forward to the brazen Altar, whereon we lay our sin-offering, in
Forgive us our debts, etc. and having sanctified our selves, 1 King. 8 10
as Priests, we ascend to the third Part, the Holy of Holies, For thine is the
Kingdom, the power; and the glory, for ever; at the end of which, or rather the
head, we have the glory of the Lord in a cloud, in this word, Amen, filling it
self and the whole house with the light thereof.

Of the Preface then, next of the Petitions, and lastly of the Conclusion, let
us treat.

CHAP. I.
Our Father which art in Heaven.
IN these words we have goodness, Our Father; next greatness, which art in
Heaven: They are the head of the Christians Prayer, and like that of the
Spouse, it is as the most fine Gold, Cant. 5 11
and weighs thus much, that we should be so circumspect in our walking, and
living upon earth, as to be accounted worthy to posses our Parents Inheritance
in Heaven, Aug. Hom. 42
unto whom we pray; whence arises those duties, of lifting up of the heart, of
the voice, of the soul, of the eyes unto God.

They have also in them the Person we pray unto, Father; the relation we pray
under, Our Father; the place we pray unto, which art in Heaven, all ushering-in
the several Petitions. Our Savior, Hug. Card. in Text.
more boni Oratoris, as an Orator here, patterns, and becomes a Patron unto
goodly Prefaces, whereby our Petitions are proposed with greater gracefulness,
and sweetness; and what shall more readily procure affection, than Praise, and
Praise is placed upon the Porch of this Prayer, in that our Lord will have us
begin to beg no otherwise, Aug. Ser. in Mon^e Dei. lib. 2
then by calling the great God our Father, insinuating praise, and love; which
rule had the Gadarens observed, they had not so profanely besought Christ his
Son, to have departed from their coasts.

To have our Prayers quadrat and conform to this holy Preface, We shall
discover, 1. What lies couched under this Name, Father, 2. What reasons might
induce our Savior to give him that Name, 3. The special excellencies, by which
most eminently he merits that Name.

In beholding the first, Chry. Ser. 67.
both thee, and I, Reader, are to behold, What astonisheth Angels, What makes
the Heavens to wonder, and the Earth to tremble, which flesh cannot express:
And I said, A great Preacher dare no utter, yet dare not be silent. The Lord
grant that I may speak, and you may hear this great thing [viz.] Gods giving
himself to the Earth, and we our selves to Heaven. Both which is granted to be
done, in these words, Our Father which art in Heaven.

Our Father, etc.
THis Name Father, Judge. 13. 18
is as the Angels name, Secret and wonderful, yet, with Moses, we shall view
its back-parts. And first of all, we may perceive the whole Trinity in nature:
For, Deuteronomy. 32. 6.
the Lord God is a Father, God the Son is a Father, God the holy Ghost is a
Father; Or, without error, Isa 9. 6
we may understand the first person of the Deity, Ioh. 3. 5
in order sometime called the Father of Rain, of Jesus Christ, and again, the
Father of Grace, Aquin. sum. 1. Q. 32. A. 3
the first having in it some vestigia of his power, the second being the
express image of his person, the third, the similitude of his nature and
holiness: And to him we may cry, as to the first person, with David, Psa. 57. 1
Be merciful unto me, O God, be merciful unto me; and also in the same phrase,
Father: We may call to the second person, with Stephen, Act. 7. 59
Lord Jesus, receive my spirit: For, both is here understood, and Prayer ought
jointly to be put up to them as they are one, and severaly to all the Persons
as they are three, provided that in naming of one, as here, we exclude not the
Son, nor Spirit, as Stephen, not the Spirit, nor the Father, though the Son be
solely invoked.

It was the Trinity that said, Genesis 1. 26
Let us make man, and from the Trinity did sin cause man to fall, and by Prayer
to the Trinity must man be remitted of his sin, delivered from evil, and
instructed to avoid temptation.

It is given as a rule, Burt. expos. of L. P.
that where the Word, Father, is simply used, without any other word
restricting it to any of the other Persons, (as here there is none) the whole
Deity is thereby signified (ex. gr.) Matthew. 6. 26
The fowls of the Air sow not, yet your heavenly father feeds them: In
Father, all the Trinity is understood, but in these words, Ioh. 3. 35
The Father loves the Son, the second Person is distinctly spoken of, and
distinguished from the first, as also, the first from the second.

But, to reach the depth of the word, Father, in this profound sense, were to
puzle our souls with inscrutable Mysteries, and with Simonides, to drench our
brains in unprofitable questions: Cicer. de not. Deo. lip.
For he, being asked by Hiero, the King, what God was, desired one days
liberty, to answer the question, but that being too short, he demanded two, but
these not being sufficient, he entreated for four, in regard, the more he
pondered, his soul was the more darkened, touching the nature of a Deity:
neither do we read that ever he answered the question, though eight days was
allowed him, his head questionless being filled with doubts, and niceties,
studying the solution. We shall therefore, taking a prospect of this word, of
this cloud, Father, from its darkest side, as it relates to Prayer, and then we
may see clearly ^avour on Gods^part, and duty upon ours: The favor is to be
seen in Privileges, Justification, and in our Adoption.

1. Our Christian-priviledges above the Jew. Many and lofty were the Titles and
Names, by which God made himself known under the Law, as, the Lord God of gods,
the God of Abraham, Josh. 22. 22
and the Almighty God; but it is Our Father, Genesis 17. 1
quia noster esse cepit, he now becoming our God, having left off to be theirs;
His Name to them was, Cyp. de Orat. Dom. S. 8
I AM, denoting Eternity and Immutability to be in himself: But Our Father,
shows plainly our interest in him, and his to us, he is not now under the
Gospel, called the God of Abraham at a distance, but having spoken to us by his
Son, Heb. 1. 2
to keep us with him for ever, sweetens our service, under the notion of
fatherly attendance, Isa. 1. 2
the other having rebelled against him. They indeed while with him, had much of
his praise, but to which of them at any time said he, When ye pray, Aug. ut
supra.
say, Our Father. They prayed indeed, but in comparison of us, they did it as
servants, we doing it as sons, having received that spirit of Adoption, Romans 8.
15
whereby we cry, Abba, Father. But of this afterward.

2. Our Justification, by the blood of Christ. Our sins made us lose our
interest we had in him, by our wandering, as the lost sheep; and by our
lavishing, as the Prodigal, we became like our old father the Devil, Ioh. 8. 44
and by consequence were afar off, but now made nigh, by the blood of Christ,
Ephesians. 2. 13
who made our peace; animating us with confidence, to pray After this manner,
having by faith received the power to become the Sons of God: Ioh. 1. 12
For, nec peccator, neither can a sinful people, Cyp. ut sup.
or a sinful man be attoned, or made a son, or sons, except there preceed a
remission of sin, which is accompanied by the gift of Sonship: Ioh. 8. 34
For, whosoever commits sin, is the servant of sin; and he who would receive
the kiss of the Father, must return and confess with the Publicane, and he
shall not only have bread enough, but his sin shall be forgiven him.

3 Our Adoption, by the regeneration of the Spirit. Regeneration implies a
twofold birth: First, we are born children of wrath, and so are children of
the Devil, yet not by nature, but imitation, because the lusts of that father
we will do, by which we have no plea to Heaven. And unless, as regenerated, a
man be born again of water and of the Spirit, Ioh. 3. 5
he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. He comprehends all Ages, Sexes, and
conditions, and except he be born again, Cajet. in loc.
shows a new Father, and a new nature. Of water, understand, that Baptism is an
entry into a new life, which is administered, Matthew. 28. 19.
in the Name of the Father, upon our bodies; denoting, that even our flesh is
capable of Heavens glory; and of the Spirit, this is that, wherein all
blessedness consists; for, as the Spirit of man must be prop'd, or buttress'd
by the Spirit of God, or it can never be elevated so, as to enter the Kingdom
of God: so must the Spirit of God uphold the faith of the believer, Romans 8. 16
by bearing witness to it of the souls being born of God, or then we cannot
call after this manner, without mocking our Father which is in Heaven.

A Father he is, in respect of Christ, and because of him, he is a Father, in
respect of us, like our elder Brother, Psalm. 2. 7
and elder brethren: Let us seek after the things of Heaven, Gal. 4. 6
that it may be known we pray by the spirit of Adoption, having re-purchased
the title of Sons; Acknowledging, by Father, an absolution of offenses, Chrysostom.
hom. 20. in Matthew.
a freedom from judgment, Justification, Sanctification, and the Adoption of
Sons, a fellowship with Christ, the gifts of the Spirit, an inheritance
incorruptible, that fades not away, eternal in the Heavens.

Whereby it may be attested of our Father, Byerl. prom. Moral. in Fest. St.
Joan.
what a dying man said of the Epistles and Gospels, when desired by some to
deliver a rule for the right ordering of their lives, held up them with an ecce
omnia hic, here are all things necessary for attaining of a good and blessed
life: he meant, they living after the rules there taught; so shall it be with
us, if we practice according to the form prescribed here. Gal. 6. 16
For this Preface holds out also duty on our part, and we learn by it to pray
with confidence, awfulness, and plainness.

1. With confidence, but not with presumption. God has come low to embrace us,
as sons, he has given us freedom to touch his Scepter, yet ought not man to be
saucy for the one, nor play as a child with the other: Let not the pride of thy
countenance keep thee, Psalm. 10 4
O man, from God, that is, from calling upon him, because he is thy Father; nor
permit the sin of thy soul to persuade thee to run from him, because he is in
Heaven. Do this and live, come boldly to the Throne of grace, ^eb. 16
that you may obtain mercy: It is a Throne, therefore denotes Majesty; to stop
presumption with the Pharisee go not too high, Luke 18 11
blurt not out thy desire, without some Religious Preface, Dan. 9. 4
After this manner, as Daniel, O Lord, the great and dreadful God: and remember
that proud beggars may go hungry away, whereas the humble and meek may get
succor; for it is a Throne of grace, affirming mercy: and there is an Art in
begging, Luke 18 13
and a reward for that Art, as the Publicane will show you.

2. With awfulness, but not with distraction. Is he a Father? he will be
honored; Mal. 1. 6
Is he a Master? he will be feared: now he is both, and to both our behavior
must conform; he speaks not love expressly in the Prophet, but of fear, and
honor, because he was not yet become like one of us, in the Incarnation of the
second Person. As Sons, we are to reverence and honor him, which we do not but
when we love, which shuts out amazement and terror, as a slave, because as
Sons, we serve for love, and waits in love, for the time of possessing the
Inheritance. Genesis 28 17
For even the visions of mercy and beauty, did put Jacob to a fright, yet made
him not forget his Pillar, his Oil, his Vow, nor his Liberality.

If therefore you call on the Father, after this manner do it, (viz.) passing
the time of your sojourning here in fear. For these two words, Our Father, as
they are sensed by our Royal Interpreter, King James Med. on L. P.
are inserted, to put us in mind that we are but dust and ashes, learning
thereby to have our reverence mixed with a sweet confidence in his love, God
being both a kind Father, and a great King, will not have these divorced; what
he has joined together, Byerl. ^t sup. Fest B. Martyr. 3
and what the great Emperor Sigismund would never have separated; for being
questioned, whether it was better for a King, to be loved, or feared; as angry
at the division, replied, God will be both feared and loved, and so must Kings.
God is optimus, we know, and therefore to be loved; but as the best, so he is
maximus, the greatest, the King of Kings, the Lord of Lords. Hence God shall
bless us, Psalm. 67 7
and all the ends of the earth shall fear him.

3. With plainness, yet with meditation. How loftily could our Savior have
composed this Prayer? and with what sublimity of style could he have expressed
the Deity; yet as himself was swadled in clouts, and his Type Moses wrapped in
flaggs, so shrowds he the glorious Trinity under the low Canopy of this term,
Father, and we must pray after this manner; For the want of meditation makes
our devotion flatulent and windy: by empty words, or unseemly Barne-like
expressions, plain praying may become uncivil pratting.

It is true, there ought to be more Religion in our Prayer, then Eloquence, yet
this palliats not the absurdities of them, whose petitions are arrayed in
nastiness, and withal making empty, frothy repetitions, from which, let me tell
you again, our Savior dehorts, by this form, from one Battus, (...). Eras.
Ada. Chil. 2 Cent. 1
as the word imports, Poaeta quodam: a certain empty Poet inculcating
tediously, through ignorance, on the same verse, as -- In illis Montibus inquit
erant, and erant in montibus illis.

That is,

Hills were in that Land, and in that Land were Hills; from which some
determines Battus to be a stammerer, Annot. in Novum Test. ex Critic. London^
ens.
and necessitat to utter the same words over, through impediment of speech, as
well as ignorance of mind, before his sentence could be perfected; which no
ways excuses such, who are impeded in their elocution, by a wilful, and
knowing rejectment of the proper means of laudable utterance; Mat. 6. 7
which is study and meditation. Strive therefore against vain repetitions in
Prayer, by communing with your own heart, Hos. 14. 2
and taking with you words. If volubility of expression be denied, or variety
of sentences not promptly minted.

The Roman Orator himself, may see the Rules of his own Art sanctified by our
Savior, Cicer. de Orat. ad Gru.
in the composure of this Prayer: And a greater then Cicero, the Preacher of
Jerusalem, because he was wise, sought to find out acceptable words, Eccl. 12 9
and spoke gracefully; so Christ spoke graciously, yet so plainly, that never
man spoke like him; Joh. 7. 46
yet that plainness was so heavenly, and so purely delivered, that it will be
our learning, and our wisdom, in both to imitate him, and pray after this
manner.

Once more let us press this Cluster of Grapes, for its juice is sweet; Our
Father, having in it yet more encouragement for us, and still discovers
something to be done by us, as mercy on his part, and love upon ours.

1. Mercy or compassion in his bowels, supplying our wants. By his eyes at a
distance he knows our indigence, as the Father knew the Prodigals; Luke 15 20
neither does long absence from him, cause us to be forgotten; to persuade to
which, we have not only the parable of the lost sheep, of the clocking hen;
yea, the shortness of this Prayer, but a reiterated Precept, joined with a
comfortable Promise, Remember these, O Jacob, and Israel, for thou art my
servant, Isa. 44. 2^
I have formed thee; thou art my servant, O Israel, thou shall not be forgotten
of me.

2. Our love unto him, opening our straits, in all, or any extremities; whether
can, does, or ought a child, to take Sanctuary, rather than in his Fathers
bosom? Hos. 4. 1^
Let Rome with Israel go aside to Saints, Hos. 11 12.
with Iudab let us be faithful to this rule, and adress to God who has
begotten us: And in sound reason, he who says to the Virgin Mary, Pater
Noster, may be suspected to have a flaw in his Pia Matter. This expression of
Father, Aug. in Ser. de Mont. lib. 2
as it holds forth love, ought to excite servent affection, or then justly
might we be charged with ingratitude, unnaturality, and idolatry; Hush. Lect.
on L. P.
which last, to avoid with Battalogy, and Hypocrisy, this rule is given to the
Churches.

Mercy always meriting duty, his love to us in becoming our Father, craves
from us as dutiful, and heavenly born sons, imitation, delectation, fellowship,
and assurance of acceptance.

1. Imitation of his holiness. 1 Pet. 1 15
Is it not written, as obedient children, be ye holy, for I am holy? Ergo hoc
sit primum, Lib. 2. de Orat.
said the Melifluous Cicero, teaching his Orator, the first precept I give, is
this, that we study whom to imitate, and let it be him who excells in that, the
imitation whereof is designed; Lib. 1. de Off.
but shows to his son, that this choice flows from our own will, which God in
his sons, will have to bear no sway, but commands holiness, because he is holy:
Urging more authoritative ways to persuade to virtue, than that Roman
exhortted implicitly his son to goodness, from the example of Hercules, who
being young, had presented two ways unto him, one of pleasure, which was fair,
broad, etc. the other of virtue, narrow, difficult, and hard; yet as a true son
of their great Jupiter, their conceited god, he choosed the last; When
wickedness, though painted, is seducing us to embraces, and offering the way of
the sinner, let us as sons of the most High, resuse such Siren enchantments,
Psalm. 119 115
and say with David, Depart from me, ye evildoers, for I will keep the
commandments of my God, my Father.

Because of which, we ought to act as sons, that as a Father, Cyp. in Orat.
Dom. Plut. in Lacon. Inst.
we delighting in him, he again as children may delight in us: Lest we hear
from him, in conviction, what a virtuous Laconian Lady wrote to her debauched
son, Aut vive rectius, either mend thy manners, or never return to Sparta;
which may be thus aplied, either live as holy, or expect never to see thy
Fathers Country, nor enjoy his Heaven: which h^ knew to be necessary, who
attested, that Sanctitas was Matter Gloriae, holiness was the Mother of true
blessedness; Theod. in Psalm. 149 1 Cor. 6 18
an argument nervous enough, to conclude our practicing what is enforced by the
Apostle, Flee fornication, and be ye holy.

2. Delectation in his presence. Where a good Father and a dutiful Child meets,
the law of love may overcome lawless necessity, and cause them, even when
urgent occasions do otherwise avocate, to continue in the society of each
other, loathing, that even business should interrupt the joy of their sweet
fellowship: How did David rejoice in the Lords House, Psalm. 84. 1
and Sanctuary? How amiable were they unto him? How frequent were his visits in
them? And like an ingenuous Son, how early comes he to beg his Fathers
blessing? and looks up, Psalm. 5. 3
whom if thou follow, as thy Father on earth, thy name shall be Solomon, 2 Samuel
12 25
because thou shall have peace, and Iedidiah, for the Lord will love thee.

3. Fellowship in our addresses. We speak with him here, not only as in the
same place, but as Moses, face to face, before him. Deuteronomy. 34 10
When we say, Our Father, give us bread, forgive us our sin, faith brings his
ear to our lips, his eye to behold our tears, his bowels to yearn at our cry,
and all these move his power, to remove us out of danger: This Prayer being
purposely taught to impress upon our hearts the thoughts of that dearness and
nearness betwixt Psa. 38. 9.
us and a merciful God, before whom, all our desires are, and from whom, our
groaning is not hid, and who is said to answer, Greg. Mor. lib. 5. c. 30.
when our requests are granted, and the mercy prayed for obtained.

4. Acceptance in our returnings. Should a child knock at a neighbors door for
bread, once or twice he might get satisfaction, but if oftener, might be
checked; yea, bashfulness in a Boy, would make him resuse, if frequently sent
to a strangers house, for food: But with what confidence can he turn and return
to his Fathers Cup-board, and when hunger, or thirst, assaults him, stands not
to demurr, but repairs straight home, because it is his Fathers house, and
dwelling? Heb. 4. 16
Let us therefore come boldly to the Throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy,
and find grace, to help in time of need. Et hoc si feceris, hoc habebis, Flug.
de Remis. peccat. lib. 1. c. 11
if thou do the one, God shall give the other, obey the precept, thou shall
have the benefit; if thou, being converted pray, thou shall have mercy, and be
happy in strengthening thy brethren.

Arristippus presenting a Petition to Dyonisius, fell down, offering it at his
feet, because, said he, Diog. Laert in Arrist*
the Emperor has ears in his feet; denoting either the liberality, or at that
time, the surliness of the King, with whom indeed Authors show, he was very
bold, because of his goodness; and trying him to admiration, boasted of his
Lords gifts, and favor, yet all his treasure being but finite, by his bounty
was exhaustible, Tymp. Spec. Mag. Sig. 68
as was the munificent Pope Alexander the fifth, who was so profusedly
charitable, that in earnest sport, he affirmed himself, that when he was a
Bishop, he was something rich, and when he was a Cardinal, he was somewhat
poor, but when he became a Pope, he was an arrant Beggar: But our Fathers loaf
never lessening, nor his rich store admitting of no diminution; Psalm. 99 5
Exalt the Lord our God, and worship at his footstool, go into his tabernacles,
Psalm. 132 7
and worship at his holy footstool; for from heaven does he behold the earth,
to hear the groaning of the prisoner, Psalm. 102 19
to loose those that are appointed to death: Iam. 1. 5
And gives to all men liberally when they ask of him.

Our Father, etc.
IN the Articles of the Christian Faith, we acknowledge our believing in God
the Father Almighty; and yet here in our prayers, we are directed to say, Our
Father, without any lofty title to express his dreadful greatness. To avoid
prolixity, it may be thought to proceed, from its fitness, fastness,
comprehensiveness, and allureingness.

1. Father, is a new Covenant term, and so more fit for the Gospel. Exodus 3 6
His Name of old was, the God of Abraham, Exodus 6 3
Jehovah, I AM, King of kings, Judge of all the earth; Genesis 18 25
but unto us the Gospel has brought glad tidings, not bringing us to the Mount
that might not be touched, that burned with fire, unto blackness, darkness, and
tempest, and the sound of a trumpet, and the voice of words, Heb. 12 18
which voice such as heard it, desired for fear of death it might not be spoken
unto them: But leading us unto Jesus, the Mediator of the new Covenant, and he
giving us a new Commandment, a new Covenant, a new way, a new Sabbath, it was
fit under these new dispensations, that God should take to himself a new Name;
for, says one, Nusquam invenitur, etc. Many Laws and Ordinances had the Jews,
Barrad. in Orat. Dom. Deuteronomy. 32 6
but never this Commandment simply to call him, Our Father.

It is true, he was their Father, and complained of their undutifulness, under
that relation; yet it is as true again, Estius in Text.
that it mainly eyed their being made by him, or created of him, which is
common to them, with beasts and devils: And though they prayed to him in the
style, Isai. 63 16
Father, yet it is added, O Lord, thou art our Father; and therefore as this
Name was not prorsus ignotum, altogether unknown to them; so it is evident,
that they had it not in that plain, full, and comfortable sense wherein we
dare, and ought to understand it: The Temple wall being broken, and its vail
rent, each man ought, and may call him Father, not only from their Fathers, but
because of his Spirit in themselves, and not as theirs alone, but of all
others, whether Jew or Gentile, bond or free, the name, Father, not being only
long natior, better, but, notissima, best of all known, and speaks to us
Christians most fitly, Love, Hope and Honor, more abundantly.

1. More love and affection to us. Of old, it was the Lord of Hosts, Dan. 9. 4
the great and the dreadful God, but now, Father, sounding grace and kindness,
God in these things having provided better for us. Bucan in Orat. Dom.
The Temple had much smoke, Moses had a vail, but here it is not spoken to us
in parables. The King (says the Christian Church) has brought me into his
chambers: Cant. 1. 4
Pardon, if I say, so great is his love, to us, and you, that the Jews and
their Priests, were but Drovers, and Butches, in respect of us; their Temple
but Shambles in respect of our Church; they serving as it were below stairs,
when compared to us and our Congregations, in the higher rooms.

2. More hope for us. The people of old did ordinarily draw near God, by virtue
of their Covenant Relation, with confidence, Heb. 7. 19
yet to us there was a better hope brought in, Hug. Card.
by which we draw nigh to God, that is, a better Law, by which its observers
hopes for a better inheritance then an earthly Canaan, which both makes us draw
near to God, Iam. 4. 8
and by the same hope God draws nigh to us.

Bias, being questioned, Lycost. Apoph. de Spe.
what was sweetest to men? replied, hope: And the knowing Christian will with
Job keep his soul alive, while other comforts are fledged and gone, with this,
that his Father is in Heaven, Job 19 25
his Redeemer lives there.

The Romans conjectured good or ill success from the very Preface, Hist. de
Spectris lib. 2. 95
which ushered-in the debates of their public affairs, which made Severus
Augustus, speaking to his Army, resolve upon a fortunat Proem; yet fortune
prompted him to a sad prologue, Heliogabulus the Emperor being killed, etc.
which was interpreted an ill Omen, predicting his own slaughter, which Fate
verified, he being afterward murdered by his own Army.

But in this Prayer we have a sure ground sor determining the enjoyment of
future good, whether spiritual, for attaining glory, in the approach of his
Kingdom, or temporal, for procuring our food, by daily bread, from the very
entry of this form, commanding us to say, Cyp. in Orat. Dom.
Father, which is, what one says all Gospel-precepts are, nothing less then
laying the foundation of our hope; a Pillar for the strengthening of our faith;
meat for the nourishment of our heart; a guide to direct us in journey; a
garrison wherein we are secure, until we receive eternal glory.

3. More honor given to God by us. This old name, Jehovah, shows how he enjoys
himself; but, Father, demonstrates, he has begotten us, which should draw the
more respect, by how much our Redemption is more honorable then our Creation;
the first of which makes the Angels more curious; 1 Pet. 1 12
and prying, they desiring to look into, to the depth of it, the rise, the
cause of it: for though they rejoiced at the world, Job 38. 7
because of its beauty, yet they wondered that in the world there should be a
Mercy-seat, so great is the mystery: As his redeemed sons we have a precept to
command him, Isai. 45 12
concerning the work of his hands; and therefore the more he is to be
reverenced for his large proffer, and we engaged to stand the more in aw,
because of his gracious condescendency.

2. This term, Father, is a fastening, and a more binding style, and so suits
best with grace. The elder Brother did keep at home, Luke 15 12
and served because, he was a Son, and the younger, after a prodigal wasting of
his portion, returned, because he had a Father. Our Lord directs us to use this
word, as every way tying us to oblidged duty, to keep at home, when in his
favor, and to return home, to prevent his anger: It binds us in respect of
Christ, of Obedience, Chastisement, Resignment.

1. In respect of Christ our Brother. 1 John 12 and 18
He is only the natural and eternal Son of God, by whom we have only power to
be called Gods Sons; and in that regard it is necessary to cleave to him more
fast, Ruth. 1 17
as Ruth to Naomi; for death there could and did make a separation, 1 These. 4 16
but if we would be happy, we must die in Christ, and afterward rise with him.

This made the Church call, Cant. 8 14
Make haste, my beloved, and be like a Roe, or a young Heart, upon the mountains
of spices, Aquin. Lect. 2. in loc.
so called, from the hight of devotion, and the fragnancy of works and
conversation, that by both I may be carried unto thee (meaning Christ) and by
thee, to the Heavens, which are mountains, because of their highness, Lyra.
and mountains of spices, because of their sweetness, Jesus sitting as
Mediator, Alsted Theol. Cat. 8. 3. c. 15
praying for us, as often as he hears us pray, Our Father, knowing his merits
must be our shield and buckler, until we be past Gunshot.

2. In respect of obedience in our whole nature. The all-wise God took this
course to keep his people from apostasy, Ier. 3. 19
and commanded them to say, My Father, and they again doubted not to come after
backsliding, because he was the Lord their God; whence flows the precepts of
imitation, 1 Pet. 1 14
that as obedient children, we do not fashion our selves according to former
lusts, Matthew. 5 48
but in speech, eyes, in heart, to be perfect, Bucan. ut supra.
as he is perfect, that is, in sanctity, mercy, and pity, having a double of
the Law, and exact copy of his will, written in our hearts, for facilitating
our studies.

3. In respect of chastisement for our misdemeanour. Some dogs when beat, and
servants when reproved, will run from their Masters, and howl; but an ingenuous
child when corrected, will draw toward his Father, and cry. It was prettily
said of a little one, when chastised, Mother, kiss me, and whip me again; yet
possibly the same infant would have strugled, and have sought, if but frowned
upon by a stranger: To roar against, or complain of God, holds forth no sign of
sonship, since correction is a character, Heh. 12. 8
and consequent thereof, and therefore to be patiently undergone.

Even earthly parents, chastising it may be out of spleen, Heb. 12 10
passion, for their pleasure will be endured by their children, or at least
much of it, Ephesians. 6. 4
since they are also flesh, and not to be provoked, how much more ought that
Father to be tolerat, whose commands in his Prophets, Law, and in his Gospel,
command what is just, holy, and good, never smiting for transgressing thereof,
Romans 7 12
but for our profit, that we might be partaker of his holiness, and glory,
which should never be inherited, were we left to our wantonness, wickedness or
folly.

This last made the covetous Emperor Mauricius, Mag. Hist: Cent. 6. c. 16 apud
Fin.
endure the beholding and slaughter of his Queen, and five sons, by that Rebel,
and Usurper Phocas, himself also after them to be likewise murdered, with a
Iustus es Domine, Righteous art thou, O Lord, and upright are thy Judgments;
submitting himself unto, and patiently bearing, Psalm. 119 137
the severity of that sad and sharp providence.

This Argument may be yet sharpened, at the Philistines sorge, sor so necessary
is it sometimes to be brought under the smart of perplexing dispensations,
Lycost. Apoph. de correct.
that Zeno, being questioned by one of his pupils, why he never corrected him;
smartly replied, Quia non credo, because I do not believe: Insinuating, their
want of any hope, or sign of goodness in him, created his impunity: And if you
eye God, he has reason to fear his Sonship, and conclude bastardy, who is
exempted from, or does not patiently endure the Cross.

4. In respect of resignment to the will of the Creator; Children leave the
nature, kind, proportion, color of food, diet, and apparel, to their parents,
and eat the portion that is carved for them, with content and thanks: And
though perverseness in babies, should cause them walk cross to this rule, yet
let us take out of the Lords hands, the presented morsel, of whatsoever kind:
Knowing, that like an indulgent parent, if we receive this or that contentedly
from him, he may give us choice, and liking in all other matters, and study,
like a father to please us, being obedient, in clothes, or money. He that
peruseth Solomon's Dream, 1 King. 11.
with the Response thereof, may understand the meaning of this rule.

Christ prayed to his Father for deliverance from the bitter Cup, and though S.
Matthew shows he drank it, Matth^ 26. 39
yet S. Paul relates, he was heard in what he asked, but how? he submitted to
his Fathers will, Heb. 5. 7
and Angels com^orted and strengthened him so, against fear, that with a daring
Majesty, he faced those murderers, with an, Ioh. 18. 5
I am he.

Behold, the Handmaid of the Lord, said Mary, Be it unto me according to thy
word. Luke 1. 38
Let us be ready for service, and we shall be crowned with the reward: In all
things, let it be according to his Will, with us, and it shall be his will, to
do great things for us, and as Holy is his Name, so holy and just are all his
purposes, and then are we holy when we know it.

4. Father is a more comprehensive style, and so fitter for our weakness. As
every word in this Prayer has an ample sense, and each Petition of an enlarged
nature, so this word, Father, though short in Letters, yet, of so huge bulk in
sense, as would puzle Angels to expound. When we pray for daily bread, we also
entreat an easy bed, good rest, for wholesome meat at home, and kind friends
without, a fair way when we travel, for a good horse when we ride, sound Ship
when we sail, and for seemly clothes when we visit our acquaintance; so that
the word, bread, is of a copious nature, and this word, Father, not short of it
in signification, comprehending Creation, Regeneration, Preservation,
Discrimination.

1. Our Creation. Each son of man, is a son of Adam, Luke 3. 38.
who was the son of God; so that our radical being was from him, and stamped at
first, by the hand of his power, being Earth, with Life, Reason, and Religion;
which not only as brethren, binds us in affection to one another, but as
children units our tongues to express this word, Mal. 2. 10
Pater, Father, all of us being created by him.

I have somewhere read that in a firait, Lady Elizabeth, afterward Queen of
England, cried, Lord look upon the wounds of thy hands, and be merciful to the
works of thy own hands.

2. Our Regeneration. Christ having taught us now under the fall, to call, Our
Father, minds us, not only, that he did make, but has also re-made us. At
first indeed, in Adam, we had great possessions, and our service altogether
praise, but by his not paying, the contracted fore-quit-rent of exact
obedience, forefeited his privileges, and we as heirs of his body, lost our
inheritance, and being, Joh. 8. 44
filii diaboli, sons of the devil, we are born again, and become anew filii
Dei; In evidence whereof, the eternal Son of the same Father, teaches us
confidently in Prayer, to call his Father and God, Ioh. 20. 27
our God and Father.

Jesus, the Mediator of the new Covenant; having procured peace in Heaven, for
a readmission into our heavenly Paradise, has given us power to become the
sons of God, 1 Ioh. 12
in our consciences, and by the the testimony of the Spirit; knowing, he came
from the bosom of the Father, showing the good Fathers good pleasure, of our
addressing our selves to him, though we have back-slidden, with love,
confidence, and joy, in our Father, Thy Kingdom come, etc.

This to the reprobate cannot be affirmed, Romans 8^ 15
God in this last sense, being no more his Father, or they his children, Burt.
exp. of the L. P.
spiritually, then David the son of Goliath, when he sought against him; or
Pipes and Organs, the offspring of Iubal, Genesis 4. 20
because he made them.

3. Our preservation. We can speak, and call for help, hope, look and rejoice
in the very expectation of our Fathers succor; yea, benefactors are called
Fathers, and where there is a personal agreement to perform all offices of
love, the recipient from respect, may use the appellation, Father: He gave us
milk, and life, and clothes, appointed for us the weeks of the harvest, Psalm.
34. 20
numbreth our hairs, preserves our bones: Its true, his Angels have charge
over us, Exodus 33. 15.
yet as a Father, he has his eyes upon us (though those Angels, as servants,
have a command to lead us) sor our greater security; Our good things he gives
us, as his glory and kingdom, evil things he puts far from us, as, our
necessities, and debts; all desirable things he has promised us, and we
believe him, Act. 17. 28
because, the Kingdom, and Power, and Glory is his, of all which, we are to
have a share, being his offspring.

4. Our Discrimination. It is a compellation, differencing us from Heathens,
who know not God, the Father; from Jews and Turks, who believe not in the Son,
and from all who fight against him as an enemy. Tremell, Weems Scrip. Exer.
Exercit. 15.
that famous Jew, and Translator of the Syriack-Bible, being at his death
asked, concerning his faith, answered, Vivat Christus, and pereat Barrabas, Let
Christ live, and ^arrabas be crucified: Distinguishing himself by this, from
his blood-thirsty Forefathers, and numbering himself among those, whose
confidence was in Jesus, which, Our Father also does, he adopting us only in
his Son.

4. Father is a more aluring style, and so, more conformable to prayer. In our
Petitions, we are to exercise the Graces of Hope, Faith, and Charity, unto
which this title brings in singular supports on Gods part, upon man's account.

1. On Gods part. For we in Prayer can lay hold upon his affection: Though we
be as grasshoppers, and unworthy to be admitted to glory, 2 Samuel 15 5
yet worthy is the Lamb, his Son, our Savior, who has procured it for us, in
whom his providence says of us, to all his creatures, what David said of
Absalom, to all his Commanders, Deal gently with the young man, with the old
man, with the sick person, and tender infant, for my sake. though the Prodigal
had spent his All, yet because he confides in his Father, Luke 15. 25.
and returns, bemoans and repents, he is arrayed with honorable raiment,
entertained with delicious sare, and honored with melodious music, to cheer
his heart, to beautify his countenance, and attract respect from beholders.

2. On our part, for we in this life ought to have filial conversation. 1 Pet.
1. 14
This Prayer is not for dogs, and therefore taught only to Sons, which we are,
when we obey, reverence, and walk in our Fathers footsteps. The debauch'dnesse
of Angustus Daughters, made him call them not children, but imposthums, boils
of his body: Suet in vi^. Oct. Aug.
Shall not God much more reprove, reproach them who give out, they are begotten
of him, when the seed of the Serpent remains in them, and the poison thereof
spreading, to the infection of others, contrary to duty, nature, and
profession, because they confess our Father.

Our Father.
THe eminent and transcendent acts by which the Name of Father is assumed by
God in this Prayer, come now to be considered, and when discovered, it will
appear so peculiar his due, that in comparison of him, we are to call no man
Father on earth, Mat. 23. 9
for one is our Father which is in heaven; Glos Interl.
because all things and beings are of him.

He is called the Father of glory, of light, of mercy; Ephesians. 1. 17
and he is so in respect of Christ, whom from eternity he begat, and also in
respect of his creatures, upon whom he has impressed his image, though in
different colors, sometimes the image of his footsteps, as in irrational, or
insensible Creatures, and thus he is the Father of the Dew; Job 38. 28 Pineda.
sometimes the image of his Knowledge, Reason, and Understanding; and thus he
is the Father of Men and Angels; yea, eye the plenitude of his power, and he
may justly be called, both Father and Mother to all created beings, their
Father, as begetting them by his omnipotency, Deuteronomy. 32. 6
and their Mother, as continually conserving, nourshing, and bringing them
forth by his providence; Deuteronomy. 38 6
but because of holiness, and sanctity, is he especially called the Father of
Saints, and blessed Spirits, which in this Prayer is principally to be regarded.

It properly signifies the natural parent of the male-kind; some say, when it
speaks of a man, (...).
it signifies a defender of children; but when of God, it denotes a preserver
of all; There are that will have it to be derived from their procuring, Fathers
getting, or procuring children to themselves: However it be, men are called
Fathers, 1. By Nature. 2. By Favor,


Our natural parents give us, 1. a being, 2. a well-being; and both of these in
a more excellent way, are bestowed by God upon believers.

If you eye our being, we have it principally from him; having it neither
wholly, solely, eternally essentially, Job 10. 9.
but by him: have we an eye, an ear, a limb, an hair, but of his begetting, a
toe, a nail, but of his making?

It was he that kept warm in the womb our tender bodies, and when ignorant of
ourselves, was he fashioning, and joining all our members, Psalm. 139 15
which other fathers neither knew how to do, nor could do: John the Baptist
respected, because rejoiced at the salutation of his Lords Mother, for his sake
who gave him life, though otherwise he was ignorant of any life he had: Chrysostom.
Ser. 70
so Jacob fought and strove in the womb, resolving even there to conquer,
whileas yet Rebekah thought of nothing less then government and dominion.

Compare him with earthly parents, and you may perceive a wide and a vast
difference, for,

1. We have not our being wholly from them, grant that by them, the principles
for a body is begotten, yet without him, it will be no birth, a lame birth, or
a dead birth, he must give the Embrio, the breath or life, or then he has not
a living soul. Greg. Mag. lib. 7 Indict. 2. Ep. 53 Ber. de Int. Domo. cap. 67
I know that inter sanctos patres, there are some that debate about the
animation of the Insant, yet that is pious, O Anima mea, O my soul, if thou
would have God to love thee, behold thy nativity, for by the Trinity was thou
made in the likeness of God, a gift which he gave no other creature, etc. As he
gave the red earth a spirit at first, and called it Adam, Genesis 2. 7
so is it still, it being the soul that makes us men, i. e. to rule and reign
in our selves, Sen. Ep. 114
and over our selves; when this is well, all is well, and when this
languisheth, all fades, so that our all depends upon it, and yet all our
earthly fathers wit, cannot procure it for us.

Adam did naturally beget, and Evah bare a Cain, Genesis 3. 1
yet the man is acknowledged to be from the Lord; and until we know, that
natural causes can of themselves produce more excellent effects, than
themselves are, we must hold, that not the body begets, but that God infuseth
the soul, and in respect of that, is absolute Father, Isa, 45 9
and is called a Potter, in regard of the body also, so little have we from our
parents.

2. Neither have we our being solely from them. Did not the Sun give heat, the
Air breath, water refresh, and meat nourish, we should for all that other
Fathers can do, be stifled in the womb, where blood was appointed by him, to be
our food, and the same decreed to become milk for our meat, Hos. 2. 9
the flax ordered to procure linen for our clouts, the sheep wool for our
coats, the hills wood for our cradles, and the valleys corn for our bellies,
and the earth veins of silver for our dowries, Job 42 15
without which, even Jobs daughters, might live as the Muses, So base is the
world
unfortunatly single.

3. Neither have we our being ever by them. The mother for a time may play with
her smiling spradling infant, and Isaac sport with his fair Rebekah, yet both
at last shall say of the same delightful objects, Genesis 23 4
Bury my dead out of my sight; and then the Father in Heaven keeps them better
then the truff, unto which the father on earth commits them: No sooner does the
babies soul take its farewell of flesh, then Angels secures it from devils,
seats it in Paradise by Gods command; the earth as a second womb retaining the
more gross part, until the birth of the resurrection by another sentence;
neither of which can be performed by the most indulgent parent.

There are that will have death have his name from division, Mors ^ (...).
yet it cannot separate us from this Father in Heaven; others from parting, as
cutting man in two parts, yet no part of us is out of our Lords protection,
though both parts be out of our sorrowful parents care and tuition. It is the
thought of an Ancient, that it gets its name from biting, that being brought in
by sin, when man was bitten by the old Serpent; Mors a mersu. Aug. Hypog.
contra Pelag. lib. 1 amaritudo.
yet this Father knocks out his teeth, that death feeds not upon us. Some will
have it named from its bitterness, but this Father so composeth this Dose, that
we are not killed by death. Some fetches it from having our arrears paid us,
Merco.
our life being a warfare, death pays, and discharges all that is owing us;
and so to be dead, is to be exonerated from further duty; yet it does not this,
for we stand continually before the face of this heavenly Father, Beda in Prove.
lib. 1. c. 3
out of the danger of hells assaults, and resting in peace, ac securus diem
resurrectionis, expecting an assured resurrection, being every way guarded and
protected of God, and continually praising of him, Psalm. 23 4, 5, 6.
and dwelling in his house for ever.

4. Neither have we our being always with them. Our Fathers may love us, yet
cannot help us; they may be capable to help us, yet at a great distance from
us: we may be exposed to the dangers of plague, pestilence, and Famine, and
they afford no relief; it is only he in Heaven that can do good, and deliver us
out of danger. Seek no place therefore (was a full rule) but the God of, and
in, all places, Chrysostom. ad Pop. Anrio. Hom. 79
thy self being a Temple unto him; and where thou stands, there is thy Fathers
House, into which if thou go, and ask, thou will receiver a blessing.

One dying in a strange country, was somewhat dejected, but roused by
Anaxagoras, with a Be of good cheer, Diog. laert in. Anax.
the way to the dead is alike to all; Let us rejoice, for so is the way to
heaven; Let the foundations be destroyed, the Lord is in his holy Temple, his
eyes behold, Psalm. 11. 4
his eyelids try the children of men: And when the wind blows, and the
Mariner at his wits end, Psa. 107. 25
yet this Father hears, and brings him to his desired haven.

All which considered, Symb. Brixian. Com. in verb. Pat,
as Chemists call quicksilver, Pater omnium mirabilium, in a juster sense we
ought to acknowledge this Father, the Father of all wonders, the parent of all
miracles, and the most wonderful Father, being maker, begetter, preserver of
men and Angels.

Moreover, from our Fathers we have our well-being; our natural birth, like the
purest wheat, is attended with the dust, straw, chaff of original corruption,
from which young ones ought by their parents to be even by threshing, I mean
smiting, winnowed and cleared off, Bosk. de finis Bo. and Malor. lib, con. 1
and by that reduced to good order. In which the Lacedaemonians were famous,
requiring of their youth these duties to the aged,

Salutari appeti, decedi, assurgi, deduci, reduci, consuli. And to salute them
at a distance, to draw near them in affection, to give place to them in motion,
and to rise up to them in approaching, to lead them in their stumbling, to
conduct them in their wandering, and to consult them in our determining, is a
respect we owe the aged, as they are fathers; but to this Father in Heaven, the
Ancient of Days, we owe all these and more; and as a natural parent, naturally
conveyeth the natural life to his son, so he is to labor to propagate the
knowledge of his sons duty, in a gracious instructing, about the nature of holy
and comfortable conversation, and for that is indebted to his son, Nutrition,
Education, Instruction, Possession; which being viewed, God is to be owned, and
highly regarded, reverenced and loved, as an excelling all, Progenitor: Man
having eminently from him,

1. Nutrition. A parent is to give his son bread, Mat. 7. 9
not a stone; but it is he in heaven must both send the loaf and give the
stomach, heat to digest it, or the bones shall never strengthen: And for all
the care Fathers take, we are directed to look upward for our daily bread, and
to obtain which, the greatest Father must bow his knee, and pray for his own;
yea, show me that Father, that by taking thought, can add, though he have meat,
one cubit to his sons stature, this heavenly-one excepted, and the omission of
daily prayer, may be passed without a censure, but speculation making this
certain, that duty ought not to move retrograde.

2. Education. This is held so necessary for our well-being, that we judge him
not a Father who neglects it; and what an Orator said of Eloqution, Sen. de
Ira. lib. 2 c. 11
may be said of Education; It is the first, the second, the third thing, the
main thing toward children, to be performed: The Moralist forbids softness,
and we must advise against viciousness: And as there are many arguments in
Scripture, demonstrating Gods goodness; so this of Education is performed by
him in so supreme a manner, that his righteousness is argued from his teaching
sinners in the way, Psalm. 25 8
and his saving truths are so industriously inculcated, that the very damned in
that day, shall be made without excuse.

A profligat youth, led to execution, desired to speak to his mother; and in
stead of whispering, Bosk, ^t Sup. lib 2 con. 8
bit a piece from her face, saying, Sit hoc maternae educationis pretium, Let
this be her reward for my education; for, it is not the Magistrate, but my
mother, that has brought me to the Gallows: This gave ground to that of the
King, Pro. 22. 6 T^gur. verse.
Train up a child in the way that he should go: Initia, enter him in it at
first, and hold him so in the love of it, that he may delight in the exercise
of virtue for ever. Let search be made, God has not one son that is idle, or a
drunkard, or that obeys not his voice, or that is cruel to his own flesh:
David kept sheep, and God kept his heart, as harmless as his flock; yea, when
he turned unto sinful folly, he was brought back again with the rods of men: 2 Samuel 12 10
So far is God from allowing vice, through fond, I should say, sinful
indulgency: But admit the highest degree of detestable vice, no Father, but he
in heaven, can remove the old, Ezekiel. II 19
and implant a new heart, seriously to contemn for hidden pleasures.

3. Instruction. He can so teach, that the greatest dolt shall learn wisdom, 2 Timothy 3 15
and smallest infant shall cry, Hosanna, making them both wise unto salvation;
1 Samuel 2 11
that like little Samuel, they shall grow before the Lord, by his own Spirit,
teaching them within at the heart, into which Cantore, an earthly Father, dare
not so much as look.

One Author mentions of a dull Prince, so doltish, Ca^s. holy C.
that he was never capable to learn the names of the four and twenty letters,
in the Christ's Crosse-row, not when he had four and twenty Pages waiting upon
him, each one being named according to a letter, the first, A, the second, B,
etc. So vitiated a brain can be thoroughly cleansed by the eye of this Father,
and their capacity so extended as to understand the Law, by which he shall be
wiser then all his other teachers, Psalm. 119 98
then all his enemies. But, suppose we had all knowledge, yet, who is fit to
pray, except he in^use in us the very thoughts of spiritual desires? and, who
can hold out in prayer, Fulg. ad pro. c. 2
unless he uphold what he begun, and make that flourish which he did sow; and
bring that to perfection by his mercy, which he first rooted in us by his love.

4. Possession. Their Fathers, like Jacob, provide for their Joseph's, Genesis 48.
22.
and as Job his daughters; A dutiful father will give inheritance to his sons
among their brethren; Job. 42. 15.
yet their portions being earthly, perishes as dung, while the legacy of that
heavenly Parent, being better then Gold, because riches and honor are both of
them durable: which not being here found, Prove. 8. 18
Bonds, Contracts, Testaments, are crowded with this name, Death, which being
excluded, and of no force in the inheritance of the Saints: Deuteronomy. 31 6
Be strong, and of good courage; Fear not little flock, it is not only your
Fathers pleasure, Luke 12. 32
but his good pleasure to give you a kingdom; little though you be in number,
nature, and beauty, yet, the Kingdom shall be yours; which for Unity,
Stability, and Majesty, is not once to be named with the Terrene-Conquests;
trembling and doubt^ull parents, bequeaths their covetous and contentious issue.

As men are called Fathers by nature, so from favor too; yet when their
kindness is balanced with his, in this Preface, the Crown of all glory and
paternity, is alone to be set upon his head: whether you eye their Benefits,
Cares, and Sagenesse.

1. For Benefits. Jobs liberality made him the poor man's Father; Job. 29. 16
and yet, what could rich, I should say, poor Job do? had he not all his plenty
out of this Fathers storehouse? yea, if he had wanted Gods leather, he had
gone barefoot: and were the least of us not confident of his goodness, in
providing for us bread, we should go with small comfort, with Joseph, Genesis 43.
16
to our homes at noon.

2. For Cares. He who provides, relieves, educateth, or teaches Orphans, or
the poor, or desolate, 2 King. 2. 12
is gratified with the name, Father, Isa. 49. 23
as Elijah was by Elisha; and thus Kings become Fathers to the Church, 1 These.
2. 7
and Paul to the Saints: yet, God being all in all, caring for all, ruling in
all, being King of kings, turning men's hearts according to his pleasure,
Killing and keeping alive, conform to the determinat counsel of his own just
will, deserves the appellation in a far sublimer sense.

3. For Sageness. An old wise Counselor will be named Father, and so much the
more deservedly, when in judgment he always proves successful; the hairy head
is to receive from all, a grave and reverend respect, this Lord and Father more
then all, who being old as Eternity, is called the Ancient of days, and his
hair said to be like pure Wool, that is white, Dan. 7. 9
soft and fine.

All this considered in him, as being our own Father, not our step-father, we
are to glory with that great Apostle, the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, 1 Ephesians. 3. 5
who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ
Jesus; and having predestined us unto the adoption of Children, by Jesus
Christ unto himself, and in magnifying, for improvement, we are to exercise, 1.
Thankfulness, 2. Obedience, And, 3. Observations upon his Providence.

Our Father, etc.
HAving seen the Person we pray unto, Kings expos. (...) the L. P.
the next thing in this holy Preface, that commands our observation, is the
manner we pray after, where Presumption is first checked, lest any say, My
Father; as also Atheism, lest any say, Thy Father; both which are equally
abominable, and deviating from this rule, enjoining to say, Our Father.

A holy man in an iron age, was affray'd to speak of the necessity, Aug. de
Quat. virtur. charitat.
dignity, utility, of brotherly-love; yet, love, shame, and duty, with a desire
to have his hearers unite, extorted from him an Oration, a treatise upon that
subject: Making the same Apology for my self, 1 Timothy 2. 1
knowing that Prayers are to be made for all men, and hindered by nothing more,
then by, meum and tuum, mine and thine, whereas ours ought to be the Christians
Motto, God ever requiring, as piety to himself, charity to man.

Let us see the necessity of this charity, 2. The hindrances of it in our
days, 3. The obligations that lie upon us, to remove those hindrances.

Not to speak of the devils or damned, who for ever are excluded the verge of
all prayer; there is a common charity we owe all by nature, Gal. 6. 10
as they are men, and a special charity we are to carry unto all for grace, as
they are good men: The last is mainly here understood, yet the other not to be
excluded; for, as we are to do good unto all, so we are to pray for all, but
especialy for those of the household of faith, God being unto them a Father in
Christ, whereby they are Christian-brothers one to another, and ought to appear
with, and pray for, each other, upon many considerations; as, our sympathy,
Gods universality, the enlargement of our own glory, the Saints exemplary
piety, and from our own extravagancy, and misery.

1. From our sympathy and similitude in nature, Ephesians. 4. 4
by generation: Not only are we of one blood, root, and sprung originally from
the stock of one Father, even Adam, which among Barbarians, will be a
persuasive motive to union, but we have one Lord, one hope, and why, Romans 12 15
therefore not one Prayer, and one Psalm, and one heart, to rejoice with them
that rejoice, and weep with them that weep.

Abraham no sooner knew of Lots captivity, then he armed his servants, Genesis 14
16
and fighting the pillagers, redeemed the prisoners, and also, brought again
his brother Lot, so called, as being of the same stock with him; though in line
but his Nephew. Genesis 12. 5
If our father Abraham ^ought, may not we pray for a Sodomite, for a friend,
because a brother may be, and certainly is, 1 Pet. 2. 5
concerned in him. Christ and his Church are but one body, and thou, with thy
brother, are as living stones in the building; if he be shaken, remember thy
self, for a hole in the wall may prove fatal to more than one, but principally
to him who is heedless, that is, prayerless.

Poverty is want of means, sickness is want of health; and in the first, as
well as in the latter, James 5 16
are we to confess our faults one to another, and pray one for another, and our
Father being equally concerned in all of us, we ought the more fervently to
interest our selves in each other; there being this difference betwixt our
faith and love, that our faith is closshanded, and we believe for our selves;
but our charity is open-handed, open-eyed, and all for others. Corpus quidem
nostrum, our bodies are confined to one place, Chrysostom. Epist. 2. ad Inno.
but our souls by the wings of charity, must flee all the world over; that
though in the greatness of this journey, we be bodily at a vast distance, yet
by piety and love we may be present, having fellowship and communion.

Jesus pitied a multitude wanting bread, and gave it them; Ioh. 6. 5
a Widow when her son was dead, and said, Noli flere, weep not; and to him who
was dead, Luke 7. 13
said, Arise, to persuade our otherwise flinty souls, to some sparkles of
compassion, when struck upon by the steel of our brothers sad countenance, and
pressing necessities; and if this prevail not, Behold the man, is not our
Fathers image in his eye, and that will enforce us, if we be sons, to relieve
him with our substance.

If thy brother be under any temptation, he ought to have thy commendamus, that
the Fathers wrath wax not hot, assuring thy self, if when thy brother is under
the rod, thou come with tales to edge the indignation, by aggravating his
offenses; Thy unbrotherly carriage in the sight of so indulgent a parent, will
take his hand from his already humbled son, and the remainder of wrath, to thy
greater astonishment, shall be laid on thy back, as a punishment for so
unseasonable address. Therefore, Christian, think upon, Remember us, O Lord,
the children of Edom, and fear to insult. Think upon the Devil in the case of
Job, and fear to accuse; and of Doeg in the case of David, Ber. de modo been
viven. Ser. 13
and boast not of mischief: for hatred and envy makes a man to dwell in
darkness, but love and amity clears the eye, and makes him behold God; for so
much only are we in his congregation and ^avour, by how much we are toward his
people, our enemy, in favor and affection.

It is recorded of Hannibal, Val. Max. lib. 9. 24.
that his father beholding his morosity, took him at nine years of age, and
upon an Altar made him swear, irreconciliable enmity and hatred to the Romans,
which fastened so much upon him, that being demanded concerning the end of the
Carthaginian War with Rome, made no reply, but struck the ground, and made a
dust, denoting thundering-war, until either Rome or Carthage were levelled,
which happened accordingly. What ever Heathens did to wed themselves to
contention, though even among them such courses were condemned by the most
refined; 2 Timothy 2 23
yet for Christians to betroth their issue unto hellish debates, is not only a
scandal, in this present age to our adversaries, but a reproach to our selves,
being dedicated to God by our Baptism, Gal. 3. 27
and by it vowed charity to the body of Christ, upon earth, which vow ought to
be observed, if we expect to enjoy the benefits conveyed mystically to us in
that blessed Sacrament. Romans 6 23


Have thou an enemy in point of opinion, Matthew. 5. 44
or practice, love him; does he curse thee, bless him; does he hate thee, do
him good, and pray for him, though he despitefully use you: and what is that,
Greg. Mor. lib. 34. c. 12
pray for him? but that God would give them repentance, and bring them out of
the snare of the devil; Col. 3. 12
by which alone we evidence, that as the elect of God, Stobae Ser. 1. de virtut.
we have put on bowels of mercy. A Temple, said that Heathen Phocion, is not to
lack an Altar, nor the humane nature to be without compassion, which indeed
beautifies, and makes fragrant all our other endowments.

2. From our Gods universality, good meaning, or intention. Matthew. 5. 45
His Sun shines, his rain falls, his corn grows, equally on good and bad, just
and unjust; his fish is taken in the net, as well of the churl as of the
liberal; his water cools the reprobate, as well as sleep refreshes him who is
upright: and though God do, as sometimes he makes a difference, yet every one
who is even holy, ought not by and by to execrate such, whom they suggest to be
in evil courses, since the prayers of a dying Stephen, Act. 7. 60
may be so prevalent, as to prove instrumental, in snatching a persecuting
Saul, both from the counsel, and doctrine of the Pharisees.

And to cause the soul to take wing for the practice of this Doctrine of
Charity, consider,

1. The certainty we have of Gods willing all men to be saved. 1 Timothy 2 4
What meant providence to move Pilats hand for this inscription upon the Cross,
in Latin, Greek, and the Hebrew Tongue, John 19 19
JESUS OF NAZARETH THE KING OF THE JEWS, Luke 23 38
but to cause all of these Nations read, and be assured, that unto all of them,
there was a Jesus, a Savior, even Christ the Lord then dying for them, and
afterward to be believed upon by them?

His endowing his Apostles with the gift of Tongues, Acts 2. 4
was but to learn every man that heard the wonderful works of God, to believe
in God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth, and in Jesus Christ his
only Son, is as clear as the fire the Spirit came down in. Why then should dust
and ashes cross the purpose and good will of God, in endeavoring a blasphemous
opposition by, and wishing him ill, unto whom God has sent Ambassadors,
beseeching him to be reconciled to God? Put up, 2 Cor. 5 20
O man, thy desire, for the same end, and be not surly, for thou knows not but
that thy prayer may prosper. Ac primum noverimus, Ambros. de offic. lib. 2. c. 7
know this, that nothing is more profitable then love, and nothing more
hurtful or unprofitable then to malign; sedulously therefore study a good
opinion, a placid mind, and benign affection toward all men.

There is no sinner ordinarily so perverse, but has so much of the Image of
God, that under the greatest conflicts with revealed wrath, we may without sin,
both shed tears, and offer up prayers for him, 1 Samuel 16. 1
as Samuel did for Saul; yea, nature it self teaches us to love our friends,
and grace commands us to bless our foes; and we see children either have, or
study to have, some property of their father, and let this be aimed at, to
imitate our Father, rather in doing good, then in uttering curses (for that is
his strange work) and beseeching good for them, since we behold God has good
thoughts toward them.

2. The uncertainty of our being first placed. In the Register of Gods future
purposes, one may be intended his daily bread, before another be remitted of
his debts; one possibly is to be brought within the body of his Kingdom, before
another have his heart screwed up to become pliant to his Law and Will; since
therefore thou knows not where thy action is enrolled, nor when it shall be
called: observe the proposed rule, and pray for all men, of which thy self is
ever to be understood one.

Abraham did earnestly desire, Genesis 15. 2
and sollicitously beg a son by Sarah, and had one; yet before his birth, he
had a son of Hagar, this in providence being to precede, was to come out first:
And so it may fare with thee in thy pressing suits.

The words, Our Father, leads us to the consideration of a great mystery of our
faith, Hosh. ^ Lect. on L. P.
an Article of our Belief, the communion of Saints, making us pray for them
that hears us not; and leads our eyes to behold as many objects, as there are
letters to give (nos) we or our being; making us look, 1. visione reflexiva,
upon our selves, nos always includes me, and noster, supposes meum: Our,
speaks always mine, and give us our bread, intimats thou art hungry. 2.
Visione collaterali, side-wayes, and that both to the right hand, upon our
brethren by grace, and to the left hand, Romans 10 1
upon our brethren by nature; compassion working for both. 3. Visione recta
ascendente, to behold directly God himself. From my Author I infer, he that
looks not to the other two, shall never beholds this last: Prayer showing love
to God, which is shown purely by demonstrating love to men; 1 Ioh. 4 20
and though in the contrary passion he deceive himself, yet he cannot delude
his Maker, none being admitted into his house, but whom he finds charitably
qualified; that being the place where men must live together; before they
enter, C^p. in O^a^* Dom.
they must pray together: And none knowing who shall first enter, let us call,
Our Father.

3. The probability of the souls being the more enlarged. As the bigger the
Star, the greater is the shine, so the broader the soul be, the more beaming is
the glory; and the better service, Dan. 12. 2
the better wages. They that be wise shall shine as the firmament, and they
that turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever, holding forth degrees
of glory for a reward to them, whose lives are more eminently holy, which is in
no one thing more elucide then in charitable praying; for that Petition, whose
rise is necessity, A^thor imperfect Hom. 14. in Matthew. Chrysostom. Hom. 1. Psalm. 118
does not so sweetly relish with our God, as that does, whose basis or
foundation, is love and charity. Yea, h^c est Christianorum bonitas, it is the
beauty, glory and splendour or Christianity, to walk as Christ walked, in
relation to enemies, persesecuters, and slanderers, and overcome, as did
Christ, evil by good.

We are to lay hold on eternal life, and he that would grasp much of any thing,
ought to extend, and to span his fingers to the utmost extension nature can
allow; Open thy mouth wide, with good words, in peaceable expressions, and thy
hand with good works, and benevolent actions, the reward of all will be a
fellowship with the Father, 1 Ioh. 1. 3
and the Son, glancing upon thy soul, by thy prayers returning into thy own
bosom.

Two contentio^s persons agreeing to stand to the umpirage or arbitriment of
Archidamus, Plut. in Lacon. Apo.
were by him brought into the Temple of Minerva, and there made to swear, the
standing to his determination, and after adjured them not to stir, until they
both agreed. O if there were such a heart in us, that God might behold us,
flying as doves to the windows, Isa. 60. 8
that as doves we might have no bag of gall, implying sweetness, and in flocks,
to signify our unity and oneness, and flying, to evidence our readiness and
zeal for each others good.

We read of a Temple in Athens, dedicated to Mercy, Primad. ^r. Acc^d. Part 1.
c. 30
into which none was to enter but the beneficient and helpful, and that
attested by the Senate. How should that structure have stood solitary in these
days of strife and debate, wherein daily annoyances have intoxicated the most
composed soul, and made it obnoxious to uncharitable surmises, 1 Timothy 6 4
harsh and dismal roavings, unjust, undecent, and to say no worse, immoderat
expressions? But hoping better things, we proceed to extort a con^ession of the
necessity of praying, according to this universal rule, from

4. The Saints piety, Genesis 18 32
and enlarged devotion. How af^ectionatly did Abraham plead for Sodom, though
he knew their iniquity, and gave no particular account of his pity toward his
Nephew Lot, but showed his desire to be equally extended for the rescuing of
that cursed brood, from the ^ury of heavens, not to say hells flames: And if
one said, Mentior, let be accounted a liar, Ambros. Hex. lib. 5. c. 16
if inhospitality was not Sodoms ruin, it might truly be said, let us not be
credited, it inhumanity be not the sin of this generation, and will prove the
bane of this present age.

What tears of sorrow? what workings of compassion? yea, no question, what
pressing arguments, 1 Samuel 16. 1
did Samuel probably in retiredness shed, and put up, that castaway Saul might
be again taken into favor? And though we only find that Noah preached to the
old world, 2 Pet. 2. 5
it is not once to be suspected, but that its unholy life, and predicted ruin,
brought from his tender soul, both prayers and tears, for their deliverance
from the threatened flood, by living according to his doctrine.

How often did Moses improve his interest with God, Exodus 32 31
craving with inexpressible affection, Isreal's pardon? prompted thereto by
nothing more, then from his innat zeal for that peoples happiness, though
always backs^iders from God, and frequently abusers of himself.

And how passionatly did our Lord weep over Jerusalem, Luke 19 41
when she had stood our her day; which one argument ought to induce the
proudest, and most self-conceited among us, to argue our selves into this
triumphant grace of charity, not only for the holy, but for the sinner, though
he contradict, and blaspheme, that he may be transmented, changed from his
irreligious conversation; yea, until with Samuel, 1 Samuel 16. 1
we get an absolute discharge from heaven; or with Paul, honored with a view
of the Book of Life, by real revelation, we are to pray for all men, though
Christ himself should remain speechless, Matt. 15. 23
as disdaining such requests, as did the Disciples for that woman of Canaan.

The Greeks in the celebration of their marriage-festivals, Bog. Archa.
Atticae. lib. 4. c. 7
took the galls of such beasts, as were sacrificed to the gods, and in a
ceremonious indignation, threw them behind the Altar; hinting their abo^^ency
of any bitterness that might arise between the young couple: And is it not hence
a shame for this generation, whose profession, betrothing us as Virgins unto
Christ, 2 Cor. 11 2
to live in, and upon the very gall of bitterness, making feasts of the
relation of falls, calumnies, hellish suggestions, sad and sinful practices, of
their brethren: so far wide are we from the due observance of those Christian
Laws, which oblige us to pray over, and weep for the enormities our eyes
behold, or our ears are informed of.

Every one of us, says our Royal Expositor, is commanded to call him, Our
Father, in the Plural Number, King James Med. on the L. P.
to show that holy communion, which is among the Saints, and that every one of
us is a member of a body, of a Church, that is compacted of so many members,
contrary to those little up-starts in Amsterdam, where two or three make a
Church: How should that Kings zeal have inveighed against these, had they aimed
at so much presumption, which some particular persons with us has arrived at,
even to Church themselves, and excommunicate from Heavens glory, all whose
opinions do not quadrate with their own. But,

4. From our extravagancy and malever sation, Aug. de Temp. Ser. 135
may we press this duty. Under this Fathers power, is the Servant and his
Master, the Soldier and Commander, the Rich and Poor: All of which, in our
several stations, has caused one another to fall by our ill example, which
might move us so highly, to resent it, as to make us dread, lest the failings
of others, be by justice reputed ours, and so all liable to double stripes,
first, for our own offenses, in their simple nature, Luke 12 47
then for their aggravations in working upon others.

It was this, as many think, made the rich man beg, Luke 16 28
that one might be sent from the dead to forwarn his brethren of the place of
torment; he having been an ill example unto them, knew each of them would in
that respect be a saggot to his own fire, Jude v. 15
by the impresses that his former actions should engrave upon his despairing
conscience: Therefore let us pray for our brethren here, or we may fear
compulsion through a heliish agony, may cause us curse our selves, Rev. 16. 10
not them hereafter.

5. From our own misery, and forlorn condition, Mat. 5. 46
let this duly be performed. What reward can we expect for loving or praying
only for them who are of our own sect or party; since Gospel-precepts go
further, and the promises thereof show more; 1 Pet. 3. 7
for, from what Arguments might love betwixt man and wife have been enforced,
and though heirs of the same grace of life, might be a sufficient bond to unite
their dear respects, yet that your prayers be not hindered, is thought a more
binding reason.

Whence it sadly follows, that even the prayers of this Age, are debarred from
having access, we, not living as heirs of the same life, but in revengeful
spite, frowning at, Act 54
and even cursing them, whose contemplations are heavenward, if in one jote
dissenting from us.

Our misery in the neglect of this charity is so much the greater, as that we
might procure by praying one for another from him who is the hearer of prayer,
Psalm. 65. 2
1. A removing of the occasions, or temptations of our sinning. 2. Possess the
heavenly joy the believer has, Zach. 10 4
at the conversion of one sinner. 3. Escape those plagues that have befallen
others for sin, etc. A Daniel, a Noah, a Job, may by their servent
supplications, Ezekiel. 14 14
save themselves from sudden calamity, which like an amazing thunderbolt,
shall at last pierce the interior parts of that soul, whose breast is hardened
against the mishaps of men, and whose spirits are careless of what befalls men.

When God scourges a Land, his very sondlings (so to speak) must not expect
immunity, they not being without their saults; how much more shall his severity
rage against them, who do not only neglect to bring water to cool and allay our
heat, but pour on oil to augment the fire: Psalm. 109 16
Since such as love not peace, nor delight in blessing, nor rejoice in mercy,
are threatened with the want of them, when their souls are most exposed to the
contrary perils, and may chance for their fiery life to die like Constantius
Copronymus, whose last words were, I am condemned to inextinguishable flames.

They might charge me perhaps with cruelty, should I enlarge the story, Gros.
Hist. Horrib. lib. 1.
and show how his body, as unworthy of burial, was first burned, then thrown
into the Sea; but this inference is harmless, to induce all to live peaceably
with living men, lest just Providence refuse them a lodging with the dead, when
they are to be joined with them.

That is not absurd to be added, which is taught us in the fabulous divinity of
the old Poets, Natal. Com. Mythol. lib. 2. c. 9
of Pluto their supposed god of wealth, whom they held to be nursed by Pax,
that is, peace; sufficiently knowing, that where peace and amity is not an
inhabitant, it is not the wit, nor industry of man, that will prevent indigence
or poverty: Such therefore, as complain, of the decay of substance (and who
complains not?) shall make a more hopeful harvest at the return of the year, if
they would maugre malice, cultivat their bosoms, grubbing up the thorns and
brambles which grow therein, and makes their fellowship dangerous, sowing it
with ^eed of the love of God, which would produce fruit in the love of man,
Psalm. 67. 6
and then the Lord being our God, the earth should yield her increase Unity
being as Hermons dew to the hills of Zion, Psalm. 133 3
the means wherein we shall have the blessing of fruitfulness, and to that life
for evermore.

Let us now enter upon the causes of that uncharitable spirit in our days,
wherein this precept, so pray ye, is not heeded; and though there is no cause
for it, yet there is a source whence it arises; as,

1. From each ones natural corruption, Psalm. 18. 23
not being searched after. He, naturally has pride, he envy, he curiosity, he
uncleanness, he intemperance; which suffered to grow, spread diverse branches,
and they again bring forth infinite sprigs; all which, finally will be mother to
direful actings, and ridiculous disputings, the bane of this transported, Isa.
1. 4
profane, impure, talkative, and speculative age.

In hac dilectissimi unitate sanctorum, In that unity that is to be seen among
the Saints, LeoMag. Ser. 10
there is no spare room for the proud man, nor place for the covetous, nor
pretense for the envyous, or for whatsoever vain glory boasts of, or wrath is
eager for, or luxury is itching after; these being known not to belong unto
Christ, but in covenant with satan, and far from being owned as pious; Fremit
itaque, therefore the adversary to peace rages, etc. If this Age be examined
by this true rule, many pretended Saints, and loose Professors, should be
surnamed by some other thing then Christian.

2. From each ones having too great respect for his own opinion. Phil. 2. 21
Is it not obvious to the most purblind in our neighborhood, that by marrying
our selves to our own humor, sordidly called a principle, we have divorced our
selves from the God of love and peace; eagerly contending for to make prize of
all, which have not paid Toll and Custom at our board, according to our own
private law, or book of rates, which yet is as different as there are heads to
invent, making our confusion the more irreparable, Lam. 2. 13
and our consciences the more insensible; yea, our vilest actions, the more
excusable, as that each sinner inferrs the soundness of his own positions, from
the rottenness he beholds in the others practice. Acts 23. 9


Love is generally divided into five sorts; that of God, Deuteronomy. 6. 5
that of our neighbor, that of our Country, that of the World, and that of
our Selves; this last is so near, and so dear, and so choice a bit, that before
it be not fully enjoyed, all the other shall pass uncourted; yea, had we a
love to the things of this world, this generation would not so eagerly seek
their own pleasures, for, sondness in this makes the other languish before us,
our projects for Government, digging sepulchers visibly for interment of
Gospel-practice. Iud. 16,


3. From each ones too great aspect to his own profit; Then were murderers,
complainers, men walking after their own lusts, their mouths speaking great
swelling words, when men's persons were had in admiration. Many other reasons of
this sort might be added, as Gods just judgment upon us, for our late
barbarous, unchristian, dishonorable, treacherous, seditious, rebellious
behavior, toward Authority, our Country, our Relations, our Religion, our
Selves; which particularly to discuss, were a task too great for a By-nature,
designed Historian.

Subordinat to these, our Peace is obstructed, and Charity banished.

First, by our weighing Doctrine by men; A sound truth will be received as
Orthodox from one man's mouth, 1 Cor. 1 12
which from the mouth of a Cephas, a Paul, or an Apollos, were they alive,
should either be condemned, as heretical, Acts 24. 5. and 13
or thought unsavory salt. There is a second, surmising evil things of men,
neglecting duty owned by themselves, lest evil should thereby follow upon
others, which evil none sees so consequential to that duty, but it may and
ought to be undergone; there is a third, bearing a real hatred to men, for
which it may be asked what the Ghost of the Murdered, said to Pomenes, Quare
me occidisti? Why do thou kill me, or hate me? the tongue of the malicious
being equally mortal, to that of the talebearer, which is a maul, Prove. 25 18
a sword, a sharp arrow.

Qui odit Fratrem, says one, He who hates his brother is in darkness; and
again, is a murderer, he goes out, he comes in, yet he is chained unto
guilt, Aug. Hom. 40.
do not imagine he is not imprisoned; for, Carcer ejus, cor ejus est, his own
heart is his prison, and there he is tormented. Where is there a Nathanael,
admired of Christ? nay, where is there a Gerhard bemoaned by Bernard? O amicum
fidelem, Ber. sup. Cant. ser. 26.
O faithful friend, in whom there wanted not friendly behavior, and all
offices of love and charity, and who sought not his own things.

This puts an obligation upon us, deliberatly to study, the acquisition of this
universality of love, that in our prayers we may remember all men.

Unto which, the very word Religion binds us, Aug. de civit. Dei lib. 10. c. 4
Religio, from Eligo, as choosing God to be ultimat end, and not our selves; or
rather from Religo, that binding us together; and by this, as by a livery are
we known to be Christians indeed, B. of Ex^et Rap. sod. lib. 1. mis. 5
that is, Chrismate sacro, anointed with the holy Ghost (for so the word by
interpretation) whose character is love, which, as the pitch to the Ark, should
be within us and without us, to hold us together; Genesis 6. 14
and though true peace be tied to the Church, yet what Religion is there, the
embracers whereof have not a mutual regard one to another? To pass both Ancient
and Modern Heretics; It is observable, that the Turks have not been of late so
vehement in fighting against the Persians as formerly, their opinions touching
Mahomet, being now more clearly known then before; and if nothing will prevail:
O that Christians would ruminat upon that of Christ, Woe unto thee Chorazin,
Luke 10 13
for if the mighty works had been done in Tire and Sidon which have been done
in thee, they had a great while ago repented.

But why should I say Christians; for look about, Aug. de vita Chr. c. 11
and where, or how few are there, for number tu illum Christianum put as, in quo
nullus Christianitatis actus, is he to be called Christian, who has no
righteousness in his conversation, who oppresses the poor, and loads the
miserable, who robs others, who gives his tongue to lying, his lips to
obscenity, his hands to sacrilege, his soul to hypocrisy, by worshipping in
the Temple, as if God knew none of this? Wherefore, Charissime in Christo, good
Reader, let us pray, that the love of Heaven abate self-love, that piety cool
our fury; modesty, Aug. de salut: docu. e. 18
our lust; moderation our talkativeness; fasting, our curiosity; sobriety, our
drunkenness; meekness, our uncharity; humility, our pride; and the love of God,
and our neighbor, the love of this present world; and then, and not before,
shall we be Christians indeed, and univocal children to our Father which is in
Heaven.

For the very form of our supplications, binds us to this union. Granting to
the earnestness of some, that this Prayer is not to be used as a form, but a
rule only; yet as a rule it commands them to have no malice when they bow their
knee, Pro. 15. 8
but to pray for all, as burdened by the same sin, liable to the same sailings,
1 Timothy 2. 8
and justly may expect without mercy, the same punishments. How are they from
their own mouths condemned, that not only refuse not to pray for, but glory in
their cursing of their brethren, satisfying themselves to be called from this
or that opinion, this or that man? whereas in this, Greg. Naz. Orat. 30 in
Laud. Basil.
says a Father, we glory, Christianos esse and nominari, to be, and to be
called Christians.

The inheritance and expectation we all have of Heaven, binds us also to this
charity. Why should we fall out in that way, or separate in that road of
blessed concord, for those things especially wherein the judgment of God does
not concern it self, as not being essential to the purchasing of, or the being
abandoned out of Heaven? Peter required of his Converts, but repent, and be
baptized every one of you, Act. 2. 38
for the remission of sins: I am persuaded, that never was there an age, but
had its own particular contentions; nor person, but had his own beloved
opinion, extraneous to the principles of et^rnal life; yet Philip thought the
Eunuch richly endowed for glory, Act. 8. 37
and capacitat in the highest degree for Baptism, that he believed Jesus Christ
to be the Son of God. What heaps of interrogatories had he been troubled
withal, if to have been ^atechised, excentrick to this, by some spirituallized
men in our days? But to know Christ, and him crucified only, is no doctrine in
our times.

The Spartans consulting their wise Lycurgus about repelling an invading so,
Lycost. Apoph. de con.
had this wholesome counsel, 1. To remain poor, that their enemy might have no
temptation, and to end their private discords, that their uniting might cause
fear. And there is no surer way to confound the rage of a spiteful Devil, then
to be reduced to that old Christian temper, Act. 4. 32
of having one heart and one soul, which is not unattainable, if every man will
(as he ought) cast his eyes inward, and by viewing his pernicious thoughts,
cure himself of those Convulsion-fits, Ier. 4. 14
which to the affronting of the very image of God in his face, or converse,
befalls him, in dwelling in spleen, rancour, and malice, and it shall evidence
a perfect recovery, when his enlarged soul shall praying, say, Our Father.

As to what may be objected, touching Turks, Jews, Traitors, or our own
enemies, or those of our Country, we must always difference the enmity from
the enemy, or the power from the person; the Turks power we are to pray
against, or our adversaries force or wisdom, but the person ought ever to be
supplicated-for, Act. 7. 6^
were he stoning us to death, as Jesus did and Stephen, for (excluding lawful
war) we are not to do otherwise, without a special revelation, 2 Kings 2. 24
as did Elisha in his cursing the children.

If it be demanded, whether a holy man may not say, My Father, when he prays;
It is answered, that some thinks it is proper to Jesus only, Matt. 26. 42
to cry, My God, or say, My Father; Genesis 24. 42.
yet, since Abraham's servant designed him, Lord God of my master Abraham, and
David most often in the Psalms, John 2^ 28
expresses himself thus, my God, my King, and that Thomas said, my Lord and my
God, without a check: Ier. 1. 19
Yea, there being a precept that it shall be so said under the Gospel; It ought
not to be accounted sinful, especially when the soul is in private; yet, always
care is to be had, that in this personal applying of God to thy self, thy
thoughts exclude none who are called by thy Fathers name; for, as Our Father in
the general indirectly includes thy self, so my Father in particular by
reflection implies others, and this by interpretation is, Our Father.

Another Lacedemonion Lady, hearing an ill report of her son, Plut. in ^acon.
instit.
writ after this manner, There is evil heard of thee, mend it or die: So there
is evil known to be in this Age, and particularly, uncharitable walking, from
which save your selves, Aug. de Subs. Dilect. c. 4
or you die. Being separat from the God of love, unto whom, Creatura
rationalis, man is tied by love only; the love of God, Bern. de Modo been viv.
Ser. 5.
and the love of man, being as the breasts of the Church, which are lovely to
Christ, by which the holy soul is nourished, in cleaving to God, and letting
out good to man, to the godly, to our neighbor, pari dilectione est optanda
vita aeterna omnibus hominibus, and salvation unto all men, that heaven, the
next considerable thing in the Preface, as being the place we pray unto, may be
filled with our brethren; for which, Let the peace of God be in your hearts,
^ol. 3. 15
to the which also ye are called in one body.

Our Father which art in Heaven.
BEfore our thoughts pursue this part of the Preface, Heaven, Gods ubi, or the
place of his abode, which must be eyed in Prayer: It is fit to notice this
word, Art, which, though darkly, yet truly intimats Gods constancy, or our
Fathers immutability. Others change their affection, their opinion, their
situation, but the Lord changes not, and therefore we are not consumed. Yet
this is not objective to be understood, as though he changed not things before
him, Schib. Me^ap. lib. 2. c. 3
for that belongs to his free will, and can alter them as he pleases; but in
sensu composito, he determining his will to one thing, is unchangeable in that,
there being nothing that can persuade him to desist, alter his purpose,
heighten his reason, James ^. 17
or remove his habitation; he wanting the very shadow of changing, his
understanding being perfectly clear. Queen Elizabeth her motto of England, was
semper eadem, his is semper idem, being still the same, to day, yesterday, and
for evermore.

This of old was expressed in his Name, I AM THAT I AM, Exodus 3^ 14
Ehejeh Asher Ehejeh, I shall be what I shall be; referring to his will, his
nature, his purposes, his intentions, his love, his mercy, his word, his
promises, are everlasting; and therefore is his Covenant called a Covenant of
salt, Numb. 18 19
that is firm in it self, and preserving others: So that in Prayer, to cut off
all Satan's discouragements, we may competently be furnished with strength,
Numb. 18 19
in questioning our inward part; Luke 10 26
what is written in the Law? how read thou? and finding there the
expressions of everlasting kindness, Isa. 54. 8
boldly concur to thy Saviors precept, and say, Our Father which art in
Heaven. Other fathers moving from, and to, other places; from the Streets, to
their Tables, thence to their beds; whence, may be, they are shifted to their
graves, but this Father in Heaven abides the same for ever. Psalm. 102 24


I AM WHAT I AM, is like that which is, Rev. 16 5
which was, and which is to come, denoting both eternity and immutability; and
though St. Paul said once, I am what I am, yet as Kings their coin, he
circumscribes his performances, 1 Cor. 15 10
Gratia Dei, by the grace of God.

Cyrus dying, endeavored a diversion to his childrens sorrow, Zenoph. de Paed.
Cyr. lib. 8
and his friends malady, in discoursing about unity and virtue, and the gods,
and closed his eyes, commanding that none should behold his soul-less body, but
that the Persians being invited to his Sepulcher, all should rejoice that Cyrus
was with the gods, and secured for ever against suffering of any evil. May not
the Christian, concluding from the paternal relation God bears unto him,
Psalm. 91 1.
secure his soul from all damping considerations, which can arise from his
perplexed heart, upon the entertaining thoughts, respecting Gods immutability,
and sublimity, he being in heaven, eternally ruling, and unchangeably abiding
to award entanglements.

Father, gives of it self significant and apt succors, to virtuat the practice
of Prayer, but a more manifest vigor is acquired, when this qui es, which art,
is reflected upon. Which expression being read backward, makes se, Symbol
Co^mento Brixian. in Verb. Es.
hinting his being, his immutable being, his unchangeable being is altogether
of himself, whence the supplicant may irrefragably infer, that though he has
changed possibly to sin, Mal. 3. 6
since the last Prayer, yet God is not altered, and therefore may be addressed
unto for pardon, vigorously in assurance.

It is to be noted, that the word, art, is not expressed in the Original, but
employed only; yet it is manifest that it is not idle in the Translation, but
operats upon the duty of Prayer.

1. Showing Gods presence in it, Exodus 2^ 4.
and therefore our awe. It is used of them only who are before us, for of the
absent we say not, qui^es, which art, but, which is: And therefore, if the
women of Corinth were to be covered, 1 Cor. 1^ 10
because of the Angels, how much more ought all to have a holy modesty, when
they call upon God, lest eying him too sawcily, he make ready his arrows
against our faces, Psalm. 21 12
the visible seat of our shameful impudence. Take heed therefore, Eccl. 5. ^
not only to thy foot, but to thy knee, thy tongue, thy face, thine eye, Iam.
4. 3
when thou enterest into the house of God, or to thine own prayer-house, lest
thou be accounted hasty, saucy, and malapert, by asking of him wherewith to
nourish thy lust.

Thou may offend in thy lofty looking, with the Pharisee, Mat. 6. 7 Theophil.
in l^c.
much speaking with the Heathen, much repeating with Battus; for one says,
Battology is inarticulata vox, like the talk of young children: Study thou
therefore to be manly, and pray with understanding.

2. Our confidence in it, and therefore let us be open in Prayer. Iam. 1. 6
The Sun never fails, for all the light he transmits unto the world; the Sea is
not diminished, notwithstanding the moisture it affords: Gods Storehouse will
not empty, though he enrich the world with his substance; while therefore thou
art with him, John 16 24
in thy house or closet, ask enough, ask, that thy joy may be full. Illi enim
(...) exaudiri merentur, he is heard a^^^ably of God, who being heated with
(...) zeal, Greg. Mag. in Quart. Psalm. poenit.
asks and does, what good possib^^^y is within the sphere of his activity. Ask
therefore, and ask again, and ask more, still capacitating for more good, that
thy own joy, and the joy in others may yet be more full. Aug. de Salut. doc^.
c. 28
Et ne demittas eum, and let not him go, until by love thy soul be joined unto
him, which shall corroborat, and yet more accumulat thy joy.

Alexander ordered his Treasurer to give Anaxagoras, as much treasure as he
pleased to demand; he asked a hundred Talents, (each Talent valued 375 pound
sterling) at which the Treasurer wondering, Plut. Apo. Alex.
Alexander gladned, saying, Recte facit, He does as he ought, knowing he has a
friend who can and will give him so much: Be not sparing in thy requests, but
beg the utmost, for the discharging of all thy debts, the assurance of all his
possessions, thy Father can do it, thy King will do it, the glory of Christ,
nor of the Angels, nor of the Saints, being not all diminished by thy accession
to those heavenly Mansions.

3. Our cheerfulness; therefore, let us not be disheartened in Prayer. Mat. 6. 6
That God should come and stand before us with sealed pardons, ought to
conciliat us to all heavenly exercises, but more singularly to this personal
treaty, to this intercourse of Prayer, wherein we can look God in the face, and
he behold our tears, when both are beyond the possibility of other Fathers:
What could Amittai have done for his beloved Jonah, Ion. 7. 2
when in the Whales belly; yet, this Pater in Coelis, God in heaven, delivered
him from all his distresses.

It is to be noted, that though God be often in Scripture said to repent; Genesis
6. 6
which implies a change of, Ex. 32. 14 Amos. 7. 3
and mutation in, mind, yet it is to be understood, rei mutatio, not Dei: A
change there was in the Ninivites first; and after in God, in the language of
men, that not being executed which was threatened, we call it repentance; when
God repreived their destruction; for, to speak properly, God has in himself no
umbrage of a change; but as the Stars of Heaven, are free from turbulency of
the Airs mutations, so is their Maker from man's tumultuous conceptions, his,
(not their) abode, being in Heaven.

In Heaven, that is, in the Saints, says a Father, by a harmless mistake,
concluding, that because wicked men may, Aug. de Ser. in Mont. Dei. lib. 2 1
Cor. 3. 17
and are termed Earth, so just men may be designed by Heaven, they being the
Temples of God, which Heaven is also said to be, yet not in a Figure, but in a
proper sense is he said to be in Heaven as a King is said to be in his Court,
that being the most glorious, ample, magnificent part of the created world,
discovering to us, power, quietness, observance in God, when we are at Prayer.

1 His power to grant what we ask. Psa. 11. 4
This word, in Heaven, prevents any harsh constructions flesh could make of his
delay in answering our suits, by letting the greatest infidel know, since he
can rule, and does reside in Heaven, he has power, authority, omnipotency, to
avert from us, what ever we fear, and bequeath unto us what ever we demand,
being there as a Father in his Cellar, Hug. Ca^d. in Matthew. 6
as a parent in his Buttry, as a King in his Exchequer, as a Prince in his
Council, as a Merchant in his Counting House, ready to perform the requests
made by us, 2 Samuel 22. 3
proper to those offices.

There can none ascend thither to assist him, in his designs, he there stands
in awe of none, to impede him in his purposes; we need not say, Mark 9. 22
if thou can do any thing, help us, for there he has done, and will do,
whatsoever he pleases, Psalm. 115 3
holding all under, and in subjection, laughing at those who obstinatly seek to
make resistance against his dominion. Psa. 2. 4


2 His blessed quietness to hear us when we ask. Heaven is remote from that
noise, and garboil, 1 Chr. 17. 16
with which our Earth and Sea, and the inferior Regions are infestred; It Is
true, it is compared to a Sea, but it is of Crystal, solid, bright and pure;
God is said to have two dwellings, Rev. 22. 1, 2
and they both evidence composure; 1. the Heavens, 2. the Humble: In both
which, Is. 57. 15
he is in so serene a Region, that if he can be said to have any work, it is to
look down and see who seeks after him. Psa. 14 2


3. Observance where ever we ask. As Heaven is above us, Psa. 34 15
so are we thankfully to acknowledge, that our prayers be not hindered, neither
by the roof of the house, nor space of the Air, nor the thickness of the
clouds, from appearing before God, and from being under his eye. The
pilgrimages of Rome are but pilgrimages, and their pennances, not very
comfortable; since we are by precept and example, to lift up our eyes to the
hills, whence our help must come; Psa. 121. 1
and disdaining such fruitless wanderings, let us look up to Heaven; which the
Moralist had some sense of, when he protested his knowledge, that the whole
world was his Country, the gods governing above him, Senec. de vi^a Bea^ c. 20
and about him, censuring, that is, judging his words and actions: Put God in
the place of gods, the saying is divine, and the practice thereof in every
place will make us holy.

Again, Pray after this manner, Our Father which art in heaven, Enforces our
souls to collect that in Prayer, God expects from us, Pureness, Zealousness,
Sadness, Reverence.

1. Pureness of soul, Iam. 4. 8
in not minding the Earth. is scarce good enough for us to look upon, or think
upon, at any time, but in prayer it ought to appear singularly despicable, Psa.
5. 3
our appetite ought to be where our eyes are fixed, and they by this precept
are extended toward heaven, 1 Cor. 5. 3
at which they ought to be intensely viewing, Philip. 3 20
that it may be demonstrated our affections are above.

2. Zealousness of Spirit for the things of Heaven. Psa. 16. 2
It supposes the eye thitherward, and implies the heart to be already in love
with glory: Man having one Muscle more then any other Creature, by which he
can, and does look directly upward, ought to be as a Pully fixed in his soul,
Col. 3. 1
to draw it Heavenward, for the attainment of heavenly bless, for which even
nature intimats a great respect, in affording man proper Organs to behold it;
that beholding may cause wondering, and wondering may effectuat a desire to
possess; Aug. Ser. de Temp. 135
Do not you therefore value or cleave to the Earth, having found a Father which
is in Heaven.

3. Sadness of heart for being out of Heaven. The first and second Petitions,
irre^ragably clear this to have been in our Lords eye, Hallowed be thy Name,
bemoaning the profaning thereof by wicked men, and let thy kingdom come,
regrating the delay thereof from good men: A child in a ditch, will cry for
help, and a Saint in the pit, will call for deliverance out of heaven, the
possession whereof being enjoyed by the glorified Angels, Earth beholding him
but as a stranger, passionatly invits him to beg its festination, or appearance.

There is Heaven, Ambros. lib. 5. de Sacram. c. 4
where there is no sin, where no wickedness is wrought, where death is not
felt, says one, pointing toward Heaven; and say thou, because of that, Thy
Kingdom come.

4. Reverence of the whole man. Greg. Naz. Orat. 30 in land. Ba^^.
It is said of holy Basil, that in sancta sanctorum non semel quotannis sed
quotidie ingrediens, appearing before the Lord in the holy of holys, he used it
not only once in, but every day of the year; Imitating Moses, Aaron, Joshua,
Elias, John the Baptist, Paul, etc. whose respectful and religious life, whose
awful and religious reverence unto God, in Prayer, has produced, and obtained
much mercy for themselves, and revoked many menaceing Edicts against offenders.

There are two vices especially, make our prayers not only wearisome to our
selves, but odious to God.

1. Nimia trepidatio, Page Ex. of the L. P.
Much fearfulness. 2. Nimia oscitatio, Much boldness.
The soul, when too much dejected, with the dreadful apprehensions of incensed
wrath, by sorestalled imagination, the fancy for reiterated offenses, only
representing hell, is curbed by this Phrase, Our Father: And when
self-confidence makes us more daring in our behavior, Mal. 3. 13
being stout before God, projecting rather, how to be homely, not to say
clownishly familiar, then how to be holy, or savingly sprinkled; we are
chastised by this expression, which art in Heaven, that making us serve with
fear, and rejoice with trembling, not presuming upon any works of our own,
Ambros. ut sup.
but solely depending upon Christ's merits, the only golden Vesture, wherein we
shall be accepted.

Our Father which art in Heaven.
OF all that ^eap of Accidents, by which one thing is distinguished from
another, God can, and is only differenced by his country and his name; two
remarks, communicable to none, are here designed to guide us in our addresses
to him.

All Translations read it Heavens, Shemajim, the Heavens. (...) ab (...) or ab
(...)
the Hebrews for Heaven having no singular number; In the first Language here,
it is thought to be denominated from its clearness to be seen; others will have
it so called from its betokening a mark, bound, or limit; Coelum, is derived by
some, from Covering, Celar, or Coelare.
others from Engraving, because of the luster of those Stars that seem to be
engraven upon it; others will have it so expressed from the cavaty and
hollownesse thereof: Coelum quasi (...)
Our word, Heaven, is borrowed from the Saxon Hefon, and to heave, for lifting
up, is yet good and ordinary English; yea, Scripture Language, Heaven being
above all, and receives a three sold signification in holy writ. Numb. 15 20


First, more largely, because more sensibly for the Region of the Air, in which
we behold the Birds and Fowls to reside, therefore called the Fowls of Heaven,
Psa. 79. 2
and may be called the lower heaven. Matthew. 6. 26
Next, more strictly, yet still visibly, for the spacious Firmament over us,
Genesis 1. 8
called Heaven, by God himself, and may be called the starry Heaven. Lastly,
and more closely, for the very seat of God, where he appears in royal Majesty,
admired of his Saints and Angels; and is called sometimes simply Heaven, 2 Cor.
12 2
sometimes the third Heaven, containing and circumscribing within, Dam. de
Orth. fid. lib. 2. c. 6
and about it self, all visible, or invisible creatures, God in the midst,
being the glory of it.

Yet observe, his being said to be in Coelis, in Heaven, has no servile
signification, as if he were excluded any other place, he being there only as a
King in his Court or presence, or as a Skipper in his Ship or Cabine, ruling
and influencing all by his authority, or greatness, guiding all with the
skilfulness of his hands. Ps. 78. 72


Let us see the nature of the Country; Its influence upon Prayer, as it eyes
that rule, so pray ye, which cannot be more exactly delineated, then by
pourtraying, though in rude draughts, the nature of this Country, whereof we
are Inhabitants: In which Death, Hatred, Rueing, Fearing, and Complaining,
fills the Table.

1. There, Psa. 116 3
(that is in Heaven) is life against our dying. In this earthly Country, we
are but hourly painting for breath, and at best in a storm sailing to the port
of our grave, and the many deaths we undergo, may sadly cause us superadde to
that old complaint, The sorrows of death compassed me, the pains of hell got
hold upon me, Psa. 18. 4
I found trouble and sorrow: In opposition to which, Heaven, our Fathers
Country, Rev. 22. 2
is said to have in it, the Tree of life, the Water of life, the Bread of life;
there being no care in getting it, no cloying in eating it, nor vexation to
keep it; whence the nearer the Saints draw to it, the sweeter do they sing,
Deuteronomy. 33 2
as Moses, David and Simeon.

Agite igitur: Strive therefore, that when worms shall destroy this body, Aug.
de Van. sec. c. 1
our souls being adorned by good works, (unto which our shortness of time,
calamities in time, and the graves of the rich shall prompt us,) we may with
all the Saints, rejoice in Heaven.

2. There is love against our hating: In this world we are pestred with ira,
Aelian. variae
furor, odium, wrath, Hist. lib. 1. c. 29
anger, and malice, contriving mischief against our brother, while our hand is
with him in the dish. I have read that a Ewe did yean a Lion, not a Lamb; such
yeaners, for all the world, are many of us, our pretended innocents, and
harmless, being seriously the dame to tyrannical behavior, and unnatural
opinions, which, though at first may be played withal, yet proves imperious
beasts of prey, toward those about them, when adult.

But in Heaven, each one joys in the prosperity of his fellow, admiring and
affecting him, because of his exceeding weight of glory, and God in Christ
rejoicing over all, in each one, as a Bridegroom over his Bride, giving them to
drink of the new Wine in his own kingdom.

Caesar observes, that at his coming into France, Non solum in omnibus
Civitatibus; not only in their Cities, Caes. com. de bell.
or Villages, but in every house there were factions; Gal. lib. 6 c. 4
Had that noble Commander the opportunity of returning to the world again, he
would (it may be) conjecture, France had crossed the Channel, and had been now
seated where Britain was. And though there be too much cause of complaining, of
many turning Prosylites to the Roman-See, yet it is more then evident, our
divisions may make us subject, and our sactions betray us, not to Cesars, but
to Romes dominion: ( Let him that reads understand) in a worse sense, then
Caesar meaned the other.

To what shifts are some put, to defend their barbarous morosity, in looking
ascue upon the virtues of the best, and aggravating the vices of the vicious,
whereby their lives are but a studious vitality, for desaming one another, and
then guilding their slander, by an adulterated reason. Timon's hating wicked
men, because they deserved no love, and good men, because they hated not the
wicked, was but a compend of the desperate fury, whereby this generation is
universally, and therefore miserably for punctilio's, woefully infected.

The single contemplation whereof, more pathetically melts the devout,
enlivening him for, and with a desire to depart, and to be with Christ in
Heaven; there being no Saul among those Prophets, nor Doeg among those
Abimelechs, nor Jeroboam among those Solomon's, nor no Satan's among those Sons
of God, nor Serpents among those Birds of Paradise. For though Hominibus
stul^is suavis est, Stella de Co^^temp.
the things of this world to fools be sweet, Mun. lib. 2. c. 1.
yet to the wise and prudent, they are but bitter; neither is it loved, but
when it is not known; wherefore such as have the Spirit of God, cries, How
long, O Lord? how long?

3. There is pleasure against our rewing. Amon loves to day a Tamar, Plato in
Phoedo.
but the same object of beauty he hates to morrow. Voluptas and dolor, pleasure
and sorrow, though of contrary dispositions, are near neighbors; yea, as in
the Fable, perpetual associats: for they once quarreiling, Jupiter, finding no
other means of reconcilement, so joined them, that he who embraces one, must
hugg the other. Others say, that he joined them together by an Adamantine
chain, Sphinx Theolog.
inseparably to remain: Philos. c. 19
and the best remedy the old Romans found for sorrow, was, the goddess
Angerona, (i. e.) of silence, whose image was placed upon the Al^ar of
pleasure, Dempster ant;
figuring that in the crowd of cares, Romans lib. 2. c. 19
there was no pleasure but in silence, a remedy, God wot, that increased the
disease.

But we have a more sure word of prophecy; for Heaven from its peaceable
pleasure, is denominated Paradise, Luke 23 43
and from its pleasant fruitfulness, there is represented, to endear our
respects, a tree of Life, whereof we shall plentifully feed, being ordained for
their eternal repast, who alienats their minds from the garbadge of this
present evil world, which is not in the same day to be named, with the fatness
of that house, Psalm. 36 8
and the rivers of his pleasures; rivers, not because they are passing, but
from their eternal overflowing: Glos. Ordin.
the very writing of this minds me, that somewhere it is said, that Pleasure
washing her self in a River, Sorrow came and put on her clothes, then lying on
the River bank, and traveling, every one ran to catch her, yet found but
Sorrow in Pleasures garment: our greatest comforts in the opinion of poor
Heathens, being overcome, and mastered with their congenit bitterness and
anxieties.

The consideration of which, Romans 8 23
made St. Paul to groan earnestly, and ought to urge upon us a proportionable
zeal to inherit that house made without hands, and to behold what manner of
love the Father has bestowed upon us, which, says one, affords unitly three
acts, videre, amare, laudare, Beholding, Loving, Praising God: and how should
grief be there? they entering (when into it) into joy, having joy above them in
God, and his Christ, joy about them in the Saints, and Angels, Psalm, 89 16
and joy within them, because of all; and therefore in his Name shall they
rejoice all the day, and in his righteousness shall they be exalted.

4. There is safety to remove our fearing^ All the splendour of this world being
but like Nebuchadnezzars image, having heads of gold, breasts of silver, yet
standing upon seet of clay, prognostics dissolution, Job 3. 25
and points it shall have an end. Job, even in plenty, when on earth, seared,
and foresaw poverty: And was not Fortune fancied by such as created gods,
Emblem. Alciat. Emb. 98
represented standing upon a round ball, showing aptitude to motion: Has not
the most Christian King a Cross upon his Golden Crown? and the great Mahumetan
glories in a half Moon, which more equally inferrs to us, a diminishing of his
greatness, then to himself justly, Est. 2. 21
it portends a growing of his power. The greatest Crown may be made to ^otter
by its own guard, but to our Fathers City there comes none, but detesters of
such baseness, yea, they are incapable of temptations thereunto.

Not to speak of the Devil, Eras. Chil. 1.
though even of him some are in as great fear, Cent. 9 Adag. 2.
as one was of Hercules, who hearing of his heroic atchievments, did hide
himself in a Cave, for fear lest he should see him, but spying him peeping
through curiosity, at first view died in a fright. I say, to pass Sa^an, there
is no thief can there break through, and steal, no fear of evil in their
thoughts, no snare in their walk, no scandal in their eye, no flesh to beguile,
Isa. 26. 3
nor world to allure, but all in perfect peace, that is, peace, peace.

5. There is largeness to take away our complaining. The greatest Kingdom here
is but a spot, when compared to the whole circumference of the Mapp; and it may
be, our portion in that Kingdom is not in the Cart at all: which makes men
look, not to say leap, over hedges, that with convenience, field may be joined
to field; but this Kingdom of our Fathers is spacious, and the most enlarged
soul has so much elbow-room, that the ecstasies of his Spirit are fixed in his
possessions, and the highest rapture he is transported unto, makes him not
grudge the glorious luster of his rich, because Sainted Comrade.

In our Fathers house are many mansions; Ioh. 14 2
wherein the soul is satisfied, being in the likeness of God: For, Matthew. 13 43
if beauty be pleasing, they shine as the Sun; does strength content them? they
shall run and not be weary, Isa. 40. 31
walk and not be faint; does royalty affect them? Rev. 21. 7
they are crowned Kings; if satiety please them? they inherit all things.
Solomon shall not then have only wisdom, nor Abraham obedience, nor Sampson
strength, no Phineas zeal; but every one shall be endowed with all, and
employed, not in looking asquint upon each other, but in eying, praising, and
adoring God.

Lewis son to Charles King of Sicily, contemplating these two Kingdoms
together, whereof we speak, said, Si regnum paternum considero; If I consider
my Fathers Kingdom, how little is it? how small is it? in comparison of that
which is upward, into which the soul is admitted, when a man once li^ts up
himself: This he spoke, who hardly saw the pavement of the palace of our
heavenly Father, and but hazy weather, the utmost coasts of that blessed
Country. Yet even that, did, and will, operat to that degree, as to put no
estimat upon the ^airest flourish, Earth can make at any time, much more at
Prayer: Unto which, there are these six things concurring. 1. Its largeness, 2.
Its fairness, 3. Its glory, Aquin. Ser. in Fest. S. Marc. Ser. 2
4. Its cheerfulness, 5. Its exercise, continual praise, 2 Cor. 5. 1
6. Its eternity, enduring for ever.

Touching the influence this description has upon Prayer, to repeat the same
things, being profitable, this account may be rendered.

1. That prayer is immediately to be directed to God in Heaven, in opposition to
all upon Earth: The best Father, is but Pater pulveris, Psa. 84. ^ Chrysostom. Ser.
68
a Father of Dust, and therefore, not capable to be for us, either a Sun, or
Shield. It is also a direction to pray to none but such whom we are sure are in
Heaven; At Rome, they are sainted, whom yet, save in common charity, we know
not but they may be damned: However it be, K. Jam. Med. on L. P.
let us be put in mind to lift up our hearts, to our Father, Sursum corda, who
is in Heaven.

Have a care, Mel. A. dam. in vit. Oecol:
said a dying Reformer of the last Age, Ioh. 2. 21
my dear Children, my Eusebi, my Irene, my Alethea, that you love God the
Father. Little children, says John, keep your selves from idols; Have a care
that you pray to your Father, says Christ to all his Sons, After this manner,
therefore pray ye.

2. That Prayer is to be offered up with reverent and spiritual thoughts, not
likening God to any Creature upon Earth. As we know not what is the likaness,
shape, or form, of the inhabitants of Heaven, so are we utterly ignorant of the
nature of God in it; and therefore, in Prayer, to conceit him a man, as some
atheistically do with us, or paint him like an old man, as some superstitiously
do, who are of Rome, is a discredit to his spiritual being: To desire to see,
Deuteronomy. 4. 12
and then to worship, is to worship without faith: Abhor therefore, such
idolizing, Chrysostom. Hom. 3. de incomprehens. Dei naturae.
and pray against the impress of such absurd vanity, the more absurd, that
there was no manner of similitude seen on the day the Lord spoke in Horeb; and
though we see heaven daily, yet can we give no account of its nature, how much
less of God, who is within it.

Euclid being vexed with an impertinent Questionist, Sphinx. Theol.
about the gods; tartly replied, Quae petis ignoro, Phil. c. 1
I am ignorant of these things, but this I know, that the gods have indignation
at such curious searchers. Sure we are, those that confine the illimited God,
in the imaginary space of any thing visible, or form his spirituality in the
likeness of what can be sancyed, creat a god which cannot hear them, and
slight a God will be revenged upon them.

Besides these, Church Mis. 154
men make God an idol, when they prepare not their hearts, nor fit their
affections for his service; and again, when all their religion is in the
Temple, and again, when they invent ways to worship God, and follow their own
imaginations. To speak of committing, or loving sin in secret, or of hoording
up wealth, with trust, or for-swearing themselves in judgment, were large
subjects, yet by these, God is made an idol.

3. That Prayer is to be presented with sincere and pure affections, Ezekiel. 33 31
not defiled with contemplating of Earth. This, so pray ye, (to show it once
more) renders Heaven, the object of our eye, and therefore, of our heart, to be
looking to Heaven, and pointing to the Earth, with the Roman Senator, is to
become sharers of his deserved scorn: and yet, how many are there, while Heaven
is in their mouth, flesh, fish, or ships, are in their heart: Acting too truly,
what in the Fable is said of the Wolf, Brom. de Oratione
when at School, for learning to spel Pa-ter, Father; but being by his Master,
ordered to put them together, in stead of Father, said, Agnus, Lamb, thinking
on his prey. An userer at the same time, made the like proficiency, and in
place of Fa-ther, said, Pecunia, Money. But let not this be among you, he is in
Heaven, and has his eyelids trying the children of men; not but that he is
every where, Psalm 11 4.
but in Prayer, he is by design said to be in Heaven, Cajet. in Mat. 6. 9
that our hearts and minds may be lifted up to the excellency of his dignity
and greatness, having all things naked and open before him, and therefore, thy
hypocrisy is apparent, Heb 4. 13
thy inside, being naked.

4. That Prayer is to be quickened, by confideing in the All- sufficiency of
God, to give what is asked, whether things of Heaven, or of Earth. By the
Heavens, and influences therefrom, is Earth and Sea sustained; he is in Heaven,
therefore in the Air, upon the great Waters: And because, he can order all for
his peoples good, Psalm. 50. 10
we are not to despond, and doubt of his sovereignty, but let our necessities
be known, whether for the Wine Press, or for the light of the Sun, or for the
Cattle upon a thousand hills, fish in the Sea, Fowls of the Air, Angels in
Heaven, or mercy from his bosom for his Son, John. 16 23
we need not doubt redressing.

He is in Heaven, and thence, he gave horns to the Bull, hoofs to the Horse,
teeth to the Lion, finns to the Fish, wings to the Bird, scent to the Dog,
motion to the Air, coolness to the Water, heat to the Fire, light to the Sun,
chain to the Devils, Iud. 6
strength to the Angels, his Image and his Son to man: what therefore, should
make the humble Orator to pray sorrowing, Matthew. 14 31
as those without hope? O thou of little faith, wherefore do thou doubt? He
is Almighty God, Genesis 17. 1
walk (pray) before him, and be perfect, be confident.

5. That Prayer is continually to be qualified with earnest considerations,
tending to the honor of God, while we are upon Earth. It is a dishonor for a
Prince to have suits made in his Presence Chamber, not adequat to the dignity
of that room: To ask of thy Father in Heaven, meat, money, or clothes, to
debauch with the glutton, to swill with the drunkard, entice with the stallion,
is a reproach unto his Majesty; ask things fit for Heaven, and do things like
Heaven, that it may be known thy Father is in Heaven, that is, in thee, Amb. in
Psalm. 119 Ser. 12.
as some expound these words, saying, Illi sunt Coeli, These are Heaven, in
whom there is Faith, Gravity, Continency, Knowledge, and a heavenly life.

Fulgentius, Vita. Full. Ante opera. c. 2
while young, had frequently these thoughts fluctuating in his breast. Cur sine
spe, etc. Why do I live on Earth, without the hopps of Heaven? what profit
shall the world at last bring me, if we love to be merry, is it not better to
have a good conscience, and how much better do they rejoice that fear nothing
but sin, and study but how to keep the Law? etc.

Let us pray for these, Romans 1. 18
or the like matters, as for the avoiding of judgments, for they are revealed
against all unrighteous men, from Heaven; Heb. 4 16
or for procuring of grace, for that becomes Heaven; And all weighty matters
bearing equality with Heaven.

View the whole fabric of the Lords Prayer, and there is nothing can be
accounted trivial, or base in it; the forgiving of sins, deliverance from evil,
the bread of our necessity, the fulfilling of his will, the advancement of his
kingdom, are substantial and solid purposes; so is the request that is first,
because the chief end of all, for the hallowing of the Name of God, which being
the first Petition, as impatient of any longer delay, we put a closure to the
Preface, Our Father which art in Heaven.

CHAP. II.
Hallowed be thy Name.
THis is the first part of the holy place; which our eyes are invited to
behold, I say, invited, for otherwise its dazzling might not only amaze us, but
utterly darken those Casements of the soul; those balls of light; our bodily
eyes; our souls intelligence.

What some have observed of all the Petitions, may be attested of this one; it
being 1. short, 2. full, or comprehensive; where, by the way, their arrogance
may be detected, whose popularity made them in public give this Prayer,
correctior and emendatior, abridged or enlarged to the people, as their
emptiness or vanity gave them occasion, or eloqution: Let thy Kingdom come in
our days, cried one; Lord, lead us not into temptation, cried another; equally
absurd, yet excusable, (because it might be from ignorance) in regard of them
whose singularity and pretended holiness, ascended the chair, and passed an Act
of Sequestration upon the Prayer it self, discharging it in the Church, so far
as they could, by their total ommission of it, or stigmatizing them who used
it: but for all their eminencies, the Lords Prayer is sacred, and verily,
verily, Mat. 26 13
where ever the Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached, that Prayer that he
has made, shall be used for a memorial of him.

The Petitions, like the Precepts of the Law, are divided between God, and man,
those aspecting God, are first placed, as Hallowed be thy Name, etc. those
respecting man then follow, as give us our daily bread: so that hallowed be thy
Name, is the first Petition, of the first Table, in this Law concerning Prayer,
so pray ye, because of which it is first to be considered

It shall not be much here debated, whether there be six or seven Petitions,
the Ancients are generally for seven, Agrip. de Occult. phi. lib. 2, c. 10
so are the Romish Interpreters, and some also of the re^ormed: The number
seven, was by the Hebrews called numerus juramenti, because Abraham in swearing
to Abimelech, took seven Lambs for a testimony; by others it is called numerus
ultionis, Genesis 4. 15
the number of revenge; for he that killed Cain, vengeance should be taken on
him seven fold. By others, numerus libertatis, the number of liberty, the
Hebrew servant being liberat the seventh year: By others, 2 King. 5 14
numerus purificationis, because the Leper was to be tried by seven days, and
Naman washed seven times: Hence some call it numerus Sacer, the holy number,
God rested the seventh day, Josh. 6 15
Jericho was taken the seventh day, Christ slept in the grave the seventh day,
Enos the seventh from Adam was translated: We have seven Lamps in Zechariah,
Zech. 4. 7
seven Trumpets, and seven Seals in the Revelation, and David praised seven
times in the day, and this has had so great veneration in all ages, that some
will have it, numerus or ationis, making deliverance from evil, a distinct
Petition, from that against temptation; approved by Chemnitius, and King James,
as shall be seen in due place, they showing good reason for this enumeration of
seven Petitions. Binchi. Melif. Theol. loc. 29 c. 5. Art. 2.


In the first whereof, we beg admission into his Temple, in Hallowed be thy
Name: In the second, to his Palace, in Thy Kingdom come: In the third, to his
Council, in Thy will be done: In the fourth, to his Granary, Give us our daily
bread: In the fifth, to his Treasury, Forgive us our debts: In the sixth, to
his Armory, Lead us not into temptation: In the seventh, to his Garden or
Arbory, Deliver us from evil.

Unto all which if we pray truly, Aug. ad Prob. cap. 12
all Prayer may be congruously reduced; in evidence whereof, receive a Fathers
judgment, Psa. 67. 3
with very small alteration: If any beg, Let the people praise thee, O God, let
all the people praise thee; says he not, Hallowed by thy Name? If any call,
Psalm. 80 7
Turn us again, O Lord God of Hosts, and cause thy face to shine, and we shall
be saved; says he not, Thy Kingdom come? If any supplicat, Psalm. 119 133
Order my steps according to thy Word; desires he not, Thy will be done? If
any demand, Prove. 30 8
give me neither poverty, nor riches; says he not, Give us our daily bread? If
any utter, O Lord my God, if I have rewarded evil to him that was at peace with
me, Psalm. 7. 4
yea, I have delivered him that without cause is mine enemy; is not this to be
constructed, Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors? Implores any,
Send out thy light and thy truth, Psalm. 43 3
let them lead me; is not that, Lead us not into temptation? And does any
request, Psalm. 59. 1
Deliver me from mine enemies, my God; is it not, Deliver us from evil? Hence
therefore, this Prayer is not only as a rule to pray by, but as a form to pray
in, supplying what ever is deficient in the supplications of mortals, Luke 11. 1
whose arm at longest, cannot fathom the length of that request put up for the
belly, give us bread, much less commens^trat the extension of that put up for
God, Hallowed be thy Name.

Yet as we can, we shall search, 1. into the matter of this Petition, hallowing
of the Name of God. 2. The order of it; for it is reckoned among the first
three, and is become their Captain, therefore more honorable.

Name, has its name in the Greek, from the help, (...).
or aid, it gives to know things, or persons by, and with, the Latins, Nomina,
were notamina, marks, tokens, signs, to difference things by; when men were
^ewest, there were names, and they increasing, sirnames were added, still to
distinguish one from another; neither do we find any Nation so barbarous, but
had names, the savages of Mount Altas, Camb. Rem. page 45
in Barbary, excepted, who were reported to be both namelesse, and dreamlesse.

Names begun with the Creation, the eldest daughter of which, Genesis 1. 5
being Light, was called Day: And who can show the improbability of their
duration, when time shall be no more? Moses was termed Moses, when Peter saw
him in the Mount, and who is that, will earnestly deny, that Enos shall not be
called Enos, even in glory?

The old Pollanders gave names to their children, Camb. ut supra.
at the first cutting of their hair, but the most Christian Nations have
followed the Jews, and given names about the eighth day; yea, the old Romans
gave it to their Femals, the same day, but to their Males, on the ninth.

All gave them for discrimination, to difference a Cain from an Abel, Genesis 25.
25
Samaria from Jerusalem; some had it, because of some property, as Esau from
his being hairy: Some from an atchievment; Jacob was called Israel for his
prevailing with God. Others gave names from a desire of continuating their own
names upon earth; and because it is a kind of judgment, to want a name, as did
David's adulterous infant, and the rich Churl in the Gospel, for this they
intended to call John, Zacharias, Luke 1. 59
after the name of his Father; some give them, in imitation of some virtue, as
Job, or David, as a spur for the bearer, to follow the virtues of those Saints.
Hence it is thought Jacobs sons were never named Iacobites but Israelites,
Aret. Prob. Theol. loc: 79
to animate the whole race for struggling with God until they got a blessing.
Lastly, Names have been imposed from some sudden emergency, as Isaac from
Sarahs, Genesis 17. 17
or Abraham's* laughter; or from future foreseeing, Genesis 18. 12
as was Cain, Abel; or from some profession, as at this day, the Mohammedan,
from Mahomet, and the Christian from professing Christ.

Most of these ways have God taken to himself, and recevied names from others,
yea, we may say, firnames; he is often called the Lord, Jehovah, God; and
frequently, the God of all consolation, the Lord God of our Fathers, Is. 43. 25
the Savior of Israel, who blotteth out transgressions for his own Names sake,
which is to be hallowed.

In order to which, let us descant upon, 1. What may be understood by his Name.
2. How that Name is to be hallowed. 3. Why the speciality of that Name is
expressed, all other names being secluded, as is employed in that Pronoun, Thy
Name.

By name, in general, understand his ineffable and invisible essence and
nature, which he held out in his Name, Ex. 3. 14
I AM, and his Name, Ex. 6. 3
Jehovah, is so peculiarly his, that it was never, and is never to be
communicated to any creature; not that the letters of his Name, Jehovah, is to
be adored with the superstitious Jews, as those of Jesus are, with the
idolatrous Papists, but his nature expressed in, and by, those letters,
including both the Spirit and the Son; for all that the Father has, Tert. Ad.
Prox.
being his, cur non and nomina, why should not the Name, Jehovah be likewise,
and consequently he get his respect?

By name, understand also his wonderful and inseparable properties, as Wisdom,
Omnipotency; as also, his beautiful, and admirable acts and workings; Ps. 19. 1
all which are called upon to praise, that is, occasion, or persuade others to
glorify the Lord; Ps. 148. 3
such as his work of Creation, Redemption, his wonders, miracles for
preservation of, and for, his Church; add to these his comfortable and
inalterable writings, Ps. 138. 2
which he has so exalted above all His Name, that when many of his works,
shall change and wax old as a garment, his promises to his servants, shall
endure for ever: The doctrine whereof, 1 Timothy 6. 1
is not to be blasphemed, for by that his Name is spoken against.

Let none hence conclude, that it ought from this, to have been, Hallowed be
thy Names, that objection being long ago answered; for Nomen Divinum, Theod.
Quaest. 6. in Deuteronomy.
the Name of God is here expressed in the singular, to remove the occasion of
idolatry, or conceit of many gods. Thy Name, having respect to the Father,
mentioned in the preface, in which also the whole Trinity is included, yet not
expressed in the plurality of persons, for the reason aforesaid.

Nomina sanctae and immaculatae Trinitatis, Chrysostom. de sp. Sanct Hom.
the names of the holy Trinity, being taken not so much from nature, as from
holy works; we shall observe some letters of this Name, that we may be careful
of giving him in it, that due respect, which belongs unto his greatness, since
the secrecy and mystery of his being, discharges our srailty and ignorance,
curiously to pry and behold his Name, in his works of mercy, of wonders, of
patience, of comsorts, of veracity: the first respecting the miserable, the
second the despicable, the third the scornful, the fourth the mournful, the
fifth the doubtful.

1. One great letter in his Name, is mercy promised to the miserable, and may
be as clearly seen as Pilats inscription over Jesus; by this as well as Paul,
all are delivered from the body of death; and the mercy shown to the Prodigal
by the Father, Romans ^ 24
discovers the tenderness of God toward a sinner, when becoming (which yet is
through grace) flexible and penitent.

In this the Saints rejoiced, Ps. 31. 7
and for this God is feared, (that is hallowed) and entreated, his heart being
affected with the miseries of poor man, he stands at their hand, to save him
from those that would condemn his soul; Ps. 109. 31
Christ pleading out of compassion, and procuring not a repreive, but a pardon.

And when men neither do, nor will implore his Omnipotent aid, for deliverance
from evil, nay, when they reluctat against his severe threats, either that they
be superceded, or omitted, his mercy passing over all neglects, presses in
upon them, dilating it self so far, that no faculty of the soul more cordially
entertains the thoughts of any thing, save those of Mercy, Mercy.

Septem in me video, misericordias Domini: Ber. de Evangel.
A holy man viewing the experiences of Gods love, Sep. Pan. Set. 2.
finds a sevenfold mercy graciously afforded to himself. The first was, that
God had preserved him from many sins in his generation; another was, that he
had highly and often offended, yet had not been plagued; A third was, that in
visiting his soul, God had made him know that sin was bitter; A fourth was,
that he becoming pe^itent, had felt the blessedness of him, whose tranlgression
was covered; Ps. 32. 1.
A fifth was, that after his recovery, he was kept from sliding back into his
old fins; A sixth was, that he had grace given him to promove and advance in a
holy conversation; And the last was, (in which he highly magnified God) that he
had gotten the assurance of acquiring Heavens Kingdom.

It was said by them of old time, Ps. 103. 10
the Lord is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy, and
therefore will the Lord wait that he may be gracious unto you; that he is
merciful and gracious, Is. 30. 18
speaks his mercy to be Speciosa, beautiful, but that he waits to be gracious
upon you, shows that it is, Spatiosa, exceeding large and universal.

2. His wonders performed to the despicable, is another Letter, and may be as
clearly seen, as the Prophets vision upon Tables, he that runs may read it; and
who reads it, ought to fear before it. That which he has done for his little
Benjamin, Hab. 2. ^
for, and by, Moses, in the land of Ham, and the terrible things by the
Red Sea, should make the whole earth tremble before him; and how twelve
fishermen from Jerusalem, Act. 1. 8
have brought the greatest Princes, and most refined part of the Universe, to
embrace the truth of Christ, and him crucified, in so ample and honorable
manner, that their Crowns has not its chiefest Jewel, if it want a Cross, nor
themselves accounted of, but as Barbarians, if not christian, is strange:
wherefore hallow his Name, 1 Chr. 16. 9
sing unto him, Eusebius. Eccle^.
talk you of all his wondrous works. Hist. lib. 5 c. 1.


That famous Christian, and woman-Martyr, Blandina, being by tormentors
tormented by turns, wearied, and not able to plague her with renewed tortours,
having her body rent, yet as often as she pronounced, I am a Christian, and have
committed no evil, was refreshed, and felt no pain.

Tyburtius the Martyr, compelled to offer Incense to idols, or walk barefoot
over hot Iron, boldly undertook the last, with these words, Depone, O Fabiane,
renounce thy unbelief, and do as much in the name of thy Jupiter, as I in the
Name of my Iehova^; and if he can, let him save thee from pain or torment. How
did he secure the Children in the Furnace, Joseph in the Prison, Job in the
Dunghill? wherefore, Psalm. 105 3
glory ye in his holy Name.

There are three great wonders should cause men revere and stand in awe at Gods
Name and power; 1. Christ's rising from the dead. 2. His ascending up to Heaven.
3. Converting of the world by twelve men, by the contemning of wealth,
despising of glory, refusing of government, and enduring of torment, which was
wonderful.

3. His patience protracted to the scornful, is another Letter, Revel. 19 16
and may be as evidently seen, as on the thigh of the WORD of GOD, KING OF
KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS. They who are as smoke to his eyes, are yet admitted
into his Temple; and how ost would he have gathered Jerusalem? yea, our selves,
when the Sun rises may learn, Romans 2. 4
that the goodness of God leads us to repentance.

It is true, the Axe of his justice is laid at the root of the tree, ^et. ^. 10
but mark, it is but laid, to see if fruit, by consideration and contrition,
will come; and though he be broken with our whorish hearts, Ezekiel. 6. 9
yet he ^aith, How long? or, when shall it once be?

We believe Gods power, and have heard of his thunder, I Genesis 3 9
yet how few faith as Adam, was afraid when I heard thy voice in the
Scriptures; but after all our roavings, rather impudently say with Gehazi, 2
King. 9 25
Thy servant went no whither; and because we are not sentenced to judgment,
Eccel. 8. 11
infer either that he is like our selves, or mocks the promise of his coming;
both which is endured through his ineffable patience, to reduce us at last to
more sober apprehensions; that is, repentance, contrition.

4. His comforts exhibited to the mournful, is another Letter, as clear as the
name, John, Luke 1 63
upon Zacharias Table: he is called sometimes, the God of Abraham, and
sometimes, Romans 15 5
the God of Heaven, as also, of grace and consolation, His Spirit the
Comforter, drying the eyes of all, who discerning their crimes and dangers,
sanctify his Name, by calling for a pardon, against those defections they have
made, from the way of his holiness and peace.

What high revelations had John the Divine in Patmos? Rev. 1. 9
what comfort had Jacob in his stone-pillows? and may we not appeal to many, if
in providence, by Prayer it has not been said, Be it unto thee according to
thy faith, when they have been perplexed by the cold blasts of temporal or
spiritual calamities, and as Nehemiah, been made to stand to bless the Lord
for ever, Neh. 9. 5
and his glorious Name, which is exalted above all blessings and praise.

It is the worlds design to delude the soul, the fleshes purpose to betray it,
and Satan's to destroy it; but Christ resolves to protect it, and checks our
unbelief to the end of the world, with his, said I not unto thee, that if thou
would believe, Io^. 11. 40
thou should see the salvation of God.

In all conflicts, we have seven grounds for consolation; 1. The mercy, bounty,
and love of God. 2. The mediation of Jesus Christ. 3. The sealing of the Spirit
for the day of redemption. 4. The Covenant of grace, by which we are adopted as
sons. 5. The seals of that Covenant in the Sacraments. 6. The gifts of the
Spirit to persevere. 7. The example of those Saints, whose iniquity has been
pardoned, whose souls have been delivered, as David, Paul, Zacheus, Manasseh,
and the converted theif. All which, in spite of those numerous Troops which
assault and oppress man, in the contemplation of his own misery, affords
auxiliaries upon the only expense of a hearty Miserere mei, Lord have mercy
upon me, sufficient to set the soul free from all disturbance, and settle it
against all shakings whatsoever.

5. His Veracity to the doubtful, is another letter of His Name, and equally
clear to that Motto engraven upon Aarons mitre, Ex. 28. 36
HOLINESS TO THE LORD.

He has many Names in Scripture, yea, and sirnames too, as the mighty God, Ps.
25. 10
the jealous God; but his truth is one of those immutable things, wherein we
have strong consolation, both in our life and death; Heb. 6. 18
comparing his veracity with the transient and fading, because airy promises,
or undertakings of men, which are in our greatest extremity as volatile, as are
the passions and humors of the undertakers, S^ob^ Sermon. 9. de Ve^it.
hence the Philosopher Pithagoras, being questioned, when men were likest the
gods, Senec. in Epist. 102
replied, when they spoke truth, that having but one face, and one way, said
another, like unto God, without change, or revocation.

He has highly glorified this attribute, 1. In the execution of those things
denounced against sin, Isa. 30. 6
and sinners, which should make us fear his Name. 2. In the Salvation of his
Elect, by his Sons condescendency: At last, the seed of the woman bruised the
head of the serpent; Let us accordingly rejoice in his Name, for the idols of
the heathen are vain, but our God is a God of truth. 3. Genesis 7. 21
In the Preservation of all things made by his ordinary providence; therefore
presume not upon his Name, Mat. 4. 7
hallow it, but tempt it not; our Savior would not tempt the Lord, by casting
himself down from the Pinnacle of the Temple, there being a pair of Stairs for
descension; for he is said to tempt, Theod. in Deuteronomy. Quaest. 5^
qui ^ine ratione, who without necessity, will cast himself upon, or in an
apparent hazard, when otherwise it may be avoided.

So abstruse is the effence of Almighty God, and so diffused is his power, that
the only one God, in Scripture, and with all people, has received different
names to express his Nature by, and beautified those names, I might say, Lemn.
Exhort. ad vitam opt. c. 59
sanctified and hallowed them, Praeclaris Elogiis, with singular and eminent
Attributes; from his existence, he is called, Jehovah; from his being with us,
Emmanuel; from his great authority, the Lord of hosts; from his dreadfulness, a
consuming fire; from his goodness, both we and the Germains, calls him, God,
or Godt; and from his kindness, he is ordinarily termed, Father; from the word
(...), (...).
that from his care over us, as children in feeding, begetting.

Say not of his Law then, it is vain, for it is his Name, and every article
thereof is good and necessary, composed neither by Art, nor man's device; slight
it not, for its plainness, simplicity, Lact. de Instit. lib. 5. c. 1
which made the wise and learned Philosophers of the world disesteem it, as not
flaunting (though yet it be majestically high,) for by its light, our steps
MUST be ordered; by its food, our souls nourished; by its virtue, our diseases
removed; by its edge, our enemies subdued; by its drawing, our wounds cured;
and by its instruction, heaven MUST be acquired. Buy therefore Bibles, Chrysostom.
in Epist.
Animae Pharmaca, the souls Apothecaries shop, Colos. Hom. 9.
there being their proper receipts, not only against all diseases, but antidots
against all damnages, and medecines, to prevent all losses, which the Spirit in
its quickest intuition, can behold it self capable to come under.

Creatures are but creatures, and as to Salvation, but mere consonants,
wherefore in comparison of the Gospel, all creatures are to be abandoned; If
punishing with a vengeance those who deride its authority, and sitting in the
seat of the scornful, give suffrage against its dignity. The last words of a
profane courtier, in this kingdom, once were, apagite, Tristium Historia. lib.
2. in Append.
away with these idle things concerning Christ, I never believed there was a
God, a devil, or hell, and for which I am now damned, and turned over to the
devil, to be eternally plunged, according to my merit, in the lowest hell, and
so died; the Gospel being in readiness to revenge all disobedience, 1 Cor. 10. 6
either in life, or at death.

Much better died Sanctus Dacianus, Deacon of the Church of Vienna, who in the
midst of exquisite torments, from persecuting heathens, being demanded what he
was, Eusebius. Eccl.
Replied, I am a Christian, this is my Name, Hist. lib. 5. c. 1. etc
my Country, my Family, my Religion, and besides Christian, I am nothing: and
until all things be accounted as dung, in comparison of the excellency of the
knowledge of Jesus Christ, Phil. 3. 8
the Name by which we must be saved, we shall never spell our own Salvation.

Abuse not his creatures, his name is seen in them, the basest of them (if
there be any base) is wonderful, and as a straw can puzle the wisest; for,
know, as false Doctrine, so a profane life dishonours the name of God, and
affronts the Majesty of our Savior; eat not with the Glutton, Pro. 23. 32
for delight; sit not down with the Drunkard, for good fellowship; for
bitterness proves the issue of unholy friendship.

Respect the Sacraments, for his Name is also beheld in them; by the one are we
baptized in his Name, and by the other, nourished in the application of him in
them, both to our selves; let them be Sacraments, that is, industriously
prepare for them, Sacra mente, holy appetites, making neither the Table of the
Lord polluted, Mal. 1. 6
by a mere customary coming, nor the waters of the Sanctuary despicable, by a
careless beholding, but sanctify our selves in religious meditation, upon the
nature, end, and use of these sacred Mysteries, that our Christianity may be
fertile, and evidenced to have a higher rise then education.

Our Baptism has a more noble end, then by a name to distinguish us among men;
Gal. 3. 17
for, he that is baptized, has put on Christ, that is, de jure, Theod. in loc.
we are to be accounted the Sons of God, or, that we are covered and protected
(as with clothes) by Jesus Christ, his Spirit giving us an inward garment in
renovation, an outward in conversation, Aquin. in loc.
and in both, by a conformity to his holiness; or, that by baptism, all our
sins (as our bodies and imperfections by clothes) are covered by Christ, Caiet.
in loc.
our works, affections, our selves are changed into Christ, which more
discovers our monstrous baseness, if for any reward, much less for any lust,
we so honor not his being, as to make our very lives pray, Hallowed be thy
Name.

Hallowed be thy Name.
WE have now the application of holiness, not to say Hallownesse, unto his
Name, to be considered, that we may regularly engage our selves, both to live
and pray according to this rule. This Petition is like that of our Saviors,
John 12 28
Father, glorify thy Name; we read of old, of hallowed Places, Times, Persons,
Vessels, yea, any thing that was dedicated to God, 1 King. 8 64
or separat for his use, or any thing used in his service now, in a
Scripture-sense has a degree of holiness; Lev. 20. 10
but God is esteemed holy, being perfectly free from the very stain of
impurity; Ex. 29. 1
his mercy, pure mercy, Dionys. de divin. Nom. c. 12
his justice, holy justice, his truth, holy truth, his knowledge, holy
knowledge; the first, wanting solly, the second, cruelty, the third, mistake,
and the fourth, ignorance, yea, himself being light, and in him no darkness at
all; and therefore, his Name like his House, is not to be polluted by the
transgressions of the people, 2. Chr. 36 14
after the abomination of the Heathen.

And if Holiness be a knowledge of, Cicer. de not. deo^. lib. 1
or how to worship God, we are not to persevere in our ignorance, but to value
every document offered, that may make his Name known, which he is resolved to
hallow, that is, make holy, and which we ought to sanctify, that is, to
glorify in our selves first, Chrysostom. hom. 20 in Matthew Tert. in Or. Dom.
and before all others next, that his Name as it is holy, may be hallowed,
honored, and magnified of us, and his glory shine more and more among men,
though our enemies, for their reconciliation.

It properly signifies, to preserve from the Earth, Glos. ord in text. Sweton.
in vita Jul. Ces.
that it be not defiled with our terrene maleversation, but contrary, by a holy
Artifice, hold, or heave it still upward, as Caesar did his writings in his left
hand, and holding his royal Coat Armor in his teeth, that the one should not
be wet, nor the other become a prey to his adversary, when swiming for his life
at Alexandria. So hold we fast his Name, that it may shine, and outshine all
other beings in the Firmament of this world, provoking one another to revere
the same.

God said of Paul, Chrysostom. hom. 3. in 1 Timothy
He is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my Name before the Gentiles; as
Standard-bearers in war, are to undergo, and suffer much, in holding up the
Banners, or Colors, lest they fall into the enemies hand; so those that bear
the Name of God, or of Christ, whether in peace or war, are studiously to
endeavor, that neither by ill speaking, nor ill doing, it fall into the hands,
or vile tongues of the wicked, that they may triumph in heaven above, and be
admired for their stoutness and courage, by the holy Angels.

The duty is undergone three ways, First, generally, then specially, then
personally; the first eyes Nature at large; the second, Grace; and the third,
the Souls of men.

Eying nature, in praying, Hallowed be thy Name, we entreat earnestly,

1. That all things might, Theod. in Ezekiel. 48
and all affairs end in his glory. As this is the end of all his undertakings,
so it is the beginning of our desires, Consuevit enim scriptura, the Scripture
usually putting name for glory, shows us, to have Gods glory in our aims, for
an universal discovery thereof, the more pressingly knowing his Name. Honor or
glory to have many enemies, maliciously contriving, and by enraged force,
uniting to darken, yea, were it possible to extinguish the glory of his
Omnipotency.

Many and different are the ways which Devils, and devilish men conclude, as
apt means for the perfecting of such projects, their atheism and hatred invents
against God and his Church; yet by an overruling providence, all their
industry, defeats themselves, being baffled by their own Arguments, God causing
his honor to be the result of their darkest and deepest consultations, though
differently managed, and by contrary spirits acted, yet are they reconciled in
bringing forth this one thing, Gods glory.

Judas sold Christ for money, Matthew. 26 15
the Jews delivered him for envy, Pilat condemned him for fear, the Soldiers
guarded from obedience; Carp^^ters might make the Cross for profit, the
beholders mock for pastime, and the devil pressed all for hatred; the Sepulcher
was watched for security; yet those watchers becoming witnesses of the
resurrection, it showed to their own eyesight, that both Herod, Pontius Pilat,
the Jews, the Soldiers, Act. 4. 27
were gathered together, for to do whatsoever God had in his Counsel
predetermined to be done.

Providentia est subdita been disponere, providence being but an orderly
disposing of things, for the production of some good, manifests that this
Prayer intimats our servent zeal, consent and agreement, that God would do what
he does, in agreeing all affairs, and consummating all designs, for his own
Names sake, Genesis 3. 15
to his great glory; that even Adams sin, Abels slaughter, Noah's drunkenness,
as well as Lots vexation, Jobs scraping, Rabshekahs railing, Acts 26 12, 13
and Peter's denying, and Thomas doubting, and Saul's persecuting, as well as
Paul's preaching, might evince to all the world, that God is to be feared, loved
and honored.

2. That all might acknowledge and own that glory. Our faith in the power of
God, renders it easy for us to believe, that all must submit unto him; but
here our charity for the souls of men, persuades us to become suitors at his
Throne, that by his Spirit he would so mollify the hearts of our brethren, as
to cause them become Volunteers in his service, since the will must be made
willing to submit, before any submission be rewarded, or accepted.

Those Jews, Joh. 8. 49
who blasphemously attested our Savior to have a devil, shall give compelled
submission, and be instrumental in causing his Name to be exalted before ail,
though (if they sorrowed not) it be in then damnation: and trembling Cain
became objectively a teacher of the holiness, severity, and justice of God; But
to have men move in a resolute and masculine courage, by loving, and sedulously
acting, to propogat that glory, that all the world might actually ascribe unto
him that excellent Majesty which is his, and is his due, is the import of this
Petition.

God is then hallowed, first, when it is known what he is; next, when it is
known what he is not; Hug. Card. in Mat. 6.
next, when it is known how he is: The first keeps us from folly, that we say
not there is no God: The second from Idolatry, that we fancy not a false god:
The third from misery, when we know he is in Heaven, full of grace, goodness,
power, and truth; all which ought to induce us to speak of his Name with fear
and reverence; Psalm. 111 9
causing our lives and actions to echo ^orth this Petition, Hallowed be thy
Name; ascribing to it holiness, with the Angels, justice with the converted
Jews; Aug. de Ser. Mon. Dei lib. 2
that as his Name is great in Israel, and in Judah known; so every where his
praise may be glorious; for then is his Name great, when he is named, that is,
accounted, according to his glorious Majesty: For which, Kings, Princes,
Fathers, Teachers, Children, are to sing, and in their Sphere move for the
promoving of that transcendent honor dueto his Name by all the earth. Psa. 29.
^


3. That he would remove suddenly the impediments of his glory: Though, give us
this day, are in words only affixed to our daily bread, yet without error,
they may be appended to this Petition, and then it is this day, Hallowed be thy
Name. Lord (said Elijah) let it be known this day, 1 King. 18 36, 39
that thou art God in Israel. Father (says the Petitioner) let all atheism,
profaneness, idolatry be removed, that all the world may say this day, The
Lord, he is God, the Lord, he is God.

That all idols with Dagon, may fall down before his everlasting Gospel, 1 Samuel
5. 4
and all people may attend and incline their ear unto the words of his mouth,
this Petition is put up, and offered in the Imperative Mood, by way of command;
a holy zeal, animating the breast of the conforming supplicant, daringly, yet
humbly charging, yet praying his Father to look after the dignity of his own
Name.

How suddenly was the head of vapouring Goliath, 1 Samuel 17 45
separated from his body, and frighted Israel, shouting for joy, after little
David had gone out in the Name of the Lord? And that God would arise, girding
his sword upon his thigh, to be feared by all that contend against him, ought
in earnest to be the matter rather of our prayers, then those curious quircks,
and homespun, 1 Timothy 6. 4
I may say hell-spun questions, and political debates, which are too frequently
the materials of our popular and domesti^k supplications, the former tending to
quietness and peace, the latter only to strife and debate, within our houses,
and among our Churches.

4. That we might improve all his providence for this his glory. Are we
advanced to any degree of honor? has God assigned us a larger portion of this
worlds goods, for the splendour of our retinue, and numerousness of our Family?
are we respected by the admiring Vulgar? then let us not sacrifice to our own
net, Hab. 1 16
but acknowledge that all this store comes of his hand, 1 Chr. 29 16
and all his own.

Timotheus that Dux or Imperator Fortunatus, Pl^t. Apoph.
was so fortunat in his Wars, that Cities were painted, yielding to him, he
sleeping: Yet somewhere it is observed, that proudly saying in a full and great
Assembly at Athens, Haec ego feci and non Fortuna, this I did, not Fortune; and
again, in this Fortune had no share, Beadl. Diar. of Thankful. c. 8.
attributing Conquests only to himself, and not to that ages fancied gods: It
was by all observed, he never prospered, but lost all the glory he had gotten.
And such at last shall be his fate, who gives not God but himself the praise of
his rich possessions.

Contrary, are we brought so low, that our harvest is blasted, honor despised,
children buried, and all pleasant things removed out of sight; let our devotion
keep its wonted vigor, and surmise neither Planet stricking, nor Wizards
bewitching, but Gods holy Providence in his wise Counsel, has been the
contriver of all our losses, and suffer not only with the wise Heathens
patiently, Theatr. vitae human. lib. 4.
but sucking good from them, as Asclepiades, who being asked what disadvantage
he had by blindness, ut uno puero, said he, ambulem comitatior, I can talk more
cheerfully to any one. Ib. lib. 19
Lycurgus, not only forgave the wild Alcander for rashly beating out his eyes,
but by virtuous discourse reclaimed him. Poor Epictetus, was amicus diis, for
all his poverty, still at friendship with the gods: I say, suffer not only with
these, 1 Samuel 31 ^
but study to know with Eli, it is the Lord, and next, with Job, to say,
blessed be his Name; preferring a Lame-leg, a hungry belly, with Gods
countenance, beyond the covered tables, or dainties of the wicked. Iubet me
fortuna, Fortune calls upon me to study Philosophy and wisdom, cried a
Philosopher, hearing of a great lose at Sea: God calls upon me, say thou, in
the greatest strait to know him, the world, and the mutability of all things
except himself, cry thou, blessed be his Name, Job. 1. 10
though brought into the lowest degree of misery, were it a dunghill, or a
bush of thorns, it being easy to adore him upon the pinnacle of prosperity,
over a rich Carpet, or leaning upon a Velvet Cushion.

This is sure, Author. imper. Hom. 14. in Mat.
qui non sanctificat Deum, he that glorifies not God, shall never be glorified
of God; and therefore, the beauty of our possessions, the industry of our
hands, the pregnancy of our wit, the patience in our suffering, the prevalency
of our interest, being considered, say however, Not unto us, not unto us, O
Lord, but to thy Name give we praise. And whether we eat or drink, which are
works of necessity, or what ever we do, which may relate to pleasure at
convenience, 1 Cor. 10 31
Let us do all to his glory; for our actions must concur with our wishes in
this matter, Aquin. in loc.
that as we exalt his Name by the one, we may not blasphem it with the other.

Further, this duty is to be performed specially according to his grace, and
that not in respect to its nature, or as it is in the fountain, that is, Aquin.
2. 2dae Quaest. 106. Art. 1. Con.
in God, but as it does, gratiam recompensare benefactoribus, as it eyes our
grateful returns to him; and so, Hallowed be thy Name, implies, Thankfulness to
him, Knowledge of him, Affection toward him, all our abilities to be laid out
for him.

1. Thankfulness, in what his power has wrought, by referring all unto him. To
batter down that wall of ingratitude, which this age has raised, we touch
again this point, or rather explain the former; Dan. 5. 23
we, Belshazzer^ like, drinking, and ranting, but the God in whose hand our
breath is, not glorified at all, for our peace, freedom, and honor, etc. A
godly Lady-martyr professed, that the blood of her Savior had made her fair
and beautiful, and not her servants industry, by care or art; not the servants
vigilance, but the Masters pounds, Luke 19. 16
gained ten pounds more. Shall we have health, wealth, peace, Princes as at the
first, and God receive no tribute of praise? since we profess sanctity, which
in the Heathens sense was nothing but ascribing to the immortal gods their due
praise and thanks. Cicer. orat. 31. proplan.


Are not many healed, but where are the nine? (i. e.) the many that examining
their unfitness for mercy, attends at Gods Altar with their Hallelujahs, for
his breaking the Spear assunder, and burning the Chariots in the fire. Brom.
summa Praed. de gratitud.
It is Fabled, that one finding a Serpent, frozen or starved almost to death,
in a vehement eold, he warmed it at his own fire; the Serpent boasting
afterward, that it was not his fire that animated him; the matter came to be
judged, and thus determined, that the Serpent should be left in periculo, in
the same state, danger, and condition, wherein at first it was found. We have
reason to apprehend, that being delivered from our civil, yet uncivil war, and
our vicious lives testifying no grateful resentment, as it flowed from God,
that he shall cause this generation to be brought back into that howling
wilderness of barbarous and cruel confusion, wherein we so lately were
labyrinthically, Number. 14 32
and scandalously involved, by making desirable peace to be enjoyed only by our
more holy Successors, etc.

Themistocles having done great service, Plut. in Vit. Themist.
observing himself noted and pointed at in the Olympic Games, as the deliverer
of his Country, is recorded to say, This day I am sufficiently rewarded for
all that ever I have done for Greece. God shall also hold himself really
repayed for all offered and possessed mercy, if we remitting somewhat of that
passionat prejudice, against what we have not, shall render our selves grateful
for what we have; Binch. Mel. Theol. loc. 15 c. 4. Punct. 3.
and for more sureties sake, pursue those things wherein gratitude stands,
which is in invitation of others, to behold the mercy, in observing of the poor
who stand in need of mercy, in a restoring what we have taken from others
without mercy, in a confessing that all our good flows purely from mercy; and
because each man complains of the others remissness, let every one
affectionatly mourn, to testify his desire of requiting God, Psalm. 10^. 8
that men do not praise the Lord for his goodness, nor for his wonderful works
to the children of men.

2. Knowledge in what his mercy has accomplished in the ^eeds of the Gospel:
As that the second person died. for us, and that all the three Persons draws us
from the power of Satan, Acts 26 18
to receive the forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance among them that are
sanctified. That as peace came down with the birth of his Son, Tit. 3. ^, 6
so peace and purity was infused by the shedding abroad of his Spirit upon us,
because of which, Luke 2. 14
on earth, glory is to be given to God in the highest.

3. Love, because of that which all his attributes has designed. As a Father,
we have his love upon us; as a King, his power exercised about us; as we are
children, we have his Angels ministering unto us, Heb. 1. 14
at all times; his face to refresh us, his Spirit to comfort us, and at last
his bosom to entertain us: To love him, is, to hallow him, than which nothing
is more equitable, fruitful, or honorable.

4. Abilities for that which in his holy Law is enjoined. We cannot express our
obligations, nor demonstrat the tie that lies upon us, for spreading abroad his
same; wherefore this, Hallowed be thy Name, reflects upon our impotence, and
confesses we cannot do it, and therefore he must; for though the devils and
damned glorify God, yet they cannot sanctify the Name of God, no more can
any, until there be a new heart created, a new spirit infused: while the
Angels cried, Holy, Isa* 6. 5
holy, holy, is the Lord of Hosts, all that the Prophet could do, was to cry,
Woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips, and did not
change his note, until his iniquity was taken away, and his sin purged, which
is also prayed for in this Petition.

And for the continuing of which grace of sanctification, and spiritual life or
ability, we, says a Father, pray continually, both day and night, Cyp. de
Ora^. Dom.
that by the grace and protection of the most high, they may be in us, and for
us preserved, ut qui quotidie delinquimus, that as we sin daily, we may by the
sanctification of the Spirit be daily purged, le^t we fall from the grace of
God. The Temple and Utensils thereof, when defiled, were cleansed and purified
from their pollution, Theod. Q^aest. in lib. 3. Reg. 24
and quae Deo sunt destinata, or dedicata, vocantur sancta, they are holy, they
are Saints, they are righteous, who fall not only, but even those that fall,
and rise again, washing themselves from their old sins, by amendment.

Of which he was apprehensive, who complained, that having desires to be happy,
but his thoughts would not suffer him: if such struglings happen in thy breast,
Reader, sentence them to death, and if too strong for thee, put up thy
supplication in an Hallowed be thy Name, that the power of God may be
discovered in thy infirmity, and his strength in thy weakness, by dissipating
such cogitations.

His Name in the last place is to be hallowed personally, 1 Cor. 6 20
if you eye man, comprehending as bound thereunto, both soul and body; and in
this Petition included, and performed directly, indirectly, and exemplarly.

1. Directly, Plut. Quaest. Romans 28
by a holy and reverend using of his Name: The Romans suffered not their
children to swear by Hercules, until they went out of doors, to prevent their
vain and ordinary swearing. Goodw. Moses and Aaron, lib. 6. c. 2.
The ancient manner of the Hebrews, in their Judical swearing, was by the
Magistrates, attesting the witness in this form, Give glory to God: And yet
there are profane wits among us, who disanulling all bonds, interprets oaths to
be a point wherein their gentility consists, and are so little afraid of a
jealous God, that their jealousy is, lest their comrade out-swear them, so
both becomes rivals of damnation.

Men may consult and act for the good of a Kingdoms peace and quiet, Chrysostom.
Hom. 15. ad Pop. Antioch.
yet a great man and a holy, is mistaken, is swearing be not worse then the
edge of the sword, and the plague thereof, beyond that of war: And if men will
do no more, yet let them revere the book they handle, and the Gospel that is
daily before them, saying, Swear not at all, etc. but let your yea, Matthew. 5 34
be yea, and your nay, nay, all other being of sin. And it is no ill
derivation, to bring the word (...), which signifies an oath, from Orcus, that
is hell, especially considering, Rous Archae. A^tic. lib. 6. c. 4
that even Heathens fancied, if any god had swore false, or broken his oath,
having sworn by Styx, he was to be punished himself in hell for it, nine
thousand years, for which cause, said they, Jupiter took the more care how he
swore. Whither shall we go to hide our faces off this age, who has got such a
knack of swearing, that it is our livelihood, our trade, our pastime, our
humor, as if our being gods, Psalm. 82 6
( i. e.) great men, were a plea sufficient to reprieve us from hells torments?
When these who knew not the God of Heaven, would out of reverence, even in
Markets, say no more then, By, etc. forbearing to name the god they thought
upon.

Some will have, (...), an oath to be brought from a word that signifies to
compel; and without a necessity, there is no naming of the Blood of Christ, or
Omnipotency of God. The Hebrews call an oath, Shabugnah, Shebang.
from a Root, signifying seven, hinting thereby, both a mystery in it, and good
advice, or deliberat thinking before the taking of it, which may be done in
these cases.

Paxfama fides, Brom. sum. Praed. de Juram. c. 12.
reverentia cautio damni, Defectus very tibi dant jurare libenter.

And when the peace of our Country, our own good report, or want of witnesses,
or loss of goods, whether our own, or trusted to us, are in hazard, we are
lawfully to clear our selves, or free our selves by an oath; so are we, if
Authority call us to it, or faithfulness be expected of us: but to inure our
tongues, to an habituated, By God, is an iniquity to be punished. The Gentiles
forbearing to name the Magician Demogargon, Wille^. in 20. Ex.
lest the earth should tremble, will be a witness against us, for our abusing
his Name, against his Law, (who hangs it upon nothing,) without dread, yea,
with delight.

A golden mouthed Patriarch, or Bishop, beholding swearing to be the sin of his
people, Chrysostom. Hom. 5. ad Popul. Antioch.
assured them in a Sermon that he had preached often against that sin, and
would do it again this day, and to morrow, and the third day, and until he saw
them mend their manners, and forsake that vice; but would it not puzle an
Angel, to declaim against the predominant vice of this perverse generation, it
being overgrown, as with a scab, with iniquity of all sorts, by pretenders to
Religion, Drex. de vi^. Ling. lib. 2. c. 8
and mockers of all Piety? But as touching this scandalous custom, ought not
that Law non-assumes, thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain,
for he will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain, to be to all
Christians more then a thousand Sermons, to persuade against that custom?

A perjured wretch* Brom. ut sup.
hearing a Sermon against the sin of swearing, or ^orswearing, said, his hand
was nothing the shorter that he had sorsworn with, and statim, and immediately
by divine vengeance, it was burned and cut from him: Chrysostom. Hom. 26. ad Popul.
Ant.
And say we not of a good man, Os tuum ablue, wash your mouth, and then speak
of him? and yet the hallowed Name, and that Majestativum Nomen, as one calls
it, that Majestic Name, and that Venerandum Nomen, that reverent Name, of the
Lord our God, at which the devils tremble, shall be scoffingly and impiously
abused by us, and then come home, and it may be, say, Amen, to hallowed be thy
Name, without suggesting danger.

The rule, Brom. ut sup.
according to a learned person, to know sinful swearing by, is, from the
initiatory letters of FATVM and IDONEA: F, signifying Iuramentum falsum, a
swearing against the truth; A, Appetitum Iurandi, a desire of swearing; T,
Trufatorium, to swear in base words, or cheatingly: U, Vsum, useing or
accustoming ones self to this; M. Malitiosum, to swear maliciously: And in
Idonea, I, Imports Irreverenter, to swear irreverently, and without fear; D,
Dolose, ^raudulently; O, Otiose, idly; N, Negligenter, negligently, if oaths
come out before a man beware; A, Alte, if with a loud clamorous or uncivil
noice; all which is comprised in this distich, Si male Iurandi species sit cura
noscendi,
Sit primas Fatum, per Idonea notificatum.
If thou takes care to shun the sin of swearing;
Of Fatum and Idones be observing.
For in these, Matthew. 5. 34
Christ's rule of, swear not all, is to be noted, and by them qualified.

Those whose tongues can hardly spell, God, are become so accustomed to hear of
him, that their ears are good only for this tune of, By God, or, By Jesus; and
can in their very play, sport with it; which last is aggravated, and becomes a
greater sin, then simply to name God: Wille^. in 20. Ex. 7
For, 1. God has magnified that Name; Quast. 2.
2. There is no other Name given whereby we can be saved. 3. It holds forth the
Divine Nature, and the second Person in the Humane Nature. 4. The Name God
shows him to be the Creator only, but Jesus, both Creator and Redeemer.

A Monitor, therefore to whisper into our debauched -- Thou shall not take the
Name of God in vain, James 5. 12
or, Above all things, my Brethren, swear not, would do well; and that they
would as gently receive the admonition, as an aged person did that of a child's,
were to be wished. The story is this:

A man of years, being heard to swear, was accosted by a young child, who with
bended knee, said, Sphinx. Phil. Theolog. c. 24
ne posthac jurato, swear no more by God, for it is not a light sin, the person
blushing, called back the child, demanded its name, and its parents, but
getting neither, glorified God, and said, non tu puer es, thou art not a boy,
but an Angel of God sent to give me this wholesome counsel, and know thou, that
hereafter I shall be careful that an oath no more fall from me; O that God,
whose Name has done great marvels, would multiply such Angels amongst us, and
make their ministry as effectual.

Soror venerabilis, Ber. de mod* be^ne vivend. Ser. 32
Courteous Reader, will you have me tell you, how to avoid perjury, swear not,
for the custom of swearing brings on the use of forswearing, and pray that the
Spirit of God, whose Temple is thy body, may put in thy mouth, the seal of
moderation, Amen. Verily, or of a truth, was a wholesome document of a good man.

2. Indirectly, by not giving occasion to profane his Name. There is a
fitness, equality, or proportion to be kept, betwixt our prayers and our
practice; for as David's harp made some to magnify the Lord, so his adultery
made others blaspheme the God of Israel, to pray, hallowed be thy Name: and to
live careless of procuring it, is not only to no purpose, for thy good, but
accelerates a curse from his hand: For as one of Philosophy, so I say of
Gospellizing. It is not populare artificium, Sen. Epist. 16
an Artifice, to delude the Vulgar, neither consists it in words, but in
things; and doing good first, and then speaking of good, for, its said of
Jesus, he began to do, Act. 1. 1
and then to teach; so ought it to be, by all that profess his Name.

Hallowed by they Name, that is, Celebre ^it, let it be magnified in us,
Landul. Cart. in Orat. Dom.
in our hearts, by believing, in our affections, by loving, in our mouth, by
praising, and in our lives, by welldoing; that thy Name, Father, be not
disgraced by our wicked courses; thy Name, the knowledge of thy Name, may be
confirmed by our true living, it being better, not to call upon God at all,
then to pray in our Closet, and follow the youth to the strange woman, Prove. 7.
22
Doeg to his tale-bearing, Cain to his envy, Rabsheka to his railing, Gehazi to
his lying.

His Name is always holy, Ang. de Temp. Ser. 135
our desire here, is that it may be kept holy, by us, and in us, for the adding
of more glory to his Name, is not here understood, but the accounting,
estimating, respecting* and enlarging the knowledge to all of that holiness,
which from eternity he possessed, that in us, and by us, he may be hallowed,
Chry. Ser. 67.
which was done when we were baptized in his Name, being from Christ, called
Christians, and Christened: Audi Deo, hear therefore the Apostle, Romans 2. 23
the Name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you; therefore, let
us amend our lives, or put an end to our Profession, that our selves, and not
our Religion, our selves, and not our God, be not traduced by our multiplied
abominati^ns, which are so much the more scandalous, and dangerous, Chrysostom. Hom.
7. in Genes.
hat from the faults of one Christian, the Gentile does judge, totam
Christianorum Gentem, all Christians which must infinitely influence upon Gods
dishonor, when the whole body of Christianity is universally leprous, as it is
with us this day; so that all the cause of those devastations, and miseries,
wherewith the Church is harrass'd, each Christian may say with him in the
Satyr, Ego omnium, scelerum materia, ego causa sum, Petron.
I have aided, I have helped, I have been the Author of all.

3. Examplarly, by doing all things in his Name. 1 Timothy 1. 12
Paul being put into the Ministry, gave thanks to God before all, and Peter
acknowledged, that he healed the impotent man in the Name of Jesus; Plut. in
Numae Pom. vit.
and Numa, who first taught the Romans Religion, enacted, that God should not
be worshipped, obiter, or casu, at it were, in passing by, or, by the by, but
to have the whole mind, intent upon the service, which beautifying Religion,
makes it graceful, yea, taking; and it is observed, Val. Max. lib. 1. c. 2
that Scipio Affricanus, never entered upon private or public business, until
in the Capitol, he had consulted god, and was thereupon thought to be Jupiter's
Son. It ought to be the study of all, but most especially of great man, to be
patterns of good works, that men seeing them, may glorify God; and it ought to
be the duty of all men, to read the Scriptures, frequent Churches, visit
Neighbors, abide in their Families, as they are directed to sing Psalms,
(viz.) to the praise and glory of God.

Hallowed be thy Name.
WE are now to reflect upon the speciality of hallowing his Name, and secluding
all others, that they do not so much as mingle, with the glory attributed to
it, which is insinuated in the Pronoun THY NAME, in which an Emphasis is
apparent, a Seclusion is intended.

1. An Emphasis is apparent; signifying, that our hearts, countenances, voices
ought to be elevated, and our minds upon nothing inferior to himself. THY
NAME, THY NAME, speaks the temper of the supplicant, to be altogether holy, and
eying naught, save Divine Attributes.

2. A Seclusion is intended. There being none like unto him among all the gods:
Psa. 86. 8
It must be conceded, that there is no name so high to be hallowed, as that by
which he is called.

The Father is the God of glory, Acts. 7. 1
so is the Son the Lord of glory, Iam. 2. 1
and the holy Spirit is the Spirit of glory; 1 Pet. 4. 14
the sense of which, being diffused in, and virtuating the Soul of the
Petitioner, his demands are conform to his Fathers declaration, Isa. 42. 8
I am the Lord, that is my Name, and my glory I will not give to another. And
that God be not pillaged of that which he is resolved to keep, do but consider,
His Eminency, His Singularity.

His Eminency above all other gods. Kings, Angels, are called gods, yet both
these wait upon him, and their glory but the Jewels that adorn his footstool.
THY NAME, is so singular, that it admits of no companion, neither is it capable
of any augmentation. To speak Scripturally, no god has a Name, but he, and
where there is no name, we are to attribute no praise; Athenag Apolog* Pro Chr.
Vna revera numen est and unicum, there is but one God, and therefore, but one
Name, unto which truth, the wisest of the old Philosophers did assent.

A great Herald, delineating the particulars that grace, and make a man
honorable, Camb* Rem.
shows, that Virtue, good Parentage, Wealth, Office, Countenance, a good
Name, and a gracious Surname, complete a person; and if an union of these creat
nobility, how ought our Lord Jesus Christ to be respected, in whom all these
meet so in their causes, as without his concurrence, they shall be in none, as
in their subject?

Behold his power to act: All arms before him are but as straw, and the
strongest is but feeble. It would puzle the Creation to make one drop of rain,
or scatter one cloud, or command a dewy morning. In all our undertakings, Jam.
4. 14
if not fools, we shall say, if the Lord will, we shall live, and do this or
that. Glory not therefore in thy wisdom, or riches, for these flee away; thou
says, I am, add the Epithet, rich, or wise, yet thou art not; for, in
speaking, Greg. Naz. ad Constable.
thou art changing, and no more to be seen what thou wast, then we can behold
again the same water in a running river.

Behold also, his wisdom to discern. He only knows the intentions, causes,
nature, and the end of things. The device of saving poor man, after his fall,
was above the imagination of the highest Angel; and for Adam, all he could
invent, was an Apron of Fig Leaves, but a Garment of Righteousness never once
entered into his head, until it pierced his ear in the promise.

He heholds the heart so clearly, which even to Angels themselves is dark,
(nisi revelentur, except revealed to them by God, Cas. Angeliog. lib. 1. c. 11
q. 4
or some external sign concluded by them,) that Ferdinand, and fourth of Spain,
putting two to death for a conspiracy, both of them appointed the King to
appear before the Tribunal of God, within thirty days, to give an account why
they were put to death, Hist. Hor. lib. 1
(for they were innocent) at the limited time, while others thought the King
had been sleeping, he was really dead, and in probability, answering the charge.

One, Turson, among the Goths, condemning an innocent, Ib. 161.
and beholding the execution, was by the prisoner commanded that very, hour, to
appear before God, to answer for putting to death an innocent, and no sooner
had the executioner done his office, then the Judge expired and fell from his
horse. Many things of this nature, might be inserted, to evince, that all ought
to cease from flattering themselves, in magnifying their own opinion of Saints
or humors, and ascribe only, Glory to the name of IAH, our God.

Behold further, his goodness to forgive. Peter's charity was indeed hot, Mat.
18. 21.
but not to the eight degree; it could not reach to forgive above seven times:
But as there is in us, a multitude of gross sins, so with him there are
multitudes of tender mercies, expressed in the number of seventy times seven,
which yet is not a determinat number, Aug. d^ verb. Dom. se^. 15.
as if at that we should close; but thereby is signified, that our mercy should
never end: The Law being given us in ten Commandments, which being broken, sin
adds one, and makes the number of eleven, and seven comprehending all time,
because time runs through the seven days of the Creation; by which we are to
press upon our selves, the remitting upon Gods part, the breach of the ten
Commandments, committed in any of the seven days, and declare the same to our
Brother, crying, peccavi, after his offending, though he owned us a hundred
talents; for, it were an indignity to our Saviors boundless love, to collect
from his seventy times seven, the non-forgiveness of seventy times eight, since
a more plain rule is before us, touching pardon, which is, as God for Christ's
sake has forgiven us, Ephesians. 4. 32
and he forgiveth all.

Besides, six is a number of work and labor, Orig. Hom. 7. in Mat.
wherein God wrought, but the seventh is a day of rest; and seventy times seven
shows, that God when our sins are at the highest, rests in pardoning grace,
and is at friendship with the penitent, and declaring the same by his Spirit,
in the Word and Sacraments, and releasings of the Church, in a far more
consolatory way, then can be attained of worshipping of Saints, or going on
Pilgrimages, etc.

As appeared in Gentleman of this same Age, who being vexed with the Pal^ie,
and entering his Ladies Chamber, heard a young Child reading to her Mother, by
providence, these words in the Gospel, Mat. 9. 2
And Jesus said to the sick of the Palsy, Son, be of good cheer, thy sins be
forgiven these; which furnished the soul of the diseased with abundance of
consolation, and blessed God, who out of the mouths of babes and sucklings,
ordained praise to himself, in this particular, of forgiving all sin.

2. Consider his singularity, besides him no God. It is a note of authority to
give, and of subjection to receive names; and the first act of Fathers power
is, in giving his Son a name: Pro. 30. 4
but had not God named himself, we had yet been ignorant both of his Name,
Lact. de falls. Relig. lib. 1. c. 6.
and of his Sons. His Name is God, because he is one, the sooner therefore may
he be hallowed; the multiplicity of Saints, and Spirits, not only cusing
irksomeness, but creating fear, left in pleasing seven, we might offend the
eight, for ommitting him; and my intense prayers, to Peter, or Paul, might
cause my guardian Angel to take snuff, when more remiss in his service or
office.

Praise him therefore, and only pray to him, he being Lord above, Neh. 9. 6
with Nehemiah; and as to Hezekiah, he will let thee know he inclines his ear
to hear, and opens his eyes to see all those that afflict thy soul; and ask thy
self, consult Scripture and experience.

1. Does he not bring down all that are high. Where are the Worthies of this
world, Achitophels policy, or Cesars sorce? Let men talk no more exceeding
proudly, 1 Samuel 2 2.
for like Oreb, and Zeeb, like Pharaoh, and Senacherib, they perish before him.

Vain boasters, who have spoke great words, how suddenly have they been
dejected and cast down? How in a movement have they been removed, and in a
groan confessed, Greg. Mo^^l. lib. 6. c. 3
that the glory of man was nothing?

It is recorded, that after Senacheribs Army was destroyed by an Angel, he had
these words engraven upon his standing Picture, Let him that looks upon me,
Trap. 1. Mala. 5. ex Herodato.
learn to fear God. Theod. Eccl. Hist. lib. 3. c. 12.


Julian, Uncle to the Apostate, after many o^trages committed against the
Church, was in horrible anguish, advised by his Wife to praise and proclaim
Christ his Savior, who had shown himself powerful in plaguing him, and had
done it in mercy, to bring him to repentance, which pious advice had some
influence upon him before he died; and how he has cast abroad the rage of his
wrath, Job 40. 11
and beheld every one that was proud to abase him, every sinner shall at last,
and most sick persons do, and condemned Malefactors bring in, plentiful
evidences.

2. Does he not exalt all that are low? Is Moses cast out by the law of
Pharaoh, Exodus 2 10
though we read of none that was drowned, yet he singularly was preserved, by
Pharaohs Daughter, David, appointed by his Father to keep sheep, as fit neither
for Court, nor Camp, is designed to be King of Israel; no soundness is in Jobs
flesh, yet a sacrifice shall redintegrat both his health, and fortune. Ruth,
accounting her self not like one of Boaz handmaids, Ruth 2 13
(as born without the Covenant) got a full reward of the God of Iocab, yea, a
royal one, in becoming Grandmother to king David, and in the Magnificat, is it
not said, My soul does magnify the Lord, Luke 1. 48
for he has regarded the low estate of his handmaid?

Humble your selves therefore, Ier. 13. 18
and say to the King and Queen, humble your selves, and all shall be exalted in
due time; and those who are qualified with this virtue of prasing God, though
here they have no house, they shall have a heaven; and though weak, they shall
have strength; and though no honor, it shall be reported, Zenoph. de Paed.
Cyr. lib. 8.
that they pleased God. When Cyrus prospered, he became the more holy, and more
frequently caused sing praises, and offered sacrifice to the gods; so ought we
to the God of heaven. For,

3. Does he not defy all that are supposed. Isa. 40. 15
He calls, in derision of all reputed gods, to whom will ye liken me? and puts
two things unto them to try his excellency; 1. Prediction, to know what is to
come. 2. Execution of either good or evil. Which if they cannot do, it follows,
that they are not gods, and he alone is to be feared, Is. 41. 22
because he can creat peace, and make war, and knows all that is past, what
is present, and what shall be hereafter.

To glorify the Name of God, Elias* in Greg. Naz. Orat. de Spi. S.
it but to publish the miracles with a thankful heart, which he has performed
for his Church, upon his enemies. Which Thulis, an Egyptian King knew, who
swelling in the pride of his own magnified greatness, would needs inquire at
the gods, Horribil* Hist. lib. 1. Page 147.
whether any King were greater or richer then himself, and had this response
from a Priest of Serapis, The greatest is God, next is, the Word and the Spirit
with them, being one in nature, and eternal in power; But thou, O mortal, haste
thee out of this place, and seek where to shut up thy life: Immediately after
which, he was slain by his own servants; and so shall all the enemies of our
Father perish, that men may know, he whose Name is Jehovah, Psalm. 83. 18
is the most high over all earth.

3. Consider his infinite glory, and there is none to be reputed God, but he.
Solomon was in all his glory inferior to a Lilly, the glory of that flower
being in it self, and from it self, yet as his was, so the Lillies beauty, is
but a ray of his ineffable splendor, and all comes from him. Herod's silver
doublet which is recorded to have been that which the Scripture calls his royal
apparel, was but poor armor (though glittering in the Sun) against the assault
of base and contemptible worms. Hug. Card. in Acts. 12. 21
It was, as we read, told him by A^gurs, he should see an Owl five days before
he died, which appearing, as the people were admiring his eloquence, and
shouting, he was a god, he cried, Behold your god dies.

It is said, Act. 12. 24
after his death, that the Word of God grew, and multiplied, and until the
false imagination of deluded souls, be indeed slaughtered by the sword of the
Spirit, or detected by the light of the Word of God, Rev. 19. 13
which is his Name, his Name does not multiply by the accession of believers to
a belief of the truth. For though there be many that profess his Name, yet it
is to be fearred, there be few has chosen it, the most falling upon it by
chance, having found it in their native Country, which also causes it to be
by chance, but honored, their chief design, being either the advancement of
them selves, or their faction.

Yet there are a few, unto whom God is doing, as he has always done, (viz.)
making known the unity, Aug. de Ser. in Mont. Dei lib. ^
that is, the glory of his Name in the Doctrine of his Son, and as they repute
none worthy of glory, but God, so they only give to him their praises, and
their prayers, and that upon good reason. For,

1. Angels will not have his glory, Judge. 13. 16
and they are intelligent. An Angel in the Old Testastament refused an
offering, and another will not have thanksgiving in the New; both commanding
them to be performed to God, Rev. 22* 9
expounding these to be prayer and praise; what is Romes meaning, or to what
purpose are those Prayers and Letany's in that Church, Sancte Gabriel, Sancte
Raphael, omnes Sancti Angeli and Archangeli orate, etc. O thou Angel Gabriel,
Raphael, and all ye Angels and Archangels, pray for us? I like that part of
another office better, and shall subscribe unto it, Off. (...) Mar. a^^ Matut.
Lect.^.
O Sancta and Immaculata Virginitas, quibus te laudibus efferam nescio, O thou
blessed Virgin, in what words to praise thee, I know not: the same I say of
praying, as either are interpreted Adoration.

This is not said to infringe the glory of these holy and glorified Saints, who
are to be honored with great reverence, and their names to be mentioned with
great respect, and their virtues to be imitated with all indutry, but to hallow
their names, or their virtues, with a remitte, or an ora pro nobis, we have no
warrant, because no rule of faith.

The ground of Romes Doctrine, touching the worshipping of Angels, is so
beastly, that it is shameful to publish a^resh, yet so irrational, that it may
be profitable to reprint it: it was this, as we read from a learned venerable
Doctor of the English Saxon Church,

In Apulia, vulgarly Puglia, a Provicne in Italy, Bedea. Sermon. Var. de Revelat.
S. Micha^lis.
in the Kingdom of Naples, near the City of Siponia, there was a rich man,
called Garganus, having much Cattle, which fed in a Mountain of the same name,
in which herd there was a wanton proud Bull, which could not be got home with
the rest, but still kept the Mountain, for which the owner resolving to kill
him, provided Bow and Arrow, but in shooting at the beast, the Arrow reverted,
and turned upon himself, at which being amazed, he tells his Bishop, who did
appoint a three days fast, that God would discover what was signified by the
wounding of Garganus, when the Arrow was levelled, or aimed at the proud Bull:
On the third night, the Archangel Michael told the Bishop, scias quia a
voluntate Dei hoc factum est, that all was done by the appointments of God, and
commanded the ground whereon the Bull stood to be consecrated and set apart for
prayer, showing them, under it there was a Cave, and in the Cave an Altar, and
upon the Altar a red Pall, or Cloak, ibi facite orationes vestras and hebete
memoriam meam, and auxiliabor vobis, there say your prayer, call upon my Name,
and I shall help you, all was searched, and all was found, and all was done
accordingly.

Haec fuit, says my Author, prima causa, and this was the first cause or rise,
that Angels were remembered, or worshipped upon earth (he must mean by Romes
authority, Colloss 3. 19
for otherwise the same doctrine was taught in, but exploded the Church before)
and from that time to this present are they remembered in the Church, He
flourished about the year 700.
etc.

This is such a Cock and Bull story, as the proverb has it, that it needs, nay
deserves to have no answer, but a his. And the ground of it being ut legimus,
as we read, so that it may be ture or false, and if true, nothing in it but
what might have been done by the devil, and therefore in all respects such
practices are to be shunned by worshipping of God, for which we have a sure
foundation.

I pass the Fables (for so let me call them) which the same Author throngs the
proper festivities withal, for were Peter or Mary upon earth, they would
undoubtedly blush at the absurdities of their zealous, though ignorant, 1 Ioh.
5. 21
prayers, and cause John comment upon on his old text, Babes keep your selves
from idols. And Paul upon his, let no man beguile you of your reward, in
worshipping of Angels, Coll. 3. 19
and not holding the head, etc.

2. Saints will not have this glory, and they are prudent. When read we that a
Noah prayed to Enos, though his piety and translation were notour? or that a
David prayed to an Abraham? or that any Israelite unto, or obtained mercy by,
Isai. 63 16
his holy Ancestors? Nay, contrary, they urged that, because of Abraham's being
ignorant of them, and their being not regarded by Israel, God would be their
Redeemer, his Name being from everlasting.

3. The other creatures will not have his worship or his glory, and they may be
observed. Every pile of grass has a finger to point up to its Maker in
Heaven, Psa. 19. 2
and day unto day utters speech, and reads Lectures of Gods wise
government, powerful providence, and rich mercy.

At Madrid, the upper Rooms of Houses, belongs by Law to the King, Heyl. Cosmo.
lib. 1. Castil.
and are not to be used, until they be compounded for, by the Inhabitant; and
to this only wise God, the King eternal, not only the upper Room, which is
Heaven, does belong, but the lowest pit also, Psa. 95. 4
for in his hand are the deep places of the earth, and ought not to be used by
us, before we satisfy the Law, by praying and praising, in doing which, we add
to the revenue of his glory.

Ezekiel saw his glory in Heaven, Greg. Mag. Hom. 8. in Eze.
Isaiah saw it upon earth, and we ought to study the beholding of both, for
though his heavenly glory we cannot see with that Prophet, yet we may perceive
something of the appearance of it, in his holy Word, Heavenly Motions, divine
Commandments, at which sight, we are with the other, Isa. 6. 5
to ^all down upon our faces, and with loud cries bemoan our infirmity,
vileness and uncleanness.

His glory upon earth is so clear, that he who has eyes, may see it in the
clouds, which are his Chariots; our ears can hear the birds warble, in their
way, the praises of their Maker, the fields clap their hands: in contemplation
of which, we are to cry, Unclean, unclean, for this, Ioh* 12 41
said Isaiah, when he spoke of him, and saw his glory, and thereupon was
comforted and purified.

4. If we consider either our good, or duty, we shall own him only for God.
Reason leads many, but profits command all persons; it is rational, it is
profitable, to ascribe only glory and honor to our Father. For,

If you eye Conscience, he can only quiet that; if the Church absolve, and the
Spirit thereby settle, does the Word of Christ apply, and the soul thereupon
rejoice? It is but in his Name, Matthew. 7. 22
they acting but in deputation from him. It is he that discovers sin, that we
may be in our selves nothing: It is he that makes us hate sin, that before him
we may be holy.

If you eye dependence, he only maintains you. At first Heaven was made by him,
the Earth, the Sea, and all the Creatures therein, because, Neh. 9. 6
says Nehemiah, thou preservest them, all the host of Heaven worshippeth thee;
not that they on earth are idle, for all his works praise him; Psalm. 145 10
put Angels for the host of Heaven, and Saints for the work of his hands, on
earth, and then we may infer our duty to bless the Lord, because he only
preserves us.

King James knew this, (...). (...). lib. 1.
who is of happy memory, were it but for this, that knowing a Prince that
fears not, and loves not the Divine Majesty, nothing in his Government can
succeed well with him, therefore, my son, said he to his Prince, first of all
things, learn to know and love God: Which darkly was performed by Numa
Pompilius, Plut. in vit. Number.
who knowing that God hated sloathful services, commanded the Romans, though
Heathen, to wait and attend upon prayer, rebus omnibus post-positis, all other
affairs being first laid aside.

Jupiter and Juno, L^ct. de falls. Re. lig. lib. 1. c. 11.
conceited Deities, were so called, by their worshippers, from the help and aid
they gave to things, but our God does more then juvare, help, because vitam and
salutem tribuit, he gives life, health, and happiness, and therefore ought
more affectionatly to be implored, and only to be adored.

An Army of Infidels rushing into the Dominions of the famous Christian
Emperor Theodosius, Socr. Schol. Eccle. Hist. lib. J. c. 42
were worsted rather by his prayers, then Arms; for, first, a thunderbolt from
Heaven, slew Rugas, their Captain; next, a plague thinned their Army, and the
remnant were consumed by fire from the Element: After which, Proclus, Bishop of
Constantinople, Ezekiel. 38 ^3
expounded a portion of Ezekiels Prophecy, wherein God was exalted, and the
Patriarch applauded, for his applying of it, sanctifying God before their eyes,
he having magnified himself in the eyes of many Nations.

If you eye service, he only can reward. Should one entreat the Virgin Mary,
Mat. 14* 30
or St. Barbara, against his wifes barrenness, it may be doubted if ever he
should have a Son; or had Peter, when sinking, followed the Doctrine of his
pretended successor, and cried, Abraham, or Jeremiah, save me, or I perish; I
am prone to conjecture he had been drenched: by this one instance, be excited
in life or death to pay the tribute of Prayer, and Praise, to him solely, who
has not only an eye to see, and an ear to hear us, Matthew. 4 10
but by precepts has commanded us to adresse our selves to him, for comfort in
the life he has given us, in the death before us, and in the hopes of that
Heaven he has proposed to us.

If you eye justice, he only does merit. Are not the Cattle upon a thousand
hills his? Are we not the people of his pasture, Psalm. 50 10
and the sheep of his hands? Are we not in spite of our hellish adversaries,
preserved by the artifice and methods of his providence? The good we have, is
it not from him? the peace, health we enjoy, is it not of him? the Gospel we
read, did not he teach it us? and the soul we live by, did not he give it us?
What a mad project, and unjust proceeding must that therefore be, Heb. 13 15
to fancy that some other then he ought to have the sacrifice of our souls,
Aqnin. 2. 2 dae
the fruits of our lips?

That distinction of the Romish Schoolman, Quaest. 83. Art. 4 Con;
is not so concluding, as perhaps he thought it, ( viz.) that God is only to be
repaired unto for grace or glory; not the Saints, they being only desired to
assist us, ^ Tim. 2. 5
or to pray for us: for, the Scripture in things relating betwixt God and man,
has given no ground for such distinction, it denying any Mediator, except
Christ, who also invites us to come directly to him, for rest and ease, and to
him our selves, Mat. 11 29
without sending another: And as when he trod the Wine Press, Isa. 6. 33
he was alone, and none with him, so in the application of its benefits, we
have no example of employing Man or Angel, to plead for us at his hand, now
glorified.

Besides, how can we call on him, or her, in whom we have not believed? Romans 10
14
and Rome with us professing to believe in God, the Father Almighty, etc. ought
with us also to expunge their Saints Litanies from their service. Not to
affront Gabriel, or Paul, or Peter, or the Virgin Mary, whose faith, whose
virtues, whose example is this day in the greatest part of the Christian world
commemorat and taught, Feb. 2.
for her eternal renown, in which we oppose her receiving prayers, or in this
sense giving glory to her name.

It was justice, Spots. Hist. lib. 2. An. D. 1653.
that extorted from a poor serving man, that excellent decision of that
ridiculous question, started by the Romish Friars, in this Kingdom, whether the
Lords Prayer might be said to Saints: and after much talk, hot debates, absurd
distinctions, the Servant concluded, when he had asked his Master, to whom
should it be said, meaning the Lords Prayer, but to God; and let the Saints
have, said he, Credos and Ave Marias, enough, for it might suffice them, and
too good for them. Wishart Lect. 4. on the L. P.
But he spoke more knowingly, and of this Kingdom likewise, who said, Let us
remember that the Pronoun, Thy, is possessive, and points out the Name to
whom glory and honor do most chiefly and of due belong: For though there be
many names, yet there is not any name to which honor and glory both of debt
and duty belongs, but only to the Name of God:

1. Because by him is named all the family in Heaven or Earth. 2. Because by
his sufferings and victorious triumphs, he has obtained a name far above all
others. 3. There is no other name by which we can be saved. Acts 4 12


The Son gave it us, to put up to our Father, not to Peter, or Brother, much
less to the Virgin Mary, 1 Timothy 1. 17
our Sister: And therefore, to the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only
wise God, be honor and glory for ever, and ever. Amen.

And so much for the matter of this Petition.
Hallowed be thy Name.
NOw we are brought unto the order of this Petition, unto which for brevities
sake, we shall annex the method of the whole Prayer, and to avoid confusion,
hint withal at the exactness required in our accesses unto God.

All our actions ought to have God for the ultimat design, or end, and so
should our prayers, to which purpose they either are to eye his glory, Aquin.
2. 2dae Quaest^ 83. A. 9. con.
as in Hallowed be thy Name, or enjoyment of his glory, in thy Kingdom come,
unto which something is directly and principally necessary, as Thy will be
done; or necessary, and instrumentally, as give us our daily bread; or
necessary and accidentally, as the removing of hindrances, either directly
excluding out of Heaven, as forgive us our sins, or impeding us in our way
toward it, as lead us not into temptation; or irksomness in our life,
traveling toward it, as Deliver us from evil.

There are who show the order thus; Hug. Card. in Mat. 6.
all Petitions respecting either the good things of Heaven or Earth, are here
ordained by our Savior to be thus sought after: such as relate to Heaven, are
first to be demanded, and are contained in the three first Petitions; and the
first of them being Hallowed be thy Name, regards his glory; and the other two
we are directed next to the good things of earth, and are to be last craved, as
appears in the three last Petitions, whereof the last is against present evil,
in Deliver us from evil; the fourth is, the medium or copula, joining both
together; for by bread we have strength to ascend in the doing of our Fathers
will, or descend for the opposing of our enemies force, or strength, whether in
sin, or temptations to sin.

There are likewise, who finding all prayer offered for obtaining good, or
avoiding ill, hold the order of this Prayer out, thus, viz* all good being
either heavenly, is prayed for in the second Petition, Thy Kingdom come; or
spiritual, in Thy will be done; or temporal, in Give us our daily bread: but if
we reflect upon evil, it is either past, remembered, in Forgive us our debts; or
to come, prevented, in Lead us not into temptation; or present, and then its
removal is supplicated for, in Deliver us from evil, making Hallowed be thy
Name, to be no distinct Petition, but rather a confirmation of all the Prayer.
Our Savior adding this in imitation of the Jews, who used words of veneration,
to the memories of them whom Virtue had Nobilitat, as we use to say now, such
an one, of pious or happy memory. But that they are a Petition distinct from
all the other, and though a confirmation, yet added to the number of all the
other, is evident.

For, 1. It is in the style of all the rest, more imperativo, by way of a holy,
religious and humble command. 2. It is improbable that our Savior heeded any
such custom. As touching the precept of seeking the Kingdom of Heaven first,
which follows after Hallowed be thy Name. Bakers Dis. and Med. on Lords P^*
It is well noted, that of things relating to our selves, that Kingdom must be
first sought by us, and is first placed in this Prayer; but in things relating
to God, as his glory, daily we deviat from this rule, if hallowed be thy Name
be not our main, great, and first design, and by consequence our first request.

Let us behold and admire the blessed and heavenly wisdom of our Savior,
Tert. de Orat.
who has taught us to pray in secret, and in open audience, in so much says,
as to behold the Omnipotent Lord to be always by us, and yet with so much
modesty, that like the Heathen, we abuse him not with many words, though we ask
so much, so great, and so many good, and different things, that this Prayer is,
and may be termed, Tert. de Fug. in Pers.
a breviary of the whole Gospel; and also, Legitima Oration, as being the
Standart unto which all prayer is to be brought, and applied for their trial,
for matter and order: which when done, it appears in general,

That we must pray for spiritual and heavenly things first, before we pray for
our food, or deliverance from evil, we ask for his Glory, his Kingdom, his
Righteousness. This Prayer may be observed to begin with glory, to end with
glory for ever, and therefore in the Churches of the Saints, Matthew. 6 33
according to Law, heavenly things are sought after first. The word first,
insinuats principally, and the word seek, implies with industry.

First, that is, in affection, they are to love and desire them most: And the
scope of our Saviors first Sermon, rather presses a vehemence, a priority of
love and intention, then of utterance and expression; as first, infers in other
places, 2 Pet. 1. 20
holding out not so much rank or place, as zeal and earnestness.

It is Raven-like to be flying upward, 1 Timothy 2. 1
and eying the carrion carcass of an earthly enjoyment, whereas each supplicant,
like a spiritual Eagle, ought to eye the slain, the crucified Christ, at the
right hand of the Father, and mount higher, Greg. Mor. lib. 20. c. 4*
giving not the lowest, but the highest seat unto him.

The Emperor Alexander Severus, reconciling a discord raised by Cooks and
Hucksters, against some Christians, who had made an oratory, Hist. Augustae
Tom. 2. in vita Alex. Sever.
or chapel, where formerly these had sold their sowls and meat; it is better,
determined he, to worship and serve God there, in any sort, then to put it to
other uses, as the selling of flesh, or fowl: If a heathen thought this house,
which he knew was to perish, fitter to serve God, then to sell Poultry in,
ought not men to apprehend the same of their souls, which must eternaly endure.
Therefore sanctify thy affections, and make them rather houses for the service
of God, then profane them in turning them victualing-houses, to thy self, the
devil and his lusts. Chrysostom. Hom. 20 in Mat.
There being nothing more worthy of God, nor profitable for men, then to give
him the first place in their respects, they calling him Father, and putting all
other things, yea accounting all other things as inferior unto his honor, in
that expression.

Again seek it first, that is, in appretiation, when a house is on fire, the
Saint himself may ^ry with greater earnestness, for water, water, then he shall
cry, Thy Kingdom come. Earthly crosses, like shallow water, making the greatest
noice, whereas heavenly love, may be more smooth, because more deep. David for
that matter of Vriah, watered his couch, but for Absalom, he wept in the top of
his house.

Isaac prayed for a son, and David for the life of his child earnestly; Genesis 25
21
sensible things, because such, being more apparent to our senses, are easily
discerned, while matters spiritual, though farthest out of sight, are in the
soul regarded with unexpressible dearness, and the other once competing with
God, and the things of his Kingdom, our hearts shall manifestly discover, that
not the world, but God, has our most zealous thoughts.

How did David roar out for his Absalom, 2 Samuel 18 33
his Son, his Son, yet not against his Sin, his Sin: not that David in the
Cabinet of his heart, did regrate his sin with less anxiety, but flesh seeing
what was flesh, the Spirit retired into more inward lodgings, waiting for a
more convenient opportunity; which offering, it is discernable, at first, that
in regard of dearness, God and his righteousness will be laid aside for
nothing; nay, not for Absalom his Son, his Son, because it is he that gives
salvation unto Kings, Psalm. 144 10
and delivered David his servant from the burtful sword.

In a great persecution under Hunericus, Mag. Hist. Cent. 5. c. 3.
multitudes being banished (by Pagans) of old and young, an old woman was
observed, leading a young child, willingly to go after them; and being demanded
why she took the Infant, pray for me, said she, I am a sinful woman; and takes
this little boy, lest he being lest alone, should be a prey to the Adversary of
truth, and seduced from the ways thereof: Preferring Gods honor, before
Liberty, Life, Exodus 321 32
or Country; nay, did not Moses choose rather not to be, then live to see it
questioned or eclipsed?

A Bishop of Lincoln journeying with some Company, Stap. prompt^ Moral. Dom. 1^
p. p.
who one morning hasted to their horses, for fear of the Pad, Robbers being in
that very road, through which they were to travel; From this place, said that
good man, will I not stir, until I have performed my morning devotion to my
God: He all that day traveled in safety, while his companions quickly fell in
the hands they feared. So, good it is, with all boldness to magnify Christ,
even in our bodies, whether it be by Life, or Death, or Fortune.

Further, First, that is in pronounciation; Even in utterance, our first words
in Prayer are to have our Fathers Name, as Lord God Almighty, K* James* Med. on
L. P.
or his Surname, as God of all Consolation, Father of lights, or of our Lord
Jesus Christ, this being the homage to expound this in the words of an
excellent King, that we ow unto God, before we make our suits; it being
arrogance, and an impudent thing, for any Subject to make a suit to his
Sovereign, before he did his homage in a reverent accost. To blame were these
men then, and scarce are those words to be accounted Petitions, that some
pretenders to Sanctity, offered up in our late times, and many still offer up,
in which the Name of our Father, is not in the Preface, nor his Son, our Lord
Jesus in the Conclusion; the practice of the old Saints, F^lg. Resp. 3. ad Fer.
Inquis. 4
and yet with the true, still accounted so necessary, that that Prayer uttered,
without these holy Indications of the parties they pray unto, are to be
rejected, as flatulent and windy, dangerous and uncertain, and not to have our
Amen.

The sum of all, is this, that the Glory of God, and the r^ches of his
invisible Kingdom, together with the mysteries contained in the Gospel, are
more earnestly, zealously, constantly, to be sought after by us, then the
possessing of any thing we see, or know we want upon Earth: Greg. Moral. lib.
15. c. 20.
God resolving that his works shall never be so much loved as himself.

It became the object of a Heathens scorn and laughter, as judicious Calvin
relates, that men abused the ears of God, Call. in Ep. Iac. c. 4. v. 3.
with profane and unfavoury requests: Yet, how do Christians ask of God to
bestow upon their lusts, their consciences, by that declaring* they have no
reverence, nor fear to that Name? Since our heavenly Master has so plainly
proposed a rule to us, to pray by, and in that his own Glory, not riches, or
vain glory to bear sway, to wanton with the Prodigal, to be strong with the
revengeful, nor wise, to defraud our Brother, not so much as in imagination, to
be reflected upon, but our Fathers honor, unto which, once more, Reader,
suffer a word of exhortation. And in all prayer,

1. Praise God for mercies received; For thy bread, thy bed, thy clothing, thy
lodging, thy strength, cloak, liberty, knowledge, and for thy hope of Heaven.
It is said of Israel, she did not know that God gave her corn and wine, Hos. 2.
8
but she prepared for Baal, these blessings, the highest act of ingratitude,
which consisting of four parts, makes their unthankfulness the more gross.
Guadalp* in loc. cit.
The first is, not to return a benefit, and do one good deed for another; there
is a greater, not to remember a good deed; there is yet a greater, to say it
was done by another; but the greatest of all is, to honor, reward, and thank
the adversary of our benefactor: this grieved God most, that Baal, the Devil,
his enemy, had the glory of the good things he gave his people: the same sin is
acted by such who give the praise of their purchase to their arm, their wit,
their diligence, rather then to him.

It is a holy and true saying of one, Bead. Jour. Ep. Ded*
that praise compared with petitionary prayer, praise excels it, as far as
giving is better then receiving: And it was also a just reproof one gave of
some Fasts celebrated in our days, that they fell short in Thanksgiving for
such mercies as were plentifully possessed.

The Children of Persia, were in their play, accustomed to hear, Zenoph^ de
Paed. Cyri. lib. 1.
try, and determine causes, and in earnest, punished delinquency, but causam
ingratitudinis vehementer agunt, they had a detestation of ingratitude, toward
god, their Parents, their Country, their Relation: and do but consider that
Thankfulness is that Ward in the Key of Prayer, by which we open the doors, (I
mean) the bowels of love; it is the scarlet thread, we hang out of the window
of our soul, to let God know we are within, whereby we may be saved when those
that forget God shall be turned into hell; and non vero verecundae sed ingratae
mentis indicium est, Le^ Mag. Ser. 1.
beneficia tacere divina, it is not modesty, but iniquity, to be silent in
sounding praise for divine beneficence.

2. Praise him for the evils you have avoided. Psalm. 136 16
O give thanks unto the Lord, calls the Psalmist, for he overthrew Pharaoh and
his host, and led his people through the wilderness, for his mercy endures for
ever.

One requesting of Simonides a courtesy, Stob. Sermon. 8. de Injust.
promising to be thankful, he replied, he had two Chests at home, in on^
whereof he put the Money, in the other the thanks he got, for service done; and
in occasion of using either, he generally found that wherein lay the Money most
helpful to him; how good a God serve we, that offers an absolute discharge of
all we owe, if we be but grateful; nay, will do us yet more good, and deliver
us for ever, if we publicly say, that he has healed our diseases, Psalm. 103
3, 4
and redeemed our life from destruction?

Let us therefore be thankful, Chrysostom. Hom. 25 ad Pop. Antioch.
since we reckon our selves among them that are to be saved, yet not in words
only, but in works and actions, and this true thanksgiving is, when we do those
exercises wherein God is to be glorified.

3. Praise him, in confessing the evils you have committed. Psalm. 51 4
Against thee thee only have I sinned, said David, after his fall with
Bathsheba, that thou might be justified when thou speak. Reader, Josh. 7.
19
give glory, I pray, to the Lord God of Israel, and show him what thou have
done.

It is not my scope to handle controversies here, yet that auricular confession
taught at Rome, enters within my thoughts, judging it, 1. New. 2. Impossible.
3. Intolerable. 4. Dangerous. 5. Scandalous; and often times, 6. Ridiculous, etc.
But if a conscience, like a raked up fire, be very hot, or aching, as a putrid
sore, it is good to confess to God, or man, or to both, the sin so pricking,
that the conscience may be eased. Mat. 3. 6
The multitude that was baptized in Jordan, confessed their sin: and the sick
believer may acknowledge his faults to his Pastor; yea, where he is not, it
glorifies God to acknowledge the commission of some attrocious crime, as Paul
^wned he was a blasphemer: Bern^ sup. Cant. Ser. 3.
for, know how greatly soever the impudence of the sinner in sinning,
displeases God, so much is he pleased with the penitents bashfulness, when
regrating.

Confession is so necessary for the acquiring of confidence in prayer, in the
sense of the Church of England, that in her holy, that is, Rational. upon Com.
P.
in her common service, she first prepares her children, by a confession of
their sin, to receive, according to the Gospel, a pardon, as being penitent;
and then ordains them, and not before, to say, Our Father which art in Heaven,
etc.

David's acquitting God that he might be justified when he spoke, Theod. in
Psalm. 51
was but an acknowledgment of his unthankfulness, for his gifts received, in
sining against his Law, and unmindfull of all the good things he possessed*
Yea, Daniel denies not, Dan. 9. 8 Gloss. Interl.
but confesses, that to us, that is, to all, belongs shame and confusion of
face, because we have sinned, bringing the sins of the people to himself,
because he was one of them, aggrageing the guilt. The acknowledging of our sin
is so indispensible, that he who confesses not, Prove. 28. 13
is never said to forsake them, and he who trusts to pardon without this, shall
see his sin spread before him, by the hand of God, in blacker colors, then his
tongue, eye, or heart, can behold or conceive; and therefore spread them before
the Lord, in thy closet, or else he will discover them in the face of the Sun.

It is a sad story which we read, Beadl. Journal. c. 8
as but lately done, of a dying man, being Bedrid, and hungry, cried, for meat;
but at sight thereof, so loathed it, that he was earnest for its removal out of
his fight, his hunger growing, loathed it as before; it was removed, and called
for a third time, and again removed; at last he opened his mouth, and confessed
Gods justice, in this dealing, having never craved a blessing upon his meat,
when he sat down, Chrysostom. Hom. 79. ad Pop.
nor gave God thanks when he rose up: Let them heed this, that rising from
meat, thinks of nothing but of sleep, or it may be worse, ( viz) chambering and
wa^tonness.

4. Praise him in bearing and exercising patience under evils imposed. Troubles
are touch-stones to try the metal of a Christian, and let hypocrisy keep
never so closs, it shall in some act or other be discovered. They tried a Job,
and found him good gold; they tried a David, and found him gold likewise, but
something dusted, now and then he was tripping; they searched a Daniel, and
made him more servent in prayer; to put a soul under crosses, is Dei mos, Gods
custom; Virtutum flos, the blossom of goodness; Fidei cos, the whet-stone of
faith; Coeli dos, Heavens dowry: whosoever weds himself to Christ, must look on
crosses as a part of his portion, and must not only glorify in prosperity, the
Name of God, Chrysostom* Hom. 64. in Genes.
but in adversity also, declareing ourselves still to be under the regiment of
his providence.

It is an argument of Gods love, an argument of thy faith, a medicament against
thy sin, Bench. Mel. Theol. loc. 28. c. 2.
and an incitement of thee unto thy prayers, which ought to enforce thee to
restrain thy passion in the most calamitous estate, who in the trial of thy
patience, in thankfulness, supplants thy corruptions, and provides for the
future strengthening of thy gifts, as a winters storm does the young Ash, Beech,
Elm, or Oak tree.

I see not, said the moralist boldly, a more pleasant sight for God to behold
upon earth, Sen. C^r. Bon. Vir. Mala ^ fiant c. 2.
if he would turn his eye toward it, then to behold a Cato standing upright,
that is, not dejected with our public calamities; sure I am, to see a Job upon
the Dunghill, or a Solomon worshipping upon the Throne, or Daniel depending in
the Den, gives far more exceeding satisfaction.

Inarius an old Bishop of Chalcedon, Niceph. Eccle. Hist. lib. 10. c. 20
becoming blind through age, was mocked by Julian, and bid pray to the
Galilean, (meaning Christ) for the restoring of his eyes; smartly answered,
gratias ago Deo, I bless my Lord God, for depriving me of sight, that I might
not see thy ungodly face; extracting from his own infirmity, matter of glory
and praise to the eternal God, in the face of a blasphemer.

5. Praise him for that illumination thy soul has obtained: Reads thou upon
his Sons cross, Come unto me? hears thou in the Sacrament, this is the cup of
the remission of thy sin? knows thou in thy journeys, his Angels have a charge
over thee? finds thou his Spirit saying, thy sins are forgiven thee? And shall
there be no Halelujah of praise, no Hosanna to him that comes in the Name of
the Lord? Knows thou not thy self to be a sinful man, Ambros. Hex. lib. 5. c.
25. (...)
a child of wrath, a denyer of Jesus, then call, that the voice of the cock may
awake thee, and that tears, as Peter, may wash thee? The cock has crowed in
the Scriptures, and our Jesus has already wept for us, and Peter has sent us
two Epistles to strengthen us (he himself being converted) that we be not led
away with the error of the wicked, 2 Pet. 3. 17
but grow in grace and knowledge.

Have we abilities to pray, Greg. Naz. Orat. 1.
be thankful, for by that, we journey unto God? Have we instruction by the
Gospel, or behold we the edification of the Church, the members thereof bearing
much fruit? Herein is your Father glorified; Ioh. 15. 8
rejoice, and if you live in peace, or keep a pure soul, Chrysostom. Hom. in Orat.
Dom.
if you speak the truth in your heart, and keep guile from your tongue, become
not tepid in Religion, be not starters from the faith, nor workers of iniquity,
nor captivated by error; for, men beholding these things, shall glorify your
Father which is in Heaven.

It is a good observe, Scnd. Key to Heaven. page 143.
that this word, Hallow, is used, because holiness is the highest title of
honor and glory, that can belong to any, though to the most high God; for, the
Seraphims being to give God the greatest mark of renown, Isa. 6. 3
cry, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts. It was the honor of Jerusalem,
to be a holy city, the glory of the third heaven, to be a holy place, and when
Christ Jesus shall present his Church unto himself, Ephesians. 5. 26
he will present it holy.

As we pray, so we ought to practice; and the holiness that God gives unto us,
Cyp. in Orat. Dom.
is, that we be not deceived, or become fornicators, or idolaters, or
adulterers, or effeminat, or thieves, or covetous, or drunkards, or
extortioners, but be washed and sanctified, (which we daily ought to pray for)
in the Name of our Lord Jesus, that holy thing, Acts 4^ 27
that holy child, whose Name we pray may be glorified in you, and ye in him;
for, in this we differ from bruits, and for this we have a spirit, and a
tongue, viz. even to acknowledge the Lord for all his gifts, Chrysostom. Hom. 26. in
Genesis
according to the grace of God, and his holy Govenant, and the Lord Jesus
Christ: So shall he in the Hebrew be hallowed, that is, Halal, be praised, and
the old English word, healed, secured, protected, or restored, iniquity making
God, as it were* sick and distempered in himself, and damnified by others, in
his renown and glory. And so much for this first Petition.

CHAP. III.
Thy Kingdom come.
THE Holy Ghost in Scripture makes mention of a threesold Kingdom; Luke 12 31
1. That of God. Col. 1. 13
2. Of Christ. 3. Of Heaven: Mar. 5. 19
and all here may be truly understood, it not being taught us, as if God
reigned not, but that his reigning and domination might be manifested to all,
and hastened to us, Glos. Ord.
which is properly our inheritance, being by the former Petition made holy, and
in the Preface adopted sons of glory.

There is mention likewise of a kingdom of men, Mat. 4. 8
in contradistinction to which, we pray, Let thy Kingdom come: there is a
kingdom of darkness is, the king thereof is the angel of the bottomless pit; for
confusion of which, Rev. 10 11
we pray, THY Kingdom come.

It is that Kingdom which the blood of Christ has purchased, the faith of the
Saints expected, and that which in the parable of the sheep on the right hand,
we are invited to enter into and possess. It is Regnum Coeleste, the Kingdom of
Heaven, Cyp. in Orat. Dom.
in all its steps, advantages and degrees.

In this, as in the former Petition, we shall search into the matter, and next
into the order thereof, with the application of both, to the rule, So pray ye.

In the matter, there occurs to be treated upon, 1. The extension of the
Kingdom. 2. The steps, methods, whereby that Kingdom comes. 3. The zeal that
is supposed to be in the Petitioner, to have that Kingdom come.

God has a twofold Kingdom in the world, and its inhabitants; one general,
reaching to the birds, even in their falling, to the hairs of men's head, and
their numbering, and to the devils in their chaining; and this is called the
Kingdom of his providence.

Whence it has been questioned, though upon poor ground, whether here we pray
for the coming or continuing of this Kingdom of providence? For since the soul
and body are preserved in their united harmony, by his favorable concurrence,
he acting all creatures for the preservation of our life, by their subsisting,
which by some, is attributed to Chance, to Fortune, to the Moon, to the Sun,
and to any other creature, which the ignorance of the true God shall lay before
an idolater, Christianity being but thin-sowen, and Christ not so universally
believed upon, but that a great part of the world is idolaters and unbelievers.
Breerwood Enquiries. c. 10 Heyl. Cosmo. China.
Quinsay, the greatest City in the whole earth, was of late known to have had
in it, but one Church of Christians; in the rest, Gentilism, sacrificing to the
very Devil, that he might not hurt: Which considered, what should hinder our
earnest sueing, for a more clear manifestation of his infinite authority, that
all Altars, and all hearts, may offer up holy sacrifice to that only true God,
by whom they only live, and in whom they shall, and may be eternally made happy?

It was not, Dan. 4 32
or but darkly known, that the most high ruled in the Kingdoms of men, and gave
it to whomsoever he will; but yet so, that he himself governed it, by the
wisdom of his power, and protected it, by the wisdom of his government.

(...), (...).
Thy Kingdom, the word importing, that Kings are inviolable, and not to be hurt
or grieved, which God is by the idolatrous and superstitious rites of Gentiles
and Jews; or that Kings are the foundation, or upholder of the people; (...).
which God also is, all things being upheld by him, and to that purpose is a
King, a word from the Saxon word, Cyning, or Cunning, which imports to know
and understand, Smiths Commonwealth of England. lib. 1. C. 9.
and ability to act, as we proverbially say, a canny man, one that can do, and
act with dexterity and skill, in which God is transcendently eminent;
King-like, providing and taking care for all, making grass to grow for the Ox,
(...)
and herb for the service of man.

Sent he not hail, and fire mingled with hail, Exodus 29 24
very grievous upon all the Land of Egypt, and a pestilence, in the days of
David, upon the twelve Tribes? Its thy Kingdom, implying his Majesty, Splendour,
Tranquillity, and Honor; and may we not desire, that by the greatness of his
power, he would command the air to be healthful, and the fire not to be
hurtful, and that it be known to be his act, to all the world, Psalm. 69 2
as an effect of his unlimited Sovereignty?

Besides this, he is said to have a Kingdom, by, and in, which, he rules his
Saints and Church in special, and relating to his Church triumphant, is called
a Kingdom of glory, relating to his Church militant, Luke 17 21
is called a Kingdom of grace; that of grace going along in that of providence,
and going forward to that of glory, we shall speak of them both mutually,
beginning with that of providence and grace.

For a safe and prosperous success of our undertakings, and affairs, for the
subjugating of our foes, 2 Timothy 2 26
for destroying the power of darkness, that we may have no treacherous heart,
with Judas, Col. 1. 13
nor a covetous with Ahab, nor an ambitious with Absalom, and that the Kingdoms
of the earth may become the Kingdoms of the Lord, Rev. 11 15
and of his Christ, and that such who know him, may give him no rest, until he
make Jerusalem, that is, his Church, a praise in the whole earth, Isa. 62. 7
we pray for in Thy Kingdom come.

At this time, regnavit, Chry. Ser. 67
Diabolus, the Devil reigns, Sin reigns, Death reigns, and by them mankind
has been taken captive; hence we beg that Satan may perish, Sin may cease,
Death may die, and that Captivity may be taken captive; that we being freed
from these, may reign quietly, honorably, and securely under him.

If he suffer Turks or Tyrants to afflict his Church, we call for strength and
aid by his providence, for grace and power by his Spirit, and in both, Fsa. 80.
3
saying before Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manasseh, stir up thy strength; why
before these three? but because these Tribes, both mar ched, and pirched
nearest the Ark, a type of his presence; Weems Ex. Judic. Law, c. 4
and in Thy Kingdom come, his rising as a Giant out of sleep, in the sight of
his Church, and march forward to subjugat those (...) by his mustered forces,
that is, the ordered Army of his creatures, or peovidences, or graces of faith,
love, and real, that Ephraim and Manasseh, without fear may worship the Lord in
Benjamin, that is, in his Jerusalem, that is, in all holy places.

The work of Gods hand, and his providence about it, may lead us to admire; but
leas^ we should stand in the world, as Mary at the grave, John 20. 11
looking, to behold what we cannot find, we call for his Kingdom, to free us of
that sordid vassalage which our parents, sin, temptation, and unbelief, have
brought upon us, to the beholding those invisible riches above, pursuing in our
thoughts their duration, fixation and consolation.

The world here follows us so closs, and grips us so hard, that we are put back
in our pursuit of those more desirable treasures above, Luke 13 24 Lyra.
so that it is called a striving, to apply our thoughts thereto so much as in a
wish, which imports among many things, this one, that there must be great
pressing, and fearing to be over-pressed, we pray, Thy Kingdom come.

Anaxagoras affirmed, the cause of his birth and coming into the world was, to
behold the Heavens and the Sun, from which the curiosity of some has picked
such a mystery, as I am prone to conjecture was never in his thoughts; Brix.
Comment Symb. Coel. 78
for, by Heaven, they would give out, he understood the power of God, which is
attributed to the Father; and by the Sun, they will have to be signified the
brightness of misdom, which is Jesus Christ; and by heat, which is from the
Sun, they would have love understood, which is the Holy Ghost: to detect the
vanity of such conceits, as issuing from Anaxagoras, were a vain dispute; but
certain it is, that man was made, and the Christian is taught, to have his
eyes, his desires, his affections, Col. 3 ^
where Christ is, at the right hand of God, and was begotten and born of the
Spirit, to love, admire, and behold the Son.

Therefore Schools and Colleges, where Arts and Principles of knowledge are
taught, ought to be recommended to the ear of providence, that from them, by
means of Professors, and Benefactors, as from a Nursery, may be removed such
plants, as may in the garden of God, which is his Church, refresh his people
with their shade and fruit; for it was esteemed the saddest persecution, Theod.
Hist* Eccles. lib. 3 c. 7.
when Julian the Apostat Emperor, to impede the Kingdom of the Gospel, ordered
that no Galilean (so he termed believers) should be trained up in letters, or
learning, alleging that heathens were killed with their own feathers, meaning
the pungency of Christian Doctors Arguments.

That the knowledge of God, being spread, the longing after Heaven may be
discerned; that the things present, being accounted as nothing, there may be
earnestness for those which are to come, a principle arising from a conscience
purged from sin; Chrysostom. Hom. 20 in Mat. Romans 8. 32
and a soul purified from the earth, as St. Paul's was, when he groaned to be
clothed upon, rests in the bosom of this Petition.

Moreover, the subjection of all souls unto his will, Law, and Government, is
entreated for here, in Thy Kingdom come, the petitioner, as the mother of
Siserah, is panting, and asking, why is his Chariot so long in coming? Judge. 5.
28
that deliverance from this present evil world might be hastened; that all,
whether high, or low, rich or poor, old and young, might rejoice together,
blessing the Lord in the beauty of holiness. For,

1: They live in fear of themselves, and therefore cry, Thy Kingdom come. Job
was not in trouble, Job 3. 25
yet he feared; they know they cannot think one good thought, nor do one good
act, upon certainty of sins lying at the door and of temptations being within
the house; distrusting of the strength of age, and experimentally apprehending
a disease, surmising through despondency, some cross to attaque them; Romans 1. 20
and lastly, beholding the severity of God upon them which fall, more grace,
knowledge, and a more clear sense of their own salvation, is frequently in
their mouth, that no temptation may surprise them, or cause them deviat from
truth and holiness.

Sometimes Curiosity, Ber. de Conscient. c. 6.
again Vanity, too often Obscenity will affault, and the thoughts of the soul
here heat the heart, there blow it, and anon disturb it, and by and by
scatter, and again confound it, then rack it, and afterward binds it,
consequently defile it, and corrupt it, from which the coming of this Kingdom
does secure it, by giving them the gifts of sobriety, Cyp. E. pist. 2. ad Donat.
and of a sound mind, purity of speech, and sincerity of grace, which they
would always possess, but that Satan, by his frequent and sudden temptations
does hinder them. Chrysostom. in 1 Thessal. Hom. 3.


In the crowd of cares and fears arising from wars, tumults, and ( as they say,
from wives, children, and families) from sin and natural srailty, a soul,
though strong, may be broken, crushed and wounded; by which that precept
recorded to have been given by the Guardian Pastor or Angel (among many) to
that holy ancient Hermes, Vision Herm. Prim. Mandar^
St. Paul's Disciple, is good, viz. to believe and fear, in regard the last
without sthe first, creats gulfs of despondency, issuing from the turbulent sea
of perplexity, entanglements and doubts, for the Spirits overwhelming; his
nuncius iniquitatis, or evil genius, like Jobs messengers, interrupting man's
beloved retirements, for Halcyon and serene tranquillity, in heavenly
meditation, more frequently with corrodeing and mournful intelligence, Ib. Man.
dat. sext.
tending to bitterness and woe; then his nuncius aequitatis, or good Angel,
comes like Ioabs informers, Ahimaaz-like, with accustomed good tidings,
nourishing the soul, or ravishing the ear with the melodious report of
benevolent providence: whence it is, that even the great judgmentday, Mat. 24 22
for the elects sake is hastened, and the Kingdom of God every wsy desired.

2. They live in love of others, and therefore cry, Thy Kingdom come: With St.
Paul they have a desire, Romans 10. 1
and their prayer to God is, that all Israel may be saved, by letting the sound
of the everlasting Gospel be heard unto all that dwell upon the earth, Rev. 14.
6
and to every Nation, Tongue, and people, that Israel and Judah, that is, Jew
and Gentile, may become one, and unite in the hand of him, who is the arm of
the Lord revealed.

For if we love the Lord, Chrysostom. Hom. 34 de studio, etc.
we shall obey his Law, and love man, for this is to enjoy good, and to be
thought worthy of infinite good things, this is the crown of virtue, the
foundation of Religion, and the Kingdom of God: there being great and precious
promises of the enlarging of the Kingdom of Christ, by the accession thereto,
of the multitude of the Gentiles, by revealing the Doctrine of says, the light
whereof detecting the unprofitableness of those various modes and forms of
worship, used by Infidels, the not doing whereof indicats one almost, that is,
scarce half a Christian, Acts 2^ 28
that in its full latitude oblidging us to lay aside passion and self, and
signify to the world, our desire of Gods removing the dark cloud of atheism,
or error, and bring all to that due way of worshipping the Father, in his
Christ, by discovering to all the beauty and order of his Kingdom.

Let us reason a little on Gods behalf, and beholding the equity and justice of
this duty, set our selves to its performance.

Contemplat upon Gods authority over us, Mal. 1. 6
and we shall learn submission; reflect upon our cumbersome lusts, our rigid
adversaries, our rueful passions, our woeful calamities, our oppressing
Taskmasters, our seducing Teachers, our eager disputes, our multiplied
opinions, our divided interests, and our probably irreconciliable divisions; to
pass by the subtilty of the Devil in all, we shall be forced not only to pray,
Thy Kingdom come, but with hatred and sorrow acknowledge, that other lords
besides thee, Isa. ^6 13
have had dominion over us: to save us therefore, and to confound them, Let thy
Kingdom come.

Our creation, possession, and future expectation, makes discernable the
infinite distance betwixt those powers, whom we obey, and God whom we ought to
obey, who not only has authority over us, but exercises the same, in so
gentle, ample, and so affectionat manner, that reason should induce us to
forsake those intricat labyrinths, inconsolat services, and filthy
undertakings, Ephesians. 5. 12
in which, and wherein our lusts and hellish masters have, and do, so deeply
engage us, and make us swear allegiance (devouting our selves unto) the Crown
of Heaven, the Laws whereof being comfortable, just, good, and holy.

A crook-back was not under the Law to approach to offer bread before the Lord,
Lev. 21. 20
and therefore let us stand upright, and not flectere ad ima, as bowed down,
behold the things of this carnal and perishing world, lest we be accounted
unfit to approach unto, Greg. Mag.
or enter in, Hom. 31. in Evan.
the Kingdom of God. Exoneremus ergo, let us therefore cleanse our hearts from
the contagion of unclean cogitations, and fit our selves for a daily offering
up unto Christ, Valerian. Hom. 3. de Arctavia.
prayer and praise, as Priests separated by the Spirit for that good work and
office, and particularly to offer bread, I mean the remembrance of the whole
Tribes, the whole earth, for their good.

It was Saul's question, whether the promise or hopes of fields, 1 Samuel 22
or vineyards, made his Guards not inform him of David's supposed conspiracy,
and consederacy with Jonathan? and truly the largeness, excellency, the
Vineyards and fields, the riches, and the glory of the Kingdoms of grace and
providence, ought to provoke us to be earnest for the advancement of the
Kingdom of God; the protection we have from Angels, the heat we receive from
the Sun, the light we have from the Heavens, the prospect we have from the
Hills, the Flowers we behold from the Valleys, the Commodities we have from the
Sea, the comforts we draw from the Beasts, the spiritual consolations we
receive from the Gospel, show the advantages we have by his Government, and
therefore ought to endeavor the removing, 2 Samuel 3 10
and fight for the departing of Readiness (the sense is easy) and the coming of
David's Kingdom, in pressing for the enlargement of the Kingdom of grace under
our Lord Jesus Christ. Luke 18 38


For though in the Kingdom of his providence we possess such a lot or portion,
as his wisdom, or power gives, and judges convenient for us, yet remembering
that these things we enjoy, common with the Swine in the field, Job 38 41
and the Raven of the air, the Fortroyal of our affections are not to be
possessed, much less commanded by the desire of enlarging temporalities (being
given but as apt means to uphold our otherwise frail Tabernacle:) but
collecting all our strength, animat our zeal for a studious striving for, 2
Pet. 1. 5
and earnest thirsting after, the beautifying, confirming, enlarging, and
adorning of our inward man, by grace, against the approaching of the Kingdom of
glory.

This Age has many who slight this Prayer in their practice, as well as
neglect it in their religious exercise; they desire the coming of his Kingdom,
limiting their thoughts to that of Providence, desiring the hastening and
advancement of those good things they desire to possess, yet not contented with
their portion, Pro. 28. 22
by stealing, cheating, robbing, they snatch it impudently out of his hands,
being impatient that he brings it not unto them, and grumbleth that he makes
not speed; whereas, Thy Kingdom come, implies, modesty, and our waiting upon
Gods leisure. Let pilfring sinners therefore know, that not a snatching, but a
mannerly receiving, is contained in this Petition. Hasten not therefore to be
rich.

Eye his Kingdom of Grace, we have those so pure in their own eyes, so holy in
their own conceits, that they behold no urgent cause for its more evident
appearing: Let such know, that not sufficiency, but a daily exuberancy is
contained in this Petition, Say not therefore, Genesis 33. 9
I have enough.

It is obvious, that many concludes the coming of this Kingdom, to consist in
such tenets or opinions they have imbibed from the Rabbis of some saction to
them beloved. Let such know, that not the following of men's opinions, but the
knowledge and owning of Gods heavenly dominion, is contained in this Petition,
the great Officers therein, under himself, being Magistrates and Ministers, etc.
both which are prayed for, in Thy Kingdom come.

Thy Kingdom come.
THe Kingdoms of Grace and Glory, as they are united in this Petition, are now
to be explicated, and first of Grace, whereby Christ reigns in the soul, Luke
10. 9
which by having the Gospel, Mat. 24. 34
is nigh unto us: and next, that of Glory prepared for us before the foundation
of the world, yet these are not so much two as one, differing only as the light
conveyed by the window, Cant. 2. 9
differs from that immediately flowing from the Sun. In the Kingdom of Grace,
Aquin. in loc. lect. 2.
Christ is compared to a Roe, standing behind the wall, looking forth at the
window, showing himself through the lattess; the wall is our flesh, the window
is his Law, the lattess is his Prophets; but in the Kingdom of Glory, the wall
is pellucide, the window and lattess both removed, and the immediate beams (i.
e.) 1 Ioh. 3. 2.
glory of the Father, by the Saints viewed and respected.

By Grace here, he has Servants, Kings, and Teachers, in his Temple and
Throne, but there in glory, there is no teaching, because no ignorance, Rev.
2^. 22
no King, because no offense, and Kingdom implying government, and that under a
King, Christ is King and Head of his Church, and God the Father, as Jesus is
man, is the head of Christ: 1 Cor. 11 3.
Hence we pray, Our Father which art in Heaven, Thy Kingdom come.

In which Petition, there is something we pray against, and something we pray
for; the latter is for the Churches and our guidance, into the Holy of Holies,
the former is for subjugating Gods and our enemies, Gal. 5. 12
and all pernicious lusts, obstructing our glory to come.

We pray against the dominion of sin, the darkness of nature, the prevalency of
Satan, and the delay of the Saints reward.

1. The dominion of sin, that its head, which is as a Serpents, Romans 5. 21
may be bruised, and its reign, which is tyrannical may be ended, all lust
being base and ignoble, and ineffably cruel, domineering more over the soul,
and making it suffer more from it, Chrysostom. Ser. 4.
quam corpus, etc. then the body, does from diseases; for, it reigns, Epist. ad
Romans
and brings into eternal death, at last, fascinating in the mean time, and
bewitching men's hearts so, Romans 7. 24.
that but few are sensible of that danger, which these Ammonites will bring
upon them, if longer tolerated; and those few again have their souls so
entangled, that though they have no love to embrace, yet they want power to
extricate themselves out of sins snare, or force to drive it from exercising
dominion over them.

Therefore, calls for help against that strong man, that by the power of grace,
and strength of faith, and ardency of zeal, all from the Spirit of God, he may
be bound as a rebel against heaven, and an usurper over man, in forcing
obedience to his lusts, and rigidly exacting what was never his due (viz.) love
and subjection.

Thy Kingdom come, as it eyes the Church, imports, that it might be manifest
among men, and that it might be known to the ignorant; Landul. Carth. in Or.
Dom.
but eying Grace, it respects the extinguishing of all vice, by the power of
God, that neither devil nor world, nor carnal lust, nor any sin, might have
dominion over us, but God alone: For, if we study good works, and shine in
virtue, Greg. in sep. Psa. penitent.
lust and iniquity shall never overcome us, nor the power of hell suppress us:
restat ergo, we ought therefore, as in all things, so in suppressing of sin, to
call for divine aid, and to flee to that rock of re^uge, impregnable against
all assaults, Psalm. 143 9
saying, Deliver me O Lord, from mine enemies, for I flee unto thee.

It desires that God may so reign in us, that sin and death may cease to reign
over us, Chry. Ser. 70.
being weakened in their strength, blasted in their beauty, and confounded in
their force.

2. Against darkness of nature. Ephesians. 5. 8
Happiness being the scope and design of all rational beings, Religion shows
to be only in God, which yet to obtain, man's weakness and infirmity, holds
difficult, if not impossible, except God himself take us by the hand, and lead
us to its enjoyment; we being as dead men, incapable of acting, or if capable,
blind as the Sodomites, wearying our selves in a fruitless groping; or if
neither of these, yet as the nighted Levite in Gibeah, Judge. 19. 15.
we sit down ready to embrace the felicity any one shall offer, and alace! are
there not many who say, Psalm. 4. 6.
who will show us any good?

Our Saviors nativity was by the Philosophers mocked, neither did Philosophy
agree to the doctrine of his rising from the dead, Tert. advers.
this earthly mind of ours, like the Kingdom of the beast, Marc. lib. 5. de Ep.
ad Col. Rev. 16.
being so darkened, we beg, in Thy Kingdom come, for the light of the holy
Gospel, (i. e.) for the spirit and gift of understanding; for, Glos. or. in
text^.
though the truth be shining upon us, and about us, yet as blind men we behold
it not, until the rays of the Spirit of light and truth, by sound and saving
Knowledge, virtuat our understanding to behold, and next, to approve the things
of God, either as to the simple knowing the nature thereof, or real observing
the laws thereof; for, without practice, knowledge is but more damning: For,
Ang. de vir. Christ^^no. c. 6
as he is not called an Artificer, who has no skill in the trade, so nor he a
Christian, in whom the exercise of Christianity is not beheld. Christian being
a name of Justice, Goodness, Integrity, Patience, Chastity, Prudence, Humility,
Humanity, Innocence, and Godliness, all comprehended in that precept, walk as
Children of light. Ephesians. 5. 8.


The Kingdom of God coming in the spiritual efficacy thereof, and shining in
upon man, discovers the thinness, blackness of all his other actions, the
reasonableness of all Evangelick duties, and the ways of extracting comforts
from them: Whereas the want thereof, either secureth the sinner, upon
conjectures that all is well, or damns him, by leaving him to the glimmering
light of his own natural Conscience, which filling him with fear and horror,
causes him do many good things, Mark. 6. 20
and with Herod, hear John Baptist gladly.

All which to prevent, by a knowledge tending to eternal life, both in work and
reward, we say, Thy Kingdom come, that is the sap^ence, the knowledge of thy
Son, in opposition to that blindness, 2 Cor. 4. 4
Satan, the god of this world, has cast upon us, and to that natural ambition,
he, as king over the children of pride, has infused in us, disdaining to
become subjects to the most high God, choosing rather vassalage to him; yea, to
be one with him the devil and wicked men, making up one body, Greg^ M^g.
and from him, as being the head, are the members sometimes designed: Judas, as
he was a traitor, Mor. lib* 13. c. 17.
is called a devil, and all sinners are either his associats, or his sons, and
one way or other related to him, and industrious for him.

3. Against the prevalency of Satan. That God may be seen to rule in his
Saints, by their peaceable conformity to his Law, without the reach of that
Serpents sting, that Dragons tail, that Lions claw, for their so doing, the
sting being pulled out, the tail broken, and the claw paired, which in the
Scripture Language, is a chaining him up, Rev. 20. 2
having no chair of estate, as in the heart of Judas; nor my repose, as once in
the bosom of David; nor mint office in the heart of any, as once in Annanias;
nor magazine in any man's soul, as he had in Ahabs breast; for the slaughter of
any, Author. Imperf. Hom. 29
as he had in Herod: and in sum, Regnum Diaboli, est omne malum, the devils
kingdom is, where ever evil is; and therefore that Gods Kingdom, which is,
where ever good is, may come, for the subduing of all that is naught, is to be
earnestly pressed.

Though we have all come short of the glory of God, Romans 3. 23
yet to limite Satan, and deliver us, adds much to the glory of his Kingdom,
especially, since God has begun to bind him, those countries, wherein he has
so long, and probably, for ever intended to play Rex, as in the America
Islands, the inhabitants whereof, as a learned man conjectures, being drawn
from the north places of the world, Medes works, lib. 4. Ep. 43.
(after the Gospel begun to shine among these barbarous Nations) their God,
Vitzililiputzli, or Vitzliputzli, the Image of which Idol they carried in a
Cosser of Reeds, supported by four principal Priests, unto whom also he gave
directions, and in apish imitation of the Israelits cloud, Purchase Pilgrimage,
lib. 8. c. 10*
so this devil signed their advance, or stay, being still in the midst of their
Camp, and having always a Tabernacle erected for his worship, where they
rested, which at last, was at the place where Mexico now stands, so called from
their chief Captain, Mexi, whom they followed: But God found them out, and
affronted the devil in his own territories, where he was worshipped (until of
late) so eminently, Hist. of West. Jud. 588.
that the King of Callicut eat not his meat, until it was offered unto the
devil, by the name, Deumo, (as being the great Gods Viceroy, and the government
of all the lower world, for convenience and ease, deputed unto him;) and the
fragme^ts given to Crows, which for that were accounted holy, etc.

Let my Reader pardon me, if for Gods glory, the words of that Covenant be
inserted, taken by the Indian inhabitants of new England, after great pains
given by English Divines; by interpretation, the engagement is this,

We are the sons of Adam, Strength out of weakness etc. Page 8.
we and our forefathers have a long time been lost in our sins, but now the
mercy of the Lord, begins to find us out again, therefore the grace of
Christ helping us, we do give our selves, and our children unto God, to be his
people; he shall rule us in all our affairs, not only in our Religion, and
affairs of the Church, (these we desire, as soon as we can, if God will) but
also in all our works, and affairs in this world, God shall rule over us, Is.
33. 22. The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King,
he will save us; the wisdom which God has taught us in his Book, that shall
guide us, and direct us in the way. O Jehovah, teach us wisdom, to find out thy
wisdom in the Scriptures, let the grace of Christ help us, because Christ is
the wisdom of God, send thy Spirit into our hearts, and let it teach us, Lord
take us to be thy people, Ibid. 29^
and let us take thee to be our God.

And by their getting Psalms translated in the Indian tongue, they have learned
to speak of Jehovah, and avoid many sins, and hates and avoids Pawwows, that is
Witches and Charmers, etc.

Now to pray for a farther binding up of Satan, in the conversion of more
Indians, all Turks, Jews, were an acceptable work in it self, and our duty as
Christians, that all the worlds inhabitants may cry out with that poor dying
Indian, Ibid. 2.
Jehovah Aninumah, that is, O Lord, give me Jesus Christ, which is equivalent
to Thy Kingdom come, and that each professor might repel all temptations, as
one of them did, Ibid. 26.
when tempted to Pawwow for a sick person, saying, I must not break my
Covenant, and sin against God.

But now to return to the old world again, where Satan also has his seat, Rev.
2. 13
which lies in wickedness, he having in it universal dominion, demonstrated by
the vanity, impiety, of its inhabitants; for though his kingdom be not natural,
but malicious, his government not defensive, but persecution, bending his power
to the damnation of his subjects, yet in the opinion of a Father, is he a great
King; strengthening his Kingdom with vices, walling it with abominations, Cyp.
de Jejun. and Temptat.
building castles in it with attrocious acts, and furnishing them with Armor
of enforced filthiness; The Collectors of his Revenue, are, oppressors of the
poor, his Officers are seducers, deceivers of the simple and honest, his Lord
chief Justice is perverseness; In his Court, and about his Chamber, you have
Cuning Rooks, by hook and by crook purchasers, cheating Merchants, covetous
Preachers, protracting Doctors, conscience-hiring Hucksters; for his Advocat,
he has a Jack of both sides, Lawyer.

He has also about him, forgers of lies, Ibid.
contrivers of mischief, receivers of bribe, reproachers of men, because
effeminat as woman; and for a Page, he has Amictus discoloribus (says my
Author) a Peacock-tail'd gallant.

But when the Kingdom of God shall come, It shall discover, that the world,
like men, brings good wine at the first, and afterward that which is worse;
Stell^ de Contempt. Mund. lib. 1. c. 5.
for, sin is Voluptatum est Tormentum, the end of our eating is infirmity, the
end of our living is death, and the end of death (to all that crucify not the
world) is eternity of misery, the thoughts of which are suffciently valid, to
wash the paint from the world, to cure the itch of the flesh, and to fight or
animat us against the tyranny of the devil, and then shall the Kingdom of
Heaven be within us.

4. Against the delay of the Saints reward. The vision being for an appointed
time, Hab. 2. 3
must be waited for, yet as the hireling for the shadow, the watchman for the
morning, the weather-beaten Pilot for the Haven, the sick for his recovery, the
weary Traveller for his Inn, so does a Saint long for the end of all designs,
their enjoyment of God in Christ: Their modesty keeps them from saying, Ioh. 31
Arise, let us go hence, yet the soul of man being easily seduced, their zeal
inflamed with the thoughts of what they shall possess, vigorously enforces
them with a holy seriousness, to call, Adveniat Regnum tuum, Thy Kingdom come.

That is, Lord say to the North, give up, and to the South, restore, the dead
bodies of thy Saints, given them in charge, that they and we ( the time
appointed of the Father, being come) may be caught up to meet the Lord in the
air, 1 These. 4 17
to remain for ever with him.

The soul being stamped with the image of God, Ber. med. 3.
betrothed by the faith of God, endowed by the Spirit of God, redeemed by the
blood of God, capable of the blessedness of God, having nothing to do with
flesh, longs for the perfect vision, and full fruition of the holy place, of
the holy face of God, that mortality might be swallowed up of life.

The soul is Christ's Spouse, and conform to her condition, Ber. Sent.
has a threefold marriage: The 1. is, In her Justification by faith, at which
she is feasted by the ablution of sin, the attainment of grace, the reforming
of nature; but this is attended, through the souls default, with many jarrs.
The 2. is, Her Regeneration, or Sanctification, by hope, at which she receives
divine consolation, heavenly communion, and a taste of the glory to come, but
this is also mixed with fears and doubtings, and therefore the third is wished
for, which is her glorification by charity, at which she is entertained with
eternal incorruption, true glory, and the perpetual vision of God, and this
being the more excellent, affectu pio, Ambr. in Psalm. 118 Ser. 19
and sensu profundo, she groans most ardently for it.

As we pray against these things, so there are other matters we pray for, such
as the Churches sovereignty, the Saints felicity, and our Fathers universal and
sole authority.

1. The Churches sovereignty in general. The Church is the continent wherein
Christ reigns, and in it his Palace and his Temple stands, which two are often
clouded by foggs, arising from open hatred against them, or pretended
friendship to them, casting stumbling blocks in the way of others, by disloyal
practices, as the idolatry of Rome, offends the Jew, and the heat of the
Calvinists and Lutherans, in their often debates, becomes scandal again to the
Papist.

To clear the air, is this Petition put up, that all may behold the mountain of
the Lords house, Isai. 2. 3
and the Sun of Righteousness shining thereon, that is, Christ Jesus, before
whom the Jews had only Lamp-light by the Law and the Prophets, Orig. Hom. 13 in
Levit*
which also shined upon them until the Baptist, who was a burning and a
shining light, but after that he rose whose Name was the East, whose Star arose
in the East, like a Sun enlightening the world, directing to the knowledge of
that Triune God; all may say of Gospel-rules, Aug. de Vira Christiana, c. 6.
this is the way, let us walk in it, that Sanctity, Innocence, Purity and Piety
may lodge in the breast of all, and malice and mischief excluded from all.

The vision of the conversion of the Gentiles to the says of Christ, Isa. 60. 8
and to the Churches of the Saints, is expressed by the similitude of doves
flying to their windows, thereby showing the swiftness, zealousness,
harmlessness, and unity (doves generally going in flocks) that shall be in
those Converts, and the multiplication and addition of whom unto the says,
notwithstanding of the diversity of opinions, (as natural as variety of
feathers, or faces) is contained in this, Thy Kingdom come.

That all beholding the King in his beauty, Isa. 33. 17
his Sacraments in their dignity, all his Ordinances in their purity, may have
their souls so influenced, Act. 4. 32
as to have all one heart, not being dismembered by faction, or passion, which
rather shows men to be inhabitants of several Provinces, then fellow subjects,
having one Language, and united in one Kingdom.

The Petition therefore importing the accomplishing of that which St. Paul gave
once a charge for, Aquin. in 2 These. c. 3. lect. 1.
(viz.) that the word of the Lord may have free course, and be glorified, that
is, be opened and expounded before learned and unlearned; that though we behold
one unskilful in knowledge or expression, Orig. Hom. 3. in Ps. 36.
yet being full of says and fear of God, dare not open his mouth to sin
against him (which alone constitutes true wisdom,) and with these, being
replenished with hope and charity, Cajet. in Text.
and and all other virtues, Jesus Christ may reign in him, and in all other,
that the Lord Jesus Christ, being known of all, to be the only begotten Son of
the Father, and whom they shall visibly perceive coming from Heaven, to judge
quick and dead, and upon that score ought to be known, feared, obeyed, and
worshipped of all, Aug. In Ser. de Mont. Dei, lib. 2
by addressing to his Kingdom in their belief of the Gospel, and swearing
allegiance to his Crown, in receiving the Sacraments thereof.

2. For the Saints felicity eternal. Laboring in the earth causes weariness,
and makes the workman eye the Sun, to behold its hight; Rev. 21 4
there being no cloth capable to dry the eyes of the penitent, save the Robe
of glory: It is here entreated for, Rev. 6. ^
that tears, not only in themselves, but in their causes and occasions, may for
ever be removed from them, and never admitted where they are, to the
interruption of their joy.

Alexander hearing Anaxagoras evincing the existency of many worlds, Val. Max.
lib. 8. c. 1^
wept, because he had conquered scarce one; The believer from the principles of
eternal wisdom, has collected the being of a world, Rev. 2^ 5
where shall be no night, neither properly, nor metaphorically understood; the
want of which, considering his present habitation, causes him with Mary, weep,
yet looking up with a phosphere read diem, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

All the possessions Abraham enjoyed, Genesis 15. ^
were but poor in his eye, so long as Childless; give any of his faithful sons
an extract of earthly pleasures, they are contemned, because heavenless: and
St. Paul's Cupio dissolvi, I desire to depart, senseth this Petition.

Though this Pronoun THY, give the property of this Kingdom unto God; Cyp. in
Orat. Dom.
yet as the bread we eat is His first, and next by says Ours, so is this
Kingdom, the truth of God having engaged it self in a promise to us, that we
shall possess it, both as his, and our inheritance.

The other Petitions admit of no demurr, no delay, Baker Dis. on the L. P. P.
86.
and are therefore in our faithful arguing, attended with a desire of dispatch,
for his will must be done, now, and this day we must have our daily bread; but
this alone has the continuation of days in the Court of Conscience, Romans 5. 5
and therefore may be called a Petition of hope, living in hope, yet such an
one, that makes not ashamed, in regard it is for a Kingdom which will come,
though for a while it may tarry.

3. For our Fathers Kingdom universal: When the end comes, Christ shall
deliver up the Kingdom unto God, 1 Cor. 15 24
that is, the Kingdom of his Mediator-ship, at which the Kingdom of Grace shall
end, the Son himself, as man, becoming subject to the Father, that God may be
all in all; then Heavens Gates shall be shut, there being no more to enter; and
Hell shut, Devils rambling being no more to be tolerat, Rev. 20 10
the harvest being then gathered, and no more seed to be sown, the elect
glorified there, being no more to be called, but God ruling, having brought
into subjection all that either denied him, or defied him; where begins his
Kingdom of Glory.;

For that time wherein God is enjoyed without Ordinances, Rev. 21 22
and praised without adversaries, sin and death being abolished, and an
immediate union with God acquired, is this Petition offered, that the supreme
dominion of the great God may be hastened, and a final close put to all things,
by folding up of the sheets of time, where ends the Kingdom of Providence.

The changes and mutations, the framings, Meed. works, lib. 4. Epist. 8.
as we may call them, which attend the Kingdom of Grace, have caused it to be
called Regnum lapidis, the Kingdom of a stone; the fixedness, perpetuity of the
Kingdom of glory, is called Regnum montis, the Kingdom of the Mountain; the
other being but as a stone hewn, or hewing; for that immovable and eternal
Kingdom therefore, and its approaches, this Petition is numbered among our daily
prayers. Yet for a caution, it may be added, that this is necessary to be
heeded, viz. that their cause had need to be good, who long for, and press
after, the coming of the Judge: Remember thy faults therefore, implore a
pardon, be circumspect in thy way, purifying thy soul by faith, abiding in
hope; dwelling in love, and then call, Thy Kingdom come, Ier. 1. 12
and the Lord will hasten his word, to perform it, for his own glory, to thy
comfort.

Thy Kingdom come.
WE are now to examine the steps and methods by which this Kingdom comes; for,
coming denots a progressive, and an advancing motion, our Father having
authority over it, Mat. 8. 9
as the Centurion, if he say, go, it goes, if come, it comes. Prepare ye
therefore the way of the Lord, and make his paths straight: Luke 3. 4.
In our endeavoring to clear, first, its motion, next, uses from that motion.
Man being in Scripture interpretatively, every creature, Mat. 16. 15
we shall not speak much of his Kingdom of providence, wherein his regiment
over the creatures, is manifested, but eying especially that of his Grace and
Glory, which his goodness is pleased to represent in this prayer, with its face
and favor toward us, etc.

The coming and completing of his authority by grace, ought to be prayed for,
upon many considerations, its regiment being as yet imperfect, impeded, and ost
obnubi^ated.

Its regiment is imperfect: The tallest Christian is but of a low stature, and
the wisest studieth most to increase in wisdom; the utmost that St. Paul could
reach unto, Romans 7. 25
was, with his mind to serve the Law of God, his flesh still observing that of
sin, Jerome. in loc.
and every good man being two men, and divided in himself, ought to endeavor
more and more freedom from that law of death. Romans 8. 2


There is no Wheat without its Chass, nor Rose without its Thorn, nor says
without its doubt, nor heart without its lust; yea, the Moon wants not her
Spots, nor the Sun its Eclipses, unto which the Church is compared, Cant. 6. 10
when in her greatest beauty; nor army, even with banners, without its own care
and fear; unto which she is also likened, when she is most terrible.

Its regiment is also impeded: There are enemies in the coasts, possessing
strong sorts, hindering grace, in her noble atchievments; Schisms, Divisions,
Heresy, Idolatry, Scandals, Prophanness, hinder the marches of the King of
Saints, (as craggy rocks do the passage of Kings of the Nations.) Saying, Job.
21. 14 Pinted.
depart from us, that is, turn from us, which includes a removing of him;
intended by them, that they may remain free. This people has a revolting
heart, Ier. 5. 23
says the Prophet, they are revolted, they are gone; They say, go, the other
says depart, both being against his approaches and dominion.

Pardon the application, if we take the wings of the morning, and flee to the
uttermost parts of the earth, Satan's power, sins law, lusts dominion is
resisting Christ's nearer communion with his Church: There shall be sound Pride
in Armor, 1 Job. 5. 19.
Covetousness in Buff* Oppression watching, Lust posting, Fury th^^tning,
Malice contiriving, and Policy uniting to suppress the Gospel; and though it
get ground in the conversion of some, to the says of Jesus, yet what Hanibal
said of the Roman General Marcellus, may the Church say of them, and the devil
their Captain, Luke 4. 13
that neither conquered, nor conquering, will they be quiet; yea, her case must
be sad, since the very li^e of her peace consists in fighting against these
restless adversaries; and where overcome, yet so desperate is their wrath, Mat.
8. 34
they with the Gadarens beseech Christ to depart.

Its regiment is likewise often obnubilated; Grace now and then is put to the
flight, by an army of lusts: The Church is said to be a Woman clothed with the
Sun, Rev. 12. 1
the Moon under her feet; Hug. Card. in loc.
that she is a Woman, betokens her weakness, her fruitfulness, clothed with
the Sun, her protection by, and obedience to, Jesus Christ; the Moon under her
feet, signifies her contempt of all earthly, because mutable, enjoyments; yet
for all this pompous equippage, she is forced to go to the wilderness for
shelter, against the Dragons rage and fury.

The feeling, the beholding, the hearing of these things, will cause sorrow;
and what consolation is that offered by an Ancient, comforting a Christian in
sad times? Aug. Epist. ad Sebast. 145. and Epist. ad Victo. 122.
It was, Pia tristitia, beata miseria, a blessed melancholy, and a pleasant
misery, to behold the sins of others, and weep; and to another, Plangenda sunt
haec, non miranda, these things are to be be (...) for, not wondered at; yet
adds, that prayer ought to be made.

I shall not say, that after the fall, God appointed our flesh, Damas. Ortho.
Fid. lib. 2 c. 10.
our sinful lusts to rule overus, for our punishment, as he appointed thorns to
arise out of the earth, for man's vexation; but since the fall, lusts and
corruption overshadow grace within us, to that hight, that Peter will curse,
Genesis 27. 24
David fall, and Jacob lie to his Father; and these weeds are permitted to
abide in all, until the Kingdom of God come with power, which made David call,
but thou, O Lord, how long? that is, in the new Testament-stile, Thy Kingdom
come.

The Gospel in its progress, is compared by our Savior to leaven, Mat. 13. 33
and that works gradually, regeneration to a new birth, and man is perfected
by degrees, the Church to a builing, and that advances by rule, and measure,
and Wisdom is said to have hewn out her seven pillars, Prove. 9. 1
which implies addition; the new man has not his proportion by years, but by
degrees, and comes to perfection by distinct gifts and graces, he first learns
as a child, to read the good examples of others, then advancing forward, he
comes to live according to divine Law, Aug. de vera Relig. c. 31.
then he is so in love with Christ, that marrying himself to him, he would not
sin, though there were no Law against it; growing now strong, he can endure,
and stand out against the worlds troubles and vexations, and then growing rich,
in the abundance of the things of the Kingdom of God, he leads a peaceable and
contented life; then he comes to forget (that is, not to heed) transitory
things, being wholly intent (as aged in grace) upon life eternal, and now there
remains but one step more, that is, the Kingdom of glory, which advances
toward us, by the grace of faith, illumination of the soul, Discipline of the
Church, and by finishing the number of the Elect.

1. By the hearing of faith: Gal. 1. 4
This eyes all the Kingdoms we have spoken of, for as by faith we believe that
Jesus came to save sinners, Heb. 11. 3
so we believe by ^aith, that the world was created, and yet preserved, the
Father Almighty hitherto working, Ioh. 5. 17
and darkly hinted at in the conclusion of this Prayer, For thine is the
Kingdom, power and glory.

All that we know of Hell his prison, of Earth his Footstool, of the Clouds
his Chariots, of Man his Image, of Angels his Hosts, of Heaven his Palace, of
Christ his Son, is by the doctrine of Faith; for, until it come, we are not
savingly sensible of the Kingdom of God. Carrion. Chronic. lib. 1
And, the doctrine of the Worlds Creation, Man's fall, and Christ's coming, are
recorded to have been the Principles of Religion, taught in Adams Temple,
Oratory, or place of worship, where God dwelt, from whose face, Cain departed;
all which show, that, it is necessary to believe as firmly, that God the Father
Almighty made the Heaven and Earth, as it is to believe in Jesus Christ, his
only Son, our Lord.

The grace of faith, is said to be the Kingdom of God within, Luke 17. 21.
Glos. ord.
that Kingdom being spiritual, and reigning in the hearts of the faithful,
while they are in the Kingdom of providence, and by which they are nourished
and protected, until they arrive at the Kingdom of God in glory, where they
shall reign as Kings and Priests unto God for ever.

2. By the enlightening of the mind. Chrysostom. Hom. 8. in. 2 Ep. ad Cor.
This peculiarly eyes his Kingdom of grace: As Moses face shined when he was
with God, under the Law, so now God shines in the hearts of his friends under
the Gospel; he says now, not Let there be light, but is himself a light unto
his people.

The Gospel puts a Key in the Converts hand, to intuat and behold the mysteries
in Christ crucified, which others cannot see; and also a Lamp, to know how far,
and in what kind, for what use, and for what end, they appertain to him. As at
the Creation, there was a fiat lux, Let there be light; so in Conversion, there
is a scias fu, thy sins are forgiven thee, which is that unction of the Spirit,
1 Ioh. 2 20
by which all things are known, as the Eunuch knew and believed that Jesus
Christ was the Son of God, and by which also, Aquin. Domin. 23. p. P.
their Conversation is in Heaven, having security by God, and joy in him, for
which cause also, it is the highest stone in Wisdoms seven Pillars, upholding
the house, Ber. de Inter. Dom. c. 7
that is, the Conscience, or Soul of man: The first whereof, being good Will,
next, a sanctified Memory, the third, a clean Heart, the fourth, a free Soul,
the fifth, a right Spirit, the sixth, a devout Mind, but the last and highest
is, an enlightened Understanding.

By the discipline of the Church; Admonitions, Reproofs, Censures, are as
military weapons, used by the Church, for the upholding of this Kingdom of
Grace, 1 Cor. 5. 4. and 2 Cor. 2. 6
yea, a delivery over unto Satan, by excommunication, which (if justly, duly,
and compassionatly done) is, and has been found, instrumental for the stirring
up the authority and power of Grace in the soul of some obdured, shame and fear
being very efficacious motives, (where other means are less effectual) to
persuade a soul to cry, Peccavi, Father, I have sinned, as did the incestuous
Corinthian.

One Sigbert, Beda Ec* Hist. A^: lib. 3. c. 22
King of the East Saxons, keeping society and familiarity with a Count or Earl,
whom holy Cedd had excommunicated for unlawful marriage; once by accident met
with Cedd, as he journeyed to the Counts house, and being smitten with shame
and fear, alighted from his horse, and craved pardon; but Gedd replied, Hist.
Hor. rib. lib. 1. 237.
Dico tibi, I show thee, because thou refrainest not from the house of that
prosane wretch, thou shall for thy punishment die in it, which fell out
accordingly, the Earl and others treacherously killing the King at a solemn
treat.

Pyrrhus Sons, demanding to which of them he would leave his Kingdom, Answered,
To him who had the sharpest sword; Plut. Ap.
Let the swords, either of Gideon or of God; Judge. 17. 18
be viewed, Gods is the sharpest, and therefore, to be most ^eared of all who
believes the coming of that Judge who commands his Anointed not to be touched.

By Baptism, the Professor takes pay from Jesus, as the Captain of his
salvation, and by scandalous* behavior, he, as it were, runs from his Colors,
and by censure is he brought back, 1 Cor. 14 25
and placed again in his rank, that men beholding, may fear, and say, that God
is in her, (viz. the Church,) of a truth. As Lycon the Philosopher, Diog.
Laert. in Lycon.
had Ambitio and pudor, shame and honor, to goad his Scholars forward in the
practice of virtue; so the Church has honor, and a Rod to excite to good
behavior, restraining the vicious, and encourageing the virtuous.

4. By finishing and perfecting the just number of the Elect. Romans 11. 25
Scripture shows, that the Kingdom of glory shall not come, until the number
of these appointed for Salvation, be completed; not to speak of that great
mystery of the Jews blindness, until the fullness of the Gentiles be brought
in, the Elect, whether Jew or Gentile are gathered: 1. At their natural
dissolution, 2. At Christ's public manifestation.

1. At the Saints natural dissolution: Every soul here uncased and divested of
the body, is a stone added for the perfecting of that house which is above, and
when the Quarry of eternal appointment has been hewed out by the Gospel, and
fitted by death, the roof is laid on, and the work is finished, for time shall
be no more, and Graces government over the soul is perfected then in glory.

If that Prayer be a real History, which is recorded for Ieroms, and in his
works which he made a little before his death, Epistola Eusebius. de morte Hieron.
for hastening of his glory, how pithy is it? but the Conclusion much more
comfortable, there appearing, on a sudden, after his communicating, so
beautiful and glorious a light in his Chamber, that the sick could hardly be
seen, and a voice heard, saying, Come my beloved, the time is now, wherein thou
art to receive a reward for these labors, which manfully thou have undergone
for me; to which he replied, Behold, I come, Lord Jesus unto thee, receive my
soul, which thou have redeemed with thy blood; which words, though thus uttered
by him, are still expressed, as often as we say, Thy Kingdom come.

Not that death is to be simply called for, or out of impatience, Jon. 4. 8
as did Job, or Jonah, but as Moses desired a sight of God, but could not
perfectly get it, until he went up to die, Exodus 32.
so we are to understand, that Paul's Cupio dissolvi, his desire to depart, upon
saving knowledge, is the most special comfortable text to a man in his
departing, said a reverend Prelat in his own Funeral; Arch B.
for, know we not, Cant.
that every day we breath here, we lose one days sight of heavens beauty, Fun.
which we may justly pray to see* Sermon.
not to alter Gods purpose, but to manifest our longing desire.

2. At Christ's public manifestation. At Jesus his coming in the Clouds, with
the train of his holy Angels, who are to gather his elect from the four winds,
from one end of Heaven to the other, Mat. 24. 31
the dead in Christ rising first, then those that are alive caught no, all
allarmed by a mighty shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and Trump of God,
1 These. 4 6
shall the accomplishment of the full ^^lly or number of the elect be finished;
At which time the Saints, of their prayers, of this prayer, shall say,
consummatum est, it is come, the Kingdom is come, the King of glory comes,
Arise let us go hence, Psalm. 24 10
and enter into our Masters joy; for, the Kingdom is come, etc.

But alas! how unprepared are we for its coming; for, the dead consciences,
scandalous lives, malicious complotters, the medlers, or busybodies about
other men's matters, the hatred and envy that appears in the actions of too
many, professing Christianity, may cause remembrance of that old complaint,
sine Martyrio persequeris, Hilar.
thou persecutes without bloodshed, contra Constan.
and thou kills under the mask of Religion, and thou destroys the says of
Christ, August.
by speaking of him, etc.

This Kingdom has come before day, Wishart lect. 6. on the ^. P.
as upon Jacob, and John the Baptist, before they were born; and at the dawning
of the day, as upon Samuel, and Timothy; at noontide of the day, as on Paul
and Elisha; and sometimes at the setting of the Sun, as upon the converted
thief; but as it were dark night with us, we sleep, and fatten in our sins,
neither fearing, nor desiring, our Lords coming; and though it be come to our
Judah, this part of the world; yet as the Gergesens, we seek by our
carefulness, its removeal from us: Be entreated therefore to throw away our old
sins, while we have time, Chrysostom.
wash away our spots, unravel the knots of our lives, Hom. 41 ad Pop.
and study purity, that the King may have pleasure in our beauty; and let us be
the more earnest, Antioch.
that the coming of our Lord is nigh: He stood before the doors in St. James
his time, Jam. 5. 19
we have reason now to apprehend he is is half over the threshold.

In thy Kingdom come, we show eagerness to be under his dominion, subject to
his power, censured by his Gospel; yet by our carnal divisions, we evince our
aversness unto all; and certainly, by Amen, we confirm our hearts in their
rebellion against his Supremacy, refusing to be under him; for though both
Devils and sinners be under the Dominion of God, Author. imperf. Hom. 14
yet because they will not obey, they are not said to be in his Kingdom.

We also bewail in it our straitness. This world is a prison, at best but an
Inn, wherein the beautifulest Chamber, even a Kings presence is so encumbered;
we may say of it, as Seleucus of his Crown, that if people knew the vexations
under it, they would not deign to list it from the ground: yet our deeds make
apparent, that this world is our rest, and our choice, not the Kingdom of our
God, having no respect to its government, evident in the looseness of our lives,
and scandalousness of our divisions.

O God, thou have hardened our hearts against thy fear, turn thy self to us
again, bless our provision, Psalm. 132 15
satisfy thy poor with bread, and cloth thy Priests with righteousness, that
thy Saints may shout for joy, expecting the new Jerusalem coming down from God
out of Heaven, Rev. 2^* 2
prepared as a Bride adorned for her Husband.

Thy Kingdom come.
THere are three graces mainly to be exercised, in our petitioning, viz.
Charity, Humility, Fervency; the first is found in each Line, Word, Syllable of
this Prayer, yea, the very Preface of it, Our Father, is clothed with Charity,
the second is equally conspicuous, acknowledging our poverty in the fourth
Petition, our iniquity in the fifth, our infirmity in the sixth, etc. We shall
in the close of this Petition, speak of the third, and discover the zeal that
ought to possess the heart of the supplicant, affixing this unto Thy Kingdom
come, yet ought it to be understood as appended unto Thy will be done.

Too much remissness, Greg. Naz. O. rat. 9. de pace 1.
and again, over eager earnestness being equally offensive, we shall discover
the zeal we speak of, the Arguments for it, and Cautions concerning it.

Zeal, Elias in loc. cit.
being a hot impetus or warm affection, heating the soul, for practicing
duties, governed by sound knowledge, and right reason, is included in the word
Kingdom, Romans 10 2.
amplified by the Pronoun, Thy; and therefore, vehement in our wishings and
longings for its coming; the very word, Zeal, denotes affections to be as fire:
that of the Pharisees earnestness to compass Sea and Land for a Prosylite, was
great, no good zeal, but if pitched upon the right object, and managed with
due circumstances, Psalm. 11^ 139
as the love of God, heeding the Word of God, enflamed with a solicitous care
for its advancement, and attended with an innocent and holy hatred against its
opposers; as in David, it is both good and great, and in Paul, it is both great
and good.

It is composed of Love, Fear, and Anger: in this Petition, the love of God,
and the love of man, the fear of his own weakness, and the desire of the
downfall of Satan's Dominion, is clearly to be beheld.

It eyes chiefly, Binc^^. Mel. the. ol. loc. 15
the propagation of divine glory, the Churches edification, Satan's destruction,
and the extirpation of all wicked Heretics and sinners, and ought to be in us,
not only at our prayers, but in the whole course and practice of our lives,
being in every thing, a zeal for Gods glory, and our own, and our Brothers
good, ought to be in us; God hating dullness upon the one hand, as well as
rashness on the other.

Much of this Kingdom, S. Paul possessed, yet he reached forward unto those
things that were before; knowing only this, that he made proficiency daily,
Jerome in Philip. 3. 13
the world not yet being ended, he pressed forward, possessing the things he
believed, if not in re, yet in spe, not having them in possession, though in
reversion, he endeavored an intuition, hating that Diagor an-like spirit (now
in man) who declared he knew not whether there was a God or not; Val. Max. lib.
1. c. 1
and if there were, was also ignorant of what nature he was: With us dullness
and carelessenesse of many in the affairs of God, publishes, their uncertainty
of the being, and next, of the quality of this Kingdom, whereas he is only
zealous, Dyonis. de divin. Nom. c. 4 pars I
who truly and soundly, that is, assuredly, is acquainted with heavenly
matters, which in relation to this Kingdom, every soul ought to be, because of
Safety, Beauty, Charity, and our Dignity.

1. Our safety, for in his Kingdom there is no enemy. Here, every bramble-lust
puts in for dominion over us, excited thereunto by the old serpent, whereby the
spirits of the meek themselves, are kept in a perpetual commotion, to be
liberat from which body of death, Romans 7. 24
and freed from that Law of sin, consequences of the coming of this Kingdom,
the devout soul has active considerations for its fruition and enjoyment.

Themistocles concluded, that the knowledge of having a good neighbor, might
enhance the price of his house, set to sale; and the Countrey-fellow has a
Proverb, we can live without our Friend, but not without our Neighbor: What a
Country must that be, where all are good Neighbors, and not one evil among
them? Here, Mic. 7. 5
we are not to trust in a Brother, nor to put confidence in a Guide, being sure
either of guilt, fear or danger, every Adam having his Evah, and she her
serpent; Matthew. 2. 13
yea, Jesus himself is not without a Herod, who seeks his life: But in that
other Kingdom, we have Christ that true Friend and Brother, reigning over us,
the Forts of Satan our foe, Chry. set^ 78
being battered, and the dominion of Death our terror, being finished, and the
plotted-for place of Hell, our torment, being eternally secured from. As
Labienus, at a treaty betwixt Caesar and Pompey, Caes. com. de Bell. Civil. lib.
3. c. 4
cried out, so may the believer say of peace in this world, Let us leave off
speaking of peace or thinking of a truce, until we have Cesars head, that is,
Satan's head bruised, and until his dominion be overthrown.

2. Our Stature is in his Kingdom, that is, Matthew. 6. 27
our beauty. What Zacheus among us by taking thought, can add one cubit to his
stature? The Ark was a Cubit and half high, shadowing, that imperfection and
^railty attends our gifts and graces, and as Children, Genesis 6. ^
when we want, who among us can do more then cry? It is true, that Noah was
perfect, but it was in his generation; but in the Kingdom of God, we shall be
perfect men, according to the stature of the fulnses of Christ. Ephesians. 4. 12


A Moralist, Plut.
required youth to have Temperance in the soul, Silence upon their tongue, and
Modesty upon their face; yet, over and above, a parent would have his Child
have stature, and shall we be zealous for Childrens comeliness, and tepid in
seeking our own perfection, Tert. ad verse. Judaeos.
which can never be acquired but at the coming of this Kingdom? and being with
Enoch, Candidats for Heaven, and Students of Eternity, ought we not to affect,
being Doctorat, and set in the Chairs of everlasting bliss?

It was a shame for the Corinthians, that after so much teaching as Paul gave
them, they remained still babes, 1 Cor. 3. 2
and not able to bear strong meat: It is a note of our childishness in the
affairs of God (yea, and somewhat worse,) that we do not in a holy emulation of
the glorified Saints, give all diligence, if it be possible to attain the
resurrection of the dead, that is as perfect now, as the glorified Saints are
in Heaven, Calvin. in Phil. 3. 11
and denotes, causa excitandi, studii nostri, how we should be stirred up to
aim at the same degree of perfection.

3. Our Brethren are all in his Kingdom, where is our charity? Above us are all
our Fathers Sons, and about us are Adam's posterity; the former edgeth our
desire to be with them, the latter fills us with fear and care for them, that
they also may be happy; the first has from our Father, Rev. 2. 17
of the hidden Manna, the new wine, we have a portion of his bread ( i. e.) the
good Word of God, but having brethren, who has not heard of the last, and has
no prescience of the first, and worshipping ignorantly, Acts 17. 23
an unknown God, brings upon their souls swift destruction; we are to have
their names upon our heart when we stand before the Lord, that unto them also
might be given Repentance unto life.

The legal Priest, Lev. 6. 13
who was of the sons of Aaron, Greg. Mor. lib. 25. c. 7.
was to have fire always burning upon the Altar before the Lord; so the
Evangelical also, who is of the sons of Abraham, ought to have always burning
upon the Altar of his heart, the fire of holy charity, and that to be blown up
by the example of the Fathers, and Testimony of holy Scripture, unto which if
we look, and take heed, the zeal for their own salvation, Psa. 64. 9
and their brethrens glory, (that all might fear, and declare the work of God,
and wisely consider of his doing,) is their chief care, according to this rule.

The Multitude of sinners, the fewness of Saints in the throng of professors,
ought to be seriously reflected upon, that faith might bring our brethren in
the flesh, to Sons of the Spirit, that living by the Laws of the Kingdom of
God, the Scriptures, they might be accounted as the subjects of it, faithful,
and worthy to possess the inheritance that fades not away, Mat. ^. 36
the harvest therefore being great, pray to the Lord thereof, that the
idolatrous and profane, which like the Syrians, fill the country, may be
listed under the Standart of Jesus, and united to Israel, 1 King. 20. 17.
which are but as a few Kids, that the seekers of the Lords face may be many,
nay, may be all, for which, provoke one another to love, and to good works.

It was an odd saying of Remigius, Magdeb. Hist: Cent. 9. c. 3.
yet a sad one, because true, that though the Church hitherto endure, they
being baptized that were her persecutors, yet the Devil is not baptized, and
plagueth the Church, not now, or not only by the fury of Pagans, but by the
harshness, ill will, and cruelty of Christians; which to put an end unto, let
each man say, as one said, Et tu Domine Jesus, Lord Jesus, where is thy wonted
kindness? and, August.
O Father, where is the sounding of thy bowels? and remember we have but two
commands from God, Ideotae. Contem. c. 29
one to love God, the other man, yet these two are but one, love, showing,
without the one we want the other; and by not doing the one, we forfeit our
interest in the other, said a wise man.

Our zeal ought to extend to the utmost confines of the world, for a bringing
in of many sons and daughters unto this Kingdom, in order to which, we are to
become Orators, for a blessing upon Kings, Princes, etc. That by their power, 1 Timothy 2. 2
upon Parents, that by their authority, upon Preachers, that by their gravity,
upon Masters, that by their industry, the Word of the Lord may run, 2 Thessalonians. 3.
1.
and be glorified, and that affectionatly, and with ardor of mind. Remissness,
Cyp. Epist. 8.
sleepiness, and dullness in prayer, being one cause, publicly declared from
heaven in a vision, of the eight persecution of the Church under Valerianus.

4. His glory is in his Kingdom, there is our dignity. Ephesians. 1. 14
There is an earnest of the Spirit in the believers soul, assuring him of
glory, and an earnest is part of the bargain, so that in his conscience, he
has a holy assurance, that when ever the Kingdom of God shall appear, he shall
be crowned in it: Here we behold the invisible God, by that which is also
invisible, Munda scil. mente vel cord, Aug. Epist. 111. ad Fort.
a clean heart, and a right spirit, which argues our distance, and is at best
but a comfortable ignorance; but let this Kingdom be revealed, and the soul
being evacuat of all imperfections, freed of all contagious principles, or
objects, shall behold it self in its spiritual beauty to be the offspring of
God, and as a Son, behold his Fathers naked face, Acts 17. 29
in his ineffable glory.

Have we not made his dominion our choice, his Son unto whom this Kingdom is
given, our joy? and shall we not with endeared regard crave, that its
beautiful and powerful manifestation, be no longer retarded, by the
hypocrisy of some, the intemperance of another, the uncleaness of a third, the
blas^hemies of many, the malicious quarrellings of most, and the false
slandrings of idle busybodies; but as the people gathers to Shiloh, Genesis 49.
10.
the Soldiers to their Colors, the Birds to the Carcass, so ought we in our
several capacities, urge fervently the gatherings of all to the Lord of Hosts,
Aug. de Morib. Manichaeor. lib. 2. c. 19.
that it might be no longer with Christians as it was with the Manicheans, with
whom there was nothing rational, nothing certain, nothing blamlesse, all being
doubtful, scandalous, abominable, and absurd.

That being truly and properly a Kingdom, where a King will have such to be his
subjects, Author. Imperf. in Mat. 6. Hom. 14.
and they will have such an one to be their King; and for this the whole
creation cries with us, adveniat, Thy Kingdom come: The Stars in their
courses, the Saints in their sufferings, cry out, how long, O Lord, holy and
true? because holy in himself, and true in his promise, therefore, say the
Saints, judge and avenge our blood, which expression being doubled, Hug. Card.
in Rev. 6. 11
shows desiderium vindicandi, a desire of this Kingdom, which the Ox at the
Plough, the Horse on the road, and the Elements in their motions, yea the whole
creation in its subjection, Romans 8. 22
groans for, to be redeemed by it, from that vanity under which they are in
bondage.

Have we made his dominion our choice, and not fight, yea fight for
suppressing, diverting of all those forces Art can contrive, Magic fancy,
Chry. Scr. 71.
Sacrilege Minister, the Devil in the multitude of sinners can suggest, or sin
in the bloodiness of its aims, can muster? which if we do not, let us be
self-condemned as unworthy of its enjoyment, when it shall be revealed.

The Romans, at their first entry into Britain, were much terrified by the
valor, and to them, by the strange way of the British fighting, Caes. Com.
lib. 4. de Bell. Gal. c. 5.
which being perceived by the Standart-bearer of the tenth Legion, he cast
himself out of the Ship, and assaulted his foes, crying aloud, Fight, my
companions, except you will betray the Roman Eagle into the hands of the enemy,
for mine own part, I will be faithful to the Commonwealth of Rome, and to
Caesar my General, at which, shame and courage animating all, the Standart was
followed, a victory obtained, and Britain subdued. Let this exhilerat this Age,
whose remissness, Jude 13.
I might say, whose perverseness, suffers the glory of the Cross of Christ, and
the government of Jesus, to be betrayed to the hands of sin and sinners, Ioh.
2. 17
the zeal of his house, being so far from consuming us, or from eating of us
up, that we suffer both it and our selves to be swallowed up by hell and
destruction, I mean strife and division.

Consider what this Kingdom produces, which we may call its Inland Commodity,
and our zeal shall become importunat, that consisting in peace, Romans 14 17.
Lyra in loc.
righteousness, joy in the Holy Ghost; the two former are the leaves of the
door, that admits us into the latter, for we have first righteousness by our
faith, freeing us of sin, and then peace hushing all our passions, then comes
joy, by our here expecting, and afterward enjoying our reward: which three, we
glimmeringly enjoy in the Kingdom of grace below, Aquin. Lect. 2. in loc. Isai.
6. 7
but shall receive them in their Meridian luster in that Kingdom of glory
above, having righteousness without sin, iniquity being taken away, peace
without disturbance, Isa. 32 18
our habitations there being in sure places, Isa. 35* 10
joy in the Holy Ghost, all sorrow and sighing being fled.

It is proverbially said of the three Princes Electors, that the Palisgrave
has the Honor, Brandeburgh the Land, but the Duke of Saxony the Money; but
what a brave soil must that be, where every man has all? and if Shells or
Pearl, cast up by Tides, has made men zealous to attaque the Country whence
they came; should not our own knowledge of such invaluable things, as Glory and
Majesty, durable riches and honor, make the weak say, Joel 3. 10
I am strong; and all of us to quit our selves like men, looking for, and
hasting unto the coming of the day of God?

For zeal (says an honorable and learned person, Leighs Body of Divinit. lib.
7. c. 26
unto whose elaborat labors, the body of Divinity, and all Divines are
beholding) is the best evidence of a Christian; the Spirit of God works, like
fire, and is the greatest means to draw out the soul for serving of Christ:
when Isaiah was touched with the fiery coal, Isai. 6. 8.
then he cried, send me; he also says, it will save a sinking Church, and
therefore needful now; and adds, that it is the glory and beauty of all our
services, adding a luster unto them, as Varnish does to other Colors.

In the Kingdom of our Father, Scripturally taken, must we eternally abide, or
for ever be inhabitants in the Kingdom of darkness; Isai. 31. 33
so that death or life is before us, and we must choose whether to be slaves to
the Devils, objects of fury, subjects of torment, where fire exercises our
feeling, ugly Devils our seeing, the cries and yelps of the damned our hearing,
brimstone and our own flesh our smelling, Psalm. 75 8
and a cup of red wine of fiery indignation our tasting, and the thinking upon
our own follies, and perpetuity of these plagues, more and more heating our
already enraged souls; this, I say, must be either chosen, Or liberty with God,
to be objects of delight, S. Rich. Bakers Meditat. and disquis. on the L. P.
subjects of Majesty in this Kingdom of God, whose coming we pray for, who has
Majesty for his Crown (says one) Mercy for his seat, Justice for his Scepter,
Wisdom for his Counselor, Almightiness for his Guard, Eternity for his Date,
Heaven for his Palace, and Hell for his Prison: So that unless this Kingdom of
Jesus come to us, we shall be for ever in bondage in the bottomless pit; Rev.
8. 11
for mark this well, will we, nill we, the Kingdom of the Father shall come,
and the will of the Father be done; Aug. ad prob. c. 11 Chrysostom. Hom. 19 in 2
Epist. ad Cor.
but in this Petition, our desire is, to be excited, and prepared that it may
come to us, and we fitted to reign in it: Unto which, as unto all other works,
there is nothing so efficacious as zeal.

There is a vast difference betwixt the being of this Kingdom, Baker ut supra.
and the coming of it; for where it is, it is only in power and justice, but
where it comes, it comes in love and mercy; it is every where, but it comes
only to the Saints upon earth, and the glorified in Heaven, which should awake
us from that spiritual lethargick drowsiness, Psa. 13. 3
wherein sin and Satan has lulled us, to prosecute our heavenly interest with
a more holy vigor, that this Kingdom may come to us, and we may enter into it.

In this Kingdom all the glory of the Father is (as though we were elder
brethren) given to us, and though we possess on earth what men calls Beauty,
Gallantry, Majesty, goods, or state; yet these are but Colors, varnishing a
rotten Post, Eccl. 1. 14
to delude our selves, for their proper name is Vanity, and their surname
Vexation, because as a shadow we only see them, not hold them, and like
shadows, again they pass away, and we see them no more.

Once the Church cried out, Orig. Hom. 1. in Cant. Cant.
Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, as if she should have said,
hitherto he has kissed me by Moses, as by Proxy, by his Prophets, as by
Ambassadors; but let himself come, let him descend and kiss me; he sends yet
his Ambassadors in the Ministry, his Epistles in the Bibles History, but these
being but as cordials to sick persons, Psalm. 40 17
we ought zealously to cry, Attamen ipse veni, make no tarrying, O our God.

Rich Cresus, clothed with all the magnificence his royal Wardrob could
afford, Diog. Lacrt.
demanded of the wise Solon, if he had ever seen a more beautiful sight; yes,
said Solon, I have seen Cocks and Peacocks; and truly, behold man in all his
glory, and a Peacock far exceeds him, he can sleep with his train, whereas
Cresus must at night be stripped to his shirt, 1 Cor. 7. 31
and in sleep be as poor as his Footman: the fashion of this world therefore
perishing, and passing away, it should, in a true sense, be our pastime to
acquitt our selves like Heavenborn souls, prizing only solidities, daily pray
for the approach of our Fathers Dominion, and our own glory.

Let no Zelot hence infer a necessity of disturbing, or conclude by rage, or
fury (too often termed zeal) to foment division, or raise discord in the
Kingdoms of this world, Kings and Princes being Subjects of the first rank, and
persons of the highest authority in this Kingdom of God, and are indeed to kiss
the Son, Psalm. 2 12
yet are not oblidged to do homage to their Subjects, how pretendedly holy
soever. The Elders cast their Crowns before the Throne, but yet they are to
have their Crowns, Rev. 4 10
to wear their Crowns, that they may cast them, and not be robbed of that
Emblem of Sovereignty, wherewith their Father has adorned their brows, in so
beautiful a way, that besides the appellation, Father, has for a surname
called himself King of kings, Rev. 19 16
the removing of which from their Thrones, were therefore robbing God of the
glory of one of his Names, and of such an one whereof he boasts.

Innocent and holy zeal is known by these marks, Ames. de Cons. lib. 3. c. 6
1. If it be according to knowledge. 2. If it be fit and adapt for the person
in his doing all duties conform to, yea, 2 Cor. 8. 3
sometimes above his ability, as the Macedonians were charitable. 3. If it
cause diligence in the affairs of a man's Calling, idleness in our own, and
busy in other men's matters, is not zeal, but sin. 4. If it cause meekness and
humility in things relating to a man's self, Tit. 2. 14
and fervency in what belongs to God. 5. If it be more studious of good works,
then how to u^^avel knotty questions and contentious debates. 6. If it bear it
self equally, according to the weight of the matter it is exercised about, Mat.
23 23
to be zealous, to tith Mint, and sloathful in doing Justice, to be angry at a
harmless jest, and delight in an ill report, is not zeal, but hypocrisy, that
rather eyes the supposed saults or infirmities of others, then the real vices
in a man's self, whereas zeal, rather respects its own short-comings, or
over-runnings in duty or converse. And lastly, it is always attended with
grief and sorrow toward the sinner, 2 Cor. 12 21 Exodus 36 6
and has pity for the offender, and in matters respecting God, uses such
means only as are warranted in his Word.

In short, zeal ought always to be attended with mercy, for wanting that, it
is rather fury then true ardour, and by not endeavoring man's bettering, is
anger and envy, which aggravats crimes more highly, Chrysostom. de Nomin. Abram Hom.
then Gods Word will warrant, by making men offenders for a word; and contrary,
puts more force and obligations upon themselves in some precise points, then
the Scriptures naturally do impose; Mat. 12 2
as the Pharisees did upon the Apostles eating of the ears of corn, and upon
our Savior, for working miracles upon the Sabbath day.

About the year of Christ 600, we find in old English, this Petition thus
paraphrased, Cambd. Rem. Sect. 1.
Thou bring us thy michel bliss, the whole prayer being in rhyme sent from Rome,
by Pope Adrian; a native English, to be taught the people, and about an hundred
years after, came it to be almost as now, thus, Thy Kingdom come to, having,
says my Author, more care to do well, then speak Minion-like; how ever, we may
spell this much, that the great blessing of eternal life might be transmitted
in the preaching of the Gospel, to themselves, and to us their posterity, was
the ardent request of our zealous Ancestors; and seeing we hold them not so
perfect as our selves, in their way of worship, 1 King. 8. 57
let us exceed them in fervency, by imploring of our heavenly Father to have
his Gospel more and more shining among us, 1 Chro. 28. 8
and continuing it to us and our successors for ever.

Thus much for the matter of this Petition; the order is discernable from what
has been said, it following Hallowed by thy Name, in regard, that the coming
of this Kingdom is the most effectual mean therefore. It preceeds also, Thy
will be done, for before his Kingdom be erected, his will ought to be obeyed,
and hearts enlightened, and we made subjects of his Kingdom, God being then only
advanced by us, when he rules in us, as an absolute King, Ps. 72. 11
and we content to be governed by his Laws, etc.

CHAP. IV.
Thy will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven.
THIS is a Petition goes quite contrary to the hair of nature, pressing us to
beg for that which of all things is most contradictory to our stuborn humor,
to will, being an inclination and consenting of the mind, Greg. Naz. lib. Cyg.
Carm. Definit.
about the doing of those things which are placed in us, or pleasing to us; and
how contrary the things that are in Gods mind, are to those which we ardently
wish for, the most blocked among mortals, who have heard the sound of the
Gospel, may be sufficiently learned.

To curb or infringe the freedom of our proper will, Greg. Mag. Moral. lib. 32.
c. 23.
is to enter in at the strait gate, and who will easily be induced to prayfor
pressure, in a throng? to give a full swing, and free carreer, to proper will,
is to run in a broad path; and who readily will not desire to have ample
freedom in his own habitation? Yet so it is, that Christianity resolving to be
Mistress over all men's endowments, orders that the will of man (how lordly
soever) shall be brought down, and tip-toe it no longer, but deliver it self
unto her hands, to be guided and commanded by the will of God.

We must observe in general, that the will of God, Lomb. Sent. lib. 1. Did. 45.
and God himself, are essentially one; for, in him, to be, and to will, are not
different things; his goodness is himself, so is his power, so is his mercy, so
also is his will: Neither are we to difference the Fathers will from the Sons,
or Spirit; for, in themselves there is una charitas, Ambros^ lib. 4. de Fid. c.
4.
one love, one purpose, and one will.

Yet the Scripture holds it forth two ways, either properly, or improperly;
that is his proper will which is in himself, and is himself, which admits of no
change, or alteration, and is called by Divines, Romans (...) 19
Voluntas beneplaciti, the will of his good pleasure; that is improperly or
metaphorically his will, which we find recorded, or marked out unto us in his
Precepts or Laws, as when a servant is commanded to go buy this, or that, the
words signify, that this is the Masters will, or Gods will, and therefore
called Voluntas signi, a sign of his will, that is, a token, whereby we
apprehend the doing of this, Romans 12^ 2
or that, will be grateful to him.

Thy will be done, etc. Which will of his we know by his injunctions, by his
prohibitions, by his admonitions, by his permissions and by his operations; his
framing of the world is a sign to us, that he willed it to be made, his Law of
honoring his Name, Exodus 20* 7
hallowing his Sabbath, are signs that he would have these things done; of both
these wills Moses speaks, Deuteronomy. 29* 29
calling the former, secret things, but this latter, things revealed; and is
that whereof this Petition does mainly take care, that all doing this will of
our Father which is in Heaven, may be studious of holiness, careful in duties,
Mat. 12. 50
vigilant against temptations, etc.

We shall search in this, as in the other Petitions; First into the matter, and
next, into the order thereof: In the former our discourse is applied, 1. to the
subject of it, the will of God, and that to be done. 2. To the place wherein it
is desired to be done, that is, in Earth. 3. The rule by which we press that
it may be done, that is, as it is in Heaven.

To unsold the extent of his will, were an employment wherein Angels might be
excused, when declaring ignorance, because of its impossibility: how much more
shall man discover his willingness to avoid so dark an abyss, wherein Gods
nature, his works, his eternal contrivance, concerning Angels and men, his
eternity, and immutability, the fixednesse of all his past and future purposes,
and all the ineffable products of his un^ear ^^able wisdom, locked up in the
secret Cabinet of his vast conception are concerned?

We shall therefore endeavor a view of it by reflection, as men behold the Sun
in a pool of water; and passing-by his advice, who in the matter of Gods will,
Church Miscel. p. 130.
would have us pitch on these three things: 1. What he will do with us. 2. What
he will do for us. And 3. What he will have us to do. We shall accommod^t our
thoughts mainly to this last, it respecting the will of God revealed, wherein
this Petition is, and we a^^o most concerned* and in discovery, what it loo^s
for from us, we shall apply all to the Rule, so pray yet, as it operats upon
his commands, his chastisements, our selfishnesse, and our dullness.

1. It respects his commands, and then, thy will be done, Mal. 1. 6
eyes our obedience. The felicity of Kings, and the honor of Parents, consists
in that obedience which ought to be given to their Laws; and the glory of
Christianity is visible by that subjection, the soul chiefly designs, to those
exact precepts, by which God has signified his will unto it, as unto his
betrothed, his begotten; Hos. 2. 19
his commands, being not only for reading, but for living, and must be walked
in, for obtaining that great blessedness entailed upon it.

The Law must not be meditated only upon, Ambros. in Psalm. 1 Enar.
in our Thoughts, but in our Conversation, in our Exercises, and in our Life,
if we would be blessed, for the doing of which, God must prepare the will,
Chrysostom. Hom. Ps. 119. 151
and that preparation ought to be requested of God.

Abraham must leave his Country, and the Abraham must sacrifice his Son, Genesis
12. 1
the devout must go to the house of the God of Jacob, Genesis 22. 1
and be taught his ways, Isa. 2. 3.
and all must go to the house of Prayer, Ps. 143. 10
and with David, say, Teach me to do thy will: I say, Must, yet their going is,
to be out of Love, rather then Necessity, Bern. de Praec. and Dispens. c. 10
for it is good obedience to do our Lords will, for fear of hell, or staining
our profession, but it is better to obey our Master, out of respect and
veneration.

Zeno held him good, who knew what he ought to do, but he was the best, who
gave obedience to the things he was advised justly to do; but God accounts him
neither good nor best, Aug. lib. 2. de Ser. in Monre Dei.
good nor knowing, who will not pray, Thy will be done, that is, let thy
Precepts be obeyed.

2. It respects our chastisements, and then, thy will be done, eyes our
patience. Transeat calix^iste, Mark 14. 36
Father, if it be thy will, let this cup pass from me, was a prayer of God the
Son; and shall his corrections be grumbled at by man, the servant? Our Father
has rods of several sorts, Cyp. in ^rat. Dom: Psalm. 39. 9
and in feeling the sharpest, we ought to be dumb, because he does it. Patience
is a virtue common to us with God our Father, Cyp. de ^ono patient.
and our Lord Jesus Christ, he bearing with our evils, endures both the evil
and the good; we degenerat, if we endure not hardship, as good Soldiers, and
put our so be it, to his fiat, and our Amen, to his Intentions, saying, with
Paul's followers, the will of the Lord be done.

Thime is a most bitter and dry herb, Purchass Theat. of Bees Part. 2. p. 340.
yet not only the Apothecary by his Art, can draw a wholesome oil out of it,
but the Bees also by nature, do extract from thence sweet honey; affliction is
bitter to the taste of men, yet out of it may be drawn an oil for a wounded
conscience, and honey to delight the spiritual taste; oil out of the nature of
afflictions, Rev. 3. 19
which are chastenings, and honey out of their cause, which is Gods love: Yea,
from the initiatory letters of the word Virg^, a Rod, one draws five arguments,
for its laying on, and to the sincere and devout soul, they are so many
arguments for its bearing. The 1. is Verecundiae excitatio, Binch. Mel. Theol.
loc. 15. Sect. 8.
for causing shamefulness. The 2. is Ignaviae profligatio, for removing
flugishness. The 3. is, Rationis informatio, to inform our Judgment. The 4. is,
Gratiae and gloriae conciliatio, to conciliat us to grace and glory. The last,
Amoris virtutum procreatio, to stir up in us a love of virtue, and therefore
even in relation to troubles, say, Thy will be done.

How often had that blessed English Martyr, Fox. Act. and Mon. An. Dom. 1555.
Bradford, fiat voluntas Domini in his mouth, before his burning; once it was,
Gods good will be done; another time it was, Oh, Lord, into thy hands I commit
it, meaning his life. Come what will, only sanctify thy Name in me, etc. And
another time it was, I shall shortly be burned in Smithfield; it is said, the
will of the Lord be done: And in an exhortatory Letter, he said, speaking of
Christ, pledge him in his cup of the Cross, and you shall pledge him in the cup
of his Glory, etc.

For, to suffer is not enough, being bound in a holy willingness to take the
cup, that is, yield to his chastisements, making that our act by patience,
which may be Satan's in malice, and wicked men's by wrath or revenge; yea, Act.
5. 41
if by holy Hallelujahs we discover the freedom of our soul, in receiving what
for righteousness the ungodly world lays upon us, his will is thereby
singularly accomplished.

3. It respects our selfishness, and then, thy will be done, eyes our
submissiveness. When God was beating upon, and working against Pharaoh, Exodus 5
3
as a Rock in the Sea he stood fixed, and would not let Israel go, through
haghtiness, and perverseness of mind and will; but as Abraham in the case of
Sacrificing his Son, remieted nothing to the suffrage of his will, or wisdom of
any, so must we indispensibly depend upon the wisdom and will of God, without
offering to dispute the reasonableness of the command; Prove. 23 4
being with him, undoubtedly persuaded, the prescripts of God are just, because
he wills them, and wills them because just; so that for our patient suffering,
we ought to have no other mandat, then his providence working; and unto this,
though cross to us, we ought to say, Welcome be the will of God.

Those who murmared were destroyed of the destroyer; 1 Cor. 10 10
and in the Gospel-sense, it is good measure to suffer patiently; sed cumulus
est, but it is heaped, Ber de tribus ordinib. Eccles. Sermon.
and running over, when in servency of spirit ( denying our selves) we embrace
the cross, and obey the providence; left not enduting, but stubbornly
maligning, what from men may be imposed, or reported, we be destroyed of the
destroyer, by Gods smiting us in the Ministry of Angels, Calvin.
into a desperate sense of our heinous solly.

In this, as we are taught, let us practice and not our own, but let his will
be done, being instructed in this Petition, Bucanin Orat. Domi.
to renounce and quit that will which is our own; and if the Holy Ghost will
have the right-hand-blessing, fall by Isreal's benediction, upon the head of
Ephraim the younger, Genesis 48. 13
Ioseah must be thankful, yea, more, Man^sseh, though the elder, must rejoice.

4. It respects our dullness; and then, they will be done, eyes our readiness:
And may be interpreted, Let our loins be girded, Luke 12 35
that is, let us be prepared always for the work of God, and the time past of
our life sufficing us to have wrought the will of the Gentiles, 1 Timothy 4. 3
walking in lussciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, etc. in which, being dead,
our aim was, the advancing and answering the command of such noisome lusts,
whereof being now ashamed, we pray the removal, and for obtaining life and
spiritual heat, to shake off those encumbrances, as Revellings, Banquettings,
and abominable Inolatries, yielding to the directions of the Holy Spirit, with
an acceptable alacrity, Cant. 5. 3
saying unto temptations of that sort, touching the soul, not, how shall I wash
it? but with the Spouse, Ambros. de Virginib. lib. 3.
though in a better sense, How shall I again defile it?

Though the will of God, Isa. 8. 20
ad longum, ^at large, be shown unto the Church, in the Old and New Testament,
and ought therefore to be there studied after in its bulk: yet there are
specialities, which chiefly, as most necessary, because most comprehensive, are
more remarkably to be noticed, and in a religious quest, singularly to be
heeded: For, though all the Scriptures of God are true and to be received, 1 Timothy 1 15
yet, this is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus
Christ came into the world to save sinners: And though all the Psalms be sweet,
Psalm. 36 title.
yet some, for their excellency, are sent to the chief Musician.

The Scriptures discover the whole will of God, yet have a hand to point at
some part of it, ^it. 3. 8
more then another, as more eminent in their use and comfort, and to which all
other portions may be reduced. For instance,

1. He wills our faithful adhering to his Son. Many Commandments he gave, 1
John 3 ^3
but this is his Commandment, that we should believe on the Name of his Son
Jesus Christ, applying Christ unto our selves, his death and merits to our
souls, without which, our performances are but nauseating to his spirit; and
therefore, Domine, adauge fidem nostram, Luke 17 ^
Lord increase our says, is solded up in this Petition, Thy will be done.

2. He wills our sincere converting from sin: It is iniquity causes him grieve
at us, and makes us averse to him; and how careful and painful he is to reform
the sinner, Mat. 18 15
before he be cast out as a Publican, shows, that if he perish, it is by his
obstinacy in sin, rather then for his committing of it; for had he delighted to
punish for that, he had long ago burned this present world, as he spared not,
but drowned the old.

We need not many Arguments to evince this, Ezekiel. 33 11
having his oath, for his being delighted in the conversion of the wicked; for
miserable we are, Tett. de Poenitent.
if we will not believe God when he swears the purposes of his heart unto us.

But as Gideons one Bastard slew his seventy Sons, so one sin left alive, will
destroy our stock of gifts and graces, which God knowing, he wills our
sincerity, desiring us to be, not almost, but altogether Christians, in
departing from every evil way, the end of his Commandment being charity, 1 Timothy
1. 5
out of a pure heart, a good conscience, and love unfeigned.

3. He wills humility in our carriage to himself: What shall, or what can
besall thee, Reader, James 4 10
that can excuse any insolence thy audacious spirit dare show before him? Is it
death of kindred? loss of goods? want of health? be persuaded, better want all
these, then once to roave at him for the want of any one; for, has he not
showed thee, O man, what it good? Micah 6 8
and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, love mercy, and walk
humbly with thy God?

The ancient Gauls suffered not their children even to stand before them, Caes.
Comment. lib. 6.
that in perfect age they might have them in greater veneration; and our Father
in Heaven, though more condescending, will yet have of all his sons a religious
reverence, sawciness becoming sacrilege, robbing him of his just devoir.

To swell for the removing of thy Gourd, as Jonah, Iona. 4 ^
may have a sadder issue; imitat rather Adam, whom we read not once to have
spoken, after banished Paradise, a silent sorrow for our delinquency, (for sin
is sorrows Prodrome) being the best succor for our weather-beaten souls, and
is more advantageous, then any Fort we can erect by argument, or reason, to
plead against, or surmize familiarity with God. That of Germanicus is
Heathenish, giving this attestation of himself at death, sifato concederem,
Tacit. Annal. lib. 2.
etc. though I should die the common death of men, I have just cause to be
angry at the gods, that in manly age I am robbed from my Parents, Children and
Country, by them, but when I die by the sorcery or poysonings of Piso, etc.
but the Christian knows he stands at Cesars Judgment Seat, Acts 10
and that enjoins reverence, fear, humility, and love, which makes him behave
himself, with David, like a weaned child, and washes with Naaman (upon
deliberation) in the commanded Jordan, 2 Kings 5. 12
though the waters to sense appear never so despicable.

4. 1 Ioh. 3 25
He wills compassion in behalf of our brethrem: This is his great and new
Commandment, that men love one another, and that we put on howels of mercy to
all, Exodus 23 4. 5
yea, the Ox or Ass of our enemy, are within the verge of his authority and
law: And we are not only to offer our hread, but draw out our very souls to the
hungry, God insinuating thereby that fellow feeling which the fight of an
hungry soul ought to stir up in us.

Non curite quid agat humanum genus, Ennii Frag. Satyr. lib. 3
not to be solicitious how the world went, or careful about the concerns of
mainkind, was held impious by a Heathen, but the religious contrary is
diffusive in his charity, and his willigness to do good, is exemplified in the
parable of the Samaritan, who secured the person, anointed the wounds, defrayed
the charges, Luke 10 30
and contracted debt for the robbed Traavller.

Three things evince true compassion, Concealed charity: 2. Known poverty: And
3. Unnatural death, being always ready to answer St. Paul's question in the
negative, who is weak, Isa. 21. 3
and I am not weak, who? though they were Bibylonians, with the Prophet, that
testifying good will; with a Father when a Brothers adversity causes anguish,
and his tranquillity exciteth thankfulness, Greg. Mag. in Eva^^. Hom. 5.
to account another loss our own, and reckon his gain our profit, loving
neither friend nor so, for the world, but both for God, is true charity.

Love being a great God, of whose beginning we have no History, Plato de Amore
in Ph^cdri Collandat.
and of its ending it were madness to suppose; therefore ought our life to be a
life of love, or then it is not the life of God, nor agreeable to his will.

5. He wills our folicity with himself. He He has so strong and fatherly a
love to his children, that he desires, yea, designs them heirs of his Kingdom;
Ioh. ^ 40
For this is the will (says Christ) of him that sent me, that every one which
sees the Son (I might say the Sun) may have everlasting life; this is a
faithful laying, and worthy of all acceptance: And the Psalm wherein the
Psalmists confidence of future glory is attested, Psalm. 16 11
is called Michtum, that is, a golden Psalm of David.

Be not, Reader, abused by any natural vanity, so far, as in any thing to
become competit or with God, and until thy will can give thee fields and
vineyards, Ior. 18. 12
nay, until it can make a feather to please thee, a s^raw to ease thee, make it
not the staple of thy soul, but award its blows, and avert its plagues, for it
shall to last be found the armed man to bin^ thee, and a sword to kill thee,
whereas Gods will has nothing more ultimatly its scope, then thy salvation.

There are many other particulars, Cyprian. in Orat. Dom.
touching our converse, discovered to be the will of God, such as Modesty in
our expressions, Righteousness in our actions, Discipline in our manners, Tit.
2. 1
enduring injuries, loving the brethren, delighting in God, loving him as a
Father, fearing him as a Lord, to value none in comparison of Christ, and
therefore inseparably to cleave to his love, 1 Cor. 16. 22
courageously to bear his cross, constantly to consess his Name, which is to be
heir with Christ, to do the command of God, to fulfill the will of the Father,
but such and many others being reducible to those abovementioned, Ioh. 21. 25
Wan. Panarion. Pastorale. Ser. 16.
we surcease from more particular designation.

Four brethren, visiting one Pambus, discoursed of some special duty, wherein
they had exercised themselves; One had been much in fasting, another had so
slighted the world, that he had nothing of it, nor in it; a third professed he
had studied that eminent grace of charity; the fourth had lived two and twenty
years in obeying the will of another; to whom Pambus gave the crown of
superexcellent commendation, in regard he had quitted his own will, and served
another; whereas his companions had chosen what their own wills had beheld as
delectable: 1 Samuel 15. 20
and though we sacrifice our selves, by giving our bodies to be burned, Chrysostom.
Ser. 20^ in Epist. ^d Romans
yet obedience is more acceptable with him with whem we have to do; and more
performable shall his will be to us, if we reflect that he wills only what is
profitable, and all his will is profitable for us, in that he wills them to us.

It is to be adverted, that God wills only good, let none therefore be harsh;
Isa. 28. 21
it is by accident if he wills ill, the means that leads to glory be more
lucidly discovered, and most pathetically pressed, 1 Samuel 16. 1
Samuel wept for Saul, and David harped for him, though both knew God had left
him: It is a scandalous practice of some, to wish either the means, or
tendencies toward hell, or to presume at first, Gods final determination, and
accordingly with delight, wishes, not to say, prays ill for their brethren.
Tit. 2. (...)
It is the will of God, that all Israel be saved, let it not be thy will to
have any Edomite damned, left thou curse thy self.

He wills moreover the doing of his will by thy self also; Luke 11. 46
be not an hypocrite, exclude not thy self from this service, for it is not,
let thy will be done, Ioh. 21* 22
by these, or these, or by him; but let thy will be done, that every where
throughout the earth, Error may be eradicated, and Virtue planted, and in
worshipping of his Name, Earth may not be different from Heaven, which cannot
be, if thy own soul be not by thy self, weeded from vice, and his will
performed to thy power.

It is Storied of religious Borgia of Guant, Lycost. Apoph. de Obed.
that he said, the furious Dog, in hunting, would be commanded from the Hare,
at the command, or hollow of the Hunt-man; yet man would not abandone his
lusts, his sinful projects, his fleshly and hellish designs, at the voice,
call, yea, thunder of God: But let it not be so with thee, Romans 8. 14
beating up thy soul to that degree of conformity, that the very whisperings of
Gods Spirit, may command practice, and be obeyed without recoyling, that God
may, as it were, wonder at thy servency, as Christ did once at a woman's
humility, with an, O man, Mat. 15. 28
great is thy obedience.

Yet in applying this Petition to our selves, it is good to remember his
advice, who propofeth this three-sold rule, Binch. Mellif. Theol. Ioc. 19. Mat.
8. 2
in and about the will of God; that his will (if we be particular) be done; 1.
With a si vis, as the leper, Lord, if thou will thou can make me clean. Moses
prayed for entrance into Candan, but finding it not to be the will of God, he
desisted from that suite.

2. There must be a sicut vis, a deliverance any way he will: 2 Samuel 15. 25.
David desired to behold both the Ark, and its habitation, but if it were
otherwise determined in the Council of God, he was content.

3. There is a quando vis, when he will; he has called upon thee and thy
Fathers house often, but his offers, and his invitations, have been often rejected,
Genesis 42. 21
and Joseph's brethren, flighting the anguish of his soul, when they told him,
made Joseph unknown to them, until the second time, they went down to Egypt.
Wait upon the good pleasure of God therefore.

There were two ways, in the opinion of Poets and Philosophers, Lactant. de
vero cultu. c. 3
in which all men walked, and was thus figured, ^, one leading to bliss, the
other to sorrow; the one was called, the way of virtue, the other, of vice:
Christianity in its Law, shows the disparity betwixt a licentious and a regular
life; neither is there any other path for happiness and glory, then obedience,
obedience, obedience: Wait then upon God, Heb. 13 20
and the God of peace, that brought again our Lord Jesus from the dead, shall
in his own good time make you perfect in every good work, to do his will.

Thy will be done on Earth, etc.
THE will is the souls hand, for applying to its self, such things as appear
useful, helpful, and convenient, but heavenly things, as most necessary, must
be reached unto, yea, Mat. 11. 12
violently attracted, left (as disobedient to Law) it be stigmatized, as
rebellion, and restrained in its other attempts, all other designs (saving
those of piety, 1 Timothy 4 8
which have the promises of both Earth and Heaven) proving abortive in
themselves, and destructive to the brain wherein they are bred; for prevention
whereof, we must have the earth qualified with obedience, by good will, Psa. 1.
3, 4
and our selves upon earth to have heavenly wills, that we may glorify God in
the lowest earth, as he is in the highest Heavens, betwixt which that there be
an holy conformity, pray, that his will be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven:

On Earth, a real limitation, and properly a boundiary unto all supplications,
for all Saints, yet of so large an extension, as includes all that are afar off
upon the Sea, and signifies that of David, Psa. 67. 2
God be merciful unto us, and bless us, and cause his face to shine upon us.
Selah. That thy way may be known upon earth, thy saving health among all
Nations.

On Earth as it is in Heaven, has received different and various senses from
the Ancients; by Heaven, Aug. de Sermon. in Mon^e Dei, lib. 2
some understanding the Saints, and godly; by Earth, the sinner and unbeliever,
making the Petition this, Let thy will be done by the wicked of the world, as
truly, as sincerely, as it is by the righteous and religious.

Again, by Heaven, is understood the Spirit, and by Earth, Cyp. in Orat. Dom.
the flesh, or body of man, which is a servant to the law of sin; and then the
Petition signifies this, Let all the members of my body, wherein sin dwells,
be made by thy power, as easily induced to the obedience of thy will, as is my
spirit, by which I serve the Law of God.

Further, Aug. Hom: 42
by Heaven, may be understood the Church, and by Earth, the unbaptized
multitude, and then the Petition speaks, Let all Atheists, Jews, Turks, do thy
will, as it is done in the Congregations of those professing thy Name.

Two Fathers will have us, by Earth, to understand our enemies, August. ^
Cyprian.
and that here we pray against their earthly-mindednesse, which being removed,
they and we, may live in heavenly concord, confirming this position, from the
Apostles their not being called earth, but the salt of the earth; yea, Non
abhorret, it is not absurd to understand (says one) by Heaven, our Lord Jesus
Christ, and by Earth, the Church, who as a wife, is desired to be like the
Spouse, her Husband, in obedience.

There are that think, Ambros* lib. 5. de Sacra c. ^
by will, peace is signied, and then the prayer may be thus understood, let the
peace of God be on Earth, as it is in Heaven.

Yet as correcting themselves, or at least not resting in those wide
Expositions, Aug. Ser. 3. Dom. in Palm.
it is agreed that sicut in Coelo, as it is in Heaven, imports our zeal for
having such insused gifts, that as none offends God in neglect of his will,
above, so we, so strengthened, may be able, and so sanctified, may be qualified,
as never to be guilty of the contrary vice, disobedience, never respecting our
own, but always his will.

It is also asserted, that this Petition includes our behavior in word and
deed, Chrysostom. Hom. 20 in Mat.
to be so modeled, as theirs are, whose habitations are in Heaven, adding,
that because of earth, its being a mixed Kingdom, where his will is often
neglected; it is the tenor of this request, Author imperf. in Mat. Hom. 1y
Gloss. ord.
that never more Satan's, but his will be done only, as it is in Heaven; for
this would be pondered and weighted, that we pray not for the knowing, but
doing of his will.

Moreover, the words are exponded to signify our desire of, and longing for,
that blessed union and conjunction of those different Families in Heaven and
Earth, Chry. Ser. 68
that they beacted by the command of one Lord, and guided with one will, which
ought to be his, for it is THY will: lb. Ser. 70
And in regard that much is done in earth, through the wickedness of the
times, the desire of the flesh, the pleasure, and terror of the Devil, we
proportion our solicitations by applying our selves to the Throne of God, that
flesh may be subdued, the wickedness of the times reformed, and Satan
interrupted, and that one will be in earth and Heaven, viz. Gods Angels and
Men, the two last devoting themselves to the will of the first, that God may be
King over all the Earth. And in this sense, and to this meaning, the generality
of Interpreters, both ancient and modern does agree and subscribe.

It is noted, that these words, as it is in Heaven, ought to be understood,
Chrysostom. ut supra.
in the Petitions preceding, though here only expressed, sensing the Prayer
thus, Hallowed be thy Name, in Earth as it is in Heaven: Thy Kingdom come in
Earth as it is in Heaven: and then, Thy will be done in Earth as it is in
Heaven. That as there is no life but what is from God, Aug. de vera Relig. c. 11
so there may be no will, but what shall flow from him.

The word Earth, may be corrupted Hebrew, that Language expressing it Eretz,
and the old Germains, from which most of our Monosyllables come, expressed it
Artham, from Em, a Mother, and Eretz, the Earth, that being like another Evah,
the Mother of us all; and afterward they called it Ertham, then Erd, whence
Earth, a derivation more probable, because more ancient; then from the Greek,
(...), or Era; the Roman word Terra, is deduced from Tero, the Earth being
broken, and teared asunder for man's maintenance, and for man must it be here
understood, the Josh. 23 14
Holy Ghost, by a holy Synecdoche, taking a part for the whole, Aug. ut supra.
Genesis 6. 3.
man being born in it, nursed by it, and at last destined to return into it: To
pass by his earthy and fleshly lusts, may, and often is called Earth, which is
also called Arida, dry Land, and Humus, moist Earth, and Tellus the ground; the
word here, (...), is from the fruitfulness and fertilty, though it be such a
condition as we find the Earth had not, when we first heard of it, being then
Tohu Vabohu, Genesis 1. 2.
that is, Informis and Inanis, without form, and void; but now being by sin
corrupted in its holiness, and by transgression cursed with barrenness, we
here request, that men, its inhabitants, be renewed, their wills sanctified,
and their hearts like good ground, once again made fruitful, by yielding
obedience unto God, that earth it self may be blessed with fertilty, and become
well watered, like the Paradise of God. Landolfus Cartusiens. in Orat. Dom.


By Earth then, understanding Men, who are of it, and in it; and by it again,
understanding only living men, we proceed, applying this Petition to the rule,
So pray ye.

1. Looking to man, as earth in his formation, or creation, we are to pray for
others. If the multitude of sinful men in the old world, Chrysostom. Hom. 23 in
Genes.
merited, through their earthlinesse, wickedness and malice, to be termed
Earth, what now does in this last age, the multitude of the Nations deserve to
be named by, more appositly then Earth, Earth, Earth? for whom our devtion must
have wings, being obliged to pray for them, whom Peter preached unto, viz. Acts
2. 9
the Parthians, Medes, Elamits, and the dwellers in Mesopotamia, etc. As also,
we are to embrace both the Indies in the arms of our brotherly charity, that as
the Inhabitants thereof, 1 Cor. 15 49
bear the image of the earthly, by the disobedience of one, they may bear the
image of the Heavenly Man, by the obedience of another.

Earth of it self is naturally cold and dry, and will not easily be brought
from its natural shape; Saul, until knocked down, and nature, until humbled,
Acts 9. 6
will not say, Lord, what will thou have me to do? It is the Lords voice in the
Gospel must bring all into obedience, and therefore Religion, when we are on
our knees, suggests us to what Paul dreamed, viz. that a poor Indian, Act. 16. 9
or a man of Macedonia, stands before us, saying, Come over and help us, that
by your prayers we may be brought to the knowledge of the everlasting Covenant.

2. Looking to man in his vocation, and because that is upon earth, he is to
pray for himself. It is wide, yet pious note, observed from that of the
Psalmist, Psa. 61. 2
from the end of the earth will I call unto thee, Hillar. in loc.
for a terrae finibus clamat, because living in the flesh, he was absent from
Christ, and that being as earth, he cried and groaned with the Apostle for
help, being willing to be freed from that necessity of abiding in the body.

This is sure, in going about our employment, from our house to the street,
from that as to an Exchange, 1 Cor. 4. 2
to buy and sell, we are but as Servants to our Masters, and must account to
him, how much of his will, and how little of our own we have performed, and
professing our selves with James, Iam. 1. 1
servants of God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ, entrusted with his Money in
Purse, his Goods in Shop, his Commodities in the Warehouse, his Garments in
the Wardrob, we ought daily to look into our Accounts, and register our
actings, that at reckoning it may be sound we have done his will.

3. Looking upon the Christian in his profession, he lies if he be satisfied
with earth; with the Bird we take our meat from it, making Heaven the Standart
and measure of our doings, not so stupefied with earths Diapery, or so much
embased with the sensual pleasures thereof, as not to make so much as our
talking be unburnished with Celestial purity, it being for this the Christian
buys his Bible, respect his Preacher, and offers up his Prayer.

Christianity has its Armor, to fight against, and overcome the world, a true
Microscope, discovering its blemishes and deformities, a Teliscop or prospect,
approximating Heaven and its glory, so near to the eye, that the carrion
carcass, of earths circle, irritats the Spirit, to have it removed, augurating
or foreseeing some pestiferous scent arising therefrom, may endanger its
spiritual health, and dead, nay, damn the soul: That being a sure rule of one,
Isidor. de sum. Bon. lib. 2. c. 41.
that never can the spiritual war be upheld, if the lusts of the world be not
subdued, nor the mind contemplat God, which meditats on fleshly pleasures, the
devil by them, as by Tubes of Pipes, conveying pride to the soul, as to Evah,
envy, as to Cain, covetousness, as to Achab; all which is openly renounced and
proclaimed against, in our receiving the press-money of sacred Baptism.

It was asked, Zenoph. de dict. and fact. Socrat. lib. 4
what was piety, or who was the pious man? It was answered, he who worshipped
the gods, not as a man would himself, but as the gods had appointed in their
Laws: If this was the judgment of Heathens, how dare thou in hypocisie take
the words of his Covenant, Psalm. 50. ^7
or this prayer in thy mouth, since, God will not only, never shake hands with
him who has a lie interwoven in his robes of praise, but revenge himself upon
all who worship him not in spirit and truth? Ioh. 4. 23


Pretenders to holiness, and simulated services, operat for nothing more, then
enlarging the vails of reserved wrath, heating and thickning the same, whereby
their evacuation must be more formidable, and the worshippers more inexcusable,
that they are judged out of their own mouth, God only hearing doers of his
will. Ioh. 9. 31
Knowledge being only as light to direct practice, and a good disposition, salt
to season it, Gouge. on the L. P. Sect. 59.
and free profession is as wine to quicken it, yet all without practice are but
instruments to destroy it; Let his will therefore be done,

On earth, for it must be done there or no where, there being no work, or
labor, Ioh. 9. 4
in the grave whereunto we tend; work his will while it is day, for the night
comes wherein no man can.

Reflect but upon natures frailty, and how ruinous the edifice of the body is
in the sudden dissolutions Fate has made in others, Valor. Max. lib. 9.
and we shall be enforced to regulate our selves to that Law of working in this
our day. Philemon died in a laugh; Anacreon with one grain of grape, Seneca de
Brevit. vitae c. 7
therefore the Moralist advises, that our life be but a learning to live, and
that spent in teaching to die; there being so many pricles about the Rose of
our beloved life, that our hands bleed as soon as it is felt, making the
hardiest to cry, tempting us to its embrace, as did the flowery Aspect of that
delectable valley, the enchanted Ass in the Fable ( miserable man in the
Mythology) but no sooner in it, Apul. Metamorph. lib. 4.
but with furies, worse then dogs, is poor man set upon, and men acting as
devils, causes the good man to sigh out, his day being crossed in his highest
enterprise, principally from his own weakness and inadvertency every day; and
next, from the asperity or wickedness of others, each day grinding him, as
under the nether-milstone, through sorrow, enraging him again so high, that
from the praecipice of passionate resolves, he invokes disaster, more sad then
did Aristarchus who yet starved himself to death, to ease the pain of the
Dropsy, which yet might take more time, and procure better preparation, by
filling the soul with more voluminous contemplation for exact removeal, then
had Baebeius Pamphilus, who died, even while asking a boy what it was of the
Clock? Death in Capital Letters, being written in the front of each day and
hour, which having not so much as one syllable to protract the pronouncing,
more then day, ought every day to expunge the speculation of futurity, and
conclude there is none to follow, yea, scarce that we behold, since as the
abovementioned Ass, we are each day suffering the Strappado of cares and
griefs, by which it becomes scarce a day, because uncomfortable and wearisome
suggesting, as well as hastening thoughts of departure and dissolution.

What one says of sins remission, may be said of times, course and motion; Now
the wicked cease from his vain conversation, Falgen. de Remis. peccat. lib.
2. c. 22.
beholding the path of piety, as more eligible, that he gain eternal life: Now
he avoids the fault, that he may never feel the smart, nunc praeveniat he
comes before the face of God with confession, that he may never be separated
from him by damnation: He does it now, that is, while on earth, or never.

On earth, Jude 6.
it is to be done there, because it is only disputed there. Disobedience indeed
begun in Heaven, but it found no entertainment, and will never be again
admitted: Of hell it is said, he that is obstinat, filthy, or unjust, let him
be unjust still, Rev. 22. 11
because they must still suffer the will of God, as in heaven, the pure, meek,
and just Saints, are doing the will of God; 1 Timothy 6. 5
but earth is, regnum mixtum, has in it some that obey, many that deny, and
numbers that boggle, 1 King. 18. 21
demurr upon, and dispute against, or by a carnal neutrality, stand in
aequilibrio, ready to perform Gods will, or any other that policy shall account
most efficacious for their carnal purposes; like that profane Soldier
somewhere, who had on one side of his Shield an Image for God, upon the other
for the Devil, with this device, if the one will not take me, the other will.

There are three things upon earth that dispute against God, Act. 17. 17
and defy his will; these are, natures pravity, the Devils tyranny, and the
variety of men's affairs.

1. Natural pravity, this will have us do our own will; It was born with us,
bred with us, and went to school with us, which makes us lath to deny it any
thing; Genesis 38. 17
If it say, as Tamar, what will thou give me? How loath are we to deny it a kid
from the flock, though God discharge it, willing our Sanctification. A Child
will do much to keep his Bird, though it pick him, and a man will do more to
preserve his will, though it sting him.

2. The Devils tyranny; Rev. 12. 12
for he will have us to do his will: Heaven he is secluded from, and hells
inhabitants he is sure of, therefore his hopes, his feats, his threats, and
arguments against the will of God, Ambros* de vocat. Gent, c. 3
are in, done, and urged, upon earth; And it is evident the will of God is not
always done; hence therefore this illation is congruous enough, that the will
of Satan is. How soon was Adam wooed to embrace hells doctrine, dethrone God, 1 Timothy 2. 14
and destroy himself, for he was not deceived: And if Judas get content, he
will deliver Jesus into his enemies hands, as soon as Satan fills, Mat. 26. 15
or enters into his heart: Neither left he there, but is yet so busy, so
cumbersome, so deluding, that we are in many places called upon to hear the
word of the Lord.

3. The variety of men's affairs; and they take up a great deal of time against
our own wills, that this must be done against the spring, that this is fit for
such a country, Iam. 4. 13
and this is suitable for such a coast, gives us no time to study the will of
God: As fishers have several baits for different fishes, Rev. 18. 17
so the world has variety of snares for its multitude of traders.

Demonaae, when questioned if the world had a soul? Lycost. de Curiositat.
then if it was round? With indignation answered, you are very careful about
the world, yet about your filthiness contracted in the world, you are
careless. Here this man is settling his heir, there that man bewailing his
poor crop, he casting up his accounts, and a fourth is preparing for a foreign
plantation; because of all which there is such a bumming in the ears of man,
that with the maniest the sound of the words, carrying the sense of the will of
God, has not admittance into that gate of the soul, Aug. Epist. 65. ad Paul.
(...).
the ear, which if it had, we should not be so far embased about the drudgery
of this pelf, but write with a holy man, for direction and instruction, about
sub jugating our wills, to the will of God, and what we ought to do therefore.

It is desired on earth, Brix. Com. Symb.
though to our sorrow, we know it will never be there exactly done; suppose our
hearts, for once holy ground, yet the Rod of Moses, I mean the Law, when cast
thereon, becomes a Serpent, and we are scarce able to endure the sight of the
just, holy, and good commandment; sin by it, taking occasion to work in us, all
manner of concupiscence, Romans 7. 8
sed hic inter in ex part oramus, we pray for some measure of obedience here,
Glass. ord. in text.
that we may be perfected in all obedience hereafter; God crowning in heaven
with perfection, our sincere service, performed on earth, Ber. Sermon. 16. Qui
habit.
though through weakness imperfecte clamemus igitur in Coelum, we therefore
list up our voices to Heaven, because under it there is nothing but labor,
sorrow, vanity and vexation.

The earth has its heats and colds, according to the cloudiness of the air, or
distance of the Sun; obedience likewise has her colds and heats, 2 Samuel 11. 27.
her workings and faintings, her runings and stumblings, and sometimes a great
intermission of her spiritual pulse.

On earth Faith has her distrusts, Psalm. 73. 2
Hope her doubts, Charity her damps; there this opinion raises Choler, that
doctrine provokes Rancour, he caufeth offense by an ill example; these are
scandalled through supposed mistakes, whereby the Earth, Iam. 3. 2
that is the best of its inhabitants, is but a bad copy, yea indeed no copy at
all; hence our Lord teaches, that not Earth, but Heaven, be the rule for doing
our Fathers will.

Thy will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven.
THE rule of our obedience is now before us, and the mould in which all actions
are to be cast for Heavens, that is, for Gods plaudit; As it is in Heaven, is a
Doctrine of comparing qualities, not substances; it respects neither Earth nor
Heaven, Physically, but Morally pressing a conformity in the inhabitants of
either, to the will of the Lord of both, and grand Master of each: It is also a
doctrine of holiness among Spirits, that the souls of the righteous here
Militant, may in virtue and well-doing, totally resign themselves in imitation
of the Spirits Triumphant, for the will of God, Rev. 14. 5
that they may be found without fault before the Throne of God.

That their conversation may be in Heaven, Phil. 3. 20
by contemplating the things which are not seen here, Aquin. Lect. 3. in loc.
and affecting the things that are only there, by working all things according
to the Angels Samplar: Sen. de Consol. ad Polyb. c. 36
Yea, even to follow God himself, it being not unlawful, per divina ire
vestigia, to walk as Christ himself walked.

The word is singular, Heaven, not Heavens, as in the Preface, (...).
excluding all but the very inside of Heaven, the interior parts of the Heaven
of Heavens, there being there, exactness, in opposition to Earths crookedness,
and stateliness, against its baseness.

1. Exactness. Examples are to be eminent, and as far as possible, 1 Cor. 11. 1
contrived above the censure of ordinary operators, in things wherein honor is
concerned; but in things divine, wherein are couched the most pressing
interests of the souls eternity, patterns ought not to have so much as an
umbrage or shadow of sensuality, which not being sound on earth, a David will
trip, Genesis 9. 21
a Jacob will halt, and a Noah lie uncovered: we are to eye Heaven for
acquiring of righteousness and ture holiness.

2. Stateliness. How slovenly (so to speak) do we handle the mysteries of God?
Is not a trembling hand, Acts 20. 37
a glazy eye, a blubred face, commended in the approaches of the devout, to the
greatest pledges of their salvation, 1 Cor. 11. 27
and yet in these addresses, not only faith, but their love to God is then more
sublimely to be acted, that it may be felt, heard, and understood, so that the
highest raptures, and most ravishing transportations, like high Steeples, are
not without their Cob-webs; whereas in Heaven, the divine beams of glory
shining upon the faces and hearts of the Elect, both heats their souls, and
beautifies their exercise, to that degree, Rev. 5. 11
that with redoubled acclamations of ineffable joy, they stand before their
Saviors Throne, and go about their Masters errant, 2 Samuel 24. 16
in a Royal, Majestic, and Authoritative deportment.

These are so well known to be in Heaven, that good men do not only mistrust
others, but fear themselves, pray against themselves, ask forgiveness, Isa.
64. 6
both in, and for, their most religious undertakings, which must cede to the
performance of those Sainted above, they being incapable of pollution,
laxation, or he^itation, through the spiritualizing of all their faculties.

In this Prayer there are two sicuts, two as-es, one is, As we forgive our
debtors forgive us; Hush. Lect. 9. on the L. P.
in which Earth draws a pattern from Heaven, to follow, sets it a copy to write
a pardon by; the other is this Petion, As thy will is done in Heaven, let it be
done in Earth; in which Heaven is recommended, as worthy for imitation of
Earth, and sets before it a picture for Earth to draw the lively features of
exact and acceptable duties: For, note, in Heaven there are three whom we must
imitate and follow, viz. Christ, Angels, and the Saints glorified.

Behold Christ as man, Ioh. 4. 34
and as when upon earth, it was meat to do his Fathers will, for himself,
giving us in that consideration, an example to prevent sin, and as God, a
remedy against it, from which it is deducible, that our eyes, feet, hands, and
tongue, are to be observant observers of the whole Law and will of God, as
Christ was; we making his life our book, our glass, our rule, our way, his
present residence in Heaven, and work there, is the Churches salvation in
general, thy soul, Reader, and that other man's in particular, for it is the
will of the Father that none of these little ones perish; hence Christ becomes
their Advocat, 1 Ioh. 2. 1
that they all may have everlasting life.

For when the Name Jesus sounds in thy ears, Bern. Ser. 15. super Cant.
understand a meek man, and a man humble in heart, courteous, sober, chaste,
compassionat, conspicuous, and renowned, for honesty and sanctity, and the same
person to be the Omnipotent God, qui suo me, and exemplo sanet, leading thee by
his example, and confirming, strengthening thee by his power.

It was a good advice, to imitat an honest man, was the way to become the best
man: Stobae^ de Prudent.
and when we know that even Christ ascended for the same cause he suffered,
Sermon. 3.
which was, that we should follow his steps; 1 Pet. 2* 21
we ought to go up with him, and to him, by intercession for our Brethren, and
by imitating of one so just, we may, and shall be crowned with those that are
holy.

Observe him where you please, in the Pulpit, in the Hill, in the Ship, in the
Garden, exemplo suo, Chrysostom. Hom. 74. in Mat.
he is, by his example, teaching us the great Philosophic virtue of submission
to the will of God, and doing of the same, which we must indispensibly conform
unto, or be extruded the felicity his obedience purchased for him.

The Scripture is not very clear, or distinct in showing how Gods will is
observed by the Saints or Angels, Dan. 8. 16
yet it is so full, that we can collect their readiness about it, whereby we
may not only learn to lament our own depravation, but beholding their activity,
can remeed the distemper, and keeping in their path, though not in their
strides; at length, by assenting to divine documents, we shall ararrive at the
same beatifick vision of God, they by their obedience do possess.

Angels have Laws and Precepts concerning Devils, Rev. 20. 1
men, whether good, or bad, alive, or dead, touching governments, fouls,
bodies, or goods of men, to afflict, or comfort, to fight, to kill, or destroy;
I say, Angels have this, Dionis. de Coelest. Hier. c. 5.
whether Cherubims, or Seraphims, Powers, Thrones, or Archangels, all these
being comprehended in this one word, Angel, there being in that holy Hierarchy
this equality, that they are all Messengers of God, made to the likeness of
God, and carried all to that one purpose which is in God, readily, thoroughly,
zealously.

1. Readily. They are spirits of life, and as for their life, they go about
Gods will with so speedy pace, Isa. 6. 2
that they are said to have wings: And has God said, Ezekiel. 1. 6
to day harden not your hearts? or, break off thy sins by repentance? Say not,
to morrow, with Pharaoh, but in this thy day, Psa. 27. 8
say, thy face, O Lord, I seek.

We read, that an Angel of God spoke to Hagar out of Heaven, in which History,
we have what he was, Hillar. lib. 4. de Trinit.
an Angel: 2. Whose he was, of the Lord; and should we, from some men's pronity
to wickedness and vice, conclude the certainty of their subjection to a higher
power, we could not rationally give any other designation, then messengers of
Satan; and if we should demand, whence come thou? (a question never asked of
the good Angels, Greg. Moral. lib. 2. c. ^
their ways are so well known) it might be replied, from compassing the earth,
they are so ready to perform the Devils pleasure, and the fulfilling of their
own lusts, by which they are, Job 1. 7
as it were, always in the dark, the eye of Gods approbation being never upon
them, which the good Spirits, and good men having, they are said to be
continually before him.

2. Thoroughly. They are so serious in the doing and executing of the Lords
purpose, Psalm. 10^ 22
that to half it, or quarter it, is none of their ease; whence they are said to
do his pleasure, that is, in all their actions perfect; all his thought their
complacency, being that wherein his soul delights, abhorring to behold men
repudiat, and abandon one vice, to espouse themselves to another; it may be to
them more beautiful, profitable or easy, for though an horse be restrained by
the bridle, yet man is to be inwardly transformed by the word, to the will of
God, and not to be like the gods in the Egyptian Temples, decked with Gold and
Silver, or veiled with Purple-royal, that is, shadowed before men with gorgeous
formality, which being once, like fair Hangings, Mell^ Patr.
drawn aside, or pryed into, filthy Apes of impure notions are visible; and the
dustinesse, Clem. Alex.
nastinesse, or lustfulnesse of their inward parts, recte scio, makes them
justly accounted the more abominable, Poedagog. lib 3.
that they only studied to seem good, it being an uniform devotion and
conversation, that makes men Angel-like, adapting them for those eternal
mansions these blessed Spirits abide in, for otherwise the Devil sometimes
covering his cloven hoof, could not in equity but be reputed Saint, and
accordingly associated withal.

It has been disputed what that particular sin was, Cosman de Angeliograph.
lib. 2. c. 10
for which the Devils fell from Heaven, whether stubbornness against the
foreknown Incarnation, envy or pride; some who are for the last, respect man,
in envying Adams dignity, and God, in affecting against him Domination and
Authority? Admit this, How humble are the good Angels? Genesis 32. 1
let God command, they will stand in a Lane as a Guard, until a poor Jacob
pass through; they will enter into dark Prisons for a condemned Daniel, or
liberat a captivat Peter: Let men learn of the Angels, Acts 12 7
and not put the Almighty to his wishes, as once to say, O that there were such
a heart in them, Deuteronomy. 5 28
that they would fear me, and keep all my Commandments.

The Lacedaemonians had good Laws touching education, Zenoph. de Cyr. Minoris
Exped. lib. 4.
especially of Children, yet had orders again, encouraging them to steal, and
an honor drium for a cleanly conveyance, provided they observed the Laws
wherein there was something excepted: Such Mungrels are too many Christians,
though not in the same Commandment, accounting it too base to steal, yet
holding it a degree of honor to swear, and being afraid or ashamed to deliver
up themselves to all kinds of ill, embrace what is more convenient for their
place and station; but this Petition discharges such bartery, Theoph. in Text.
as sacrilegious, enjoining perfect, because conscionable obedience, and sueth
for the gifts and graces required thereunto.

3. Zealously. The heart giving life to every commanded duty, has such
impressions on the Angels spirits, 2 King. 6 17
in their missions, that they are said to be flaming fire, their strength to be
Chariots of fire, and their swiftness horses of fire; Psalm. 104 4
he makes, (says the Psalmist) his Angels Spirits, his Ministers flaming
fire, Damas. de Orth. Fid. lib. 2. c. 3
denoting Agility, Ardency, Penetrability, Dexterity, and the Fervency, with
which they go about his will.

They are called Angels, because they deliver his message; Dionysde Coelest.
Hier. c. 7. etc.
Cherubims, because they know his purpose; and Seraphims, because they burn
with a holy zeal to confess and glorify God; Isa. 6. 6
it was one of these that flew with a live coal, to purge away the pollution
from the Prophets lips and life.

What has been said of the Angels, might be truly said of the Saints departed,
but they not being employed about earthly affairs, as Angels are, let us
distinctly search into their doing of the will of God, and without much
scrutiny, we shall see them do it conjunctly, continually, and sincerely.

1. Conjunctly. Rev. 4. 10
All the glorified number unites in this one thing, of giving honor, power and
glory to the Lord, because of all his wondrous works; and such who desire to be
of that Quire, must to that Hymn in joint devotion give^n their Amen.

Israel must join with Egypt and Assyria, avoiding neither, Is. 19. 23
because he is a Jew, but beholding the Spirit of God breathing upon them, must
celebrate with them as Brethren, though formerly aliens, and with binding
resolution, each precede another by affection, and in imitation of that
glorified number (though probably before different in opinion) combine in this
judgment, to practice and do the will of the Lord for ever, saying to dividing
principles, Abide here with the Ass, Genesis 22. 5
and I will go yonder and worship, etc.

2. Continually. Their eternal Sabbath is spent with unwearied ceasing in their
serious attending his Throne; Psa. 119. Theod. in loc.
we ought to be earnest, and with David, keep the way of his statutes unto the
end, (i. e.) sine impedimento incedam, giving defiance unto the keenest
temptation, I shall gracefully persevere, and imitably walk in the road and
path of thy Commandments, observing them in all my undertakings; not putting on
the royal apparel of Faith, Righteousness, and Obedience, for the Throne or
Temple, but make them my daily garment, yea, my night-cloaths, for at midnight
will I arise and give thanks unto thee. Psa. 119. 62


3. Sincerely. There is in Heavenly Saints a concord betwixt heart and harp,
Rev. 14 2*
being like the Sun, transparent, every cavity within them exceeding the
Crystal in purity, evidenceth no disingenuity, but perfect harmony in love, in
voice, in desire, in moving, and in doing.

Abfuit ergo, Lact. lib. de Justitia. c. 3.
as true disciples of Christ, let us hate dissimulation, or willing to feign,
but let us do, as well as sing, I love the Lord, otherwise, Psa. 18. 1
as the devils, we may speak much truth, and with the reprobat, do much good,
but neither being hearty, it is not our own, and the sooner shall we be
accursed, if we call out, Aug. Confess. lib. 3. c. 6.
the Truth, the Truth, and not walk accordingly.

Not to separat what God has joined together, both Saints and Angels in Heaven
do the will of our Father, joyfully, humbly.

1. Joyfully. Great content have they to be employed, and great satisfaction
have they all, Luke 1. 28, 38.
in doing the will and work of God. Hail, thou art highly favored, said
Gabriel; be it according to thy word, said Mary; to be sorrowing with the
covetous young man for the sale of lust, and discharging of thy sin, or
passionat or careless, John 18 38
as was Pharaoh, and Pontius Pilate, is to contradict the spirit of God,
prompting thee to pray after this manner, Thy will be done.

2. Humbly. Christ is represented to the Divine, Rev. 3 9.
sitting at the right hand of the Father, but the Angels and Saints about the
Throne, and sometimes falling down before it; and then are men obedient, when
the precept not being delayed, is heard by the ear, saying, Now, the tongue
saying, arise, the feet, Chrysostom. Hom. de Orat. Dom.
run, and the hands saying, all that thou command we will do. That his will
be done, Reader, in thy soul, and in thy body, in the heaven of thy soul, and
in the earth of thy flesh, that as the Angels, who are spirits, thou
spiritualized, may live, and do on earth his will, as it is in Heaven.

The Popish Franciscus, Tympii. Specul. Magnum sig. 149.
being demanded who was to be judged truly obedient? ordered the exhuming of a
dead body, who would not be discontent, how ever placed; nor puffed up, though
throned; nor clamorous, if despised; nor beautiful, though gorgeously arrayed.
Such is the obedient doing, giving, suffering, where word or providence gives
order, without wresting it, or strutting it before the Lord.

This word As, either the Greek (...), or the Germain Als, importing
similitude, here denots a likeness only, not an equality, we by it desiring
amidst such encumbrances as the soul groans under, to live inculpat, as
inoffensively as the Angels; Jerome. ^ textu,
but to reach them in the large extent of perpetual conformity, is a task
beyond mortality, for during our abode in houses of clay, Ignorance, malice,
weakness, wantonness, and wickedness, will affect us, yet as children, we
may regard our copy, Iam. 1. 21
and scorn luxury, and all exorbitancy, and lay aside superfluity of
naughtiness, being persuaded, that albeit the Character of our lives and
actions be unproportioned, we shall at length write fair; and draw good Text
Hand, Ephesians. 4. 13
when in heaven we come to be perfect men in Christ Jesus.

For, however obedience be here mixed with frailty and imperfection, yet as a
tender son, endeavoring to execute his fathers will, is approven, so is it
with God, he requiring and blessing the will or desire for doing, when the work
it self may be defective, so that though we arrive not at the perfection of the
first or second Adam, in doing Gods will, which is to be found in the holy
Angels, yet we may acquire in obedience, the perfection of Zacharias and
Elizabeth, Luke 1. 6.
which consists in the sincerity of our service.

We cannot, Wischart. Lect. 9. on the L. P.
and do not the will of God with the Angels speedily; for, like Lot, we linger
to go out of Sodom; nor cheerfully, for like Israel, we murmr in the way; nor
fully, for the good we would do, we do not; nor sincerely, for our hearts are
far from him; nor perfectly, for we know but in part, and see but in part; yet
we are to strive after all this, there being a time to come wherein all shall
be obtained; Ios. 6. 15
though now with Israel, we compass Jericho, and with Sampson, groan under
blindness, at length the siedge shall be ended in conquest, and we revenged
upon all Philistines that tormented us; and all that we do shall be very good.

Therefore study for an enlarged soul, Caiet. in textu.
that largely the will of the Lord be done, for it is thy will, not our own;
not every where, but on earth; not every way, but as it is in Heaven, that is,
doing it out of love and affection: And so pray ye.

From all this we infer these four particulars.

1. A necessity of doing. Men came not into the world to stand idle, or gaze
about, but to work; and though sin and Satan put many to miserable drudgery, it
is still sloth, except the work of God be done: The heathen beheld and scorned
the consumption of time in the inutile pursuits, Seneca. de brevie ^itae. c. 12
of the ordering, plaiting, and curling of hair of some phantasticks in his
time; and how with us such vanities are priveledged to inhabit the souls of too
many, is scandalously evident? the saying of the prophecy of this book, this
prayer, being kept neither in memory, nor manners; neither in heard nor heart,
etc.

2. Timidity for failing. The vitiousnesse of the age, in spending the greatest
part, if not all time upon things ^innical, ought to creat a fear both for our
selves and others, having for the doing of this will, Eccl. 3. 2.
a patent, not for one minut, yet filling two times so nearly placed, that
there is scarce an Asper to lengthen the phrase, Romans 13. 13
viz, a time to be born, and a time to die, with rioting and drunkenness,
chambering and wantonness, strife and envy, and accounting it a magnificum, to
reiterat such impieties, that becoming expert in sin, we gradually advance in
the profane legion, and pointed at for eminent fighters against Heaven.

How severe therefore must our punishment be, when untomb'd of our carnal
security, we stand naked of all excuse, and accused as infringers of the Laws
of the omnipotent God; this, if really reflected upon in the private sanctuary
of our own breasts, would in tears make us cry, Thy will be done; the house of
Nathan apart, Zach. 12. 12
and their wives apart, as did Monicha, for her son Augustine, because of his
lewdness, and had this answer, a son of so many tears could not perish, Aug.
lib. Con. 3. c. 12
as he did not: But what shall become of so sinful a world, of so few, yea, of
no tears, but a fearful expectation? etc. For prevention whereof, implore
mercy, Psa. 79. 6
deprecate wrath, in Thy will be done; for, a world, a kingdom, of so few
prayers, so few tears, is not far from destruction.

3. Ardency for perfecting. It is evident by this, that the bias of all our
contrivements ought to be for a more closs, Col. 3. 17
full, and proximat conformity with the holy Angels; and if by heedlesnesse we
rub, that is, mistake, or be impeded in this grand scope, we are to cast our
eye upward, that by his Omnipotent arm, we may again be reduced to this ultimat
of Angelical perfection, Psa. 30. 6
being afterward the more warry that formerly we were in Jeopardy.

4. Fervency for knowing. 1 Timothy 4 13
A holy hand can never be directed, but by a sanctified head and heart; and in
order for the accomplishing the will of God, we are to improve our knowledge
in, and of that will, a due management thereof depending upon the right
apprehension of the same, otherwise a pursuit of such heavenly exactness is
but vain, it making us but almost Christians, that is, altogether miserable,
since eternal life consists in knowledge, Ioh. 17. 3
and in that we are commanded to increase; yea, in that the Angels desire more
and more to have inspection, 1 Pet. 1* 12
stooping down, as it were, to have a clearer, and more naked sight of the
ground of that salvation shown to man.

If it be here objected, that the will of God being powerful and irresistible,
Romans 9. 19
cannot be frustrate, or obstructed by creatures, and therefore this Petition,
as redundant, in regard of Gods alsufficiency, to effectuat any undertakings,
might have been spared.

Besides what has already been said; Elton: Expos. 3. Petition of the L. P.
it is replied, that the will of God in the Scriptures revealed here, chiefly
understood, has ever for its end, obedience, trial, or conviction, and has
always, in all, a powerful effect, but not in all alike; in some it works
obedience, as that of the circumsion, the Sabbath, etc. Others it puts to a
search, whether the existence of that or this grace be with them, as that
command to Abraham, about sacrificing his Son, Genesis 22. 12
the event whereof showed, that Gods end was but to try Abraham, in others it
mounts no higher, then merely to convince them, as was the commandments to
Pharaoh.

His secret purpose we are not therefore to pry into, Ephesians. 4. 25
but accept the duties of the Gospel, as precepts propounded unto us for
obedience, that to our power they be performed, and where that fails, to our
utmost they be bewailed, wishing or doing the fulfilling of his will, Exodus 12.
31
as it is in Heaven, that is, cheerfully, not by constraint, as did Pharaoh,
that is, lovingly, not by haughtiness, Isa. 10. 7
as did Senacherib. For God expects to have, Ambros. in Psalm. 119. 108.
and loves to see, voluntary service, and he has it from the glorified Saints,
and Angels, whose practice man as^^duously must follow.

Restat ergo, Greg. Moral. lib. 6. c. 14
it is necessary therefore diligently to regard this will, making it our guide,
in all our actings and undertakings, and the impossibility of obstructing it,
ought somewhat to move us for coming under its protection, for bearing
patiently its Laws, with a willing heart and mind.

Let Jesuits follow Ignatius, Tit. 1. 10
and his way of living; the Franciscans, Francis, and his way of mortifying;
the humorist his Patriarch, and his way of opinionating; Let us aspect Heaven,
for a Peter upon earth, by dissimulation may ensnare us, Gal. 2. 13
that Elect vessel being but an earthen vessel, is not perfect enough for
discovering the infallible rule we ought to walk by; and in this sense, call no
man father upon earth.

Let it not seem strange that our Father is not here our example, but our
fellow creatures, since other Scriptures press our holiness and perfection, 1
Pet. 1* 16
from his perfection, and his holiness; for this Prayer eyes chiefly obedience,
and God having no superior, S. Rich. Baker: Disquis. on the L. P.
is not within the verge of this request: In holiness God is above the Angels,
and in that He, not They, is to be our pattern, but in service, the Angels are
above us, and They, not Men, to be our pattern, Aquin. Ser. Dom. 23:
is here intended; for as in Heaven, is to be expounded as the Angels, that is,
sine dolo and in charitate, without Hypocrisy, in servent charity, P. P. K.
James medit. on the L. P.
and holy purity.

Hitherto of the matter of this Petition, the order is most excellent.
Obedience to his will in this Petition being the means of attaining his
Kingdom, prayed for in the second, as if we should say, Thy Kingdom come, that
is, to our comfort, for which effect, Thy will be done.

In the first Petition, we aim at the hallowing of Gods Name, Paget. expos. of
the L. P.
which to accomplish, we pray in the second for the enlargement and
establishment of his Kingdom, and in this we pray for our own subjection to it.

Again, Baker. ut supra.
in the first Petition we are assured of Eternity; by the second, of a Kingdom;
by the third, to be like the Angels: Or by the first, we are informed what we
shall be, that is, as the Angels; by the second what we shall have, that is, a
Kingdom; by this third what we shall do, that is, the will of God. And after
this manner pray ye, 2 Cor. 1. 12
that God may be glorified by us, as in the first; that Satan may not rule over
us, as in the second; and that we rule not over our selves, Act. 21 14
as in this Petition, but that by us, with us, about us, and in us, the will of
the Lord be done, as it is in Heaven.

CHAP. V.
Give us this day our daily bread.
THIS is a Petition offered by the soul, for sustenance for the belly, and that
in the throng of those sublime supplications for propagation of the Gospel, and
imitation of holy Angels, Gods goodness, stooping to man's pinching necessity,
knowing that the belly has no ears to receive counsel, Judge. 15. 18
when it is empty, to persuade it to patience; and that it has a mouth, which
will open and bawl, to the souls disturbance, until it be filled with bread, 1
Cor. 6. 13
which indeed is its due, bread being made for the belly, and the belly for
bread; yet it is considerable, that it is placed after all the Petitions that
concern God, insinuating that his work and glory is first to be done, and then
we may cause lay the cloth, and put on bread.

We find that in times of Famine there have fallen showers of Wheat, Swans
Specul. Mund. c. 5.
for the refreshing of the hunger-bitten; and here we are directed without a
prodigy, to respect Heaven, and not the Fields for Grain, or the Mill for Meal,
but both sexes to imitate the virtuous woman, and bring their food from afar:
Prove. 31. 14
For so pray ye, Our Father which art in Heaven, Give us this day our daily
bread.

From the naked face of which words, we discover a Law commanding care for, and
abstinence while we are in the body.

1. Our care for the body. For beauty, proportion, strength, the body is so
stately and curious a structure, Exodus 2. 2
that it were impiety against nature to suffer or design delapidation, the
least hair whereof being allowed a place in Gods Note Book, 2 Samuel 17 28
we may conclude its bowels to be more intensly regarded.

It is the souls Cabinet, therefore not to be broke; Christ died for it, and
therefore it is not to be slighted; the earth is to conceal it, and therefore
is not to be stripped; yea, Heaven is ordained for it, and therefore it is to be
honored.

The soul indeed is to be the main, not our only care; but the body has here
Gods Image, and shall, if we be wise, walk up and down in his inheritance
above: Heb. 11 22
As Joseph by faith, gave charge to bury his bones, we by the same grace, may
give charge concerning our bodies, and order to set on bread.

The charge against shedding the blood of man, Genesis 9. 6
is from this Argument, For in the image of God made he man, that image being
in the blood, tanquam in copula; in the body, tanquam in organo; Weems*
Exercir. on the 6. Com.
in the soul, tanquam in proprio subjecto, in its proper place; the vital
spirits are carried by the blood, and upon them also depend all the senses, and
upon the senses depends the rational soul, in which the image of God
principally resides; now, take away bread, the blood fails, and by that the
spirits fail, and by them the senses fail, and by that the soubremoves, and by
that the image of God.

We offer this to the consideration of the malicious, who shedding the blood of
man, desaceth that goodly workmanship, for whose preservation he is bound to
pray, it not being preceptive, give me, but give us our daily bread: Lact. de
vero cultu c. 11.
For quid est conservare humanitatem? what other is the preservation of
humanity, then the loving of man, because he is a man, and the same that we our
selves are? and who does it not, dispoyls himself of the appellation, man, as
not worthy to be so termed.

The superstitious also rivetting this request upon his own thoughts, 1 King.
18 28
will be self-condemned, his cutting, tearing, whipping, and lashing himself,
making him Fellon de se, in a sort, a self-murtherer, Ephesians. 5. 2^
in renting the back, or torturing the skin of that belly he prays for, etc.

The covetous also must not plead immunity from the mulct appended unto the
breach of this Divine Law of cherishing the body, as the fruit of his prayer;
for in his fordid baseness; withdrawing from the flesh what God has sent it,
Mat. 5. 7.
and keeping from the belly its just modicum which it craves, yet to his own
annihilation, it remains empty, he in the mean time cramming, even to
nauseating, the hollow bowels of a wooden box, makes him culpable of
self-hostility, and impeding him in his spiritual traffic, his cash but serves
him to buy damnation; Valerian. Homil. 8 de misericord.
For quid prodest? what is the profit of concealed hoards? and who knows not
that by doing good, and showing mercy, men shall find mercy, and reap good? but
what shall he gather, who is merciless to his own self?

It is good and comely for one to eat and drink, Eccles. 5. 18
yea, deck his house, and to enjoy the good of all his labor, Jerome in Ephesians. c.
5.
which God has given him, Leon. Mag.
in neglecting whereof, he becomes guilty of Idolatry in St. Paul's meaning, and
of Adultery, Sermon. 5. de Collect. and Elemos.
in the sense of an holy Interpreter; and abundantes temporalium, inopes
aeternorum, being rich in this world, is yet poor, and yet more poor, when it
is considered he has no treasure in Heaven.

If any object, that we are not to take thought what we shall eat, and the
required zeal in the duty of prayer will certainly suffer intermission, Matthew.
6. 31
in enlarging upon daily bread. It is to be adverted, Aug. de Ser. in Monte Dei
lib. 2
that there is no repugnancy between give us bread, and take no thought what ye
shall eat, etc. The latter condemning distrustsulnesse and ^infull distraction,
not a prudential foresight of competent provision, for Parents are to lay up
for Children, 1 Cor. 12. 14
and a Master must provide for his Family, and a man for himself.

2. Our abstinence while in the body. Abstinence, in the judgment of the
Orator, Cicer. de Offic. lib. 2.
did much conduce for conciliating People and Prince, but in our Saviors
Doctrine it is the sole medium for keeping Heaven and earth in concord, so
clearly, that the great Amphiaraus, who in life was accounted a great Prophet,
and after his death a reputed god among the Grecians, advised their Priests
before their consulting at the Altar, to abstain one day from bread, and three
from wine. Plato made his greatest seasts to consist in Salt, Theatr. vitae
Human. lib. 5.
Olives, Chease, and Herbs, and he was called the Divine. The Egyptians tied
their Kings by Law to a certain portion of wine and meat, and they were
accounted Sacred. Yea, bread, water and salt, velut exquisitis obsoniis, as
great delicats, did the Persians give to their Children. And we read, that
Martha after our Saviors Ascension, did neither eat flesh, nor drink wine,
until she saw him whom her soul loved above; BREAD? the poorest boon that
nature can ask, and the least a Father can deny, and yet the only great thing
we are to entreat for. Hng. Card. in text. Auth. Imperss in Mat.
Our Lord restraining the Petitioners hungering for luxurious fare, and
conjuring against riches, delicates, and gaudy Raiment, the Pedissequae or
handmaids of which, are Wrath, Intemperance, Anger, Arrogance, Injustice,
Pride, and every evil work. Becoming (by joining dinner to supper, and drowning
the body with drink, oppressing the belly with meat) a ludibrious spectacle to
their own attendants, Chrysostom. in quod nemo laed. etc. Hom.
who must convey the vomited carcass to a dormitory, out of which its possible,
the besotted comes more surious then before, sleep procuring neither health,
nor ease, to the ininflamed body.

All which courses to prevent, or temptations to avoid, we are only directed to
pray for our daily bread, as Agur prayed for his convenient food, unto which
prayer, it is thought our Savior has reference, Mede. disc. 28,
in wording this Petition, and dissect food convenient, or open daily bread, in
our practice, we shall find sobriety to be hominis prima medicina, Chry. Sermon.
41. Chrysostom. de Poenitent.
the chief Physician of man, Hom. (...),
as one Father calls it, and the Mother of health, as another, and so good for
soul and body.

To these we might add a third, viz, Gods goodness to the body. At the giving
of the Law, he gave man six days to work, for its upholding, and at the
ordering of prayer, you see he allows one Petition for the same end; the
Ravens brought Elisha bread and flesh to eat, 1 King. 17. 6
and the brook did afford him water in a drought; here lest natural strength
should sail, and the body languish by immoderat fasting, we are advised to pray
for all these in this one word, bread, notwithstanding our attendance about
Heavenly doctrine. Mat. 15. 32


To these three, might be added a fourth, that is, our charity to all in the
body. We say not Me, but Us, and Our bread; which phrase is as wide as the sea,
and as large as the earth, and commands us to pray for bread to all in the
flesh, or in the Lord, our glory and honor not consisting in our wealth, Greg.
Naz. Orat. 27.
strength, youth, beauty, nor in nothing of the worlds product; but he that
gloryeth, let him glory in this, that he knows, and seeks after God, and
releaseth his poor servants, laying up in them a good foundation against the
time to come: For charity is omnium Artium quaestuosissima, the most enriching
trade, Chrysostom. Hom. 33. ad Popol.
delivering us from the power of death, providing us oil for our lamps, fitting
us for the great wedding, and building for us everlasting habitations. And in
this case, Tympii. Spec. Mag. fig. 23.
the words of Pius the second Pope, may be applied to an officious Chambersain,
hindering true information of affairs, Know thou not I have the Papacy for
others, rather then for my self? Let the Reader put in Wealth, Riches, Power,
Honor, in place of Papacy, and he may learn his duty.

Prepare your appetites for receiving, as God shall direct us to distribute
this bread in our old method, by showing first the matter and next the order of
this Petition; the former we lay before you in four pieces, 1. The thing asked,
that is, bread: 2. The manner it is askad by, and that is imperative, give us:
3. What kind of bread we ask, and that is, our own, our bread? 4. The time
wherein we ask this our own bread, which is, this day. If there remain any
fragments, we shall gather them together, putting them in the basket of the
word, daily; which shows the extension how long we would have this bread given
us, which is daily, or day by day.

(...), bread, (...)
so called from its fitness for us, it being fit as a staff for an old man; or
from its perfectness, as having all other things under the crust thereof, so
eminently, that it is conceived the Roman word Panis, is from the Greek word
Pan, as if it had every thing in it, or all things understood by it, it may be
deduced from the word Pascendo, as if it alone sed men, or were his proper,
because chief food. Our Saxon Ancestors called it Brood, the Germains now Brot
whence probably comes now the word Bread, and all from the Greek Brotus, that
is, Meat, in a most emphatick sense, all meats, yea the least of meats, being
generally unwholesome, if not loathsome, without bread: so that bread, by
interpretation, Aug. ad Prob. c. 11
is all things necessary for the being, or well-being of man, and a sufficiency
of them in that, which is most necessary and most excellent, Theophil. in text.
which is, BREAD, and here daily to be demanded, and having it, to conclude we
have sufficiency of food.

Ordo petitionum cogit me, Cajet. in Text.
says a great Cardinal, the method of the Prayer enforces me, by bread, to
understand, not that of the body, but of the soul, as the Gospel, and the
Sacraments, etc. to which sense many of the Ancients do adhere, Beda in Evang.
Lucae c. 11 Barrad. Concord
and many Romish Interpreters, but he erred not that undestood it, de utroque,
of them both. But to the Cardinals ordo, I oppose a Jesuits existimatio,
existimamus nihilominus, for all that, says he, we conclude that here we are
to understand corporal or bodily bread.

It is observed, that where bread has a mystical signification, Gouge on the
L. P. Joh. 6. 35
there is added some word to discover its mytaphysick sense, as the bread of
God, bread from Heaven, bread of life, etc. which insorceth a spiritual sense;
but as it stands here, there is no circumstance insringing its literal
interpretation, all things divine or spiritual being couched in the other
Petitions, thy Kingdom come, and thy will be done; and yet in a remote sense,
soul-bread may be an orthodox glass, Lyra in Text.
relating to Christ, and the blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist, but in its
proximat signification, we shall understand it vulgarly, for the ordinary staff
of life, with the consent of reformed Interpreters.

Take then, Reader, thy bill, and for bread, and in bread, and with bread,
write down meat, drink, raiment, strong house, wholesome air, upright friends,
good neighbors, honest servants, dutiful children, and a virtuous wife;
understand also, Genesis 28 20
prudent Magistrates, wise Counselors, a fruitful Soil, and a peaceable
Country, Prove. 19 14
for all these are good and profitable to men; Exodus 23 25
for these the best of men have prayed, Prove. 27 10
and these also has God promised to his people.

The Pilgrim may have bread in his Budget, yet perish on the top of Snowy
Mountains: the Mariner his Biscuit and his Bottle, yet be swallowed up by
insulting waves: the diseased may have the learned Medicinal receipts, Mark
5 26
yet be Bedrid: None of which things being congruously reducible to the other
Petitions, they relating immediately to God, ought in equity, if not in
necessity, to be brought to this Petition, 2 Kings 2. 19
as their proper continent: All of them being necessary for life, comfortable
for life, helpers to a godly life, and enjoyed and prayed for by the godly in
this life.

1. Necessary for life. This is so natural a truth, that though the Scripture
showed not famine to be a Judgment, we were able by the light of Nature to read
punishment in the looks of the very bruit: Ezekiel 5 16
Bread is called the staff of life, and that is sometimes broke, implying by
its breaking, Hug. Card. in loc.
either the want of all corn provision, or withdrawing from the grain its
natural strength and vigor, whereby it having nourishment, Psa. 104 5
men ^aint; for it is bread that strengthens man's heart.

Consult man in his highest seize, and the miseries in which he is
envalp'd, makes his condition deplorable, 2 Samuel 7 20
and to individuat the same in prayer, would make devotion, and his other
affairs incompatible: wherefore by an holy Synecdoche we here have part for the
whole, God our Father knowing how to apply our sense of desiring bread, to the
present or soreseen exigence we are, or shall be under. The Seaman senseth it
calm winds, the eye of providence discerns a necessity of baiting a leak. The
Traveller means it good accommodation, the Father graciously adds liberation
from Robbers; one may want sleep in a soft, and another cannot get it in a hard
bed, thus man's calamities cumulat themselves; and multiplied against him, he is
taught to encounter all, prevent all, to pray against all, in this unite, bread.

Zenodochus was seen to weep frequently at Table, and gave this reason, that
being a reasonable creature, he should feed upon unreasonable bruits, was
shameful, (and was it not more dashing to gnaw insensible Beings) being
designed for the delights of Paradise; what a pinch was here? 2 King. 6. 26
He cried, because he eat, and eat in his crying; and had he not eat, he could
not have cried, and the want of these things would have forced him to cry, each
misery becoming a doleful Nurse to subside another, yet all showing meats, that
is, breads necessity.

2. They are comfortable during life. ^ King. 8. 37
Pestilence, Blasting, Mildew, Locusts, Caterpillars, are prayed against by
Solomon; Neh. 1. 11
Nehemiah prayed for savor of the King; Ezra. 8. 21
Ezra for direction in the way; Abraham's servant for a wi^e to his Masters Son,
and Isaac prayed for children; all these suggaring the tart potions wherewith
this life treats her enjoyers, the affections of the holy are more inflamed
with an exhilerating zeal in their addresses unto God their Father.

3. These are helps to a godly life. Mat. 24 19
Wars, crosses, vexations, tumults, are Remora's to devotion, whereas peace,
tranquillity, plenty, sufficiency, cause it make way; they like the purest Oil,
making the Lamps both of Soul and Sanctuary to give the brighter shine, and
make the heart for Gods service many pounds lighter. Judge. 15 18
Sampson's thirst, and Abraham's being childless, Genesis 15. 2
made some, heaving in their otherwise becalmed souls.

4. These are craved and enjoyed by godly men, Isai. 38 21
even in this life. Hezekiah prayed, and health was restored, and a son given
him, the sick is to call the Elder, and he is to pray, and health and salvation
is the return: James 5 14
the Disciples prayed against shipwreck, and were safely landed. Our life is
the only season we have to manure our hearts, to do good to others, Psalm. 6. 5
and what may conduce to that great end in a natural way, may be reduced to
this head, BREAD; whether in prosperity or adversity.

Once more slice this bread, and in its perceptible, we are to pray against
poverty, idleness, apostasy and verbosity.

1. Against poverty. Let the belly want its due supply, the ears will hear from
all quarters ill tidings of certain dissolution, and when the shadow of death
is drawn upon the eyelids, the nose will soon scent the turff, Job 38 41
the Raven has an inauspicat voice, and though by no Law, save that of Nature,
it calls for food, yet when it cries, it gets meat out of the earth. Give us
bread, is, give us not poverty, lest we sin, or be ensnared, but a sufficiency
for encouragement, O Lord, in thy service.

Were every man righteous, wealth would be profitable, Plato Dial. 1. de Repub.
and riches were truly goods, conciliating to our selves friends by that
mammon, to receive us to everlasting habitations; they would ballast the soul,
which otherwise like a light Ship, is in danger of over-setting; they would be
Bladders, facilitating our swiming through the Sea of this wearisome world; 2
King. 6 5
yea, they would make that Sea pacifick, our pillows would be so^ter to sleep
upon, our cares would be less, and our other enjoyments more comfortable.

It is not easy to find out that competency at which we might lay down our
staff, traveling no further, asking no accrument to our Fortune, Stobaei Sermon.
92
but only a peaceable possession and continuation thereof, yet Plato came near
it, who being asked, what wealth was sufficient? answered, so much as did not
ensnare a soul by abundance, nor angust or straiten it in the want of
necessaries. But let God carve or cut out thy quantum, let convenient food
terminat thy desires, and thy prayer is sinless.

2. Against idleness. Author. Impers. in text.
This Prayer supposes work, and work done, it not teaching us to call for
bread simply, but for OUR BREAD, that which we have already by us, in our
Cupboards, in our surrows, give it us, that is, sanctify it unto us.

Our Savior discharges taking thought for to morrow what ye shall eat, but
forbids us not, yea rather commands us to work (but not to take thought)
against to morrow, that we may eat, Author. Impers. ut sup. Hom. 16
for from labor, Adam in inocency was not exempted. Hence Gamesters, Dicers,
Lotterers, etc. dare not behold their gains, and beg Sanctification in a give
us our daily bread, there being nothing in a holy sense, to justify any
possession, but prayer and labor, labor and prayer.

Love not sleep, Prove. 20 13
Reader, least thou come to poverty, open thy eyes, and thou shall be satisfied
with bread: Cajet. in loc.
What! Love not sleep? is it not a necessary act of Nature, and an humane
passion? Yes, Sleep is, but the love of it is a vice, Ephesians. 4. 28
and comes of evil, Nurse of idlness, and that the mother of theft, Amos 6 1
drunkenness, tale-bearing and uncleanness, and the predominancy of these sins
in our days, 1 Timothy 513
as they are palpably known to be the cursed daughters of sinful idlness;
Ezekiel. 16 49
it is as evident they issue from the matrix of our shameful beloved, Sloth,
etc.

To exclame against the perpetual poverty sworn at Rome, or against the
boasted-of oscitancy of many in the monastic life, Byrel. prom. Mor. in Fest.
B. Mar. Text. 2
is not my purpose; but to either of the Persuasions, let me offer what I find
recorded was from heaven charged upon an Hermit, when in perplexity about many
thoughts, he saw one in the habit of a Monck, sometimes working, and sometime
praying, at last heard a voice, saying; and tu fac similiter, do thou the like.
The application whereof to persons of both, or of any Religion, is so easy,
that there needs no descant upon the Story, 2 These. 3. 12
save this, O man, pray and work, that with quietness thou may eat thy own
bread.

3. Against apostasy; This is cast in out of respect to the ancient Fathers of
the Church, Christ being named the bread of life, and in a Scripture trope,
Cyp. in Orat. Dom. Ambros. lib. 5. de Sacra. c. 4. Chrysostom. Jerome. Bern. August.
he being our necessary food, our damnation being a consequence of receding
from him, they make the daily bread in the Text, to signify not that which
enters into the body, but that which nutriats the substance of the soul, as
Christ in the Gospel, by says in the Sacraments, which daily profiting, ought
to be daily received, whereas we only annually communicate.

It is the Gospel of God, by which men lives, Aug. de Sermon. in (...) Dei, lib. 2
and ought to be received by continual meditation, growing sat by the good
things of the world to come, which becomes ours by acceptance, applying
Christ himself to us, being that seed that was grinded in, and under the Law,
Chry. Sermon. 71
knead in his Cross and Passion, leavened in the great mystery of godliness,
viz. the flesh, baked in the oven of his sepulcher, made ready, and drawn forth
in his refurrection, set on upon the Table of the Church, and daily broken in
the remission of sins, Tert. in ^rat.
nourishing the eaters to eternal life: For, by a daily asking, we demonstrate
our willingness to be always in Christ, and united to him.

And indeed both Christ, Barrad ut supra.
and bread, may be truly called bread, and our bread. Not that it is not God's;
for, even when he has given both soul-bread and corporal bread unto us, it is
still his; but ours, that is, which is designed for us, So is Christ; ours,
that is, necessary for us, So is Christ; ours, that is, that which is fitted
for us, and suitable to our condition, So is Christ; lastly, ours, that is,
such as thou uses to give us, that is Christ, daily offered in the Gospel.

Give us our daily bread, Chrysostom. Hom. in Orat. Dom?
is, Feed us Lord continually with that bread came down from Heaven, that Word
that was made flesh, the food both of Angels and Men, that was made known in
breaking of bread, that is, in revealing the great mystery of thy two Natures,
and give it us day by day, that our faith languish not, our souls weary not,
and that we faint not before we reach our home; Yea, give it us daily: for,
thy day, O Lord, has no night, nor shadow of darkness.

4. Against verbosity. To stretch out a prayer, by enumerating particulars,
possibly ridiculous, is against this form, the word being so narrow and short,
that it passes in the twinkling of an eye, 2 Kings 25. 29
yet so immensly broad, that only our lives shall measure it: for, though day,
or daily be in it, yet this day has no night, and if it have, it is by
intepretation, rest in sleep, Pro. 3. 24
security of goods, freedom from sinful dreams, visions, terrors, or what ever
can interrupt our sweet and natural repose.

It considers the man, and allows him bread, raiment, and rest; the Soldier,
and allocats to him fair and good quarter, Neh. 4. 17
provides approved Armor, competent Ammunition, with a strong line of
Circumvallation; It beholds the Prince, and gives him Majesty and Honor, with
competency of wisdom, to his Officers and Counselors, Prudence and
Faithfulness, and to his Throne Honorable succession from his own loins,
Athaenoga. Apolog.
the express prayer of the primitive Church: and in a word, like a well drawn
Picture, it takes inspection upon all that enter the chamber of this world,
giving milk to babes, meat to the strong, a book to the Scholar, a goad to the
driver, skill to the Pilot, and all to each of those in all things wherein
their earthly ^elicity does competently subsist, or which it any way respects.

Absit ergo, Aug: ad Prob. c. 10
Avoid therefore in prayer much talking, or wording, contrary to this manner,
for long speaking, and true praying, are different; have thou, Reader, servency
and love, and thy prayer (if not so designed or wished for, as we have said
before) cannot be short, groans and tears, sincerity and repentance being
infinitely more efficacious then breathing and bawling.

I say, bawling, for because of that and some other vices which we have heard
to fall from the mouths of many in prayer, if demanded what we liked best, we
might reply with Theocritus, when interrogat by an inept Poet, which of his
works most pleased him; smartly answered, the works thou have omitted: And the
truth is, Dan. 9. 3.
some delighted to be in public so particular, that the service was tedious
(which yet was the least fault) and the expression base, their language
scurril, smelling of Kitchin-stuff, or fat of the Pot, to the reproach of the
blessed Ordinances of Prayer and Fasting, Mat. 1^ 21
and causing them to beget Devils in many, to my own knowledge, but casting out
very few, etc.

What a Father said of Constantius, may be said of such, Hilary Cont. Constan.
August.
and therefore let not their sin be imitated; that under pretense of honoring
the Gospel, they disgraced it, and slew Religion, under the notion of healing
it, Leaving themselves without all excuse, and became the most guilty amongst
sinners, in resusing this prayer, both as to its words, and meaning, the
brevity thirof being one of three things, Tert. de Orat.
wherein our Savior showed his wisdom in its composing, unto which, with the
other two, viz, of adoring only God, secretly expressed in Father; of Modesty
in our asking, throughout the whole prayer he has asfixed this command, Pray
after this manner.

Which precept, brought to daily bread, orders that in prayer, we learn duties
of opennesse, submissivenesse, diligence and contentedness.

1. Oppennesse. It was, and is, strange to hear how some will torture their
invention, 1 Cor. 1^ 19
for abstruse words to express themselves in prayer, beyond the rule of all
ordinary Grammar, whereas in prayer every word ought to be as plain as bread;
give me, said one, to a Garagantum-talker, 2 Pet. 2 18
the lives of the Ancients, but our own countrey-mens words, God says the same
to thee in all prayer, and commands the rejectment of words obsolete, that men
may speak to be understood, not gazed at, and pray to edify, not stupifie
their hearers, in these words, Pray after this manner.

2. Submissivenesse. Bread we ask, but how much, Landul. Cartus. de Orat. Dom.
or of what kind, we determine not? Non carnes, non pisces, we ask no flesh, no
fish, nor any superfluous thing, but food convenient; if we have therefore
bread, though course; clothing, though plain, convenient for our station,
apposite for our degree, we ought to acquiesce in the providence, having no
warrant to ask more; neither is it fit for all to wear silk, nor for every
Israelite to wear a crown with David, 2 Samuel 12 30
or guide an army with Ioab, but every one to move within his own sphere,
keeping his calling, for purchasing daily bread.

3. Diligence. Give us our bread, shows there is a store within doors, procured
by prayer and work, Author Impers. in Text.
from the hand of God, which we are not sloathfully to lavish, but prudently to
manage, for his honor, whose it is, even while it is between our teeth: Yea,
is it not one character of a good man, to watch the house, lest the thief break
in? and not to be a prey to the ^^athen, Mat. 24 43
but to dwell safely, is a blessing from the Lord; yet, hark, keep it not too
closs from the poor and indigent, rememb^ing that the Manna^ did stink, when
too greedily gathered, though it fell from Heaven.

Expel therefore avarice, Chrysostom. Hom. 20 in 2 Ep. ad Cor.
as an enemy to thy family, and be not diligent over much, lest thou come to
rags, avoid covetousness, love righteousness, be beneficent, the consequences
whereof, is here liberty, and hereafter glory.

4. Contendednesse. Bread we ask, and pass forward to other necessaries, as
pardon of sin, freedom from temptation, Lact. de Divin. Institut.
etc. Being in all affairs, to study the retention of these two eminent
virtues, innocence and patience, with which we shall never want. The crumbs
refused to Lazarus, was bread, and the rich man's sumptuous fare, Wishart on the
L. P. Lect. 10*
was but bread, Daniels pulse and water, was bread, and the Kings royal fare,
was but bread, the husks of the swine, was bread to the Prodigal, and his
Fathers feast and satted calf, was but bread, so that contendednesse is in all
conditions to be exercised, Psalm. 106 15
lest in the multitude of temptations leanness befall our souls.

Certainly, the skillfull gluttony of our times, our great and daily sacrifices
to the belly, offered up with as much alienation of mind, Natal. Commit. Mythol.
lib. 5. c. 13
from the decency that our natures, professions, and Religion ought to be
adorned with, as were the profligat and heathnish bachanalia, this making the
balance of our iniquity more ponderous, that we celebrat our Victimes daily
against the express Law of that God whom we pretend to worship; Luke 21 34
I say, pretend: for, really he has little service, our hands being defiled
with blood, our eyes full of adultery; Petronius.
and as it is in the Satyr, we delight so much about the dressing-board, and
like the nourishment upon it so well, that God's Altar is not minded; and when
approached unto, it is to be feared our breath favors of the Kitchen, and our
clothes of the Cellar, and our heart panting after a strange woman.

All which, I say, will certainly have direful effects, and cast our body
politic into some formidable, and dreadful distemper, for: sear^h the
Scriptures, Micah 6 13
we shall find desolation and sickness coupled together in a threat, sent to
chastise a stuborn and perverse generation; and for crying in a sensual sense,
Our bowels, our bowels, Ier. 4. 19
it may be suggested, that for punishment hereof, we shall be made in a
dispairing temptation, 2 King. 4 19
to roar, Our head, our head, when Christ our head shall depart from us, Ezekiel.
16 49
because of pride, uncleanness, uncharitableness, idleness, and fullness of
bread.

Give us this day our daily bread.
THe mood in which this prayer is offered in order, offers it self for
contemplation, which, (for the avoiding of presumption) we shall examine in
common, with the property the bread has we ask for, and that is, our bread,
which properly presses humility, and dependence.

We say, Give us, so that here is no bartering, no selling, nor indeed no
returning, save that of praise and glory in the conclusion. It is, give us our
bread, Genesis 30 1
unto which we may add that of Rachel in her suit for children, give it us, or
else we die.

The Church once complained, that she got her bread with the peril of her life;
Lam. 5. ^
yet here she gets it for asking: for asking? nay, for commanding, give us our
bread. But remembering a Father may condescend to, but children ought not to be
irreverent to a father, especially knowing he is such an one, that if we ask
for bread, Mat. 7. ^
will not give us a stone, nor a serpent, when we demand a fish.

Give us. If this eye God, we see his readiness to hear our complaint at
first, needing neither preface, nor argument, if pinched with necessity, to
adorn our request; Mar. ^. ^
Christ in earth had compassion on an hungry multitude, so he has in Heaven,
and such as complain, shall have.

Give us; if it eye man, shows our confidence in coming with so humble
boldness to the Throne of his Grace, Heb. (...) 16
wanting hesitation and doubts, which to be intimated in this plain request, is
as conspicuous as the bread we desire; and he that runs to God when hungry,
shall have a spiritual demonstration of the truth of this observe.

But to be more particular, and reach the ground upon which this Petition is
framed, that is, the proper arguments of our asking from God our daily bread,
which are such as these;

1. Because be bequeaths the means by which we purchase bread. Job 38. 28
He is the Father of rain, and of the dew, by wh^^ the earth is virtuated for
production of necessary fruit; we living, moving, and having our being from
him, as the efficient cause of our animal life, Acts 17. 28
of our rational life, by which he is nearer to us then we are unto our selves,
uniting the very ^^^insick principles of our essence, Lyra. and Glos. Interl.
and by them ^^using us to move our joints, and change our places, for
convenient subsistence.

Yet this must not cause sloth, but he that would have bread, must manure his
ground, Prov^^. 11
observe the season, applying himself diligently and skilfully, to the several
parts thereof, all which are gifts of God, and being apt mediums, for obtaining
of food, the most ^aborious may be said to have not from himself, but of God,
his daily bread.

2. Because he gives the blessing, even nourishment with bread. The co^^ may be
good, the meal ^^ne, the loaf great, yet may not be bread to the eater; Mic. 6.
14
Thou shall eat, says the Prophet, but not be satisfied; which, though applied
to lea^nesse, not withstanding of knowledge in the Scripture, Jerom^ in loc.
Trap. in loc.
yet it is better to understand, that Caninus appetitus, greedy appetite, when
either the digestive faculty is destroyed in us, or the nutritive power taken
from the grain, which may be that, which is called the staff of bread, and is
ordinarily ^elt in wet years, or days of famine.

As David was covered with clothes, 1 Kings 1. 1
yet could get no beat; so we may have bread, yet want food; a medicinal
potion, yet no ease, unless he give a blessing: wherefore his goodness, and
cooperating, Ioh. 2^. 6
being that right side of the ship, out of which we must cast our prayers, as
nets; let us do as he commands, otherwise we may toil all day, and catch
nothing; yea, not only so, but for bread we shall find a stone, Mat. 7. 9^
and swallow a serpent in stead of a fish.

3. Because undeservedly he presents us with bread. The very style of this
Petition deba^s our thoughts of buying, or meriting, accounted extravagant by
this word Give. Neh. 8. 10
A father will both lodge and sup his son, though both wantonly and tru^ntly he
consume the day; and God even our Father presents us with comfortable morsels,
notwithstanding of our lusciousnesse in, and lasciviousness since, excluded
Paradise, until our readmitting into the heavenly Garden of God, Rev. 228^ 2
and to the impaled Tree of Life.

He gave Adam and Evah coats, and to both their sons, and daughters, has he
given change of raiment, and many loaves of bread, when nothing but stripes
might have been dispensed; Ier. 14. 22
and as he proves himself to be God, by giving rain, so we may infer him a good
God, by our breaking of his bread, his bounty in which, Greg. Moral. lib. 10.
c. 9.
being one of those footsteps wherein we ought to trace him, love him, and
follow him.

Though our comment and text only mention bread, yet our sense, and gratitude
ought to know that this bread is multiplicated, Gods liberality with it giving
us a large portion of other good things, yea Patrimonies of ample possessions,
not like that Roman, who would not give (or endeavored to hinder the giving)
wine to the Citizens, Hist. Aug. Tom. 2. in D. Aurel.
because with that they would expect more delicate sare, as Fowls, Geese, etc.
Whereas we from the inexhaustible treasure of his overflowing goodness, are
invited, commanded, yea, encouraged to go to the Wine Press, for our stomachs
sake, 1 Timothy 5. 23 Chrysostom. Hom. 1. ad Pop. Ant.
and many infirmities: the sweetness of which care, and condescendence of such
a God, from the mouth of such an Apostle as Paul, from the cheeks of such a
trumpeter as the Apostle of the Gentiles, a song set by the hands of such a
heavenly Musician, as heard the music of the third heaven, ought to cause
reflection upon that, Psalm. 84. 11
No good thing will be withhold.

4. Because of that necessity we stand in to have bread. Buy it, we cannot;
steal it, we dare not, Tig^r. Verse. Vulg. Lar. C^stalio. T^^m.
and yet it must be had; I say, must, for that which by some Interpreters, is
called panem quotidianum, daily bread, super-substantialem, or heavenly bread,
or victum alimentarium, our nourishing bread, is translated by some, panem
necessitatis, the bread of our necessity; there being such inseparable
connection betwixt bread and life, (especially in wholesome constitutions) that
without the first, the latter should expire; and David's let my soul live, Psa.
119. 175
and it shall praise thee, when reduced to this prayer, may be expounded, give
me bread, and I will bless thee.

Trees, plants, rooted in the earth, must have nourishment from the same, for
their upholding, their enlarging, so our bodies being earthy, must have from
thence competency of nourishment, or they perish, were it but bread and water;
Psa. 104. 14
hence God is said to water the hills from his chambers, that he may bring
forth food out of the earth.

Cyrus that great King, when demanded what he would have dressed for dinner,
replied, Bread: for, I hope, (said he) to sup at a River, deferring the
deliciousness of water, in quenching his thirst, by the hopes of future
tasting. Great temperance in a heathen, yet heightened, when we consider his
custom was never to dine or sup, until by some exercise he was brought to a
gentle sweat. Stobae. Ser. 29.
And that Fathers advice was also sound, who advising a fitness for continual
fasting for God, recommends the accustoming of a man's self, Tart. Adver. Marc.
lib. ^.
paucis non gloriosis, i. e. neither unto many, nor luscious dishes. And indeed
it is noted as a crime in the rich glutton, that he fared deliciously every
day, which is discharged in this phrase, daily bread; things necessary, God
accounting only profitable, superfluities not relieving, but destroying nature
and reason also, in so gross a way, Orig. in Epist. ad Romans lib. 9. c. 13.
that rioting and drunkenness, the usher of chambering and wantonness, makes
them not to appear so much men, quam feras and belluas, as Boars and Bulls.

5. Because, Eccl. 6. 2
but by him we have no heart to eat our own bread. The earth by its primeve,
and first blessing, of sertility, brings forth fruits, and by a natural
appetite in man, some of these fruits must be received; yet there are Misers,
whose hearts grudge their own craving stomach, to that degree, that their
tongue is disposed to curse their hand, for conveying a morsel to their own
mouth, which is not only vanity, but an evil disease.

There is a man (says Solomon) to whom God has given riches, Eccl. 6. 2
that is artificial, as store of Coin and Wealth, Lyra.
that is, natural riches, as abundance of Wine, etc. and Honor, that is, put
him in an honorable estate, so that he wants nothing that is pertaining to a
pleasant life, Gloss. Interl^
yet God gives him not power to eat thereof, because the churl himself will
not, suffering his belly, his body, the fruit of his body, his children, the
walls of the house that contains his body, and the companion of his body, his
wife, to want that which God sent to them; but diverted to a by end, I mean, to
fill his eye, or ear, thereby giving all occasion to curse, Psa. 10. 3
and cursed he is, for God abhors him.

This is magna miseria, Vulg. Latin.
an inexpressible misery, the Nabal cruciating and vexing himself, nimia
parcitate, by his sordid detaining from his own soul, in selfishnesse what he
ought to give it; to be mute of the Laws of Justice, Prudence, and Religion,
which commands sustentation of himself, to himself, having this always like
the sting of the Scorpion, biting him to death, that he painfully gathers up
wealth, Eccl. 6. 2
by ways none knows how, that they may be spent by, he knows not whom.

Was it not base in the Cardinal Angeloctus, Textor. O^^cin. lib. 5. c. 43.
by secret ways to enter his Stable, and from the Manger to steal the allowed
Provender from his own Horses, until the Groom after watching, gave him
Stock-fish-oyl, anointing his shoulders with the Strapado, apprehending him at
first to have been a foreign thief. What heaps of Authors can show the
Readers, that the sordid covetousness of the Emperor Mauricius, cast himself,
his children and his wife, into the barbarous hands of the Usurper Phocas,
their murderer? and Phocas again upon the same selfish account, to be parted
limb from limb by Heraclius? Though I dare not say the last was undeserved, yet
I close, that these, and all such as these, were poorer then the poor, and they
being poor in the judgment of one, Leo. M^g* Set. 5. de Collect. and Elem.
rich both in grace and honor, who being rich, are not bountiful to the
indigent, nor helpful to the maimed, nor pitiful to the oppressed: How
superlatively miserable is that Dives, who withholds not only from these, but
from his own loins, their proper aliment?

Diogenes asking something from such a wretch, Laer^. lib. 6
and perceiving him to Fall into a brown study, and suggesting denial, he
called, O homo, O man, I am asking thee for some bread, not commanding thee ad
sepulchrum, to a sepulcher: To this man may all such men be compared; the sight
of their own food, or their childrens coats, frighting them like Executioners.

^ll which to prevent in our selves, we say, Give us bread, give us our bread,
that is, our own bread, that is, in this sense, a heart, a hand, Eccl. 8 15
a power, a will, to eat, enjoy a sufficiency of those good things, thy bounty,
in our labors, has bequeathed, for thy glory, our own comfort, credit, and
content, that we our selves, Eccl. 3^ 22
not strangers, may possess our wealth.

It was sordid in Lewis the eleventh French King, Full. Holy State, lib. 4. c.
16
to employ his Harbor Oliver in Embassy, through covetousness, and was like
to prove satal to that Stateless State-officer, (notwithstanding of National
agreements for immunity) he having been like to be washed, I cannot say trimmed
(but for his heels) in the River Guant. And the rich City Florence, for sending
Merchants Ambassadors to Rome, Thyns Hist. of Ambassad. c. 3.
(when besiedged by Charles the fifth) who being found to have Gold Thread for
sale, to save charge, was put to greater charge, when their Ambassadors
were-rejected with scorn, and sent home with shame; this is registrated to be
as a monitor to all, Eccl 3. 14
that high and low be excited in their several ranks, to understand this
Petition, as desiring an enlarged soul, for the splendid, honorable, as well
as gracious and proportionable elargition of their goods, otherwise another
shall be their Almoner, Eccl. 2. 21
and because their Cash wants a Master, it shall elect one to it self, who of
thy money, and by thy wealth, shall eat his own bread, 1 Samuel 25
and be thankful to God, be blessed by the poor; in the interim, thou have
neither praise nor comfort, but shame and grief with men, and in thy self, and
a vomiting up before God, through remorse, or sting of Conscience, what ever
thou have greedily devoured.

It would be discovered, when our bread is our own, since it is that we here
call for, and may be so called, 1. Author Impers. Op. in Matthew. Hom. 1^
When by our industry and labor we procure it, having it by us, prepared by,
and in, the exercise of our Calling. 2. When by piety and devotion we are
thankful: It is ours when sanctified unto us, by the Word of God and Prayer,
and not only our bread, but our board, our bed, are not ours until they be
blessed in the Name of the Lord, Ruth 1. 6
as Boaz did his Reapers in the Harvest Field.

Hence may be defended that pious practice of blessing the table before and
after meat, a duty among many others thrust from the houses of some impiously,
a practice put to attend too base services in the Chambers, and Halls of others
ridiculously, yet used Apostolically, is a sovereign sauce to help concoction,
and prevent crudities in the Conscience, and belchings arising from an
oppressed soul.

To leave such whose hateful acts in this kind, denominant them either Swine,
arising from sleep, and eats, and from eating, goes to sleep again; or which is
more troublesome, Rats, their whole time being consumed in running up and down
the world, making a hideous noise, tearing clothes, and eating victuals: I say,
to leave them condemned by the old Jews, our blessed Savior, our Religious
primitive Predecessors, Tert. Apolog. ad Gentes, c. 39 Job. 11. 31
let others do it with the sign of the Cross, let us bless our meat as did
our Savior, with lifted up eyes, and a Father, we thank thee, remembering that
it is his bread by gift, and ours only by acceptance, and only then received,
when we are blessed.

1. By owning him the giver of all our bread. 2. In receiving it soberly, not
as wanton children, crumbling it down, for it is bread. 3. In dividing it
charitably, for there are at thy door who want bread. 4. In admiring his
wisdom, in fitting thee with bread. As meat, it is nomen officii,* and imports
similitude to the eater, otherwise it is not meat; hence it is said, Cajet. in
Joan. Evangel. c. 6. verse. 55
that man's bread, is a Hawks poison. 5. In not binding our affections to
earthly bread. Of all Petitions relating unto man, this is first and
immediately before that, for remitting sin, showing, says one, it is the first
sinners care f^^, yet following all those which relates to Heaven, it being the
least that Saints regard.

It is said of a holy man, that he saw four sorts of men glorified in Heaven,
one was the obedient man; Wan. Paarion, Tom. 1. Sermon. 16
another was the self-denied man; and the fourth was the thankful: whether this
sight was seen or not, I dispute not, but this from the Scriptures may be seen,
that the thankful man shall be glorified.

An Hosaunah in the Hall, Psalm. 50 ^23
or Temple, for the bread sent us, a moderat use and eating of the bread before
us, it being just to say of it, Ambros. Epist. lib. 10 Epist. 8^
as the Apostle orders of wine, a little, for we are to eat for our infirmity,
and not for our lust, and walking to the glory of God, in and by the strength
of our bread, and sending a portion to the hungry, of the bread left us, in
regard our Lord Jesus Christ must not be put away without a quantum, Valerian.
Hom. 8. de Misericord.
for if we be not nigards, our Lord will not be far from us, yea, so near us,
that we shall know him in the naked, in the blind, in the hungry, or in the
crying man; and of their sadness thou art bound to say, as did Socrates of
Aristarchus melancholy, Zenoph. de dict. and fact. Socrat. lib. 2.
What aileth thee, make this trouble known to us thy friends, it may be we can
relieve thee? All this being thus done, makes all thy other enjoyments, as
well as thy bread, thy OWN.

Yet further, and for caution, Our bread it must be, not another; our Prayer
being limited to our own portion, as well in our affection, as in the Petition:
Luke 12 15
Take heed and beware of covetousness, by expounding our bread to be that upon
our Table, when by oppression, stealth or plunder, it has been taken by force,
or fraud, from another. Knowing that good men, with Socrates, hold him the
richest, who is most contented with his own just gotten goods, and purchased
bread, though sruall, which is implied in the word bread; in which he is rich
in the judgment of the same Philosopher, Zenoph^ ut supra, lib. 4. Greg. Naz.
who has a competency for himself, and a modicum left for others, implied in
the word, our bread; another man's bread being one of those many things, whereby
this world, this life, is accounted miserable, comfortless, despicable, and
angust.

Liberius being banished under Constantius, Theod. Hist. Eccl lib. 2. c. 16
from his Episcopal Chair of Rome, when offered money for supplying his
necessaries, by Eusebius the Eunuch, Tu Ecclesias orbis terrae expilasti, etc.
thou lives by robbing of the Churches of Christ, and do thou think, I, though
condemned, shall prove thy Beadsman? Say the like to thine own soul, when rape
becomes thy husbandry, and work to eat thy own bread.

Give us this day our daily bread.
THis day, denoting the time wherein this Petition is offered, and the term
unto which it is limited, is this hour, cum Deo, to be opened; and for our
entry, know, that though day and night be set opposite in Genesis, yet not in
Matthew, Daag. Daah. (...).
day in the Hebrew has its name from stir and business, or motion and flying,
in the Greek, from its light and shining, and in it we must labor for our
bread, that we may have food for our bellies: the English Saxon expressing it
Dag, as is thought from Dego, to live, as if in nights darkness, our spirits
being locked, vitality may be questioned: this is clear, that meat for our
bellies, clothes for our backs, bed for our bodies, drink for our throats,
whether day or night, are even pleasant to think upon, and in the light, Eccl.
11. 7
as the light, delectable to behold.

Let us see the import of the word day, and its influence on Prayer, as it
respects the rule, so pray ye.

In the light of DAY, we by this Sun of Righteousness can clearly read these
four following particulars.

1. Contentedness with our enjoyments, 2 Kings 4. 13
though little; we ask not store for years, months or weeks, neither are our
bellies as insatiable as the grave, but satisfied if we have for it, this day,
that is, in the Proverbs Language, from hand to mouth, so that at first dash,
that improbitatis metropolin, Aug. Ser. 126^ de Tem.
that elementa malorum, that fountain of wickedness, that ground-stone of all
evil, covetousness, either in desiring more then enough, or retaining what is
left of enough, is here damned up and removed.

We may be cold, Heb. 10. 36
hungry, and sick, yet we are still to be content with the clothes, meat, or
portion God gives, he best knowing what, when, or how much is best for us, and
most for our good. Here are, says one, six words (eying the Roman tongue) all
speaking (in gross) content: Hush Lect. 12. on the Lords Prayer.
Let us be more particular then he, and show how in the English, here are seven
words including that virtue particularly.

GIVE, by this we show our content to be begging: US, by this we show our
content to be sharing: THIS DAY, by this we show content with our living, and
if he please, with our removing: OUR, by this we show content to be working:
DAILY, by this we show content upon his providence to be depending; Luke. 11. 3
Lake calls it, Day by day, which is the same: BREAD, this shows us to be
content though he be sparing. Content, indeed content, is that great rock that
strengthens the house of the soul of man, Phil. 4. (...)
securing it from tottering, against outward storms, from (...), by desponding
suggestions.

2. A necessity if we enjoy our selves to have that little. It is clear, that
in this request we pray as for our lives, if we want it (here we may understand
air) but for a day, we are bod^^y ^ndone, and flies away as fast as day.

Forget not what here has been said touching necessity, for bread here imports
the supplying of the ^eeblenesse of some, and supporting the honor of another,
1 Kings 17. 5
Elisha must have bread and water, which serves him; Abraham must have bread in
the head of his Army, and a great deal will but serve him, yet both must have
sufficiency; and here stands their necessity, the poorest Israelite must have
bread, or dye; but Solomon must keep a royal Table, 1 King. 4, 20
or be desamed, and in that must not be thought peccant, because it is
necessary for his honor.

3. The excellency that is in that, (when enjoyed) little bread being precious,
Mark. 7. 27
our f^ther will not have it mould, or turn into a stone, by us, but will have
us accounted by our selves, rich enough, if stored for a day, or in a day. Thus
in a holy sense it is not unwholesome to eat new bread each morning, by the
heat of piety to have it sanctified for thy use all day, which will operate
upon all thy enjoyments, Schol. Saler. de Pane.
giving occasion to say, non talis fit tibi vanus, that Prayer shall be
profitable for all things, yea, for bread, which must have some intrinsic
value, no larger commission being sealed for its acquisition, by our great
Master, then for a day.

4. Dependency on him, to enjoy that little. Matthew. 6, 34
It is but bread, and yet we must not eat it, until we go to his cup-board
each day for it, Isa. 8. 17
as for our set allowance, and ordinary rate, trusting upon his care and power
for to morrow, providing our selves by labor and prayer, but for this day, and
having that with life and health, say, when thou beholds another feasting his
heart, and eye, with variety, as that Philosopher, beholding the various
curiosities in a Market, Laert. in Socrat.
quam multis ego non egen, how many dishes can I live without? with this
thought superadded, Psa. 104. 27
he can never be poor who is in friendship with God, possessing all things. By
this Day, our says is tried, whether we will trust him for our bodies, as well
as we do for our souls, and make our lives like that of venerable Beda, Vita.
B^dae; Presb. ante opera.
norma Religionis, and honesti, both Religious and honest, considing not for
security upon personal abilities, but providence, being intelligent in this,
that by grace God takes care for all, but chiefly of them, who are united to
him by says, and therefore hush temptations, Chrysostom. de provid. lib. 1.
of subtle dealing, cirecumventing, or cheating stratagems, for thy
maintenance, but clear up the preface, that God is thy Father, and fear not
want of the substance of this Petition, thy daily bread.

Yet reflect that this being but a temporal request, and for a small pittance,
there must be submission to providence, though bread be wanting, and his will
must be done, in submitting to yield up the ghost for hunger; Iam. 5 10
man living not only by bread, but upon some other food, which an Expositor
has presented before us in five slices, and when we wants let us be eager for
another cut.

The first is, bread requisite for this present life: H^g. Card. in Evang. Luc.
c. 11
The next is, the understanding of the holy Scriptures: The third is, the
blessed Saarament of the Lords Supper: and the fifth is the firmness of our
obedience; and all these in their courses and turns are to be prayed for; and
if the first be wanting, pray for the last, and the fourth shall not be
wanting, which is the refreshings of grace, 1 Pet. 1. 7
which as daily bread shall strengthen thee in thy journey to the Mount of God.

This day may occasion this question, whether a Christian may lawfully beg to
be rich, and for store for time to come, since he is only here directed to call
for bread, Mat. 6. 3.
and that day by day? It is denied, and that he ought not so to pray, is
evident*

For, 1. There is no example for it in holy S^ripture. The whole Book of God is
a general rule for direction in the affairs relating to Prayer, Prove. 30. 8
and in all that, there is not one instance of the thing questioned, but
contray Laws and Prayers against it, and this Prayer an exact pattern in
special and particular, does apparently exclude such a request from its
studious imitator.

2. We are commanded not to be careful about the end of riches. Mat. ^. 25
Wealth but seems to answer these questions in a gaudy manner, what shall we
eat? What shall we drink? What shall we put on? Problems about which we are not
so much as anxiously to dream, being bound in carefulness to nothing, but
oblidged in every thing to make request unto God: Chrysostom. Hom. 20. in Mat.
for, by This day, we are discharged to ask riches, and in our bread, not to
think upon delicates.

This day being Gods day, Ambros. de Nabal. c. ^.
must be known to have no night, and yet consider, Quis tibi pauper videtur,
whom think thou to be poor, he that is content with his own, or he that
coveteth another? O dives! nescis quam pauper sis, know, he who is so rich is
miserably impoverished, Lact. de Falsa Sapient c. 11.
this being fatal to riches, that they set him upon desiring of them, who most
plentifully possesses them, contrary to the by God decreed desires, or ends of
man, which was sedulity in acquiring holiness and wisdom.

3. It holds forth a distrust of the providence of God: To wish and call for
store of provision for many years, is to suggest that either God cannot keep
thee long at a set rate, or that he will put thee off in a distressed time;
Genesis 21^ 19
whereas the birds sow not, yet are continually provided for; Exodus 24. 30
to pass by Hagar who got water, Moses wanted food forty days, yet was not
pale.

Tell me, carping Fool, Art thou not always in Gods hand? Have thou not
forgotten thy self, but he provided for thee in the womb, I say, he whom thou
now distrusts; shake off such sinful surmising, Job 31. 24
and say not to gold thou art my confidence, for to doubt of thy Father, Greg.
Moral. lib. 22. c. 2.
is to confide in a creature.

4. It suits not with that humility we ought to have before God. To stand
before his Throne asking for Riches, Eccl. 2. 8
many Houses, large Barns, much Gold, fine Hangings, curious Carpets, gilded
Cabinets, delicious Scents, change of Garments, store of Plate, and variety of
Purslain, to pass the sweet meats, fruits, and gustful drink therein; were
improper for us, and hateful for him to hear, thy breath being in his hand,
Dan. 5. 23
and thy years passing as a tale that is told.

He said much, Hist. Augustae in vita Gord.
who affirmed of Gordianus Emperor, Moribus ita moderatus, he was so moderate,
that none could say he did any thing excessively, covetously, immodestly, or
unbeseemingly. But that was true of Peter, Lord we have left all and followed
thee, Bernardi declamat.
lest all in possession, left all in affection; and it is conjectured, that the
loving of the things of this world is more hurtful then enjoying of them; all
which speaks against earnestness for superfluities, since covetousness is not
so much as to be named among Saints. Ephesians. 5. 3


5. From the inconveniency, or no good they bring to man. The abundance of
earthly things, evidenceth no more a good man, Ambros^ de Precatio ad^ Prepar.
ad Mis.
then a silk Stocking argues a sound leg, yea, it were well it they did not
harm him more, leading, tempting, causing and multiplying in the soul,
treasons, deceits, falsehood, perjury, restlessness, and hard-heartedness.

It is observed, that most ordinarily Spectrums, Devils, Lav^te^ of spirits
lib. 1. c. 16
or Ghosts, are seen it Pits, or Mines of Metal, and there to work, as other
laborers, after the Vein, to carry O^r, wind the Wheel, etc. and see we not
in the hearts of avaritious Pioneers, hellish haunters, working in them all
manner of ungodliness; for what will they not do, and whither will they not go
for gain. Valer^ Max. lib. 9. c.^
gain, gain? Septimulius took the head from his friend, confident, and
acquaintance Graccus, and carried it through Rome fixed upon a Pole, because
Opimius Consul promised him Gold; It was therefore said of him, Ante omnes,
etc. he was the most covetous of men, yet had he been in our Christian world,
this attrocious crime had but numbered him among offenders.

Riches pierce the soul through with many sorrows, 1 Timothy 6. 9
says St. Paul; Care in getting, fear in possessing, Aq^in. in loc. Lect. ada.
grief in departing, says an Expositor. Videamus, Mark it, says one, if men
as they grow wealthy, grow not hasty, saucy, haughty, angry, iniquity wrapping
them about as fat; Chrysostom. Hom. 54 ad Pop. Antioch.
which fat, when melting from them by the heat of some sad disaster, must needs
overwhelm them in despair.

As appeared in a French Boor, who hoording corn for a dearth, entering his
Garner, was so enchanted with the Devil, or blinded with vengeance, that he
could perceive no grain, though heaps of it before him, for the supposed
stealth of which, he incontinently hanged himself. But what thought that other
Hound, Histori. Terribilum, l. 1.
who in dearth refusing to sell his Victual, when ordered by Authority, denying
he had any to spare, and what he had was scarce fit for Hoggs; when his wife
was brought to bed of seven young Piggs, which were seen, says my Author, a
multis fide dignis viris, by many honest men?

Yet this argues not so much against the having, Psalm. 22. 29
as the abusing of riches, for the rich in their abundance, Tarnovius in loc.
and the poor in their scarcity, possunt salvari, may both be happy, since they
that be sat upon earth shall worship and eat, and such as go down to the dust
shall bow unto him: Neither read we of rich Abraham's being excluded Heaven, or
of poor Lazarus his being depressed to Hell.

Neither is this against an holy prudence, Genesis 41 48
a foreseeing evil to come, for Joseph laid up Corn, and our Savior had a
treasure for ordinary expense: In short, as Harvesters make provision for the
Winter, Scoder on the L. P.
and do store up grain, yet causing their care to extend only to the time
present, so our doctrine opposes only a care of distrust, about what shall be
had hereafter, not a wise providing, or competent provision, Greg. Moral. lib
14. c. 8.
for a man's self, family, or relations; it being often seen, that riches and
glory, are possessed sine culpa, without hurt, because used in humility. The
influence this has upon Prayer, is evident.

1. Perseverance in Prayer. Bread here, is health, life, safety, security, and
the daily bread insinuats a daily attending before the Throne. David's soul had
ordinary (as may be supposed) three meals a day, Ps. 55 17
but in extrordinary days, Psa. 119 164
as Sabbaths, New Moons, it had seven; teaching us not to permit our souls to
languish, for want of its due support, but as we call daily for bread, for
bodily strength, so for grace, for spiritual vigor.

2. Reverence in thy getting. Be humble, not arrogant in thy deportment, by
eating not wasting thy bread, Ioh. 6 12
being it is the fruit of thy prayers, use it for thy self, for it is thine
own, and what is left is another; for charity here is reciprocal, we call upon
God for our bread, Mat. 25 37
and he calls again in his poor for his bread; so that on all hands we are not
to be prodigal, or abusers of it.

Has not? does not? this impious age, in its stupendous prodigality, consume
wastfully what it is indebted to wife, family, and children, exceeding the
Israelites, Joel. 3 3
who gave but a boy for an harlot, and sold a girl that they might drink; for
they give their Honor, their Wife, their Children, for Wine, Wantons, Silk and
Ale. Dorotheus abhorring idleness and intemperance, Niceph. Hist. Eccl. l. 11.
c. 35
did yearly gather stones from the Sea, and build a little house for the
distressed; did eat by weight every day, and subdued his body so by laboring
and watching, that he was demanded why he killed it? but he replying said,
otherwise it will kill me: And, believe it, Reader, the pampering the belly in
this generation will be the death of many, and may in time get empty intrails
for a due reward of too gorgeous feeding.

Anacharsis the Scythian was wont to write about the Pictures of Princes, this
little, yet worthy lesson, Rule Lust, temper the Tongue, bridle the Belly: if
this be not authority sufficient, sure, be not filled with wine, wherein is
excess, Ephesians. 5 18
might be nervously pungent to command sobriety in all ranks.

And if adultery, Binchii Mellificium Theol. loc. 15.
prodigality, stoathfulnesse, talk ativenesse, inhumanity, gluttony,
unchastity, stubornnesse, looseness, covetousness, lasciviousness, and
seekers after vain and unprofitable things, be the sins for which in Scripture
poverty is threatened, as they are, this age has reason to expect a famine.

3. Preparedness for our removing: This day is all we are to care for, and how
soon our Sun will set, Ier. 6. 4
is unknown, yet its setting ought to creat an earnestness in us, to have our
sins forgiven, for it is This day, and This day has mortality, frailty, and
death contained in it. Therefore are our lives and all things inconstant here,
Greg. Naz. de Virae itineribus.
that we should be inflamed with a holy servour to love and desire the fixed and
immovable things above, in which sense our daily bread, that is, strength and
life by the blood of Jesus, is industriously to be pursued after.

4. Respect for all the (...). In prayer remember thy five, thy seven brethren:
Give us our bread, Psa. 144. 14
includes all men, especially our friends and neighbors, yea, our oxen that
they may be strong to labor. Pray good, and do good therefore unto all, it
being our good, that is, our charitable works, which keeps our faith, Leonis
Mag. Ser. 3. de Collect.
that is, our hopes of salvation alive. Yea, as the Devil is delighted with the
errors, and superstitions of some, he is afflicted with the bounty and
liberality of others, were it but for which, we ought to sow more bountifully,
yet God promising mercy to the mercisul, excites eminently enlarged devotion
for our brethren.

5. Piety in all our acting. To pursue our own lusts, Psa. 106. 39
and go a whoring after our own inventions all day, is to do the Devils work;
and to call, give us our bread, is to crave our supper and lodging from God at
night, which argues impudent presumption: Are we children, servants, or heirs
of God, expecting to eat at his table? Isa. 1. 19
we are to execute his will, attend upon his work, serve in his house, then
verily we shall be fed, and dwell in the land, feeding upon the finest of the
wheat, the hidden Manna, Rev. 2 17
the bread that came down from heaven.

Matthew. 6. 11. Give us this day our daily bread. Luke 11. 3. Give us day by day
our daily bread.
WE are now arived at the utmost border, viz. the extension of this petition,
intended in our design to be viewed, as it relates to bread, yet before we
launch forth toward the other shore of the succeeding words, we shall look
about the country, or at least the ground we eat our bread upon, and gathering
up the fragments, cast them into the basket of this word, daily, before which
its necessary to speak of that diversity, these two Evangelists relate this
prayer in.

Originally the word translated, (...).
bread, is alike in both, yet the vulgar Interpreter translates it in Matthew.
supersubstantial bread, which occasioned the ancients, and causes many of the
romish Writers generally to understand it by Christ. King on the L. P. ex Alex.
Hales Part. 4. Quest. 10
But in St Luke he expounds it, Quotidian, or daily bread, though originally
the word be the same in both, and for the difference of the translation, we
have this reason given: That the Translater spoke in Matthew. to the capacity of
the learned, Barrad. in Concord. Evang. de Orat. Dom.
and in Luke to the understanding of the unlettered, daily, being a word more
familiar to the vulgar; or says another, Matthew eying only the bread of the
soul, it is called super substantial, but in Luke, eying both soul and body, it
is rendered daily, both being daily, (i. e.) necessary to be had.

This arises from the ambiguity of the word (...) signifying, (...),
as it may be derived, either substance, as being fit for our substance, or
acceding, as if bread must continually be coming to us: and in this sense,
Ierom shows, he found in a certain edition, Jerome. 10 textu.
the word Machar, signifying to morrow, or the time to come; but it is best to
understand it in the former sense, bread that must come to us; which suffices
not, having once received it, but in the intercourse of changing times, Chem.
(...) Orat. Dom.
must come unto us ever, and anon, daily, or day by day, continually.

The reason given for its spiritual sense, being nimis profana, too gross, as
if Christ in prayer, Iostir. l^b. 3. c. 20.
(says Calvin) would not have us mind bodyly things, whereas his goodness is
conspicuous in giving us, and allowing us the things of this life, 1 Timothy 4. 8
as a reward of godliness: Unto which sense agrees, and to which verdict,
assents the whole Jury of reformed Interpreters.

For the other difference in our Transl^tion, Medes works lib. 1.
conform to the Original, Disquisitions. 1.
we must note, that in the judgment of a learned person, this prayer in St.
Matthew was a part of our Saviors first and famous Sermon the second year
after this Baptism; but as Luke records it, our Lord did repeat it in a private
place, Luke 11. ^
upon another occasion, in the third year, and tied not himself to the
reiteration of the same words, but gave it to his Disciples more compendiously
as to the number of the words, omitting the Doxology, For thine is the Kingdom,
and more elucidly, as to the sense of the words, as in this Petition, day by
day, that is, sufficient for each day.

So that this day, Down. hame on the L. P.
in Matthew, or day by day, in Luke, reaches the present condition we shall at
any time be in, we not needing the same kind of bread at all times; the times
of adversity, travel, sickness, requiring other mercies, then those of
prosperity, rest, or health do, which Luke, in his day by day, may have a holy
regard unto, enlarging only, not contradicting Matthew in his, this day, they
being both (as all the sayings of the Holy Ghost) at peace between themselves,
2 Pet. 1. 20
yet Matthew, as more large, is generally used in our Churches, in the word
daily, avoiding such thundering words in prayer, as supersubstantial. But to
leave this, we may gather from the whole Petition,

1. That possessions ought not to restrain prayer. Though we have a portion,
Job 15. 4
a Barn-full, a Shop-full, a House-full, a Buttry-full, yet day by day, and
every day, is the Throne, the face of our Father importunatly to be inquired
^^^er for a blessing; Job 1. 5.
and in this sense it is the rich man's prayer.

Bread may be had, and the stomach be away; Genesis 13* 2 and verse. ^
Beds may be had, yet sleep may be away; clothes may be had, yet heat may be
away; much may be had, and but little used; This day, or day by day, as trouble
arises, still implores ^ prosperous usage of good things, I say, implores, for
he who confides in his prosperity, Greg. Moral. lib. (...) c. 1. (...)
and fixes himself in his abundance, or in the transient comforts he here
apprehends, Iustus non est, cannot be holy. Yea, conceit o^ our selves, as we
please, pauperes tamen omnes in universum sumus, Greg. Naz. Orat. 27. de
pauperum amore.
we are all poor, and stand in need of the mercy of God; and therefore ought
continually to crave it.

It is recorded to the honor of Pacilla, wise to Theodosius Emperor, that she
would visit the sick, and with her own hands, succor the maimed, and give
bread to the famished, and would say often to her Husband, Hist. Tripart. lib.
9. c. 31.
oportet te semper, always remember what formerly thou was, and what futurly
thou shall be; discovering the truth now under search, that no greatness
should obstruct piety. Stella in Evang. Luc: c. 1^
He as Father, or tender Mother, having bread always by him, (of which thou
have need) that in all emergency thou may as a son be supplied. For prayer
preserves, increases, the treasure of man, upon a three-sold account.

It blesses all for us. It enters the very pith of any undertaking, and so
virtuats it, that our very eating and drinking, Epist. lib. 8. Ammo^ Eras.
talking, yea, our sleeping, is acceptable to God; whereby what was said of
Erasmus, may be of the Christian, he purchasing a good report, and wheresoever
he turns, finding friends.

It preserves all to us. Ezekiel. 4. 16.
Sin transports both our bread and water to another country; Moab had bread,
when Canaan that fruitful soil had none; yea, not bread only, but birds also it
forces from us, Ier. 4. 25
robbing us at once both of profit and pleasure; of a tune for the ear, and a
dish for the mouth.

It keeps both God and them with us. Prove. 10. 22
When our care has done its utmost, we must own this, That the blessing of the
Lord makes rich, and he adds no sorrow with it. Worldly goods may be east,
as a Master does a sat bone to his Dog, or as a Physician beholding faciem
Hypocraticam, on his patient, a deadly countenance, orders him to be pleased in
all things, there being no hopes of recovery; so riches may be given even to
fatness, until the man have collops of fat upon his flanks, Job. 15. 27
yet wanting Gods presence, they have no blessing, which prayer procures, yea,
importuneth.

Behold David's Throne, Endors Air, Nabals Mutton, Ehuds Parlour, Araunahs Barn,
and Tyres Ships, Psa. 14. 5
if they want God, are unhappy; where contrarily, Jacobs stone, Jobs Dung hill,
Ieremiahs Pit, Daniels Den, Paul's Prison, Silas Stocks, having God, are
comfortable retirements.

It is a good observe of our Royal Interpreter, King James Medit. on the L^ P.
that though we abound in all kinds of flesh or sowl, yet cheap or dear years
are so accounted from the abundance or scarcety of Corn, that being called
victual, a victu, because we feed upon it, as if all other dishes were but as
sauce to this, and yet even that, without our Fathers favor and good liking,
is but a killing portion.

Holy Augustine, Matthew. 14* 17
opening the miracle of the Loaves, calls the five loaves the old Law, or the
five Books of Moses, Aug. S^r. 109. de Temp.
and the two fishes, either the Doctrine of the Prophets, and the Baptist, or
both the Old and New Testaments; the grass upon which the multitude sat,
signifies the slighting of all things earthly: It is to be wondered, that our
Saviors giving of thanks was not heeded, yet that may be included in the two
Testaments, for without an allegory, it is a character of the blessed man,
Psalm. 1. 2
that be meditates in the Law of God, the blessed consequence whereof is, that
what soever he does shall prosper.

2. That poverty ought to provoke prayer. The young Ravens, Pined^ in Job c.
38. v. 41.
when forsaken, either through the negligence, sorgetfulnesse, or foolishness
of the old, because of their whiteness, cry unto God for food, and has it,
whether by creating vermin for them out of their own dung, I know not; but it
is sure they receive meat, and shall man despond, the needy man conceit himself
forsaken? For in this sense this is the poor man's prayer.

The Monkish vow of poverty is against the Law of Nature (though they should
keep it) and also of Religion, 1 Samuel 14 27
both allowing us, with Jonathan, to taste honey, lest we faint, and with
Isaac, to dig wells, to procure water; and seeing to eat grass like the Ox,
Psalm. 104 14
is not our bread, but our curse, we may, and ought with Abel, to plow against
hunger, and here to pray for a days sufficiency of bread.

Besides Oeconomick, Acts 3. 2
there is a Politic or natural poverty, as blindness, lamenesse, sickness,
madness, against all which, intensnesse in Prayer is necessary; But
particularly (to keep more closs to our Text) against poverty and want, or
scarcety of bread. For,

1. It is to the best of men a great temptation to evil. Medes works ut supra
Disquis. 28.
Agur praying against it, urges two arguments, 1. Least he should steal, an
ordinary effect of want. 2. Lest he should take the Name of God in vain, an
effect of theft in the Jewish Law; for, in want of clear probation, the
suspected, purged himself by oath, and was acquitted from restitution.
Therefore, as in want of bread our Savior was tempted to distrust, Judge. 17. 19
so in Agur it might occasion perjury and theft, as in the Levit it did
arrogance and idolatry, so every way is it to be prayed against.

2. It is often trod upon by men, and this breeds ill blood. The former note
produced ill thoughts against Gods Law, this eyes ungodly speeches against man.

When David is become like an Owl, it may cause much mischief to whoot at him,
Ps. 102. 6
as is evident in his design against Nabal; and when Daniel the Prince is
called Daniel of the captivity (upbraiding him with his thraldom) he is a
Daniel who can sustain the affront, Dan. 5. 13
and bridle his tongue, not answering the taunt.

Quid enim paupertas? for what is poverty, but a certain deformed leanness? or
plenty, Greg. Mor. lib. 12. c. 22.
but a certain f^^nesse? and how hard is it for the fat, not to point at, and
shame the poor? and the lean again (since a worm will wriggle when trod upon)
to envy, malign, and to his power bite the very nose from the face of him whom
Parasites or Smell-feasts call beautiful?

Yet, Pro. 30. 8
noli flere, weep not, poor man, if God has given thee this gift, (for poverty
is his donation) he will, if it be embraced, give many blessings: A father, a
mother, will dandle most their blind, their lame, their diseased child. The
three Children fed on Pulse, and drank Water, yet were not sindged in the fiery
furnace, when those, who it may be, did eat of the Kings meat, were immediately
consumed: Grata paupertas, Fulgent. de Joan. Bap:
patient poverty is so acceptable to God, that chooses rather to be at course
fare, then to countenance Herod's (i. e.) the oppressors bloody banquet: And
his company shall make thy quarter-loaf of the nature of the Tarentines feast,
Quod jejunium appellabant, for they, when besiedged, were by the Rhegians
supported, and supplied by food, which by public Edict was spared in fasting
each tenth day; and this succor was so happy, as to cause the Romans raise
their siedge; Aelian. Hist. Var. 1. 5. ^. 20.
in grateful memory whereof, the Tarentines kept a feast, which they called a
Fast; and such a feast does the holy poor continually celebrat, having
fellowship with the Father and the Son; which Son, our Jesus, undertaking to
deliver man, abhorred not a poor Virgins womb, choosing not the belly of a
rich, great, or full sed Queen; and when born, Granat. Ducis peccat. 1. 2. c. 5.
slighted the Pallice, the Downy Bed, the fine Linen of Egypt, and embraced
the Manger; yea, in life, had poor Fishermen his attendants, and after his
ascension appointed them, not grandees, to be his Ambassadors to reconcile the
greatest to their God, who are commanded to be poor in spirit, so highly does
the contempt of this world please him? True riches being neither Gold, Silver,
nor p^eciou^ Jewels, but Virtue, and the peace of a good Conscience, which rich
men often wanting, occasioned this Provech, viz The rich is either a wicked
man, or a wicked man's heir.

Thou art not yet so poor as thou was born, Sen. Cur. Bon. Vir. etc. c. 6.
being then in greater indigency then ever poveity it self can redact thee
unto, yet then God supplied thee with food convenient, which did make firm thy
flesh, though slubbry, and consolidat thy bones, though brittle; and see we not
the poor to have generally sounder bodies comlier faces, fairer children then
the rich? accommodat thy self therefore to thy necessity ( as the Philosopher
advised) and be wise, Enchir. Epicteti. c. 78.
knowing there is a providence in all things, and a blessing for the true
observer.

Heliogabulus caused men's flesh to be sacrificed upon his altars, Hist.
A^g^stae in vita.
to his heathen gods, and the beholding of the treats of some, might make the
poor man conjecture his own samished table, to be a curse unto his house, but
if he reflect upon the lives of them, who by oppression, gripping, and crushing
is put out, to make up these culinary offerings, with the blood, tears and
sighs of the widows, orphans wherewith the other delicats receive a
hough-gough, he shall rejoice in his penury, and say of their plenty, Ps. 141. 4
let me not eat of their dainties.

The Lacedaemonians regarded not wealth, pleasure, Zenoph^ de Repub. liced.
delicates nor abundance, but made it their care to have strong sound bodies,
which Portion is evidently seen to be entailed to that Family where scantnesse
is at board, and the reason is known to the Scripturist, Ps. 146. ^
the Lord preserving the stranger, he relieving the father less and widow,
though not so well to the heathen, Petronious
who yet knew (but I know not what way) that goodness and poverty were sisters.

I have seen the Scelet of a famous Queen, Q. Katherine (called Mortality) at
Westmi^ister^
and really it appeared not so lovely as the bones and sculls in ordinary
Charnel-houses, on such as adorn the Frontispiece of common Graves; so that
even of bones, we might answer with him, who being asked why the poor had
generally more thriving children then the rich? answered, Bucan. Instit. Theol.
loc. 35.
The rich was at their own keeping, the poor at Gods, that is, trusts more to
it, riches often causing forgetfulness of God: Hence one speaking of them whose
prayers God principally hears, mentions the Penitent, the faithful, the
afflicted, but makes the prayer of the poor to begin his roll. Textor officin.
l. 2. c. 22.
Demonax the Philosopher, never traveled with Coin, but when hungry, stepped in
at the first open door, and got supply, yet dying in his hundred year, was
honorably buried upon the public charge. And if this be thought stale or
antic, let the Water Poet be reflected upon, who traveled from London to
Edinburgh, and from that to many places, and from that to London again,
entertaind with the best, Tailors penniles^ pilgrimage, Anno, Dom. 1618
drank of the best, and eat most times of the best, yet never spent penny,
borrowed never penny, and begged never a penny, and cheerfully wrote his
travels, for his own mirth, the Readers wonder, and this Kingdoms fame, and
particularly, this Cities honor, neither dare I exclude Gods glory, the Poet
having religious a^imad versions.

We never read that either Christ of his Apostles begged, yet they had no
lands; our Savior made no Testament, Luke 23 53
yet got both a Tomb and a Winding Sheet. Remember, poor man, that seven loaves
did seed many thousands, Hill^ i^ Mat Ca^ non 14
bread multiplying bread, either upon the table, the Apostles hands, or in the
eaters mouth. Pray for a blessing, thy piece of b^ead, thy quarter loaf, may be
commanded to (...), in thy mouth, thy stomach, and in thy bowels, for
strengthening of thy body a higher degree then they who have their co^^^y
^iands, their flately chynes; yea, if thou want it, Genesis 22 8
say; My ^on* God will provide us one, and depend.

It was a strange, yet true prodigy and wonder of love, Speeds Mapps of Soffolk.
that in a great death in England, Anno Dom: 1555. there grew about Orford in
Suffolk, upon hard and solid Rocks, where grass or earth was never seen to
grow without tillage or sowing, a rich crop of Pease, and there was in August
gathered above one hundred quarters, says my Author (that is, two hundred
bolls) and in blossoming remained as many more growing immediately still from
the hard Rock. Meditate upon this in the night season, and consider, the widows
oly enlarged until her debt was paid, 2 Kings 44 Genesis 21 19
and Hagars empty bottle was at last filled, for the keeping alive her Son.

Once more observe,

Convenience of food ought to be all our prayer; Aug. ad Prob. c. 6
our daily bread, nec amplius vult, he will have us to ask that, but no more,
such as follow us, to abate the edge of hunger in our traveling through this
vale of Bacha, and the sufficiency not to be required for it self, but propter
salutem corporis, for the health of the body, which possessing, in praying for
daily bread, the continuance of it is desired, but if it be wanting, the
obtaining of it is sued for, in Give us this day our daily bread.

It is well said of an holy man, Leon. Mag. Ser. 4. (...) Quadrag.
that semper Dives est Christiana paupert as, the poor Christian has greater
and larger possessions then the rich, having more good things about him, having
God, and in him a sufficiency, yea, an overflowing of all delectable things,
for if a Cup of cold water be rewarded, Luke 21 4.
and the widows mite be praised, there shall be always some to show mercy to
such who have been merciful to others.

From all which we infer this threesold duty:

1. Look backward upon your life, and praise him, Noah builded an Altar after
his deliverance from the stood; Genesis 8. 20 Psalm. 18. 1
and David composed a Psalm alter victory: we have outlived the sword, the
pestilence, and famine, and shall there be no song of triumph? have we
purchased our daily bread, by a da nobis, our prayers, and shall there be no
tuum est Regnum? no Hosannah to our Father which art in Heaven, Psa. 144 9
for praise?

2. Look forward, supposing life, and depend upon him. Should the poorest of us
all cast up our yearly expenses, they would amount to a pretty sum. Psa. 71. 9
He is hearty at fourscore years, and it may be never had so many farthings
free together; if his bounty has flowed until now, trust his beneficence, and
distrust not though thy strength fail.

Let the worst be suggested, and blessed are the religious poor, Tert. de (...)
persecur:
for they only possess their souls under arrest or confiscation, in the
keeping of which, they cannot want their bread, an omnipotent and invisible arm
affording out of an immense Treasury sufficient to keep his servants soul alive.

Young Cyrus at a richly furnished Table, begged liberty to do what he pleased,
Zenoph de poe. dia Cyri.
gave one to this, and another dish to that man, and to a third another, for
teaching him to ride, etc. as thinking it against health to seed upon variety:
if God, a greater King then Cyrus, Eccles. 2 24
give this rich qu^ntum to one, and that to another, and give the strength,
health, sound sleep, and a cheery heart with thy pittance, thou have enough,
yea, abundance.

3. Look present on passing life, and be content The richest of us all can have
but a belly-full, and what they have more is not theirs; if the poors bowels be
not empty, they may be said to be both rich alike. The multitude had their
fare, Mark 6 35
but we read not that they got the fragments; and without them, having
sufficient for the day, we ought to be grateful.

Bread being a help to life, not the end of life, pleads at our hands industry,
for its acquisition. It was poverty after high prodigality, Aelian Var. Hist.
1. 5. c. 9.
that made Aristotle both wise and samous; and pinches ought to make us
importunatly press God for bread, for food and raiment, as the very words of
this Prayer imports, curbing our mouths, girthing our bellies, Eccl. 11 10
composing all disputes about what shall we eat? in commanding us to call, and
allowing us but to call, for our daily bread this day.

The matter of this Petition being discussed, the order is to be next viewed,
and it is easy to behold, that the Petitions relating to the Kingdom or glory
of God, are three; such as relate to man's salvation are also three: Luk 12 23
this respecting the body, being but one, demonstrats upon what the vehemence
of our affections should be fixed. And if any contrary to this rule, has
minded their body with a three-^old more zeal then their souls, let them know,
that God, and not bread, is to be the Alpha and Omega of all their duties; but
more especially at this duty to Prayer, and say with Isaeus, whose pallat had
been a touchstone for tastes, when demanded what fish or sowl was sweetest,
Eras. Apoph. 1. 8.
replied, de hisee cur are desii, it is long since I left off such foolish
doings, because unprofitable and sinful.

As the Sun shines, and enlighteneth the Orbs above, as well as those under,
so it is thought this Petition has an aspect upon these precedent and
subsequent requests, in the whole body of this Prayer, sensing the Prayer thus,

Hallowed be thy Name this day: Thy Kingdom come this day, etc. Forgive us our
debts this day, etc. which is the Petition in our Saviors holy method we are
next indebted unto for explication, and shall, cum Deo, endeavor to discharge
the same.

CHAP. VI.
Matthew. 6. 12. And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. Luke 11. 4.
And forgive us our sins, for we also forgive every one that is indebted to us.
HItherto we have been begging from our Father, and in that has attained to
such degrees of familiarity, that in an humble confidence, we sinlesly
prescribe directions for him to walk and act by; for what other is this
Petition, forgive us as we forgive; or, Forgive us, for we forgive? This
Petition making a Jubilee in the soul, and inviting every one that is in debt
to run to God, as they did to David, 1 Samuel 22 2
for security, pardon, and a discharge; we offer our selves to open it, for
purchasing a release, in your application of the same unto your lives, of all
former delinquencies, transgressions, and enormities.

In this form of Prayer we shall keep our old set form of method, and see the
matter, and next the order of this Petition.

The first relating to debt, a word borrowed from the French debte, and that
from the Roman debitum, to owe or be engaged to any thing, or person; being
varied by two Evangelists, shows how to expound the phrase; the one calling
debts what the other calls sins; discovering, that our sins being debts, we
pray, that what we owe may not be exacted, ( i. e.) for forgiveness, as we
forgive, or for we forgive; Ambros. lib. 5. de. Sacra, c. 4.
both concurring to this Interpretation, that sin is debt, yet not properly,
but by similitude; and by similitude, nos sumus debitores, we, because sinners,
are debtors, Luke 7* 41
and owned such in the parables of the Gospel, yea, and condemned to pay the
utmost farthing, Mat 5. 26
if we stand to a reckoning.

For clearing of which, the word debt is first to be explained; next, the
extent of this term forgive. After that the necessity and equity of the
condition, as we forgive. And lastly resolve some questions about forgiveness.

Forgive us. Cypr. in Orat. Dom.
ne quis sibi quasi innocensf let no man conceit himself free, or exalt himself
in that fancy, lest by contracting more, in denying just debt, he perish more
severely, and be surprised more suddenly. Gaspar in Comment. in Mat. c. 6.
Solida vitae puritas, it being madness, to fancy a Church pure from ^in,
since this Law is given to the Church, pray after this manner, forgive us our
sins, which are as debts, being contracted, booked, and must be cleared.

1. They are contracted. Psa. 136. 25
Our meat, lodging, washing, dwelling, clothing, we receive from the Lord
Paramount, the great Landlord of Heaven and earth, and all is noted down with
the returns we make unto him; Psa. 50. 10
the highest of us all being but Tenant Parravail, Sub-sub-tenants. What we owe
may be guessed at, Prove. 24. 16
by the justs man's falling seven times a day, by which we may understand sin,
which is as debt, and rises again, which we may interpret mercy, and that also
expects a discharge, and must by us be accounted for.

Two ways men contract debt, by poverty, by prodigality; the poor must live,
and therefore must borrow, and our wantonness compels us to take up more
then we need. Adam was not hunger-starved, Genesis ^. 2
but had great store, yet that morsel of the forbidden fruit must go down.
David had many Lambs yet that one in the house of Vriah, 2 Samuel: 12. 3
as fairer, fatter, goodlier, then any in the royal flocks, must be dressed for
that stranger of carnal lust, which visited his Palace.

How unnecessary eating, abundant drinking, rash swearing, intemperat living,
enlarges the scores of many, is matter of no great difficulty, seeing men
hourly swallowing by hand-fulls, mouth-fulls, cup-fulls, what without calling
for forgiveness, shall take eternity to de^ray.

To pass the curtains of the womb, where our poverty was excessively great,
were we not met in this world with clouts, and milk, in our infancy, which our
being men will make us to repay? And though we came naked into this world, yet
in ordinary gracious providence, we go not out so naked, as to want a
burial-place, and winding sheet; which exected kindness, is good debt, and
with thankfulness remembered, if we know it was given to our relations. But
wastfully, and in prodigious debauchery, to borrow from our creditor, for
entertainment of insatiable lusts, or unbridled vanity, may justly cause him,
immediately to demand, discharging of the Bill, without giving us a day (not to
pay, but) to pray for a remittment.

2. They are booked. My transgressions, says Job thou-hast sealed up in a
bag. Job 14. 17
For, nisi Poenitentia interveniente, without a hearty Forgive us, Greg. Moral.
lib. 12^ c. 11.
and sorrow for the debt, the sins publicly committed, are concealed in the
secret judgment of God, until (as Clarks do Charges or Processes) they be
brought forth into open Court. Deuteronomy. 32. 34
And hence that of Moses, Is not this laid up in store with me, and sealed up
among my Treasures? Trap. in loc.
to wit, for a just punishment. That though as a thief may gallop away with a
stolen horse, the wicked may conceit himself secure, and gallantly mounted,
yet he shall be found, and a Court fenced, and his charge before him, unto him,
and against him, read, for his thieving, vapouring, and sinful revelling.

To pass also the Book of life, Rev. 20. 12
there shall be two Books used in the sinners condemnation, that of the Law,
which shows the duties to be done upon the receiving of the mercy; and that of
the Conscience, which discovers vices done under that mercy: and as Peter's
Cock, it will make the most secure to think upon all that ever he did, and
cause the dryest eye weep. Chrysostom. Hom. in Mat. 77.
All Raps, Fornications, Oppressions, Adulteries, being therein written, and
not vanished as the profligat may suppose.

A Phythagorean taking shoes upon his credit, came to make payment some few
days after, but understanding of his creditors death, Seneca de Benof. lib. 7.
c. 21.
concluded a discharge within himself, yet his conscience gave him such a
summonds, that he went to the dead man's house, and, threw in the price, saying,
Ille tibi vivit, tu read quod debes, though he be dead to the world, yet being
alive to me, I am bound to pay what I owe. In the greatest there is something
of an accusing conscience, Romans 2. 15
when doing evil, and except the hand of the Gospel offer the mercy of the
book, and nail sin to the Cross of Christ, it shall be in his breast as a
handwriting to condemn him that goes not to discharge his Bill, by repentance.

3. They must be cleared. Poor honesty will, as it can, be crossing scores,
more or less at times, sooner, or later, so must our sins.

But it must be with good and upright money, not washed, August. Enchir. c. 71
nor counterfeit coin. This prayer daily and heartily said, viz, Forgive, etc.
Will wash away our daily sins, and we shall know them no more. Achab indeed
gave light gold, and God took it, 1 Kings 11. 29.
for so much as it was worth (as he will do copper) and for his temporary, or
day repentance, God gave him a temporary deliverance, and lengthned his
tranquillity a few days.

It must be also our own money; to pay one debt with what we borrow from
another, is no release from the burden, and here is a pinch, 1. Cor. 4. 7
that we can give God nothing but what we have from himself, for our selves
being not our own, how shall we pay our debts: Observe, we say Forgive us our
trespasses, for except these, nothing is our own, and our own indeed, none but
our selves being concerned in them. Yet here is liberty, that this Forgive us,
is accounted so full a discharge, that we are assoiled for ever from future
pleas.

It must be also proportionable to our debts; two pence pays not six penny worth
of ware. Isa. 1. 6.
Is sin a wound? the plaster must be as broad as the sore; is it a debt? It
must be balanced, and the sum deposited, equivalent thereunto; we have sinned
from the heart, and our grief for so doing must have the same rise, and yet
herein we fail, the infinity as it were of sin, being beyond the reach of our
finit, and interrupted sorrow, which still hightens the debt, causing an
impossibility in its defraying, and in us an ardency for its utter discharging.
Yea, freeing us from that guilt, which even in asking we sadly contract.

To give the particulars of the debts, is a task impossible, yet a few
particulars may put us in mind of many. All owes him,

1. Obedience to his Law; Rev. 22. 14
but this we pay not, because we do not. Adam transgressed, and fell, we in
that also being his unhappy posterity, falls and sins shamefully, for all that
commanding and exacting obedience from beasts, Tert. de Patient.
as our due, yet not only doubting, but resolving against obsequiousness unto
that Lord, whose are all things we possess.

We owe unto God, the keeping of his image in our selves, Chrysostom. Hom. de Orat.
Dom.
undefaced. The honoring of one another before him; but sunt alia debita,
there are other debts, for we have sinned grievously, lived unjustly, and loved
iniquity, all which will be accounted for.

The Persians hated, and of sins accounted, a loving to lie, and contracting of
debt, the most filthy; And if we say we have no sin, we lie. And if we say we
have sin, we shall certainly die, except we say with grief, forgive us our sin.

2. Exactness in his presence, but this we pay not, because of our imperfect
doing. The way of the Law being una, Lact. de vero Cult. c. 7
simplex, angusta and ardua, one, pure, strait, and hard, we often leave it,
and lean to our own understanding, that leading us to a path, open, wide, and
easy; so that God, if he have any, has but his bodily service. Romans 7. 25
Saint Paul gave him true service with the mind, but answer thy soul truly when
it asks, whom serves thou in thy inward man? and there shall be reason to cry
out, who shall deliver me? O forgive me.

3. Of thankfulness for his favors, but this we pay not by our abusing the
creature. Has not store been lent us, much been given us, Psa. 107. 8
and where is that peace offering of praise and gratulation, for all his
benefits to us, and his wonderful works to the children of men?

As babes, let us be but touched in our toy, house, kindred, or goods, how soon
shall we put finger in eye, Fulgent. ad Prob. c. 7.
and cry, but where is he who not to be accounted ingrate, does pulsare
continuis precibus, continually, let God hear him, rejoicing in, and under his
love?

To omit education, Prove. 4. 4
instruction, opportunities of doing good, what is his name? who sits down with
the relenting Pilgrim, and weeps at the sight of a poisonous Toad, when
reflecting upon his long negligence, in not blessing God for making him a man,
the not doing of which has wonderfully, I should say miserably, increased our
debt?

4. Of sufferAnce because of our failings, Phil. 1. 29
in these and all other particulars of his will; but this we can never
satisfy, because of our distance. Except each man (pardon the expression) were
indeed God, no man, all men, could not satisfy God, there being an
inexpressible distance between the infinite justice, and the finit limited
suffering to be undergone.

Yet when providence calls for justification of the truths of God, Acts 21 13
no precious thing ought to deterr from a masculine defending and sealing of
the same, under the greatest torture tyranny can invent in externals.

In internals, our right eye, or right hand is not to be valued, S. Valeriani
Hom. 17
hoc est, vice, though beloved, is to be chastised, the heat of lust to be
extinguished, lasciviousness, though sweet, is to be suppressed, and at all
hazards, chastity to be preserved; by which, in safety we shall be Martyrs,
Confessors, for the truth, as it is in Jesus.

Our debts; and the thoughts thereof, will stick the closer, if we think upon
Moses, who craves them, and the prison prepared for us, because of them.

They are craved by Moses: His sword is over our head, Ioh. 5 45
his rod is over our backs, he says, Thou shall not covet, not steal, not
murder, not have other gods; but we making every lust a god, must forecast an
arrest and imprisonment, he having no power to release, nor authority to accept
Cautionry, or Surety for us.

A greatly indebted Roman dying, Augustus the Emperor gave order for buying
his bed, his goods being put to Auction, or Ropeing, saying, when others
wondered, I must have it, that upon it I may sleep quietly, since he that was so
much in debt could quietly rest. Let us mind our own security, notwithstanding
our debt to Almighty God, we shall condemn our selves as more senseless then
that admired Knight; Greg. Hom. in Evangel.
and stand in awe of sin, for in this, Dormire mori est, to slumber is to die.

There is a prison with Devils. The Parthians gave a piece of the debtors flesh
to each Creditor, but the whole man falls under the censure of this terrible
Judge. Ib. Dial. l. 4. c. 38.
Rich, vicious, proud, covetous, and dying Crisorius, conceited Devils
attending his departure, called, as the foolish Virgins to the wise, upon his
religious son, which being ineffectual, roared out to the spirits themselves,
Inducias, Inducias, O let me alone until the morning; this as a Beacon is set
up by an holy man, that our lives being more virtuous, our death may be more
consolatory.

The death of the profane is the sadest, being ill first in leaving the world
which they love, Bern. Sermon. Var. and Par. 41
worse in their souls removing from the body, but worst of all, in their being
both soul and body adjudged to eternal condemnation.

It is observed of Egypt, that after the flourishing of many famous Churches,
Charian. Chronic. lib. 4.
the Gospel being planted by the Apostles, Alexandria it self having the
Evangelist Mark, Nephew to St. Peter for its Pastor or Bishop; yet justo Dei
Judici^, by reason of their sin, the inhabitants being exemplarly wicked, full
of blasphemy and rape, is now without God, and generally has a greater hatred
to Christianity then the ordinary Saracens, for which they are destined to
eternal plagues. Let this age know, and every man in it fear and stand in awe,
for what is it Egypt had of ungodliness, whereof we have not plentiful
examples, with this aggravation, that we have had of old Christianity, and of
late great judgments?

Yet there is a Cautioner, a Surety, even Jesus, Isa. 53. 5
who will pay the Creditor, (unto whom it is alike who pay him,) for by Christ's
stripes we are healed; he entered into bond, yea, into prison for us, and by
rising from the dead, the third day, he both declared himself to be the Son of
God, and of his giving satisfaction to the utmost of all that was owing unto
him, Romans 8. 2
making us thereby free from the Law of sin and death.

Yet so miserably are we deluded with self, and self-conceit, that debt is
daily contracted, by taking up more mercy, abusing more time, neglecting much
grace, thwarting many invitations, quenching many good motions, and by
inadvertency falling into numerous temptations, which continually call for
fresh suits, for forgiveness; and considered, might cause expostulation with
sin, Aug. de Contritione Cord. c. 4
O peccata; O wickedness, how easily do persuade us to commit thee? but with
what difficulty do we procure riddance from thee? While thou smiles, we embrace
thee, but while embracing, thou art killing us to death, and in death.

Eye the debtor, and he is so unable, that his very soul cannot be full
restitution; Mat. 16 26
eye the Creditor, and he is so inexorable, that he will be paid the utmost
farthing by our selves, or by our Cautioner; Josh. 24 19
and his suretyship is to be humbly entreated for, for they are our debts, and
no secret conveyance, no private contract, can turn them over to another hand;
Eye the debt it is deplorable: there are original debts, our parents debts, our
own debts, of childhood, ignorance, knowledge, debts of presumption, infirmity,
against counsel, against conscience, and against threats, debts of the Sabbath,
of the Week, of our Family, and of our Neighborhood, etc. debts of our
waking, of our sleeping, of our talking, and of our thinking, etc. offenses of
the Chamber, sins of the Shop, and iniquities of the Street; so that all of our
selves, and each man for his brother, Psalm. 4^ 12
may cry, Innumerable evils have compassed us about, and no way for deliverace
but by acquittance, and no way for that but forgiveness.

Over and above, Aug. de Ovibus, Hom. c. 4
reflect upon that magna lenitas, great goodness, infinite patience, ineffable
mercy, and long-suffering God has shown unto us, that we might call for this
forgiveness, having this comfortable Scripture, Isa. 43. 25
I will not remember thy sins.

Forgive us our debts, etc.
FORGIVE: A short word, but of large and extended sense, much used in Gods
promises, and often pressed in the Saints petitions; (...)
and the word properly signifies a sending back something to the place whence
they came: Sin came from hell, and here the soul would have it remanded to the
same land of darkness.

As it stands in this Prayer, it denotes somewhat which relates to God, and
somewhat relating to our selves, As it respects God, it weighs.

1. His commiseration of us, because of our debts. Goodness is an ordinary
plea with all the holy, Psalm. 103 13
and they sound that the Lord, as a Father, pitieth them that fear, them that
pray: Cyp. in Orat. Dom. ^^^^ar. in Psalm. 119
And the liere who taught us to pray this Prayer* has promised his Fathers
mercy; says a Father, mercy comes* ex bonitate Dei, purely from goddnesse,
yet must be drawn from him by innocence, virtue, and obedience, as did Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, Joseph, Job, and Moses, says another.

He discovers love in desiring our salvation, Isa. 1. 11.
in euring our wounds, in teaching us prayers, in pardoning our sins, and
upbraiding us with our unbelief (...) there not mercy in the word Father, and
goodness and hope in the word Forgive, Manasseh his Prayer, and Judas his
Confession, Micah. 7 18
were alike: but he pardons iniquity, because he delights in mercy.

In a dearth at Corinth, Aelian Hist. var. l. 14 c. 25
Theocles and others advised Creditors to remit their debts, for easing of the
poor, but being refused, he acquitted his own, and those who contemned the
motion, were in invincible rage slain by their debtors, Aug. de Vera. Innocent.
195
excited to extremity by poverty and necessity: we have fair offers, and better
conditions, both a remission offered, and a reward for acceptance of that
tender, that as the earth expects showers and light from Heaven, so man is to
expect, yea, he is called to look up for truth and mercy.

2. His aversion detected not to exact those debts. Ezekiel. 33 11
What is man, but dust? what is his birth, but loathsome and shameful to
himself, and at best so contemptible? that God might say to Justice, Let him
alone, non dignus est ira Caesaris, he is not worthy of my wrath.

Job thought of this when he uttered, Job 14. 3
And do thou open thine eyes upon such an one? and bring me into Judgment?

3. His indiminishable possession, though he should remit the debt. Admit our
skin could ransom our life, Psa. 30. 9
what would he gain? or if he freely absolve it, what would be his loss?
Knowing this, he puts us neither to call for ease nor time, but for a forgiving.

Accept of the precept, by begging a free acquittance, and so much the rather
that bounty and liberality is to be showed, Lact. de vero cultu, c. 11.
quantum potest non idoneis, where there is the least hopes of advantage in
requital, which in our arguing for Heaven, is an excellent rule.

The Roman and famous Alexander, would exclaim against his shy, yet deserving
Courtiers, why do you not ask something from me? do it, Hist. Aug. it vita
Severi.
that I neither be your debtor, nor complained of, as a slighter of your merit.
Yet what he gave, was neither silver nor gold, nor out of his own treasure, but
bona punitorum, the goods or wealth of for^eited malefactors, etc. not
diminishing thereby his Revenue. Here is a greater Emperor without merit,
giving of his own, requesting of his foes to plead remission of injuries done
to himself, Isa. 50. 1
for their good who have done the injury.

4. His dominion or just power to forgive the debt. This Petition has a
peculiar respect to the Preface, Mark. 2 7
Our Father, because none can forgive but God, it being his Law, his Grace, his
Son, his Gospel we sin against.

Hence the Indulgences to be bought at Rome, and the Pardons even for sin, not
yet but to be committed, (a greater grace then ever God promised, K. James
Medition the L. P.
two whereof King James of blessed memory, upon this Petition, does protest he
saw) are to be detested; this being a more sure word of Prophecy, I, even I am
be that blotteth out thy transgressions, for mine own sake; Isai. 43 25
mark, for mine own sake, neither for Peter's, nor the Virgins, etc.

5. His Justification, though he should make us stand to those debts: They are
our debts, and though he delay to acquit us, Psa 80. 4
his Throne is to be frequented, Petitions to be iterated, and forgive us our
debts, importunatly to be demanded, until the vigorous exaction of the Law be
repelled, by the mellifluous sentence of the Gospel, Be of good cheer, thy sins
are forgiven.

Not intending to pose any with that question, whether they could be content of
damnation, if God so pleased, God putting no such question to us, Psa. 44. 9
but joining his will and our salvation together, we affirm that in Gods
demurring to answer, or delaying the assurance of remission, notwithstanding of
our prayer, he is not to be deemed severe, nor imputed unjust, but in his
seeming greatest rejectment of thy petitions, Psa. 143 2.
let Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord, be the burden of thy
devotion.

Forgive: As it eyes our selves, in this Prayer is not limited to the strict
sense of the word forgive, but has a greater latitude, evincing sorrow,
confession, inability.

1. Sorrow for our wantonness. Luke 15 21
The debts our fathers left us, are great and many, but how prodigiously
prodigal have we been in spending that little, nature by them gave us; defacing
Gods Image so much the more earnestly, Amos 7. 2
by how much we have acted against the principles and light of a natural
conscience?

This Petition says, Ier. 15 10
Woe is me my mother, thou have born me a man of strife, of a hard heart, yet
harder by custom; of loose principles, yet more loose by obstinance; distant
from God, yet further off by rebellion; deformed by sin, but more monstrous by
delighting in ungodliness. Woe is me, calls the Prophet; Be merciful to me,
calls the Psalmist; O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, Dan. 9 19
calls the relenting penitent.

They say a man is once miserable, if twice rich, and all of us had once
enough, and most of us had more then we have; Adam and we also by receiving
from the devil that which was not necessary, Ambros. lib. 5. de Sacra. c. 4
became a debtor, but Christ has made us free, Abstulit debitum, reddidit
libertatem, bertatem, by paying the debt, restored our privileges, with the
price of his own blood, for which expense, the soul in a holy ingenuity is
angry at sin, and sorrowful for its own miscarriage.

2. Confession of our own loosnesse. By this, Forgive us our debts, we
acknowledge our delinquency; for, Tert. de Orat.
qui petit veniam, delictum confitetur, Petition for, implies confession, and
that includes action of sin: and mark this, it is not debt, but debts,
insin^ating long Bills of Account, for which the word Pardon is used, as if we
should say, do it, or fogive them thoroughly, sensed by per and dona; the
Germains say, Ver^geven, the word Ver incomposition, very much hightning the
sense, and the word Forgive, flowing thence, shows how far, that is, how
infinitely we desire the remission to be extended.

Man has a five-fold act about sin, I mean the impenitent man, Binch. Melli.
Theolog. loc. 12 c. 5.
comprehended in this verse, Laetatur, silet, extenuat, tremitatque laborat.

For does he not delight in it, or boast of it, as did Doeg; or hides and
conceals it, as Cain; or lessens and extenuats it, as Saul; or st^rtles and
desp^irs because of it, Gal. 2. 16
as did Judas; or (though in vain) labors in some unprofitable work, to be rid
of it, as did the Jews? but the Saint takes a far better course, which is this
of confession, complicated with that other superadded grace of forsaking sin,
as did the Prodigal; ^er. Ser. p^r. 60. (...)
true confession in prayer, being ever accompanied with mortification of heart.

In relation to the progress or ingresse of sin, it is observed that it
entered man pep saggestionem Diaboli, Damasc. Ortho. Fid. lib. 4. c. 2^
and nostram liber am admissionem, by the Devils sugestion, and our own
consent; so for sins egresse or removing, there must be the spirits
compunction, with our own assent, that the guilt of it be not imputed by a
cordial rejectment, which cannot be without an open acknowledgment of its
iniquity, and our folly; not only when called upon by Authority, Josh 7 9.
as was Achan, but when goaded unto it by Conscience, Acts 2. 37
meditation, Scripture, or the Spirit, as Peter.

In this word Forgive, there is a general implicit confession of all our sins,
and so pray ye, preventing Satan, who will with a hellish noise, bawl them out
before God, except we our selves say, Chrysostom. Hom. 3. in Mat.
thus and thus have I done, which will remove a thousand sins, yea, millions,
God never refusing the humble soul, how criminous soever; confessing of sin
being an exalting of his Name.

3. Inability for our own release. If a man have Cash, it were both sin and
shame to beg either for composition, or remission; but poor Adam having
nothing, involved in desperate difficulties by ommitting good, committing evil,
is introduced by Jesus, and by him so placed before the Father, that
forgiveness is promised, yea, sworn.

The great Lucifer fell from Heaven, Isa. 14. 12
but could not for all his Angelick nature, recover himself again; he is very
subtle, yet never could invent a proper mean to discharge that debt his sin
contracted. Arrest the dead man, yet cannot he redeem himself; we as dead in
sin, yet alive to suffer, are taught to plead in forma pauperis, Ephesians. 2. 1
or sue out a billa bonorum, being poor, blind, and naked.

What can we do? 1 Ioh. 5^ 18
can we either obtain the Spirit of God, to sin no more? can we believe in his
Son, and fear no more? can we keep our selves from Gods hand, and procure some
time more, Psalm. 49. 7
to shelter us from his wrath? or can we say unto death, we will not be
arrested, to the grave, we will not be imprisoned? For know that death is in
this Petition, and where is there a Pent-house or To-fall until he pass by?

Verily, verily, it is as if a man should flee from a Lion, Amos 5. 19
and a Bear met him; or went into the house, and leaned on the wall, and a
serpent bit him, being one degree beyond the misery of that monster Nero,
Sueton. in vita Nero.
who in desperate rage cried out at his death, nec amicum nec inimicum habes,
have I no friend to help me, nor enemy to kill me, for of ^oes we shall have
legions; Aug. Ser. 126. de Tem. lb. Enchirid. ad Laur. c. 30
and though we strugle from one or two, solvi in Gaehenna necesse est, we must
begin payment of our debts in hell. And quid boni operari potest perditus, what
can the damned wretch do?

All which should make us eye Heaven, there being an Advocat and a Cautioner,
that cares for us both, for debts contracted, and sin we shall be tempted unto,
or may fall in, represented in the parable of the good Samaritan, Luke 10. 35
who promised to repay what was to be disbursed for the cure of the wounded
Traveller, the very inclinations and tendencies toward sin, being by his
mediation often impeded; and to the penitent by the same forgiven.

Forgive us our debts, Acts 3. 19
that is above in Court, or then there is no faith; remission of sin is one
Article of our Creed, and we believe it to be done above in the Signet-office
of the great King first, and then passing the Seals, Mat. 26. 28
of the Sacraments in the Church, we lock it up in the Charter-chest, 1 Pet. 3.
21
or Archives of our own conscience, or then there is no joy, 1 Ioh. 5. 20
by applying the fiducial certainty of our sealed pardon, through the Spirits
testimony within us, giving so clear light, that the soul says, Isa. 38. 16
O Lord, by these things men live, and in all these things, is the life of my
spirit, thou have in love to my soul, delivered it from the pit of corruption,
for thou have cast all my sins behind thy back.

Yet because of those gloomy foggs, 1 Ioh. 3. 14
which may arise from the lower ground, or doubting part of the soul, dimming
our sight of such a delectable prospect, as serene and heavenly love; so
bountiful is God, that in legible Characters of our own writing, he leading our
hand, we may have the certainty of his pardon, and his seal affixed unto it in
our own bosom, Act. 7. 60
and by the prospect or spectacle of our sincerity in pardoning the petty debts
or trespasses against us, we do clearly observe they are blotted out which we
have done against him; for thus it is written, Forgive us, as we forgive, or
for we forgive others, giving us thereby Potestas veniae, a power to pardon,
Chry. Ser. 71.
and clothing us with authority, as it were to absolve our selves.

Forgive us our debts as we forgive our debtors.
THE necessity of the ^ondition of pardoning offenses done against Us, if we
would have such forgiven done by us against God, is next to be considered; for
we doing the one, God assures us he shall do the other, Mat. 18. 35
making our measure of charity, the Standart of his bounty; and the power of
limiting or enlarging it, is in our own hands, as we forgive; so that si duri,
if we be hardhearted, harsh, Caiet in textu
or but halfway charitable, or through paced charitable, God is still ^tinted
by our prayer, to our tallies, to our crossings:

As we forgive our debtors, Ep^. 4. 32
is not added here as a reason, forgiveness in him being an act of mercy, and
his forgiveness in Scripture is proposed as a rule to us. Call. 3. 13
It is here only certa condition contingens, a certain condition on our part,
without which God will not seal the counter-part: And though the particle be
illative in Luke, Cyp. in Orat. Dom.
for we forgive, yet it amounts not to a formal reason, but beggs the happy
conclusion of forgiveness from one, Luke 11. 4
that is naturelly good, because, man genuinely morose, can yet forgive his
brother.

Neither is it added as a measure, our forgiveness being finit, whereas his
must be in^nit; neither is it to be understood properly, Aug. lib. 2. de Sermon*
in Monte Dei.
as if we were to forgive pecuniary, or money-matters, for then the shortest
cut to Christianity were to contract debt, and infallible assurance a
concomitant to not craving, which were a whip of knotted cords, once more to
drive buyers and sellers from the Temple.

It is added as an auxiliary band, to help our weakness, being one of the
clearest promises, a writing in Text-hand of holy writ, Mat. 6. 14
the easiest to be read in all Scripture, nothing being clearer then Forgive,
and you shall be forgiven, which in the darkest night of grossest ignorance is
fairly legible.

It points also at the verity and quality of our forgiveness, and intimats our
desire to be, that God would as heartily and speedily forgive us, as we do
others, a duty necessary to be done upon many accounts: meditat upon these ^ew,

1. From the iteration of it, Mat. 6. 14
for it is pressed and doubled. This relating to forgiveness, is the only
Petition our Savior takes a review of, after he has closed this prayer,
en^orcing afresh the duties of amity and concord, under the penalty of divine
displeasure; therefore as Pharaohs dream, Genesis 41. 32
this is doubled, showing the necessity of our forgiving, or the certainty that
he will not.

As at the creation, there was a survey of all works, Genesis 1. 31
and in that were found to be good, so here there is a reflection upon all the
parts of prayer, and this petition urged, and repeated chiefly, because of
wickedness and surlinesse; it is said by such as are conversan^ about
children, that they are longest in learning and pronouncing this part of
prayer; and is it not evident that morally men can hardly, yea, not without
great difficulty learn it, and therefore here pressed again and again? And
sure, where God sets up candles, it is for some work, and when he calls us to
double our guards, it is to prevent some dangerous surprise.

This pray^^ knocking down the surious bulls of enruged lust, thirsting after
revenge in brawny, yea, horny madness, commands us in slanders, Luke 32. 34
in injuries, to remember Stephens charity, David's sasting, and our Lords (to
his Father) call for mercy, and fight against evil suggestions, oppose sinful
desires, and crucify the lusts of the flesh, that the soul of man may live
quietly at home. Chrysostom. Hom. in Ps. 142


Teleclus a King in Laconia, being complained unto by his Brother, concerning
the peoples disrespect of him, though a Prince, causa est inquit Rex, it is
because (said the King) thou can not put up an injury; Plutarch Apotheg
and if stinging men complain to God or man, for neglect, intending revenge,
wise men, as God, will advise to forgiveness, upon which honor shall attend
him at the long run.

2. From the opposite vice which is condemned and judged; morosity,
doggednesse, snarling and scowling, is already condemned, in the rever^ing of
that Decree given by the Lord in the Parable of the Talents, Mat. 18. 23
where the cruel Creditor that had no mercy on his debtor, ^ound no compassion,
but more severe condemnation from his justly incensed Master.

Should God challenge to a duel or combat, all who give him the lie, there
should be no man to tell truth? Should he in thunderbolts smite him upon the
cheek-bone, who flouts and jeers at his preceptive will, Psalm. 3. 7
the fairest face would be bruised? Should he kick the ranting Belshazzers ou^
of the world, or spurn a churlish Nabal, when calumniat for his laws of
temperance, and bounty, where would there be men? etc. But since the Cow of the
wicked calveth, Job 21. 10
and casts not her Calf, and the Sun shines, and the rain falls upon their
houses and fields, he is more then blind, who perceives not Gods abhorrency of
rendering evil for evil, yea, of not for evil good.

Christianity is so denominat from Christ, Acts. 10. 38
and the Christian being oblidged to walk as he walked, he is to go about doing
good, healing the very ear of a Malchus, Boskier. Terror. Orb. in Concion. 27
and though reviled, answered not again; as he is called a Ciceronian, who
imitats a Cicero in his style, not otherwise, so he is not to be termed
Christian, who gives his tongue to evil speaking, his heart or hand to
revengeful re-acting, that being contrary both to the practice and command of
Jesus. Mat. 27. 14


Behold nature her self, and this hare-brain'd f^llow is condemned; should the
pile of grass wither when trod upon, or every excessive heat creat a fever in
the body? or should the heavens thunder at every overclouding, what ^^ights
would be in the world? As Chirurgions have unguentum Basilicon to cause matter,
Edwards Analys. of Chirurg:
so they have Apostolicum to cleanse the wound, Album to expel the heat, and
Desi^^^tiu^m rubrum to dry and skin it: As there are provocations to choler,
so there are Gospel documents, which as spiritual Artists we must have ever in
readiness, to apply to the place affected for curing, as proper medicaments,
for the souls ease.

That advice of one Philosopher is good, that when Epict. E^eh. c. 48
any reports thee to have been sl^ndred, say thy adversary knew not all they
vices, or then he had not spoke ^o little; and though the world talk of honor
and courage, magni animi est injurius despicere. It is the symptom of a large
and noble soul, to despise contempt, Senec. de Ira. lib. 2. ^. 32^
or disdain revenge, said another Philosopher, albeit he knew not, (at least
prosessed not) the Gospel, nor perchance ever saw that of the wise King, he
that is slow to anger, Prove. 16. 32
is better then the mighty, and he that rules his spirit, then he that takes
a city* for he sub dueth himself, and possesses himself, the greatest virtue
among morals. Ca^et. in loc.


It was among the Scythians a mark of insamy, Floyds Mar^. of Hist. c. 19
and dishonesty, if any man had not killed some man, where this b^dge was put
upon innocence among Barbarians; how mutually would they go about, and prey
upon one another, to purchase reputation; but good men, detesting the
procurements of such honor, entails same upon themselves and their successors,
by their warrinesse of goring their conscience, imputing it grandour, to be
afraid of sin, and reputation, to walk without offending God.

In that Dialogue betwixt Philosophy and her Beloved, Boe^lus de Consol. lib.
1* Pros. 4
it was held as a sound advice in point of calmnesse of spirit, of one Canius,
who being informed of a conspiracy against himself, answered, if I had known
it, I had not told it you: Not to press this on all four, or every way,
Christianity discharges credulity to slanderous reports, orders a check and no
more to be owing the relater.

Moses the meekest man of the earth, could bear personal calumny, and before
him Isaac only pleaded, but scolded not for his wells; and after them Paul
wished no more hurt to his ^oes, Act. 26. 29.
but that they were as himself in every thing, his bonds excepted.

It is true these Diamonds had their flaws, these Pomgranats their rotten
kernels; David curses, Judge. 16 30
and Sampson prays for the ruin of the Philistines, yet these Prophetic
impulses are not to be the ordinary Standart of our converse with men; for
Paul, though sharp to Elymas, prayed over the Jailer, as though he had never
scourged him; he gave place to wrath, and advises like a good Preacher, a good
practitioner, to be followers of him, as he follows Christ, Boskier ut s^pra:
who is maxim imitabilis, most to be followed, 1. For piety: 2. For zeal: 3.
For humility: 4. For patient suffering.

3. From the obstruction the contrary vice bears to goodness, that being by it
hindered. Sullenness and rancour impeding prayer from having entrance into the
ear^ of Heaven, the Laws whereof requiring prayer to be ma^e every where
without wrath, (...) Tim. 2. 8
implying frequency in that duty, and composedness of mind at it, evidenceth
this conclusion, bottomed upon infallible verity; for if Family-contentions
prove obstacles to Family-duty, shall not that particular Petition be doomed by
men, to be condemned by God, whose flames are excited by the billows of fury, 1
Pet. 3. 7
envy, hatred and passion, and not by those of the Sanctuary charity, love and
concord?

The same is to be said of Sacraments, spleen hindering thereby spiritual
influx, (...) how can they be beneficial to him, Mat 5. 25
who not only is not injured, but himself by ill-wishing is injurious to his
brother? Not to reflect, it is to be feared many of our supplications, Author
Imperf. oper. in Matthew. Hom. 14
because of this vanishes into air, and Sermons become unprofitable because of
this unfruitful work of darkness: malice, for (...) home, Chry. Ser. 67
understand Reader, the Basis, or Groundstone of Gods forgiveness is fixed
only on the ground of thy brotherly forgiving.

And in spiritural conflicts allow hatred to plead its old supposed plea, Aug.
de Conflict, Virtu^m and vitior. c. 7
viz, Love not him who walk's contrary to thee, who derogats from thee, who
complains of thee, and insults over thee? Let love reply, That the love of
Christ constrains me, Greg. Pastor. lib. Cur. 3^. part c. 23 Landuls^ Cart.
and that quam diu, so long as I keep at distance from man, in point of
charity, so long detain I from my self the good of all my sacrifices, and make
my prayers, yea, the praying of this Prayer do me more hurt then good, so much
the more as this command is easy. Meditat. vitae Christi.


I am prone to conjecture, should Christ have said, Fast, pray, read, fight,
kill, burn, and lie, and be forgiven, there are in this age had embraced the
doctrine; but to forgive, is durus sermo, an hard saying, and cannot be
digested.

It were some excuse if any lived and transgressed not, Iam. 3. 2
for in many things we offend all; and as a stone cast into the water creats a
circle, and that another, and a broader; so anger, if tolerat, will naturally
kindle a fire in one man's breast, which shall blow up another into a flame,
which may endanger an house, and that a street, and that a town, and therefore
happy is he first stifles it in the hearth of his own bosom, Prove. 17 14
lest by its heating, the flesh of another be scorched, in his re-offending, or
tart replying.

There was a breach made of the Kings peace in the Kings own house, after the
cruel servant had imprisoned his fellow for an hundred pence, that is, in our
coin, three pound two shillings sterling, Bunt. I^^^nerar. Scripturae.
when his Lord had forgiven him ten thousand talents, which in our vulgar
account is eighteen thousand seven hundred and fifty pounds sterling, six
thousand times more then was owing him; yet charged upon him afresh, though
poor, for not having mercy upon his debtor, when humble.

The stormiest man in his age it seems was Celius, who was so testy, though an
Orator, that at his own Table he avoided peace, and there meeting one for
patience, was offended, checking his guest, Senec. de Ira, lib. 3. c. 8.
with an aliquid contradict, oppose me in something, that we may discourse, as
if quietness and calmnesse in conferring, had made his Table solitary; yet
there are who give better rules about converse, recommending, if our company be
better then our selves, to learn; if inferior, to be modest and learn them; if
our equals, to assent to all proposals that relate to good, which eminently
will keep alive charity in Families and Corporations, without which virtue,
neither of them can even in the brain of a learned Statesman, Moors Utopia,
lib. 2. c. 7
be fancied to subsist, so great is the power even of a fancied Amnestia, or
brotherly forgiveness.

It was the wonder of a Father, writing to an holy man from Mount Sinai, Greg.
Epist. lib. 8. Epist. 45
that he was not moved, irritated, perplexed, or any way afflicted with the
reproaches of men; and forgive Us, is not meant Us here, but Us all,
wheresoever we be, whatsoever we are; Us predicats of all people, kinds,
nations, sexes, languages, and proclaiming every soul to be a sinner, all
should be tender, and make, as God, the scarlet- offenses of their brother,
Chrysostom. Hom. 25 ad Pop. Antioch.
to become by their forgiveness white as wool, that God by his, may make their
crimson-sins become as snow.

Revenge flows from a conceit of some abused excellency which we conjecture to
be in our selves, and though it were, yet know that self, and self-opinion is
to be mortified: In order to which, let me impresse a story printed by a
Modern, expounding this Petition, wherein he shows, he was once demanded by one
who was troubled in his mind for this, Page on the L. P.
viz. he suspected himself guilty of not forgiving injuries and affronts, and
was desirous to know of this clause, as we forgive our debtors, might be
ommitted in daily prayer, for he trembled to think of it. I answered him, says
that reverend and learned Doctor, with St. Chrysostoms answer: (The work was of
old thought his, but now generally known by the name of Author Imperfect. Hom.
14
in Matthew. he not ending his Comments upon Matthew, as Chrysostom does.) 1.
Qui non sic orat ut Christus docuit, non est Christi Discipulus, he who prays
not after Christ's manner, is none of Christ's Disciples. 2. Non exaudit Pater
orationem nisi quam Filius dictaverit, the Father hears not that Prayer which
the Son has not commanded: Which answer was somewhat more refined then that
supposed Father his Author gave it; for it is prefaced with this word stulti, O
fools, accounting them such who will not say, as I forgive; yea, such do say in
their heart either that there is no God, or that they have no sin, which if
they thought they had, Stella in Luc. c. 6. 37.
Nullam rationem habes, there is no reason to complain of man's rising up
against thee, when thou have exalted thy horn against God.

It is not with the soul of man as it is with the setting of the Sun, that
prognosticating a fair morning if there be a red cloud; for he that would arise
and wake in mercy, (and who knows how soon he may fall asleep) must not ly down
with execration, for so did not Christ, whose doctrine, as well as profession
or name, thou must take upon thee, or then in vain are all thy pretenses to
Religion, and thy usurping the empty title, without the substance of it, Aug.
de vita Christia. c. 1.
Love, evidenceth that not the being, but being thought a Christian, is all thy
care.

Death and sickness humble us, and at that time chiefly we are to ask, Glos.
Ord. in Text.
what an Expositor says we here beg, that is, Spiritum scientiae, wisdom to
know our offenses against God, which when acquired, the offenses against our
selves shall never be weighed in the balance. Lemn de oc^ultis not. l. 2. c. 3.
It is said the scobs or powder of a man's scull, is sovereign for curing the
Epilepsie, a disease strongly vitiating, and impeding the sense and
understanding; sure it is, as when Bees fight, the throwing dust among them,
causes a truce, so the thoughts of death is a season for the absolute crossing
the day-book of our remembrance, and quitting to our brother, whatever upon the
account of injury he is indebted to us, suddenly, heartily, freely, which shall
so clear the soul, in beholding his own remission therein, that without
tergiversation or lingering, he may confidently say, Lord, forgive me my debts,
as, or, for I forgive my debtors.

As the tree falls so it lies, whether to the south, the warm gates of mercy,
or to the north, the freezing blasts of provoked indignation; to ly down in
wrath, anger, spite, is to begin a fire, yea, wild fire, that shall never
consume, yet burn, and make thee feel what Guntherus Chancellor to Henry the
third Emperor saw and heard, Mag^iburg. Hist. Cent. 11. c. 13
when beholding miraculously the Heavens opened, and God in his Majesty
extending his Arm, wherein was brandished a sword, and saying, I will render
vengeance to my enemies, and will reward them that hate me; after which many
Princes of the Empire dying, he saw God again, the sword sheathed, and heard a
fire is kindled in mine anger, and shall burn unto the lowest hell; hereby we
know we love God, if we keep this command of forgiveness, but if we as enemies
kindle a fire in our wrath, there is a sad conclusion to be deduced, which is,
that God shall kindle another in his.

And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.
MAny are the inferences might be drawn from this Doctrine and Text of
forgiveness, so principal a point, and so material, that it is the only
Petition in this Prayer observed by St. Mark in his Gospel, he, suo more
comprehendit, abridging, after his usual way of writing, Jerome in Mar. c. 11 25
the whole Prayer into this one, in regard whosoever has it granted, has not much
more to demand, save grace for perseverance in the consolations which by that
he has attained: Eras. Adag. Chil. 5. Cent. 1. 46
so that this may be reckoned inter preces armatas, among commanding prayers,
by it asking forgiveness, but with this burden, that we forgive first: The
advice being King-like, enforcing the thing advised.

Our meditations shall eye such as go to Law; toward Magistrates that put
malefactors to death; toward Creditors that do trust and lend; and touching
dying Malefactors, who do ordinarily forgive.

Concerning the first, it may be questioned whether such as pursue by legal
decreets or executions, 1 Cor. 6. 1
the reparation of damnages, losses, hurt they have received from the
frowardness or untowardness of their neighbors, can say in such pursuits and
claims, Forgive us as we forgive, or, for we forgive; the whole process bearing
a contradiction to this Petition; hence it is, that Anabaptists and other
Heretics, revived this old condemned Doctrine in our days, that no Christian
ought to go to Law, and that none ought to be a Magistrate.

To which it may both truly and briefly be replied, Ezra 7 25
that it is not only lawful, but absolutely necessary (since the fall) for the
preserving of mankind in orderly society, for to have Laws and Government,
whereunto the oppressed may run for shelter and protection.

As for those abused Texts, Judge not that you be not judged: Resist not evil:
My Kingdom is not of this world, etc. They strike not in the least against
Magistracy, Featleys Dippers dipped, page 142.
but private revenge, malice, ambition, which were sins also under the Law,
under which they approve of Magistracy, and now under the Gospel there is a
necessity of Officers and Judges, the old abominations, enormities, disorders
through natural corruption, being even under the Gospel daily breaking forth.

Christ himself paid tribute to Caesar, and Paul appealed to him, and
complained to Lysias of a conspiracy against him, Act. 23. 17
yea, pleaded his cause and innocence without reflecting or exclaiming against
Courts of Judicature. Good Kings in the Old Testament are famed for their
Judgment, and our Savior in the New, mentions of Judges, Officers, and of
Prisons, Mat. 5. 25
even while he is establishing the Doctrine of the Gospel, and gives no hint to
their abolishing under it.

In short, the Magistrate being appointed to punish evil doers, Romans 13 4
prevent consusion, and maintain good works, we may complain to him of theft,
murder, etc. and yet say this prayer. Always distinguishing betwixt the
Offense and the Damage, the offense we are called to pardon, Pro. 6. 30
but not the loss, which may be a man's whole substance; again differencing the
public from my private capacity, a personal contumely I am to answer with
silence, or a soft reply; but if my friend be murdered, Number. 35. 19
or maimed, the malefactor is to be accused, that wickedness be restrained,
that if possible all the world may see that calm, Simler. de Repub. Helvet.
lib. 2
which Helvetia, both really and proverbially heard of, and had in it, viz,
that if any man had wedges of gold hanging at his staffes end over his
shoulder, huic licere tuto per Helvetiam iter facere, he might travel in
security throughout the country. This being the end of the Law, it may be
repaired unto, observing these few rules,

1. If it be the last refuge, this checks the Baratour. Mat. 18. 16
It is here as in Church Discipline, tell it not the judge at first: a plaster
of Cantarides is not to be applied for every small it ching of the blood, Mat.
5. 40
nor the Bar to be run unto for every trifle, least the remedy be worse then
the disease.

From the clamours of others, of this lawing it may be attested, what Solomon
says of the strange woman, go not first to it, least strangers be filled with
thy wealth. Prove. 5. 10
Which Ghilon the wise reflected upon, in his precepts written afterward in
letters of gold, at Delphos Oracle; they being. 1. Know thy self. 2. Covet not
much: The 3. was Aeris alieni; shun debt and the law.

All which, how applicable to this Text, is easy to apprehend, and profitable
to observe; adding to it that of Artimidorus, Of Dreams lib. 2
that the very dreaming of Judges, of Attourneys, signifies trouble and anger.

2. If it be done in all simplicity, this reproves the cheater, plain-dealing
becomes a court of judgment, Psa. 93. 5
as holiness does Gods house, to enter thy process with salse evidences, fly
conveyances, whereby an unjust suite is bumbasted (as Tailors do the garments
of crooked Customers,) and made to appear straight and good, may cause the
pursuer to seed with Pharaohs fat Kine in a meadow; Genesis 41. 30
but God the avenger of all defrauded, shall have them so consumed, that their
riches shall not be seen or known, and illegitimat in his own way such tricks,
such forged evidences, Job 20. 15
such extorted and cunning interpretations of the Law.

3. If it be done in all charity; this blames the hater. To stand at the bar
without bowels of mercy, and with teeth and nails to destroy and tear, is toto
Coelo different from that paciflck disposition, required in this prayer, 1 Cor.
16. 14
and that little is done among us in charity, is evident from our numerous
suits; Joseph's brethren hated him without a cause, so we ours, and power
failing us, to parallel the Patriarchs, we sell our brother to a pettey-fogger.

4. If it be done out of necessity, 1 Kings 3. 23
this is to shame the trifler. Some are like the bees, bumming at the first
approach of the term or Session, and thrusting out their stings if men but
over-shadow them. Fullers Holy war lib. 3. c. 13.
Henry the sixth Emperor, for his tawing nature, was surnamed Asper, and
wanted but one degree of a tyrant; these men are so nettly, that a sew grains
more of perverseness would rob them of the name man, having already laid aside
so much humanity, as makes them to act, merely to please themselves, without
pity or compassion toward others; Genesis 16. 12
and like Ishmael, becoming wild men, irritats themselves by themselves (as the
Lion is said to anger himself before fight, by beating his sides with his
tail,) are brought unto that unhappiness, as to be incapacitate to enquire any
thing touching the for givenesse of their sins, being convinced in themselves,
that they remit not the enormities, or supposed transgressions of others.

5. If it be done in all humility, 2 Samuel 19. 30
this discovers the murmurer. The Law is a Lottery, and he who has the
sentence of it against him, is to acquiesce in the judgment, even though
oppressed, committing his cause to him who judges rightously; and who will
sometimes blind the eyes of a judge, to punish by an unjust sentence, him, who
has formerly been consenting to an unjust act, etc.

Socrates being kicked and spurned at by a profligat and impure youth, Plut. de
lib. Edu. cand. lib.
was in indignation by the beholders desired to accuse him publicly, but what,
said he? should I, if an Ass strick me, fling at the Ass again? No: yet this
was not all the ranter had, for being houted at by the people for such an
unworthy deed, and nick-namaed Calcitronem, the kicker, for grief he hanged
himself.

Let it be below thy spirit, to accost a judge, or salute the bar for every
disingenuous act, and remembering (as one said of Philosophy) in all things that
thou art a Christian, Epictet. Enchir. c. 30
and then shall Christ the Judge reward thee, by rectifying the abuse, when
thou art patient, but if with Patacion thou make a gain of quarrels of thy own
raising, or with Eurymnus thou strive to seperat even Castor and Pollux (i. e.)
Textor. Officin. lib. 5. c. 29.
dear Brethren, or with Euristenes and Procles two Brothers, thou only fight
and law it thy self contentiously, but at death recommend the contest to thy
heirs, thou shall have a reward, but not of glory, that being the Bravium of
the patient sufferer, the very hopes of which shall do thy Honor and thy
Estate good; but however, thy conscience shall be benefited thereby: for as
that King was no fool, who highly applauded that answer of the Augur, Lycost.
Apoph. de lite.
when demanded what was best for the eyesight? which was, seldom to see a
Lawyer; so to thy experience, shall thou perceive good to attend thy not
attending at the Courts, but if compulsion give thee a call, observing the
forementioned rules, thou may enter thy suite, and say, forgive us, as we
forgive, etc.

In the next place, if it be demanded whether Magistrates, Ezra. 7. 25
in punishing delinquents by death, Confiscation, Mulct, or Mutilation, can
with a safe conscience offer up this Petition; it is answered in the
affirmative, they can.

The word shows his duty, being compounded of magis and ter, having a
threefold duty over and among the people, he being to govern them, to pray for
them, and to correct them when offending; for which end God appointed swords,
burning, scourging, according to the merit of the cause: God win. Moses and
Aaron lib. 5. c. 7.
and the Jews have a rule, when the Scripture says of an offender, morte
plectitur, he shall die, or be put to death, without mentioning the particular
kind, strangling is to be understood, judging that to be the easiest, so that a
Magistrate being tender in executing the sinner, he does but his duty, and
transgresses not this rule of prayer.

Were authority of this nature revoked, Heb. 13. 4
why* soth the Gospel mention of bearing a sword, without reproos, for having
that, he would be no more feared by evil doers, if he durst not strick, then is
a George on horseback upon a half-crown; the sword, the Magistrates bearing, is
no Romantic, Genesis 9. 6.
or Pageantry, but really to shed blood, which is according to Divine Law in
the Old Testament in infinite places, according to the New; yea, from the very
Law of nature, (which appointed death for criminals, and particularly death was
by heathens thought deserved for adultery) might be made application to
Magistracy. Charion. Chronic. lib. 2


And though there be many instances, of Worthies, who have declined authority
and power, from its difficulty, molestation, yet it cannot be found of any, who
threw it off as sinful; and though ease plead for exemption, Pars. 1. Janii
policar. Quest. 7.
yet God has appointed ut sit vindex, Magistracy to be a terror against, and
a punisher of evil works, and the want of it is a plague and judgment to a
Nation: Imo sine imperio, and without government, nec domus, nec gens, neither
house nor kingdom could subfist.

But it would be ruminated, lthat he punishing by virtue of authority and
place, ought not to expectorat, rancour, choler, or upbraid his prisoner with
any misdemeanour personally committed against himself, for that would bear the
impresse of revenge, not justice, and creat contest in the sentenced, being
doubtfully carried, whether to defend his sin, or patiently submitt; Lips.
Civil. Doct. lib. 2. c. 12.
since not the Law, but splean becomes his accuser: and parcere afflictis, to
pity the miserable, is required in a judge. Hence the last clause of the
condemning speech of the British judges is, and the Lord have mercy upon your
souls.

Justice, according to the Heralds Art, bears in a Field Jupiter a pair of
balances, Luna intimating vigilance in service, Leigh. Acc^d.
and courtesy with discretion, but the religious practice of Nicias the
Heathen, would also be reflected upon, and prayer daily made to God for the
good of the Commonwealth, Plut. in vita,
and that his prayers may prosper who punishes the wicked, discreet, courteous
and religious, must his behavior be, there being three things in the opinion
of a Statist, Pascal. Aulic. Politic. Reg. 135
deterring from vice, viz. Religio, Pudor, and Paena, Religion, Shame, and
Smart; this last, as more felt, is caetoris duabus firmius, more binding then
the other tow, and therefore to be applied; but where Religion and modesty
attends the Judge, it will certainly be more pungent, and the offender the more
ashamed of his misdeeds, and the Magistrate better qualified to say, Forgive us,
for we forgive; and though he be rewarded with calumny and hatred (as who can
be high but he shall be blown upon) yet this being the general reward of
unstained integrity, land hardly possible to be avoided, Guicciard. Hypom.
Politic. Hypo. 57
since Subditi sine severitate malitia eorum ita exigente, it is severity, best
rules, land keeps most in order in the judgment of another skilled in
politics. As God, whose place he bears, let him be fixed in his own virtuous
intentions, persevering in ruling though wickedness show its teeth,
confidering that as it is written, (not to say dreamed) that to dream of being
Provost or Bailiff, Mayor or Alderman, betokens suture Anger and trouble: so
to be either of them may make this a Prophetic Revelation; yet since God
himself pleases not all, nor Solomon escaped not the censure of oppression,
nor Jesus the name of a Devil: 1 Kings 12. 4.
be patient under the greatest obloquy, and faithful in dispensing the
authority entrusted; for care, the conscientious shall habe a Crown; and for
trouble, Josh. 24 29
rest in glory. Yet with Venerius a Duke of Venice, Histor. Marcel. de Venetor
ducib.
to study by goodness to conciliat love, may creat even honor and respect on
earth with all ingenuous.

How Creditors should behave toward their debtors, is next to be considered,
and without much scrutiny, it may be declared that they may pray this Petition,
yet crave their debts: The good Samaritan in the Parable, paid the Reckoning
for his Guef^^nd the Prophet in the Story, 2 kings 4. 2
gave no order to the Widow to pray, but showed her the means how to pay her
Creditor.

A^ there are diversity of debts, so there are great difference in and among
Creditors, one may be able and unwilling, the Law may be pressed upon him;
another is willing, but unable, he has often promised upon hopes, but cannot pay
it through want; the breach of that pronise, Aug. lib. 2. de Ser in Monte Dei
in the judgment of a Father must be forgiven, for Peccat namque in te, he
wrongs thee in promising; forgive him that wrong, or then this prayer cannot be
offered.

A poor and honest Debtor, who has it not to pay, though he should be sold lto
satisfy thy lent favor, puzleth and perplexeth the merciful and humane; for
what shall be done? he cannot give it, nor get it for thee; it is at this
point, because thou have lost thy money, he a servant of the great God, and of
our Lord Jesus Christ, must die, or as the phrase is, rot in prison, which is
but poor payment, beggarly satisfaction, and nothing increasing thy substance.

But what shall be sone? I do not say his debts are to be forgiven, but this
from Scripture may be said, that he is not to be thus straightened, but the other
ot wait the bettering of his fortune, and turn his, He will never be able to
pay me, Deuteronomy. 1. 2
unto a May be he will, or to a May be God shall, who shows mercy to the
merciful, who has in relation to the (...) made but two exceptions, Huish on
the L. P. Lect. 15
either when he was a forraingner, or able to pay; for if he were poor, and of
Israel, he was to be supplied; and doubtless the bond of Christianity is as
near a tie to us, las kindred was unto the Jew. To close this, it may be added,
we are to do good, and lend, hoping for nothing again, that is, says one,
forgive our debtors; Luk 6 35
that is, say I, when they have nothing to pay.

But since no man can forgive sins but God, how is it that this Petiton
insinuats man to have the authority so to do, Mark 2 7
in so high a measure, that he makes it his argument, for God to forgive him
his sins, because he has forgiven those against himself? It is evident to give
a short reply, that this duty of forgiveness, as relating to man, Romans 12 19
is frequently pressed in holy Scripture, and commanded, and therefore he has
both power to do it, and it is just so to do.

In every trespass there are two offenses, and consequently two offended,
Alsted Theol. Carech. Sect. 3. c. 20
God and Man: As it eyes God, it is called a sin, which he can only forgive; as
it eyes Man, it is called an injury; and in that sense men may, must, and ought
to forgive it. Ita si spolietur homo, a man is robbed, here is theft, a sin
against God; a loss sustained, here is a trespass against man; the first, God
only can pardon; man the other. Trespass is thought to come from Trans and
passus, as if to offend were to go over the hedge of the Law, which when done,
Ergo pro me, and proximus pro se, I for my self, and my neighobour for his
self, lcan forgive, and Preachers of the Gospel can forgive that is,
Ministerially, but to do it Authoritatively, is proper only to God, and to do
it charitably, common to all, and required of all.

Phocion that famous Greek, Plut. Apopl^ in Pho.
being unjustly, and by execrable ingratitude, condemned to die by poison, was
demanded if he had any fatherly advice to leave his son, gave this, that his
death should never be revenged by him upon the Athenians: here is a Heathen,
showing us how to pardon, and how to distinguish Gods act and man's, in this
virtue of remitting. Yet have a care that they be they own debts which thou
remittest, not acting the part of a busiebody in other men's matters, whereunto
thou art not called, Phil. 10.
or related: Paul (who had much charity) yet did not give, but beg forgiveness
of Philemon for his run-away-servant.

The last reflection is touching Malefactors, of whom it may be enquired,
whether when at the place of Execution, we hear them forgive their Judges,
Accusers, Apprehenders, we may conclude Gods remitting unto them the sin for
which they die?

Most certain it is, that these words are added as a rule, and afterward added
as a precept, and here urged as a reason why God should forgive us; Mat. 6. 12.
implying in all, Mark 6. 4
that forgiveness is blessed with forgiveness, and God will never be wanting
to the execution, impoletion, or fulfilling of his own promise. It is true,
forgiving in a perfunctory, heedlesse, or heartless way, or for some friend
whom we love or respect, or for hope of some advantage, or fear of greater
mischief, or out of a lumpish, dedolent, and stupid way, it cannot have much
weight.

But contrary, if it flow from a fruit of that Spirit which works repentance
for his sin against God, and dewed with the tears of contrition for the same,
and pardoning man thereupon, for his concurrence in apprehending for condign
punishment. Harwood on the L. P.
Let me see such a thief, and to die to day, says one, and I dare say, that
this night he shall be with Christ in Paradise.

Reader, 1 Samuel 15. 15.
suffer a word of exhortation: And, 1. Smooth not thy debts. It were a foolish
thing to extenuat and conceal them, when forgiving will pay them all: Hell
cannot be washed with Spanish white, Psalm. 25. 11
neither will God suffer sin to go apparelled in Silver Cloth; say with David,
pardon mine iniquity for it is great.

Praying here for the imputation of Christ's righteousness, and against the
imputation of our own offenses, Alsted. O^ supra.
both quoad culpam and paoenam, as to their guilt and punishment, it were an
improsperous course, to sue a pardon from their paucity, or smalnesse, from him
especially who accepts us most heartily, when we conclude our condition most
desperate.

2. Clear not thy debts. Notwithstanding of asking, cross not presently thy
conscience, as if thy business were immediately done; Ioh. 16 27
who has a suit at Court, must wait until his Petition be signed, and by the
Master of Requests returned.

3. Curse not thy self. There is in this Prayer a mercy said to be given to thy
brother, if there be a lie, here is a fearful execration against thy self,
says thou not, Forgive as I forgive? Now beware and take heed, Chry. Ser. 68
for etiam per quod orat accusat, thou art accusing thy self, saying, Lord, as
I purpose never to forget this injury, to revenge this loss, so revenge thy
self upon me for ever, and forgive me as I forgive others: ^b. Ser. 7^
therefore quantum velis, or quaris, as much mercy as thou wishes or desires to
thy self, show to thy brother: For, mark, here is one word copulative, not in
the Prayer before; and after which follows, Chemn, in Orat, Dom.
Forgive us as we forgive, showing that with the same earnestness wherewith we
are carried to seek after the things of this life as daily bread, or that
other, as remission of sin, we have already pardoned our brother; Authon
Impers. in text*
I say, already, for God will trust neither our promises, nor our charity, but
will have us be reconciled to our Brother before we come to him for
reconciliation, otherwise our supplications are so much the more damnable, as
the condition upon which they stand is the more feasible; Valerian Hom. 9.
for, scio sane and sine difficultate, said a Father, pressing charity, that
command may without difficulty be obeyed, where nothing is commanded but what
is within the possibility of the party enjoined.

The reciprocal offices of Husband and Wife, Job 2. 9 and Job 4^. 13
Parents and Children, Master and Servant, Neighbor and Kins-man, can hardly
be performed without flaws and ruptures, quarrels, debates and breaches, which
by amity must be filled, and ended again by a proceeding in the duties, and
making progress in the offices answering those relations, where the trespass at
least destroys not the relation, as that of Adultery in the case of Marriage.
In all which si dimiseris, Ambros. lib. 5. de Sacra, c. 4
if thou forgive the injuries committed against thee, it is comely, and it does
become thy Father in Heaven; to forgive thee thy sins committed against him.

Thy sins, though as was David's, they be great, Psa. 139 19
that is, in number more then the sand, in weight as a heavy burden, Psalm. 38 4
great in cry, reaching up to Heaven in continuance, for they have endured
since thy mother conceived thee in her womb; Psalm. 51 5
yet he can scatter them as a cloud, B^ker Disquis. on L P.
and cause them to flee away.

To flee away, but in his own due time, he may be angry at the prayers of his
people, yea, at our prayers, and may order this dropping Summer to lay our
Feathers, wash our Paint, and make our strength to fail, yet continue saying,
Forgive us our debts, and be assured to hear, Thine inlquity is done away, etc.

Let this suffice for the matter of this Petition, the method and order thereof
follows, which is this,

We have this, and another next, that for our daily bread, indicating that
bread ought not to be so delicious, or any natural delicate to be so zealously
sought for, as those Celestial refreshings, assurance of pardon, and guidance
from, and in, temptation. Moreover, it is apparent that all worldly wealth
contained in the word bread, are frustraneous, and ineffectual for procuring,
or interpreting us to have blessings from God, if unto these remission of our
sin be not annexed, here pleaded for by arguments from the less to the
greater, that our bread, may indeed be bread, and give us strength in our
bodies, and marrow in our bones.

And to close, the sinner is called upon to be humble, he is commanded to
forgive, that he may cleanse his conscience, and promised forgiveness, that he
may live in hope, Hug. Card. in Text.
and with reverence be it said, made, as it were, a god unto himself, his own
conditions being left unto the penitent, to discern what he pleases, God
purposing to do the same, and decree to him, what he appointed to be done to
others. Col. 3. 12
Put on therefore as the elect of God, bowels of mercies, kindness,
humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering, forbearing one another, even as
Christ forgave you, etc.

CHAP. VII.
And lead us not into temptation.
THE Doctrine taught in this Chapter, and in this part of this exact platform
of pertinent Prayer, is with pathetick reasons urged by our Savior upon his
Triumvirat, the chief three Disciples, Peter, James, and John, beholders (as of
his Transfiguration) of his Passion, while in the Garden, where they are roused
in the sense of this Petition, Watch and pray, that ye enter not into
temptation: Mark 14 38
what was there disallowed, viz. slumbring and sleeping, is here provided
against, viz. not being led into temptation. For the attempting the discovery
of the equity of the counsel, and necessity of the duty, we shall speak of the
Matter, then of the Order of this Petition.

In the Matter, these things are manifestly necessary to be discussed, 1. The
nature, kinds, and degrees of temptation. 2. What it is to be led into
temptation. 3. The great evils of being so led. 4. Resolve some questions,
concerning Gods leading men into temptation.

Temptations are either inward, as natural lusts within us, Romans 7. ^8
or outward, as trials brought upon us; and these are either, of probation, for
to prove us, as God is said to tempt Abraham, that is, to try him; or of
Seduction, Genesis 22. 1 (...)
to deceive us, as the Serpent tempted Evah; and are either from the Devil, as
in the same case, or from the Flesh, as was the adultery of David, or from the
world, as was the covetousness of Achab, 1 Kings 21. 16
in the case of Naboths vineyard.

They are said again, to be either on the right hand, when in a ^awning way we
are flattered our of obedience, in hopes of some comfortable reward, Mat. 4 9.
as our Savior was offered the world; and in story, Moses the crown of Egypt:
or on the left, when like the northwind in the Fable, there is hard blowing,
and danger presented in case of refusal, as was the temptation of Job, 2 Cor.
12. 2
and of Paul, who by buffetings of Satan, was frighted (had it been possible,
for it may be literaly understood) from being zealous in the Gospel.

Now we praying in the third Petition, that the will of our Father be done in
earth, as it is in Heaven, temptations from him are not absolutely here prayed
against, but with submission to his will, Mat. 26. 39
as our Savior pleads, the removal of the bitterness of his passion; but such
as lead to deceive, seduce, cheat, or destroys us, are here deprecated against,
as leading to evil, as David did against covetousness.

It would be remembered, Deuteronomy. 8. 2.
that properly God tempts no man, but he is said in Scripture to tempt, Cajen.
in loc.
as he is said to be angry, quia operatur instar irati, when he appears unto
man as if he were angry, thus he led Israel forty years in the wilderness to
prove him, and know what was in his heart; an expression after the manner of
man, putting men to trial, to the touchstone, to know their friendship or
their kindness: But of this afterward.

Lead us not into temptation, Landuls. Cart. Medit. in vir. Christi.
that is, of the flesh, lest we be swallowed up by pleasure; of the world, lest
we be burned by lust; of the Devil, lest with him we be damned for our
iniquity; and this prayed for after, the great concernments of Heaven, in which
our confidence is inwrapt; but in this, our natural infirmity and weakness is
acknowledged; our inability to support our selves being involved, in lead us
not in temptation, Greg. Moral. ^ib. 18. c. 1
Satan not daring to assault us, though he unjustly desire it, but when God for
just causes does allow him; I say, Satan, quia proprium est ejus officium
tentare, Cajet. in Epist. 1 Thessalonians. c. 3
it being his property, nature, and practice to tempt, and seduce to evil,
wicked men but as the serpent, being his instruments.

The word is Peirasmon, whence, it is thought, comes the word Pirat, in regard
tempters do try, whether by force or fraud, by guns or false colors, to search
and betray the party designed into their own power and management, which is so
eminent in Satan, that he is called the Tempter, by all ways and subtility, as
a pirat searching for man's destruction.

So that temptation in its just latitude, Aret. loc. Comm. loc. 115.
is a searching, or trying after something yet to us unknown, for the
commendation or destruction of the party tempted. Here it is to be understood
ad aliquid illicitum, to some unlawful act, Chry. Ser. 72.
that we may be freed therefrom, or from any snare laid by the Devil, world, or
lust, against us: Temptation being that handmaid, in all our habitations
appointed and hired by the Devil, for to open the door of our hearts, when he
knocks, to give us a visit in our quarters.

To detect particularly how each of our enemies, 1 Cor. 2. 11
has his own Art, and peculiar Stratagems adapted for his sly purpose in
courting us to affect unlawful pleasure, or the contrived methods, or each
Anvil he has to compel us into, yea frame us for debauched, and illegal
actings, were too intricat for the quickest apprehension: The world has gold
for an Achan, Josh 7. 21
a Sacrifice for Cain, the Flesh can give an argument for the Stoic, and both
Flesh and the World has a Damsel for Peter, and a Bathsheba for David, 2 Samuel
14. 19.
and for Evah a goodly apple, in all which the hand of the Devil (as of a Ioab)
is evidently seen.

Temptation has generally in it Vision, Attraction, Inescation, the first
stirs up to watchsulnesse, the other discovers weakness, the last excites to
repentance.

1. Vision stirring us up to watchfulness. It presents usually man with
something that is pleasant, Genesis 3. 6
like Rachel, fair to look upon; Evah saw that the tree was good for food,
Judah saw her, and thought she had been an Harlot, Sampson went to Gaza and saw
there an Harlot, Genesis 34. 2
and Schechem saw her, and he took her, and lay with her. Let experience be
interrogat, and there is scarce any imaginable distance between looking upon,
Job. 3^. 1
and liking of sin. Hence Job made a covenant with his eyes, sin being as fatal
as the serpent Aspedigargon, causing the immediate death of him who turns unto
it, which to prevent, in lead us not into temptation, we pray with David, Psa.
139. 37
turn away our eyes from beholding vanity.

We are commanded to flee fornication. Let it be affixed to each sin, 1 Cor. 6.
18
or trespass of this age, and let us say, flee wantonness, flee drunknesse,
flee swearing, flee cursing, flee back-bitting, 1 Timothy 6. 11
flee heart-burning, flee oppressing; for by the eye as by a window, temptation
suffers Satan to enter, and then he finds no difficult task to pick the lock of
the most secret Cabinet, I mean the remotest faculty of the soul, which was
known to that ( as to a sword) undaunted, Eras. Apoph. lib. 4.
(though young) Alexander, he refusing to give frequent visits to Darius
daughters, then his Prisoners, alleading that Persice Puellae, the Persian
Ladies made his eyes sore.

2. Attraction, this discovers weakness. A fish smoothly glyding down the
River, is in safety, but beholding the bait, and turning aside after it, is
ensnared by the hook: Let the Painter Paint as he pleases, I am prone to
suppose, that Evah both went unto the tree, and pluckd the fruit her self: The
foolish youth having seen, Jerome. in Eccl. 10. v. 4.
followed after the strange woman, whereas if that evil one wound us, by a
sinsul thought, we are not to yield, but to fight against that little, to keep
our selves from danger by a greater, which shall besal us, when sinful thinking
grows to sinful doing; which we have not force sufficient to evite, except we
bruise its head as soon as it is conceived.

As children, Eras. Adag. Chil. 1. Cent. 10
having no strength to oppose, runs from what may endanger them, so let us flee
at first sight; yea, the sweeter its voice be, let us make the greater speed,
and it shall be spiritually and morally found, what proverbially is received,
Cyp. in Orat. Dom.
a fleeing man valueth not the Lute: and this Petition bears witness of our
inability for self-defence; yea, experience proves very few ( Jesus Christ
excepted) to have entered into the field of temptation, but came off with loss:
Abraham held out in Mount Moriah, Chrysostom. Hom. 24. in 1 Cor.
yet could lie in Egypt: hence a Father affirms, there are temptations which
we cannot bear; and what are they? Omnes, all: and in truth, without God we can
bear none.

3. Inescation; 2 Kings 4. 40
this ought to stir us to repentance, We will eat of the fruit, and swallow the
broth, though poison be in the one, and death in the other; and sell our
birthright for a dish of either. Theoph. Cont. Calumniat. Christ. Relig. lib.
1. Glos. Ord. in text.
The soul ought, as a mirror or glass, to be kept clean, that in it might
perfectly be viewed the Image of God; but alas! sin has dusted and darkened the
same, and yet we are not sorry, and yet we are not warry, though we say, lead
us not into temptation, that is, given us wisdom to know those evils we are
encompassed with, and not be so sordid as to prefer our lusts to God, a
Concubine to our Savior, or our Catamite to our Heavenly Paradise.

King Lysimachus, besiedged in Thracia, quitted his Army, Plutarch. Apoph. in
Lysin.
his Honor, his Liberty and Kingdom to Dromichata, for a draught of
puddle-water, to quench his thirst, whereof when he tasted, his sad Fate he
thus sadly lamented, O how for how small a pleasure, have I a King, made my
self a servant! The voice of Hell may be imagined to have something in it like
this O for how small a pleasure, having to aggrege their hellish despair, this,
that their was no such necessity for their drinking stolen waters. Prove. 9. 17


To these three, you may add Occasion, awaking us to prayer; neither Devil,
world, nor flesh, Romans 7. 8
dare assault the most Abject among men, if occasion do not fairly invite. The
works of the flesh, though manifest, as Adultery, Murder, Witchcraft, are
more or less brought to the birth, as occasion, the Midwife, is sooner or
later in coming: Orig. de Princip. lib. 3. c. 4
that incitamentum ad malum, in us, corruption, being fearful even to peep
where opportunity is wanting, which that wanton knew, who to assure the simple
youth of all security, told him that the Good Man was not at home, Prove. 7. 10
but was gone a long journey.

An ancient writing to Secundine, whose life was private and solitary, among
other Items of Satan's subtilty, Greg. Epist. lib. 7. Epist. 53
is warned of this, that in the souls private retirements, there shall be, as it
were, visits made by the tempter, and things brought to his mind, and laid
before his eyes, and all to seduce him, in his thinking of, he cannot get him
to perpetrat, ungodliness.

It is written that Joseph was held by the Garment by his Mistress, Genesis 39 11
when none of the men were within, it is said, they were all abroad at a feast,
she having counterfeited sickness, to procure an occasion to satishe her
intemperance; Joseph.
hence one calls temptation an instruction how, and when to sin, we say,
Occasio facit furem, Occasion makes the Thief; it makes also the Murderer,
the Wencher, and the Tipler. Simulque animadvertendum, let it be remembered,
Beda in Lucae 4 Evangel. lib. 1. c. 4.
that until our Savior was hungry, Satan had no occasion to assault him, or
at least most strongly then did attempt him.

I have, said David, remembered they Name, Psalm. 119 55
O Lord, in the night: Tempus tentationum, I think (says a Father) he means in
the time of temptation, Theod. in loc.
when he is encompassed with darkness; take it either way, it intimats in
solitude, God is to be remembered, and contrary thoughts to be expelled from the
soul, imitating Pyrrhus, who being alone, was asked what he was about? I am,
said he, studying to be good.

There is Fabled of a suit commenced betwixt the heart and eye, which were the
causers of sin; and thus it was decided, Cordi causam imputans, occasionem
oculi, the heart was the cause, Weems Vol. 1. of man, c. 3.
but the eye gave the occasion of sin: In short, occasion has so great a hand
in evil, that it is a temptation to evil.

Saint James giving us the degrees of temptation, gives them thus, James 1. 14
Every man is tempted when he is drawn aside of his own lust, and enticed; then
when lust bath conceived, it brings forth sin, which when finished, it
brings forth death. Concupiscence then being the Mother, Sin the Daughter,
and Death the Granddaughter, all issuing from the strength of temptation, set
on by Satan, as he finds our complexions, inclinations pliable to receive the
impression, ought to excite us, and in an holy servour, to draw from us, Lead
us not into temptation.

It is observed, Bed^loe. (...).
that our Savior had three strong temptations in the Wilderness; that there
were three which refused to come to the Supper of the Kings Son; and that there
are three which in the world bear up enmity against God, Luke 14. 18
and in them all, the sight of the eye bears a great stroke, 1 Ioh. 2 16
therefore to be looked after in resisting temptations, against which, to
highten your zeal, consider their unweariednesse, nearness, imperiousness,
appositnesse, and their closnesse.

1. Their unweariednesse. The Devil is still going about, Aug. So. lilo, c. 16
and temptation is never quiet, Et ideo Deus meus, therefore, O God, we ery for
security, (cried one) because whether we sleep or wake, eat or drink, by force
or fraud, secretly or openly, is our watchful enemy directing his poisoned
darts for our destruction; Chry. 77 Sermon. Bern. de diversis Sermon.
which made another cry, that our life was but one temptation; and another
adds, that it is not so one way, but multipliciter illudat, many; here it
affirms, there denies, there it changes its voice, and is ashamed of neither.

2. Their nearness. The greatest engine wherewith Satan endeavors man's ruin,
is man's own heart. It is thought Jobs wife gave him the sharpest and sorest
temptation to despair, Lavater Hom. 11 in Job.
because of her proximity, being indeed (as wives are said to be) his second
self: But what pangs of horror shall he feel? and to what strange extravagancy
may he be tempted unto, whose inbred corruption allures to sinful exploits, and
then to despairing attempts, because of which there is still temptation, or
fear of temptation (which yet must not be differenced from a temptation) in the
soul?

Apollodorus dreaming of captivity among the Scythians, fancied, that they
flayed off his skin, and chopped him in pieccs, and then boiling him in a
Caldron, imagined his heart, ex ipso lebete, out of the furnace cried unto him,
O Apollodours, I am the cause of all this pain and misery thou endures; A
Judas, a Cain may be conjectured to say the like words in torment. Hill. in
Psalm. 119
There is within us, putrid matter, apt tinder, which the Devil is still
striving to fire, and carrying it about us in our very bodies, we have no
reason to confide in our selves, but pray, Lead us not into temptation.

3. Their imperiousness. Annanias sacrilegious thoughts, and Judas covetous
desires, with the Jews malicious contrivings, say unto them, Joh. 13 27
what thou do do quickly; and then it may be, to do good is present with
thee, but such an usurped dominion has lust got, that the good we would do,
Ber. Med. c. 14.
cannot be done, being besooled, besotted, and enraged, by the fleshes soft
things, the worlds vain things, and Beelzebubs bitter things; our own hearts
joining withal forcing upon us the acceptance of things corrupt, from each, as
occasion shall prompt us with convenient opportunity, to that degree, that we
might observe and write of all the world, and of our selves in particular, what
one did of Cyprus, for there the Turks despise their Alcharon, the Jews smileth
at their Religion, and the Christian derideth the Scripture, and all men and
people make a mock of purity and sanctifying graces, Secretaries study. page 278
or the true way to salvation, so that I am weary of this profane Country,
and desire nothing more then the blessedness of our own, etc. yours in the
midst of temptation.

4. Their appositnesse. Temptations, like David, 1 Samuel 17 51
take our own sword, and cut off our head, our own dagger, and wound us; the
Melancholian shall have horror, trouble, and vexations, yea, the pleasantest
song in providence shall be represented in the tune of the Lamentati^ns, making
even mercy and long-suffering an argument of Gods stupendous wrath, that being
but delayed until meeting in the other world. Contrary to a ranting
Belshazzer, Dan. 5. 2
it will renew the thoughts of (it may be) forgotten victories, and hold no
Goblet fit to drink his Concubines health in, but the Lords Chalice, no ground
proper for his dance than that which is holy, nor no sporting-jest so frisking,
as that which moves by the wire of sacred Scripture. Mat. 14 8
When Herod swears out of Madness, Drunkenness, or Vanity, to grant the
request of that galloping Wench Herodias, it answers, and is set to the Tune of
her Malice, and off the head of the Baptist goes.

They will give the furious man occasion of broils, 2 Samuel ^. 8.
the phlegmatic both wine and wantons, and the proud shall be presented with a
Boorish Clown, 2 Kings 18. 27 and 36 2 Samuel 16. 19
an inadvertent Swain, on purpose to make him swear and roar: or with some
Colloguing Gnatho, to cause him huff, swell, and vapor; all which keeps the
soul like the sea, in so restless a motion, that except we anchor within the
vail, how easily shall all make shipwreck of faith and a good conscience? 1 Timothy 1 19


5. Their closnesse. Did temptation speak out its mind, there would be no great
danger to debate the cause with it? Judas did look for something beside a
Halter; and who can persuade that Dapper Youth in the Proverbs, Pro. 7. 27
that he is going to the house where a dart is prepared for his liver ( the
very seat of love,) which if temptation told, he would avoid it as death and
hell?

The malicious Jews averr that their bloodthirstinesse comes from a zeal to
God, Ioh. 16 2
and their spleen against the Apostles to be a voice from Heaven: and Saul
before he was called Paul, Act. 26 9
thought ( in his conscience, no doubt) that he ought to do many things
contrary to the Name of Jesus Christ.

Neither does temptation come all at once, but by degrees, 2 Samuel 11 8
as we listen and attend unto it, and indeed as we are able to bear it: It told
not David at first of Vriahs murder, for then it is possible he had started
from adultery; Ioh. 12. 6
so it told not Judas at first, he should hang himself, but set him on
coveting, then to stealing, then to murmuring, so luring him, and trolling him
to her hand, until she slew him.

There is one who wittily shows how temptation passes through, Hatwood on the
L. P.
and advances forward in the dominion of the soul, make the heart a Country,
and then temptation has six Posts, six days march, and thus her Gests lye^l^;
the first day, she provokes lust to the first motions of sin; then the second
day, or the second Stage, she turns the heart toward it; the third Stage is,
when the heart in a high trot (that is, earnestly) comes up to it; 2 Samuel 11 11
in the fourth Stage, she hovers, is circumspect; and dwells upon the way and
manner of doing that evil; in the fifth, she begins to assent and to dally,
embrace and do the projected sin; in the sixth, the evil is done, finished and
accomplished: Temptation is then entered the head City, the Fortroyal is taken,
and the soul says unto it, Take thy ease, and indeed it may, for its work is
done, and the errant it came for is already finished: It can do no more, and
leaves it unto sin to bring forth death, Jam. 1. 15
the proper work thereof.

Temptations then having no other end then to cast us under the wrath of God,
Binch. Mel. Theol. loc. 28.
to bring and draw innumerable evils from him, and atlast to have us hear the
sentence of final extirpation to be pronounced by him: Let us mind our
deliverance, and study its avoidance; and if thou, Reader, has yielded
formerly unto its flatterings, to prevent killing by its hellish blandishments,
imitat that Sophist Isaeus, once wild, but at last sober, who when questioned
if he knew that beauty, or if that woman were fair, modestly replied, desii
laborare ab oculis, I have given over gazing. Sphin^ Theo. c. 18.
It being a sure rule that sin is best overcome by flying, that is, by flying
from it.

Lead us not into temptation.
THE wonders which God performed, and the difficulties wherein he led his
people of old, Deu. 7. 19
are called great temptations, and in that same wilderness wherein Israel saw
the works of God, Mat. 4. 1
did our Savior hear the temptings of the Devil, but having strength within
him, he held out, and was not tempted, ( i. e.) did not yield, we wanting
ability to oppose when he embatles, against us, pray here, for security against
those formidable forces we apprehend shall attaque us in the hour of trial, in
the day of temptation.

Let us enquire what it is to be led into temptation, and why God will lead any.

In general, we are led into temptation, when we are suffered to commit the sin
we are tempted unto, Pela in Evang. Mat. c. 3.
as David was, when he did not design, but actually did adulterat Vriah's wife;
his leading being a not liberating from the evil thereof, Glos. Interl.
but a suffering us to fall, and to be hurt in the falling.

The house builded on the sand, Chrysostom. Hom. 2. in Genesis
was overthrown by the rains and floods, which are no other then temptations,
and ordinarily they are expressed by waters, and the metaphor serves to
explain the sense of this Petition, he that is led into temptation, is upon the
brink of some jeopardy, he who is led in temptation, Hush. 21 Lect. on the L. P.
is in the water, but in no danger of drowning; he that is led into temptation,
is the deep; but he who is led out of temptation, was in, but yet drawn out of
the water.

He who says, Greg. Naz. Orat. 16
Lead us not into temptation, says, quod amissum est exquire, Lord, seek what
is lost, and strengthen what is weak; but the Energy of the words are, and they
reach unto, Lead us from temptation; Keep us far off from the waters, Ambros.
lib. 5. de Sacra, c. 4.
quam far non possumus, for we are not able to resist their violence. But to
be more particular, then are men led,

1. When God relinquisheth them, and leaves them to themselves, suffering them
to combat with Satan, as Saul did David and Goliath, he being only a beholder;
Ioab drew back from Vriah, and he died; God left Hezekiah to himself, 2 Chronicles.
32. 31
and he was wounded; exposing, that is, suffering the tinder of man's corrupted,
rotten, and black heart, to be open for, and under the flint and steel of
Satan, and Temptation, without interposing of his power to allay, Tert. de Orat.
or command to cause Satan avoid; for no otherwise does he lead, then to leave
men in it, by withdrawing the assistance of his grace, suffering them to be
led, or fall, for causes best known unto himself.

When he stands beholding man's natural inclination inducing to sin, is in
Scripture a giving men up to their own lusts, a hardening of their heart, Romans
1. 26
the wind of temptation, blowing away the very leaves of formality, or
withering them by the heat and strength thereof, thus he gave up Judas to his
covetous mind, Gen, 4 6.
Cain to his envious heart, which had been so long beaten upon by temptation,
that like an Anvil, it made wholesome admonitions for amendment to recoyl.

He brought Auxiliary grace to Paul under Satan's buffettings; 2 Cor. 12 9
and though he was tempted, yet was he not led into temptation; Joseph was
brought in mind of Gods severity against sin, Gen 39 9.
and preserved his chastity: so was not David, and sell with the Wise of Vriah,
God suffering him to be led into, yet suffered him not to perish, but drew him,
by his love, through the waters of temptation, God suffering sometimes the best
of his Saints to be tempted, hurt and wounded. And the Prophet secing Joshua,
Zech. 3 1
and Satan standing at his right hand to accuse him, palpably discovers (from
the circumstance of place) that the accusation was both true in it self, and
vehemently urged, Joshua having at that time filthy thy garments, all having
sinned; God takes glory to bring his own to himself, in suffering that Accuser
to be accusing, Psalm. 51 14
that they by conviction may see mercy; that Lion to be scratching, that they
dreading, may cry for help; that Serpent to be stinging, that they smarting,
may learn to avoid sin, for that wicked one touches them not, that is, tactu
qualitativo, C^jet. in ^ Johan. 5. 18
non corrumpit eum, the poison does notso invenome the heart, as to kill it,
nor diffuse it self so far into the soul, as to destroy, God applying proper
antidots against the malignity thereof in them, leaving others to their own
skill, so that Lead us not into temptation, Jerome. in Mat. 26
is, Let not temptation overcome us, neither Lord suffer us to be taken in its
snares.

2. When he delivers them up to the enemy, or commissionats their adversary
with power against them. As a Judge delivers his obstinat Malefactor to the
hands of the Jailer, or E^ecutioner, so will God commissionat his Hellish
Officers to dispose of refractory delinquents in such or such a way; thus he
authorized a lying spirit to seduce an Ahab, 1 Kings 22. 22
that he might fall, and by him was led in, and into, temptation, perishing in
the floods (as did Saul;) of sin and ungodliness, as did they who receiving
not the truth, were delivered up to strong delusions, 2 The^. 2 12
to believe lies, that they might be damned, being overwhelmed in temptation.

All which causes application to God, it being only his property and
prerogative to deliver, Aug Ser. de Temp. 126
quid potest educere de tentatione, not only because he can, but because others
cannot deliver me; nay, not the Saints, but the Father only, he being in all
places, filling all places, knowing all straits, which without the defending of
Vbiquity to every glorified Saint, is argument sufficiently valid to convince
any infected with Romes Doctrine, touching prayer to Saints: for when I am
tempted, and prays for my deliverance, both the Virgin, and Peter, and Paul,
and Gabriel, may be out of my hearing, but God never.

If it be demanded why our Father will suffer the workmanship of his own hands,
to be led into temptation, that is, to fall, or be hurt, in it, or by it. It
is, I trust, no paradox to affirm that strictly we are not to search into the
nature, that is, causes of his doings; of which, Aug. de T^ini^a^. lib. 5. c. 1
as one said of his nature, we are not worthy so much as to think: yet to
satisfy the truly doubtful, we offer these considerations. It is done,

1. For the discovery of Gods power. He led a Job in, and into, and through a
temptation, that by inextricable providence, the procedure of sad, and issue
of hard, harsh, and almost despairing difficulties, might cause Satan, being
baffled, to be ashamed, and the believer, being upheld (as by the chin) to
glorify God so much the more ardently, Psalm. 124 1.
as he was delivered the more miraculously. What a beautiful exit, had Joseph's
selling? yea, David's Adultery, how, did it occasion his Harp the more
melodiously to twang, and gave life to seven, that is to many holy songs.

2. For honoring of Gods servants. No General but will try a stout Officer,
and will give, Job 2. 13
or occasion to produce something worthy of that valor he knows to be in him.
The Lord boasted of a Job, and because Satan would not credit the report, all
that Job had was put into his hand; and though for a while he was in the dust,
and under contempt, yet what would his friends, his mockers, his wife, yea, his
enemy the Devil say? and how would he be looked upon by all, for holding fast
his integrity, at the time of his restoration, whereby Job was not only more
confirmed in the confidence and power of God, Greg. Mo^al. l. 1. c. 32
but as Abraham had his faith, so Job has his fortitude, courage, and patience
spoke of, and known to all the world: Gloss. Ord. in Text.
and for this cause temptations are, because without them there is no Crown.

Cesars Soldiers fought (as became them) best in C^^^ris conspectu, Caesar.
Com. de Bell. Gal. l. 3.
while Caesar was beholding, that something might be done by each, worthy of his
praise and commendation. An Abraham in the Mount, a Paul in the Sea, a Stephen
at the Bar, God beholding, will do great matters to be accounted faithful,
which will make them to be esteemed honorable.

Temptation affords to the godly a two^old good; Stella. in Luc. c. 11
in purging, as by fire, the heart from its rust; in cleansing, as by Betony,
the wounds of the soul, and curing the bones broken by fleshly pleasure, or
wordly pomp; for sine tentationum experimentis, without the thorn of
temptation, Leo. Ser. 1. de Quad.
there were no excitement to virtue; and without perturbing cares, no faith;
and without an enemy, no contest; nor without fighting, would there be a
victory. When he has tried me, says Job, I shall come forth as gold, and
tried he was, being made, neither father, nor master, nor healthful, nor
honorable, and yet made all repent, Jerome. in Psalm. 66
on a sudden, yea, nothing was left him but the tongue, that by that he might
blaspheme God, but he was still like gold, shining in the fire, and spreading
in the water of affliction.

3. For the humbling of conceited persons, where the flesh is proud, corrhoding
Medicines, by the Judicious Surgeon are applied as proper for a cure; when
Peter is lofty, and David is haughty, a wench, a Doeg, a Saul shall be employed
as instruments, to bring them to acknowledge they are no better then their
fathers, Greg. Moral. lib. 23. c. 27.
and after the sacrifice of humility, by reminding of their infirmity, thereby
to increase in the exercise, and habit of all virtue, by seeking God in their
affliction early, that making him to be the more regarded.

This doctrine giving ground to the proudest to confess his baseness, Cyp. in
Orat. Dom.
that he may be exalted, and by his not being pussed up with a conceited glory,
either of suffering for, or confessing of God, may escape these bruises,
wounds, griefs, which the most upright has to their sorrow felt, in imagined
security: And mark, Beda. in Luc. lib. 6. c. 22.
that temptations in themselves are here not so much prayed against, as
strength to resist them, expressed in the word into: for when a Martyr is to
die for bearing witness to the truth of Jesus, he is thereby tempted, but
unless he deny the Lord that bought him, he is not led into the temptation.

Eleutherius, Bishop of Illyricum, was under, and by, Adrian the heathen
Emperor, first laid upon an Iron-grate, having fire under it, Niceph. Hist.
Eccl. lib. 3. c. 29.
then put into a Fat, or Caldron of boiling Oil, and after placed in a fiery
furnace; but God strengthening even his body to endure all, and confirming his
^aith, that he denied nothing; he was tied to wild horses, but vi divina,
though they pulled thither and thither, God was yet supporting his servant, and
he escaped that, after was cast unto wild beasts, but they not offering to
tear, he was slain by two soldiers, where the temptation ended, Gallon. de
Mart. Cruciat. c. 7.
he never being led into it. It is also recorded ( for no Historian has all
circumstances in every thing) that after he had layen an hour upon the grate,
being thought dead, he was untyed, and afterward lifting up his arm, he cried,
Magnus est Christianorum Deus, etc. Great is the God of the Christians, whom
Peter and Paul preached in this city, and by whom was done many miracles and
wonders in this city; for it was at Rome; none can can say but the snare was
broken, and this holy Saint and Martyr, was (though tempted) delivered from
temptation.

4. For discovery of men both in, and unto, themselves. In the temptations laid
before the reprobate, it is made manifest to themselves, that they are unworthy
of the Kingdom of God, in their so easy parting from the promises thereof, for
the enjoyment of a ticklish, transitory, and galling lust, rejecting the
honorable, permanent, and comfortable offers of immortality and life, as
touching the Elect; as the Israelites were led through the wilderness, for
discovering to themselves the soundness of their metal, so he led Hezekiah,
Peter, and David, that they might know what was in themselves; I will, said
David, keep thy Testimonies: but, meminisse debemus, it is to be remembered,
that by temptation, we may be induced to a despising, Psa. 119. 8
neglecting, and denying of them; therefore there follows, O forsake me not
utterly.

Temptation is an Alarm seldom false; and it is a fann, to separat the chaff
from the wheat; it is a cloud predicting a storm, and causes the conscionable
observer, to hasten to an harbor; it is an assault, showing the disparity
betwixt true and counterfeit armor; it is a shour, detecting the soundness of
our roose; it is a sea, and shows if the ship be sound; it is a rod, to know if
we be patient under severest dispensations; by it Paul discovers his love to
Christ, and Demas his love unto the world. It being a blast blowing upon the
heap of professors, Origin. Hom. 26. in Luc.
separating the chaff from the wheat, for the endure temptation, makes not a
man patient, or steadfast, but only discovers them so to be; Gods end in
tempting Job, or David, or Abraham, not being ut perimatur, Aug. Ser. 26. de
Temp
that he should be destroyed, but tried.

5. For punishing of men, for their own presumptuous sins done against the
light within themselves. Romans 1. 28
The Gentiles knowing God, but not glorifying him according to that knowledge,
were given over to a reprobat mind, Saul to an evil, and Achab to a lying
spirit; vides igitur, by this it is easy to perceive, that God allows
temptations, Chrysostom. Hom. 42. in Act. Apost.
to awaken his Disciples, rouse his followers, and make them watchful to resist
temptations, when they come, that they be proportionat to our strength, and
also we liberat from their fraud, or force; both which are hinted at, in lead
us not into temptation.

Lead us not. The old rule of charity is here again to be reflected upon, and
presses brotherly-love upon all undertaking to pray; we are all subject to
temptation, and all is to be prayed for, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 5
that we all may be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. The
Mahumitans, will stand together, the Indians pray for one another, yet it is
with Christians, as it was in the Orators complaint, with the Romans, Cicer.
Tus. Quaest* lib. 5.
(a small allowance being given me to alter,) for with shaddows, idleness,
pleasure, opinions, and wicked works, are we destroyed, destroying each other,
in our cursings, heart-burnings, railings, and sinful reproachings of our
neighbors, in stead of earnest, servent, and religious solicitations for them.

To inveigh against such in this age, who, it may be feared, put themselves
into temptation, and when their ways are by themselves Barricado'd, demands
strength from Christ to support them, Chrysostom. Hom. 20. in Mat. 6
is not my design, yet it is a duty to show such, that to run into temptation,
ought not to be our practice, but quietly to rest in our calling, and patiently
endure the time of trial, not opening a door of temptation to our selves; Tert.
de Cultu Foem.
the presumptuous being fearlesse, heedlesse, are evermore in hazard, whereas
the intelligent, in the perfection of Christian stayedness, say in a sound
sense with Ahaz, Isa. 7. 12
I will not sin, nor tempt the Lord. And he gave one golden sentence among
hundreds, to the Church, Sentent. Tropol. B. Nili.
who uttered, tentationes declina, flee from temptations like a child, but if
they come, show manhood, and endure them patiently.

Lead us not into temptation.
THe danger or great evil of being led into temptation, couched in this
Petition, offers it self, Reader, unto consideration; the Jews tempted Christ,
1 Cor. 10. 9
and were destroyed of serpents, tu igitur cave, believe and tremble.

Naturalists speak of a little, Franz. Hist. Animal lib. 2. c. 24.
but bold Bird, that will sall upon the biggest Goat, and suck her, leaving as
a reward, dryness, and blindness to her feeder for ever; to this (
Caprimulgus or Pfassus, that being the Birds vulgar name) may temptation be
compared, which falls upon us in our wandering, tickling our breasts with
complacency and sinful delight, yet we are made empty of the sincere milk of
the Word of God in one sense; Mat. 13. 19
and by it is picked up the good seed of the Word in another; and being blinded
in our understandings, we become as hooded Hawks, and carried whither
temptation pleases.

This Petition has fear for its rise, as all the rest has necessity and love.
A wise man will decline the food, that disposes the humors for that disease
unto which he naturally inclines, and avoids the house, infected with that
malady of which he is apprehensive; and all being subject, Chry: Ser. 68.
mill modis more then ten thousand ways unto it, w^shall, to creat
warrinesse, 1. Discover the danger which is here feared: 2. How we shall be
delivered from it, the thing here desired.

The first shall appear from the Coherence, from the Exigesis, it follows
immediately after the Petition, for pardon of sin, forgive us our trespasses,
because relapses are dangerous, sin is compared to broken bones, sores,
diseases, wounds; the relapsing into which is a prognostic of direful
sufferings: David sell by a woman, Lot by wine, Peter by a wench, but we do not
read they turned back into those sins after the washing, not loving these
iniquities in their practice again, 2 Pet. 2. 22
which once by repentance they had vomited up, or reacting that folly, Prove. 26
14
for which lately before God they pretended to be sorry.

Let one example of a relapsed sinner throughout the whole Bible be sound, that
after conviction, supplication, pardon and absolution went back to his former
irregularity, and redintegrated for all that into favor with God again; and
something may be said, but since it cannot be had, Ioh. 5. 14
let the pardoned sinner fear the snare, and pray against temptation.

The Exigesis (as it is called) clears this, for after, Lead us not into
temptation, follows, Deliver us from evil; as if temptation and the Devil,
temptation and ill, temptation and evil, were so joined, as hardly to admit a
separation. And in earnest, we read of sew assaulted, but were either killed,
wounded, or skarred: Job, it is true, cursed not God, yet he cursed the day of
his birth, Job 38. 2
which God made, and uttered some words which God did not relish. It is an
excellent observe, that the fall of the two wisest, Adam and Solomon, Page on
the L. P.
was so great, that (though upon little ground) their salvation is questioned,
which is a punishment their fall deserved.

The strongest Peter, that is, the most rocky Christian, 2 Cor. 4. 7
being but an earthen vessel, may get a crack by temptation, which in our
circuit through the world, should obsequiously make us listen to our Saviors
direction, and pray after this manner, Ier. 10 23
for the way of man is not in himself, neither is it in man that walks to
direct his steps.

A poor man in Leipzick, having murdered and robbed the Master, Mistress, and
Children of a Family, Histor. Terribil. lib. 2.
declared, when attaqued and apprehended, that he had lain hungry three days
under a stair, studying how, yet abhoring to do the deed; and in deliberating
whether to do it, it was whispered by an unknown voice, Fac fac, do it, do it;
upon which being encouraged, he attempted and executed that bloody crime. 2
Cor. 2 11
Tempting to sin is usually attended with sin, if not with the sin designed,
yet a sinful way may be forged to elude the design, which makes temptations to
be dangerous, and so much the more are they portentuous, as there is used a
five-fold policy to ensnare the most Cautelous.

1. Temptation beautifieth the sin. The wine is sweet and pleasant to the gust
of Noah; 1 Kings 21. 2
Ahab rejoiced no doubt in the conceited pleasure of the not yet possessed
Garden of herbs; and how did Judas hugg his thirty pieces of silver, when
represented unto him, in the fairest colors that the Devil or the World could
possibly draw, to overballance the bloudinesse of that crime nature it self
detests, and without the fascination of money would not commit? Hence one
calls temptation a deceitful gloss set upon vice, King on the L. P.
to make it look amiable.

Pirates at Sea will put out the Kings Colors, Stella l. 3. de Contem-mond. c.
34
promising peace, and assuring friendship; so temptation will put forth the
vexillum of Profit, Security, Quiet, Rest, Satisfaction, and Content, and thus
Wolf-like (clothed with the Sheeps Coat) prey upon the credulous, inadvertent,
and the careless soul. Avoid therefore, Reader, first the pleasure of sin,
B^rn. de passio. Dom. c. 22.
and next the sorrow of sin, in a withdrawing from temptation; yea, when omnia
prospera sunt, time, all things thrives, live thou in fear.

2. It makes them frequently to commit the sin. Luke 22. 61
Peter's love made him follow his master, but fear of himself made him do it
afar off, and at last overcame his love, and made him be plunged in the gulf of
temptation: And as the Fishes in Jordan, glides smoothly down the River, and
sports in the Sea of Tiberias, and then hopefully advancing, as they think,
Mat. 2^. 41
they suddenly fall into the dead and stinking Sea of Sodom: So had Peter been
by the stream carried to perdition, if our Savior had not turned, which made
Peter be (though wet) safely landed upon the shore.

God stood by, Genesis 9. 22
and suffered Noah to drink, but sent Noah's own son to mock him for his
intemperance, which occasioned the Father to curse his Son, which for his
insobriety was a punishment to himself: Sampson saw an Harlot and went in unto
her; Judge. 16. 1
and Delilah at last made that Nazarite be shaven, and the Judge of Israel to
be derided of the Philistines justly; he had put out the eyes of his soul by
gazing upon the face of a daughter of the uncircumcised, and they
uncircumcised, put out the eyes of his body, that he circumcised, should gaze
upon no other.

3. It may benumme the conscience under sin. How soon did David's heart smite
him for cuting the lap of Saul's garment? 1 Samuel 24. 4
but until the Child was born by Bathsheba, he never reflected upon his
adultery, and cutting off a Worthy from Isreal's Camp. A hand by long working,
contracts hardness, to that degree, that a Thorn will not penetrat, nor a
Nettle raise a blister. What more? by frequent assaults of evil thoughts, 2 Samuel 12. 14
crowds and throngs of unclean desires, the soul becomes stupid (as men are
said to do by touching, though with a pole, the Torpedo) and its hoo^ being
hardened by trotting in the way of the wicked, it is not disturbed, but eased
in the seat of the scornful, 1 Timothy 4. 2
the Conscience being seared as with an hot iron.

4. It may cause black suppositions because of sin: Job 7. 15
What sad and dark expressions flowed from the mouth of patient Job? choosed he
not strangling and death rather then life? etc. What man can reveal the inward
actings of Asaph's soul, Psa. 77. 9
when he roared under the rod, Has God forgotten to be gracious?

Such a cloud of witnesses affrighting from temptation, ought to inspire us to
pray against it, in the words of a holy man, Rector meus, Anselm. Meditat. lib.
2. c. 2.
O my God, remove from me vanity of soul, unconstancy of mind, wandering of
affection, impurity of speech, loftiness of eyes, gluttonny of the belly,
backbiting of my neighbor, the desire of riches, hunting for worldly glory,
the evil of hypocrisy, the poison of flattery, the contempt of poverty, for
these are temptations, and if they overcome, our reckoning will not be so
insignificant as our licentiousness makes them now to be accounted.

5. It may end in desperation. Greg. lib. Moral. 10. c. 20.
A Father speaking of the temptations of the righteous, asserts, that pene ad
lapsum, it almost creats utter despair, as it did of late to that Yorkshire
Minister, Robert^ Key Introduct. c. 2. Mat. (...) 28
who going down to the Waterside to drown himself, opened the New Testament,
and in a glorious providence first fell upon that of St. Matthew, Come unto me
all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Does Christ
say so, said the good man? then I will not drown my self. The soul here was
bouy'd up by a miraculous and invisible hand, or then he had sunk in the mighty
waters: Psa. 124* 3
the man might have sung, If it had not been the Lord who was on my side, when
temptation rose up against me, then the waters had overwhelmed me, the stream
had gone over my soul, then the proud waters had gone over my soul; blessed be
the Lord who has not given me as a prey to their teeth.

But what a doleful ditty would the soul of a Judas, Horrib. Hist. u^ sup. 656
a Saul make, when dislodged the body, by the force of temptation? O I am
eternally doomed to be the Devils slave, cried a convicted soul, and in so
saying, impetuously threw himself out of a window and broke his bowels. Alas,
alas, cried another somewhere to one, in a vision, woe is me, woe be to me: all
which to prevent, keep from the brink of the Well, Prove. 5. 8
the edge of the Hill, the mouth of the Pit, the way to the Den, and avoid the
path of death, by declining the very occasion of temptation. And pray, 1. That
they come not. 2. That they conquer not.

That our eyes may behold no Delilah, 2 Samuel 13 3
nor ears hear the voice of Ionadab, nor our hands handle Judas silver, nor our
backs that it wear nothing of Achans garment, our tasting none of the rich
gluttons sare, our noses smell-nothing of the blood with Nimrods hounds. Gen
10. 9
I knew and heard a Malefactor affirm she smelt the blood of the murdered then
in his clothes, and at a great distance, certain days after the fact.

Pray, Reader, against such devices, I say, pray, Mat 8. 25
for it was not rowing, but Lord save us, or we perish, brought the Disciples
safe to land.

Palladius consulting with Macarius about his temptations, was advised to tell
them, that he kept the walls of his Cell for God. And indeed we ought to keep
both the walls and furniture of the house for God, temptation being so daring,
that if the door be not open, it will creep in at the windows, Greg. Moral. l.
8. c. 4.
yea, uncover the roof, and take possession. It is pugna contra malignos
spiritus, a fighting against evil spirits, and they will not be said nay,
having a threefold stratagem to conquer and overcome: Ib Hom. 16. in Evangel.
1. Suggestione. 2. Delectatione and Consensu, suggesting or prompting the mind
to ill, then alluring the affections to betroth it, then commanding the will to
consent to it.

Or first, Wishart 19 Lect. on the L. P.
bewitching the sense, then inflaming the appetite, and lastly, causes the
action, and ut hoc non hoc fiat, that it be not done, that God suffer us not to
answer the desire of temptation, nihil enim fit, nothing being done, but when
he either does it, Ang. de bon. persever. l. 2. c. 6
or permits it; this Petition is offered up, the Saints thereby begging
perseverence in sanctity and holiness in the whole man, which as it is Gods
Temple, ought to be kept clean for him.

I can find no convincing argument persuading, T^stam. Pa^riarch. page 144
that Manuel under the title of the Testament of the twelve Patriarchs, to be a
real History, yet it seems the Treatise is ancient, and touching the case in
hand, Benjamin is personated, to speak pertinently, thus, My children, shun the
naughtiness of Belial, for at the first he delights those that obey him, but
in the end he is a sword, and father of many mischiefs, for the mind having
once conceived by him, it brings forth envy, then despair, then sorrow, then
bondage, then needinesse, then troublesomnesse, and then desolation: for which
cause Cain was tormented with these seven punishments by God, and in seven
years had still a new plague, etc.

Lead us not into temptation, shows, we regard and notice their force, and
would have it dissipated and overcome, Ephesians. 6. ^7
which shall be, we using against it the Word of God, and faith in God, and
prayer to God.

It was by Scripture that Christ the Second Adam overcame the tempter, Mat. 4. 4
not that he had no other weapon, but he would use no other, to teach us to
depend and trust to its edge, when tempted to gluttony, as he was in the first
temptation; to vainglory, as he was in the second; or covetousness, as he was
in the third; all which he Overcame by the Psalms, and Moses, when the first
Adam tempted to the same sins, Jerome. in Mat. 4.
was foiled in the first assault: In both which it is observed, that Adam
yielded to be as God, when Christ left it doubtful, whether he was the Son of
God; by humility destroying the first Adams loftiness.

Therefore omnes Scripturas, let thy mind and heart be upon the Law, and
believing that word, Resist the Devil, and he will flee from you; Plut. Apoph.
in Agesil.
answer all temptations, as Agesilaus answered that question, What benefit the
Spartans reaped by his Laws? answered, The contempt of pleasure; or if you will
take a more understanding Teacher, Are you tempted to Covetousness? think of
Paul's bonds: To Concupiscence? ruminat upon Paul's prison: To
Distrustfulnesse? remember of Paul's chain: Chrysostom. Hom. 12. in Epist. ad Colos.
To Gaudinesse? meditate upon Paul's palenesse: To Delicacy? reflect upon
Paul's tears, his hungring, his fasting, etc. do this, and praesentia ridebimus
omnia, Author. Imper^. Oper. Hom. 3.
we shall overcome all trials. Or if you will yet go higher, Art thou tempted
by diseases, by death, by losses, in thoughts, of distrust, etc. or
persecutions? remember Christ his scriptum est: It is written, eye the Law and
Scriptures, observe the Saints, Jerome: Epist 13. a^ Rustie.
remember Jesus, and that the Word of the Lord endures for ever: Imitate what
is good, consider what is holy, build a Solomon's Temple in thy self, let light
be in the holy of holies of thy soul, set an watch at the door of thy mouth,
give not thy self over to temptation, and he who keeps thee shall not sleep.

Yet our life being so sull of temptations, that non immerito, Ser. 5. in Psa^
Qui habitat.
it might be called a temptation it self; we are both to be watchful of them,
and pray against them, that we may be protected by the shield of God, unto
which, prayer must either be effectual, or we are in vain taught to pray in
this Scripture after this manner, Lead us not into temptation; and that we be
fitted to pray, we are exhorted to watch, that temptations may be taken at
first, while young. In that just now cited suspicious Manuel, Page 137
Joseph is represented advising his sons to chastity, giving them an account of
the slienesse of Memphitica his Mistress, who came to him, sometimes to learn
the Word of God, sometimes to pray, that he would pray God might give her a
son, which he did, not knowing her meaning, etc. Temptations are generally
wary, which should make us chary, 2 Pet. 2. 9
and when intricat, to call for deliverance.

Moreover, in dealing with temptations, the King of Syria his policy will be
useful to fight against the King of Israel himself, 1 Kings 32. 31
thy master-sin; David declares he was upright, and kept himself from his own
iniquity, that which is nearest, inmost: And it is happy, as one says, Act. 12
13
and well, when the soul is acquainted with temptation, as Rhoda was with
Peter; Page on the L. P.
It is Peter's voice, said she: It is Satan's voice, it is the fleshes voice, say
thou, and flee from it, not for joy, but abhorrency. When David was tempted to
number the people, 2 Samuel 24. 3.
he saw not the drift of the temptation, but Ioab did; yet all his rhetoric
could not persuade that King to desist from following the temptation, until he
smarted for his folly.

It is a difficult task to distinguish the voice of Satan from that of the
flesh; yet touching the first, I have read a twofold rule, assuring they are
immediately from Hell, and from the Devil: 1. When they are sudden, unexpected,
drawn from no premises, but like a flash of lightning (not for its going) but
for its coming. 2. When they are out of the road of natural corruption, when
horrible, destructive, and contrary to the very principles of carnal self, like
that story of a certain Widow, who being delivered of a child, could not get it
baptized until she discovered the father, which she resolving to conceal,
first killed her child, and then hanged her self, and this coming to the ears
of a Scholar who was the father, he stob'd himself to death; which related to
the ears of him who refused baptism, made him hang himself also. Now ( says my
most worthy Author) who can doubt but all this was done by the instigation of
the Devil, Trap. in Johan. 13
lying so far from the highway of Humane frailty, that they are not to be seen
in it, say I? to which may be added, drenches for destroying births, murdering
of infants, committing incest, bestiality, Sodomitical embracements, or the
like.

Satan, Luke 4. 13
after a foyl, may depart for a season, watching a fitter opportunity to tempt;
he is called Beelzebub, that is, a Prince of flies; either as the learned
think, his image was in that likeness, 2 Kings 1. 2.
or worshipped among the Ekronites, when molested by that creature; this is
sure, that like a fly, if he be beat off, he will come on again, and by some
enticing way, may be not yet urged, fetch the soul from its former
steadfastness, to follow him; which he can do with more skill then Calisto the
Curtizan did, Aelian, Hist. Var. lib. 13. c. 32.
who told Socrates the Philosopher, he could draw none of her followers away,
but when she pleased she could draw away all his: No wonder, said he, for I
draw them to virtue, and that is up hill, a difficult ascent, but thou draws
them down a Precipice, thrusts them down a hill, which is easy. We are by
natural corruption still traveling upon the edge, and Satan has, and will,
try many ways to give a thrust; and we accounting our passage easy, are
delighted with the change, and love not to return back again.

Temptations may be compared to that raging sea, conceited to flow upon a poor
Traveller, who saw moreover a raging Lion coming toward him; and at the same
instant, an ugly serpent creeping into his breast; all which made him cry,
miserere, for a remission of sin, and delivery from death, for which, by a
voice, he was advised, saying, fuge, sperne, contere, corono, flee from the
Sea, defend thy self from the Lion, bruise the Serpents head, and I shall crown
thee with glory and victory; the issue of every religious resister, and
wrestler against temptation, there being a Crown for the victorious.

Lead us not into temptation.
THe danger of temptation being so great, it is time to appear for caveating
against harsh conceits of God, and touching that, it is fit to inquire whether
he be the Author, or cause of the sin committed, since he is the leader to
temptation; the ground of which surmise is founded upon those Scriptures
expressing his hardening of Pharaohs heart, Romans 1. 28.
giving up the Gentiles to a reprobat mind: For answer to which, we shall
clear, 1. That God is not the Author of sin. 2. What may be the true cause of
it.

As introductory to which, we distinguish betwixt Gods willing, nilling, and
permitting sin; It is unquestionable that he wills not sin, that is, Deuteronomy. 25.
16
commands it not to be, it being neither among his works, nor in his Law: It is
as evident, that if he willed not the same, it should not be, he being able to
reduce both Devils and men to order, that he permitts sin, Job 1. 10
is by few denied; and its permission is consistent with his Law, he beholding
it, as a Prince might do a thief. In short, to say he commanded sin, were to
deny his holiness, to affirm he could not stop it, were to infringe his
omnipotence; Genesis 50. 20
and to attest he permitted it not, were to deny his providence, and somewhat
to exist that gives Check-mate unto his power, with which also he has nothing
to do: for if we err not, Chrysostom. Hom. 64* in Genes.
Joseph's selling, as well as Joseph's dreaming, is to be referred to providence
overruling.

He saw Cains envy, Genesis 4. 6
which cannot properly be said his willing, or nilling, having a productive
will which works on things, as the cause on the effect, but by a permissive
will he is a spectator and beholder, as in that case of the Babylonish
Ambassadors, 2 Chronicles* 32. 31.
and Hezekiah, whereas he withheld Abraham from sacrificing Isaac, by a
contrary precept, leaving the other to himself for discovery of himself.

This is excellently figured under that parable of King James, King. James
Meditat. on the L. P.
of a Nurse having a child, but beginning to go, who may be said justly to make
the child fall, if she leave it alone knowing it has no strength without help
for self-supportance, so God Almightly, as before is said, is said to lead us
into, when he leaves us in temptation; and though he can say little or nothing
that comes after that King, yet for the case in hand it may be said, though
the Nurse may be shent, yet God is not to be blamed for his relinquishing: For,
1. He is not oblidged to hold us up. 2. We often conceit our selves to be strong.
3. We had once strength, and he is not bound to repair broken sinews. 4. He can
cure us, and make us better. And, 5. Such as falls, blame themselves, never
God. Judas, an Achab, go not without their own heart charging themselves with
the production of sin.

And it may be attested also from reason, Aug. de Civit. lib. 14. ^. 13
that God is not the Author of sin, there being no evil work, without the
precedence of an evil will, which flows not from him, as is apparent from the
nature of God, the Law of God, Iam. 1. 13
the nature of sin, and the bitterness of the death of Christ.

The nature of God, being once known, darkness may be thought to flow from the
Sun, as soon, as clearly, as sin can be suggested to originat from him, when
the root of all sweetness shall be embittered, and the Suns darkness in his
Eclipse be defended, as proceeding from its self; then, and not before, can sin
in reason be thought to proceed from God, he tempting no man, that is, to evil.

The Sunbeams light on a Carrion, and also on a flower, that the one is sweet,
the other not, proceeds not from the Planets influence, but from the delicacy
or rottenness of the thing scented. The Musician stricketh on an ill-tuned
instrument; that it sounds, indeed he is cause, but that it sounds ill,
emergeth from the vitiosity of the instrument: yea, what though our shallow
judgments sathom not the Abyss of Gods innocence, rather let us charge our
selves of ignorance, then him of injustice, for to use the words of our Royal
Expositor, King James ut supra.
and a Father, in so high a point, it is fit for every man, sapere ad
sobrietatem, to be wise unto sobriety.

Respect the express will of God, or his Scriptures, and their aim, scope,
design, energy, and end is, to bind, curb, and destroy sin: It was in man's
redemption said to mankind, Ioh. 5 14
sin no more, and the Apostles praying, preaching, amounted to this, 1 Pet. 2.
11
dearly beloved, abstain from fleshly lusts. Behold also the nature of sin, and
it is a departing from God, it is called a work of darkness, Ephesians. 5. 11
and by it the flesh striveth against the Spirit, evidencing, that the wise God
gave no consent to its being; for, who would appoint a power to check and
restrict himself? and though none of these might, yet the bloudinesse of the
death of Jesus, the strong cries he put up, the bloody sweat he suffered, 1
Ioh. 3. 8
the shameful and painful death he under-went for the expiating its guilt,
the destroying of its work, clears his detestation thereof; to all which add,
that in the highest accusations of an awakened conscience, Mat. 27. 4
the sinner roareth against himself for yielding, not God for leading him into
temptation.

Once more consider, Aquin. 2. 2dae.
there is in sin two things, First, the Act, and next, the Deformity or
obliquity in that Act. Quaest. 79 Art. 2.
The strength by which the Murderer puts forth his hand, is from God: but that
he does it to kill, is from another efficient. The rider causes his horse to
go, but if he halt, it proceds from some debility in the beasts nerves. Judas
eyes saw the money which was from God, his fingers told the money from him
also, but the sin for which he had it, he charge solely and wholely upon
himself.

Gods giving up the Gentiles to vile affections, Romans 1. 29
to a reprobat mind, implies not his Agency therein, but the Retaining of his
grace, and leaving them to themselves, being otherwise not bound to do, as was
the Nurse in the abovementioned similitude.

And the same serves to answer, 1 Kings 12. 15
if the Lord be said to be the cause of the defection of the ten Tribes from
the house of David, with this addition, that when it is said to be of him, it
is understood of the disposing the proper causes thereof, for the punishment of
Rehoboam, and fulfilling the Prophecy made against Solomon, Aug. de Civit. Dei.
lib. 14. c. 27
quoniam qui providenter atque omnipotenter, he in his wisdom being able to
rule all things, whether good or evil, for his own purpose. The cause of Judas
selling Christ, was Covetousness; Pilats crucifying him, was for Fear; Acts 4.
28
all was of God, that is, the ordering of these things, for production of the
great end of man's redemption.

Fore note, his permitting sin is not otiosa, a bare looking on, to behold it,
and no more; neither is it Tyrannica, Biuch. Mellis. Theol. loc. 12.
as to command its actions, or approve its workings; neither is it libera, as
if sin were not under his providence, and had liberty to run and come where and
how far it pleased his permission, being determinativa, determinative, he
appointing how far it shall go; and further then his Law, neithe Jews, nor
Pilat, nor Judas, nor sin, nor the Devil can go: Jesus may be put to death, but
who can hinder his assuming life again, it being so determined by God?

A Hermit often deluded by the Devil, Hondo^f. Theat. in Exem. Tertii. Precept.
being taught, and having heard many things from him, supposing he had been an
Angel of light, was at last advised by his Familiar, to slay his son, who abode
in the Cell with him, for procuring to himself equality of glory and dignity
with Abraham, for which glory, delirus iste senex dementatus, the deluded old
man attempted the act of murder; but the boy by flight and nimblenesse escaped
for, and with, his life. Here was temptation yielded unto, Genesis 20. 6
but the sin of the temptation, as to its term, viz. as it ended or designed
the boys life, God frustrated and bound it up, that sin could not do it.

It was for this, viz. lest God should be concluded the Author of sin, that
some of late read or said these words, Suffer us not to be led into temptation,
in stead of lead us not: To detect which solly at large, were to be like them
who said it: But this may be said, that these indeed were wise and holy in
their own conceit, that thought the Gospel wanted their pertinency, or the
Lords Prayer their correction; as if Jesus did not know how to teach apposite
devotion, without their directory; why was not Moses refined? and that ordinary
expression expunged, Exodus ^. 3
God hardened the heart of Pharaoh? but where was the benefit of the change?
For if God suffer a David to be led into temptation, having more power, wisdom,
and strength, then David had, he is by that known rule, qui non prohibet
peccatum, he who can hinder sin, and does it not, commits the sin, equally as
guilty of the sin, as he should appear to be, had it been said, Lead us not
into temptation; which yet is a more Scripture-like expression then the other:
For who in Scripture is said to harden Pharaohs heart? It is answered, God. Who
stirred up David to number the people? It is replied, God, he permitting Satan.
Who mingled among the Princes of Zoan the spirit of error? Isa. 9. 14 Romans 1.
16
It is said, the Lord. Who gave up the Gentiles to vile affections? it is
attested, God. In these and suchlike expressions he is not said to suffer it
to be done, but to do it; and if it be demanded, who leads men into temptation?
I answer truly, because Evangelically, Our Father which is in Heaven, etc.

It is true indeed, Cyprian reads the words, Et ne nos patiaris, suffer us not
to be led, being constrained, as some others also, so to speak, because of the
Manichean Doctrine, of two supreme beings, one of God, whence all good: Cyp. in
Text^.
and another of the Devil, whence all ill; but, who knows not that the Fathers
must in many places, as light Gold, have their allowance, and in feeding upon
them, they must have salt? and enquiring only of such, whether their changing
lead us not, 1 Cor. 11 1.
to suffer us not, was to confute heresy, or to broach novelty, I go forward,
knowing it may be a good Commentary, as with Augustine.

In Lead us not, there is no harm; for besides our Saviors authority, there is
this in reason may be said for its innocence, that Gods leading is not a
dragging; Iam. 1. 14
man is not forced, though led into the field: for being led into, imports,
consenting to; hence that Precept, Resist the Devil: Aug. lib. 2 de Ser. in
Mont. Dei.
neither is it determining, Fiunt tentationes enim per Satanam, temptations not
flowing from Satan's power, but Gods sufferance, and Lead us not, imports a
confinement of Satan, a binding of him up, that though he desire to, yet he
never may devour us. Our fear not being primarly of the Devil, Cyp. in Orat.
Dom.
but in God, his sorsaking us, nothing being able to hurt without his
permission.

He led Cain into the field, and he died, but succored Peter, and though
wounded, yet he was not killed by his foe; Genesis 4. 14
he so ordered Cains sin, that he became a terror to himself; he so disposed
of Peter's fall, that he is a notable example, of man's frailty, and Gods
compassion; he orders the fair, and so he does the foul weather; and for the
one, or removal of the other, he is still to be addressed unto.

If we search into the true cause of sin, and speak properly, we shall perceive
it has no cause, yet since it is, it must have a principle, an Author, Joh. 8.
44
an Origin, and fountain; and to lay the sadle on the right horse, the cause of
sin, is either without us, which is the Devil, or within us, which is our own
corruption.

Against the first in this Petition, we pray, and for his chaining, he often
holding up the wrong end of the Perspective, Genesis (...) 21
making sin either not visible, or so little, that it may be attempted, says
corruption, without danger, or contrary by a magnifying mirror, he makes sin
to appear of a despairing bigness, that it cannot, that there is no hope of
pardon ( says both he and corruption) he is that spiritual murderer that
wounded our first parents, that contrived the death of the Son of God, Ioh. 13
27
Judas covetousness, and the Jews malice concurring. He is still tempting us,
in visions, dreams, by ill example, alluring the old to covet, the young to
lust, the rich to pride, the poor to despair; and in short, had it not been for
this tempter, Genesis 3. 6
it is probable sin had never been in man: by the inordinat desire of
knowledge, he cha^^'d the Virgin Wax of Adams innocence, with such Art, that it
received his own image of insanctity, who transmitted the same, as well as his
nature, to his unhappy posterity; but since God had mercy, and saved Adam, we
here recurr to the same compassion for deliverance from the old tempter.

At Friburg he appeared in Ministerial habits, Hist. de Spect. l. 1 Spect. 117
to a good old man dying, with Paper, Pen and Ink, to write down all the sins
committed in his life; and after much importunity, he was ordered to write
down, first, The seed of the woman shall bruise the head of the Serpent; at
which words, throwing paper and all on the ground, the spirit disappeared, and
the old man died comfortably, God not leaving corruption to it self, though
Satan attempted excitation.

To scan the length, or discover the various ways by which the Devil suggests
or tempts to evil, Ephesians. 6. 11
is a darker mystery of iniquity then man can clear; and the darkness that is
in our nature ( where he usually keeps) is so gross, that we cannot trace him:
Yet as the Country of Hamsem, Purchase Pilgrimage, lib. 4. c. 1
though covered with so obscure a darkness, that no neighboring Province dare
either enter in, or can see any thing in it, and yet by the voice of Men,
crowing of Cocks, neighing of Horses, which is heard, it is concluded
inhabited: so by the noise, Act. 13 10
roaring, fightings Satan makes in the heart, it is evident he is there; and
being it is not in our power, we have recourse to our Father, to be delivered
from him, yea, secured from our hearts, a Province in the Kingdom of Man (as
the other in Armenia) so dark, that it exceeds Cimmerian darkness (a proverb
thought to rise from the abovementioned Country) that our selves cannot see
into it, until the glorious face of God, as the Sun, shine in upon us; Ier. 17
9
and when that is done, its intricacies and slienesse, still enforces this to
be said, Lead us not into temptation.

As the case is now, natural pravity, hardness of heart, infidelity, Act. 7. 51
and all other vices arising from the soul, as sparks from the fire, tempts
Satan himself to tempt us, and gives occasion by supine sloth, for him to work
us easily to his mould: Psalm. 9. ^7
God is generally so forgotten, his Son is ordinarily so slighted, and the
Spirit so often despited, that we expose our naked breasts to the tempters
shafts, as if their poison and heat should be cooled, and deaded, before they
reach our hearts. It is said of one, reading those words of St. John, The Word
was made flesh, and not reverend enough in his behavior, a Spirit gave him a
blow on the face, saying, If the Word had been made a Devil, the Devils never
forgetting that mercy, had eternally been reverently thankful: But since this
was not, how respectfull and mindful should man be? yea, how vigilant against
himself? and how watchful against temptation? that by them God be not
provoked, Niceph. Eccles. Hist. lib. 11. c. 43
imitating him who was so warry, that he knew not if ever the Devil had
beguiled him twice in any one thing. Temptation not being the cause of our
falling, but our inadvertence, Chrysostom. Hom. Quod ^emo, etc.
dullness, and instability, whereby we shall even without outward violence, (as
that house builded on the sand, which) will sink, though neither winds nor
floods should rise.

Satan that old Serpent being the father of sin, and our own lust its mother,
adultery, fornication, uncleanness, etc. its progeny; Moses rod and an evil
conscience, its attendants; diseases of the body, consumptions of estate, and
destruction of the soul being consequences thereof, we are to pray against it,
and temptations to it, which shall suffice for the matter, and follows now the
order of this Petition.

It follows, Forgive us our debts, that relating to sin past, whereas, Lead
us not, insinuats our desire to be redeemed from sin to come, and in both
imports the sad and perplexed estate of poor mortals, who can no sooner have
sin remitted, but must expect from hell to be freshly assaulted, and led into
temptation, which generally is an Usher to signal, great, and sad evils prayed
against in the next Petition.

CHAP. VIII.
But deliver us from evil.
THis is a Petition calling for the effectual accomplishment of that promise
made by the Holy Ghost to the fearer of the Lord, Prove. 19 23
viz. that he should not be visited with evil: And with an Ancient is often
reckoned a distinct Petition, Aug. de Ser. in Monte Dei.
being septima and ultima, the seventh and the last. Yet again the same Author
has a modest videtur, a probability only that it may be so. ^b. Enchirid. ad
La^rent. c. 115
Many of the modern Authors beholding this but as an explication of Lead us not
into temptation, will have this not to be differenced, so much as to sense one
Petition. We are clear for his judgment who asserts parum refert, B^rrad. in
Orat. Dom.
it is no great matter whether we hold this to be so, or no; and he is
pertinent among reformed Writers, who concludes they may be reduced into one,
Huish 23 Lect. on the L. P.
yet are not so one, but they may be divided into two Petitions, that is, in
the general and implicitly, they are one, in particular, expressly and actually
they are two.

And considering that every evil is not temptation, Page Expos. of the L. P.
and that in Lead us not, etc. we pray that no evil may be done, whereas here
we pray that no evil may be suffered; Chem. de Orat. Dom.
we shall handle them as a distinct Petition, which is approved not only as
most ancient, but as most rational, King James Medit. on L. P.
clear and edifying: and as natures motion is more swift the nearer it approach
to the Center, so shall we make the more speed to arrive at our place of rest,
this Prayers signaculum, Amen.

It is to be adverted, the Vulgar Translation has in Luke curtailed this
Prayer, by ommission of these words, holding it contained in Lead us not into
temptation; but being originally in both the Evangelists, man is not to be wise
above what is written, especially when the matter written, Glos. Ord. in text.
continet tantum, has as much in it as the retained part, which here it does,
for pray we not, for the doing of Gods will, for the coming of his Kingdom,
only that we may be delivered from evil, whether visible or invisible.

In this last as in all the other Petitions, we shall make enquiry into the
matter, and next the order of this, the first has deliverance in its mouth,
and evil in its eye, a malo, so sin may be called from its blackness, (...)
malum.
and therefore as evil it defiles, or from its cause (say others) for it came
by an apple, and therefore it is evil, it causes deadness? This is certain
there is both natural and moral evil.

There is natural evil in, but least in this Petition, Io^. 9. 1
blindness, deafness, bruises, deformity, or any casualty marring the beauty
of man, is herein deprecated in this, the child prays against cuts, hurts,
before he play, that Mephibosheths misfortune happen not unto him in his
sports. 2 Samuel 4. 4


There is moral evil in, and most in this Petition, against sin, our prayers
here ascend, our heart continually as the sea, Isa. 57. 20
casting forth the dirt and mire of adulteries, and all lascivousnesse in their
acts, or fumes, Mat. 15. 19
and falling down by either in shours of vengeance, except scattered by the
beams and rays of mercy, we say with the Psalmist, Psalm. 14^. 4
Incline not our hearts to any evil thing, to practice wicked works. Really
performing what was thought Hypopocritically written, by a vainglorious
Braggadochi, over the door of his house, the Friend or Son of God lives here,
Laert. lib. 6.
let no evil enter: when as Diogenes questioned how the Inhabitant himself
should enter! he being excessively vicious, of which extreme, there are so many
imitators, that were Timon the Manhater alive, he would encounter with
multitudes, naturally so torrid, so rough, so scorching, contentious, that his
once admired dandling, young Alcibiades, for nothing, but because he saw in him
fair symptoms, or rather shrewd signs of much future mischief to be done by
him, toward his Country; I say, this act of his should be razed from
Authentic record, Theat. Vitae. Human lib. 1.
as wonderful, his confederats should be so numero^s, evil having so
universally infected nature, mankind, and man.

There is also political evil in, but last in this Petition. Sin and
punishment, drunkenness and poverty, are not many leagues distant; not many,
Deuteronomy. 28. 15
say I; yea, not one, each sinner, as a Muscovia servant, carrying a Curbatch
at his girdle, wherewith he is to be beaten when found offending; the
Delinquents breast, not to say his belt, having Scorpions tied unto it,
wherewith he is to be scourged, Mark 9. 44
and shall be tortured when doing a miss.

But generals not being pungent, the evils we pray against are more
particularly these, from evil, that is, from an evil conscience, which
follows evil doing. Romans 2. 15
When Adam sinned, he was first ashamed, then afraid, conscience under guilt,
may, as a dog in the warm Sun of worldly affluence, Genesis 4. 7
sleep in, or at the door of the benumbed, but in the gloomy weather of ^ading
pleasure, will in defyance of all resistance, fright and tear the sinner,
either out of his rest, or out of his sin.

Pestilence and Famine attending evil actions, Ezekiel. 5. 16
with evil beasts; the sword, with terrifying diseases, are with evil
interwoven, and lest our cities be depopulat, Psa. 31. 9
our families scattered, our beauty blasted, we beg deliverance from evil.

From evil, that is, from Satan, the tempter to all evil; Mat. 4. 1
he is here so understood, that some will have no other evil thought upon: that
he is understood, is certain, but that other evils are not likewise included,
seems gross; there being no circumstance of restraint, we are bound to take
the word in its largest extension, though he, Chrysostom. Hom. 20. in Mat.
as more eminent then others, propter excessum malitiae, for his abounding
wickedness may be principally eyed, who having nothing to say against us, yet
irreconciliably pursues us for hurt. Against which wickedness of his, Tert.
de Fug. in Pers.
even of his, we are here commanded to pray, the word (...), in the Masculine,
signifying properly Satan, Chem. Orat. Dom.
and in the Neuter, hurts and dangers, it may be sensed: the Article (...),
being sometime demonstrative, pointing at a special one, and other times
indefinit for any one, Gouge. on the L. P.
and in such a summary, as our Lord here intended, we may comprehend its
meaning, to be deliverance from all evil in the bulk, and Satan as the chief.

A Spanish Gentleman, and noctivagant, or a night-walker, Goularts Hist. Page
204
rising in his sleep through excessive heat, intending to wash in the River,
was met by one pretending the same business, but tempted him to cast himself
from a high bridge into a very deep place, into which the tempter was already
vapouring, the Dons seet no sooner touched the water; then he awoke, and
calling upon the other for help, was frustrat; perceiving it an evil spirit,
after prayer to God shifted as he could, avoided the danger, and guarded for
the future against such extravagancies; 1 Pet. 5. 8
and the Devils going about to devour, has made the Religious of old, urgent
and vigilant to escape captivity, and we in this age have no reason to be too
secure, though upon beds of Down.

From evil, that is hell, the place of evil. in Heaven all is good, on earth
there is some good, Act. ^. 25
but in hell no good. Judas is said to go to his own place, that ^is, to which
he was adjudged, his merits worthily casting him from the Apostolat, of which,
in, and by, his hypocrisy, he only keep'd possession; from which place,
Pelarg. in Act. Apost. c. 1.
worse then that wherein he died (which yet ( as is said) was so stinking, that
men were forced to stop their noses, through unwholesome scents,) we beg here
freedom from our Father, setting him, viz. Our Father, in the preface, in
opposition to that evil one here, Gaspar. in text.
begging his good, against the others evil, opposing person to person, things
to things, a Father to a Foe.

Behold this evil, through the prospect of Scriptural threats and exhortation,
and an evil example, and an evil death, is easily perceptible; all the Law and
Prophets, by a Father, is summed up in this, Bern. in Vigil. Natal. Dom. Ser. 5.
viz to eschew evil, and do good, but Drunkards, Blasphemers, Idolaters, Jews,
Turks, seeking still to debauch, there is strength to resist their
solicitations, violence, their frauds, and their enticements, here prayed for,
that though men accept favor from such, (which yet ought not to be done, Greg.
Naz. in Sent. 48.
says some) yet certainly no kindness ought to lure us unto, encouraging them
in unholy performances.

There is a people near unto Armenia, called the Curdi, whose Barbarous
cruelty, especially to Christians, P^rchas. Pilgrimage ut supra
has circumcised their country, and made it be called terra Diaboli Devils
land, and it is to be lamented that so much of the European continent, or
indeed so many of its Islands, Hos. 4. 2
may be thought to be governed by the same Sovereign; yet how prevalent soever
that Fiend be, to prevent the spreading of his dominion, as well as restricting
the exorbitancies thereof, 2 Cor. 4. 4
yea, for repelling its force, and nullifying its being, we pray, in
deliverance from evil.

Not only this, but a peaceable departure and removeal is here beseeched; the
death of the uncircumcised, or to die by the hands of a stranger, Ezekiel. 28. 10
being a curse; yea, not to die the common death of all men, or a man's own
death, being both sad and dangerous, is by all men (except inconsiderat)
deprecated under the notion of evil, Stella in Evang. Luc. c. 11
fire, water, and sudden death being comprehended therein, in the judgment of
a learned Interpreter.

A Scholar quarrelling with one of his companions over night, in the night in
his sleep, entered the others Chamber and slew him, returning still asleep into
his own bed, Gowlarts Hist. ut supra.
declaring next day he dreamed he had slain his Comrade: Here was temptation
and evil both done, and suffered; yet such, Reader, as may befall both me and
thee, which should make us pray against evil, whether in its causes, or in its
occasions, whether for our selves, or others.

It not being deliver me, Aug. cont. Donatist de Baptist. l. 1. c. 9.
but Us, from evil, without which charity, neque multa, neque magna, the doing
many things, the doing great things, being not good things, avails nothing;
but let it be still remembered, that the greatest Evil, viz. the evil of sin, is
to be guarded against, sickness, poverty, death, having no such bitter
influences on the Conscience, or on the Soul, as transgression has: for how
pleasant soever it seem to flesh, it shall be toylsome, P^rchas. Theater of
Bees, c. 32
burdensome, and tormenting: we read even of sour honey, such is sin, of heavy
sand, but evil is heavier, for that will rest at Earths Center, but the other
press to Hells bottomless bottom, Deuteronomy. 32 22
therefore most to be prayed against and feared upon our Earth, that from it by
the power of our Father in Heaven we may be delivered and made watchful against
it; I say watchful, for to pray against evil, Prove. 28 14
yet study to do evil, is bold impiety, and shall end in mischief.

It is (...) ^he Jesuits have a Law secluding women from their Colleges, and
if any, through the Porters inadvertence enter, the dust upon which she trod is
to be gathered, Hasenmuler Histo. Jesuit. c. 6. Sect. 2.
and extruded the gates, lest they be defiled; to preserve chastity is good,
and to fear evil is happy; but to avoid sin, the Heart more then the Earth is
to be heeded, and the soul of man rather then the sole of the shoe, is to be
respected, and praying, rather then such fooling, Psalm. 119 25.
is to be used as a proper antidot and remedy against sin, or evil.

But deliver us from evil.
THE pernicious consequences of sin and evil, are so numerous, that nature it
self prompts natural men to endeavor an escape; Acts 28 4.
but freedom from the tincture and stain of vice, is more earnestly pressed by
the spiritually intelligent; Mark 13 37
yea, in fear, or in case of sloth, the Doctrine is feelingly urged upon all
Saints, by the Lord of glory, in many Scriptures, particularly in this
Petition, deliver us from evil, Chry. Sermon. 70
that is, from the Devil, the Author and prompter to evil, being old in
wickedness, so skillful in allurements, Ib. Sermon. 71
that man with his carnal weapons, cannot defeat him in his invisible assaults,
and therefore cry for deliverance: which Petition that we may learn, let us
examine into the extent of the word deliver, and next the use thereof.

It is as broad as evil, as long as the day; it is not a tali vel tali, Matthew.
6 34
deliverance from this or that evil, Cajet. in textu.
as Peter from drowning, Sampson from thirsting, but absolutely from all, from
any evil, whether of temporal, spiritual, or of eternal concernment. The word
is (...), signifying two things, Downham Expos. on the L. P.
1. That we be preserved from falling into evil; next, that we be liberat out
of the evil wherein we have fallen, he trusted in God, said the Jews, let him
deliver him; Mat. 27 43
and this deliverance our Father does command four ways,

1. By renewing our natures through grace, Col. 3. 10
he washes us by the blood of his Son, which purges us from our innate
pollution, delivers us from the evil of a defiled soul, hard heart, dead
conscience, darkened understanding, and from the guilt of impure thoughts, by
sending in the nick of temptation fresh supplies of reserved grace, 2 Cor. 1^ 9
as a General will do to a stout and overpowered Officer.

Divines mention often of Restraining grace, by which the sinner meets with
obstructions in his clossest-contrived projects, Genesis 20 6
as Laban did in the ease of Jacob, which, though a singular mercy, yet
superlatively amounted by this renewing grace, Romans 12 2
it consisting in a transmenting of the soul, and drawing out from its remotest
ventricle, the very wishes of doing evil, destroying enmity to the Law, and
seminating the love of God, Leigh. Crit. Sacra.
whereby it is more desirable, and is indeed a delivering from, or drawing out
of that dark hole, which a Gentile Learned Critic thinks is employed in these
words, (...), deliver us.

2. By securing our persons from evil in his providence. Psalm. 127 7
In falls, slips, Sea-voyages, Land-journeys, if his holy Angels had not
supported, we had been like them that go down into the pit? Has not some in
their readings, dreamings, had warnings to prepare for the Cross? Fish. Book
Epist.
And that Book found in the belly of a Fish in the Market of the famous
University of Cambridge, a little before these late troubles, which being in
writ, and teaching preparation for the Cross, at a public Commencement or
Laureation, was certainly a providential, if not a miraculous warningpiece of
future disasters, hardly to be believed in future ages. And that was strange in
that old History, of a lascivious Soldier, who attempting the chastity of a
Virgin, Theod. Hist.
was wonderfully struck blind, whereby with her honor the Maid escaped intact,
Sanctor. Patrum, Hist. 9 Romans 16 20
and untouched.

3. By restraining our adversaries through his power. Satan's wisdom God has
made, and will still make foolishness, and his power weakness, and the
poisoned Arrows, which contrary to the Law of Arms, Ephesians. 6. 16
he shoots (called in Scripture fiery darts) become ineffectual, as touching
the execution of his designed end, for delivering of his adopted from their
apprehended evil: Saying to them as to the Sea, Hitherto have you gone, but you
shall go no further. Chrysostom. Hom. 20 in Mat.
Hence it is, Deliver us from evil, not evils; that we should not be revenged
at one another, but united against Satan, he being the head in which evil is
most desperately plotted.

4. By detecting the world, in showing it in its native dress. That often by
the golden Apple of some gaudy and finical pleasure, interrupts us in our
course to the New Jerusalem; in going aside with Judah; Genesis 38 16
in falling back with the Galatians; Gal. 5. 7
in embracing this present world with Demas; with those hypocritical painted
countenance, strong men have perished; but the deformity thereof in the
withdrawing its mask, being viewed, creats in place of love, a detestation of
its blandishments, and a derision of her wheynings.

To conceit a purgatory in this prayer, Hug. Card. in text.
is to bring strange fire into the Sanctuary; for unless it can be proved,
that Christ has not completely suffered for our sins, or that his blood
cleanses us not from all sin, 1 Ioh. 1. 7
we cannot fancy any suffering of our own, to be either just, or profitable:
And when the Apostle teaches that righteous men, 2 Cor. 5. 8
naming himself, is present with the Lord, when absent from the body; 2 Cor. 5.
1
and that when this earthly Tabernacle is dissolved, they have one eternal in
the Heavens. It is wondered how Rome entertains the Doctrine of purging souls,
in a distinct locality from either; Rev. 14. 13
and where is that blessed rest they possess that die in the Lord, if there be
a burning Purgatory?

Deliver us from evil, Psalm. 91. 15
that is, from the Devil, World, and sin, and in all spiritual conflicts, God
having a City of resuge from the inticer to evil, and in case of seduction,
has the kindness to bind up their wounds by the death of the High Priest,
Number. 35. 28
antidoting the souls of the deluded against the poisoned Arrows, which either
by force or stratagem, Satan, or any of his accomplices can throw against them:
David and Peter fell, and yet were delivered after they had finned; Joseph was
delivered and he had not sinned, and many of the righteous are delivered by
death, Isa. 57. 1
least they should sin; which last, though it be not the lot of every Saint,
(for Daniel saw the captivity) yet it has been the prayer of the Elect, Phil.
1. 22
as Paul of old desired, to be with Christ, and long after him, it was said of
Satyrus, non nobis ereptus es, Ambros. Funeb: Orat. de Obitu. Satyr.
sed periculis, thou art not removed from us but from evils, and in the last
age, an holy Germain desired removeal, for three causes, to behold Christ,
enjoy the company of the Saints, and be free ab implacabilibus odiis
Theologorum, Mel. Adam. in vit Strigelii.
from the furious disputes of contentious Scollars and Divines.

Deliverance is that copiosa redemptio, a full redemption from evil, 1. By
prevention, that it come not, Page Ex. of the L. P.
2. By subvention that it conquer not, 3. By plenary liberation that it never
come. And it our houies be naunted, by evil spirits, (to pass the proving that
we are not oblidged to dwell where Satan is an inmate; or to speak to him
without special revelation) besides that courage, Lava^er. of sp^r is lib. 3.
c. 6
and faith which is to be exercised, and a gooly life, fasting, prayer, and
this prayer, are proper means to be delivered from that annoyance.

In bodily distempers, worldly crosses, not charms, but prayer is to be made
use of, for our deliverance, as did the Christian Army under Bren King of
Jerusalem, Full. holy war lib 3. c. 25.
besiedging Damiata in Egypt, when provision was brought into their tents by
the overflowing of Nilus, bold fishes swiming throughout the Leagure, to their
great terror and amazement, in that manner, that Soldiers took them up in
their hands, but the sauce being more then the meat, by prayer and fasting the
river was diverted, yea ditched, that it returned no more; by prayer and
thanksgiving throughout the army, by open Proclamation. Afterward the city
being taken, great spoil was found, and by applying the same medicament, great
cures have been wrought, and great evils senced against: Theod. in vita Maron.
for as it is said of Maro in the history, it will cure fevers, remove devils,
discharge avarice, heal wrath, cool lust, cure sloth, and command intemperance
to be gone; the prayers of the penitent be a Catholicon, proper against all
diseases.

It is a question well ftarted, and wisely answered, S. R. B^ker. Dis. on the
L. P.
by a person of learning and honor, why in this prayer we have no Petition for
a joyful resurrection, or for eternal life, for to let pass what is contained
in Thy Kingdom come, it is sued for also in deliverance from evil, it being the
highest step we can attain unto in this life, and by it Christ's says, Friend,
sit up higher; and therefore are we delivered from evil, that we may be
delivered unto Heaven: I say, we, for again it is, deliver Us, not Me; neither
ought we to envy or hate our Brethren, how different soever from us, all have
not one speech, one accent, nor one opinion, Tatian. Orat. ad Graecos.
yet non decet, we are not to quarrel with them, nor oppose their good
therefore; but what can be said, propter peccatum venditi sumus, we are by our
sins separated from God, and by judgment he has divorced us from one another,
and not praying against evil, with and for our Brethren, all of us suffer evil
from our God, Matthew. 5. 25
as from our adversary, because we will not agree with our brother in the way;
from which evil, with all other, good Lord deliver us.

And so much for the Matter of this Petition, the Order has respect unto the
whole prayer; and is briefly this, viz. there is no freedom from evil to be
expected, without calling upon the Father, hallowing of his Name, advancing of
his Kingdom, doing of his Will, acknowledging of his Providence, craving pardon
for our offenses, watching against temptation; all which do so secure us, that
evil shall not come nigh our dwelling.

CHAP. IX.
For thine is the Kingdom, Power, and Glory, for ever.
IN our entry, this Prayer was compared to Ierusalems Temple, it had an outward
Court; Lights. on the Temple, c. 13
here is a Preface, a goodly Porch like it, having no doors, because
representing Heaven, the words Our Father, being open to all Believers. There
was the holy place, here are seven Petitions; there was the most holy place,
here is the conclusion, (the comparison running not upon all four) for thine is
the Kingdom, Power, and the Glory, etc. Words significant, yet ommitted in the
Vulgar Latin, and generally neglected by the Latin Fathers, because, as it is
thought, not recorded by St. Luke, from which argument how much of the Gospel
must be snatched from, and scratched out of St. John, Ioh. 17. 1
because not recorded by St. Matthew? yet retained in the writings of the Greek
Fathers, Chrysostom, Theophylact, and the Author of Opus imperfectum, which
passed for the work of the first named Author, generally until the last age,
and is yet ordinarily bound up with his works.

The Romish Interpreters put a reproach generally upon this clause, Ca^et.
Barrad. etc.
thinking it has stole into the Gospel from a custom of the Greek Church,
whose Clergy said this, when the people uttered, deliver us from evil. But the
dangerous consequence of such conclusions explods the very imagination of such
base and blasphemous interpretations, and much of the Gospel by it may be
adjudged men's conceits, not to rake into Montanus his animadverte; Erasmus his
nugae; Barradius his irrepsit; and having spoken of that difference betwixt the
two Evangelists, and the reasons thereof.

Either this must be a part of the Prayer, or most Greek copies must be
suspected, or which is more, this prayer is not perfect, as wanting a sorm of
Praise, and Thanksgiving, which makes it so opposite in St. Matthew (who
registrats the prayer fully) that it ought not to be extruded, Calvin. Instit.
lib. 3. c. 20.
though not found in some copies, through prejudice or misunderstanding, many
having it, and learned Interpreters paraphrasing upon it; Catena. Aur.
yea, Aquinas gives it his interpretation, without any reflection upon its
being a fondling, but as holy Writ, though in his text, following the Vulgar,
it be not inserted, though yet it be retained in more Authentic, and more
correct copies, the Syriack, and the hebrew, which were the Originals.

Being not bound to err with any, King Ex. of the L. P.
holding this conclusion as part of the holy Canon, and holy Writ; we shall of
it, as of the prayer, consider the matter, and next its influence on prayer. In
the first it may be explained, 1. As a reason of our praying: 2. As a reason of
our praying to the Father: 3. As a reason of our so praying.

In the first of these, as they are illative, and ^ollowing the particle FOR,
they weigh,

1. The Kingdom to ^e his, and therefore as subjects, Psa 97. 1
the supplicants are to be preserved. It is a Kings duty to guard his coasts,
secure his subjects, and protect their goods, they having no power of
themselves, except to say, Psa. 57. 1
Deliver us from evil, For thine is the Kingdom.

2. The Power to be his, and therefore the supplicants as unable, ought to be
upheld. It is power which makes a King, and the higher power, being God; yea,
as in our Creed, being God Almighty, the inhabitants of Earth have recourse to
him for bread, for forgiveness, for thine is the Power.

3. The Glory to be his, and therefore the supplicants as thankful, ought to be
answered. The beggar receiving a morsel, renounceth merit, and blesses his
benefactour, the Christian knowing whose bread he eats, ought not to forget,
Ambros. Ser. 42.
but being religiously thankful, bless God for food natural, as bread, or
Physic; or spiritual, for mercy and forgiveness, or political, Psa. 145. 2
as freedom of body, credit in report, or convenience in house, and is
retributio divinorum, but all the reward expected for bountiful liberality.
For, for hastening of his Kingdom, teaching of his will, and deliverance from
evil, his shall be, that is, thine is the Glory.

It was said of Gordian the third Emperor, Hist. August. in vita Gord.
that he wanted nothing to complete a Prince, but Age; and it was said by him,
miserable is that King from whom truth is concealed; but in the King of this
Kingdom, there is no apprehension of de^ect, he clearly knowing all distresses
the meanest subject can fall under, which is his Glory, and can by omnipotence
deliver him out of all, for his is the Power, there being no possibility of
avoiding his search and censure, for his is the Kingdom.

Again we pray to him, Psalm 73. 25
not to Saints or Angels, the Sovereignty not being theirs; give us
deliverance, assistance, say we to the Father, For thine is the Kingdom, Peter,
Mary, Gabriel, Anna, or St. Barbara, being but Subjects, our Sisters, and our
Brethren, neither is the Power theirs; by grace they are what they are, but he
by nature, that is, by himself can discharge all debts, quench the horest fire,
restore the dead, stop the mouths of Lions, framed us in the womb, makes the
Heavens as a Canopy above us, and hangs the earth upon nothing under us. Job
26. 7
For which power let him have all the Glory, and make our access by faith unto
him.

It is said, that young Titus (the delight of mankind, as he is called) after
worthy warlike exploits, was so courted, so beloved, that it was rumored he
intended to rebel against his father, but he hasted to confute the calumny,
Sueton. in vita.
and after a great expedition, unexpectedly accosted Vespasian the Emperor
with a veni Pater veni, Father, (...)
here am I, Father, here am I, as if thereby he had showed him filial
faithfulness, and bear testimony there was no project of disloyalty against
his Sire, the Kingdom being his; and certainly, in the worshipping of Saints,
there is treachery against the King of Saints, he having no Master of requests
in Heaven but Jesus, Acts 4. 12
nor no name there whereby we can be saved, but Christ's of Nazareth.

There may be a King without a Kingdom, without Power and Glory, in his
Kingdom. The King of Spain, Fullers holy war lib. 5. c. ^9
when all Christian Princes have quit it, styles himself still King of
Jerusalem, but his authority and royalty in it, is not so great as it is when
he enters Biscay, Heylyn. Cosmograph.
where yet he must not by Law enter, without a bare leg. But this King having a
Kingdom, and in that, Glory and Power, and these in a King who is thy Father, 1
Kings 17. 14
O thou of little faith, wherefore do thou doubt? he will by Power, bless
thy small store, command thy handful of meal, by authority, not to decrease,
and make thy fleshlesse broth, giving him the Glory, Dan. 1. 12
nourish thee and thy son, more then the dainties of a King do himself or his
royal issue.

Yet rembember there are degrees of glory even upon earth, and though St. Paul
can glorify God in his life, yet if his death can produce more glory, the will
of God is, that the less cede to the greater; so that indeed thine is the
glory, is a boundiary and limitation for submit^ing to his will, in his
Kingdom, and giving him the glory in the utmost extremity, since his power can
extricate us out of the deepest contrivances of men or Devils.

Once more this clause is to be reflected upon, Hirwood Expos. of the L. P.
in each Petition of the Prayer, as Hallowed be thy Name, thy Kingdom come,
etc. For thine is the Kingdom, the power, etc.

One will have In Earth as it is in Heaven, joined to the three first
Petitions, as Hallowed be thy Name, etc. In Earth as it is in Heaven: and this
last Doxology, For thine is the Kingdom, to have reference to the four last, as
Give us our daily bread, forgive us our debts, etc. Author Imper^. in text.
For thine is the power, and to do this is for thy glory, in regard he is
glorified when the fearers of his Name are aided, defended, honored, as he was
when the house of Obed-Edom prospered.

There is visibly in it, Gods sovereignty to make us low: it is not thine are
the Kingdoms, but the Kingdom, his being but one, and all others but his
Vassals, which even beastly Heathenish, Tacit. Annal. Lib. 15.
brutish, and destroying Nero knew so well, that at the re-building of Rome
(which was suspected to be burnt at his own order) Sacrifices were offered to
Vulcan, and other gods and goddesses, Sybillarumque Libri, the Books of
Heathenish Prophetesses were perused also to have all things more prosperous
for the future; King James Medit. on the L. P.
this God, this Father, this King, being a King in solidum, (as our learned
King does King-like interpret the words) commanding all and in all, over all,
as himself will, and all for himself.

In it there is also Gods eternity to make us fear. A Kingdom which we know is
to perish, a Power that will in time fade and grow feeble, would not cause
everlasting terror, were it not to be he^erodox in history, it might be
affirmed the Greek Monarchy to be madness rather then a reign; and though its
first Parent Alexander was dreaded, AElian. Hist. Var. lib. 13. c. 30
and by some adored, yet, was he not at last contemned, scorned, and that by
his own Mother, when for want of hands, for want of respect, he lay thirty days
unburied, and got earth, but by a stratagem of a friend? sic transit gloria
mundi, so shall the fashion of this world perish, and the glory of it become as
dung, when this everlasting King shall come in power, with excellent glory, to
take an account of the subjects of his Kingdom, in order to reward them for
ever.

For thine is the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever.
BEholding these words as a portion of the Canon, the testimony against them
being negative and humane, and the Latin Fathers rather blameworthy for
ommitting them, because not in Luke, then the Greek Fathers for preserving of
them, being found in St. Matthew, and if ommitted in some Greek Copies, or in
the Vulgar Latin, the Monkish Amanuensis, to magnify and uphold the honor of
the same, might cover it, as the second Commandment is from the Law, because of
its boldness to discharge Idolatry, so religiously observed in the Cloister,
Eras:
though he who speaks most basely, if not blasphemously, of this Doxology,
acknowledges he found it in all Greek Copies; and therefore from its adversary
we press its reverence: yea, 2 Timothy 4 18
St. Paul in mentioning the deliverance from evil, Arnold. Lux. in Tenebris
fine intervallo, with the same breath, mentions of a Heavenly Kingdom, and of
glory for ever and ever. Amen.

But controversies being out of our Province, we advance, to behold the
influence this Coronida has upon prayer, and how easy is it to understand its
commands for praying, Argumentatively, Confidently, Thankfully, yea,
Practically also?

Great things are asked in this Prayer, things not to be scanned by the
measures, words, or conceptious of creatures; yet it is evident we are not
unreasonable in our demands, Psalm. 86 12
Bow down thine ear and hear, O Lord, said the Psalmist, for I am poor and
needy: And Christ the Savior of the world, prays, Father, Ioh. 17 24
I will that they whom thou have given me be with me where I am: FOR thou
love me, and will have us still to pray, Thy Kingdom come: Psa. 12. 1
FOR thine is the Kingdom, Power, and the Glory, for ever; Arguments drawn from
his Dominion, Authority, Excellency, and Eternity, etc.

But note, the reasons are all brought from himself, we declining any boon from
our own eminency, equality, or merit: and if a Saint plead for mercy, Psalm. 6. 2
because of poverty, or holiness, it is not to be dreamed he understands
self-worth, Psalm. 50 15
but his pressure under that exigence, unto which God by grace ha^h made
promise of support. And moreover it is to be remembered, that the mercy is still
suited in our prayers, conform to the condition we stand under, as we are weak,
ignorant, or indebted, so still we desire proportionable succor, Psalm. 17. 8
Keep me as the apple of the eye, says David, and that has first the brow,
the prominency of the brow, Theod. and Caiet. in loc.
hair-brow, the lids, the hair or latches to those lids, then the muscles and
membranes of the eye, signifying that divine and secret protection, he then
wanted, under his many^old extremities, from which consideration, a judicious
Author will have this clause to be esteemed honest, and not as a thief to enter
into this Prayer from any custom of men (a dangerous conceit, Calvin. Harm.
and may curtail the Bible) but in an holy and devout way, for a seemly close
approved by God, and recommended by Christ unto his Church.

By the way, the pertinency of Prayer lies in these two,

1. By asking relief from our present necessities by ordinary means. Jonah 1. 5
If a weary Traveller should ask for wind to blow him forward, or an hungry
Petitioner for food from Heaven; or a timorous Pilot for the creating of an
Harbor, the prayer were impiously, ridiculous: Our Savior would not pray for
twelve legions of Angels; Mat. 26 ^3
yet with great fervor he urged the removing of the cup. Yea, not in these
things only, but against Alexanders Fate we may call for a decent gathering
into our Fathers.

2. By craving mercy agreeable to our duration, having everlasting principles.
A good man being told that his father was dead, was sharp, Niceph. Eccl. Hist
l. 12. c. 64
and replied, define blasphemare, blaspheme not my father, he is immortal; and
indeed die absolutely we shall not, the soul but removes for a while, and until
it return, the body sleeps; our eviternity causes us to eye eternity, and
because we are for ever, to be, its pertinent to deprecat evil for ever.

(...), throughout ages, for ever; some render it in English, for ever and
ever: the first ever expressing Gods ever-being, or that part of eternity which
is past, (pardon the impropriety of the phrase) and the last ever, that which
is to come.

Touching the confidence this Conclusion creats in the Temple, Psa. 65. 2
or in the Closet, in the breast and soul of the heavenly Orator, it is
pregnantly seen, by applying the several parts thereof unto the several
Petitions of the Prayer, thus, viz. Thine is the Kingdom, and therefore God
ought, and it is for his honor to regard his good Name, 2 Samuel 12 29
and therefore let it be hallowed; and as a King, he ought to look to the
observation of his Laws, therefore let his will be done; and he must, being a
King, look to the wealth of his Subjects, Genesis 41 55
and therefore let them have bread. It is also the glory of a King, to pass by
a transgression, let him therefore pardon our trespasses; he ought moreover to
^ecure his Subjects, by delivering them from temptation, and ease his Subjects,
1 Samuel 11. 6
by delivering them from evil; the doing whereof can be nothing to him, for his
is the power; nay, it shall pro^ure something to him, for he shall have all the
glory for ever.

For ever. 2 Samuel 12 30
The King of the Ammonites had once a Kingdom and a Crown, but could keep
neither: Darius in his first message unto Alexander the great, Quint. Curt. l. 2
styled himself Rex Regum, and Consanguineum Deorum, King of Kings, and Cousin
to the Gods, with other expressions thought by the Historian flaunting, but the
event showed his folly, fear, flight, poverty, and thirst made him know, he was
but (when highest) as the grass, Psalm. 103 15
the glory of all Kings but being emanations from the glory of this King of
whom we treat, and like summer brooks shall be dried up, as the story of Darius
was, his glory alone remaining for ever, Psalm. 115 1.
and praise belonging to him, not power to them.

To Kingdom, Power, and Glory here, St. Peter adds Dominion, 1 Pet. 5. 11
and Jude Majesty, words without multiplication, not being able to express
Jehovah his greatness; yet these two, how eminent soever, are comprised in
this breviary, Dominion being to be found in the word Kingdom, Jude 25
and Majesty, in that of Glory; from which as a fountain, all the rivulets of
splendour, refreshing men or Angels, have their first rise, as is cleared in the
Pronoun THINE, Chrysostom. Hom. 20 in Mat.
Thine is the Glory* not only of delivering us from evil, but of bequeathing
unto us good; yea, because of his goodness, Theoph. in Text.
being confident of glorious good things for ever: his Name God, being
originally from that act called Good, in our Ancestors Dialect.

Thankfulness and Gratitude, a constituent of true Prayer, and without which
it cannot, nor ought not to be, is so shining in this Epilogue of Thine is the
Kingdom, etc. that a learned Author concludes it to be added purely ut Dei laus
finiret preces nostras, to evince our Prayers, are to end in Praise; and
generally it is so in these or the like words now, as of old in refutation of
the Arrian Here^ie; the latin Fathers ended their supplications, Through our
Lord Jesus Christ, cui cum Patre, to whom with the Father and the Holy Spirit,
be honor and glory for ever: Alsted. Theol. Catech. de Orat. Dom.
and this not only to their own conceptions, but to this Prayer, taking all
means to hammer that heretical doctrine of Arrius, which by the Learned is
given as a reason for their ommitting of this, per oration, in their
Commentaries and Homilies upon the Gospel. However it may be questioned, 1 Timothy
2. 1
what kind of Prayers these be, which want both Praise in their body, and in
their close? but leaving them to the censure of the Scriptures, Psa. 85. 2
I must declare it provokes a smile, to hear how impertinently, to say no
worse, some even in public, end their addresses unto God, where after begging
plurality, or multitude of mercies, they end with, In hope whereof we give thee
praise, and remain as mute as Fishes, appending neither Glory, nor Amen,
according to this manner.

The smell of thy Ointments (says the Spouse to his Church) is better then all
Spices; Cant. 4 10
there is ointment of Contrition, a falling down before the Throne, in grief
for sin committed, the soul thereby anointing the feet o^ Christ. Bern. Set.
10. in Cant. Canti^
Of Devotion, in doing good to all the Saints, whereby the body of Christ is
anointed. And there is also the ointment of Gratulation, acknowledging the
receipt of invaluable favors, wherewith the soul unguents the head of Christ,
Crowning him King-like, by giving to him Praise, Honor, and Glory, for all
possessions. And in this form of Praise, we render ^^anks, 1. For our
Denization, being Naturalized, and made Subjects of his Kingdom. 2. For our
Information, and knowledge of the blessed Trinity, and that in Unity, Isa. 42, 8
included in the expression, Father in Heaven, that his glory be not given to
another. 3. For our Expectation, or hopes of the world to come, for ever being
added, ut firmius stet, Bucan. in Orat. Dom.
that we mig^^ be strengthened in the perpetuity and immutability and eternity
of Gods glory and domin^^n. 4. For our Preservation, or deliver^nce from evil,
and all evils in which, both in, and from the womb we might have fallen,
without his inspection, as was that Country Boy, who being ordered to drive
home some Oxen from the Field, Gowlarts Hist. 241
was benighted, and storm-stead by a sudden shower of snow, which covering the
ways, and stopping passages, the Child was enclosed in the Mountains, his
^arents seeking him in vain, but after two days, designing to find only his
body for burial, they found him on a Bank, neither covered nor touched with
snow, and told them, he tarried there intending to return home in the evening;
Psalm. 84 11
(certainly God was both a Sun and a Shield unto him, nay, a Purveyour for)
being asked if he had eaten any thing, told them, A man whom I knew not came
and gave me Bread and Cheese: Hos. 11. 3
Though all meet not with such portions of wonderful kindness, yet generally
we have such Guardian Providence, that if God had not held us by the coat, we
had perished in our folly, in our impiety, which ought to be recorded by us
both in thankful remembering of it before the Altar, Genesis 35. 1, 2
and in walking suitably thereunto before men.

For Prayer must be practiced, Isa. 1. 15, 16
and in an holy life only can we pray daily, he having the Kingdom, and the
Power, we as Subjects ought to be faithful, and loyal, and as Servants,
diligent and peaceable, and that always, since he is for ever, a word that man
cannot fathom, a note beyond all ordinary rules, a lesson more then our Masters
can pierce or construe. I say, since he for ever lives to punish us for ever,
Isa. 2. 17
in case of disloyalty, let us for ever be obedient.

Some learned men, during the Council of Basil (a time wherein the world was
turned a School, and every soul a learned Disputant) walking in and about a
Wood, debating about the questions of that age, Hondors in Exem. secund.
Praecept.
heard and saw an unusual, if not prodigious bird, its sweetness was so
enchanting, that it was suspected and conjured, and then it declared it self to
be a soul condemned in unto that Wood, until the great day, after which it was
to suffer eternal plagues; then taking wing, cried, saying, O quam diuturna est
aeternitas! O how long is eternity! O how immense is eternity! all suddenly
sickned, and in few days after died, who beheld it. Melanchton judged it to be
a Devil inhabiting the place. But whatever it were, the relation may admonish
us, in this litigious age (wherein q^estions are started of no weight, yet
pursued with scorching ^eat) to retire from the throng of disputes, Greg. Hom.
11. In Evan.
into our selves, and mind eternity; for by well-doing, and upright living,
shall we only live happily with our Father which is in Heaven, (an ^pellation
in the Preface) settling us in love, King James Medit. on L. P.
as thine is the Kingdom, Power, and Glory, fixes us in confidence, in the
Conclusion, For ever.

CHAP. X.
Amen.
IF the structure of this Prayer be like to Solomon's Temple, Tolbooth Church,
Nov. 15. 1668.
the Preface as the Porch, the Prayer like the holy place, the Conclusion like
the most holy, we shall in it assimulat Amen to the glory of the Lord in a
cloud, which being the last breath of this first and perfect Prayer, comes
last to be considered, 1. In its original and nature. 2. In its place and order.

It is signaculum orationis Dominicae, S. Jerome. in Text.
the seal of this, and of all other prayers; yet forsooth has the misfortune
with its companions to be thrust from the Codex of the Gospel, as being
inserted into the Evangelist, not from our Saviors lips, but from the custom
of the Church, as if every thing which is not in Luke, or Mark, must be ejected
John and Matthew, where Amen is to be sound; this Prayer being sent as an
Epistle to our Father, closed by Amen, and given to be presented by the graces
of Faith and Charity upon command.

It is sometime put before a sentence, and so is a note of confirmation,
ordinarily translated verily; Chrysostom. Hom. 1^ in Mar^.
and in the New Testament imports that expression; As I live, in the Old; but
here it is in the close, as in the execrations of the Law, and is doubled by
the Psalmist, in blessing the Lord, from everlasting to everlasting, Amen, and
Amen, Psalm. 4* 13
that is, Amen in the heart, Amen, in the mouth, Caje^. in loc.
demonstrating the union of these two, in this one duty of blessing God.

It is a Jew by birth, and speaks Hebrew in the Laconick style, yet its
ingenuity and noble converse, its candor and comprehensivenesse, has procured
for it self that freedom to be denized, in all Nations, and all in each Nation,
speaking the same Language, says Amen, and is either imperantis, Ambros. in
Psa. 40
of command, or confirmantis, of assuring, or precantis, of desiring, and is
generally, and was of old annexed to Prayer and Praise, except that it was
impiously, because out of scorn, laid aside by Humorists, as though the saying
of Amen had not been a Gospel-precept.

It grows upon the Hebrew root Aman, which by interpretation signifies to
nourish, and by degrees, as by bearers, blooms on a branch, signifying truth
and fixednesse; and the truth is, Amen has nothing of flatulency or
windiness* but nourishes every soul that by holy discretion* prepares a
Conscience for its receiving.

It is not interpreted by Expositors here, Nec Grae^us Interpres ausus est, Aug
41 Tract. in Joan.
neither dare they, yea, the verity is, they cannot, there being no Language to
express its full sense, and in Scripture having different significations;
being taken, 1. Substantively. 2. Assertively. 3. Optatively.

1. Substantively, and then it signifies Christ himself: Rev* 3* 14 Parae^^ in
loc. Wishart 22 Lect. on the L. P.
These things says the Amen, that is the Truth, he being prima veritas, the
first and the last; and by Amen he gives a reality to what he has spoken,
because in him all the promises are yea, and Amen. In the word Father, the
Trinity is employed, the first Person only expressed in Amen, the second is
contained, and these are one with the Spirit. Hence one promises, I resolve
never te leave Amen out of my Prayer, Harwood
since it is as much as Christ, which one sound from the heart, is able to
procure Gods^blessing on all our askings, importing, For Christ's sake have
mercy and hear, O Heavenly Father.

2. Assertively, and then it is a note of Attention, M^t 16. 28
translated often Verily; for what is in one Text Amen, Luke 9. 27
or Verily, is in the parallel Text Amen, or of a truth, as if Christ should
have said, Aug. ut s^pra.
I speak it not rashly, but certe, profecto, si fas est dicere, juratio ejus
est, it is indeed his Oath, so to speak, As I live, Amen; Verily there be some
standing here, which shall not taste of death till they see the Kingdom of God:
Isa. 65. 16
And in the Prophet it is said, he who blesses or swears in the earth, shall
bless or swear by the God, Amen, or of truth.

3. Optatively, Rev. 7* 12
and then it is a note of wishing; Blessing; and thanksgiving, and honor, said
the Angels, be to our God, for ever and ever, Amen, and may in this sense be
expounded, fiat, or So-be-it, a word short of Amen's extent, and is but a
corner of it, yet used by many of late with us, as thought more perfect and
significant, though Amen is reverent and gray headed, and venerable through all
ages, under the Law by Moses used in point of jealousy, Number. 15. 22
and in point of exaction by Nehemiah, Neh. 5. 13
that it like the last stroke of an heavy Bell, might bumme in their ears who
had offended. It ends all the Epistles, the third of John, and that of St.
James excepted; and is the last word of the Bible, and one way or other Fifty
times used in the New Testament.

It is acutely observed, that the mystery of the Jews conversion is herein
touched, Harwood on the ^. P.
the whole Prayer being Greek, this Amen only Hebrew, hinting, though
obscurely, that the Greeks, that is, the Gentiles, shall speak the language of
Canaan, and that the Jews shall be conducted unto Christ the Amen; these two by
our Father being united in him, who is the truth, the way, the life, Ioh. 14. 6
and the AMEN.

Let Amen respect Christ, it is nota fiduciae, of affiance, regarding all his
offices, expecting with confidence deliverance by him as our King, Instruction,
as our Prophet, and remission of sin as our Priest; yea, indubitanter, it is
unquestionable he would not have us scruple the obtaining any thing we demand,
Cate^. A^rea.
because next Amen, he says, if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly
Father will also forgive you.

Let it respect the soul, and its nota desiderii, and checks our dullness,
ro^zing up our ^etha^gick spirits, and like the last stroke of a shrill Clock,
shows what time we have spent in Prayer, and what heart we have toward God,
for the advancement of his honor, or for the remission of sin, Cant. 8. 14
(...) Rev. 22. (...) ^0
Make haste, my beloved, said the Church of old, Even so, come Lord Jesus,
says the Church now. Amen. The Jews make four kinds of Amen, 1. Pupillum, when
the thing to which i^ is said, is not understood. The 2. is surreptum, when it
is not heard throughout. The 3. is o^^osum, when it is not thought upon. The
last is, when it is pronounced from the heart, and desired, and that is, Amen
justorum which they account their own, Alsted. lo. (...).
ending still their devotion with it: this shows quam difficile, how hard a
thing it is to say Amen, says one; yet Cyprian being sentenced, ut gladio
feriatur, to be beheaded with the sword, for being Christian, said, Amen, is
somewhere recorded by another.

Let it respect the Preface, and it contains the mystery of the Trinity, unto
which we only ought to pray, all others being only our fellow creatures, and
has not begotten us, or our sisters or brethren, and so not our fathers, which
speaks two things, 1. The fullness of the Scriptures, not only Amen, but each
Iota in the institutions of God is mysterious, and of immensi^rable sense. Rom
7. 21
2. Comforts in our failings, for if in Prayer infirmity divert us from a
zealous pursuit of heavenly objects, we recover our feet, and unites in one
Amen. Bern. Ep^st. 201
Now there remains three, said a Father, the Word, Example, and Prayer: yet all
the three is here for Prayer, and Amen, and example even in History is not
wanting: For,

Basil the Great, Tymp^u Sp^c^l. Mag. Sig. 200
being sick, was attended by one Joseph a Jew, and his Physician, who had from
natural signs showed him that he should die about the evening. What, said
Basilius, if I live another day? then said Joseph, I shall become Christian.
The holy man for saving a soul, plyes the Throne of God, and about three of the
Clock rises next morning in health, which so astonished the Doctor, that he
was the same day baptized in the public Congregation, by Basil, who returning
to his bed, died. Likewise So^inus dying, Melch. ad^^^ ^ vita.
called upon his Redeemer, attesting dependence upon providence and mercy,
hearing Scriptural exhortations for his souls strengthening, to every Text
sobjoyned his zealous Amen, Amen. Heb. 11. 33
And what has not Prayer done throughought the world? why then should this
three^old cord be broken, having the word Prayer and example for Amen in all
our supplications.

Let it respect the Petitions, it is worthily compared to a bound or stitched
up Book, more portable and less bulksome, then when scattered in single
sheets; the Law was abreviated in the ten Commandments; the Gospel is abridged
in the Creed, and the Lords Prayer; yea, all Prayer in Amen, which speaks
three things;

1. Ordering the studying of Amen. Let the mad world say its list. 1 Cor. 14.
16*
it is Divine, and of heavenly sanction, and as Jesus, though Hebrew, is over
all the world understood, Mat. 1. 21
and if more closely studied, would prove consolatory and more revered, even so
Amen, if searched into, should prove significantly helpful for all addresses:
It was of old uttered to each curse, and here annexed to each Petition, and
once for all uttered, discovering its secret Energy, Ambros. in 1 Cor. 14*
but impenitus enim audiens, if he that understands not the prayer cannot say
Amen, how shall he say it, who understands not Amen it self.

2. Ordering the saying of Amen. As it is an old, so it is an holy, seemly, and
necessary duty in the Church, or at Church Service, for all to say Amen; Rev.
19. 4*
by it the Church Militant being mostly Uniform, to that of the Triumphant, the
noise of Dogs is harsh, of crying children troublesome, Mell^. patrum* he
flourished, A. D. (...)
of opening locks unholy, etc. But the noise of Amen is heavenly, we are
baptized, said Iustine in his Apology for Christianity, to Antonius the heathen
Emperor, we communicate, we gather offerings, we pour forth prayers, we
celebrat praise, and the people say, Amen. And if the word lingua, the tongue
in its initiatory letters, direct to a six-^old duty, at all times the tongue
must express Amen, for it does as, L. directs, for then, loquitur been, it
speaks good. Binch. Mellif. loc. 12.
I. then Jesus is acknowledged. N. and then the Name of God is invocate. G.
then the Grace of God is proclaimed. V. then the Will of God is obeyed. A. and
all others about us are edified, instructed, and holily excited.

3. Ordering the affecting of Amen, we have not ended our prayers, if according
to this pattern, until this be Echoed from the heart, Christ having said it
before us. It is said that the natural heat, Mexi^^ Treasury lib. 1. c. 13
being more and greater in man then in any other creature, does in a second
sense, or as a secondary cause, make his body straight, and his soul when
heated by holy zeal, shall more and more being fledged or ^eathered, by the
practice of prayer, spiritually go aloft, entering by devotion the Quire of
Angels, bearing share in their Antiphonies, Rev. 1^. 16
as in the vision, Amen, Allelujd, where obiter, by Amen we learn that God is
to be praised, and by Allelujah, that he is to be feared, it is the fi^tieth
Greek word in this prayer, ^rix. Com. Symb.
and fifty was the Jubilee, and that was the year of rest, and after much
plodding, and praying, we rest in Amen, that is in Christ Jesus.

Let it respect the Conclusion, and it shows when in prayer the Christian
comes to his conclama^um est, a closs laying his petitions, and his case
before the Throne of God, leaving them to the Power, Glory, and Authority of
God* which speaks two things,

1. Perseverance in all prayer. 1 These. 5. 17
Mind but that precept, Pray without ceasing, and this command, Pray after this
manner, that is, as, and from Our Father, to Amen, and from Amen, to Our
Father, in circulo; and it is easy to infer that there is a religious
unweariednesse (at least in habit) wrapped up in this word and work.

2. Confirmation of all good. We here beg, and continue begging, for good and
comfortable things, until we say, Amen; there sisting, steadfastly persuaded,
that in the Kingdom of our Father, Aug. Hom. 42
by his Power, for his Glory, we shall want no portion of the matter craved,
heeding this form, as most perfect, which was daily by the Ancients in Gods
House, observed as such, in order for their prosperous and more successful
issue in their practical devotion, its vastness and perfection, mediating from
Heaven, Antidots against the narrowness, and many failings wherewith their
performances, in point of justice were beheld, and because of which, they might
have been excluded the ears of God, who certainly is most delighted with the
penitents lips and heart, when both are acting in the words his blessed Son and
our Savior has endited to them.

Not that we are to use no other prayer, for that is contrary to our Lords own
practice, in his deprec^ting the Cup, Mat. 24* ^0
and his precept in his enjoining prayer, that our flight might not be in the
winter, nor on the Sabbath day: yet both these, and all other Scriptural
prayers are ac^^^ding to this prayer, as it is in Matthew, pray afte^ this
m^nner; and since the command in (...), it is to be made a prayer, as it is
required in that Evangelist, (...) 11. ^
When ye pray, say, Our Father, which we are no more to doubt of its being done
by the Apostles, then to doubt of their baptizing in the Name of Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, Mat. 28. 19
though we read of neither; the Law for both being evident, and the Law of
Amen, is equally Scriptural, as Lead us not into temptation, though some boldly
expunge it the Text, and exclude it their mo^ths, Critic. Londine^s. (...)
because its not to be found in St. Luke, though in our Saviors first and
famous Sermon in St. Matthew it is clear, and in other Scriptures evident, each
Evangelist and Apostle having his own peculiar excellency, and gives by
brevity in some places, and by prolixity in others, light, glory, and beauty to
each other.

Before we close, let us give thanks to the memory of that learned Divine, and
(in this whereof we are to speak) Anagramatist, Harwood on the L. P.
who by a more then ordinary, because religious fancy and judgment, finds in
the word, Amen, this word Mane, and clears hi^ Mane thus: Thereis Mane, the
Verb, signifying to tarry, pressing constancy in prayer, and importuning of God
as the importunate Widow did the unjust Judge: Luke (...) 3
There is Mane, the Adverb, by interpretation, the morning; urging earliness
at the duty, that at the rising Sun, if not before, we are to be at this
exercise of prayer and praise: to cle^r which, Reader, accept of a good note,
though at a great distance, of ^ famous English Jew, Genesis 32. 26
let me go, said the man to Jacob, for the day breaks, that is, tempus est ut
^antem Dei lauds cum aliis Angelis, Lyra. in loc.
let me go, for it is time I were among my fellow-Angels, glorifying God, as if
even to those bles^ed Spirits, a new morning, a fresh Sun, a daystar, were
arguments exciting them to magnify God for his Providence unto us poor and
dark mortals.

All this considered, how wise are they, who in the shutting up of their
prayers, neglected Amen? or abused it, in a curtailed So-be-it, or, this we
desire, or, so let it be, or said Mumm? whereas Amen had even sounded better,
and really was better, L^^dulf. Cart. in Orat. Dom.
and ought to have been used, propter reverentiam salvatoris, out of reverence
to our Lord, who in this Greek and Syriack prayer, retained the Hebrew word,
Amen, that Amen might not be slighted or mocked, Aug. Tract. 41. in Joa^.
for its poorness, nakedness, or emptiness, for which reason the Ancients
translated it not, there being in no Language able to discover in many words,
its ample meaning, in its own one, for which cause the Churches of old, in what
language soever they prayed, concluded with it, though Hebrew, and decet sane,
verily in supplications it it most seemly for all, Amen, Afferre, to utter
Amen, the custom of the Churches, (which if harmless, is good to observe)
craving that from us, Theodor in Psalm. 105.
who confirmed all that was asked, communi consensu, with one consent, by
hearkening, I might say, by tarrying, until the Preacher in his blessing,
said, Amen.

O magnificum and e^^^acissimum verbum, Landulf. ut supra.
AMEN, O powerful and wonderful Amen, God is Amen, Christ is Amen, O good, O
blessed Savior the Word, and Amen, cried one, perfect my prayers in Amen;
Amen, let it be done, Amen, let it be done, and in my mouth let thy words be
fulfilled, thy prayer completed, and say, Amen, to which I add, the Rabbis
proverb, he who says Amen in this life, is worthy to say it in the life to
come: understand the Christian expression worthily.

It is written in the life of that great light of the reformed Church of
France, Beza, that his last Sermon was upon the third Petition of this prayer,
Melchi. adam in vita.
Thy will be done, ceasing here to preach it, that he might go to Heaven for to
do it. But God our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, has conducted us through
the land, from the Dan, to the Beersheba of this prayer, and has let us see
both the rising and setting of the Sun, of this most perfect platform, and two
Novembers, betwixt which there were seen many and unusual Funerals, Trains, and
Mourners going about the streets, we still surviving: for which and all other
his mercies, blessed be his glorious Name, for ever, and let the whole earth be
filled with his glory; Amen, and,

AMEN.
Errata sic Corrige.
IT is a certain truth laid down amongst disputable things, That it is a good
Book, and well Printed, Sober Answer, etc. p. 266.
that has but one, or two, or but ten Errata's, from first to last; And
Printers in their common talk (I might say in judgment) not only condemns a
faultlesse Book, but summarily adjudgeth it to the flames immediately, as
monstrous. In this there are Literal, Marginal, and Textual escapes; among
others, let these few be thus corrected.

Page 18. line 11. for pound, read pownd. p. 77. l. 33. for us, r. O. p. 100.
l. 18. for possibility, r. possibly. p. 207. l. 10. for sin is, r. finis. p.
301. l. 9. for tasting. r. fasting. p. 379. l. 7. for thou only, r. not only.
p. 442. l. 1. for that this, r. that is. p. 452. l. 19. for opposite, r.
apposit. Marg. p. 2. for 2. 11. r. 2. 2. for 24. r. 34.

and sic de ceteris.


