A CONTINUATION OF Morning-Exercise QUESTIONS AND Cases of Conscience,
PRACTICALLY RESOLVED BY SUNDRY MINISTERS, In October, 1682.

1 THESSALONIANS. II. 4, 5, 6. But as we were allowed of God to be put in trust with
the Gospel, even so we speak, not as pleasing men, but God which tries our
Hearts.

For neither at any time used we flattering words, as ye know, nor a cloak of
Covetousness, God is witness.

Nor of Men sought we glory, neither of you, nor yet of others, etc.

LONDON, Printed by J. A. for John Dunton at the Sign of the Black Raven in the
Poultrey over against the Stocks-Market, 1683.

To the READER.
WHat I have formerly endeavored in these Exercises, I need not here tell you:
My design is still the same; when too many are contending about comparatively
trifles, or worse, I would do my utmost, by calling in better help than mine
own, to promote practical Godliness. I Will not mention the Cases unavoydably
(some by Sickness, some otherwise) omitted; and for those here, should I place
them in this Preface, as I intended them in the Book, tbo it might somewhat
rectify their Order, 'twould not add to their Usefulness; and therefore take
them as they are, and the Blessing of God go along with them; and certainly
'twill, [as to you] if you are willing it should, pray try else. (1) We are
surrounded with Vanities, let (2) Godliness be such, that you may feel its
excellency, and expose (3) God will not only be your (4) as you mind (5) mourn
for (6) you can say, through (7) be as solicitous for (8) Do not flatter your
selves to think, that you need not be cautioned against Flattery. (9) Let (10)
the practical Love of Truth, will best preserve from Popery. (11) Let not
Melancholy persons neglect their Remedy. And (12) press after a growing
Knowledge of Christ. (13) Then whatever God does in the World, cannot but be
well (14) What you hear and read, do not let (15) Let your obedient Love to
God, evidence your Love to (16) Avoid spiritual Pride, as a mischievous Sin.
(17) Count a midling Condition best, as to the World, tho not as to (18) Admire
and improve those Truths and Works of (19) Do all you do, with an eye to God,
tho you meet with unanswerable returns from men. (20) Still mind your present
Duty. (21) Mind something that is (22) Let Childbearing (23) Take care of your
Souls according to their worth. And (24) follow the Conduct of the Holy (25)
thereby you will be raised to a divine Union. (26) To which your thoughtfulness of
Eternity will much contribute. (27) And singularly promote Communion with God.
Which (28) those that have, are prepared for whatever God will do with (29) tho
God hide his face, he will not finally forsake (30) God will privilege them at
present, to be the (31) to all these Truths, as well as to all Gods Praises,
let us believingly say Amen.

These are the Cases: several of them had been more polisht, had not the
Authors and their Books been separated; and I must confess, that the tolerable
Errors of the Press are as many, as an ingenuous Reader can well pardon; what
then can I say for those which are inexcusable? Bear with this word of
alleviation; 'twas next to impossible, for every one (in our present
Circumstances) to Correct his own Sermon, and none else could so well do it.
I Will add but this, they are Cases (most of them) of great moment, and daily use:
Do but bring (or endeavor to get) an honest Heart to the Perusal of them; and
I doubt not, but you will bless God for them, and (I hope) put up a Prayer for

April 9. 1683. Your Soul-Servant Samuel Annesley.

The CONTENTS.
Sermon. I. HOW is the adherent Vanity of every Condition most effectually abated
by serious Godliness? Eccles. 6.11, 12. Sermon. II. How may we experience it in
our selves, and evidence it to others, that serious Godliness is more than a
Fancy? 1 Pet. 3.15. Sermon. III. How is God his Peoples great Reward? Genesis 15.1.
Sermon. IIII. What may most hopefully be attempted, to allay Animosities among
Protestants, that our Divisions may not be our Ruin? Coloss. 2.2. Sermon. V. How
ought we to bewail the sins of the places where we live? 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. Sermon.
VI. What must we do to keep our selves in the Love of God? Jude verse. 21. Sermon.
VII. What may gracious Parents best do, for the Conversion of those Children,
whose wickedness is occasioned by their sinful Severity or Indulgence? Mal.
4.6. Sermon. VIII. How may we best cure the Love of being Flattered? Prove. 26.28.
Sermon. IX. By what means may Ministers best win Souls? 1 Timothy 4.16. Sermon. X. How
is the practical Love of Truth, the best Preservative against Popery? 1 Pet.
2.3. Sermon. XI. What are the best Preservatives against Melancholy, and
overmuch Sorrow? 2 Cor. 2.7. Sermon. XII. How may we grow in the Knowledge,
Estimation, and making Use of Jesus Christ? 2 Pet. 3.18. Sermon. XIII. How may
our Belief of Gods governing the World, support us in all worldly distractions?
Psalm. 97.1, 2. Sermon. XIV. What are the Hindrances and Helps to a good Memory in
Spiritual things? 1 Cor. 15.2. Sermon. XV. What are the Signs and Symptoms
whereby we know we love the Children of God? 1 John 5.2. Sermon. XVI. What must
we do to prevent and cure spiritual Pride? 2 Cor. 12.7. Sermon. XVII. Wherein is
a middle worldly Condition most eligible? Prove. 30.8, 9. Sermon. XVIII. How may
we graciously Improve those Doctrines and Providence which transcend our
Understandings? Romans 11.33. Sermon. XIX. How ought we to do our Duty toward
others, tho they do not do theirs toward us? Romans 12.21. Sermon. XX. How may the
well discharge of our present Duty, give us assurance of help from God, for the
well discharge of all future Duties? 1 Samuel 17.34, 35, 36, 37. Sermon. XXI. What
distance ought we to keep in following the strange Fashions in Apparel which
come up in the days wherein we live? Zeph. 1.8. Sermon. XXII. How may
Childbearing Women be most encouraged, and supported against, in, and under
the hazard of their Travail? 1 Timothy 2.15. XXV. for
Sermon. XXIII. How may we best know the worth of the Soul? Matt. 16.26. XXVI. for
Sermon. XXIV. How may we get Experience what it is to be led by the Spirit of
God? Romans 8.14. XXVII. for
Sermon. XXV. What advantage may we expect from Christ's Prayer for Union with
himself, and the Blessings relating to it? John 17.20, 21. XXVIII. for
Sermon. XXVI. How should we eye Eternity, that it may have its due influence
upon us in all we do? 2 Cor. 4.18. XXIX. for
Sermon. XXVII. How may we most certainly get and maintain the most uninterrupted
Communion with God? Joh. 1.7. Sermon. XXVIII. What is the best way to prepare to
meet God in the way of his Judgments or Mercies? 1 John 12.28. Sermon. XXIX. How
may a gracious person, from whom God hides his face, trust in the Lord as his
God? Psalm. 42.11. Sermon. XXX. How are the Religious of a Nation the Strength of
it? Isa. 6.13. Sermon. XXXI. Whether it be expedient, and how the Congregation
may say Amen in public Worship? Neh. 8.6.
ERRATA.
PAge 108. lines 43, and 44. (beginning at these words, It should, etc.) must
be made the 3d and 4th lines of page 109. Page 116. l. 30. for offenses r.
offenders, p. 152. l. 12. dele while, ibid. after displeasure; you, insert do
not, p. 177. l. 3. for only r. duly, ibid. l. 35. r. Tell me, First, ibid. l.
42. r. Secondly, Do you, p. 180. l. 27. r. Father, p. 192. l. 44. insert not,
p. 421. l. 14. for early r. easily, ibid. l. 30. for forced r. found, p. 422.
l. 21. for injuries r. iniquities, ibid. l. 32. for scene r. scope, ibid. l.
36. for wet r. rub, p. 424. l. 2. for lakes r. leakes, ibid. l. 24. for
conceived r. conveyed, ibid. l. 32. for them r. thence, ibid. l. 42. for why
r. who, p. 425. l. 35. for Family r. Faculty, so also p. 433. l. 36, p. 427. l.
38. for inducers r. induces, p. 432. l. 30. r. old boots, p. 434. l. 35. r.
Thurvey, p. 495. l. 38. dele All, ibid. l. 41. for External r. Eternal, ibid.
l. 42. for Externity r. Eternity, p. 496. l. 31. for Owenesse r. Oneness, p.
506. l. 27 for Yet r. Yea, p. 506. l. 28. for Chetir r. Chetiu, p. 510. l. 27.
for Interception r. Introrec^ption, p. 511. l. 33. for be r. are, p. 512. l. 8.
for it is God that, r. it is. That God, ibid. l. 12. for whence it is r. And, ibid
l. 23 after of r. Reason, p. 513. dele said, p. 514. l. 5. after Rules r. of
natural Reason, p. 519. l. 1. for Corresponde^^y r. Transcendency, ibid. l. 4.
for without it r. about it, p. 521. l. 28, 29, for by Impression r. I^^ell,
and, p. 1019. l. 16. add them after distinguish, p. 1025. l. 12. dele 1. p.
1035. l. 28. after Christ add so.

Quest. How is the adherent Vanity of every Condition most effectually abated
by Serious Godliness? SERMON I.
ECCLES. VI. 11, 12. 11. Seeing there be many things that increase Vanity, what
is man the better?

12. For who knows what is good for man in this Life?


I Began my Morning-Exercises with this comprehensive Case, How to be in all
things, at all times exactly Conscientious; and the Supplement with this, How
to attain and improve such Love to God, as may influence all the Graces,
Actions, and Passages of our Lives; and now I would fain direct you, How to
prevent, or cure the Vanity that is incident to every Condition.

Solomon, upon the review of his Life, the Honors, Pleasures, Wealth, and
Wisdom, he had so abundantly enjoyed, the many observations he had made of
things, natural, moral, domestical, civil, sensual, and divine; the curious,
critical enquiries he had made after true Happiness, and what contribution all
things under the Sun afford toward it, at last demonstrates the utter
insufficiency of all things merely worldly to make us happy. In the first six
Chapters of this Book, he shows wherein Happiness does not consist, confuting
the vain Opinions of all sorts of irreligious Persons; and in the six last
Chapters, he shows wherein it does consist, rectifying the Judgment of all
those that seek after it.

In this Chapter is continued a further description of the vanity of Riches,
and Honors, and Children, and long Life, etc. And in these two last verses he
takes up a general Conclusion of all the precedent Vanities; Since there are so
many things that increase vanity, what is man the better for all of them?
Considering our ignorance, we do not know what is best for our selves; many and
great things do but distract us, and if we did know, and could obtain what is
good for us, we can enjoy these things but a little while, and what will come
to pass hereafter, we know not: To make every Condition as easy as it is
possible, I shall endeavor to discuss this Question:

How is the adherent vanity of every Condition most effectually abated by
serious Godliness? You will all grant, that Solomon was the fittest man that
ever lived, to find out the very quintessence of Creature-excellencies, and to
extract what was possible to be extracted out of worldly Vanities; he does,
upon both his own impartial Scrutiny, and the infallible guidance of the Holy
Ghost, give you the total Sum at the head of the account, Eccles. 1.2. Vanity
of vanities, Vanity of vanities, i. e. extreme vanity: This he demonstrates by
an induction of particulars; but to dispell as much as it is possible, that
vexation of Spirit that steams from such multiplication of Vanity, he does upon
his own experience, and the Holy Ghosts direction, commend this Prescription at
the foot of the account, viz. Serious Godliness; Eccles. 12.13. Let us hear the
conclusion of the whole matter, Fear God, and keep his Commandments, etc. And
do it now, as you will wish you had done it when you come to Judgment. For the
discussing my Question, I shall lay down these Propositions.

Every Condition is clogged with Vanity. All things that men generally set
their Hearts upon, are Vanity; Vanity is that which seems to be something,
and is nothing, it is a shadow, empty, without substance, unprofitable, without
fruit; if you put any confidence in it, 'twill not only deceive you, but hurt
you; we are loath to think so, more loath to believe it; every one has a kind of
unaccountable confidence about the things of this world, that if they might but
be their own Carvers, they doubt not of an earthly happiness; whereas they
cannot but be mistaken. For,

1. God never made the World, nor any condition in it, to be a place of rest
and satisfaction; and since Sin has so far marred the Beauty of the Universe,
there is a judicial Vanity upon the whole Creation, Romans 8.20. Now men must
needs fail of their expectation, when they look for that in the Creature, that
God never placed there; as if we could mend the works of Creation and
Providence: I confess, it is ordinary for persons to attempt it, and to glory in
their Atchievments. e. g. God made man only to have the use of Speech, but how
do persons please themselves, with teaching Birds to speak some few words,
which they cannot possibly furnish them with Reason to make use of, and yet
they are delighted to hear them speak what they understand not, more than to
hear the most edifying Discourse of a serious Christian. How have others cried
up some Chemical Extracts to make men immortal, when their own being cut off in
the midst of their days unanswerably confuted their ill-grounded boasting! How
do others prate of governing the world by Stars, as if they would ease God of
the trouble of it, while they know not one Star of a thousand, nor what is their
influence! just as the old World would fence themselves against another Deluge,
when God did nothing to defeat them, but let them forget their Mother tongue,
and so speak gibberish one to another, that they run up and down like Persons
distracted, 'till they could find out any to understand them, and run away from
the rest as Salvages; so true is that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 39.5, 6. Verily
every man at his best state is altogether Vanity. Selah. Surely every man
walks in a vain show.

We know but very little of the true Nature of things, nor of our selves, and
therefore we cannot find out that good that is possible to be had in the
Creature; there must be some distinct knowledge of these things, or we can
never find out what is best for us, e. g. Let one that is utterly unacquainted
with Materia medica go into a Physick-garden, where are all manner of Simples,
and thence into an Apothecaries Shop, where are all manner of Drugs and
Compounds, with which Medicines are made for all Diseases, he knows not what to
do with them; his Disease may to him be incurable, though surrounded with
Remedies; Job 8.9. We are but of yesterday and know nothing, because our days
upon earth are a shadow.

That little that we do know of any thing, we come so droppingly to the
knowledge that e're we can lay things together, so as to compare them, and
separate them, and sort them, and compound them, so as to make a judgment,
either things themselves, or our circumstances are altered, or upon alteration,
there is such a mutability both in persons, and things, and times, that it is
as if one would undertake to gather at the same time Primroses and Violets, and
Roses and Gilliflowers to make a Nosegay, when some of these are withered, e're
the others be budded: When we call in the help of wiser heads than our own,
there is nothing more ordinary than when wise men give good Advice, those they
give it to, want Wisdom to receive it, suspecting some overreaching Design,
and therefore dare not trust them, and who can say how soon? Psalm. 146.4. His
breath goes forth, he returns to his Earth: in that very day his thoughts
perish; the Princes thoughts perish, and the thoughts of him that trusted in
him perish.

This is the way utterly to dispirit men from every thing,

Will nothing but Flatteries and Lies encourage you to the Duties better than
they are, or you will needs be worse than otherwise you would be? are you so
ridiculously Proud as to delight to dress your selves by a false Glass? John
8.45. Because I tell you the truth, you believe me not; will you only believe
those Truths that humor you?

true Discovery of the evils and dangers of every Condition, is so far from
discouraging men from their Duty, that it is the best way to bring them to the
best resolutions, for the well discharge of their Duty. Cowards wink when they
fight, but the truly Valiant dare face their danger: 'Twas Christ's method in
the whole course of his Ministry, to tell his hearers the worst they should
meet with: Luke 14.26. If any man come to me, and hate not his Father, and
Mother, and Wife, and Children, and Brethren, and Sisters; yea, and his own
life also, he cannot be my Disciple. V. 27. And whosoever does not bear his
Cross, and come after me, cannot be my Disciple. And Matthew. 24.9. Ye shall be
hated of all Nations for my Names sake.

manage and master all the evils that are in any Condition, and every thing on
this side the Power of Godliness, is too feeble to grapple with any one
inconvenience; let but Grace be asleep, (if I may so speak) and how weak is the
best? How was Peter, the forwardest of all the Disciples, in a fright foiled by
a Servant-maid! But to Grace in exercise nothing is impossible, Mark 9.23.

All things on this side Religion, whereby men endeavor to get above Vanity,
increase it. The multiplication of Ciphers amounts to less than nothing: Isa.
40.17. All Nations, the Persons and things of all Nations, before him, compared
with God, aye and in the esteem of the Godly, are as nothing, and they are
counted to him, and so far as they are gracious, to them, less than nothing and
Vanity: Happiness is that which every one aims at; now that which can make us
happy, must supply all the Wants, satisfy all the Desires, fill all the
Capacities of the Soul, and above all these, be of equal duration and
continuance with the Soul it self; now none of all these are to be found in any
thing on this side serious Godliness, but the quite contrary, and therefore
every thing that pretends to it, does but increase Vanity: Can any thing of the
World supply the Soul with Grace? satisfy the desires in so much as any one
thing? or fill any one Faculty of the Soul to satisfaction? can the World fill
the mind with heavenly Light? or the Will with heavenly Love? or the Conscience
with that Peace that passes understanding? But you will say, this is to beg,
not prove; forbear me a little, 'till I have answered a By-question, and I will
in the Prosecution of the next Proposition, prove this by little less than
Demonstration.

Dote so much upon Vanity, and upon adding one vanity to another, and upon
heaping one Vanity upon another, if they can be no better for them? We see wise
men as eager as others; Solomon himself, tho he had his extraordinary Wisdom
given him in his Youth, yet he continued trying Experiments till his old Age:
and tho he so much decryed the Vanity of all things, yet he was scarce able to
bear the thoughts of his Sons inability to carry on the search, Eccles. 2.18.
-- 23.

To this several things may be said, more Plausibly,

There Is a Necessity of these things, while we are in the World, and e. g.
Childhood and Age are helpless, and need greater supplies: there is difference
between Sickness and Health, and we must provide for both, and is not this very
plausible? Whereas, did but Persons consider, how many Superfluities shroud
themselves under the wing of Necessaries, and how Persons love to be at their
own finding, rather than Gods, tho there is no comparison between them; as
Israel, Numb. 11.5. We Remember the fish which we did eat in Egypt freely; the
Cucumbers, and the Melons, and the Leeks, and the Onions, and the Garlic; and
now our Soul is dried away, there is nothing at all besides this Manna before
our Eyes. They preferred the Food which the Egyptians gave their Slaves, before
Manna, which if the Inhabitants of the upper World needed food, were fit for
them. We would not only have Mercies, but we would be humored in the
Circumstances of 'em: Rachel must presently have Children, or she will be weary of
her Life; whereas she might have learnt, from her own Husband, and
Grandfather, that those Children of patiently believing Parents, were the
greatest Blessings, that came from teeming Prayers and Barren Wombs; but she
considers not this, she must have Children, or dye: Well, God so far gratifies
her, she shall have Children, but that which she reckoned, would be the
greatest Comfort of her Life, proved to be her death.

The flattery of worldly things prevails with many. The Grandeur Esteem of the
World, that pleases the Fancy; whereas, would but these Persons consider, all
things of the World appear better at a distance, than we find them near at
hand. I dare confidently make this offer, and (without imposing upon God any
thing indecent) peremptorily assure you God will make it good, That if you can
but give any one instance of any one Person made happy, satisfyingly happy, by
any worldly enjoyment, you shall be the second. I grant many are through Grace
contented with a little pittance of the World, but where dwelt the man that was
ever yet contented merely with the World? The wealth of the World promises
Satisfaction, Eccl. 10.19.
Money answers all things, but chapter 5.10.
he that loves Silver, shall not be satisfied with Silver, nor he that loves
abundance with increase. The pleasures of the World promise refreshment, to
relieve us of all our cares; but instead of it, Eccl. 2.11.
they are all Vanity and Vexation of Spirit. The Honors of the World promise
quiet and contentment, but Psalm. 73.18, 19.
surely they are set in slippery places, as upon a Pinnacle, whence though they
do not presently fall, yet they are utterly consumed with terrors of falling.
In short, Psalm. 49.20.
man that is in honor, and understands not how to honor God with it, is
like the Beasts that perish; degrades himself into a Beast, and the time is at
hand when he would count it a greater happiness than ever he shall obtain, if
his Soul and Body might die together like a Beast.

Experience is beyond Speculation; we see others grow great, they fare better,
and go finer, and are more esteemed in the World; every one respects them, and
if he but grow Rich, he must presently be the best in the Parish: whereas,
those that are low and mean in the World, they are despised, tho never so well
qualified. This thou speak upon thine own Observation, thou can name the
Persons, and the places whence thou have this experience. Very well! thou
take this for a demonstration that there is such a thing as an Earthly
happiness! Hold a little, be but entreated to push the Observation a little
further, and consider impartially, how loath thou would be to take up with
that for thy Happiness, which thou so much admirest! Single out any one of
those thou accountest most happy in their outward enjoyments, and be sure thou
art as thoroughly acquainted with all the circumstances of his Condition, as
thou art with thine own, and then sit down and seriously consider; Is this the
Person whose happiness thou admirest? View him inside, and outside, and tell
me, would thou have his Condition, and all the Circumstances of it? It Is
true, he is great in the World; but would thou have all his cares and fears?
his restless Nights and troublesome Days? would thou have just his
qualifications of mind? that half-wittedness that makes him ridiculous? his
peevish Humors, which make him a burden to himself and others? Would thou
have just his temper of Body? To be always sickly, or conceited to be so? He
cannot eat this, nor digest that, nor relish any thing, as do meaner Persons?
Those Relations that should be the greatest Comfort of his Life, hanker after
his Death: His Children upon one account or other, almost break his Heart; his
Servants are vexatious; his Business distracting, or his idleness wearisome.
Whereas (perhaps) his next Neighbor that has scarce bread to eat, has a
quieter frame of Mind, a better temper of Body, a better Stomach, better
Digestion, better Health, more Comfort in Relations, and longer Life to enjoy
all these, than him thou countest the Worlds darling: think of this before thou
concludest for an earthly Happiness.

restlesness of the Mind of man upon so many disappointments, makes him eager
after any thing that promises Satisfaction; he has experience of the
uneasiness of his present Condition, and none of that which flatters him. So
that he becomes like one that has been long sick, who is willing to try every
Medicine that every Visitant commends, never considering how he heightens his
disease by the use of false Remedies. e. g. Should thou take medicines proper
for an Erysipelas to cure a Dropsy, or Medicines for the Stone to cure a
Consumption; tho those Medicines would not presently kill thee, they would
never Cure thee, but thou must still complain of disappointments, and be worse
and worse instead of having any amendment: Do not deceive your selves, one
Vanity will never cure another.

Satan will not be wanting to set in with all the other cheats, Satan, you may
be sure, will do what is possible to be done to entangle the Soul in a fools
Paradise, or plunge it into inextricable difficulties, especially when he has
a good second as in this Case: tho one might rationally think, there should
need no more to fright him to his watch, then to assure him the hand of Satan
is in all this. Suspect him in every thing, he cannot be thy Friend; he cannot
make any one motion for thy good; where he seems to do so, it is to do thee
greater mischief. Thus have I jumbled together, something of what may be said,
both with real and seeming weight (for empty reasonings weigh most with empty
understandings) why all sorts of Persons are hankering after an earthly
Happiness: And now I shall speak largely in the third to what I little more
than hinted in the second Proposition.

It is only Serious Godliness that can any whit really abate the Vanity Other
things, may like Topical Medicines (as Playsters to the Wrists) repel the
Disease, but while they do not remove the cause, they cannot Cure it: We may
exchange one Vanity for another, and the Novelty may please us for a while, but
when that is over, the Vexation returns. It Is true, God alone can cure us; but
what ever method he takes to do it, whether of Indulgence, or Severity, it is
always by framing the Heart and Life to Serious Godliness; to hate Sin, and
love Holiness, to live a Life of Faith, in dependence upon God and resignation
to him; to live above the transports of hopes and fears, about things temporal;
and to grow up in the Graces and Comforts of the Holy Ghost for things Eternal:
In short, to be Blessings to the World while we live, and to be Blessed with
God when we dye; this is the business, and fruit of Serious Godliness: And this
alone is that which at present can effectually abate the vexatious Vanities
which every Condition swarms with.

The wisest man in the World cannot tell what is good for man in this Life: No
man can tell what worldly Condition is better for him, than that which is his
present Condition. Among the variety of things under the Sun, which the Heart
of man is apt to be drawn out unto, neither he himself nor any other for him,
is able certainly to inform him, which of all those it is best for him to enjoy,
and to reap Comfort from: Whether it be better for him to be rich or poor, high
or low, in private retirement or in public service. Some men's greatness has
undone them, they had never been so wicked, had not their Wealth been fuel for
their Lusts: Achitophel might have lived longer, had he not been so wise. No
man can tell, whether that he snatcheth at with most greediness, have not a
hook under the Bait, or be not tempered with Poison. Those that live by Rapine
and Violence, Prove. 1.18. They lay wait for their own blood, they lurk privily
for their own lives. But you will say, these are hotheaded Persons, live
extravagantly, walk by no Rule, don't take time to consider: well, turn your
Eyes from these, to those that are most accomplished for humane wisdom and
knowledge; Romans 1.22. Professing themselves to be Wise, they became Fools;
drowning their some way right (tho every way short) Notions they had of God, in
unreasonable Idolatry: You Will say, these were but Heathens, and therefore no
marvel, if they did not like to retain God in their Knowledge, it is better with
Christians: Look next upon Christians, and those of the highest Notions and
form of Godliness (on this side the Power of it,) 2 Pet. 2.18, 19, 21. While
they speak great swelling words of Vanity (about that they call Christian
Liberty) they themselves are the Servants of Corruption; and it had been better
for them never to have known the way of Righteousness, than not to have walked
in it. Well, but for all this, Job tells us of some (of even the worst of men)
that account themselves so happy, as if they needed nothing from God to better
their Condition; but he tells you withal in the same breath, Job 21.15, 16.
Lo, their good is not in their hand, tho they think it is; they have not their
Fortune (as they call it) in their own power, to retain it while they live, and
dispose of it when they dye; God can overturn it when he pleases, and will do
it to their Sorrow: whatever Persons may hope or fancy, if they fear not God,
nor obey the Voice of his Servants, tho they are not at present in trouble like
other men, Psalm. 73.5, etc.
but can speak loftily, setting their mouth against the Heavens, and their
Tongue walks through the Earth; tho they compass themselves about with some
sparks or blaze of Comfort, Isa. 50.10, 11.
yet this shall they have of Gods hand, they shall lie down in Sorrow.

Now thus when every one is rummaging among heaps of Vanities, that pretend to
be good for man upon Earth, will you accept of a Guide to direct you to what
cannot but be good for you, and that in every Condition; that shall not only
abate the Vanity, but discover the Excellency that is in every Condition? This
will be most distinctly done, by an induction of particulars, and setting
contrary Conditions one against another, what may be said for, and against each
Condition, and how Serious Godliness makes every Condition amiable.

Who knows whether Riches, or Poverty, be best for man in this Life?

I. For Riches. I need say but little, because most Persons are ready to say
too much; they seem to be the Cause without which there can be not so much as
the fancying an earthly Happiness: what pleasures or esteem can worldlings have
without an Estate to feed them? the Riches of the Mind are too Spiritual to be
seen by carnal Eyes.

But when you consider these, or such like inseparable attendants on a great
Estate, you will see the desirableness to shrink, as the Vanity swells: e. g.
Some run out the greatest part of their Life, before they can reach what they
can call an Estate (to say nothing of those that dye the Worlds Martyrs, in the
pursuit of that they never attain;) those that have got an Estate, or have an
Estate left 'em, have ordinarily as great care and difficulty in keeping, as
they or others have had in the getting of it. O the tiresome Days, the
restless Nights, the broken Sleeps, the wild Passions, the fretting Disquiet of
those troublesome occurrences, which they cannot possibly prevent! And when you
come to speak of an Enjoyment, to speak strictly, they have nothing worth the
Name of an Enjoyment, which they may not have as well (if not better) without
what they call an Estate: Yet tho it is thus while they have it, they are not
able to bear the parting with it; the very thoughts of losing, puts 'em into
Heart-convulsions. So that an Estate can neither be got, nor kept, nor lost,
without manifold Vanity and Vexation of Spirit. Alas! what remedy?

Serious Godliness carries a Gracious Person above all Heartbreaking Vexations
of getting the World, for his Thoughts are filled about getting something
better; about keeping, for comparatively he cares for keeping nothing but Faith
and a good Conscience; about enjoying, for he counts nothing on this side God
worth the Name of an enjoyment: And as for parting with the World, he
impartially considers, that he cannot have the possession of his Heavenly
Inheritance, till the World and he shake hands for ever: So that there is no
room without the regret of Grace, to edge in so much as a distracting Thought
about worldly Vanities. Faith in Exercise treads the World (1 John 5.4.) under
feet, and alone makes it know its place. When Riches capacitate a Gracious
Person for those Offices and Employments from which the Poor are excluded, the
Power of Godliness, not only teaches, but enforces them to employ all their
Capacities for God and to do good; they know they are Gods Stewards, to whom
they must be accountable, Gods Almoners, and God makes the Poor their
Creditors, to whom they must pay Alms as Debtors Mat. 6.1. Your Alms, (...),
your Justice.
. In short, it is only the Holy Person that receives this for a Maxim, That a
worldly Estate is no otherwise desirable, but to capacitate him to do that
good with it, which he cannot do without it. This for Riches. What may be said
for Poverty?

II. Poverty is so desirable to many thinking Persons, that they have, not only
in words, for discourse sake, but in practice, for Happiness sake, preferred it
before the greatest Wealth and grandeur in the World; and this has been done,
not only by melancholy mopish Persons, but by men of great name for Wisdom and
Learning, and that upon great deliberation and Counsel, upon weighing of
circumstances, and trying experiments; and further yet, not only Bookish men,
to whom beloved Retirement is much the same, whether they are Rich or Poor; but
those that have worn an Imperial Diadem, that have commanded victorious Armies,
swayed the Scepters of flourishing Kingdoms, Dioclesian. Charles the 5th.
and some of the (then) greatest Empires of the World; and these again not only
Ethnic, but Christian. Casimir.
And some of these even after their self-deposition, have been importuned to
re-accept their Dominion, but have refused it. What greater demonstration can
you expect, of the preference of Poverty before Riches, and to be a Cipher
rather than to bear the greatest figure in the World? All this is true: --

Eccles. 9.15, 16. There was a Poor wise man, who by his Wisdom delivered the
City, yet no man remembered that same Poor man. -- The Poor man's Wisdom is
despised, and his Words are not heard. As to all the Instances that have been
(or can be) given of persons quitting troublesome Riches for a quiet Poverty;
those great men that have done it, it has plainly proceeded from vexation of
Mind, that they were not able to have their will upon Christians, for their
extirpation: And as for the several Orders of Friars, that have vowed Poverty,
and renounced Property, this is to be reckoned among the Damnable cheats of the
Romish Apostasy, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2.
whose Religion is made up of lying Hypocrisy and Doctrines of Devils; their
prodigious Wealth, and abominable Luxury sufficiently confuting their pretense
of Poverty: what help then in this Case?

Serious Godliness sweetens all the bitterness of a poor condition; bears up
the Heart under all those difficulties that were otherwise intolerable; God
makes up their worldly Poverty with Riches of Grace; it is the Poor receive the
Gospel, and the Blessings of it; it is the Poor that are best contented with
their Condition, and without content every Condition is uneasy: what tho the
Poor are secluded from serving Offices, they are also excused from the Oaths
and Snares that attend them. At first, when Christianity was managed without
tricks and artifice, when for once (upon particular Circumstances never to be
repeated) the Disciples of Christ used a compassionate Levelling, it is said,
Acts 4.
great Grace was upon them all; they were greatly in Gods favor, they were
greatly enriched with the Graces of the Holy Ghost, and they were greatly
honored by those that did but gaze at them. You may easily observe that very
few grow better by growing Rich, but it is ordinary for God to advance Holiness
by worldly abasement; and who live more in Heaven, who have more satisfying
communion with God, than those that are mean in the World? In short, to be Poor
and Wicked, is to be in some respect more miserable than Devils; to be Poor and
Gracious, is to be conformable to our Blessed Jesus, and his chiefest Apostle,
who were Poor, yet made many Rich, 2 Cor. 6.10.
who had nothing, yet possessed all things. And thus I have endeavored to set
forth the Vanity of the first Pair, Riches and Poverty, and how Serious
Godliness wears off the Vanity that cleaves to them. I see I must not, indeed I
need not, be so large in the rest.

II. Who knows whether a Life of Pleasure or a Life of Sorrow

For pleasure, to live without the pleasure of Life, seems in some Joy: so that
a Life of Comfort is the desire of mankind.

But now when we consider the unreasonable cravings of a carnal Mind, and how
impossible to be satisfied, and when most satisfied, soonest cloyed, wearisome
to the flesh that is most gratified, and infamous in their Eyes whose esteem we
value: most of our carnal pleasures are the same with Brutes, only they have
the better relish of them in the use, and no after-claps when past; they eat,
and drink, and frisk, and sleep, without any disturbing cares, or subsequent
Reflections: you cannot force 'em to excess in the use, nor impose upon them
any corroding remembrances. e. g. Let but a voracious Glutton be bound to sit
at a well-furnish'd Table, but two hours after he has filled his Paunch, he
would account it an intolerable Penance. Let but the Crop-sick Drunkard be
forced to drink on with those that drink him down, how is he a burden to
himself, and a scorn to his fellow Drunkards! and for those that glory of their
conquest in out-drinking others, how are their best Friends ashamed of them, as
glorying in their shame! Let but a lazy Sluggard be confined three days to his
Bed, and how weary will he be of his Bed of Down! how is the Idle Person more
weary of his Idleness than another is of Work! I am loath to blot Paper with
Naming the loathsome rottenness of filthy Persons, the unpitied Poverty of
Huffing Gamesters, and in a word, the unpleasant Exit of most Pleasure-mongers;
and for those that escape these common effects, they as commonly contract a
carnal Security, which is as bad as the worst of these. And for those pleasures
that are above sensual, I Will say no more at present but this, the better the
Objects of our delights are on this side God, and the pleasing of God, the more
our carnal Wisdom is fortified against the true method to real happiness. Upon
the whole matter then, Pleasures are a kind of dangerous fruit, which if not
well corrected, are Poison, we can scarce taste without danger of surfeiting.

But now what does the Power of Godliness in this case? What? 'twill not meddle
with unlawful pleasures, tho never so tempting; 'twill strain out the dregs of
lawful pleasures, that they may not be unwholesome: 'twill moderate the use of
unquestionable delights, that they may not be inordinate: And 'twill teach us
to be thankful to God, for making our Pilgrimage any way comfortable; 'twill
raise the Soul to prepare and long for Heaven, where are pure and full Joys,
and that for evermore. Thus for a Life of Pleasure.

Sorrow and Pensiveness? to live (...) Recluse from the flattering Vanities of
the World? Eccles. 2.2.^
I said of Laughter it is mad; and of Mirth what does it? What Music is the
gigling Mirth of the World to a serious Soul? Those that the Frothy part of the
World count Melancholy, the sober part of the World count them Wise.

But yet to give way to Sorrow, disspirits us for any considerable service
either to God or Man; it unfits us for every thing; 2 Cor. 7.10.
the Sorrow of the World works Death. Such are burdensome to themselves and
others; they are weary of themselves, and every body else is weary of them. If
a Melancholy mopish temper be not checked, 'twill lead to hard thoughts of God,
to blasphemy, infidelity. In short, a Life of Sorrow is a degree of Hell upon
Earth, and such Persons torment themselves before their time. But what can
Religion do in this case?

Serious Godliness bears up the Soul from sinking under worldly sorrow Eccles.
7.3, 4.
: Sorrow is better than Laughter, for by the sadness of the Countenance the
Heart is made better: The Heart of the wise is in the house of Mourning; but
the Heart of Fools is in the house of Mirth, Religion will teach us how to turn
worldly Sorrow into Sorrow for Sin, 2 Cor. 7.9, 10.
to sorrow to Repentance, after a godly manner, and godly Sorrow works
Repentance to Salvation, not to be repented of. It Is Serious Godliness that
teaches how to mourn for the Sins and Dangers of the Times we live in. And
Christians, pray take special notice, that this is our present great duty, a
duty that every Christian not only ought, but may perform, and none can hinder
it. And, O that this duty were frequently thought of, and more universally
practiced: The Land is even drowned in Pleasure; the Conscientious performance
of this duty, would be a token for good, for the abating of the deluge: And tho
the times should be such that their own Sorrows should be increased, yet then,
even then, how chearing would the forethoughts of Heaven be to such serious
Christians! How may they chide their Hearts out of their Dejections! Psalm.
42.11.
Why art thou cast down, O my Soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? hope
thou in God, for I shall yet, aye, and ever praise him; who now is, and for
ever will be the health of my Countenance (...) Salutes faciei mei.
, and the Salvation of my face, and my God: Because thou art my God Psalm. 67.6.
, my own God, my exceeding great (not only rewarder but) Genesis 15.1.
reward. And thus much for the second Pair, Pleasure and Sorrow.

III. Who knows whether Honor or Obscurity be best for man in

For Honor; every one would be Somebody in the World, would Job had done
contesting with his censorious Friends, he is greatly concerned about the
contempt poured upon him, tho but by infamons Enemies, Job 29. and 30. And
David, tho he could even in desperate cases encourage himself in God, yet
complains, Psalm. 69.20.
Reproach has broken my Heart: matter of Honor and Reputation is a tender
point, not any, of what rank soever, but deeply resent the being slighted.

But for Honor, when we consider how hazardous it is to get, (tho all are
clambering, few reach it;) consider further, when it is got, it is slippery to
hold, (others envy and their own fear, distract 'em;) and then if you add the
falling from it, (that is worse than if they never had it;) but there is worse
than all this, the insuperable temptation to pride, oppression, and
impenitency, all which nothing but Grace can prevent or cure. And for that
lesser reputation and esteem which comes short of the Name of Honor, it is
troublesome to carry it, like a Venice-glass, that the least touch may not crack
it. What can Religion do in this Case?

Serious Godliness, 'twill never be beholding to Sin, nor Satan for worldly
Honor: It values it no more than as it adds to a capacity of honoring God. He
that is truly Religious, is neither so fond of Honor as to Sin to get or keep
it, neither does he count himself undone to lose it; he values the privilege
of Adoption beyond all the Honors in the World: Isa. 43.4.
Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou have been honorable; he is
graciously ambitious of doing God and Christ some service in the World; he
appears for God, to discountenance, prevent, or remove Sin; to encourage,
promote and advance Holiness; this God in condescension accounts an honoring
of him, and has accordingly promised, 1 Samuel 2.30.
Them that honor me, I will honor; and they that despise me, shall be lightly
esteemed. In short, you may know what Faith you have, by what Honor you prize.
John 5.44.
How can ye believe, that receive honor one of another, and seek not the
Honor which comes from God only? This for Honor. Some prefer

Obscurity in the World; to snudge in quiet, to live retired,

But how do these in running from one Vanity, fall into another! They debase
the humane Nature, and the reasonable Soul, while they industriously conceal
themselves from being serviceable; they are guilty of a civil
Self-excommunication, while they shut out themselves from those Employments
wherein they might be useful. God has made every thing for use; to rust in a
Corner for the avoiding of Trouble, can proceed from nothing but uncharitable
Pride, or wilful Ignorance; from base Pride, you think the Neighborhood not
good enough to be blessed with your endowments; or slothful weakness, which you
are conscious of, but will not take pains to cure: In short, to choose retirement
for love of ease, is an envious kind of Life, and therefore far from Happiness:
But what can Religion do in this case?

One that is Serious in Religion, can best manage an obscure Station, whether
it be forced or voluntary. It Is only he that is crucified to the World, that
can scorn the Worlds scorns, and contemn the Worlds contempt. He that has
learnt the great lesson of Self-denial in the School of Christ, is well pleased
with his Secrecy for Communion with God: In short, his Religion keeps him
from being fond, or weary of worldly Obscurity. Thus I have run over the 1 John
2.16.
beloved Disciples Summary of all worldly Vanities, and their Contraries, and
how Godliness in the Power of it, corrects the Vanity, and extracts the
Excellency of all those. But let these pass, and let us examine things of a
higher Nature, for which more may be pleaded, than can for these be pretended;
and here you will find, that without Serious Godliness their Vanity is intolerable.

IV. Who knows whether Wisdom, and Learning, and the endowments of the Mind be
best for a man; or whether to be without these, and their troublesome
Attendants? Now we come to a close and inward Search.

Wisdom and Learning, and intellectual accomplishments, they are of such
incomparable Excellency, that he is scarce worthy the Name of a man that
slights them: Eccles. 2.13.
Wisdom excels Folly, as far as light excels darkness. This is Solomon's
sentence, even then, when he is sentencing all worldly Vanities.

But (and who mistrusts such a but here) the wiser men are, the more they are
exempted from the ordinary Comforts of humane Society; they meet with but few,
and those but seldom, that they can converse with, to any Satisfaction; the
more Learning they have, the more Sense of, and Sorrow for their Ignorance.
Eccles. 1.18.
In much Wisdom is much Grief, and he that increases Knowledge increases
Sorrow. Hence it is they affect an uncomfortable Solitude, that they are fain
to force themselves into a sociable compliance, where they seldom meet with any
thing but what they slight or pity; they are ordinarily the objects of their
own grief, and of others envy. There Is nothing more ordinary, than for Persons
of lower accomplishments, to carry their designs, and attain their ends before
them: they cannot sneak and flatter like lower-spirited Animals, that while they
are pursuing a Notion, others catch Preferment; and while they are enriching
their Minds, others are filling their Coffers.

What does Serious Godliness in this Case? It Is this alone that makes wise men
truly wise, and Learned men truly learned. Unsanctified parts and Learning
may (in some respects) be reckoned among Christ's worst Enemies; aye, and among
his worst Enemies that have them; they furnish him with Cavils (which they call
unanswerable Reasons) against the Simplicity of the Gospel, they fill him with
those prejudices, that nothing but Grace can remove: Romans 8.7.
The carnal Mind is enmity against God: for it is not subject to the Law of
God, neither indeed can be: But where Grace is graffed upon good Natural parts,
there Wisdom and Learning are excellently beneficial; it is they that have the
clearest Understanding of Gospel Mysteries; it is these who are the most
substantial grounded Christians; these are the only Christians who are able to
defend the Truth, and convince gainsayers; Job. 33.3.
it is their Lips can utter Knowledge clearly: 1 Cor. 14.3.
it is they that can best speak or write, to Edification, and Exhortation, and
Comfort.

What then can be said for the want of parts and Learning? satisfied, than
those thar are more inquisitive: Besides, these better suit the generality they
live among: They are wise enough to get Estates, (for men are ordinarily afraid
to deal with those that are wiser than themselves, lest they be over-reacht,)
and they are esteemed in the World, and what care they? They don't impair their
health by study, nor perplex themselves with great matters. What can be more
desired to make them happy? Happiness (as it were) drops into their mouth
unawares; for when they compare their Condition with others, they find it more
eligible, tho they did nothing to make it so. But alas! what use do these make
of their Souls? A lazy neglect of improving of parts, and of getting of
learning, who is able to express the Sin and Mischief of it? To be contented to
live and die but one remove from a Brute, who can express the baseness of it?
Ignorance may well be the Mother of their Devotion whose Religion is a Cheat,
but the Scripture tells us, and we believe it, Prove. 2.10.
When Wisdom enters into thine Heart, Knowledge is pleasant unto thy Soul:
And without it neither Heart nor State can be good.

But what does Serious Godliness in this Case? These, tho they have not any
considerable Parts and Learning, yet they bewail their Ignorance, and are
willing to learn: they get a savoury Knowledge of necessary practical Truths,
and they increase the knowledge of them by practice; tho they are Fools to the
World, they are wise for their Souls, and wise for Eternity, and this is the
best Wisdom: They have learned Christ, which is the best Learning. This you
shall find, those great Doctrines of Christianity, which Learned men bandy to
and fro in doubtful disputation, such as these, viz. The unaccountableness of
Predetermination, the supra or infralapsarian aspect of Election, the
controverted extent of Redemption; the manner of the concourse of the Divine
and Humane will in Vocation; the formality of Justification: In these and such
like Doctrines, wherein the most eminently learned can neither give nor receive
satisfaction, Serious Christians, of but ordinary Knowledge, are so far
satisfied, as to admire the Grace of God in Christ, and press after such
Holiness of Life, as adorns their Profession and muzzles Revilers. So that by
what has been said, you may plainly see, that both the excellency, and
deficiency of intellectual endowments, are best managed by Serious Godliness;
without which, whatever can be said for either, is not worth the mentioning.

the worst of Sins, that have scarce any barefaced Advocates, yet have more
hearty admirers, than what really deserve it: And that is, a form of Godliness,
or downright Atheism; whether of these is to be preferred? I am sensible it is
dangerous to compare Sins; for we are not to make choice of any, tho the
necessity be never so great, or the excuses never so plausible: Of afflictive
Evils we may choose the less, but of sinful evils we must choose neither; but
rat^^^ suffer the worst of deaths, than commit the least of Sins. My only
design therefore in this instance, is, to strip these Sins of the times of
their specious pretenses, and to do what I can to persuade these
Self-applauding Sinners to serious Godliness.

A show of Godliness seems to carry it both with God and Man; till his
Hypocrisy is discovered, he seems to be the favorite of Heaven, and the Glory
of Earth. Some that are sincere, think their Estates well bestowed upon them,
so they may but enjoy their Prayers: They have Religion enough, to get Mat.
23.14.
credit by it, and to make their Markets of it, and that is all they care for;
on the other hand, they have latitude enough to avoid danger, that unless they
be surprised by sufferings, their Religion shall cost 'em nothing; if they
cannot win what they play for, (alas they do but play with Religion, they were
never Religious in good earnest,) yet they will save their Stakes: Are not these
the only wise men that are (as they call it) Zealous with Discretion; that will
not expose themselves to danger, but will (more) warily (than conscientiously)
avoid it? These censure those that are more venturous than themselves to
befriend the Gospel, when it is despised and persecuted: is not Religion of such
a size, a Conscience thus manageable, most fit for doubtful times, when dangers
surround us? Gal. 2.18.
What if I build again the things which I destroyed, must I therefore needs
make my self a transgressor? Here Is the indifferent Moderation, and Gallio-like
Discretion; is not this highly commendable? Commendable say you? Hypocrisy is
odious to God and Man: It Is too true, that Persons of no Religion decry the
most sincere Christians by the Name of Hypocrites; this is unreasonable, and
devilish, but it is not my business now to deal with them: Thus far I Will join
with them, whatever their most envenomed mouths can speak against Hypocrisy,
I Will add to it, and say more, and that from Scripture, and that not from here
and there a Verse scattered up and down, (tho that is sufficient proof for the
highest Doctrines of Christianity) but I shall commend to you above twenty
Chapters together, from Job 4. to the 27th. inclusive, wherein you have such a
Dialogue, none like it in the Bible, between Job so eminently sincere; God as
it were boasts of him, that there was none like him in the World, (tho at
present God hid his sincerity from his Friends;) the discourse was between this
Job and his three compassionate (tho censorious) Friends, who could not but
suspect, there must some extraordinary guilt bring such extraordinary
punishment; they knew him to be free from open wickedness, and therefore
conclude it must be for secret Hypocrisy; and thereupon they speak the most
convincingly they can of the Evil of it; Job adds considerably to all they say
against it, only denies himself to be an Hypocrite: His justifying himself
makes them press more hard upon him, and every one strives to be more close
than other, and to make a more home thrust into his Conscience, to force the
acknowledgement of his Hypocrisy: So that upon the whole matter, here is
something of Satan's Temptation, tho overruled by the Spirit of God; here is
something of the height of Grace, tho allayed by humane frailty; and something
purely Divine, eminently from the Holy Ghost; and these all agree in the
Conclusion, tho they differ in the Premises, viz. That Hypocrisy is the worst
of Sins, most odious to God, most ruinous (...) Man; the better any one seems
to be, and is not what he seems, the more severity he must expect from God, and
the less humanity from Man. I know not whether it is possible to speak worse of
Hypocrisy than it deserves; for tho studied Hypocrites, who industriously set
themselves to deceive others, may long do it, yet they are often in this World,
but always in the next, worst deceived themselves. A mere Form of Godliness is
not then to be rested in.

But what can the Power of Godliness do in this Case? What! what can it not do?
it is that alone that is worth the Naming, worth the getting, worth the Owning;
and therefore, O that I could persuade and prevail with all that have the Name
of Christians, that they would be as loath to be Hypocrites, as to be thought
so, for what if you shall be accounted sincere, while the Heart-searching God
knows you to be hypocrites, and will deal with you as such? I grant, the
resting in a form of Godliness is a Disease rarely cured, and therefore upon
that, as well as upon other accounts most dangerous: But yet through Grace it
may be both pardoned, and cured: Will you try an easy experiment? ('it is
difficult I confess, but as easy as possible for such a disease:) Hypocrisy
is ordinarily defective in the manner of doing what is good; and those who are
most sincere, complain most of their ill manner of performing of Duties, and
improving of Ordinances; now if I can at once satisfy the sincere with the
assurance of his Sincerity, and cure the Hypocrite of his Soul-deceiving
Hypocrisy, and all this by a Prescription, that the bare work done shall work
the cure; there is little danger about the manner of doing it: if you do it at
all, you cannot but do it well; and it cannot but be effectual: does not this
raise your Expectation to know what this infallible receipt is, that never so
much as once missed curing every one that took it? I would I could hold you a
little longer in suspense, till you would resolve to try the Experiment before
you reject it, unless you can object something against it: If you will but
resolve thus, I Will referr it to your own Conscience to be Judge of the weight
of your Objection. What say you? Will you upon this Condition resolve to make
Trial of my proposal? Shall I take it for granted, you will? then here it is,
and the blessing of God accompany it, that you may not be the first
successeless taker of it.

Do but endeavor to get and keep in your Hearts as actual apprehensions of the
all-seeing God as it is possible. Genesis 16.13.
Thou God see me -- have I also here looked after God that sees me? q. d.
Now I am come out of Abraham's Family, where God is worshipped, I never thought
of Gods looking after me here; but now I find he sees me as well when I am
sinning, as when I am praying. Psalm. 139.1. -- 13.
Where ever I am, what ever I am about, whether Busy or Idle; my thoughts,
that no Creature can know, God knows them; though I equivocate in my Words, God
discerns them: Whether I draw near to God, to flatter him, or run away from God
to escape him: Tho I lay my self to sleep, that I may not think of him, or get
into the dark where I may see nothing of him, yet Gods eye is every where all
this while upon me. Christians, be but so far sincere as industriously to
endeavor to keep upon your Hearts such apprehensions of God, and this alone
will effectually cure you of reigning Hypocrisy, and clear up your suspected
Sincerity. I grant, some men may be so impudently wicked as daringly to Sin
while they think God looks on; but this is seldom, and only in the heat of
Temptation: they cannot, no, they cannot, nay, the Devil himself cannot help
them to keep up their Hearts to this pitch of impiety: the most daring Sinners
are but like men in a Fire-ship; what tho they venturously run it in, to fire
the Fleet, they themselves get away as fast as it is possible: so tho in their
drunken frolicks, they set themselves to outface God, yet when they are sober
they retreat to this: Job 22.13, 14.
How does God know? thick Clouds are a covering to him, that he sees not:
Psalm. 10.11, 13.
He has said in his heart, God has forgotten: and if he can but repel his
twingeing Gripes of Conscience, he not only quickly forgets them, but flatters
himself that God forgets him too, and that he hides his Face, and will never
see it: And so, tho he contemn God, yet he has said in his Heart, God will not
require it; yea further, Psalm. 94.7.
they say, the Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard it.

But men of the most seared Consciences cannot always thus carry it; there are
some of the worst of Sinners, of whom it may be said, God is always in their
thoughts while they are awake (and they sleep little) they think of nothing
else, and yet these are far from Sincerity, or the way to it. I grant this, for
it confirms, not enervates my Remedy: They under horror and despair, think of
God, and cannot but think of him, but it is sore against their Wills; they would
outrun those Thoughts, but the Wrath of God pursues 'em; Joh. 27.22.
they would fain flee out of his hand. But now to pray, and strive, that we may
get and keep God always in our Eye; to be inwardly grieved that our Thoughts
of God so easily slip from us; so to presentiate God to the Soul, as to be able
to appeal to God; Psalm. 139.18.
All the while I am awake, I am still with thee; and when I sleep, Psalm. 91.1,
4.
it is under the Shadow of the Almighty, he shall cover me with his Feathers,
Mat. 23.37.
as the Hen does her Chickens. Christians, those that can (comparatively) see
nothing else with delight, nor rest any where else with content, they are
truly Religious, they are certainly sincere. Let Us now consider the other
extreme.

Too many think (or do what they can to make it sink into their Atheism is best
for 'em: these would be accounted men of a great Soul; they scorn the
Pusillanimity of Conscience; they are neither allured, nor frighted with the
fore-thoughts of a future State; they slight any discourse of Heaven, and they
laugh at the Torments of Hell; they live without care in a continued Frolic;
and are not these the only happy men? Tho they restrain their Blab, they let
loose their Thoughts, and it is the common language of Men's Hearts and Lives:
Men secretly bless themselves that they are not Religious, when they see men
suffer for Conscience sake, all the pity they express, is from their deluded
Fancy.

But will this always hold? Job tells us, Job 9.4.
no man can harden his Heart against God in the way of his Providence, and
prosper; muchless sure, can he set himself against God in his very being, and
prosper. He Is really a Fool Psalm. 14.1.
(tho the World count him a Wit,) that says in his Heart, i. e. he heartily
wishes that there were no God; but God has a witness within him that he cannot
silence, but (will in despite of him) convince him, that there is a God. Never
could any man yet blow out that Candle Prove. 20.27.
of the Lord, which God has set up within him: It cannot be expected, that he
who strives in his Practice, to be an Atheist in his Judgment, should be so
ingenuous as to tell us what Convulsions of Conscience he is incurably troubled
with; if he would, we should need no other Testimony but his own to convince
him; and seeing he will not, I Will only bid him, first get the Mastery of his
own Conscience, before he decry that God that Masters it: I might press him to
consider the works of Creation and Providence, and how unreasonable it is to
expect, that another should believe thy profound Arguments (as thou esteem'st
'em) when thou unbelievest 'em thy Self, every time thou hear'st it Thunder:
(for why should I coast about for convictions) while thou carriest that within
thee, which neither thy self, nor all the Devils in Hell to help thee, can
extinguish; thine own Conscience man; Conscience I say, not another, but thine
own; and thou may as soon tear thy Soul out of thy Body, as thy Conscience
out of thy Soul: And while Conscience has a being, the being of God shall not
be denied: It Is too true, thou may sear thy Conscience from speaking any
thing for thy good; but thou can never silence it from speaking to thy
Terror: That never-dying worm will be still gnawing, to make thee feel, both
here, and to Eternity, that there is a God. One thing I confess, I have
sometimes wondered at, that ever any Atheist can dye without horror; the
approaches of Death commonly undeceive us. But when I consider, that those who
industriously endeavor to stupifie their Consciences while they live, should
in Gods Righteous Judgment be so far besotted, as not to have their Consciences
so much as quitch when they dye: but, that as they have industriously
proselyted others to their Atheism, they should be so far deserted of God, as
to leave their Companions under that Delusion, till Hell undeceive 'em. O! but
what can Religion do for the cure of Atheism?

Serious Godliness in the lowest degree of it expells Atheism. I grant, those
that are eminently Godly may be tempted to Atheism, but they reckon these among
Satan's fiery darts, and accordingly set themselves presently to quench them;
which tho they cannot so easily do, as they imagine, who have not experience of
such Temptations, yet there is this palpable difference between them and
Atheists, viz. The Atheist is inquisitive for Arguments to promote his Atheism,
the tempted Christian as inquisitive for Arguments, and Grace to destroy it:
those that are seriously godly, do not only seek a perfect cure of their own
(in part) mortified Atheism, but mournfully bewail the insolent Atheism of the
age they live in. If it be (as it is) as a Sword in their Bones for their
Enemies to Psalm 42.10.
reproach them, while they say daily unto them, Where is your God? If it (as it
were) break their Bones, to have their interest in God, and Gods peculiar care
of them so much as questioned, it must needs be as a Sword to their heart (a
killing wound) to hear the Fear of God ridiculed, and the Being of God denied.
Certainly as Grace is heightened, a gracious Person is next to being
overwhelmed: Tho God has an evidence of his Deity lies lieger in the worst of
his Enemies, yet upon the miracles of Mercy he works for, and in, his own
People, God may say to them, Isai. 43.12.
They are his Witnesses, that he is God. And the more eminent any one is in
Grace, the more experimental Witness he is that the Lord is God. This may not
only be sufficient for the instances already given; but be sufficiently
instructive, what to do in all other Cases that might be named. I had thought
to have proportionably enlarged upon these, which I shall but little more than
name, and therefore shall not add them to the number.

Who knows whether a full or a vacant employment be best for him? A full
employment is that which every one that has dealings in the World gapes after:
this leaves no room for Melancholy, nor Idleness, each of which are unspeakably
mischievous.

But those that live in a Hurry of business, do neither enjoy God nor
themselves; it is tiresome both to Body and Mind: the Truth is, the desire of it
is ordinarily naught in the rise, it is from covetousness and ambition; naught
in the progress, it neglects God and godliness; and naught in the close, it
ends at best in disappointment.

But here Religion gives relief; for a Heavenly-minded Person to be full of
worldly business, it is he alone that minds the main business of his Life, to
work out his Salvation: it is he alone that both will and can keep the World
from justling out what is better: the World in this is like the Gout, tho you
keep it at your feet, it is troublesome, but if it reach the Heart, it is mortal;
the World through Grace may be a good Servant, but it is impossible to be a good
Master.

Is vacancy from Employment better? It Is tedious to be always drudging, for we
know not who nor what, to have no time to spare for Refreshment, and
Recreation, that we may enjoy what we have, be it more or less; this seems
better. But yet to have little or nothing to do, exposes us to we cannot say
what; Idleness is an inlet to the most monstrous Abominations; Relaxation from
business, and Recreation after weariness, is at best but a banquet, no way fit
for ordinary food; besides this, Satan watches, and never misseth prevailing
upon an idle Person.

What can Serious Godliness do in this Case? When one whose Heart is set upon
godliness, has but little to do with the World, he finds enough to do as a
Christian: The considerate Christian has not one hour in his Life wherein he
has nothing to do; he alone can make a Virtue of Necessity; he alone can
redeem time for God; he alone can fill his Life with Duty and Comfort: in
short, it is through Grace alone, that a man has never too much, nor too little
business: It Is the power of Godliness that is thus powerful.

Who knows whether many or few Friends be best for him? For many A Friend is
born for Adversity; a Friend may be better than an Estate; to have many dear
Friends and Relations, it carries us through our lives with Comfort; it is a Duty
to prize 'em, it is a sin to slight 'em; and therefore this seems
unquestionably best.

But ( and there is no Friends on earth without a but in their Commendation,)
Friends themselves are troublesome, apt to take exceptions, to mistake, to be
weary of us if we have long need of 'em; and besides this, there is none in the
World, whose Friendship is not founded on Grace, can be so much my Friend now,
but he may be as much my Enemy hereafter: And if you can find any Friend above
these exceptions, how do the thoughts of parting abate the Comfort of enjoying?
Alas! we dare not think of it.

Can Serious Godliness stand us in any stead here? Much every way; if our
Friends be Irreligious, this necessitates us to do what is possible to make them
Friends to Christ and to Religion; and this attempt is always successeful, if
not to make them Gracious, yet to make our selves more gracious; and if thy
Friends be already Religious, thou will have a foretast of Heaven in the
Communion of Saints; tho this is rare, and rarely enjoyed.

Some think it is best to have few or no Friends. We are too apt to flatter our
selves, and to bear upon our Friends, to reckon upon their Interest, when we
ordinarily find disappointments; whereas, expecting nothing from them, makes us
learn to live without them, and in some sort above them. We need neither
flatter nor humor any Body.

But now to be Friendless, that is very uncomfortable; a Friend greatens all the
Joys, and lessens all the Sorrows we meet with in this World: it argues a
crooked and perverse disposition, to be without Friends, or not to care for
'em. Besides this, we had need to have every man our Friend, for we know not
into whose hands our Life may come before we dye; that Person must needs be
miserable, who lives undesir'd, and dies unlamented.

What can Serious Godliness do in this Case? A Serious Holy Person, tho he have
but few, or perhaps no worldly Friends, he has the most, and the best Friends;
he has God to be his Friend, he has an Interest in the whole household of
Faith; and he can make up in God what he wants in any other Persons, or things
of the World: what tho he has no Friend to stand by him? Innocence and
Independency dare do, and can suffer any thing.

Freedom from Affliction, or an afflicted Condition, be at present best for
him? Freedom from Afflictions seems most desirable both to Nature and Grace: we
naturally love our ease, and would have nothing befall us that is Grievous to
Flesh and Blood; and Gracious Persons pray and strive to prevent and remove
Afflictions. But yet the experiences of all, good and bad, in all ages of the
World, proclaims this upon the House-tops, that more have got good by
Afflictions, than by being without 'em: Prove. 1.32.
The Prosperity of Fools destroys 'em.

What does Religion in this Case? The Truth is, there needs a great exercise of
Religion to carry us safe through Freedom from Affliction. Job 1.5.
Jobs extraordinary devotion, upon his Childrens ordinary rejoicing in their
prosperous Condition, may Convincingly instruct us, that there is more danger in
Freedom from Affliction, than we are willing to suspect, and it is more
difficult to love, and fear, and trust God, when we have the world, than when
we want it. so that without Serious Godliness, it is impossible to withstand the
insinuating and pleasing Temptation of flattering Prosperity; and unless Faith
be in Exercise, we cannot do it with it. What then! is an afflicted Condition
to be preferred? Some that have had experience of both, say Yes; they have been
afraid to come from under their Afflictions; some sick Persons have been even
afraid of Health, tho they desired it, lest what they got in their Sickness,
they should lose in their Health.

But yet the continuance of Afflictions breaks the Spirits, and hinders that
cheerful serving, and praising of God, which is (or should be) the Life of a
Christian: tho many are bettered by Afflictions, yet none are allowed to pray
for Afflictions, but against them, and use all good means to avoid, or remove
them: it is one thing makes Heaven desirable, the putting an end to all our
Afflictions. In short, Heb. 12.11.
no chastening for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous, whatever be
the after-fruit of it: This therefore is clogged with Vanity. But what does
Religion in this Case?

Serious Godliness by Afflictions becomes more Serious: God makes great use of
Afflictions for the working, and promoting of Piety; and in this (I think) all
experienced Christians are agreed, they reckon sanctified Afflictions among the
choicest Providence of their lives: I commend the enlargement of this by your
own Thoughts out of your own experiences: And thus including these three Cases
as in a large Parenthesis; there is one Case more that I would cautiously speak
to, which the Church Catholic (truly so called) may have more cause than ever,
tremblingly to consider; and to seek more satisfying resolution than I can give
for it is determination.

VI. What man upon Earth can peremptorily assert, whether Peace, or be just at
such a time, infallibly best for the Church of Christ? It Is easily granted,
that we must at all times pray for, and endeavor the universal (both outward,
and spiritual) Peace of the Church: and this, that we may at all times do any
thing but Sin, to avoid or put an end to Persecution; but let us consider each
as in the former instances.

That the Peace of the Church is beyond Expression desirable, he is those that
are the greatest troublers of the Churches Peace, do usually proclaim their
Friendship to it, calling their Affection to a party, Love to the Church, and
the welfare of their party, the Peace of the Church: Now tho their Charity is
too narrow to contract the Church into a party, their Notion of Peace is large
enough, they would have it commensurate with the Church. So that I need not be
large to prove what no body denies: Outward Prosperity was so much the Blessing
of the Old Covenant, that some confine it to that, but others upon better
Grounds expect more under the Gospel; for Luke 1.74, 75.
this was no inconsiderable end of Christ's coming into the World, to deliver us
out of the hands of our worldly Enemies, to serve him, without affrighting
fears of men, in Holiness before God, and Righteousness before men, all the
days of our Life: Which Prosperity when the Church has enjoyed, according to
Christ's purchase, and Promise, then they have walked in the filial fear of the
Lord, and in the encouraging Acts 9.31.
Comforts of the Holy Ghost, were multiplied in number of Converts, and
increase of their Graces that were formerly converted: But here, as we use to
say of pleasant weather, It Is pity fair weather should do any harm; so it is
pity the Churches Prosperity should do any harm.

But alas! the Church of Christian as little bear continual Prosperity, as long
Adversity: a Calm is sometimes as dangerous as a Storm. Many are the
Temptations and Snares of a Prosperous condition: it breeds Hypocrites; Errors
and Heresies spring up like Weeds in rank ground; Professors are apt to grow
Remiss and Careless, Wanton and Secure; to be too fond of the Present, and to
hanker after more Temporal Happiness than God judges good for them. How hardly
were the very Apostles awakened from dreaming of Christ's temporal Kingdom, and
the very best of 'em from suing for great Offices at Court! O the Divisions
among Brethren, when Pride makes them quarrelsome! When the World favors the
Church, the Church slides into the World, then their worldliness spoils their
Christianity, and their Christianity palliates their worldliness, and so those
things are mixed which can never be compounded.

But now Serious Godliness is the best Preservative against Surfeiting on
Prosperity. It Is Grace in the Exercise and Growth, that powerfully enables, and
necessarily provokes to improve the Churches Peace to all Spiritual advantages.
The Church of the Jews was never in such a flourishing condition as in
Solomon's Reign; and is it not well worthy our observation, that the Posterity
of his Servants, who became Proselytes to the Jewish Religion, were several
Ages after his death, doubly recorded by Neh. 7.57.60.
the Spirit of God, above the Proselytes of former Ages?

It Is Serious Godliness that keeps them humble, and always upon their Watch
against flattering Temptations; that keeps them low in their own eyes, and from
despising others: and what on this side great Grace, could make David, who had
a 1 Chronicles. 22.14.
greater Sum of ready Money than ever any had in the World, either before or
since, prefer that little of Scripture that was penned in his time, before an
innumerable Treasure Psalm. 119.72.
? He had also a List of Worthies 2 Samuel 23.
, never the like in the World, yet he Psalm. 16.3.119.63.
preferrs the Communion of Saints before 'em. To have our Conversation in
Heaven, when it is best with us upon Earth, this can only be effected by the
Power of Godliness: believe it Christians, this is no easy matter.

What then! Is a State of Persecution more Eligible? Before I dare speak a word
to this, I must premise this Caution: Let not Persecutors take encouragement to
be more outrageous in their Persecution, and then scornfully tell you, this is
good for 'em, their Pastors tell 'em it is sometimes better for 'em than Peace.
This is like Julian, who in every thing he did, with a deep Reach, and greater
Malice than former Emperors, to undermine and worm out the Christian Religion,
he still twitted the Christians with some advice or promise of Christ to his
Disciples about Persecution, jearingly telling 'em 'twas for their good. Let
such Persons know, and O that they would consider, that though God has, and
does, and will bring good out of evil, and overruled the fury of men for the
good of his People; yet this is not the least excuse for their Sin, nor can it
be pleaded to abate their Punishment. To give you an Instance, I cannot give a
greater, and I need give no more: The Jews Persecution of our Blessed Savior,
'twas predetermin'd of God, and eventually proved the greatest good to man, yet
no thank to them, nor alleviation of their guilt: Acts 2.23.
Him being delivered by the determinate Counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye
have taken, and by wicked hands have Crucified and slain. They pretended high
to Piety, and necessity for their Process against him; they Charge him with
Blasphemy against God, Treason against Caesar, Devilism against the Souls of
People, and Luxury as to his common Conversation; whereas he was no other than
Act. 7.52.
the just one, of whom ye have been now the Betrayers and Murderers. 'Twas
Good Counsel that Gamaliel gave those Rulers Act. 5.29.
who were cut to the Heart, i. e. vexed at Heart, and counted it Criminal that
the Apostles should dare to tell 'em, We ought to obey God rather than men:
Refrain from these men, and let them alone, for if this Counsel or this work be
of men, it will come to naught; but if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it,
lest happily ye be found to fight against God; for it is said of others of them
that slighted this, 1 These. 2.15, 16.
They have persecuted us, and they please not God, and are contrary to all men:
forbidding us to speak unto the Gentiles that they might be saved, to fill up
their sin always; for the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost. And how
heavy does that Doom ly upon them to this day! I Will add no more to this
Caution, but a Request to Persecutors, to read, and think, and pray over the
Second Psalm.

This premised, much may be said of the good which God does in, and for, and by
his Children, by bringing them into, his presence in, and deliverance out of,
Persecution; how God increases their Graces, heightens their Comforts,
multiplyes their Experiences, beyond what he does any other time of their
lives. I remember Augustine has a Passage, (though being separated from my
Books, I cannot name where,) That if a Person suffer death for Christ before
Conversion, his Martyrdom shall be to him instead of Regeneration: But if you
will not receive his Testimony about the first Grace, I am sure you will not deny
my next about the Exercise of Grace Heb. 5.8.
. Our great Exemplar, tho he was the Son of God, yet as he was the Son of man,
he experimentally learned Obedience by the things which he suffered: And the
Holy Ghost tells us Heb. 2.10.
, It became him for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in
bringing many Sons unto Glory, to make the Captain of their Salvation perfect
through Sufferings. It Is hard to say what kind of Perfection Christ had by
Suffering, but it is easy to observe how Sufferings tend to the Perfecting of
Christians; they force them to a more severe examination of Heart and Life, and
to a more through Repentance of what provoked God to lay them under Sufferings:
then their Prayers are more fervent, and their whole Conversation more regular
than at other times: so that I know not whether as well the former, as the
latter part of that passage may not be a gracious Promise. Psalm. 89.30, 31, etc.
If his Children forsake my Law, and walk not in my judgments, if they break my
Statutes, and keep not my Commandments; then will I visit their Transgression
with a Rod, and their Iniquity with Stripes: nevertheless, my Loving kindness
will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail: my
Covenant will I not break, etc. In short, their greatest Sufferings shall be
medicinal, not destructive; the more they exercise their Graces, the more they
increase them: for here is the difference between an Earthly and an Heavenly
Treasure; the one, the more you spend, the less you have; the other, the more
you lay out, the more you augment the Treasure. James 2.5.
Hearken my beloved Brethren, has not God chosen the poor of this World, those
especially who are impoverished for Righteousness sake, rich in Faith? and
according to our Faith are all our other Graces, and all our other Comforts;
for it is 1 Pet. 1.8.
by believing, we rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of Glory. And the
Apostle tells you expressly, that it is for the Comfort of others, he acquaints
'em 2 Cor. 1.5.
, As the Sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our Consolation abounds by
Christ. Those Christians that have walked droopingly all their days, when God
has singled them out for Sufferings, God has cleared up their Evidences:
Never did any Martyr dye in desertion. 'Twas in the Captivity, Dan. 10.10, etc.
that one while Christ the Angel of the Covenant, another while a created
Angel, one of his menial Servants, did revive, instruct, support, and comfort
Daniel, as Gods greatly beloved: The Blessed Apostle, in one Chapter 2 Cor. 11.
gives us an account of his Sufferings, and in the next 2 Cor. 12.
of his (some degree of) s beatifical vision; and both beyond all the other
Apostles. And God does not only this, in and for themselves, but God makes them
more eminently useful unto others; Persecution was the occasion of spreading
the Gospel all the world over. Blessed Paul wrote more Epistles in his Bonds,
than any one of the other Apostles in their Liberty; and 'twas in one of those
Epistles, that he appeals to his Readers, Ephesians. 3.4.
to understand his Knowledge in the mystery of Christ. 'Twas in the time of the
beloved Disciple's banishment into Patmos, that Christ gave him a Prospect of
the State of the Church from his time to the End of the World; through all the
times of the Heathen Persecutions; and through the rise, reign, and ruin of the
Antichristian Apostasy; with peculiar Prophesies, suitable Directions,
terrible Threatenings, and chearing Promises through the several Visions; all
which, tho not very easy to be understood, yet well deserve the Name of
Revelation; evidencing Christ's peculiar care of his persecuted Servants, that
nothing befalls them by Chance, but that the main outrage of Enemies is ordered
and bounded by Christ's infinite Wisdom, and Compassionate Love: And tho time
has confuted many mistaken Calculations of the continuance of the Churches
troubles, yet God will not delay the Churches deliverance one moment, in favor
to their Enemies, but gradually to ripen his own design; and God will in the
best time do more for his People, than their present Faith and Hope can grasp;
and as we need the understanding of these dark Scriptures, God will unriddle
them to us.

But at present the Churches Persecution is grievous to it, and that upon many
accounts. In times of Persecution, Hell seems to be let loose as to all manner
of Wickedness; when nothing but the Service of God is Criminal, the Service of
the Devil seems Meritorious. Some will be frighted from the entertainment of
the Gospel, and dye in their Infidelity, and they are lost for ever. Others so
far shrink that they lose their Peace, (tho they do not lose their Souls,) and
never recover it more. And the Spirits of the strongest will be apt to faint,
if the Sufferings be sharp and long; Dan. 7.25.
They shall wear out the Saints of the most high. When Persecution comes to its
height, Mat. 24.21.
except those days should be shortened, there should no flesh be saved; but for
the Elects sake those days shall be shortened. But what is to be done at that
time, that what is intolerable to flesh and blood, may be born with triumph;
that we may be so far from stumbling at the Cross of Christ, that we may humbly
glory in it; Act. 5.41.
Rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer Shame for his Name? In a
word, How may the time of their Persecution, be the best time of their life?

By Serious Godliness, by a more vigorous Exercise of all the Graces of the
Holy Ghost. When we feel what there is in that life of Faith, we have at other
times but talked of: What tho the Furnace be heated seven times hotter than
ordinary, may we be but seven times more purified than ordinary! Christians,
let this be your great care, never to suffer as evil doers; but so walk, that
your Enemies may despair of ever finding any occasion against you, except they
find it against you concerning the Law of your God. Persecutors will never own
it, that they inflict evil upon Persons for doing good, but always pretend
something Criminal: As when Paul and Silas preached Christ at Thessalonica, Acts
17.5, 6, 7.
the Jews which believed not, moved with envy, took unto them certain lewd
fellows of the baser sort, and gathered a Company, and set all the City in an
uproar, and assaulted the house of Jason, and sought to bring them out to the
People: and when they found them not, they drew Jason and certain Brethren unto
the Rulers of the City, crying, These that have turned the World up-side down,
are come hither also; and these all do contrary to the Decrees of Caesar. When
Paul was afterward taken and arraigned, Act. 23.1.9.
he earnestly beholding the Council, (he could look them boldly in the face,)
said, Men and Brethren, I have lived in all good Conscience before God until
this day. And tho this Plea enraged some of his Persecutors, others became his
Advocates, saying, We find no evil in this man, therefore let us not fight
against God. And when he was afterward, in this Process, brought before a
Heathen Magistrate, corrupt enough, and thereby prejudiced against him, yet
there, Acts 24.25.
as he reasoned of Righteousness, Temperence, and Judgment to come, Felix
trembled. Nothing so ruffles the Consciences of Persecutors, as the
uncontrollable blamelesness of Sufferers: As Job told his prejudiced Friends,
Job. 19.28.
Ye should say, Why persecute we him, seeing the root of the matter is found in
me? I Will close all these Propositions with Job's resolution, which I request
may be this; Job 27.5, 6.
Till I dye I will not remove my integrity from me; my righteousness I hold
fast, and will not let it go; my heart shall not reproach me so long as I live.

And now, tho I have thus made out what I proposed in behalf of Serious
Godliness, yet I am sensible it is not done beyond contradiction: I shall
therefore next endeavor to remove the Objections that are of moment, and leave
the Cavils to die of themselves.

Health when we are sick, or right our selves when we are wronged? or why
should we seek peace of Conscience, when we are under trouble of Conscience?
This seems to make a confusion in our very Prayers, to hinder praying, and to
stagger our Faith in Prayer; for our Prayers are for the altering of things for
the better; that is the Sum of all our Petitions: Now if we be wavering in
our minds, about what is good for us, how can we think to receive any thing of
the Lord? James 1.6, 7, 8.
A doubleminded, unresolved man, is unstable, uncertain in all his ways.

hindering or confounding our Prayers, that next to the Spirit of God, it is our
best Guide and Instructor for Prayer: This will teach us, that our Petitions
are not to direct God what to do, nor may we expostulate with God in a
quarrelling manner, as if God wronged us if he do not humor us. Whatever we
pray for, that cannot but be good for us; e. g. Renewing, strengthening,
stablishing Grace, these cannot but be good for us; for these we may insist
with so much earnestness, as not to be contented with a denial. God has no
where made it our Duty to be willing to be damned, to be his Enemies, to hate
him, and Blaspheme him for ever: And therefore herein if a pretended Angel from
Heaven (for God never sent any holy Angel upon such an errand) should tell us,
as from God, that God would not hear us, nor bestow his Grace upon us; we might
tell him, God never denied his Grace to any that were not willing to be denied;
and therefore where God has by preventing Grace so far engaged the Will
restlesly to desire Grace, he has given a token for good that he is pl^ased
with our Importunity, and therefore peremptorily to resolve, humbly to lie at
Gods foot, and to live and dye with this Petition, for Grace, (your endeavors
being answerable to your Prayers) you may comfortably believe, never any
perished that did it. But now in things not necessary to Salvation, (and of such
things is the question) we must pray in another manner: we are to consider our
Circumstances, the Promises that suit them, how far God uses to fulfill such
Promises in the Letter of them, how in his wise Love he fulfills a Spiritual
Promise, when they are earnest for a Temporal; and we shall never have hard
thoughts of God, tho he deny us any thing in this world for which we are most
earnest: And the truth is, let but serious praying Christians deeply reflect
upon their own hearts, how they have been differently affected in Prayer,
according to the things they prayed for, and they will certainly find, that
whatever their expressions have been about things less necessary, yet their
Hearts have been more thoroughly broken, and more unexpressibly longing for
Spiritual supplies: It Is about Gods bestowing of his Grace, that they adore his
Sovereignty, justifying God though he should reject them, and wondering (even
to astonishment) how he can show kindness to them: so that the more Spiritual
any Christians are, the more they lose their will in the will of God, and the
less they quarrel with God, let him do what he will with them: They do not
think it in vain to serve God, tho he should (but he will not) cast them off at
last; they thankefully acknowledge they receive so many mercies from God here,
as are infinitely more worth than all the Services they can do him; and they
see cause to love God, tho there is no cause why God should love them: so that
they will pray, and wait, hate sin, and love holiness, admire God, and abase
themselves, and let God do what he will with them: This is the temper and
practice of the most serious Christians.

This will teach us to observe Gods answering of Prayer, so as to thankful or
penitent, to retract or alter, or urge our Petitions, as our case requires: And
this I think I may say, One of the choicest exercises of Grace, is about the
improving the return of Prayer: e. g. I think such a thing to be good for me,
suppose a better frame of Health; for this I fill my Mouth with Arguments, and
my Heart with Faith, but God answers me with disappointments; this puts me upon
reflection; I find causes more than are good why God should deny me. Suppose
further, I beg the pardon of sin, am sensible that I must perish if I be
denied, and therefore reckon I cannot be too earnest; but am so far from
speeding, that to my apprehension God seems Implacable, and I have less hopes
every day than other. Well! this puts me upon a more through Scrutiny, and I
find I have not observed Gods Method for Pardon; I would have the comfort of a
Pardon without a suitable sense of the evil of Sin, which if I should obtain, I
should not be so shie of Sin as when I have felt the smart of it; I should not
look upon my self as so much beholding to Christ, but that I might venture upon
sin, and have a Pardon at pleasure; I should not so much pity others under
their Soul-troubles. In a word, the more we consider, the more cause we shall
see, why God answers Prayer according to his own wisdom, not our Folly.

We do not see that Religion does any great matter toward the bettering of
every condition: those that pretend to Religion, have always their own good
word, they love to speak and hear of the Achievements and Priveledges of
Religion, tho they are invisible to all but themselves: A little more Modesty
and less Arrogance would better become 'em.

To our grief we must acknowledge, Serious Christians are shamefully defective
in living up to such a height of Heavenly-mindedness, as to have the
Experiences they might have; and shall we when we are injurious to our selves,
expect God to fulfill conditional Promises, when we neglect the Condition of
them? No! Christians, God will say to us, what he once said to Israel; Lev.
26.3, etc.
If thou will walk in my Statutes, and keep my Commandments and do them, then
the Lord thy God will set thee on high above all nations of the earth, and all
these blessings shall come on thee, and overtake thee, etc. Deuteronomy. 28.1. etc.
But if you will walk contrary unto me, then will I walk contrary to you also,
Number. 14.34.
and you shall know my breach of Promise. God does not only in displeasure, but
in kindness make his People feel a difference in their Comforts, from the
difference in their walking: ou may as well expect to buy things without Money,
because Money answers all things, as to expect Promises fulfilled to Godliness,
when you want that Godliness to which the Promise is made. It Is true, God may
give it of bounty, but not of Promise; and then it may be a Mercy, but not a
Blessing: Make Conscience of performing the Condition, and make Conscience of
believing the Promise; for God will certainly fulfill that Promise or a better;
so that the fault's our own that we don't inherit the Promises.

vanity of every Condition; 2 Pet. 1.4.
it is they only have received those exceeding great and precious promises,
whereby they are partakers of the divine nature; having escaped the corruption
that is in the world through lust; and though they have not already attained
that heavenly frame they hope for, neither are already perfect; Phil. 3.12, etc.
yet this one thing they do, forgetting those things which are behind, and
reaching forth unto those things which are before, they press toward a full
Experience of what is to be found in the ways of Holiness. If this be not a
sufficient answer to this Objection, what I shall add will be more than enough.
Whereas I have by an Induction of six comparative Cases (I hope) demonstrated
the excellency of Serious Godliness, I shall now in as many Instances, beyond
all Comparison, and beyond Contradiction, demonstrate the superlative
excellency of the Power of Godliness, all which may serve as arguments for
Practical Godliness.

Serious Godliness will make your present Condition good for you, be it what it
will. Every thing but Religion will make you think any Condition better than
your present Condition: There Is one Text I would commend to your consideration
in this matter, 1 Timothy 6.5, 6. Those that are destitute of the Truth, suppose
that Gain is Godliness; from such withdraw thy self; but Godliness with
contentment is great gain: q. d. Those that only talk of Religion, and wrangle
about it, they have no higher design than to make a gain of it, avoid all
familiarity with them; but those that are sincerely Religious, that know, and
fear, and worship God aright, there is a Treasure, a great Treasure, (...)
fundus, quasi perannis sons.
a constant Revenue, an unexhaustible Spring; and then Content is not mentioned
as a Condition added to Piety, as if Piety were not great gain without Content
added to it, but Content is mentioned as the very genuine effect of Piety Purum
putum pietatis effectum.
: The Godly man is so well contented with his Condition, that he is not so
solicitous as others for the bettering of it; whatsoever is wanting to him, is
made up by Tranquillity of mind, and Hope in God, that God will supply him with
necessaries, and he acquiesceth in his will: Now where is that Man in all the
World that can do this, beside the Christian?

Serious Godliness will make every change of Condition good for us, tho shock
both Nature and Grace: A change of condition is either the hope, or fear, of
every one in this World; and it is not the least part of Heavens happiness, that
there is no fear of change. In that state of Happiness wherein Men and Angels
were created, Mutability was their Outlet into Sin, and Misery, but now through
Grace there is no change formidable. Alas! we change more or less every day, and
who is it that meets not with some (almost) overwhelming changes in his life,
and does (or should) preparingly expect his greatest change at Death? And let
the Consciences of all that are not worse than dead, say, whether any thing on
this side now-despised Godliness, can so much as endure the thoughts of such a
Change. In the comparatively petty changes of our life, when we but change
Plenty into Want, or Credit into Disgrace, or Health into Sickness, how do
Persons fret and toss like a wild Bull in a Net, or lie down sullen under God's
hand, as if he had done us wrong, or were to give us account why he grieves us!
But now Grace in exercise, turns our eyes inward, and shows us what we have
more cause to lament; no evil comparable to the evil of Sin: whatever God does
against us on this side Hell, it is less than sin deserves. Will God any way
prepare us for our unchangeable change, glory be to Free Grace.

Serious Godliness will make Relative Afflictions (which of all outward good
for us, and nothing else can do it. I confess it is morally worse, for all the
Relations of a Family to go the broad way to ruin, and tho their Lusts clash
one against another, yet to be all agreed to be the Devils willing Servants:
'Twas sad in Egypt Exodus 12.30.
, when there was not an house whore there was not one dead; but it is far worse
to have whole Families, where there is not one Spiritually alive; but tho it is
Sinfully worse, than Divisions in Families about Religion, yet it is at present
more dolefully Afflictive, to have those whose Souls welfare we desire as our
own, to be Devils incarnate: For a David, a man after Gods own heart, when he
comes from public worship 2. Sam. 6.20. etc.
to bless his household, to be so reviled by Michal as to divert his Zeal, to a
twitting her with her Fathers rejection, and his Blessing of his Household into
Gods Curse upon her Self: On the other hand, for a most obliging Abigal 1 Samuel
25.17. etc.
, to have such a Son of Belial to her Husband, that a man cannot speak to him;
that when by her prudent foresight he was preserved from sudden death, he was
so drunk as not to be capable of hearing of his danger. Again, for Abraham (the
Father of the faithful) to have a seven years Promise of a Son, and for God to
give that Son his Name, and this Son to prove a scoffing Ishmael; for Isaac
(the quietest of all the Patriarchs) to pray twenty years for a Son, and to
have his firstborn prove a profane Esau; for good Eli to have such Children as
1 Samuel 2.17.
made the Offerings of the Lord to be abhorred. And on the other hand, for
Hezekiah of whom it is said, 2 Kings 18.5.
After him was none like him among all the Kings of Judah, nor any that were
before him, to have such a Father, as Ahaz, that as it were, 2 Kings 16.3.
devoted his Children to the Devil; and has this peculiar brand upon him 2 Chronicles. 28.22.
, that in the time of his distrests did he trespass yet more against the Lord;
this is that King Ahaz. How might every one of these complain as Rebekah did
Genesis 27.46.
, I am weary of my Life, because of some wicked Relations, and if I should have
more such, what good shall my Life do me? Again, for Masters to have such
Servants as Mephibosheth had of Ziba 2 Samuel 16.1, 4.
, who irreparably blasted him in his Reputation, and ruined him in his Estate.
For Servants to have such a Master as Laban was to Jacob, who gives this
account of his twenty years Service, Genesis 31.40. etc.
In the day the Drought consumed me, and the Frost by Night, and my sleep
departed from mine Eyes; and had not God relieved him by little less than
Miracle, Surely thou had sent me away empty. And now having mentioned sinful
relative Afflictions, I Will mention no other, for there is no Evil comparable to
Sin, nor any Evil so intolerable to a Gracious Soul; that if Serious Godliness
can keep from sinking under this burden, you need fear no other; to be
inseparably related to one that is loaded with infamy, or even famisht through
Poverty, loathsomely diseased, or incurably distracted, these are but
flea-bitings to the stabbing wounds of wicked Relations: But now serious
godliness does not only support, but grow under this burden: which is a
privilege they are injurious to themselves, to overlook: Christ takes upon him
all those Relations that are impossible to meet in any other, that what is
grievous in any Relation, may be comfortably made up in him; and God usually
increases their Graces, tho not always their present Comforts.

Serious Godliness will make horror of Conscience and divine Desertions good
for us. These, where there is no godliness, nor working toward it, they are
none of the least of Hell torments; but where they befall any one that is
godly, or that God is about to make so, they prove healing tho rough Physic.
When God thoroughly awakens the Conscience, tho with a fright; and drops
spiritual influences, tho withdraws; he makes Convictions more deep, and
Repentance more sound; you may take this for a tried case: Those serious
Christians whom God is pleased to exercise, with tremblings of Conscience,
temptations of Satan, and apprehensions of Desertion, God thereby makes them
eminently gracious and compassionately useful; they walk most humbly with God,
justifying and praising him under his most astonishing Providence: And tho
above all temptations, these are so far from joyous, that they are most
grievous; yet these, even these, Heb. 12.11.
afterward yield the peaceable fruit of righteousness, unto them which are
exercised thereby.

Serious Godliness will force something good out of the evil of Sin. Here it
concerns me to speak with more Caution, than in any other Case whatsoever; for
we must not dare to venture upon Sin, through hopes of extracting good out of it,
(as Chemists extract Spirits out of Soot, and Urine, etc.) No: The Apostle
tells us, Romans 3.8.
That those that do but say, that offer to say, we may do Evil, that Good may
come of it, the Damnation of those slanderers is just. So that it is next to
impossible, to be too shye of Sin, unless when Satan frights us into the
omission of some duties, for fear of the Sins that inevitably cleave to them.
In short, I would have you understand this Instance, to referr to Sins past,
not future; to Sins already committed, that there is no other possible way of
undoing what is done, but by Repentance; not of Sins not yet committed, as if I
gave so much as the least encouragement to so much as the least Sin: Thus
understanding the instance, I dare say it over again, Serious Godliness will
force something of good out of the Evil of Sin. These are the Persons that
cannot forget the Wormwood and the Gall of their Mortification; Lam. 3.19, 20.
their Soul has them still in remembrance, and is humbled in them. These are
the Persons that put a due estimate upon pardoning Mercy, and love Christ the
more, for the more Sins he has forgiven them: As Christ said of Mary Magdalen,
Luke 7.47.
Her Sins which are many are forgiven, for she loved much; but to whom little
is forgiven, the same love little. The Blessed Apostle, that brands himself for
the chief of Sinners 1 Timothy 1.15.
before Conversion, dare own it, that 1 Cor. 15.20.
he labored more abundantly than all the Apostles after his Conversion: and
it is peculiar to him to coin words, Romans 5.20. (...). etc. 1 Timothy 1.14.
to magnify the Grace of God in Christ. Christians, I beseech you, let not any
one take encouragement hence to Sin, but let the worst of Sinners take
encouragement hence to repent: What tho thou have been one of the vilest
wretches upon earth, thou may through Grace be one of the highest Saints in
Heaven; and the sense of what thou have been, may promote it: The rising ground
of a Dunghill, may help to raise thy flight toward Heaven: Once more,

Tho to your own Apprehension, you have no Faith at all to believe any one Here
you see, I take it for granted, that one may be seriously godly, who, in his
own present Apprehensions, has no Faith at all, nor skill at all for any thing
that is Spiritually good; many may be in this like Moses, their Faces may shine
(their Grace may shine) to others, and they themselves not Exo. 34.29.
know it: Many that are dear to God, live many years in the growing Exercise of
Grace, and yet dare not own it that they have any at all: God bestows the Faith
of Assurance upon those of his Children that are not able to bear up without
it, (mistake me not, as if it were not every ones duty to seek it, and a great
Privilege to have assurance,) when others of his Children which have a
stronger Faith, live and (...) without it. To give you an Instance beyond all
instances: Our (...) Jesus Christ, who ('it is certain) could not want assurance,
yet died in as great desertion as 'twas possible to befall him Mark 15.25. with
Mat. 27.46.
: When he had hung six hours upon the Cross, He cried with a loud Voice, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? q. d. This is beyond all my other
Torment: And when he had cried again with a loud Voice, with a vehement
affection and a strong Faith, Verse 50.
he laid down his Soul: But what was that he spoke with such vehemence the
second time? Luke 23.46. (...).
Father, into thy hands I will commend my Spirit; I will depose my Soul with
thee, I will thrust it into thy hands: Now that Jesus Christ was under this
unexpressible Desertion, during the three hours preternatural Darkness, it is
more than for the best of Christians to be so during their whole life; which
does more than prove what I asserted: That a Person of great Grace, may be so
much in the dark, as not to see he has any. But what must he do in this case?
Can Serious Godliness afford any Relief? Christians, pray mark it; these
Persons, they are (and through Grace cannot but be) seriously Godly, and their
serious Godliness finds 'em work enough, and support enough to keep 'em from
sinking: They daily do what they complain they cannot do: Isa. 50.10.
They do fear the Lord, (they fear nothing more than sinning against him,) they
do obey the voice of his servants, (there is none receive Instructions more
Obediently,) tho they walk in Darkness, they will never follow a false Fire; if
they have no light from God, they will have none from any else: They do trust in
the name of the Lord, they lie at Gods foot, let him do what he will with them;
they do stay upon their God, they come up from Cant. 8.5.
the Wilderness of the World leaning upon their beloved: Religion is the whole
business of their life, and comparatively they do nothing else: And tho they
have not ravishing Comforts, they have that Peace that exceeds Phil. 4.7.
all understanding that is merely humane, and that does guard their hearts and
minds through Christ Jesus, against all the Stratagems and Fiery Darts of
Satan. Their State is good, their Souls are safe, and they cannot but be happy
in both Worlds. And thus I have endeavored to be so practical in the Doctrinal
part, that there needs but little to be added for the Application; the Lord
make that little to be like Chemical Spirits, to be more effectual than a
greater quantity: Rouse up your selves to do your part, that it may be so.

Set your hearts upon Serious Godliness. This must be the first Use, for you
can make no Use at all of this Doctrine, till you have made this Use of it.
Every thing without this is but an abuse of it; you do not only wrong the
truth, but you wrong your selves, what ever you say or do about it, till you
make it your business to experiment the truth of what has been spoken in its
Commendation; and this I can assure you, never any one repented of his
downright Godliness. Therefore live in the practice of those plain Duties,
without which it is in vain to pretend to Religion: e. g. Daily read some
Portion of the Old and New Testament, not as your Child reads it for his
Lesson, but as (...) Child reads it for his Profit. Be more frequent in Prayer,
not as those that pass their Prayers by number, but as those that pour out
their Hearts to God in Holy fervor. Let your thoughts be so filled with
Heavenly Objects, that you may in some respect make all things such, you think
of. Discourse of the things of God, not in a captious or Vainglorious manner,
but as those that feel the Truths they speak of. Receive the Sacrament, not as
a Civil Test, but as sealing that Covenant, wherein you will be as careful, to
fulfill the Conditions, as you would have God faithful in fulfilling the
Promises. Look out so sharp to the Progress of your Sanctification, that Sin
may not expire, but be mortified; and that Grace may be so lively, as to
confute the reproach of Enemies, and exceed the Commendation of Friends. Bear
Afflictions not as a Malefactor goes to Execution, because he cannot help it,
but as chary not to miss the Fruit of Affliction, the Participation of Gods
Holiness. Tho you look first to your selves, be not only selfish, though in the
most Gracious manner, but endeavor to be Blessings, as far as your Name is
heard of. In short, perform all your duties, to God, your selves, and others,
in the Name of Christ, through his Strength, according to his Command, relying
upon his Promises, that you may feel what it is to be accepted in Gods and your
beloved. This is to be Serious in Religion.

Learn to be more than barely contented with your present Condition; chooses
for you, preferring it before any other Condition. Every Condition has some
lessons peculiar to it, which are better learnt in that Condition, than in any
other; and those things that may be best learnt in thy Condition, are the
things you most need learning; which when you have learnt, then God will put
thee into other circumstances, to teach thee something else. Every Condition
has something grievous in it, by reason of the Sin and Vanity that cleaves to
it, but that which is most grievous, if it be used as Physic, will help to
cure thee. We all grant it is best to take Physic when we need it; 1 Pet. 1.6.
Now for a season (if need be) you are in heaviness through manifold Trials; and
when we take Physic, we imprison our selves in our Chamber, as much as others
in a Gaol; we abstain from riot as much as they that want bread, we tend our
Physic, and need no Arguments to do so. Christians, let God be your Physician,
and prescribe what Physic he pleases; we have nothing else to do, but observe
his Instructions for it is beneficial operation: Apply this to any Condition
that is uneasy to you, and you will see cause not only to justify, but to praise
your wise Physician; but if this arguing be not cogent, I will commend one that
is, (I confess I love those Directions that will apply themselves, that will
work their way for Application,) That you may so far like your present
Condition; as to perform the duties of it, before you desire an Alteration of
it, take this course: Sit down and consider, should God so far humor thee, as
to let thee frame thine own Condition to thine own mind, to give thee thy
choice for a worldly Happiness: Suppose he allowed thee time to think, to
consult Friends, to alter, and add, upon second, and third, yea upon your
twentieth Thought, whatever the Wit of man could suggest, or the Heart of man
desire, and all this for a whole Month together, before you fixed your choice:
I suppose when you chose, it should be Wealth without Care, Pleasure without
Weariness, Honor without Hazard, Health without Sickness, Friends without
Mistake, Relations without Crosses, Old Age without Infirmities; and if God
should thus alter the course of his Providence, unto what would your own Pride,
and the Worlds Envy expose you? O! but you will say, all this with Grace will do
well: Do you think so? but would not Grace without all this do better? Can you
think that such a Condition would Wean you from the World, and fit you for
Heaven? or is Earth the place where you would live for ever, and have no more
Happiness than that can afford you? Return, Poor Soul, return to thy Self, and
to thy God; acknowledge that God is Wise, and thou art a Fool: And it is better
be employed in the present Duty of thy present Condition, than to doze out thy
Life in wild Imaginations.

Make Conscience of both sorts of Duties, Religious and Worldly; and allot fit
and distinct times for Heavenly and Worldly Business; but with this difference,
let Religion mix it self with worldly business, and spare not, but let not the
World break in upon Religion, lest it spoil it. Religion will perfume the
World, but the World will taint Religion: Though every thing in the World be
clogged with Vanity, yet there is something of Duty about every thing we meddle
with, and we must not call neglect of Duty, contempt of the World. Use the
World as you do your Servants, to whom you give due liberty, as the best way to
prevent their taking more than is due: so to take a due care about the World,
is the best way to prevent Religion's being justled out by worldly cares. Count
not any Sin or Duty about the least matters, so small, as to venture upon the
one, or neglect the other, but proportion your carefulness according to the
business before you. I see more cause every day than other, to commend both the
Truth and Weight of the Observation, that all Over-doing is undoing: You cannot
bestow too much diligence about one thing, but you rob something else of what
diligence is necessary, and mar that about which you are over-solicitous. I Will
close this with that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31.
This I say, Brethren, the time is short, we have none to spare; It remains,
for the future; that both they that have Wives, be as though they bad none, let
'em not be Uxorious; and they that weep, as if they wept not, if God bring them
under sorrrow, let them but water their Plants, not drown 'em; and they that
rejoice, as if they rejoiced not, we must at best rejoice with trembling; and
they that buy, as if they possessed not, there is nothing we can purchase worth
the name of a Possession; and they that use this world, as not abusing it, to
any other use than what God has appointed; for the fashion of this World
passes away; the Pageantry of this World will soon be over; but I would have
you without carefulness, without distracting carefulness about worldly things.

Whatever you do for the bettering of your Condition, follow God, but This is a
direction of great moment, being a necessary Caution against that Sin that does
always beset us. Every man is an Orator to aggravate his own grievances, and
thinks himself a Politician, for fitting them with Remedies; yea, has the
confidence of a Prophet, that they shall certainly be effectual, if God will
but take his Time and Method for their operation. Job 11.12.
Vain man would be wise, tho he be born like a wild Asses Colt, to kick up his
heels against Gods unsearchable Wisdom. You may at once see both your proness
to the Sin, and Christ directing to this Remedy, in one and the same instance;
viz. When Peter had made such a Confession of Faith, that Christ never
commended any like it, but would prescribe to Christ an exemption from
Suffering, not considering that Mankind would have been undone by that advice;
but Christ with a sharp reproof bids, Mat. 16.16.23.
Get thee behind me, etc. In all cases, about settling in the World, getting
Estates, seeking Preferment, entering into Marriage, removing from one place to
another, be not self-conceited, nor hasty, to run before God, nor to go out of
his way; but follow him, follow his Commands in a way of Obedience, follow his
Providence in a way of Observance, follow God, and you may expect his Blessing.

Remember these two words, tho you forget all the rest of the Sermon, CHRIST
and HOLINESS, Holiness and Christ: Interweave these all manner of ways, in
your whole Conversation. Press after Holiness as much as it is Possible, had you
no Christ to befriend you, (for it is a shame to mind Holiness the less, for any
benefits you expect from Christ) and rest as entirely upon Christ, as if there
were nothing else required, (for the best of your Holiness does not merit
acceptance;) It Is serious Christianity that I press, as the only way to better
every condition; it is Christianity, downright Christianity, that alone can do
it: It Is not Morality without Faith, that is but Refined Heathenism; it is not
Faith without Morality, that is but downright Hypocrisy: It must be a Divine
Faith, wrought by the Holy Ghost, where God and man concur in the operation;
such a Faith as works by Love, both to God and Man, a Holy Faith, full of good
Works: Ephesians. 2.10.
For we are his Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God
has before ordained, that we should walk in them: Phil. 3.3.8, 9.
Worshipping God in the Spirit, rejoicing in Christ Jesus, and having no
Confidence in the flesh; yea doubtless, counting all things but loss for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus; that we may be found in him, not
having, (not trusting in) our own Righteousness, but that which is through the
Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith; that we may be
found in him, etc. I Will close all with this of Solomon, of whom it is said, 1
King. 4.32, 33.
He spoke three thousand Proverbs, and his Songs were a thousand and five; and
he spoke of Trees, from the Cedar that is in Lebanon, even unto the Hyssop that
springs out of the wall; he spoke also of Beasts, and of Fowls, and of
creeping things, and of Fishes. Now consider, his Treatises of Natural
Philosophy are utterly lost, tho we may well suppose them the best that ever
were writ: Nay, of his three thousand Proverbs, those that were not divinely
inspired, are lost, and those that were, are some of them collected by other
hands, Prove. 25.1.
not his own; but his two last and best Treatises, [ Ecclesiastes and
Canticles] the one to abate our Love of the World, and the other to increase
our Love to Christ: These are the Books, these are the things, with which he
did, with which we should close our Lives.

Quest. How may we Experience in our selves, and Evidence to others that
serious Godliness is more than a Fancy? SERMON II.
1 PET. III. 15. Be ready always to give an Answer to every man that asks
you a Reason of the Hope that is in you.
CHristianity was no sooner come into the World, than it was assaulted by
Satan, and his Instruments, persecuting Believers, and either Reproaching their
Religion as Impious, or censuring it as Madness, or ridiculing it as Folly; the
Holy Ghost in the Scripture foreseeing this, not only forewarns them of it, but
arms them against it, and, among others of his holy Penmen, employs this
Apostle to fence those Saints to whom he wrote against this Temptation, and to
direct them what to do if it came to be their Case.

1. He encourages them under Sufferings (of all sorts) for righteousness sake;
tells them, that so to suffer would be so far from making them miserable, that
it would be their Happiness, v. 14. happy are ye; answerably to what his Master
had before told him, and the rest of his hearers, Matthew. 5.11. Blessed are ye
when men shall revile you and persecute you, etc.

2. He directs them how to carry themselves,

(1.) When persecuted, and that

1. Negatively, v. 14. Be not afraid of their terror, etc. Be not daunted nor
affrighted with those fears your Enemies would work in you. This passage
relates to that of Isa. 8.12. Neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid; where
the Saints are bid not to fear what others were afraid of; but here, with a
little variation, they are exhorted not to give way to, or be overcome by those
terrors their adversaries would strike into them.

2. Positively, sanctify the Lord in your hearts, v. 15. Fear him more than
your Persecutors; stand in awe of his Power more than their Rage; fear him so
as not inordinately to fear them; he so afraid of offending him, as not to fear
suffering by them: And this advice likewise is agreeable to that our Savior
gives, Math. 10.28. Fear not them which kill the body, etc. but rather fear him
which is able to destroy both soul and body in Hell.

(2.) When reproached or scoffed at, or traduced by their Enemies: If they
accuse or mock your Religion as impious, or childish, or unreasonable, if they
demand a reason of you why you Believe or Practice as you do, Be always ready
to give them an answer; to give an account of your selves, and show upon what
grounds ye are Christians, and to make it appear that your Faith is real, and
your Obedience reasonable.

Three things only in the words call for a little Explication.

1. What is meant by Hope? Either hope here is the same that Faith is, (and so
it is in diverse other places) and then to give a reason of their Hope, Calvin.
in loc. Grot.
is to make a Confession of their Faith; so some take it. Or it may be taken
Synechdochically, for the whole of their Religion, as others; And indeed the
hope of a Christian being one of the most eminent Acts of Religion, and seeming
withal to the profane and ignorant World, one of the most strange things in
it, and which was most cavil'd against, and laughed at Act. 17.18.32.
, (for men to expect a Life after death, a glorious Resurrection after a
dishonorable lying in the grave, and to renounce all Worldly enjoyments, and
expose themselves to the bitterest sufferings merely in hope of something they
did not see, nor expected to enjoy till after they were dead,) it might well be
put for the whole of Religion, as being so remarkable in it.

2. What is meant by this Answer they were to give? (...), it is elsewhere
frequently rendered by defense, Act. 22.1. Phil. 1.7.17. it is rendered answer,
as here, 1 Cor. 9.3. you may call it an Apologetical, or defensive answer, as
relating to their Enemies accusation, or charge against them, or Examination of
them; they might look upon the Religion of Christians as an unreasonable thing,
and therefore require a reason of their Faith and Practice, which if they
should, the Apostle would have them ready to make their defense, and show how
good grounds they had for both.

3. How they were to be always ready to give an answer. It does not imply that
they were bound to do it to every Caviller, or trifler, but when the Glory of
God and the Honor of the Gospel required it, and when their silence might be
injurious to the Truth, to their own Consciences, or their Brethrens Souls; and
so Christian Prudence ought to judge of the seasonableness of their making
their defense; they were not bound always actually to do it, but to be always
actually ready, whenever God in his Providence should call them to it.

Now from what our Apostle enjoins these Saints to be always ready to do, I
infer what all true Saints may be able to do, at least what the nature of the
thing is capable of, and so the doctrinal Inference I deduce from the words, is
this: That true Christians may give a satisfactory account of their
Christianity, that it is something both real and reasonable,

In speaking to this Truth, two things are to be done:

1. I shall show, that true Believers may give an account of the Religion they
profess according to the Gospel.

2. I shall give Directions in answer to the Question, How a Believer may be
able to experience in himself, and evidence to others, that his Religion (that
powerful Godliness in the Practice whereof he lives) is more than a Fancy?

(1) That true Believers may give a good account of the Religion they profess.
Most that the carnal World is wont to object against powerful Religion in the
Saints, may be reduced to three heads:

1. Against their Faith (in which I include their Hope as of kin to it and the
Fruit of it) it is objected that it is but a fancy.

2. Against their Obedience and close walking with God, and diligence in Duty,
which is the fruit of their Faith, that it is but the effect of Fancy, and so
no better than folly, an unreasonable and groundless niceness and scrupulosity.

3. Against their Comforts, and spiritual Enjoyments, that they can be no
better than their Faith and Obedience from which they proceed, and are no more
than mere Imaginations and delusive Conceits. In answer to each of these, I
shall (I hope) evidence the contrary to be most true.

1. That the Faith of a true Believer is something real, and not a Fancy. By
the Faith of a Saint I understand only that lively, and effectual Faith which
is the Instrument, or Means (call it as you please) not only of a Saints
Justification Romans 5.1.
, but Sanctification Act. 15.9.
, that which is called precious Faith, 2 Pet. 1.1. the Faith of Gods Elect,
Tit. 1:1. as being peculiar to them, and the effect of their Election Act.
13.48.
, that Faith, in a word, which is an apprehending Christ as the author of
eternal Salvation Heb. 5.9.
, a believing the record God has given of his Son, that eternal life is in
him, 1 John 5.11. This Faith imports in it a respect to Christ as the Author of
all other spiritual benefits antecedent to eternal Life; Justification, whereby
a Believer is entitled to it, Sanctification whereby he is prepared for it,
Consolation by which he is encouraged in seeking it, and supported under the
opposition, and difficulties he meets with in the way to it. But here I speak
of Faith especially as respecting Eternal Salvation, which is one principal act
of it, and which includes or supposes the other; and the rather because the
belief and expectation of Life, and Immortality after Death, is that which the
unbelieving World looks upon as most strange and unreasonable, and takes all a
Believer can say of his expecting future things in another World to be but
strong fancies of great Nothings. There is no act of Faith against which the
Objections of carnal Reason are more usually levelled than against this, and if
the reality of a Christians Faith appears in this, it can scarce be denied in
others. Now that this belief of Eternal Life is something real in a Saints
Heart, and not merely a Fancy in his Brains, might appear more than probable in
that it has been, and still is to be found in those who are least fancyfull,
men as serious, as judicious, as rational as any in the World; though not many
wise men after the flesh are called 1 Cor. 1.26.
, yet some are: And it cannot reasonably be imagined, that they who are
confessedly Grave, and Prudent, and Discreet, and free from Conceits and
Fancies in all other things, should dote in those only which are of the
greatest Concernment to them; especially if we consider that this Faith is
stirring in them at such times as men use to be least given to Fancies, as on
the most solemn Occasions, under the greatest Afflictions, and at the approach
of the most terrible of all temporal evils, Death it self. Men are most apt to
be taken with Fancies, and Appearances when they are wholly at Ease, and flush
in the World, and have hope, or some prospect of great things in it; then they
are apt to fancy things according to their Appetites, and fondly to believe
that that will be, which they desire may be. But when Death draws nigh, they
have nothing to encourage such imaginations, and then usually their Fancies
vanish, they come to discover their folly, and deceitfulness; they judge quite
contrary to what they did before; they then see those things to be real which
they counted but Fancies, and those things to be but Fantastical which they had
thought to be real. Now at such a time as this, the Faith of a Saint (saving
what desertions or Temptations may occasion in particular instances) is
ordinarily more-strong, and active; as his judgment of earthly things is more
true when he is leaving them, so his apprehension of heavenly is more clear
when he draws nigh to them; the approach of Death proves an enlivening to his
Faith; he has the fairest view of the Crown of Glory when his Lord is about to
set it on his head; the same thoughts indeed he then has, which before he had,
only more clear, and affecting they are at the last, there being less to
interrupt, or discompose him. It were hard to say that all the Comforts and
Joys of dying Saints and Martyrs, have been mere Delusions and Cheats, and yet
so they must be, if the apprehensions they have had of heavenly things were but
Fancies and Ravings.

But to pass this by, it will sufficiently evince the reality of a Christians
Faith, if we can make it appear, that the Object of it is real, the Ground of
it certain, the Actings of it sensible to himself, and the Effects of it
evident to others: This I shall endeavor to do.

I. As for the Object of a Believers Faith and Hope, that good which he
believes shall be, and expects after this life, a state of glory for the
spirits of just men; He that shall deny that such a thing is, must not own the
Name of Christian, when even the light of Nature will go so far toward the
proving of it; for

1. That shows us, that the Soul is immortal, as being of a spiritual nature,
and independent on the Body in its most proper, and noble Operations, the
actings of the Understanding and Will.

2. That there is a reward after this life for them that do well, no less than
on the contrary, Punishment for evil doers. This the generality of the Pagan
World that knew not distinctly wherein that Reward did consist, yet have
granted the thing; and who is not instructed by his own Conscience in the
knowledge of it? The work of the Law written in the Heart Romans 2.15.
, and the secret pleasure, and satisfaction men take in their own Innocence, or
good actions, proves a reward on the one hand, as well as the fears, and
horrors which the Consciences of the most sly and secret sinners subject them
to, speak the punishment they expect on the other. And if these things were
only impressions made upon men's Fancies in their tender years, it were strange
that all the Reason they grow up to exercise, and all the Art many obstinate
Sinners make use of on purpose to obliterate them, and to impress the contrary
upon their Minds, together with a thousand other Species printed on their
Imaginations by their Employments, their Pleasures, and all the various
Occasions, and accidents of their Lives, should never be able to rid them of
these so unpleasing Sentiments.

3. Something may be said even from natural Reason to prove this reward to
consist in the enjoyment of God, and so not only to evince the reality of some
Happiness, but of this in particular, in the other life. For

1. It will scarce be denied but that the soul of Man is capable of enjoying
God as its Sovereign good, i. e. of most intensely delighting, and entirely
acquiescing in him as a good suitable to the spiritual Nature, and sufficient
for the vast capacity of an immortal Soul. Some of the Heathen came near this,
when they stated man's Happiness as consisting in the Contemplation of the
highest being. And indeed the very Nature, and Operations of the Soul, and its
apprehending spiritual Objects, amounts to little less than a demonstration of
this.

2. The enjoyment of God is the greatest good any Creature can be capable of.
God is in himself absolutely the greatest good, because an infinite one, and
comprehensive of all Perfection; and there can be no greater good than to be
possessed of him that is the greatest.

3. The reward and happiness of an holy Soul can be nothing less than the
greatest good, and therefore must needs be the enjoyment of God himself; this
appears in that

1. Less than the greatest good cannot satisfy man's Soul, and then to be sure
cannot make it happy, when its happiness consists in its being fully satisfied.
All the riches and pleasures of this World, and delights of Sense can never be
to the Soul instead of God, because they are unsuitable to its nature which is
spiritual, to its duration which is immortal, and to those appetites God has
implanted in it. It Is very capacity of enjoying God is attended with a secret
Inclination to it, insomuch that many times when a man may not have an explicit
and distinct knowledge of the good he wants, yet being unsatisfied with what he
has (though never so great) he finds a want of something else, and because he
wants it, he desires it (though he know not clearly what it is) to make him
happy.

2. It is most congruous to the Wisdom and goodness of God to appoint the
greatest good to be the Happiness of the noblest of his Creatures; not that
they deserve it, but because he may be most glorified by it, and because he
has given them a nature capable of it. As he suits the good of other Creatures
to the capacities he has given them, so he does the good of man. None but
Angels and men are capable of enjoying or actively glorifying him, and God
having capacitated them for that, suits their good to their Capacity. It had
not been agreeable to the Wisdom of God for man to have had only some inferior
good in this Life assigned to him as his chief Happiness, when he had made him
capable of an higher. Thus much has been said (and more might) even from
Reason it self to prove the reality of those things Believers look for in the
other Life; How much might be said from Scripture with respect to which only
they are the Objects of Faith, but this I refer to the next head, the ground
of a Christian Faith,

2. That is certain. The same things sometimes may both be believed with a
Divine Faith, and known too by natural Reason, but then the Medium whereby they
are known, and the ground whereon they are believed are very different, the one
is some rational argument, the other the Word of God. In the case before us,
the being of Eternal Life (the present Object of Faith we speak of) may be
proved by reason, but then so far it is not the Object of Faith, but of
Knowledge; but withal it may be proved by Scripture, and so it is the Object
of Faith; and as such I am now to speak of it, and so to show that the ground
on which a Christian believes Eternal Life, is most certain; and that is no
other than the Word of God, particularly the Promise of the Gospel. The
Scripture therefore is the ground of the Faith of Eternal Life.

1. As it reveals it, for that it does more fully, and clearly; though
something a man may know of future Happiness by his natural light, (as before
was said) yet the fairest, and most distinct notion he has of it, is by
Revelation in the Word, that tells us plainly what is that great good in which
man's Happiness consists, 1 John 3.2. Seeing God as he is, and being like him.
Life and Immortality are brought to light especially by the Gospel, 2 Timothy
1.10. not only more distinctly discovered, than ever Nature could discern them,
but than God himself had revealed them in the Old Testament.

2. As it shows the way to it, the terms on which it is to be obtained, sets
before us Eternal Life as in Christ; it not only tells us of the thing it self,
but shows how man, sinful man may attain to the enjoyment of it; declares true
Holiness to be the way in which he is to walk, and Christ the Door by which he
is to enter.

3. As it secures it upon those terms; for so it does, it is the scope, and end
of the Promise to secure Life and Glory to those that accept of it upon the
terms propounded; the Command directs in the way, and the Promise makes over
and conveys the blessing. Believe and thou shall be saved, Act. 16.31. So Joh.
3.16. and Romans 2.7. To them that by patient continuance in well-doing seek for
glory, and honor, and Immortality, Eternal life is promised. Now the Word and
Promise of God not only as revealing Life to us, and the way to it, but as
conveying it, is the ground of our Faith, and Hope; though without the Word we
might have some more general Knowledge of a State of Happiness in the other
World, yet without the Word we cannot know the way to it, nor ever attain to an
Interest in it, nor have so full certainty of the very being of it as by the
Word we have, the certainty of Faith being greater than that of any natural
Knowledge whatever: we have no ground at all to believe we shall be saved but
what the Promise affords us; And that is sufficient ground to build our Faith
upon, and a better we cannot have than the Word of him that is the Truth it
self, and so can neither deceive, nor be deceived, God that cannot lie has
promised Eternal life, Tit. 1.2. Upon the Infallibility, and Veracity of that
God in his holy Word the Faith of a Christian rests, and a surer Foundation for
it cannot be imagined, and need not be desired. As the certainty of any assent
of the Mind to a truth depends upon the strength, and firmness of the Reason,
or Argument which moves to, and procures that Assent, and is the Cause of it,
so likewise the certainty of Faith proceeds from the goodness, and validity of
the Authority which is the Motive to, and Reason of our believing, or (which is
the same) the ground of it. If we believe a man, that belief is more or less
certain according as the Person on whose Authority our belief is grounded, is
more or less credible; and so when we believe God, our Faith is such as its
Foundation is, (the Effect imitates the Cause) the foundation of that Faith,
Gods Veracity, is the best, and therefore the certainty of our ^aith is the
greatest. If a man be sure that what he believes is the Word of God, he may be
sure it is most true, and never will fail. And this no doubt may be sufficient
to satisfy a Believer in his own mind, or any one that receives the Scripture
as the Word of God, concerning the reality of the Faith he professes, that the
ground of it is so certain; but if he have to do with those that believe not
the Scripture, and so question the foundation of his Faith, in that case he may
have recourse to all those Arguments whereby we are wont to prove the Divine
Authority of the Word, and they all Confirm the Faith of a Christian, and so
the same account a Believer may give of the foundation of his Faith, as of the
Divinity of the Scripture; if the Scripture be the Word of God, and that Word
be true, his Faith built upon it is certain.

3. The Actings of a Christians Faith are perceivable by himself. Habits which
cannot be discerned of themselves when they lie still, yet may be known by
their actings, such an Habit Faith is, which though it discover not it self, or
be not perceived when unactive, yet may be discerned in its exercise: When a
man actually believes, he may know he believes; reflect upon his own act, as
well as when he hears, or sees, or walks, he may know he does so, and is not
deceived in it. Inward Sense has as much certainty in it as outward, and
spiritual Sense as natural; if a man therefore assent to the Truth of Gods
Promise, he may know he assents to it, and if he accept of, and close with the
good Promised, he may know he does so; though sometimes Temptations may be so
strong, and the Actings of Faith so weak, and the Mind so clouded and
distracted, that a man may hardly be able to pass a right judgment on those
Acts, yet it is not always so, but other whiles, when the workings of Faith are
more strong and vigorous, and a man more clear of temptations he may do it. In
this therefore a man may give an account to himself of his Faith that it is
real, he may know that he believes the Promise of Eternal Life as really as he
believes any ordinary Truth proposed to him, and that his believing and resting
on Gods Word, is no more a Fancy, than his believing the word of a man: As for
others with whom he has to do, I know no reason why they should not believe
him when he says he believes Gods Promise, as well as when he says he believes
their word, or why one should be a Fancy any more than the other.

4. The Effects of a Believers faith are evident to others in a good measure,
as well as to himself more fully: As he may perceive his Faith purifying his
heart, taking it off from the World, drawing it nearer to God, so others may
see his Conversation ordered correspondently to his believing; they may see him
Shie of Sin, Diligent in Duty, Conscientious in his Calling, Patient in
Sufferings, Charitable to those that Need him, Meek toward those that Offend
him, Profitable, Spiritual, Savoury in his Converse, Just and Righteous in his
Dealings, and in a w^^d, the main of his Course and Ways such as is agreeable
to the Faith he professes, and the Recompense he expects: So that if the
lookers on cannot be infallibly certain of the reality of his Faith, or that
such a Carriage proceeds from such a Faith, yet they may not only have their
Mouths stopped, that they cannot reasonably object against it, but they may be
bound in Charity to believe his Faith to be true, and real, when they see so
much in him answerable to it, and what he professes to be the effect of it;
when they see him live like one that expects eternal Blessedness, well may they
believe that his Faith concerning it, and hope of it is not feigned: They see
him walking strictly, mortifying his flesh, denying himself as to his outward
enjoyments, and carnal liberties, and generally acting at such a rate as none
would do that did not expect Eternal Life; and what ground can they then have
to suspect the Faith he pretends to, to be only a Conceit or Fancy?

2. An account may be given of the Practice of a Christian, his Obedience and
Holy walking, the strictness and (as the World counts it) singularity of his
Manners, his universality, diligence and constancy in the most spiritual and
difficult Duties, his watchfulness over his words, thoughts actions, his
mortification and self-denial, and whatever it is in a Believers life which the
World is most apt to quarrel with, and to look upon as the effect of Humor, or
Fancy, or Error; it may be made appear that his Practice is reasonable, and
well grounded, he has good cause to do what he does: His Practice is
reasonable,

1. In respect of Gods Command, for that he has to allege for the reason of
what he does in pursuance of the glory he expects in the other World: So long
as he does nothing in Religion but what God commands him, he cannot justly be
taxed with folly or unreasonableness, it being the greatest reason to obey God
in all things. If indeed a man should add to Gods Word, devise Worship out of
his own Head, contrive new means for his Salvation which God has not
appointed, and so be strict, and punctual in things not enjoined; or should he
be very exact in Ceremonials, insist upon the Minutes of the Law, and be more
negligent of Morals, the more weighty things of it, he might be well charged
with Folly for making himself wiser than God, and thinking he better knew how
to please him than he does himself? But let a man walk never so strictly, if it
be but according to the strictness of the Rule God has given him, it is no
Folly in him: If God commands us to walk Circumspectly Ephesians. 5.15.
, to keep our Hearts Prove. 4.23.
, to deny our selves, and take up our Cross Math. 16.24.
, etc. it is reason we should do so, though we had no other reason besides the
Command: If in Civil things the Command of Superiors in their Laws be counted a
sufficient Warrant for the Obedience of Subjects, though perhaps it may seem
strange to Foreigners who have other Laws and Customs; why should not the Law
of the Governor of the World be Warrant good enough for the greatest Holiness,
and most strict walking, though perhaps carnal men may think it strange 1 Pet.
4.4.
or unreasonable?

2. In respect of their own Faith, which requires such Holiness.

1. Serious Holiness is most agreeable to the ^^^ect of their Faith, that great
good they expect in the future Life: The holiest Practice suits best with the
highest hope, it is but reasonable that they that expect to live in Heaven,
should live answerably while on Earth; they that hope to be perfectly holy
there, should be as holy as they can here; it ill becomes them to lead sensual
Lives now, that look for spiritual Enjoyments then; to live like Beasts, or but
like Men, that hope hereafter to live with God; and to neglect him at present,
whom they hope to enjoy at last.

2. It is serious Holiness which must maintain Life in a Christians Faith: A
man can no longer maintain his Faith than while his Practice is answerable to
it; Jam. 2. last, Faith without Works is dead: Faith has a respect to Commands
as well as Promises, or to the Condition of the Promise, as well as to the
Mercy promised; now the Promise being made to Holiness as well as Faith (though
perhaps in a different respect) a man cannot have a true Faith without
Holiness; not believe that God will save him, if he walk not in that way in
which God has Promised to save him; though men have not their Title to Heaven
by their Holiness, yet they cannot be saved without it, Heb. 12.14. It is the
qualification required in all that are saved, and no man can be assured of his
Salvation, if he be not in some measure qualified, and fitted for it. It is
certain that Holiness is a Condition though not of Justification, yet of
Salvation, and therefore Faith wherever it is in the Life and Power of it,
provokes, and stirrs a man up to the exercise of Holiness, as being the way in
which he must, if ever, attain to happiness. Where a Promise is conditional, it
is Presumption to apply it with a neglect of its Condition; and in this case
the Promise does no further encourage a man's Faith, than the Command quickens
his Obedience.

3. Powerful Godliness in the practice of it is reasonable in respect of a
Christians Peace: he can no longer maintain his Peace than while he walks in
the way of Peace, and that is the way of Holiness; Isa. 57. last, There is no
Peace to the Wicked: may we not say (as to the sense of Peace) nor to Saints
neither, so long as they approach to them that are Wicked, and live not like
Saints? Believers experience in themselves that when they neglect holiness,
they wound their Consciences, weaken their Faith and Hope, lose the sight of
their Interest in Christ, and Heaven, expose themselves to Gods displeasure,
and the Reproaches of their own hearts, and are many times filled with trouble
and bitterness; or as the Prophet, Isa. 50.10. Walk in Darkness and have no
Light: and is it not then most reasonable for them to take heed of any thing
that may break their Peace, and to labor so to walk, as that they may best
secure it? if some single gross Sin causes broken bones, and doleful
complaints, and lamentable cries in the choicest Saints; have they not cause to
walk as circumspectly as they can, and keep up in themselves the Exercise of
Grace, that so they may keep their Peace too? And so upon the whole, the most
stri^^, and Severe Obedience of a Christian, is far from unreasonable when Gods
Command warrants it, his own Faith calls for it, and he cannot enjoy his Peace
without it.

3. That a Believers comforts are real, not fantastical or delusive. I deny
not but the delusions of Satan (especially transforming himself into an Angel
of light) or the deceits of men's own hearts may sometimes impose upon them, and
pass with them for divine Consolations; thus carnal men who mistake their
State, and apply those Promises to themselves which belong only to Gods
Children, may usurp the Saints Privileges as if they had a right to them, and
so speak peace to themselves when God does not speak peace, and when they walk
in the Imagination of their own hearts, Deuteronomy. 29.19. But it follows not that no
comforts are true, because some are false, or that the comforts of the Saints
are not real, because those of Hypocrites are but imaginary. We may say
therefore that the Comforts of Religion are then real,

1. When they are wrought only in Souls capable of them, such as have Faith,
and Holiness already wrought in them, are real Saints, persons justified, and
sanctified; for others, carnal men, unbelievers, (whatever they profess,
whatever show they make) are not yet capable of Gospel Consolations, as not
having a right to any Gospel Promise, or Privilege from whence such Comforts
are wont to flow.

2. When they are wrought in a Regular way, by the Spirit as the principal
Efficient, and the Word as the Instrument: when the Holy Spirit applies the
Promise to those to whom it belongs, and thereby comforts them: they that are
qualified according to the Scripture, experience the comfort of the Scripture;
the Spirit speaks in their hearts what he speaks in the Word, and Conscience
says but the same the Scripture says. Now the Comforts Believers pretend to
may, for methods sake, be reduced to two sorts, the truth and reality of both
which we shall labor to evince.

1. Such as proceed from the direct Acts of Grace; by this sort I understand
nothing else but that inward delight and pleasure which usually accompanies the
exercise of any Grace, or gracious performance of any Duty, and is in a manner
intrinsic to it. And the reality of this is confirmed by the Experience of all
the Saints; who of them does not find a secret sweetness, delight and
satisfaction in the exercise of ^aith on Christ, love to God and Holiness? Res
jucunda est resipiscentia. Luth.
Nay sorrow for Sin, Mortification, Self-denial, have something of pleasure in
them. There is, I dare say, more pleasure in a kindly melting of the heart for
sin (where the sorrow is not merely Legal but Evangelical, and mingled with
Love) than there is in the Commission of it; more in denying a man's self as to
any unlawful Appetite, than in gratifying himself, in resisting a temptation
than in yielding to it, in mortifying a Lust than obeying it; and how much more
is there in the exercise of Faith, and Love, etc? If our natural faculties are
delighted with their proper actions about suitable Objects, why may not our
spiritual too? are they less capable of pleasure? or are spiritual Operations
less congruous to our faculties when renewed and spiritualized, or the Objects
less suited to them, than natural actions and objects are to our Faculties in
their mere natural state? If excellent Objects, and intense Operations commonly
produce the greatest pleasure in our natural Powers when rightly disposed, why
may it not be so in spirituals too? What more excellent Object than God and
Christ? what more noble act is there of a renewed Soul than Faith and Love,
what delight then may such a Soul take in closing with its chief good in those
acts? And so if a natural man may take pleasure in the Contemplation of natural
things, why may not a Saint in the meditation of heavenly? If one may delight
in the exercise of Moral Virtue, why may not the other in the exercise of
Grace? If a just, a generous, a valiant act afford some delight to the Actor,
how much more an holy one? If the Excuse or Applause of a natural Conscience,
and its testimony of our well-doing affords some delight and sweetness; how
much more may the approbation of a renewed Conscience yield to a renewed Soul?

2. Such as proceed from the reflex Acts of Grace, or men's reflecting upon, and
perceiving their own Graces; as suppose a man's knowing he believes in Christ,
or that he loves God, or hates Sin; and this kind of comfort is no other than
that which flows from Assurance; which wherever it is in Exercise, always
brings Comfort along with it. Assurance in the Act, is nothing else but a
Conclusion drawn by the practical Understanding of a renewed Soul (through the
assistance of the holy Spirit) from two Premises, whereof the major is of
Faith, the very Language of the Scripture, usually some Gospel Promise: For
instance, Joh. 3.16. Whoever believes in Christ shall have Eternal Life; the
minor is the language of Spiritual sense, I believe in Christ; the Conclusion
from both is, Therefore I shall have Eternal Life; which following the major
proposition which is of Faith, and therefore inevident, and consequently in a
Logical sense the weaker (though Theologically more strong, as being more
certain) is it self of Faith too, and therefore most certain. No man that
believes the Scripture will deny the Major, and he that shall deny the Minor,
must deny all Spiritual sense, and the reflection of a gracious Soul upon its
own Actions, and so all possibility of Assurance in any such way of
ratiocination, and then he may well deny the comfort of Assurance, when he
takes away Assurance it self. And therefore there needs no more to prove the
reality of this kind of comfort (which is so strong and satisfactory to the
Soul of a Believer, that he is never at rest in himself till he have attained
to it) than to prove the being of that Assurance from whence it proceeds, and
all the Arguments which evince the one, will infer the other; he that shall
grant a man may be sure of Heaven, cannot doubt but he may take abundant
comfort, and satisfaction in being so assured, and that that Comfort is no
Fancy. And so if a man may certainly know he believes in Christ, loves God
above all, truly fears him, is pure in heart Math. 5.8.3.6.
, poor in spirit b, hungers and thirsts after righteousness c, or has any
Grace which accompanies Salvation in sincerity in him, which is an evidence of
his right to, and Interest in any Gospel Promise or Privilege thereby
conveyed, it will amount to the same; and the sight and sense of any such
Evidence cannot but bring the greatest sweetness, and refreshment to a gracious
heart; and which is as real as the delight he takes in the exercise of any of
his natural faculties. If a man may take much real delight in knowing his
Interest in a Prince here on Earth, is it a delusion when he delights in the
knowledge of his interest in a Savior in Heaven? If a man be so much pleased
with his being the Son of a great man, may not a Believer be as much Pleased
with his being a Child of God, his being born of him, and adopted by him? If
men do ordinarily comfort themselves with the hope of some worldly Inheritance,
they reckon themselves sure of, why may not a Saint much more Rejoice in Hope
of the Glory of God Romans 5.2.
; triumph in expectation of an Inheritance among the Saints in Light Col. 1.12.
? When no man in the World can ever be so sure of obtaining the things of the
World, as a Saint may be of coming to enjoy the things of Eternity: the Hope
and Assurance a Christian has, is according as the Promise which is the
foundation of it is, but the Promise of future Blessedness is a better Promise
than that of any temporal enjoyment, not only because the good promised is
better, but because the Promise of the one is more peremptory and absolute,
when the other is but conditional, and limited.

Thus much may suffice to have been spoken to the first General propounded;
That a true Believer may give an account of his Christianity, and such a one as
is satisfactory to himself, and ought to be to others; he may make it appear
that that serious Godliness in the practice of which he lives, is more than a
Fancy.

2. I come to the second General mentioned, to give Directions, and show in
answer to the Case, How we may experience this in ourselves, and evidence it in
others.

There be two parts of the Question which must be distinctly spoken to; How we
may experience this in our selves; and then, How we may evidence it in others.

(1.) How may a Believer experience in himself, that that Serious Godliness he
lives in the Practice of, is more than a Fancy?

1. See that your Religiousness came into you the right way, was wrought in you
by the Word of God, the power of which ye have found changing your Hearts, and
reforming your Lives: When men leap into Religion they know not how, can give
no account to themselves of their Conversion, or Reformation, that the Word
which is the Ordinary means God uses in converting Sinners has had any
influence upon them in working such a change, it is suspicious that what they
take to be Godliness in themselves is not real; that which is unaccountable is
most like to be a Fancy. True, a man may not know the just time when God did
work Grace in his heart, nor the particular Word which was the Seed of it, or
which did first draw the heart to a closing with the Promise, and subjecting it
self to the terms of the Gospel; he may not know when the new man was first
quickened in him, not be able to discern distinctly the first vital motions of
Grace in his Soul; some may have been wrought on in their Education, by which
they have been restrained from more gross Sins, and influenced to some
diligence in Religious duties, and in them the passing from one extreme to the
other, from a state of Nature to a state of Grace, may not be so remarkable,
and therefore not so easily discerned. However a change they find, and that the
Word has wrought it, whch they have experienced Effectual in many things; it
has been the means at one time or other of enlightening their minds, melting
their hearts, exciting their affections, directing their ways, and refreshing
their Spirits; though they cannot say what truth wrought the first degree of
Grace, yet they can say such and such truths have had an influence upon them,
and promoted the work whenever it was wrought; such a Command quickened them to
their Duty, another brought them off from some evil way, another helped them
when they were tempted; such a Promise supported them when burdened, eased them
when troubled, or comforted them when cast down, and so what good they have
done, the Word has put them upon it, what evil they have escaped that has
kept them from it, what refreshment they have had, that has brought it in.
They know they are in their journey to Heaven, and that they do not Dream that
they are so, because if they cannot tell which was absolutely the first step
they took in the way, yet they are sensible of many Stages they have traveled,
many removes they have made; what accidents have befallen them, what
difficulties they have met with, what Guide they had, what directions were
given them; their journeying agrees with the map of their way; the Word has
been a light to their Feet, and a Lamp to their Paths Psalm. 119.105.
, that has still gone before them, and conducted them in their march, and
their steps have been ordered according to it Psa. 119.133.
: they have not taken up a Religion at a days warning, not passed from being
profane and worldly to be even superstitiously strict all upon a sudden,
without being able to give a reason of so great a change. Look therefore to the
way of Gods working upon you, and the means he made use of in it, and though
you cannot trace the workings of his grace in all the particular steps he has
taken; yet ye may conclude it to be his Work, and not your own fancy, because
it was wrought in his way, and by his Word, which is his usual Instrument in it.

2. See to your Faith as to the Foundation of it, and the Effects of it; that
it be rightly grounded, and rightly qualified, built upon the Word, and
fruitful in good works.

1. See to the Foundation of it, that it be the Word it self, and not your own
mistakes about it. When men misunderstand the Scripture, and so believe it,
they Build on their own Errors, not Gods Truth, and then what they call Faith
is but a Fancy, as not being grounded on the Word of God, but their own
Conceits. See therefore that ye rightly understand what ye profess to believe,
and know the mind of God in the Word, and so indeed believe what he speaks, not
what you imagine. See that your Faith respect Commands as well as Promises,
Duties as well as Privileges, what you are to do, as well as what you are to
expect; God joins both together, and if you separate them, you set up a Conceit
of your own instead of his Truth. Take heed of believing Promises as absolute,
when they are conditional, or when made with some limitations or restrictions,
or when they suppose the use of some means prescribed by the Command; in such
cases men may think they believe when they do not; there being no right Object
for their Faith, they believe what God never spoke. This fallacy appears when
men apply Promises to themselves, but overlook the Condition, or the Command
annexed; as suppose believe they shall be Pardoned, though they never desire to
be purged, shall find mercy though they do not forsake Sin, contrary to the
tenor of the Word, Prove. 28.14. or that they shall see God though they do not
follow after holiness, contrary to Heb. 12.14. And so when they believe one
promise, and not another, the Promise of Justification, but not of
Sanctification, when yet there is a connection between them, and to whom one
belongs, the other belongs too. In a word, let your Faith take in its Object in
the whole Latitude, there being the same reason (Gods Authority) for your
believing one truth, as well as another.

2. See to the Effects and Fruits of it, the reality of it must be proved by
the fruits of it; a Barren Faith is a dead Faith, and indeed if any Faith be a
Fancy it is the Faith of those that live destitute of Holiness, and under the
Dominion of Sin, and yet expect Eternal Salvation; bring forth no Fruit to
Holiness, and yet hope the End will be Everlasting life. Faith will work as
long as it lives, and where there is no Fruit you may be sure there is no Root;
if it Act not, it lives not.

3. Therefore look to your Obedience too, not only that it be (as in the
former) but that it be Right, and such as it should be, that is, Regular,
Universal, Spiritual, for otherwise it is not reasonable.

1. Regular, such as the Word of God calls for, and has its warrant from
thence: whatsoever we do in the things of God, and what we would have looked on
as Acts of Obedience, should be done with a respect to Gods Commands, and not
of our own heads: Obedience it is not, if it be not Commanded. Men may do many
seemingly good things, and place Religion in them, and think they please God by
them, which yet may be no true Acts of Obedience to him, because not according
to his Word: They do but obtrude a Worship upon God, and Fancy it will please
him, because it pleases them; Whereas indeed nothing is acceptable to him, but
what is enjoined by him; Nothing is Duty but that which has a Warrant from God
for the Performance of it. Men may abound in Will Worship, and come short in
Obedience; they may do more than is enjoined them, and yet less too; much which
will never be reckoned to them, as it was never required of them. You must
judge of your selves not merely by what you do, but by the ground you have for
the doing of it, when Gods Will is the Reason of it, and not the Precepts of
men, nor your own Fancies; so much, and no more, you do for God as you do in
Obedience to his Command.

2. Universal, both as to the extensiveness and continuance of it.

1. As to its Extensiveness. See that you be not Partial in the Law Mal. 2.9.
, that you walk with God in all his Ordinances, Luke, 1.6. have respect to all
his Commandments, Psalm. 119.6. There is the same reason for Obedience to one
Command as well as anotherb, Gods Authority who is the Lawgiver; and therefore
when men choose one Duty, and overlook others, they do not so much obey the will
of God, as gratify their omn Humors and Fancies, pleasing him only so far as
they can please themselves too, and this is not reasonable; we never yield him
a reasonable Service, but when it is universal.

2. As to its Continuance and duration. If Gods Command be still the same, and
the Obligation of it, it is but reasonable that our Obedience likewise should
be still the same. Constancy and Perseverance in serious Godliness, will
greatly confirm, and Evidence the reasonableness of our Practice, and reality
of our Principles; Fancies are usually transient and variable, and so are their
Effects in men's actions; few Live by Fancy all their days, but one time or
other they find their Error. When a Christians carriage is uniform in the
course of his Life, and still continues the same in a congruity and
suitableness to his Principles, it can hardly be imagined that it should be the
effect of mere Fancy, but must proceed from something in him more fixed, and
settled.

3. Spiritual. If the Obedience we yield to God be conformable to his Nature
who is a Spirit, so far it is reasonable, and that is such as Christ requires,
and this the reason he gives for it, John 4.24. God is a Spirit, and they that
worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in truth. See therefore that the
Service you do him, be not merely external, and carnal, but inward and
Spiritual.

1. Spiritual in its Principle. The goodness of your outward actions proceeds
especially from within, and you cannot judge rightly of them, but by the
Principles from which they proceed, those Principles are Faith and Love: Your
work must be the work of Faith 1 Thessalonians. 1.3. Romans 1.5.
, your Obedience the Obedience of Faith; Faith both in the Command and Promise
must put you upon it, and if your believing both, makes you Act conformably to
them, the Faith of the Command presses you to Obedience, and the Faith of the
Promise encourages you in it, you therefore Serve the Lord because you believe
him, and trust in him, that Service cannot be unreasonable. And so likewise for
Love: Love to God must set you at work for God, Exodus 20.6. those that love me,
and keep my Commandments: If love within Command all without, if that make you
Labor in his Service, fear to offend him, strive to please him; if you can not
only see your own Obedience but feel your Love to God working your hearts to
it, you may be sure that Obdience is reasonable, because its Principle is so
real; Love felt in your Hearts, and breaking out in your Lives cannot be a
Fancy; and what more Reasonable than for him that loves God to do all he can
for God?

2. Spiritual in the End for which ye Act. 1. Cor. 10.31. See that whatever you
do, you do it for the Glory of God as the Supreme End. It is most Reasonable,
that as you do all from God, so you should do all for him, that he who is the
first Cause of all you have, should be the ultimate End of all you do; and if
you can be content to be abased that God may be Exalted, to deny your selves as
to your Credit and Interest, and all Worldly concernments purely that God may
be Honored, it is your desire that in all things Christ Jesus may be magnified
in you, whether by Life or by Death Philip. 1.20.
; and so in doing, or suffering, that Obedience which is not only qualified as
before mentioned, but is directed to such an End. is not Folly, nor the effetct
of Fancy.

3. Spiritual in the Acts of it: not that all Gospel Obedience, or Worship
consists only in the internal Acts, and workings of the Mind; for external
Worship it self may be spiritual Worship, and so it is when rightly performed,
that is, when it is accompanied with, and proceeds from internal; but by
Spiritual in its Acts, I mean that which principally consists in the inward
Acts of Faith, and Love, and Fear, etc. which is a Serving God in our Spirits
Romans 1.9.
; yet withal is productive of and manifests it self in an outward behavior
correspondent to those internal workings. See therefore that your Religion do
not consist merely in Externals, that you make as much Conscience of inward,
and Heart-worship, as outward, and Bodily; of the Actings of Faith, and Love,
as of Praying and Hearing; look as much at least to what is within as to what
comes out. Do not rest in the outside of Duty, nor satisfy your selves with
what you do, when yet it is without life and warmth; have as much regard to the
Manner of Performing, as to Performance it self, to the motions of your Hearts,
as to the Labor of your Lips or postures of your Bodies. To conclude this
direction, let your work in the whole of your conversation be as much about
your Hearts Prove. 4.23.
, as your Lives: be the same in secret that you are in public, the same when
under Gods Eye only, that you are in the Face of the World. This I am sure
cannot be said to be foolish, and unreasonable, when it is grounded on the
greatest reason. God sees in secret Math. 6.6.
, looks to the heart, 1 Samuel 16.17. and calls for the heart Prove. 23.26.
, and therefore it is but reason we should look to them too. It is the seat of
Sin, the Fountain whence it springs, and therefore must be looked too, that we
may prevent the working of it, and mortify the root of it; and it is the seat
of Grace; there is no more good in any man than what is in his Heart, such as
that is, such he is: now if a man's chief work be about his heart, to watch
that, to purify that, to suppress the corruptions of it, to reduce it into
order, and keep it in ord^^ to bring it into an holy frame, and maintain it in
such a frame, when he has so much reason for it, it cannot be the effect of
Fancy, or a mere pretense.

4. Let Grace influence you in all you do, even in your ordinary Civil actions;
do all graciously, do your common work as your Duty, labor in your Callings,
enjoy your Refreshments, visit your Friends, make use of your Recreations with
a sense of Duty, and an eye to God; do all as commanded by him, and with a
respect to his Glory, and your own Salvation: in a word, Interest God in all,
let all be done by his Grace as the ruling and directing Principle, and when ye
find it so powerful, ye may well believe it to be real.

5. Labor to out do all you ever did while in a state of Nature: Think what
have been the highest actions you have ever been put upon, not only by Fancy or
humor, but by the best Reason you then had, by natural Conscience or good
Education, or legal Convictions, or any present impressions from things
without, and then make it your business to outdo them all; labor so to act, as
nothing less than a settled principle of Holiness in your Hearts could ever
make you act, living in the Love of God, delighting in his ways, rejoicing in
Christ Jesus, mortifying your beloved Lusts, your most secret, or most
pleasant, or most creditable, or most profitable Corruptions; renouncing all
trust in your own Righteousness, when yet you do your utmost to work
Righteousness, are such acts, as nor mere nature, nor any thing in Nature can
reach unto; and for any to say that Fancy can put a man upon so acting, is it
self the veriest Fancy.

6. Keep an even Course of holy walking, in the most different, or contrary
Conditions. If you can hold on in Gods ways when most disheartened in them,
Serve him never the worse for his Afflicting you, walk holily when you have
least of the Comfort of Holiness, not only keep to God when the World is
against you, but you fear he is himself against you, trust in him when you
think he is slaying you, follow him when he withdraws from you; and on the
other side, not abuse his Goodness, not grow wanton with his Smiles, not
presume upon his Encouragements, if the taste of Gods graciousness 1 Pet. 2.3.
whet your desires after him, his Comforts do not cloy you, nor dull you, nor
make you grow more loose, or slack in his ways, if when you rejoice most in
God, ye rejoice most in his work, the Comfort of your Hearts purifies and
spiritualizeth your Hearts, so that the more ye enjoy of God, the more ye do
for him; and so in a word, all Gods dispensations help you forward in his
ways, his Rods drive you on, his Gifts draw you out, and both further your
Progress in Faith, and Holiness, neither his Consolations puff you up, nor his
Corrections cast you down, so as to abate your Affections to him, and care of
pleasing him; you can love the Lord and his Holiness, and fear the Lord and his
Goodness Hos. 3.5.
; love him when he Frowns, and fear him when he Smiles, this will certainly
speak the reality of that holy Princi^^^ which is in you; nothing not real,
could ever have so real, so great effects upon you.

7. Be much in the exercise of those Graces which have least affinity with your
Natures, least footing in them, and in mortifying those Corruptions which your
Natures are most inclined to; and that will evidence a real change in you, and
a real Principle. Some Graces may be further off from your natural tempers than
others, be more in the exercise of them; and some Corruptions may be more
agreeable to them, so in some Pride is, in others Anger, in others Fear, be
sure exercise your selves especially to beat them down; go contrary to the
stream, and current of your own inclinations; it must be something more than a
Fancy, that can either outdo the best of nature, or mend its worst: Man's
Fancies usually have some foundation in their tempers, and dispositions, and
therefore as their tempers are various so are their Fancies too, some carry
them one way, some another, but for the most part it is for the promoting, or
gratifying some natural inclination, and then that which crosses such
inclinations most, is most like to be something constant and fixed. Fancy will
hardly overcome Nature in a wrathful man, and make him become meek and gentle;
nor make one that is dull and phlegmatic, active and zealous; nor a proud
person humble, nor a churl liberal; though where Grace meets with a good
disposition, it makes the greater show, as suppose gracious Meekness in one who
has already a natural meekness, yet the power of Grace is especially seen in
its influence upon such inclinations in men's natures as are most contrary to
it, when it corrects them, regulates them, or makes men act most oppositely to
them. And that which thus rectifies the most crooked dispositions, sweetens an
harsh Nature, moderates a furious one, elevates a dull one, whatever it be, it
is more than a Fancy.

8. Labor to act to such an height of Holiness, and walk so closely with God,
that ye may have some sensible Communion with him in Duties and Ordinances;
that you may see his Power and his Glory in his Sanctuary, Psalm. 63.2. May taste
his Graciousness, 1 Pet. 2.3. David did taste sweetness in the Word, Psalm.
19.10. and why may not you? Why may not the spiritual senses of a Believer, an
enlightened Understanding, and renewed Conscience, take as real pleasure in
spiritual Objects, as his natural Senses may in natural ones? God may beam in
his Love into your Souls, shed it abroad in your Hearts Romans 5.5.
, make you taste its Sweetness and feel its Power, chearing up your Spirits, and
filling them with Joy unspeakable and glorious 1 Pet. 1.8.
; the Father may come, and the Son come, and manifest themselves to you, and
take up their abode with you Joh. 14.21, 23.
, so that you may say in the joy of your Hearts, This is the Lord and we have
waited for him, this is our God and he will save us Isa.
: And if you experience this in your selves, in your conversing with God in his
Ordinances, find something you never found any where else, and can scarce
express, or make others understand that have not felt the same, like the white
stone with the new Name, which none knows but he that has it. Rev. 2.17. You
will find Gods Consolations carry their own Evidence along with them, and speak
their own reality; they have something Divine in them, such a Stamp of God upon
them, that they will satisfy your Hearts as to their being no delusions; and
then let Scoffers scoff on, they shall never be able to laugh you out of those
Comforts whereof you find such real effects, in reviving your Hearts,
enlivening your Graces, breaking the Snares of worldly Temptations, abating the
force of your Lusts, and adorning even your outward Conversations: I dare say,
they may as soon persuade you that Honey is not sweet, when yet you taste it,
Snow not white, when yet you see it is, or not cold when you feel it so, as
persuade you, either that these Comforts are not real, or that holy Principle
in you which is attended by them, is but Fantastical.

To these Directions I shall add two general Rules, by which you may best judge
if you would pass a right Verdict on your selves, as to your spiritual State.

1. When you would judge of the reality of Grace in your Hearts, Judge of your
selves by what you are alone in the most secret Duties of Religion,
Closet-Prayer, Meditation, Self-Examination, etc. What men are when alone, that
usually they are for the main; the Heart which may be awed or some way swayed
when in Company with others, is most apt to discover it self then: if ever
Grace be working at all it will be at such a time, and if none appear then, it
is odds but there is none in the Heart. As some Corruptions may be most apt to
show themselves (such is the secret Atheism of men's Hearts, and little sense of
Gods Presence) in secret, when men are free from the restraint of Fear and
Shame; and such like motives which many times give check to, and keep them
under, in the Company of others, so likewise Grace may more readily act in
secret where men may use such means, and take such liberty for the awakening,
and exciting it, as might not in the presence of others be so convenient, and
be rid withal of some Temptations which at least in some tempers may prove a
hinderance to the more free actings of it. If you would therefore take the just
measure of your spiritual Stature, and know what in you is real, do it when
alone, when retired, when your Hearts are most like to discover themselves
fairly, and have least Temptations to deceive you, or impose upon you.

2. Be curious and diligent, in observing, not only the inward workings of your
Souls, but the ordinary settled inclination, and main bent of your Hearts;
observe them therefore, as to what they are in the main, and not only what they
are by fits, at some certain times, or when it may be under Temptations. The
Heart of a carnal man may seem to be very good under a pang of Conscience, or
fit of Conviction, or in relation to some more gross and scandalous sin, which
yet in the general is stark naught. Ahab may humble himself and put on
Sackcloth, when under the apprehensions of threatened Judgments 1 King. 21.27.
; Pharaoh may cry God mercy when under his hand Exodus 10.16, 17.
, and Herod may do many things when convinced by John Baptists Ministry Mark
6.20.
, and yet still they may continue the same they were: And on the other side,
the Heart of a Saint may appear very wicked under a Temptation, as David's did
in the business of Vriah, and of Numbering the People, in both which Grace was
for the present run down by a Lust; and so many times Passion, or carnal Fears,
or Distrust may lie uppermost in the Saints, when yet there is Grace within,
and that which at present appears is not the ordinary settled frame of their
Hearts; and though whatever corruption at any time breaks out, you may be sure
it is within, yet that may not make a discovery of the habitual temper, and
disposition of your Spirits, nor argue that there is no Grace in you. Judge
therefore of your selves by your course, and ordinary carriage, and by that you
may see what is most prevalent in you; and if you find your Souls mainly
looking to God, and respecting his ways, and best pleased when ye keep closest
to him, you may be sure there is something more in you than a Fancy or humor;
you may in some particular go astray like lost Sheep, and yet not forget Gods
Commandments, Psalm. 119. last.

2. The Second part of the Case is, How may we Evidence to others, that serious
Godliness in us is more than a Fancy?

In this there seems to be more difficulty than in the former; we may more
easily satisfy our selves concerning our inward workings, and the temper of
our own Minds, than we can others; we Judge of our selves by our inward
actings, and Principles, of which by inspecting our own Hearts, we have a more
immediate knowledge, and therefore are less liable to be deceived in our
Judgment; but when others have to do with us, they can judge of what is in our
Hearts, only by our outward Carriage which is patent to them, and so are liable
to more Errors in their thoughts about us: Here therefore if we cannot give so
clear proofs, and evident indications of a real Principle in us, as may work a
full Conviction of it in Gainsayers and Cavillers, so as to force them to an
acknowledgment of it, it may be sufficient if we can go so far, as to stop
their mouths and put them to silence 1 Pet. 2.15.
, that they may not be able reasonably to oppose, what yet they are unwilling
to grant; and if it amount not to a demonstration which may overpower their
Reason, and compel it to yield us to be real in our Profession, yet may (as
before was intimated) lay an obligation upon their Charity to believe us to be
so; and in this we must especially have respect to that outward carriage of
Professors, which may make the best discovery of their inward frame, and is
most obvious to the sense, and observation of those that are to be satisfied.

1. In general, Let men see that you live up to the Faith you profess, that
your Practice is agreeable to your Principles, and then they cannot deny the
reality of your Faith when it is so powerful, nor the reasonableness of your
Practice, when it is so answerable to it. You profess before men to believe
there is a God, let them see that you walk as before him, desire to approve
your selves to him, dare not sin against him: you believe a Christ, let your
Conversations be an imitation of him, Walk as he walked 1 John 2.6.
. You believe a future Judgment, live as becomes those that would be able to
stand in it, and give an account of your selves to the Judge. Let your carriage
be such as not only your own Consciences, but your Adversaries when they
quarrel with you, tell you it ought to be; that is, such as best suits your
Faith, and Hope, even in their judgment as well as your own. What is it makes
the profane World question the reality of Godliness in Gods people, but because
they think they do not live and act as they should do that believe such weighty
Truths, and expect such great things as they profess they do? If therefore your
Conversation be correspondent to your Faith, you take away the great Cause of
their cavilling with you, and slandering your Profession.

2. More particularly; Be as much in acting for God, as speaking for him. Not
only commend his ways, but walk in them; not only plead his Cause verbally,
but really, by being in your proper Sphere, active for it, not only speak well
of them that are good, but do good to them. Many will speak for God, and good
men, but when it comes to doing, there is an end of their goodness, they will
not stir a step, not part with a penny: they can say as Jam. 2.16. Be thou
filled, and be thou warmed, and yet not give them those things that are needful
to the Body: they will be Religious as far as good words will go, which cost
them nothing, but are loath to be at the charges of doing any real good: How
many have their Tongues tipped with good discourse, whose Lives are unfruitful as
to good works? See therefore that your actions keep pace with your words, that
your Religion do not consist merely in talking, that will be a sign it is
either fantastical or hypocritical; when the Fruit of it reaches no further
than the Tongue, it is odds if the root reach any deeper than the head: but
when your Religion appears in action, your Enemies themselves will confess the
reality of it.

3. Be as diligent in and make as much Conscience of the Duties of the second
Table, Righteousness and Mercy, in their place and order, as those of the
first: Without this your Religion cannot be real, and then no wonder if men
think it not real: Jam. 1.6. Pure Religion and undefiled in the sight of God,
and the Father, is this, to visit the Fatherless, and the Widow, in their
Affliction, etc. In the sight of God; God himself that searches the Hearts, yet
having given men such a Law as may govern their owtuard as well as inward man,
and influence them in those things which relate to their Neighbor, as well as
which relate to himself, does accordingly look to their outward Carriage toward
men, as well as the inward respect they bear to him, and so expects the fruits
of Righteousness in their Lives, as well as the root of Piety in their Hearts:
That holy Principle he has put within them is such as extends to their
Conversation outwardly, and not to the inward frame of their Hearts alone, and
so the reality of it in it self, must be evidenced by the power of it in its
effects: Now if these external actings. (where opportunities and means are) are
requisite to ascertain the Truth of Godliness in the Heart, as to its very
being, we may be sure they are no less necessary as indications of it in the
sight of men. The World, which is apt to traduce you as Hypocritical, or
Fanatical in Religion, will be best confuted by your Carriage in those things
which relate to themselves, and from which some benefit redounds to them. If
men see you Just, and Righteous, and Merciful in your dealings with, and
behavior toward others, Helpful toward them that want you, Pitiful to them in
their Misery, etc. what is in your Hearts and Minds they cannot see, but they
will be more ready to judge well of it, because they see so good Effects of it;
what they see, they will think is real because it is sensible. True indeed, the
first place is due to the Moral Duties of Gods immediate Worship prescribed in
the first Table, but yet those of the second must accompany them, or you will
never be able to prove the reality of your Christianity, or reasonableness of
your Practice to your selves, and much less to others. They must and will judge
of what is within, by that which appears without, of what they do not see (as
your Faith and inward Holiness they do not) by that which they do see.

4. Be most diligent in those Duties which all own to be Duties, wheof the
first or second Table; those which are confessedly Moral, and which your
Enemies themselves cannot deny to be Duties. Some Duties have an intrinsic
Loveliness in them, and are of good report Phil. 4.8.
even among those themselves that are but Carnal. These carry Conviction along
with them, and if you be diligent in the Practice of them, you will have the
Consciences of your Adversaries take part with you, and their Judgments to
applaud you, when perhaps their Malice censures you, and their Lusts oppose
you: you will have something within them to bear testimony to you, and when
they do not love you, yet they cannot condemn you.

5. Labor to out do and excel others in the World in all those good things in
which they excel most. Whatever you see praiseworthy in any, though Enemies,
do it, and outdo them in it. If they be just, do you be more just, either more
exactly, or more universally, or more constantly so; If they be temperate and
sober, if it be possible go beyond them in it; if they be Charitable, be you
more Charitable; if they be Humble, Meek, Gentle, Courteous, endeavor to
excel them in each: if you think that cannot be in some cases, yet it is but
in some, and may you not exceed them as to the general course and whole of a
moral Conversation? Labor then to make it appear that a Nobler Principle out
of which you act, an higher End at which you aim, and a more perfect Copy after
which you write, can raise and heighten you to a pitch above any thing not only
that Fancy might do in you, but natural Conscience, or moral Virtue in them.
And though the best and highest of such moral performances in your external
Conversation, might be in themselves but insufficient arguments, as to your own
personal satisfaction, of the truth of Grace in your hearts, yet your
overtopping others in what they excel most, or in the main of your Life and
Practice, may be an argument ad hominem, and be a means to silence Enemies, and
stop their mouths, it may be convince their judgments; or if it do not make
them acknowledge what you do to proceed from a supernatural Principle, it may
however force them to own it as coming from something more than a Conceit or
Fancy.

5. Be diligent in those Duties the performanee of which has least Connection
with a secular Interest. So Christ commands, Luke 6.35. Love your Enemies, and
do good, and lend, hoping for nothing again. Sow good Seed though upon barren
ground, and which is like to yield but a poor Harvest. Buy the Truth, and never
sell it, though you should for the present be losers by it; Nay, follow it at
the heels, though it should kick out your teeth. They that do good to others
only from whom they expect good, give to them that are like to give again, do
plainly turn Religion into Bartery, and may be said to be good Traders, but
scarce good Christians. When men appear for Religion only when, and where it is
countenanced, or while there is something to be got by it, Practice in an
Employment, Custom in a Trade, or the favor of men, or applause from them,
they may well be suspected if not of Fancy, yet of Design, and Hypocrisy. But
when men will do Duty and keep Gods way though they get nothing by it, but
frowns, or blows, detriment, or danger, it cannot be reasonably imagined but
that they have some better thing in their eye which they look for hereafter,
and some very Powerful Principle at present within them, to support them under
difficulties, and prompt them to such Duties, as are (for ought the spectators
can discern) both unprofitable, and hazardous.

6. Labor so to carry your selves in the sight of men, as to let them see that
you are as much set upon gaining Heaven, as getting or keeping the World. Be as
active, as busy, and show as much concern for the things of the other life, as
the things of this. Scarce any thing is a greater blemish to Religion, or
disreputation to them that profess it, than their passionate, and over-eager
pursuit of Temporal things, with a coldness and visible indifferency in seeking
Eternal: when they can rise up early, and sit up late, and eat the bread of
Carefulness, spend their time and strength in laboring for the World; nay,
lose the comfort of their Lives by scrambling for the things of this life; and
in the mean time put God off with some little superficial Service, neglect some
duties and hurry over others, let the crowd of business thrust their spiritual
work into a corner of their time, if not quite out of it; the world indeed
justle God and Christ, and Heaven out of their discourse and conversation,
which savours of nothing but Trades, and Bargains and Adventures, and getting
Estates, and tends to nothing but the promoting a mere Worldly Interest. Are
these men, think their carnal Neighbors, in good earnest for Religion, when
they are so mad upon their business? does their Happiness lie in Heaven, when
their labor is only for the Earth? can their Treasure be above, when their
hearts are below, and their actings plainly show that they are so? can their
hope of Eternal Glory be any better than a Fancy, who do so little for that
Glory, and lay out themselves for this World as if there were no other? And
indeed who can judge otherwise of some men, that hears their pretenses, and yet
sees their practice? And therefore Christians, think with your selves, How does
it become you to act, if you would persuade others that you have real designs
for future happiness? What would you do, if you did pretend to the hope of some
great Estate, or enjoyment in the world, to convince them that that hope were
reasonable and well grounded? would you not act at such a rate, as to make them
acknowledge you were serious? would you not make it your great business to
attain your great Ends? Do the same in the present case: let men see that your
belief of things to come is as real as of present things, by your pursuing them
as earnestly, and acting as vigorously for them; Nay show a greater
concernedness for them, and that will be a means to convince men that you
believe a greater excellency in them, and that they cannot be obtained upon
easier terms.

7. The more you pretend to the comforts of Christianity the more mortified let
your conversation be to the things of the World, and pleasures of Sense, and
your carriage more apparently holy. Let it never be said that the Comforts of
the Spirit make you give liberty to the Flesh. When men see that the more you
pretend to spiritual enjoyments, the more spiritual you are; and the more
pleasure you profess to find in Gods ways, the more exactly you walk in them,
and the less ye dare sin against him, they will have little to say against you.
Those comforts cannot but be real which have so great, so good Effects, and
when men see the effects so real, they cannot judge the cause to be less so.
Whimsies and Fancies do not use to make men grow in Righteousness, and
Humility, and Meekness, and Mortification: Let men see the respect you bear to
all Gods Commands, and they will scarce dare to question the comforts you
receive from his Promises.

8. Labor to make such advances in the way to Heaven, as may not only be
sensible to your selves but perceivable by others: let your profiting appear
unto all men. 1 Timothy 4.15. Let your paths be as the shining light, shining
forth more and more. Prove. 4.18. Not only grow in Grace and inward Holiness,
but abound in the fruits of Righteousness. A sensibly thriving Religion cannot
be thought to be an imaginary one: they that observe the progress you make,
will not be able to question the grounds upon which you go. When they see that
as you grow older and wiser, so you grow better, they cannot reasonably imagine
that strength of Fancy ever raised you to that height of goodness, but rather
suppose that you do more good than you did, because you see more reason for it,
and have more lively hopes of being gainers by it.

9. Lastly, Heb. 10.23.
Be sure to persevere and hold on in the Faith you d profess and the practice
of Godliness: your Constancy may be a special means to evidence your reality
not only to your selves but others. When men grow weary of Gods ways, their
Courage fails them, their Zeal is out of breath, it is a sign their Religion
was never real; but when they act uniformly under the most contrary
Providence, and among all the Vicissitudes and Changes of humane affairs, in
Conformity to the Principles they have all along professed and owned; the shock
of Temptations they meet with cannot justle them out of the way of Holiness,
nor the Enticements and Courtship of a (sometimes) fawning World wheedle them
into a compliance with it; they hope to the end 1 Pet. 1.13.
, are not weary of well doing Gal. 5.9.
, labor and faint not Rev. 2.3.
, bring forth Fruit with patience, and persevere to do so, serve God as long as
they have their being Psalm. 104.33.
, live to him as long as they live at all, act by the same Rule, aim at the
same End while they live, and when they come to die; in a word, when opposition
from men, temptations from Satan, nay frowns from God himself have not
discouraged them, nor lessened their love to him, or activeness for him, or
diligence in his Service, and at last upon reflection they approve of that good
course they have now finished, and have the same thoughts of God and Holiness
they had before; the worst of Enemies cannot (but as impudently as
unreasonably) charge them with acting out of Fancy or humor, or any thing but
a fixed and stable Principle.

Besides what has been spoken by way of Direction in answer to the Question,
some further Improvement of this Doctrine may be made.

Information. If true Christians may give an account of their Christianity,

1. They then are no true Believers, no true Christians, of whose Religion no
good account can be given, either how they came by it, or whereon it is
grounded.

1. How they came by it, when they pretend to be Saints, but cannot in the
least tell how they came to be Saints, have found no real change in themselves,
are the same they have always been; they have, they think, loved God, and
believed in Christ, and had hopes of Heaven ever since they can remember, but
know not how any of these things were wrought in them, or by what means; such a
Faith I dare say is but a Fancy, and so is their Hope and their Love, and
whatever Grace they pretend to.

2. Whereon it is grounded.

1. When their Faith is not rightly grounded it is no better than a Fancy. When
it is built on the Authority of a Church, or the Traditions of men and not on
the Word of God; or on the Word misunderstood, or misapplied, or divided, or
maimed; when they believe Promises without respect to Commands, believe Christ
is their Savior, and yet never receive him to be their Lord; believe they
shall See God, though they be not pure in Heart, follow not after Holiness, and
such indeed is the Faith and Hope of Profane Worldlings, and whoever live in
Contradiction to Gods Commands, and yet expect the benefit of his Promises.

2. When their Practice is not rightly grounded, it is no better than Folly,
how fair soever and plausible it may seem. When men set up a Religion merely of
man's devising, contrive new ways of Worshipping God, which he himself never
appointed, and so indeed impose upon him, and prescribe to him what they think
must certainly please him. This is unreasonable, for men to think that their
Inventions or others Traditions can be more acceptable to God than his own
Institutions, that Sacrifice can go further than Obedience would have done.
They would themselves be served according to their own minds and not their
Servants pleasure, and why should not God? They would not have their Commands
neglected that their Servants Will might be performed, and how foolish is it
then to adhere to their own Inventions though with the slighting of Gods
Institutions? and yet how few be there that are so addicted to Humane
Observances, but they are careless of Gods Appointments? Gods Commands being
the Great, and only Warrantable reason of all Divine Worship, whatever Worship
is uncommanded, cannot be but unreasonable.

2. How great is their sin that Question, nay Deride the Grace that is in
Believers, as not being a real thing? count the most Serious powerful
Godliness to be no better than Humor, of Fancy? All the Religion they own
consists but in a few outward Forms, or some moral Actions, and whatever is
above this they look upon as not real; and so they leave us a Lamentably empty
Religion, when they condemn our Faith as Fancy, our Practice as Folly, and
casheer all our Comforts as mere Delusions. This usually proceeds either

1. From the Atheism and Infidelity of such men's Hearts, some Question all
Religion and so the true Religion among the rest; they are themselves for none,
and therefore Quarrel with all; they think all Religion is but Fancy, or
Policy, and so the Christian Religion too: They do not really believe the
Grounds of Christianity, and therefore laugh at them that do.

2. Or, from Pride and Conceitedness of their own Wisdom and Reason: they
magnify their own Notions, are in love with their own Wisdom, and so contemn
all else, like the Athenians, Acts. 17.18.32. that laughed when they heard of
Jesus and the Resurrection. The high Opinion they have of their Reason makes
them deny the reality of Faith; what they cannot themselves comprehend, they
will not believe, nor allow others to do it; they will scarce allow of any
thing between Demonstration and Fancy, and this makes them Innovate so much in
Religion, and Scoff at the Faith by which they should be Saved.

3. Or, from Ignorance of Spiritual things, and their not Experiencing the
Power of Grace in their own Hearts: They will believe nothing in Religion but
what they have themselves felt. They never found the Light of Divine Truths
shining into their dark Minds, and overcoming their Carnal Reason, nor the
Power of Grace renewing their Wills, and subjecting them to Gods Will, breaking
the force of their sinful Inclinations, mortifying their Lusts, regulating
their Affections, changing the habitual temper and disposition of their
Spirits: nor the Efficacy of Faith in the Purification of their Hearts, their
resting upon the Promises, cleaving to Christ, and fetching in supplies of the
Spirit from him; nor the Love of God shed abroad in their Hearts, enlarging
them in Duties, quickening them in his ways, supporting them under Burdens,
strengthening them against Temptations, and comforting them under Afflictions,
and therefore they Question all these things, and take them to be nothing else
but canting Phrases and unaccountable Fancies. A man that never was at Rome, or
Constantinople, might at the same rate deny there ever were such places; one
that never tasted Honey might deny it to be sweet, or a blind man laugh at
Colors because he never saw them, though contrary to the Experience of
thousands that had, with as much reason as they who live merely by Sense, and
never Experienced any better pleasures, deny a higher Principle by which
Believers are acted, and more Spiritual Comforts which they enjoy.



1. Labor to Experience the reality of your Religion in your selves. So live
as that you may not be deceived, and may know that you are not. So act Grace as
that you may feel it working, and from thence conclude the Principle to be in
you, and may taste the sweetness of the comforts it brings with it. Labor to be
fully satisfied that you do not live by Fancy, and act by Fancy, think you
believe, and hope when you do not, that Grace in you is as real a Principle as
Reason is.

1. This becomes you as reasonable Creatures; as such you should know the
reason of your own Actings, upon what Grounds you do what you do, and believe
what you believe. You would think a man very weak and foolish in the
concernments of this present Life, that could give himself no account of his
own Actions, or expectations, should have high hopes of great things, but not
tell why he entertained them. How unreasonable then is it for a man to hope for
greater things in the other Life, to engage in a Religious Course, be diligent
in Duties, deny himself as to his Worldly Interest, and yet not know why he
does so?

2. It is a matter of great Consequence to you. For,

1. If you cannot give your selves an account of your Religion, you will never
enjoy the Comforts of it, never take comfort in its Comforts. The Comforts of
true Religion are too Great, too Sweet, ^oo Precious to be vainly lost, or but
coldly sought after; Joy unspeakable and full of Glory is well worth having:
but alas! how shall you come by this Joy, these strong Consolations, if you are
not satisfied in the reality of that Principle in your hearts upon which they
depend? You have no Joy or Peace but in Believing Romans 15.13.
and Hoping 12.12.
, and walking Holily Psalm. 119:65:
, and if you know not but your Faith, and Hope may be a mere Fancy, and so your
diligence in Holiness which is the Effect of Faith, but the Effect of Fancy,
what Comfort can you have in one or other? what pleasure can you have in
reflecting upon your Sincerity when you question your Sincerity? Or upon your
Interest in Christ and the benefits of His Blood, and privileges of the
Gospel, when for ought you know the Faith upon which that Interest immediately
stands, is not a Grace of Gods Spirit, but a Fancy of your own Heads?

2. You will never be able to give an account of it to others. What you
understand not your selves, you will not be able to make out to others that ask
you a reason of it: If you cannot tell why you believe, how can you Evidence to
others that you do believe? And if you cannot tell why you Practice thus, or
thus, how can you satisfy others that your Practice is reasonable? If you
would be able to answer them, first see you be able to answer your selves; when
you can satisfy your own Conscience, you may the better answer their Cavils,
or Check their Revilings, or bear their Censures.

3. You will never be able to suffer for your Religion, if you cannot give (at
least) your selves an account of it: nor suffer for that, the Reality of which
is Doubtful to you. You will soon make shipwreck of a good Conscience if you
be at uncertainties about that Faith which should help you to keep it. Get well
settled or you will be easily shaken; you will very scarcely venture your All
in the World in Expectation of Eternal Life, when you are not sure there is
such a thing, or that you have a Title to it, but rather fear that the hopes
you had of it, were no better than waking men's Dreams, or pleasing Visions of
an imaginary Happiness which had no Subsistence but in your own Fancies. You
are like enough to come into sufferings, you had need see upon what Ground you
stand that you may be able to hold out. If you once come to Question the
reality of your Faith, you will soon come to forsake it: And if you know not
but your Practice hitherto has been unreasonable, you will think, when
troubles come upon you, you have reason to alter it. If your former Strictness,
and Zeal in Religion seem Folly to you, you will count it your Wisdom to grow
loose, and cold, and careless in it, especially rather than hazard Estate, or
Liberty, or Life for it. What man of Sense would Hang or Burn rather than
forgo that which he himself took to be but a Fancy, at least had no assurance
that it was not?

4. You shall not need to fear the Scorns or Censures of Enemies, if you be
fully satisfied in your selves that your Faith is really a Grace of Gods Spirit
in you, and not a Deceit of your own Heart, and the Holiness of you^
Conversation a well grounded, Scriptural Practice, not an unwarrantable
Irrational Niceness. Let the Profane World Scoff its fill, and call you
Deceivers, or count you Fools; it is no shame to be called Fools for believing
Christ's Truth, or doing Christ's Will; it has been the Lot of others before
you: And so long as you Feel the Power of Faith in your own Souls, you are sure
it Purifies your Hearts, makes you fearful of Sin, Conscientious and painful
in Duty, Strong against Temptations, Patient in Afflictions, and so long too as
you find Holiness growing and thriving in you, your Spiritual Strength
increasing, your Fruit abounding, so long you may be sure you are not Fools,
and the Worlds Flouts or Scorns cannot make you so. You would not be much
concerned if those that bore you an ill will should make themselves sport with
you, and attempt to persuade you that you were Blind, or Lame, or Sick, or
asleep, when in the mean while your Eyes were open, and you saw all things
about you as at other times, you could walk and Exercise your Limbs, discourse
and Exercise your Reason, perform all the Actions of men that are awake or in
health. If you experience the workings of an holy Principle in your Hearts, and
the Effects of it in your Lives, neither the Sophistry, nor Censures, nor Jeers
of those that are otherwise minded, will be able to beat you out of the
Conviction of your Spirtual Senses, any more than of your Reason and
Understanding, or Bodily motions.

2. Labor to Evidence the same to others, and to be able to give a reason of
your Faith, and Hope, and holy Obedience to them that demand it of you, and (if
possible) to satisfy them as well as your selves.

1. This may be much for the Glory of God and Credit of the Gospel, when it is
seen that you are Men as well as Christians, and act Reasonably as well as
Religiously, and never more reasonably than when most Religiously, that that
Divine Nature 2 Pet. 1.4.
you are made partakers of is a perfection, and Elevation not the destruction
of your Humane; that you have great reason for that good way, that Holy course
in which you have been walking, and that the greatest strictness in Religion is
really your greatest Wisdom. How may your Confession when joined with a Godly
Conversation (which is a speaking Practice, and the most forcible Conviction)
stop the mouths of Cavillers, falsify their Slanders, make them know
themselves to be Liars, and own themselves to have had too hard thoughts of
you, and that they and not you have been in the wrong? And if you come into
sufferings it will be for the Honor of the Gospel so to demean your selves as
to make it appear that you suffer, not only not as Evil Doers 1 Pet. 4.15.
, but not as Fools, that there is enough in your Religion to justify you
before men not only in your greatest Preciseness, but in your deepest
sufferings, and though you pass for Fools with the unbelieving World for
exposing your selves to a thousand miseries, and apparent present ruin in
Expectation of an Invisible and only future Happiness, yet your Faith is so
well grounded, your Hope so sure, that you need not be ashamed of undergoing
evil, any more than of doing good.

2. It may be a means to encourage the Hearts, and strengthen the Hands, and
confirm the Faith of your fellow Saints, when they see that you believe as they
believe, and hope as they hope, and Practice as they Practice, that they are
not alone, nor singular in what they do. Though a true Believer ought to hold
on constantly in the way of Faith and Holiness, notwithstanding the opposition
of all the World against him, yet it may be no small Encouragement to him to
find others of the same mind, Acting at the same rate, and upon the same
Grounds.

Quest. How God is his Peoples great Reward. SERMON III.
GENESIS XV. 1. I am thy Shield, and thy exceeding Great Reward.
ABraham is called the Friend of God, Jam. 2.23. The Lord spoke with him
familiarly, Genesis 17.22. he was made of Gods Privy Council, Genesis 18.17. And in
the Text, The Word of the Lord came to him in a Vision. Representations of
things in a Vision, differ from Revelations by Dreams Genesis 31.11.
. And what was the word that came to this holy Patriarch in a Vision?

I am thy Shield, and thy exceeding great Reward.

Words too great for any Man or Angel fully to expound. Both the Hebrew and
Greek carry the Phrase very high (...).
, I am thy superabundant, very exceeding much r^ward (...).
. In the Text is a Climax, it rises as the Waters of the Sanctuary, higher. I
am thy Reward, thy great Reward M^rc^s tua manna nimis. Grotius.
, thy exceeding great Reward. There are four things here to be spoken to.

1. That nothing besides God can be the Saints Reward. 2. How God is their
Reward? 3. How God comes to be their Reward? 4. Wherein the exceeding Greatness
of this Reward consists?
1. That nothing besides God can be the Saints Reward.

1. Nothing on Earth can be their Reward. The glistering of the World dazles
men's eyes, but (like the Apples of Sodom) it does not so much delight as
delude. The World is res Nihili, gilded emptiness Prove. 23.5.
. The World is made Circular, the Heart in the figure of a Triangle; a Circle
cannot fill a Triangle. The World is enough to busy us, not to fill us Fumus
and Ventus sunt omnia mundana. Aug. Tom. 9.
. Job. 20.22. In the fullness of his sufficiency he shall be in straits. It
seems a Riddle, to have sufficiency yet not have enough. The meaning is, when
he enjoyes most of the Creature, yet aliquid deest, there is something wanting.
When King Solomon had put all the Creatures into a Limbeck, and went to extract
and still out the Spirits, (...).
they turned to Froth. Eccles. 1.2. All is Vanity. God never intended we should
dig Happiness out of the Earth which he has cursed.

2. Heaven it self is not a Saints Reward. Psalm 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven
but thee? There are Angels and Archangels Ibi sunt angeli and archangeli. Musc.
, (says Musculus) I, but though these are for a Saints comfort, yet not
properly for his Reward. Communion with Seraphims is excellent, yet can no more
make a Saints Reward than the light of the Stars can make day.



Himself upon them Non tantum sua sed se nobis imp^rtit.
. The Great Blessing of the Covenant is, I am thy God. The Lord told Abraham,
Kings should come out of his loins, and he would give the Land of Canaan to him
and his Seed, Genesis 17. but all this did not amount to Blessedness. That which
made up the Portion, was Verse. 8. I will be their God. God will not only see
that the Saints shall be rewarded, but his own self will be their Reward; a
King may reward his Subjects with Gratuities, but he bestows himself upon his
Queen: God says to every Believer as he did to Aaron, Number. 18.20. I am thy
part, and thy Inheritance; and as the King of Israel said to Benhadad, 2 Kings
20.4. I am thine, and all that I have.

Abraham sent away the Sons of the Concubines with a few Gifts, but he settled
the Inheritance upon Isaac. Genesis 25.5. God sends away the Wicked with Riches
and Honor, but makes over himself to his people: they have not only the Gift,
but the Giver. And what can be more? As Micah said, Judge. 18.24. What have I
more? So what has God more to give than Himself? what greater Dowry than
Deity? God is not only the Saints Rewarder but their Reward Merces idem valet
quod haereditas. Calvin.
. Job 22.25. The Almighty shall be thy G^d! So much the Hebrew word imports
(...) Aurum lectissimum, Junius Buxtorf.
. Perperam and impie delirarunt, qui complementum Dei, Ephesians. 3.19. interpretati
sunt plenam divinitatem, quasi homines fiant Deo aequales. Calv.
The sum of all is, The Saints Portion lies in God. Psalm. 16.5. The Lord is
the portion of mine Inheritance and of my Cup Notant Grammatici, Rectionem
Plurium Synonymorum auxesim denotare.
.

Q. But how does God give himself to his people, is not his Essence
incommunicable?

A. True, the Saints cannot partake of Gods very Essence; (an Error of Montanus
and the Familists.) The Riches of the Deity are too great to be received in
specie. But the Saints shall have all in God that may be for their Comfort,
they shall partake so much of Gods Likeness 1 John 3.2.
, his Love John. 17.26.
, his Influence and the Irradiations of his Glory Joh. 17.22.
, as does astonish and fill the Vessels of Mercy that they run over with Joy.



Jesus Christ; his Blood being Sanguis Dei, the blood of God, Act. 20.28. has
merited this glorious Reward for them. Though in respect of Free Grace, this
Reward is a Donative, yet in respect of Christ's Blood it is a Purchase. Ephesians.
1.14. How precious should Christ be to us! Had not he died, the portion had
never come into our hands.

4. Wherein the exceeding greatness of this Reward consists?

1. God is Merces ampla, a satisfying Reward Perfectionem omnium honorum in se
uno comprehendit. Rivet.
. Genesis 17.1. I am God Almighty. The word for Almighty, (...), signifies him
that has Sufficiency. God is a whole Ocean of Blessedness, which while the
Soul is bathing in, it cries out in a Divine ecstasy, I have enough. Here is
Fullness but no Surfeit. Psalm. 17.15. When I awake I shall be satisfied with thy
likeness Spiritualem vult Foelicitatem quando Facit ad Faciem se nobis fruendum
exhibeat Deui. Calvin.
. When I awake out of the sleep of death, having my Soul embelished with the
Illustrious Beams of thy Glory, I shall be satisfied. In God there is not only
Sufficiency, but Redundancy; not only Plenitudo Vasis, the Fullness of the
Vessel, but Plenitudo Fontis, the Fullness of the Fountain. When the whole World
was defaced, Noah had the Copy and Emblem of it in the Ark. In God this Ark of
Blessedness are all good things virtually to be found. Therefore Jacob having
God for his Reward, could say, I have enough: or as it is in the Original, I
have all (...)
; God is all Marrow and Sweetness Ipse Deus sufficit ad Proemium. Aug.
; He is such an exuberant Reward, as exceeds our very Faith Proemium quod fide
non attingitur. Aug.
. If the Queen of Sheba's Heart fainted within her to see all King Solomon's
Glory, what would it have done to have beheld the Astonishing and Magnificent
Reward which God bestows upon his Favorites?

2. God is Merces adaequata, a suitable Reward. The Soul being Spiritual, must
have something Homogeneal and suitable to make it happy, and that is God. Light
is not more suitable to the Eye, nor Melody to the Ear, than God is to the
Soul. He pours in Spiritual Blessings, Ephesians. 1.3. He enricheth it with Grace,
feasts it with his Love, crowns it with Heavenly Dignity.

3. God is Merces jucunda, a Pleasant Reward: He is the Quintessence of
delight, all Beauty and Love: To be feeding upon the thoughts of God is
delicious. Psalm. 104.34. My Meditation of him shall be sweet. It Is delightful
to the Be to suck the Flower; so by holy musing to suck out some of the
sweetness in God, carries a secret delight in it. To have a Prospect of God
only by Faith is Pleasant, 1 Pet. 1.8. In whom believing, ye rejoice. Then what
will the joy of Vision be, when we shall have a clear intuitive Sight of him,
and be laid in the Bosom of Divine Love? Is God so sweet a Reward in
Affliction? 2 Cor. 7.4. I am exceeding joyful in all our Tribulation (...).
. Philip Lantgrave of Hesse, said, That in his Confinement, he had the Divine
Consolations of the Martyrs: Then what a delicious Reward will God be in
Heaven? This may be better felt than expressed. The Godly entering upon their
Celestial Reward, are said to enter into the joy of their Lord: Mat. 25.21. O
Amazing O Gaudium vincens omne Gaudium, extra quod non est Gaudium.
! The Saints enter into Gods own joy: They have not only the Joy which God
bestows, but the joy which God enjoyes.

4. God is Merces transcendens, a transcendent Reward. The Painter going to
take the Picture of Helena, not being able to draw her Beauty to the Life, drew
her Face covered with a Vail. So when we speak of Gods Excellencies, we must
draw a Vail. He is so supereminent a Reward, as we cannot set him forth in all
his Oriency and Magnificence. Put the whole world in Balance with him, and it
is as if you should weigh a Feather with a Mountain of Gold. God has got the
Ascendant of all other things: he is better than the World, better than the
Soul, better than Heaven: He is Causa causati, the original Cause of all good
things Quod efficit tale id est magis tale.
; nothing is sweet without him Quicquid praeter Deum est, Dulce non est. Aug.
; he perfumes and Sanctifies our Comforts, he turns the Venison into a Blessing.

5. God is Merces Infinita, an Infinite Reward; and being infinite, these two
things follow: 1. This Reward cannot come to us by way of Merit: Can we merit
God? can finite Creatures merit an infinite Reward? 2. God being an infinite
Reward, there can be no Defect or Scantiness in it: there is no want in that
which is infinite Quicquid praeter Deum est, Dulce non est. Aug.
. Some may ask, Is God sufficient for every individual Saint? Yes, If the Sun
which is but a finite Creature, disperseth its light to the Universe, then much
more God who is infinite, distributes Glory to the whole number of the Elect.
Every individual Christian has a Propriety in a Community; as every Person
enjoyes the whole Sun to himself, so every Believer possesses whole God to
himself: the Lord has Land enough to give all his Heirs. Throw a thousand
Buckets into the Sea, and there is water enough in the Sea to fill them: Though
there be Millions of Saints and Angels, there is enough in God to fill them.

God being an infinite Reward, though he is continually giving out of his
fullness to others, yet he has not the less; his Glory is Imparted not
Impaired; it is a Distribution without a Diminution.

6. God is Merces honorifica, an honorable Reward: Honor is the height of
men's Ambition: Aristotle calls it (...). Alas! Worldly Honor is but a pleasant
Fancy. (...).
Acts 25.23 In Infinito non datur (...).
. Honor has often a speedy burial: but to enjoy God is the head of Honor. What
greater Dignity than to be taken up into Communion with the God of Glory, and
to possess a Kingdom with him, bespangled with Light, and seated above all the
visible Orbs? A great Heir while he is in a Foreign Land, may be despised, but
in his own Country he is had in Veneration. Here the people of God are as
Princes in a disguise, 1 John 3.1. but they shall have honor enough in Heaven,
when they shall be clothed with white Robes, and sit with Christ upon his
Throne. Rev. 3.21.

7. God is Merces aeterna, an Everlasting Reward: Mortality is the disgrace of
all earthly things Inter Peritura vivimus. Seneca.
. They are in their Fruition surfeiting, and in their Duration dying; they are
like the Metal Glass is made of, which when it shines brightest is nearest
melting: but God is an eternal Reward. Eternity cannot be measured by Years,
Jubilees, Ages, nor the most slow motion of the eighth Sphere. Eternity makes
Glory weighty. Psalm. 48.14. This God is our God for ever and ever. A Christian
cannot say, I have an Estate in the World, and I shall have it for ever; but he
may say, I have God, and I shall have him for ever: O ye Saints of God, your
praying and repenting is but for a while, but your Reward is for ever. As long
as God is God, he will be rewarding you; Hos. 2. 19. I will betroth thee to me
for ever Adsciscam mihi in sponsam. (...) Corn. Lap.
. God Marries himself to his People, and this admits of no Divorce. Gods Love
to his Elect is as unchangable as to Christ. Psalm 73.26. My portion for ever.
This Portion cannot be spent because it is Infinite, nor lost because it is
Eternal. We read of a River of pleasure at Gods Right Hand. Psalm. 36.8. But
may not this River in time be dried up? No, for there is a Fountain at the
bottom, verse. 9. With thee Lord, is the fountain of Life.

But if this Reward be so Exceeding Great,

In the other World our Faculties shall be extended,

There is no seeing the Sun in the Circle, but in the Beams; so whatever of God
is made Visible to us, will be through the Golden Beams of the Sun of
Righteousness.

Wherein appears the certainty of this Reward?

God who is the Oracle of Truth has asserted it.

A Charter Legally confirmed under the Broad Seal is unquestionable: The
Public Faith of Heaven is engaged to make good this Reward. Gods Oath is laid
at Pledge Psalm. 58.11.
. Nay, God has not only Pawned his Truth (the most Orient Pearl of his Crown)
but he has given the Anticipation and First Fruits of this reward to his
Saints, in joy and Consolation, Gal. 5.22 Vae nobis si nec juranti Deo
credimus. Aug.
. which assures them of an Harvest afterward.

But when shall we be possessed of this Reward?

The time is not long. Revel. 22.12. Behold I come quickly, and my reward is
with me. Sense and Reason think it a long Interval, but Faith looks at the
Reward as near: through a Perspective Glass, the Object which is at some
distance seems near to the Eye. So Faith looking through the Perspective Glass
of a Promise, the Reward seems near; Faith as it does Substantiate, so it does
Anticipate things not seen, it makes them present. Ephesians. 2.6.

But why is this Reward at all deferred?

1. God sees it not fit that we should yet receive it. finished the Faith. A
day Labourer does not receive his Pay till his work be done. Even Christ's
Reward was deferred till He had Completed his Mediatory Work, and said upon
the Cross It is Finished.

2. God defers the Reward that we may live by Faith. We are taken with the
Reward, but God is more taken with our Faith. No Grace Honors God like Faith.
Romans 4.20. God has given himself to us by Promise: Faith trusts Gods Bond, and
Patience waits for the Payment.

3. God adjourns the Reward a while to sweeten it, and make it more welcome to
us when it comes Quo longius defertur eo suavins laetatu^.
. After all our Labors, watchings, conflicts, how comfortable will the Reward
be? Nay the longer the Reward is deferred, it will be the Greater. The longest
Voyages have the largest returns.

If still it be asked, When shall the time of this Reward be? I say, The
righteous shall receive part of their reward at Death. No sooner is the Soul
out of the Body, but it is Present with the Lord, 2. Cor. 5.8 Piae animae a
Corporibus solutae cum Deo vivunt. Calv.
. And the full Coronation is at the Resurrection, when the Soul and Body shall
be reunited and perfected in Glory. Christians, faint not in your Voyage (tho
troublesome,) you are within a few Leagues of Heaven. Your Salvation is now
nearer than when you First believed, Romans 13.11.

Several Corollaries follow.

1 Use, Infomation.
Hence it is Evident, that it is Lawful to look to the future Reward. God is our
Reward, is it not Lawful to look to him? Moses had an 11.26. What was this
Reward, but God himself? verse. 27 As seeing him who is invisible. Looking to
the Reward quickens us in Religion. It Is like the Rod of Myrtle in the
Travelers hand, which (is said) revives his Spirits, and makes him walk
without being weary: who that is subject to fainting-fits will not carry
Cordial-water about him.

Mal. 3.14. Ye have said, it is vain to serve God: The Infinite Jehovah gives a
Reward that is as far beyond our thoughts as it is above our deserts. How apt
are persons through Ignorance or mistake to misjudge the ways of God! They
think it will not quit the cost to be Religious. They speak evil of Religion
before they have tried it; as if one should condemn a Meat before he has
tasted it: besides the Vails Psalm. 19.11.
which God gives in this life, Provision, Protection, Peace, there is a
Glorious Reward shortly coming; God himself is the Saints Dowry In uno Deo
omnes florent Gemmae ad salutem.
. God has a true Monopoly. He has those Riches which are no where else to be
had, the Riches of Salvation. He is such a Gold-mine as no Angel can find the
bottom. Ephesians. 3.8. The unsearchable Riches of Christ. Is it vain then to serve
God? A Christians work is soon over, but not his Reward. He has such an
Harvest coming as cannot be fully Inned; it will be always Reaping-time in
Heaven. How great is that Reward which Thoughts cannot measure, nor Time finish?

Psalm. 81.11. Israel would none of me. Is it usual to refuse Rewards? If a man
should have a vast Sum of Money offered him and he should refuse it, his
discretion would be called in Question. God offers an incomprehensible Reward
to men, yet they refuse. Like the Lodestone, which refuses Gold and Pearl,
and draws the rusty Iron to it. Man by his fall lost his Headpiece. He sees
not where his Interest lies. He flies from God as if he were afraid of
Salvation; and what does he refuse God for? the Pleasures of the World. (...).
Epi^tetus.
We may write upon them (...) These are like Noah's Dove which brought an
Olive Branch in her mouth, but quickly flew out of the Ark. And to lose God for
these Perishable^, is a Prodigy of Folly worse than that of Lysimachus, who for
a Draught of Water lost his Kingdom. We Read in Scripture of two Cups: Psalm.
16.8. The Lord is the Portion of my Cup. They who refuse this Cup, shall have
another Cup to Drink of. Psalm. 11.6. Upon the wicked he shall rain Snares,
Fire and Brimstone, this shall be the Portion of their Cup.

If God be such an immense Reward, then see how little cause the Aliae
haereditates in morte deseruntur sed ad solidam hujus Possessionem per mortem
immittimur. River.
. Christians would be clothed with Glory, but are loath to be uncloathed: they
pray Thy Kingdom come, and when God is leading them thither, they are afraid to
go: what makes us desirous to stay here? There is more in the World to Wean us
than to tempt us; Is it not a valley of tears, and do we weep to leave it? Are
we not in a Wilderness among fiery Serpents, and are we loath to leave their
company? Is there a better Friend we can go to than God? are there any sweeter
Smiles or softer Embraces than his? (...). Menand
Sure those who know when they dye they go to receive their Reward, should
neither be fond of Life nor fearful of Death: the Pangs of Death to Believers,
are but the Pangs of Travel by which they are born into Glory.

Believe this Reward, Exhortation,
look not upon it as a Platonical Idea or Fancy. Sensualists question this
Reward, because they do not see it: they may as well question the Verity of
their Souls, because being Spirits they Africa and America (though we never
saw them) because Travelers who have been there affirm it; and shall we not
believe the Eternal Recompenses, when (...), God himself affirms it? The whole
Earth hangs upon the Word of Gods Power, and shall not our Faith hang upon the
Word of his Truth? Let us not be Scepticks in matters of such importance: The
Rabbis tell us, the great dispute between Cain and Abel was about the future
Reward: Abel affirmed it, Cain denied it. The disbelief of this Grand Truth, is
the cause of the flagitiousness of the Age. Immorality begins at Infidelity
Heb. 3.12.
; to mistrust a Future Reward is to question the Bible, and to destroy a main
Article of our Creed, Life Everlasting: such Atheists as look upon Gods Promise
but as a forged deed; put God to swear against them that they shall never enter
into his rest Heb. 3.18.
.

If God be such an exceeding great Reward, let us endeavor that Pharaoh to
Moses and Aaron, Sacrifice to your God; not My God: The leaving out one Word in
a Will, may spoil the Will: the leaving out this Word My, is the loss of Heaven
Toll meum and toll Deum.
, Psalm. 67.6. God even our own God shall bless us.

He who can pronounce this Shibboleth, My God, is the happiest man alive.

How shall we know that God is our Reward?

If God has given us the Earnest of this Reward, Earnest is his Spirit Pignus
redditur arrha retinetur. Hierom.
Ephesians. 1.14. Ye were sealed with the Holy Spirit of Promise, which is the
earnest of the Inheritance. Where God gives his Spirit for an Earnest, there he
gives himself for a Portion: Christ gave the Purse to Judas, not his Spirit.



influence along with it Est Vehiculum influentiae.
, it consecrates the Heart, making it a Sacrary or Holy of Holyes: it
Sanctifies the Fancy, causing it to mint Holy Thoughts; it Sanctifies the Will,
strongly by assing it to good: as Musk lying among Linen perfumes it; so the
Spirit of God in the Soul perfumes it with Sanctity.



enlightening of the Spirit, not the anointing; they may have the Spirit movere,
not vivere, move in them, not live in them. But to partake of the Holy Ghost
aright, is, when the Spirit leaves lively impressions upon the Heart, it
softens, sublimates, transforms it Implet Spiritus Sanctus organum suum, and
tanquam fila Chordarum tangit digitus Dei corda Sanctorum. Prosper.
: writing a law of Grace there, Heb. 8.10. By this Earnest we have a Title to
the Reward.

2. If God be our Reward, he has given us an Hand to lay hold on him: this
hand is Faith, Mark. 9.24. Lord, I believe; a Weak Faith justifies Credo Domine
languida fide tamen credo. Cruciger.
: As a weak hand can tie the Knot in Marriage; a weak Faith can lay hold on a
strong Christ; the nature of Faith is assent joined with affiance Acts 8.37.
Acts 16.31.
. Faith does (...), make God ours: other Graces make us like Christ, Faith
makes us One with him; and this Faith is known by it is Virtue. No precious
Stone, says (Cardan) but has some virtue latent in it. Precious Faith has
Virtue in it: it quickens and enobles, it puts worth into our Services Romans
16.26.
; it puts a difference between the Abba Father of a Saint, and the Ave Mary of
a Papist.

3. We may know God is our Reward by our choosing him: Religion is not a matter
of Chance but of Choice Psalm. 119.30.
; have we weighed things in the balance, and upon mature deliberation made an
Election; We will have God upon any Terms? have we sat down and reckoned the
cost; what Religon must cost us, the parting with our Lusts; and what it may
cost us, the parting with our Lives? Have we resolved (through the assistance
of Grace) to own Christ when the Swords and Staves are up? and to sail with him
not only in a Pleasure Boat, but in a Man of War (...), etc. Ignatius ad Tars.
? This choosing God speaks him to be Ours: Hypocrites profess God out of
Worldly design, not Religious choice.

4. God is known to be our Reward by the complacential Delight we take in him,
Psalm. 34.7. How do men please themselves with rich Portions! what delight does
a Bride take in her Jewels! Do we delight in God as our Eternal Portion Hae
sunt Piorum delitiae Deo pacato frui.
? Indeed he is a whole Paradise of delight, all excellencies meet in God as the
Lines in the Center: is ours a Genuine delight? do we not only delight in Gods
blessings, but in God himself? is it a Superior delight? do we delight in God
above other things? David had his Crown Revenues to delight in, but his delight
in God took place of all other delights; Psalm 43.4. God my exceeding Joy, or
as it is in the Original, the Gladness (...)
(or Cream) of my joy: can we delight in God when other delights are gone? Hab.
3.17. Though the Figtree shall not Blossom, yet I will rejoice in the Lord.
When the Flowers in a man's Garden dye, yet he can delight in his Land and
Money; thus a Gracicious Soul when the Creature fades, can rejoice in the Pearl
of price: Paulinus when they told him the Goths had Sacked Nola Domine ubi sunt
omnia mea tuscis.
, and plundered him of all, lifting up his Eyes to Heaven, said, Lord, thou
know where I have laid up my Treasure *. By this delighting in God we may
undoubtedly know he is our Reward.

What shall we do to get God to be our Reward?

Let us see our need of God. We are undone without him. Lift not Laodicean
temper. Revel. 3.17. Thou say I am rich, and have need of nothing. God will
never bestow himself on them that see no want of him.

Let us beg of God to be our Reward: 'Twas Austin's Prayer, Lord give me thy
self Da mihi te Domine. Aug.
. O do not put me off with Common Mercies. Give me not my Portion in this life
Psalm. 17.14.
. Make over thy self by a Deed of Gift to me. Be earnest Suitors, and God
cannot find in his Heart to deny you. Prayer is the Key of Heaven, which being
turned by the hand of Faith opens all Gods Treasures.

Live every day in the Contemplation of this Reward. Be in the Altitudes.
prepared for them that love Him Nihil in hac vita dulcius sentitur, nil ita
mentem ab amore mundi seperat, nil sic animam contra tentationes roborat, nil
hominem ita ad omne bonum opus excitat quam Gratia contemplationis. Bern.
! O that our thoughts could ascend! The higher the Bird flies, the sweeter it
sings. Let us think how Blessed they are, who are possessed of their Heritage.
If one could but look a while through the chinks of Heaven-door, and see the
Beauty and Bliss of Paradise; if he could but lay his Ear to Heaven and hear
the Ravishing Music of those Seraphick Spirits, and the Anthems of Praise
which they Sing, how would his Soul be Exhilerated and Transported with Joy.

O Christians, meditate of this Reward! Slight, transient thoughts do no good:
They are like breath upon Steel which is presently off again: but let your
thoughts dwell upon Glory, till your Hearts are deeply affected: What Lord, is
there such an Incomprehensible Reward to be bestowed upon me? Shall these Eyes
of mine be blessed with Transforming Sights of thee! O the love of God to
Sinners. Stand at this Fire of Meditation till your Hearts begin to be warm.
How would the reflection on this inmense Reward conquer Temptation, and behead
those unruly Lusts that have formerly conspired against us? What, is there a
Reward so sure, so sweet, so speedy, and shall I by sin forfeit this? Shall I
to please my Appetite lose my Crown? O all ye pleasures of Sin be gone, let me
no more be deceived with your sugered Lies, wound me no more with your Silver
Darts. The stolen Waters are sweet, yet the Water of Life is sweeter. No
stronger Antidote to expel Sin, than the Fore-thoughts of the Heavenly
Remunerations. It was when Moses was long out of sight, that Israel made an
Idol to worship. Exodus 32.1. So when the future Reward is long out of our mind,
then we set up some Idol-lust in our Hearts which we begin to worship.

Oil in the Cruse, and their Estates are almost boiled away to nothing, their
Great Reward is yet to come. Tho your Pension be but small, your Portion is
large. If God be yours by Deed of Gift, this may rock your hearts quiet. God
lets the wicked have their Pay beforehand; Luke 6.24. Ye have received your
Consolation. A wicked man may make his Acquittance, and write, Received in full
Payment: But the Saints Reward is in reversion, the Robe and the Ring is yet to
come. May not this tune their Hearts into contentment? Christian, what tho God
denies thee a Kid to make merry Luke 15.31.
; if he will say, Son, all I have is thine, is not this sufficient? Why do
thou complain of the Worlds emptiness, who have Gods Fullness? Is not God Reward
enough? Has a Son any cause to complain that his Father denies him a Flower in
the Garden, when he makes him Heir to his Estate Quid ultra quaerit cui omnia
suus conditor fit. Prosper.
? The Philosopher comforted himself with this, that tho he had no Music or
Vine-Trees, yet he had the Household Gods with him (...).
. So Christian, tho thou have not much of the World, yet thou have God, and he
is an inexhaustible Treasure. It was strange that after God had told Abraham, I
am thy exceeding great Reward, yet that Abraham should say, verse. 2. Lord what
will thou give me, seeing I go Childless? Shall Abraham ask, Lord what will thou give me, when he had given himself? Was Abraham troubled at the want of a
Child, who had a God? was not God better than Ten Sons Quid homini sufficit cui
ipse conditor non sufficit? Aug.
? Who should be content if not he who has God for his Portion, and Heaven for
his Haven?

Let this exceeding Great Reward stir up in us a Spirit of Activity for God.
Our Head should Study for him, our Hands work for him, our Feet run in the way
of his Commandments. Alas! how little is all we can do! Our Work bears no
Proportion with our Reward. Mercedi an tantae par Labor esse potest Verinus.
? The thoughts of this Reward should make us rise off the Bed of Sloth, and Act
with all our might for God Spes proemii solatium fit laboris. Hierom.
. It should add Wings to our Prayers, and Weight to our Alms. A slothful Person
stands in the World for a Cipher, and God writes down no Ciphers in the Book of
Life. Let us abound in the work of the Lord. 1 Cor. 15.58. As Aromatical Trees
sweat out their precious Oils: So should we Sweat out our strength and Spirits
for Christ. Saint Paul knowing what a Splendid Reward was behind, brought all
the Glory he could to God, 1 Cor. 15.10. I labored, (...), more abundantly
than they all. He outwrought all the other Apostles. Saint Paul's Obedience did
not move slow as the Sun on the Dial, but Swift as the Sun in the Firmament
(...). Chrysostom.
. Did Plato and Demosthenes undergo such Herculean Labors and Studies, who had
but the dim Watch-light of Nature to see by, and did but Fancy the pleasures of
the Elizian Fields after this Life? and shall not Christians much more put
forth all their Vigor of Spirit for God, when they are sure to be Crowned, nay
God himself will be their Crown?

If God be so great a Reward, let such as have an Interest in him Acceptior est
Deo grata laetitia quam querula tristitia. Bucholcer.
: Cheerfulness credits Religion; (...) causes (...). The goodness of the
Conscience is seen in the gladness of the Countenance. Let the Birds of
Paradise sing for joy. Shall a Carnal man rejoice whose hopes lean on earthly
Crutches, and shall not he rejoice whose Treasure is laid up in Heaven? Be
Serious, yet Cheerful: A dejected Melancholy temper, as it unfits for Duty
(especially Praising God) so it disparageth Heaven: will others think God is
such a great Reward, when they see Christians hang the wing, and go drooping in
Religion. It Is a sin as well not to rejoice, as not to repent.

But how can I be cheerful, I am reduced to great Straits?

Let God take away what he will from thee, Pharaoh said, Genesis 45.20. Regard not
your Stuff, for the good of all the Land of Egypt is yours. So I say, Regard
not your Stuff, be not too much troubled at the diminution of these earthly
things, for the good of all the Land of Heaven is yours. In the Fields of
Sicily there is a continual Spring, and Flowers all the Year long: an Emblem of
the Jerusalem above, where are Flowers of Joy always growing. There you shall
tread upon Stars, be Fellow-commoners with Angels, and have Communion with the
blessed Trinity. Let the Saints then be glad in the Lord; in God are Treasures
that can never be emptied; and Pleasures that can never be ended.

If God be an exceeding great Reward, let such as have hope in Veni Domine Jesu
ut ad te veniam, veni dulcedo mea, emancipato Animam hanc ut te Marito suo
fruaatur. Roll.
. This is a temper becoming a Christian; content to live, desirous to dye.
Phil. 1.23.25. Does not the Bride desire the day of Espousals In Visione Dei ut
primi very, and amore Dei ut summi boni consistit Corona. Aug.
? Rev. 22.17. Did we but seriously consider our Condition here: We are
compassed with a body of Sin, we cannot pray without wandering, we cannot
believe without doubting, should not this make us desire to have our Pass to be
gone? Let us think how happy those Saints above are, who are solacing
themselves in God: while we live far from Court, they always behold the
smiling face of God; while we drink Wormwood, they swim in Honey; while we are
perplexed between Hope and Fear, they know their Names are enrolled in the Book
of Life; while we are tossed upon the unquiet Waves, they are gotten to the
Haven. Did we but know what a Reward God is, and what the joy of our Lord
means, we should need Patience to be content to stay here any longer.

Let such as have God for their exceeding great Reward be living Organs Gratias
agere possumus refer non possumus. Aug.
. Psalm. 118.28. Thou art my God, and I will praise thee: Themistocles thought
he was well required by the Graecians for his Valor, when they took such
notice of him in the Olympicks, saying, This is Themistocles. God counts it
Requital enough for all his Love, when we are grateful, and present him with
our Thank-Offering: and well may we stand upon Mount Gerizim Blessing and
Praising, if we consider the Greatness of this Reward; that we should be made
Heirs of God; and that this surpassing Reward is not a Debt, but a Legacy; and
that when many are passed by, the Lot of free Grace should fall upon us; let
this make us ascribe Praise unto the Lord. It is called the Garment of Praise,
Isa. 61.3. The Saints never look so comely as in this Garment; Praise is the
Work of Heaven. Such as shall have Angels Reward, should do Angels work. The
word Praise comes from an Hebrew R^dix, that signifies to shoot up (...)
. The Godly should send up their Praises as a Volley of shot toward Heaven:
shall you live with God, and partake of his Fullness in Glory? break forth into
Doxologies and Triumphs, long for that time when you shall join in Consort with
the Angels, those Quiristers of Heaven, in sounding forth Hallelujah's to the
King of Glory. Such as are Monuments of Mercy, should be Patterns of
Thankfulness.

3 Use. Consolation.
Will God himself be his Peoples Reward? this may be as Bezar-stone, to revive
and Comfort them.

1. In Case of losses: they have lost their Livings and Promotions for
Conscience sake, but as long as God lives their Reward is not lost, Heb. 10.34.
I cannot be poor (faith Bernard) as long as God is rich, for his Riches are
mine: Habet omnia qui habet habentem omnia. Whatever we lose for God, we shall
find again in him: We have left all (say the Disciples) and followed thee, Mark
10.28. Alas! what had they left? a few sorry Boats and Tackling! what were
these to their Reward? they parted with movable goods for the unchangable God.
All losses are made up in him: we may be losers for God, we shall not be losers
by him.

2. It is Comfort in Case of Persecution: the Saints Reward will abundantly
compensate all their Sufferings: Agrippa being laid in Chains for Caius, when
he came after to the Empire, released Agrippa out of Prison, and gave him a
Chain of Gold bigger than his Iron Chain: So God will infinitely remunerate
them that suffer for him; for their Waters of Marah, they shall have the Wine
of Paradise: The Saints Sufferings are but (...), for a while, 1 Pet. 5.10.
their Reward is for ever; they are but a while in the Wine Press, ever in the
Banqueting House (...). Chrysostom.
: The Hebrew Word for Glory (...) signifies a Weight; the weight of Glory
should make Affliction light; the enjoying of God eternally, will cause
Christians to forget all their Sorrows. One Beam of the Sun of Righteousness
will dry up their Tears: after Trouble Peace, after Labor Rest. Then God will
be all in all to his People, 1 Cor. 15.28. Light to their Eye, Manna to their
Taste, Music to their Ear, Joy to their Heart: O then let the Saints be
comforted in the midst of their Trials, Romans 8.18. I reckon that the Sufferings
off this present time are not Worthy to be compared with the Glory which shall
be revealed in us.

4 Use.
Terror to the Wicked: Here is a Gorgons head to affright them. They shall have
a Reward, but vastly different from the Godly: the one shall be rewarded (...),
the other (...); all the Plagues in the Bible are their Reward, Prove. 10.29.
Destruction shall be to the Workers of Iniquity: God is their Rewarder, but not
their Reward: Romans 6.23. The Wages of sin is Death. They who did the Devils
work, will tremble to receive their Wages.

Zophar does notably set forth a Wicked man's Reward, Job 20.7. He shall perish
for ever like his own d^^^g: That is, he shall perish with disgrace: he shall
leave a stinking Savor behind: Verse 16. He shall suck the Poison of Asps:
that is, the sin which was Sweet as Honey in his Mouth, shall be bitter as the
Gall of Asps: verse 26. A fire not blown shall consume him; that is, either
ignis a Coelo delapsus Mercer.
, a Fire falling from Heaven shall consume him, as it did Korah; or a fire not
blown, may be meant a Fire casually happening among his Goods and Chattels shall
consume him; or a fire not blown, that is, the fire of Hell, not blown with
bellows, shall torture his Soul; he shall be ever consuming, never consumed Sic
morientur damnati ut semper Vivant. Bernard.
. Ver. 20. This is the Portion of a Wicked man: And how Tremendous is this! for
every Golden sand of Mercy that runs out to a Sinner, God puts a drop of Wrath
into his Vial.

Quest. What may most hopefully be attempted to allay Animosities among
Protestants, that our Divisions may not be our Ruin? SERMON IIII.
COLOSS. II. 2. That their Hearts might be comforted, being knit together in
Love, and unto all riches of the full assurance of Understanding, to the
acknowledgment of the Mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ.
THis Question is propounded to me: What may most hopefully be attempted to
allay Animosities among Protestants, that our Divisions may not be our Ruin?

I must here in the first place tell you how I understand this Question.

1. As to the End, the preventing our ruin. I take the meaning chiefly to be,
not the ruin of our Estates, Trade, Houses, Families; not our ruin, in these
respects, who are Christians, but our ruin as we are Christians, i. e. the
ruin of our Christianity it self, or of the truly Christian Interest among us.

2. As for the Means enquired after, I understand not the Question to intend,
what is to be done or attempted by Laws, and Public Constitutions, as if our
business were to teach our absent Rulers, or prescribe to them what they should
do, to whom we have no present Call or Opportunity to apply our selves.

Nor again can it be thought our business, to discuss the several questions
that are controverted among us, and show, in each, what is the Truth and right,
wherewith every man's Conscience ought to be satisfied, and in which we would
all meet and unite. As if we had the vanity to think of performing, by an Hours
discourse, what the voluminous Writings of some Ages have not performed.

Much less are we to attempt the persuading of any to go against an already
formed Judgment in these Points of difference, for the sake of Union; and to
seek the Peace of the Church, by breaking their peace with God, and their own
Consciences.

But I take the Question only to intend, What serious Christians may and ought
to endeavor, in their Private Capacities, and agreeably with their own
Principles, toward the proposed End.

And so I conceive the words read to you, contain the Materials of a direct,
and full answer to the Question. Which I reckon will appear, by opening the
Case the Apostles words have reference to; that will be found a Case like our
own; and by opening the Words, whereby their suitableness to that Case will be
seen, and consequently to our Case also.

1. The Case which these words have reference to (as indeed the general aspect
of the Epistle, and in great part of the other Apostolical Letters, looks much
the same way) was in short this. That a numerous Sect was already sprung up,
that began (so early) to corrupt the simplicity, and purity of the Christian
Religion, and very much to disturb the peace of the Christian Church. A sort
they were of partly Judaizing, partly Paganizing Christians, (the Disciples as
they are reputed of Simon Magus,) who joined with the name Christian the Rites
and Ceremonies of the Jews, with the impurities (even in Worship) of the
Gentiles, denying the more principal Doctrines, and hating the holy design of
Christianity it self, while thy seemed to have assumed (or to retain) the Name,
as it were on purpose the more effectually to wound and injure the Christian
Cause and Interest. Men of high pretense to knowledge (whence they had the
Title of Gnostics) filched partly from the Jewish Cabbalisme, partly from the
Phythagorean. By which pretense they insinuated the more plausibly with such as
affected the knowledge of more hidden Mysteries. Whereto the Apostle seems to
have reference, where he adds immediatey after the Text, that in Christ were
hid all the Treasures of wisdom and knowledge, verse. 3. And says he, did
purposely add it, lest any man should beguile them with enticing words.
Intimating, there was no need to follow those vain Pretenders, out of an
affectation of sublimer knowledge, and forsake Christ in whom all the Treasures
of Wisdom and Knowledge were hid.

Of the progress and Genius of this Sect, not only some of the Fathers of the
Church give an account Clemens Alexandr. Irenaeus, Epiphanius, etc.
. But even a Plotinus. Ennead. 2. l. 9.
noted Philosopher among the Heathens; who writes professedly against them (tho
not a word against Christians as such) both making it his business to refute
their absurd Doctrines ( that the World was in its nature evil, and not made by
God, but by some evil Angel, etc.) and representing them as men of most immoral
Principles and Practices; worse, both in respect of their notions, and morals,
than Epicurus himself.

It appears this sort of men did, in the Apostles days, not only set
themselves, with great art and industry, to pervert as many Professors of
Christianity as they could, but found means (as they might by their compliances
with the Jews, who were then much spread, and numerously seated in sundry
principal Cities under the Roman Power, and who were every where the bitterest
enemies to Christianity) to raise Persecution against them they could not
pervert, which some passages seem to intimate in the Epistle to the Galatians
(who, as that whole Epistle shows, were much leavened by this Sect, insomuch
that the Apostle is put to travel as in birth again, to have Christ formed in
them, and to reduce them back to sincere Christianity,) viz. that some leaders
of this Sect, so set the Peoples minds even against the Apostle himself, that
he began to be reputed by them as an Enemy, chap 4.16. and was persecuted under
that notion, because he would not comply with them in the matter of
Circumcision (urged as an engagement to the whole Law of Moses,) chap. 5.11. If
I yet preach Circumcision, why do I yet suffer persecution? Then is the offense
of the Cross ceased. And that they were as mischievous as they could be, to
Fellow Christians, on the same account, biting and devouring them that received
not their corrupting Additions to Christianity, as the circumstances of the
Text show, verse. 15.

How like a Case this is to ours, with our Popish Enemies, I need not tell you.
And now in this Case; when the Faith of many was overthrown, so much hurt was
already done, and the danger of greater was so manifest, partly by the most
insinuating methods of Seduction, partly by the terror of Persecution, the
great care was to secure the uncorrupted residue, and preserve unextinct the
true Christian Interest.

The urgency of this Case puts the solicitous, concerned spirit of this great
Apostle, into an inexpressible Agony, as his words do intimate. I would you
knew what conflict I have, and not for these Colossians only, but for them of
Laodicea (which was not very remote from Colosse) and for as many as have not
seen my face in the flesh: For it was a common Case; and upon him lay the care
of all the Churches.

So that hence his musing, meditative Mind, could not but be revolving many
thoughts, and casting about for Expedients, how the threatening danger might be
obviated and averted. And these in the Text, which he fastens upon, and wherein
his thoughts center, how apt and proper they were to that Case (and
consequently to ours which so little differs) will be seen

2. By our opening and viewing the Import of the Text it felf: Wherein he

1. Proposes to himself the End which he apprehended was most desirable, and
above all things to be coveted for them. That their hearts might be comforted.]
A word of much larger signification than in vulgar acceptance it is understood
to be. (...) signifies (with profane as well as the sacred Writers) not only to
administer Consolation to a grieved Mind, but to exhort, quicken, excite, and
animate, to plead and strive with dull and stupid, wavering and unresolved
minds. It was thought indeed comprehensive enough to express all the
Operations of the divine Spirit upon the Souls of men, when not only the
Christian Church, but the World, yet to be Christianiz'd, was to be the Subject
of them, as we see Joh. 16.8. In respect whereof that holy Spirit has its name
of Office, the Paraclet, from this word. And it being the passive that is here
used, it signifies not only the endeavors themselves, which are used to the
purpose here intended, but the effect of them wherein they all terminate, a
lively, vigorous, confirmed State and habit of Soul. And that not indefinite,
but determined to one thing, the Christian Faith and Profession, which the
Apostles drift, and scope plainly shows. It Is not to be thought he so
earnestly coveted and strove that they might be jocund, cheerful, abounding
with joy and courage, in any course, right or wrong. But that they might be
encouraged, established, confirmed in their Christianity. And if the word he
here uses were large enough to signify (as was noted above) all that was
necessary to make men Christians, it may as well all that is necessary to
continue them such.

In short, the end which the Apostle aims at, the (...) intended to these
Christians, was their Establishment and confirmed State in their Christianity,
as the Effect of all Apostolical, or Ministerial Exhortations, Persuasions,
Encouragments, or any whatsoever endeavors; made efficacious to that purpose
by the powerful. Influence and Operation of the holy Ghost.

And that it was no lower thing than this, we have sufficient Evidence by
comparing the close of the foregoing chapter with the beginning of this. Where
we find chap. 1.28. the avowed design of his preaching, warning and teaching in
all wisdom, was that he might present every man perfect in Christ Jesus. That
whereas there were various Arts and Endeavors used, to adulterate the
Christian Religion, and pervert men from the simplicity of it, he might lose
none, but to his very uttermost keep all in a possibility of being presented
perfect in Christ Jesus at last. i. e. That they might be all entire, complete,
and persevering Christians to the end. And for this he adds, verse. 29. he did
labor, striving according to his working, which wrought in him mightly. All
his labor, and the strivings of his Soul, acted by divine Power, and by a
Spirit greater than his own, did aim at this End. And now hereupon he intimates
how fervid these his strivings were. chap. 2.1. I would you did but know (what
it is not for me to say) (...), what an Agony I endure! how great this my
conflict is for you, and for them at Laodicea, and for as many as have not seen
my face in the flesh! And for what? That their Hearts might be comforted (as we
read) meaning manifestly the same thing he had expressed before; that
notwithstaning all endeavors of others to the contrary, they might be complete
and confirmed Christians to the last.

2. We have next to consider in the Text the means, or what expedients the
Apostle conceives would be most effectually conducing to this blessed purpose.
They are two, Mutual Love to one another; And A clear, certain, efficacious
Faith of the Gospel:


The former is shortly and plainly expressed. The other by a copious and most
Emphatical Periphrasis or Circumlocution. He most earnestly covets to have them
knit together by both ((...)) compacted (as the word imports) in the one (...),
and unto or into the other, as that Particle signifies [(...)] (...), etc.

1. Mutual Love to one another, q. d. The thing were done, or much were done
toward it, if they were knit together in Love, compacted; made all of a Piece,
if by Love they did firmly cohere, and cleave to one another. For then it would
be One and all, and it is scarce ever supposeable they should all agree to quit
their Religion at once. But if that were to be supposed, he adds another thing
that would put all out of doubt.

2. A clear, certain, efficacious Faith of the Gospel. For the several
expressions that follow are but a descripton of such a Faith. Where we are to
note What he would have them apprehend; And, The apprehensive Principle.


1. What he would have them apprehend; viz. The Sum and Substance of the
Christian Doctrine, which he calls a Mystery, both, because it was so in it
self, and it is often spoken of, under that name by our Lord himself, Mat.
13.11. and familarly by this Apostle, Romans 16.25. Epes. 3.3, 9. Col. 1.26. and
elsewhere. And because of the high pretense of the Gnostics to the knowledge
of Mysteries, which sometimes he slights. Especially being unaccompanied with
Love, as with them it most eminently was. Tho I understand all Mysteries, and
all knowledge, and have no Charity, I am nothing. 1 Cor. 13.2. Knowledge
puffs up, love edifies. chap. 8.1. Sometimes, as here, he makes the sincere
Doctrine of the Gospel to outvy theirs herein, intimating that such as made
Profession of it could have no Temptation to go over to them, for the knowledge
of Mysteries (unless a Mystery of Iniquity were more pleasing to them) whose
very Religion was that Great Mystery of Godliness. God was manifested in the
flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentles,
believed on in the World, received up into glory. 1 Timothy 3.16.

Now this Mystery he, first, more generally characterizes, by calling it the
Mystery of God, a divine Mystery, not made one, by merely humane fiction; and
then he very distinctly specifies it in the following words, and of the Father
and of Christ. Where the former [and] needs not be thought copulative, but
exegetical, and might be read even, or to wit, or it may be read, both, as it is
usual with the Greeks as well as Latins when the copulative is to be repeated,
so to read the former. As if it were said, by the Mystery of God I mean, not of
God alone, and abstractly considered; as if it were enough to you to be mere
Deists; and that the whole superadded Revelation concerning the Mdiatour, might
be looked upon with indifferency or neglect (as by the Gnostics it was known
then to be, and afterward by some of their great leaders, in the substance of
it, with downright hatred and opposition) but that which I so earnestly covet
for you, and wherein I would have you unite, and be all one, is the
acknowledgement of the whole Mystery of God; i. e. both of the Father, and of
Christ.

2. The Apprehensive Principle; which we may, by a general name, call Faith,
and accommodately enough to the name here given us of its object, a Mystery
which is elsewhere called the Mystery of Faith, 1 Timothy 3.9. or a Mystery to be
believed. Faith being the known Principle of receiving the Gospel revelation.
But he here expresses it by words that signify knowledge (...) and (...),
thereby intimating that the Faith of Christians is not to be a blind and
unintelligent Principle, but that though there were contained in the Gospel,
Mysteries never to be understood, if God had not afforded a special Revelation
of them on purpose; yet being revealed, we ought to have a clear and distinct,
as well as lively and practical perception of them. By these two words, and the
other expressions he joins in with the former, he seems to intimate two sorts
of properties which belong to that Faith of the Gospel which he wishes to them.

1. The rectitude, clearness and certainty of notion.

2. The efficacy, impressiveness, and immediate aptitude to have influence upon
practice which he would have it carry with it. The latter properties supposing
and depending on the former, he there highly exaggerates the matter, and heaps
together expressions that might with most lively emphasis set forth the kind of
that knowledge which he conceives would be of so great use to them. He wishes
them a (...), a clear, perspicacious Knowledge, and an Assurance, even to a
plerophory, a fullness of assurance in their knowledge of the truth of the
Gospel. Yea, he wishes them the Riches ((...)) yea and all Riches ((...)) of
that full assurance, or Plerophory of understanding, and knowledge of that
Truth; apprehending that this would certainly fix them in their Faith and
Profession, so as they would never recede from it. As when in Christ's own days
many went back and walked no more with him. Joh. 6.66. That which retained
others, so that when Christ asks, Will ye also go away? verse. 67. they
presently answer, Lord to whom shall we go? could entertain no such thought,
was that, besides what they believed of him was of greatest importance to them,
thou have the words of eternal Life, verse. 68. So their belief was with that
assurance as to exclude all suspicion or doubt in the Case, and we believe and
are sure that thou art that Christ, the Son of the living God: verse. 69. And
therefore neither can want Power to confer eternal Life, as all thy words do
import thy design and promise to do, nor truth to make good thy own plain
words. And then he also knew that such a (...) or knowledge would produce, what
he further wishes them an (...), an acknowledgement, an inward, vital owning, a
cordial embrace, a lively perception of the same blessed Truths, which must
needs further most abundantly contribute, to this their so much desired joint
and unanimous stability.

And now these are the two expedients by which he reckons they would be so
closely compacted together as that no subtilty or violence could endanger them,
mutual love, and a clear, certain, operative Faith of the Gospel; if, by the
one they did cohere with each other; and by the other, adhere to God in Christ;
if the one might have with them the place, power and bindingness of a cement,
the other of a continual inclination, yieldingness, and compliance to the
magnetism of the center, they would never so fall asunder; as to give any
enemies opportunity to be the succesful authors, or the gratified Spectators of
their ruin.

Thus therefore I would sum up the sense of this Scripture, and the answer to
the question proposed.

That the maintaining of sincere Love among Christians, and the improving of
their Faith to greater measures of clearness, certainty, and efficacy in
reference to the substantials of Christianity, are to be endeavored as the
best means to unite, establish and preserve them, against such as design the
ruin of the truly Christian Interest. The Case was at that time urging and
important. A great and numerous party was formed of such as did nauseate the
simplicity of the Christian Religion and hate the true design of it. All the
care was what course was most proper and suitable to preserve the rest. And you
see what was then thought most proper.

Counsel was not taken to this effect (and therefore Christians in a private
capacity should not covet to have it so) Let us bind them by certain devised
preter-Evangelical Canons to things never thought fit to be enjoined by Christ
himself, severely urge the strict and uniform observance of them, make the
terms of Christian Communion straiter than he ever made them, add new rituals
of our own to his Institutions, and cut off from us all that (never so
conscientiously) scruple them. No, this was the practice of their common
enemies, and it was to narrow and weaken the too much already diminish't
Christian Interest. The Order mentioned verse. 5. might be comely enough,
without things that were both unnecessary, and offensive.

Nor was it consulted and resolved to agitate the Controversy about this power,
and practice, in perpetual, endless disputations, and stigmatize them that
should not be enlightened and satisfied in these matters, as schismatical and
wilful; tho they never so sincerely adhered to the Doctrine and observed the
Laws of Christ. i. e. 'Twas neither thought fit to urge the unsatisfied upon
doubtful things against their Consciences, nor to take order that continual
endeavors should be used from age to age to satisfy them, or that the Church
should be always vexed with a vain controversy about needless things; that, if
they were never so lawful, might as well be let alone, without detriment to the
Christian Cause, and perhaps to its greater advantage.

Yea the attempt of imposing any thing upon the Disciples but what was
necessary, is judged a tempting of God, Acts. 15.10. a bringing the matter to a
trial of skill with him, whether he could keep the Church quiet, when they
took so direct a course to distemper and trouble it.

But it was thought necessary (and sufficient) that all did unite, and were
knit together in the mutual love of one another, and in a joint adherence to
the great mysteries of Faith, and Salvation.

In the same case, when there were so many Antichrists abroad, and ('it is
likely) Ebion with his partakers made it their business to pervert the
Christian doctrine, the same course is taken by the blessed Apostle St. John
only to endeavor the strengthening of these two vital principles Faith in
Christ, and Love to Fellow Christians as may be seen at large in his Epistles.
These he presses, as the great commandments, upon the observation whereof he
seems to account, the safety and peace of the sincere did entirely depend. This
is his commandment, that we should believe on the name of his son Jesus Christ,
and love one another as he gave us Commandment. 1 Epistle, 3.23. He puts upon
Christians no other distinguishing test, but whosoever believes that Jesus is
the Christ, is born of God: And every one that loves him that begat, loves
him also that is begotten of him. chap. 5.1. Is only solicitous that they did
practice the Commandment they had from the beginning, i. e. that they loved one
another, 2 Epist. 5. and that they did abide in the Doctrine of Christ, verse. 9.

The prudence and piety of those unerring Guides of the Church, (themselves
under the certain guidance of the Spirit of truth) directed them to bring the
things wherein they would have Christians unite, within as narrow a compass as
was possible, neither multiplying articles of Faith, nor rites of Worship.
These two principles (as they were thought to answer the Apostles) would fully
answer our design, and present enquiry. And we may adventure to say of them
that they are both sufficient, and necessary, the apt and the only means to
heal and save us; such as would effect our cure, and without which nothing will.

Nor shall I give other answer to the proposed question, than what may be
deduced from these two, considered according to what they are in themselves,
and what they naturally lead and tend unto.

I shall consider them in the order wherein the Apostle here mentions them, who
you see reserves the more important of them to the latter place.

1. The sincere love of Christians to one another, would be an happy means of
preserving the truly Christian Interest among us. That this may be understood,
we must rightly apprehend what kind of love it is that is here meant. It is
specified by what we find in conjunction with it, The understanding, and
acknowledgment of the mystery of Christianity. Therefore it must be the love of
Christians to one another as such. Whence we collect, lest we too much extend
the object of it on the one hand, or contract it on the other,

1. That it is not the love only which we owe to one another as men, or humane
Creatures merely, that is intended here. That were too much to enlarge it, as
to our present consideration of it. For under that common notion, we should be
as much obliged to love the enemies we are to unite against, as the friends of
Religion we are to unite with, since all partake equally in humane nature. It
must be a more special love that shall have the desired influence in the
present case. We cannot be peculiarly endeared and united to some more than to
others, upon a reason that is common to them with others. We are to love them
that are born of God, and are his children, otherwise than the children of men,
or such of whom it may be said they are of their father the Devil; them that
appear to have been partakers of a divine nature at another rate, than them who
have received a mere humane, or also the diabolical nature. 1 John 5.1.

Yet this peculiar love is not to be exclusive of the other which is common,
but must suppose it, and be superadded to it, As the reason of it is
superadded. For Christianity supposes humanity, and divine grace, humane nature.

2. Nor is it a love to Christians of this or that Party, or denomination only.
That were as much unduly to straiten and confine it. The love that is owing to
Christians as such, as it belongs to them only, so it belongs to all them who
in profession and practice do own sincere, and incorrupt Christianity. To limit
our Christian love to a Party of Christians truly so called is so far from
serving the purpose now to be aimed at, that it resists and defeats it; and
instead of a preservative union, infers most destructive divisions. It scatters
what it should collect and gather. It Is to love factiously; and with an unjust
love, that refuses to give indifferently to every one his due. (For is there no
love due to a disciple of Christ in the name of a disciple?) It is founded in
falsehood, and a lie; denies them to be of the Christian community who really
are so. It presumes to remove the ancient landmarks, not civil but sacred, and
draws on not the peoples curse only, but that of God himself. It Is true (and
who doubts it?) that I may and ought upon special reasons to love some more
than others (as relation, acquaintance, obligation by favors received from
them, more eminent degrees of true worth, and real goodness) but that signifies
nothing to the withholding of that love which is due to a Christian as such, as
that also ought not to prejudice the love I owe to a man, as he is a man.

Nor am I so promiscuously to distribute this holy love, as to place it at
random, upon every one that thinks it convenient for him to call himself a
Christian, tho I ought to love the very profession, while I know not who
sincerely make it, and do plainly see that Jews and Pagans were never worse
enemies to Christ and his Religion, than a great part of the Christian world.
But let my apprehensions be once set right concerning the true essentials of
Christianity, (whether consisting in doctrinal or vital principles,) then will
my love be duly carried to all in whom they are found under one common notion,
which I come actually to apply to this or that person as particular occasions
do occur. And so shall always be in a preparation of mind actually to unite in
Christian love with every such person, whenever such occasions do invite me
to it.

And do we now need to be told what such an impartial truly Christian love,
would do to our common preservation, and to prevent the ruin of the Christian
Interest?

1. How greatly would it contribute to the vigor of the Christian life? for so
we should all equally hold the head, from which all the body by joints and
bands having nourishment ministered, and knit together, increases with the
increase of God. As afterward in this Chapter, verse 19. Thus (as it is in
that other parallel text of Scripture) Speaking the truth in love, we shall
grow up into him in all things, which is the head, even Christ: from whom the
whole body fitly joined together, and compacted by that which every joint
supplieth, according to the effectual working in the measure of every part,
makes increase of the body, unto the edifying of it self in love. Ephesians. 4.15,
16. Obstructions that hinder the free circulation of blood and spirits, do not
more certainly infer languishings in the natural body, than the want of such a
diffusive love shuts up and shrivels the destitute parts, and hinders the
diffusion of a nutritive vital influence, in the body of Christ.

2. It would inspire Christians generally with (...) sacred courage and
Fortitude, when they should know, and even feel themselves knit together in
love. How does the revolt of any considerable part of an army, discourage the
rest! or if they be not entire, and of a piece! Mutual love animates them, as
nothing more, when they are prepared to live and die together, and love has
before joined whom now their common danger also joins. They otherwise signify
but as so many single persons, each one but caring and contriving how to shift
for himself. Love makes them significant to one another. So as that every one
understands himself to be the common care of all the rest. It makes Christians
the more resolute in their adherence to Truth and goodness, when (from their
not-doubted love) they are sure of the help, the counsels and prayers of the
Christian community, and apprehend by their declining they shall grieve those
whom they love, and who they know love them. If any imagine themselves intended
to be given up as Sacrifices to the rage of the common Enemy, their hearts are
the apter to sink, they are most exposed to temptations to prevaricate, and the
rest will be apt to expect the like usage from them, if themselves be reduced
to the like exigency, and be liable to the same temptations.

3. It would certainly in our present case, extinguish or abate the (so
contrary) unhallowed fire of our anger and wrath toward one another, as the
Celestial beams do the baser culinary fire, which burns more fervently when the
Sun has less power. Then would debates (if there must be any) be managed
without intemperate heat. We should be remote from being angry that we cannot
convey our own Sentiments into another mind; which, when we are, our business
is the more remote; we make our selves less capable of reasoning aptly to
convince, and (because anger begets anger, as love does love) render the other
less susceptible of Conviction. Why are we yet to learn that the wrath of man
works not the righteousness of God? What is gained by it? So little does
angry contention about small matters avail, that even they that happen to have
the better cause lose by it, and their ^dvantage cannot recompense the damage
and hurt that ensues to the Church and to themselves. Our Famous Davenant Sent.
ad Dur.
speaking of the noted controversy between Stephen Bishop of Rone, who, he
says, as much as in him lay, did with a Schismatical Spirit tear the Church,
and Cyprian who with great lenity and Christian charity professes that he would
not break the Lord's peace for diversity of opinion, nor remove any from the
right of communion, concludes that erring Cyprian deserved better of the Church
of Christ than Orthodox Stephen. He thought him the Schismatic, whom he
thought in the right, and that his Orthodoxy (as it was accompanied) was more
mischievous to the Church than the others Error. Nor can a man do that hurt to
others without suffering it more principally. The distemper of his own Spirit,
what can recompense! and how apt is it to grow in him, and while it grows in
himself to propagate it self among others! Whereupon, if the want of love
hinders the nourishment of the body, much more do the things, which, when it is
wanting, are wont to fill up its place. For as naturally as love begets love,
so do wrath, envy, malice, calumny, beget one another, and spread a poison and
virulency through the body, which necessarily wastes and tends to destroy it.
How soon did the Christian Church cease to be it self! and the early vigor of
primitive Christianity degenerate into insipid, spiritless formality, when once
it became contentious. It broke into parties, Sects multiplied, animosities
grew high, and the grieved spirit of love retired from it! which is grieved by
nothing more than by bitterness, wrath, anger, etc. as the connection of these
two verses intimates, Ephesians. 4.30, 31. Grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby
ye are sealed unto the day of redemption. Let all bitterness, and wrath, and
anger, and clamor, and evil speaking, be put away from you, with all Malice.
And to the same purpose is that, 1 Pet. 2.1, 2. Wherefore laying aside all
malice, and all guile and hypocrisies, and envies, and all evil speaking, as
newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby.
By this means Religion, once dispirited, loses its majesty, and awfulness, and
even tempts and invites the assaults and insultation of Enemies

4. It would oblige us to all acts of mutual kindness and friendship. If such a
love did govern in us, we should be always ready to serve one another in love,
to bear each others burdens, to afford our mutual Counsel and help to one
another, even in our private affairs if called thereto; especially in that
which is our common concern, the preserving and promoting the Interest of
Religion, and to our uttermost strengthen each others hands herein. It would
engage us to a free, amicable conversation with one another, upon this account;
would not let us do so absurd a thing as to confine our Friendship to those of
our own Party, which we might as reasonably, to men of our own stature, or to
those whose voice, and hair, and look and mien, were likest our own. It would
make us not be ashamed to be seen in each others Company, or be shy of owning
one another. We should not be to one another as Jews and Samaritans that had
no dealing with one another, or as the Poet notes they were to other Nations;
Non monstrare vias eadem nisi sacra colenti, not so much as to show the way to
one not of their Religion. There would be no partition wall thorough which love
would not easily open a way of friendly commerce, by which we should insensibly
slide, more and more, into one another hearts. Whence also

5. Prejudices would cease, and jealousies concerning each other. A mutual
confidence would be begotten. We should no more suspect one another of ill
designs upon each other, than lest our right hand should wait an opportunity of
cutting off the left. We should believe one another in our mutual professions,
of whatsoever sort, both of kindness to one another, and that we really doubt
and scruple the things which we say we do.

6. This would hence make us earnestly covet an entire Union in all the things
wherein we differ and contribute greatly to it. We are too prone many times to
dislike things, for the disliked Persons sake who practice them. And a
prevaling disaffection makes us unapt to understand one another; precludes our
entrance into one another mind and sense: which, if love did once open, and
inclined us more to consider the matters of difference themselves, than to
imagine some reserved meaning and design of the persons that differ from us:
it is likely we might find our selves much nearer to one another than we did
apprehend we were, and that it were a much easier step for the one side to go
quite over to the other. But if that cannot be,

7. It would make us much more apt to yield to one another, and abate all that
ever we can, in order to as full an accommodation as is any way possible, that
if we cannot agree upon either extreme, we might at least meet in the middle.
It would cause an emulation who should be larger in their grants to this
purpose. As it was professed by Luther when so much was done at Marpurg toward
an agreement between him and the Helvetians, that he would not allow that
praise to the other Party that they should be more desirous of peace and
concord than he. Of which amicable conference, and of that afterward at
Wittenburg, and several other negotiations to that purpose, account is given by
diverse. Hospiniun Histor. Sacramentarum Thuanus etc.
And insisted on by some of our own great Divines as precedential to the
concord they endeavored between the Saxon and the Helvetian Churches of later
time, as Bishop Moreton, Bishop Hall, Bishop Davenant in their several
sentences or judgments written to Mr. Dury upon that subject.

And indeed when I have read the Pacific writings of those eminent worthies,
for the composing of those differences abroad, I could not but wonder that the
same peaceable Spirit did not endeavor with more effect the composing of our
own much lesser differences at home. But the things of our peace were (as they
still are) hid from our eyes, with the more visibly just severity, by how much
they have been nearer us, and more obvious to the easy view of any but an
averse eye.

It is not for us to prescribe (as was said) to persons that are now in so
eminent stations as these were at that time. But may we not hope to find with
such (and where should we rather expect to find it?) that compassion and
mercifulness in imitation of the blessed Jesus, their Lord and ours, as to
consider and study the necessities of Souls in these respects, and at least,
willingly to connive at, and very heartily approve some indulgences and
abatements in the administrations of the inferior Clergy, as They may not
think fit themselves positively to order and enjoin? Otherwise I believe it
could not but give some trouble to a conscientious conforming Minister, if a
sober pious person, sound in the Faith, and of a regular life should tell him
he is willing to use his Ministry, in some of the Ordinances of Christ, if
only he would abate or despense with some annexed Ceremony, which in Conscience
he dare not use or admit of. I believe it would trouble such a Minister to deal
with a person of this Character as a Pagan because of his scruple, and put him
upon considering whether he ought not rather to dipense with man's rule, than
with Gods. I know what the same Bishop Davenant has expressly said, that He
that believes the things contained in the Apostles Creed, Ibid.
and endeavors to live a life agreeable to the precepts of Christ, ought not
to be expunged from the Roll of Christians, nor be driven from Communion with
the other Members of any Church whatsoever.

However truly Christian love, would do herein, all that it can, Supplying the
rest by grief that it can do no more.

8. It would certainly make us abstain from mutual Censures of one another as
insincere for our remaining differences. Charity that thinks no evil, would
make us not need the reproof Romans 14.4. Who art thou that judge another
servant? The common aptness hereunto among us shows how little that divine
Principle rules in our hearts, that in defiance of our rule, and the authority
of the great God and our blessed Redeemer to whom all Judgment is committed,
and who has so expressly forbidden us to judge lest we be judged, Mat. 7.1. we
give our selves so vast a liberty! and set no other bounds to our usurped
license of judging, than Nature has set to our power of thinking, i. e. think
all the mischievous thoughts of them that differ from us that we know how to
devise or invent, as if we would say our thoughts (and then by an easy
advance, our tongues) are our own, who is Lord over us? I animadvert not on
this as the fault of one Party, but wheresoever it lies, as God knows how
diffused a poison this is! Among them that are satisfied with the public
constitutions toward them that dissent from them, and with these back again
toward them, and with the several parties of both these toward one another.
This uniting, knitting love would make us refrain, not merely from the
restraint of Gods Laws in this case, but from a benign disposition, as that
which the temper of our Spirits would abhor from. So that such as are well
content with the public forms and rites of worship, would have no inclination
to judge them that apprehend not things with their understandings, nor relish
with their taste, as persons that therefore have cut themselves off from Christ,
and the body of Christ. They might learn better from the Cassandrian
moderation, and from the avowed sentiments of that man Cassander de officio pii
ac publicae Tranquillitatis vere amantis viri.
(whose temper is better to be liked than his terms of union) who speaking of
such as being formerly rejected (meaning the Protestants) for finding fault
with abuses in the Church, had by the urgency of their Conscience altered
somewhat in the way of their teaching, and the form of their service, and are
therefore said to have fallen off from the Church, and are numbered among
Heretics and Schismatics. It is, says he, to he enquired how rightly and
justly this is determined of them. For there is to be considered, as to the
Church, the head, and the body. From the head there is no departure but by
Doctrine disagreeable to Christ the Head. From the body there is no departure
by diversity of rites and opinions, but only by the defect of Charity. So that
this learned Romanist neither thinks them Heretics that hold the head, nor
Schismatics for such differences as ours are, from the rest of the body, if
love and charity toward them remain. And again, where this love remains, and
bears rule, it can as little be that they who are unsatisfi'd with the way of
worship that more generally obtains, should censure them that are satisfied as
insincere, merely because of this difference. It cannot permit that we should
think all the black thoughts we can invent of them, as if because they have not
our consciences they had none, or because they see not with our eyes they were
therefore both utterly, and wilfully blind. To be here more particular: The
most you know are for the public way of Worship, and of these, some are for it
as tolerable only, others as the best way, and think all other ways of
worshipping God in Assemblies (being forbidden as they think by a just Law)
sinful. Others, dissenting, are of several sorts. Some think the Conformity
required of Ministers sinful, because of previous terms required of them which
they judge to be so, but not that which is required of the people. Of which
sort, some that think it not simply unlawful, find it however less edifying to
them, and tho they can therefore partake in it at some times, think themselves
more ordinarily bound to attend such other means as they find more conducing to
their spiritual profit and advantage, judging they have an undoubted right from
Christ, anciently allowed from age to age in the best times of the Christian
Church, and never justly taken from them, of choosing the Pastors to whose
ordinary care and conduct they shall commit their Souls. Others judge the
public way simply unlawful, and therefore judge themselves bound to decline it
wholly; and are the more averse to any participation in it, as apprehending it
to have no suitableness or aptitude to profit their Souls, wherein they are the
more confirmed that they believe not God will ever bless the means which he
has not appointed. Now how apt all these are unto very severe Censures of one
another, he knows not the age that is ignorant. One sort censuring the other
as humorsome, factious, schismatical, the others them back again as formal,
popishly affected, destitute of any savor of spiritual things, having nothing
of God in them, or of the life and power of Godliness.

Now is this suitable to the love that should rule among Christians? or to the
reverence we ought to have for that authority that forbids such judging? It
ought to be considered both that all have not the same understanding, nor the
same gust and relish of things.

1. Not the same understanding. And therefore where Conscience has the same
rule, it cannot have, with every one the same actual latitude, that rule being
so very diversely understood, which different estimate of Consciences, the
Apostle has express reference to in that large and most healing discourse of
his Romans 14. One (says he verse. 2.) believes that he may eat all things,
another, who is weak, eats herbs. Nor does he, in reference to such doubted
things, determine what all should do or not do, by particular rules, concerning
every such case that was then depending, which it seems he reckoned was not
necessary, or that might afterward fall out, which was little to be expected.
But he lays down one general rule, against judging one another, which he
presses with that authority, and such awful reasons as might make a Christian
heart tremble to be guilty of it.

And in reference to the mentioned differences among our selves (as well as
others no nearer to the substantials and vitals of our Religion) there is
somewhat else to be done than to conclude against a man's sincerity because of
such differing sentiments and practices, and which certainly would be done, if
truly Christian love, or even justice it self did take place as they ought, i.
e. It would be considered what these several differing Parties have to say for
themselves, what reasons they may allege, and whether, tho they be not
sufficient to justify their several opinions and practices (as all cannot be
in the right) they be not such as by which a conscientious man, a sincere
fearer of God may be swayed, so as to take the way which he is found in by the
ducture of an upright (tho misguided) conscience, and not as being under the
government of depraved vicious inclination.

As those that can and do yield the conformity that is required of Ministers,
tho perhaps they wish some things altered, why may it not be supposed they
sincerely think (tho it should be mistakingly) that the things more liable to
exception are capable of a sense wherein they are not unlawful: And not being
so, they think themselves bound to take the opportunity which they this way
obtain of doing good to the souls of men? Others also apprehending it lawful,
how possible is it to them from a certain reverence they have for Antiquity,
and for our own first Reformers to think it best and fittest to be continued!
Nor is it unsupposeable that many of the Layity may upon the same grounds have
the same apprehensions.

Again diverse in the Ministry judging the terms unlawful upon which only, they
can have liberty for the public exercise of it: Is it not possible they may,
with a sincere conscience, think themselves not therefore obliged wholly to
renounce their calling and office, to which they were duly set apart, and had
by their own solemn vow given up themselves; but to do so much of the work of
it as they can have opportunity for?

And whereas of the People, some may think the public forms and ways of
worship not simply unlawful, but find them less edifying to them than other
means which the Providence of God affords them; and therefore do more
ordinarily attend those, tho sometimes also the other. Why should it be thought
on the one hand or the other that it is so little possible they should be
guided by reasonable and conscientious considerations herein, that nothing but
corrupt inclination must be understood to govern them? Is it not supposeable
that accounting the public worship substantially agreeable to divine
institution, tho in some accidentals too disagreeable, they may think there is
more to incline them at some times, to attend it, than totally to disown it?
For what worship is there on earth that is in all things incorrupt? And they
may apprehend it fit to testify their union with the sincere Christians, that
may be statedly under that form, and especially in a time when the contest is
so high in the world, between them that profess the substance of Reformed
Christianity, and them that have so much deformed it; and may conceive it
becoming them (at any time) to express their own unconfinedness to a Party, and
to use that liberty which (they think) should not be jug'd by another man's
Conscience, which yet they would have regard to, where there are not greater
reasons to preponderate. They are indeed under a disadvantage (with them that
are apt to use a greater liberty in their Censures than they do in their
practice in these matters) when it falls out that their partial compliance is
the means of their security from penalties. And their disadvantage is greater,
whose judgment to this purpose has not been formerly declared and made known.
But they for shame ought to be silent whose total compliance gains them not
only immunity, but great emoluments. And that perhaps, yielded not according to
a former, but (at that time when the opportunity occurred) a new and altered
judgment. They may however know themselves to be moved by greater ends than
secular interest. And so may these we now speak of, and yet may think the
preservation of their earthly portion wherewith they are to glorify God in
this world not too little an end to be designed and endeavored by lawful
means. It were a very uncouth and sinful thing to do a spiritual action for a
carnal end. But if the thing sincerely and supreamly designed, be the glory of
God, that is the most spiritual end. If it be not, that ought to be changed
which is wrong, not that which is right. The unlawful end, not the lawful
action, if it be lawful. If it be not, their good end will not justify their
action, but it will their sincerity, which is all that this discourse intends.

And then for such as decline the public Worship totally, as judging it simply
unlawful: Is it not possible they may be led to that Practice by somewhat else
than humor and factious inclination? Have they not that to say, which may at
least seem solid and strong to a conscientious man? How jealous God did
heretofore show himself in all the affairs of his Worship! How particular in
the appointment even of the smallest things he would have appertain to it! How
unsuitable multiplied Ceremonies are to the mature State of the Church! And how
sensibly burdensome, they were to the Disciples of the first Age as a yoke not
to be born. And that therefore God himself when the season of maturity, and the
fulness of time came, thought fit to abrogate those of his own former
appointment, with no (probable) design to allow men the liberty of substituting
others in their room. Why is it not to be thought that the fear of the great
God withholds them from doing what they judge would offend him? And that, if
they err, it is for fear of erring? Why can nothing be thought on whereto to
impute their practice, but peevish humor?

Especially if that be considered (which is common to these two last mentioned
sorts of men) that they sensibly find other means more edifying to them, or
expect them only to be so, if the other be thought unlawful. If they be thought
merely lawful, and such as may therefore be used upon weighty reasons at some
times, but are found less edifying, who can doubt but I ought to use for my
Soul (at least in an ordinary course) the aptest means that I can ordinarily
have for the promoting its edification and salvation? Do we not reckon our
selves to owe so much even to our bodies? And what is another man's opinion to
signify against my sense and constant experience? Is there not such a thing as
a mental idiosynerasie (or peculiarity of temper) as well as a bodily? and
whereto what is most agreeable, any man that is not destitute of ordinary
understanding is the fittest judge himself. As every one, that is not a mere
fool, is so much a Physician as to know what diet suits him best.

And if it be said against the former of these two sorts, Are they not at all
times obliged to use the means which are most edifying? They may say at all
times when they have nothing to outweigh their own present edification. But it
is not imposs^ible that a conscientious judgment may esteem all the
forementioned considerations concurring, to be of more weight than the greater
advantage hoped to be gained in that one hour. Nor need any man be ashamed
professedly to avow that which may seem the least of them, the saving of
himself from temporal ruin. For he is to be accountable to God for what
portion he has entrusted him with of the good things of this life, and is not
to throw it away without sufficient cause. Who sees not that more is allowed
and ordinarily done without scruple or censure upon the like account? as to
omit the hearing of a Sermon, if at that time ones house be on fire, yea or if
it be to save my Neighbors, or the plucking of an Ox or Sheep out of a ditch
on the Lords day, when I might have been employed at that time in the solemn
worship of God to my Spiritual advantage. A mere commutation unto less
advantage upon an equally or more urgent necessity is less than omission. And
they that shall have learned, as our Savior directs, what that means, I will
have mercy and not Sacrifice, will not condemn the guiltless.

Only such are concerned first to search well and be satisfied concerning the
lawfulness of their action in it self, that they do it not with a
self-condemning conscience, nor with a groundlesly self-justifying one. And
then especially to see to it that their end be right. Gods interest not their
own, otherwise than in a due, entire subordination to his. We can never act
innocently or comfortably in any thing, till he be in every thing more
absolutely our all in all; and have much more reason to be scrupulous, and (if
others knew our hearts) were much more liable to censure, that, in our common
affairs, he is so much forgotten, that we live not more entirely to him; which
we little animadvert upon, and are very officious to cast motes out of our
brothers eye, when this beam is in our own.

The design of mentioning these hints of reasons for so different judgments and
practices, is not to show which are strongest, and ought to prevail, which
cannot be the business of so short a discourse as this, and so much of another
nature, but to show that while there is any thing colorable to be alleged for
this or that way, True Christian love, compassion of common humane frailty, and
a duly humble sense of a man's own, would oblige him to think that Conscience
toward God may have a greater hand (tho with some misguided it self) in
guiding men the different ways they take, than is commonly thought. And to
consider tho such and such reasons seem not weighty to me, they may to some
others, who are as much afraid of sinning against God as I; and, perhaps, their
understandings as good in other matters as mine. It would be considered how
really difficult the controversy is about the ceremonies, and some other parts
of conformity. Perhaps few metaphysical questions are disputed with more
subtilty than that controversy is managed with, by Archbishop Whitgift,
Bishop Morton, Doctor Burgess, Doctor Ames, Cartwright, Calverwood and others.
And how very easily possible and pardonable is it to unlearned persons, or of
weaker intellectuals, being obliged in order to their practice to give a
judgment in reference to these things one way or other, to judge amiss! Why
should we expect every sincerely pious man to be able to hit the very point of
truth and right in matters that belong, as Bishop Davenant once said in another
case [non ad fidem fundamentalem, sed ad peritiam Theologicam, and fortasse ne
ad hanc quidem, sed aliquando ad curiositatem Theologorum,] not to the
foundation of our Faith, but to the skill of Divines, and perhaps not to this
neither, but sometimes only to their curiosity. What were to be done in
reference to so nicely disputable things made part of the terms of Christian
communion, is more the matter of our wish than hope, till by a gracious
influence God better men's minds, or by a more deeply felt necessity bring us to
understand what is to be done. Our case is ill when only vexatio dat
intellectum, when nothing but sorrow and suffering will make us wise which is
very likely from the righteous hand of God to be our common lot.

In the mean time it is hard to think that he cannot be a sincerely pious man
whose understanding is not capable of so difficult things, as to make a
certainly right judgment about them: In absoluto and facili stat eternitas. And
why should not the communion of persons going into a blessed eternity have the
same measure?

And besides the different size, and capacity of men's understandings, and
consequently of their conscientious determinations,

2. There are also as differing relishes of these things, which Christian love
would oblige a man to consider with equanimity, so as thereupon to refrain hard
censures. All good men have not the same relish of the various forms and modes
of dispensing the Truths and Ordinances of Christ. Some of our suffering
Brethren in Q. Mary's days are said to have found great spiritual refreshing
by the Common Prayer. And in our own days some may profess to have their
hearts warmed, their affections raised and elevated by it. They are no rule to
us; but it would less become us, hereupon to suspect their sincerity, than our
own. Others again cannot relish such modes of worship, when in the Ministry of
such as use them not, they find a very sensible delight and savor.

And this, by the way, shows the great difference between such things as have
their evidence and goodness from God himself, and those that borrow their
recommendableness only from humane device. All good men in all the times and
ages of the Christian Church have a constant value and love for the great
substantials of Religion, which have in them that inward evidence and
excellency as commands and captivates a rectified mind and heart, whereas the
mere external forms of it, the outward dress and garb, are variously esteemed
and despised, liked and disliked by the same sort of men, i. e. by very sincere
lovers of God, not only in diverse times and ages, but even in the same time.
How different has the esteem been of the Liturgick forms with them who bear
the same mind, full of reverence and love toward Religion it self! As that
habit is thought decent at one time, which in another is despicably ridiculous;
whereas a person in himself comely and graceful, is always accounted so, by
all, and at all times.

Now this various gust and relish cannot but have influence, more remotely,
upon the conscientious determination of our choice, concerning our usual way of
worshipping God. For how should I edify by what is disgustful to me? Tho it be
true that our spiritual edification lies more in the informing of our
judgments, and confirming our resolutions, than in the gusts and relishes of
affection, yet who sees not that these are of great use even to the other? And
that it is necessary that at least there be not a disgust or antipathy? What is
constantly less grateful, will certainly be less nutritive. That is usually
necessary to nourishment. Tho, alone, it be not sufficient. As it is in the
matter of bodily repasts. Who can without great prejudice be bound to eat
always of a food that he disrelishes, though he may, without much
inconvenience, for a valuable reason, do it at some time.

And they that think all this alleged difference is but fancy, show they
understand little of humane nature, and less of Religion: Tho they may have
that in themselves too which they do not so distinctly reflect upon, even that
peculiar gust and relish, which they make so little account of. For have they
not as great a disgust of the others way, as they have of theirs? would They
not as much regret to be tied to theirs? Have they not as great a liking of
their own? And does not common experience show that there are as different
mental relishes as bodily? How comes one man in the matters of Literature to
savor Metaphysics? another Mathematics, another History, and the like? and
no man's Genius can be forced in these things. Why may there not be the like
difference in the matters of Religion? And I would fain know what that Religion
is worth that is without a gust and savor, that is insipid and unpleasant,
much more that would, being used in a constant course, this or that way, be
nauseous and offensive?

If indeed men nauseate that which is necessary for them, the Gospel, for
instance, or Religion it self, that is certainly such a distemper, as if the
grace of God overcome it not, will be mortal to them, and we are not to think
of relieving them, by withdrawing the offending object, which it self must be
the means of their cure. But is there any parity between the substance of
Religion, which is of Gods appointing, and the superadded modes of it, that are
of our own?

Upon the whole nothing is more agreeable, either to this divine principle of
Love, nothing (within our compass) more conducible to our end, the ceasing of
our differences (which are most likely to die and vanish by neglect) or their
ceasing to be inconvenient to us, than to bear calm and placid minds toward
one another under them, to banish all hard thoughts because of them. If I can
contribute no way else to union, from this holy dictate and law of the Spirit
of love, I can at least abstain from censuring my fellow Christians. It is the
easiest thing in the world one would think not to do; Especially not to do a
thing of it self ungrateful to a well tempered mind; and a great privilege not
to be obliged to judge another man's conscience and practice, when it is so
easy to misjudge and do wrong. Most of all when the matter wherein I presume
to fit in judgment upon another is of so high a nature, as the posture of his
heart Godward. A matter peculiarly belonging to another Tribunal, of divine
cognizance, and which we all confess to be only known to God himself. And if I
would take upon me to conclude a man insincere, and an hypocrite, only because
he is not of my mind in these smaller things that are controverted among us,
how would I form my argument? No one can with sincerity differ from that man
whose understanding is so good and clear as to apprehend all things with
absolute certainty just as they are. And then go on to assume (and a strange
assuming it must be) But my understanding is so good and clear as, etc. It Is
hard to say whether the uncharitableness of the one assertion, or the arrogance
of the other is greater; and whether both be more immoral or absurd. But the
impiety is worst of all, for how insolently does such a man take upon him to
make a new Gospel! and other terms of salvation than God has made! when his
sentiments and determinations of things which God has never made necassary,
must be the measure and rule of life and death to men! How is the throne and
judicial power of the Redeemer usurped which he has founded in his blood. Romans
14.4. Who art thou that judge another man's servant? to his own master he
stands or falls. Yea, he shall be holden up, for God is able to make him
stand. verse 9. For to this end Christ both died, and rose, and revived, that
he might be Lord both of the dead and living. verse 10. But why do thou judge
thy brother? or why do thou set at naught thy brother? we shall all stand
before the judgment seat of Christ. verse 11. For it is written, As I live,
says the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess to
God. One would think they that lay no restraint upon themselves in this matter
of judging their brethren, upon every light occasion, reckon this chapter came
by chance into the Bible. And that our Lord spoke himself, at random, words
that had no meaning, when he said Mat. 7.1. Judge not that you be not judged,
etc. What man that fears God would not dread to be the framer of a new Gospel,
and of new terms of salvation? It is a great solace indeed to a sincere mind;
but implies a severe rebuke, in the mean time, to such a self-assuming
censorious spirit, that it may in such a case be so truly said, It is a much
easier thing to please God than man.

They that find this measure will have the better of it, if they can abstain
from retaliating, when as the reason of it is the same on both sides. For they
may say, You are to remember I differ no more from you in this matter, than you
do from me, and if I judge not you about it, what greater reason have you to
judge me? And they have little reason to value such a man's judgment concerning
their duty in a doubtful matter, who cannot see his own in so plain a case. The
matter for which they judge me may be very doubtful, but nothing can be plainer
than that they ought not so to judge.

9. A due Christian love would oblige us after competent endeavors of mutual
satisfaction about the matters wherein we differ to forbear further urging of
one another concerning them. Which urging may be two ways. Either by
application to our Affections, or to our Reason and Judgment.

Some perhaps find it more suitable to their own temper, and measure of
understanding and conscience, to go the former way; and only vehemently
persuade to do the thing wherein the other shall comply with them, and in some
fort justify the course which they have taken. Without regard to the others
conscience; press them right or wrong to fall in with them. Sometimes laboring
to work upon their kindness by flattery, sometimes upon their fear by threats
and menaces. Sincere love would certainly abhor to do thus. Would it let me
violate another conscience any way? The love I bear to a fellow-Christian, if
it be true, having for its measure that wherewith I love my self, would no more
let me do it than hurt the apple of mine own eye. An inspirited waking
conscience is as tender a thing, and capable of a worse sort of hurt. If some
have more latitude than I, and think what they may do, in present circumstances
so far as they may, they must, would it not be the dictate of love patiently to
admit it, especially when it comes to suffering. For let me put my own soul in
his souls stead, and would I be willing to suffer upon another man's conscience,
and not upon my own? and forfeit the consolations which in a suffering
condition belong to them who for conscience toward God endure grief, would I,
if I loved them, be content they had the grief and did want the consolation?
There will be still found in a state of suffering, somewhat that will prove a
common cause to good men wherein they will most entirely agree, whatsoever
smaller things they may differ in. As the pious Bishops Ridley and Hooper well
agreed upon a Martyrdom at the Stake, in the same important Cause, who before,
had differed (somewhat angrily) about some Ceremonies. Concerning which
difference how pathetical is the Letter Fox. Martyr.
of the former of these to the other, when both were Prisoners (the one at
Oxford the other at London) on the same account. But now, my dear brother
(says he) forasmuch as we thoroughly agree and wholly consent together in those
things which are the grounds, and substantial points of our Religion; against
the which the World so furiously rages in these our days, howsoever, in time
past, by certain by Matters and circumstances of Religion, your wisdom, and my
simplicity (I grant) have a little jarred; each of us following the abundance
of his own sense and judgment, Now, I say, be you assured, that even with my
whole heart, God is my witness, in the bowels of Christ, I love you in the
truth, and for the truth's sake, which abides in us, and as I am persuaded
shall, by the grace of God, abide in us for evermore.

Again, if others have less latitude. It would be far from us to add to the
affliction they are liable to, upon that very account, by a vexatious urging
and importuning them. Especially to do it with insulting threats, and menaces,
and labor to overawe their brethren, against their consciences, into the
embracing of their sentiments and way. Is it possible a Christian should not
understand how necessary it is to every ones duty and peace that he exactly
follow that direction of the Apostles, and esteem it most sacred. Romans 14.5.
Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind. And that we firmly resolve
never to do any thing with regret or a misgiving heart, at least. Not against a
prevailing doubt, for in very doubtful cases to be rid of all formido oppositi
or suspicion that the matter may be otherwise is perhaps impossible to me, but
to do any thing against the preponderating inclination of my judgment and
conscience, were great wickedness, and such as, if it were known, would make me
unfit for any communion whatsoever. And I do here appeal to you who most
severely blame any of us for our dissent from you, whether if we should thus
declare to you, That it is truly against our consciences to communicate with you
upon your terms, we believe we should greatly offend God in it, and draw upon
us his displeasure, but yet to please you, and prevent our temporal
inconvenience, or ruin, we will do it. I appeal to you, I say, whether we
should not hereby make our selves incapable of any Christian communion with you
or any others? This is then the plain State of the case, and you do even put
these words into our mouths: If we follow the dictate of our consciences we
must decline you; if we go against it, you must decline us; supposing we
declare it, if we dclare it not, we have nothing to qualify us for your
communion but hypocrisy and dissimulation! And what do you gain by such an
accession to the Church? you have gained, in any such case, not half the man,
the outside, the carcass only, or the shadow of the man, i. e. when you have
debaucht our consciences, when you have spoiled us, and made us worth nothing,
then we are yours, wherein you show nothing of love either to us or to your
selves!

Others again that are, themselves, men of more reason and conscience, take the
somewhat more manly and Christian course; and bend themselves by argument to
convince the reason, and satisfy the consciences of such as differ from them.
But herein also there may be an excess, that is, unprofitable, and grievous to
those they would work upon by this course. And from which therefore Christian
love, studying the peace and quiet of their brethren would restrain them. I say
from the ungrateful excess of such an endeavor. For I would fain know can
there not herein be an excess? Is it not supposeable that they who differ from
me, in such lesser things, may be sometime arrived to a settlement and
fixedness of judgment in them, as well as I? Is it not possible they have
weighed the moments of things as much as I have done? Is such a cause infinite?
Is it not possible that all may have been said in it which is to be said, and
the matter have been sifted to the very bran? So that all my further arguings
may serve but to argue my vain self-confidence, or aboundingness in my own
sense, as if all wisdom were to die with me. Or what if they serve at length,
but to show the incapacity of the subject to be wrought upon, and the different
complexion of his mind I am treating with. All cannot receive all things. We
cannot make our sentiments enter with every one. Perhaps they show the weakness
of his understanding: And then has that direction of the Apostle no Authority
with us. Him that is weak in the Faith receive, but not to doubtful
disputations. Romans 14.1. He whom we account our weaker brother, and of slower
understanding, must be received, (not cast out of our communion) and because
God himself has received him, as verse. 3. ( q. d. Is he thought fit for Gods
communion, notwithstanding his unsatisfied-scruple, and is he unfit for yours?)
And he is not to be vexed and importuned with continual disputation, if that
Apostolical precept be of any value with us. Sometime at least, we should
think, we have tried in such a case as far as is fit, and driven the nail as
far as it will go. Is it not possible such a matter may be agitated beyond the
value of it, and that more time and pains may be spent upon it than it is
worth? The obscurity, and perplexity of the controversy shows the less
necessity. Things most necessary are most plain. Must we always in matters of
confessedly little moment, be inculcating the same thing, rolling endlesly the
returning stone, and obtruding our offensive Crambe? Perhaps as no good is
done, we do much hurt. When is the saw of disputation long drawn, about one
thing, without ill effects? Reason having at length spent its strength grows
(as weak people are) peevish and froward; degenerates into anger and clamor.
In greater differences than our present ones, between the Protestant Churches
abroad: Some of more prudent and peaceable minds have earnestly pressed the
laying aside of disputes, and putting a Period by consent to their Theological
wars. Solitarum disputationum labyrinthos ^e ingredi quidem conentur Davenant
Sent. ad Duraeum.
: Said a great Divine in his days in reference to those controversies that he
would have had composed by an amicable brotherly conference. And that King of
Navarre, who, at that time, seemed highly concerned for the peace and welfare
of the reformed Churches (afterward Henry the 4th of France) in his
negotiations with diverse Princes to that purpose, gave special instructions to
his Ambassador much to insist upon this Vt acerbis illis contentionibus,
quibus, and verbis rixati sunt inter se Theoligi, and scriptis: and ejusmodi
disputationibus silentio tandem finis imponatur, ut Christianae charitas, et
animorum fraterna conjunctio revocetur. Mandat. Hen. Reg. Navar. Jacobo Siguria
Legato suo, etc. Apud Goldastum.
, That (till other remedies could be used) an end might be put to bitter
contentions and disputations, that Christian love and a brotherly union might
be restored. And who sees not how much this would conduce to peace and union in
our case too? who sees it not that is a hearty lover of peace? and that is not
intent upon continuing and keeping afoot a controversy, not so much a^ a means
to that, but as an end, contending for contentions sake, and as a thing which
he loves and delights in for it self? I am sure love to our brethren would not
let us continually molest and importune them to no purpose. And it is fit they
that urge to us, these are little things, which they importune us about, should
know we have great things to mind, of eternal concernment to us. And that we
cannot be always at leisure to mind little things, beyond the proportion of
our little-time on earth, and the little value of the things themselves.

10. Sincere love restored and exercised more among us, would certainly make us
forbear reviling, and exposing one another, and the industrious seeking one
another ruin. For such as can allow themselves to do any thing that has this
tendency; not to preserve public order, but to gratify their private ill will,
not in a sudden heat and passion, but deliberately, and so as to pursue a
formed design to this purpose. If such men were capable of being reasoned with
(tho it were to as good purpose, to talk to a storm or reason with a whirlwind,
or a flame of fire) I would ask them What are you altogether unatoneable? will
nothing divert you from this pursuit? If any thing, what will? What more gentle
thing than our destruction do you seek, or will content you? Is it our
communion? And do you so recommend your selves? Do you not know Cain is said to
have been of that wicked one who slew his brother? 1 John 3.10. And that
whosoever hates his brother is a murderer; and that no murderer has eternal
life abiding in him? Is it not said Joh. 8.44. That such are of their father
the devil, and the lusts of their father they will do, who was a murderer from
the beginning? And in the forementioned 1 John 3.10. In this the children of
God are manifest, and the children of the devil: whosoever does not
righteousness is not of God, neither he that loves not his brother? If all
were like you under what notion were we to unite with them? The Apostle tells
us 1 Cor. 10.20, 21. I would not that ye should have fellowship with devils. Ye
cannot drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of devils; Ye cannot be partakers
of the Lords table, and of the table of devils. And in good earnest, incarnate
devils (tho that Text do not directly speak of such) have too much of devil in
them, to be participants in a communion, that can seem desirable, or is likely
to be grateful to serious Christians. I must avow it to all the world, it is
not this or that external form I so much consider in the matter of Christian
union and communion, as what Spirit reigns in them with whom I would associate
my self. How can I endure to approach those holy mysteries, wherein all are to
drink into one Spirit, and declare their union with the God of love, with the
Emmanuel, God most nearly approaching us, God with us, collecting and gathering
us in unto him as our common center, whence the blessed Spirit of holy love is
to diffuse it self through the whole body, all enlivened by that spirit, and
formed by it unto all kindness, benignity, goodness and sweetness! With what
significancy can I do so (tho I were never so well satisfied with the external
forms and modes my self) if it be apparent (I say if apparent) I must cast in
my lot and join my self with them (were they generally such) whose souls are
under the dominion of the quite contrary spirit, that fills them with
malignity, with mischievous dispositions, and purposes, toward many a sincere
lover of God, that cannot be satisfied with those forms and modes, and who
decline them only from a sense of duty to God, and a fear of offending against
the high authority of their blessed, glorious Redeemer!

I know many are apt to justify themselves in their animosity, and bitterness
of spirit, toward others, upon a pretense that they bear the same disaffected
mind toward them. But besides that it is the most manifest, and indefensible
injustice; if they charge the innocent, or such as they are not sure are
guilty, if their own wrath and enmity be so potent in them as to enable their
tainted vicious imagination to create its object, or so to disguise and falsely
clothe it, as to render it such to themselves, as whereupon they may more
plausibly pour out their fury. I say besides that, how contrary is this
vindictive spirit to the rules and spirit of the Christian Religion! Is this to
love our enemies, to bless them that curse us, and despitefully use us, etc?
How unlike the example of our blessed Lord, when, even in dying agonies, he
breathed forth these words and his soul almost at once, Father forgive them,
etc: Or of the holy Martyr Stephen, Lord lay not this sin to their charge. How
unlike is that aptness to the retaliating of injuries, to the Christian temper
which the renowned Calvin discovers in an Epistle to Bullinger, speaking of
Luthers severity toward him. If Luther a thousand times (says he) call me
devil, I will acknowledge him for a famous servant of God; which Passage both
Bishop Morton and Bishop Davenant, magnify him for, and the former says, he
herein spoke so calmly, so placidly, so indulgently, as if it were not a man,
but humanity it self that uttered the words.

Yea and such retaliation is what Paganism it self has declaimed against
Maxim. Tyr. Dissert. 2.
. A noted Philosopher urges that against it that one would think should not
need to be suggested to Christians, somewhat so prudential as might not only
work upon the principle of love to others, but even that of self-love, That
then the evil must perpetually circulate, and so must again and again return
upon our selves. As indeed if that must be the measure to revile them that
revile us 1 Pet. 2.23. c. 3.9.
, and render evil for evil, railing for railing, we should never have done. It
were a course which once begun, could by that rule, never find an end.

This then is the first part of the Answer to the proposed Question, What may
be most hopefully done, etc? The endeavor of having our hearts knit together
in love would surely do much toward it. And this is agreeable to any the most
private capacity. No man can pretend his Sphaere is too narrow (if his Soul be
not) for the exercise of love toward fellow-Christans. And I hope it is
agreeable to all our principles. Sure no man will say it is against his
conscience to love his brother.

And the same must be said of

2. That other expedient, the endeavor to have our souls possessed with a more
clear, efficacious, practical faith of the Gospel. Which was to make the other
part of the answer to our Question. And tho this is the more important part. It
is also so very evident, that we do not need to make this discourse swell to a
bulk too unproportionable to the rest it is to be joined with, by speaking
largely to it.

Although we have not the Name of faith in this Text, we have the Thing. It is not
named, but it is described, so as that it may easily be understood, both what
it is, and how necessary to our purpose.

1. What it is, or what measure and degree of it, that would be of so great use
in such a case. We are told with great Emphasis, The riches of the full
assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgment of the mystery of God, and of
the Father, and of Christ. Such as whereby,

1. Our understandings are duly enlightened so as mentally to entertain aright
the doctrine of the Gospel, i. e. 1. Distinctly to apprehend the meaning and
design of this mysterious revelation of God in Christ. 2. And to be fully
assured of the truth of it.

2. Such again, as whereby our hearts are overcome, so as practically and
vitally to receive it, i. e. To acknowledge, receive, resign, entrust, and
subject our selves unto God in Christ revealed in it.

2ly. And of how vast importance this is toward our establishment, the
confirming, fortifying and uniting of our hearts, and our joint preservation in
our Christian state (the main thing we are to design, and be solicitous for) we
may see in these particulars.

1. Hereby we should apprehend the things to be truly great wherein we are to
unite. That union is not like to be firm and lasting, the center whereof is a
trifle. It must be somewhat that is of it self apt to attract and hold our
hearts strongly to it. To attempt with excessive earnestness an union in
external formalities that have not a value and goodness in themselves; when the
labor and difficulty is so great, and the advantage so little, how hopeless
and insignificant would it be! The mystery of God, even of the Father, and of
Christ, how potently and constantly attractive would it be if aright understood
and ackowledg'd! Here we should understand is our life and our all.

2. Hereby we should, in comparison apprehend all things else to be little. And
so our differences about little things would languish and vanish. We should not
only know, but consider and feelingly apprehend, that we agree in far greater
things than we differ in; and thence be more strongly inclined to hold together
by the things wherein we agree, than to contend with one another about the
things wherein we differ.

3. Hereby our Religion would revive, and become a vital powerful thing; and
consequently more grateful to God, and awful to men.

1. More grateful to God, who is not pleased with the stench of Carcasses, or
with the dead shows of Religion instead of the living substance. We should
hereupon not be deserted of the divine presence, which we cannot but reckon
will retire when we entertain him but with insipid formalities. What became of
the Christian interest in the world, when Christians had so sensibly diverted
from minding the great things of Religion to little minute circumstances, about
which they affected to busy themselves, or to the pursuit of worldly
advantages and delights?

2. More awful to men; They who are tempted to despise the faint languid
appearances of an impotent, inefficacious, spiritless Religion, discern a
Majesty in that which is visibly living, powerful, and productive of suitable
fruits. Who that shall consider the state af the Christian Church, and the
gradual declining of Religion for that three hundred years from Constantines
time to that of Phocas, but shall see cause at once to lament the sin and folly
of men, and adore the righteous severity of God? For as Christians grew
gradually to be loose, wanton, sensual, and their leaders contentious,
luxurious, covetous, proud, ambitious, affecters of Domination, so was the
Christian Church gradually forsaken of the divine presence. Inasmuch as that at
the same time when Boniface obtained from Phocas the title of universal Bishop,
in defiance of the severe sentence of his Predecessor Gregory the great, sprang
up the dreadful delusion of Mahomet Brerewood's Enquiries.
. And so spread it self to this day, thorough Asia, Africa, and too
considerable a part of Europe, that where Christians were twenty or thirty to
one, there was now scarce one Christian to twenty or thirty Mahometans or
grosser Pagans. And what between the Mohammedan infatuation, and the Popish
Tyranny, good Lord! what is Christendom become! when by the one, the very name
is lost; and by the other, little else left but the name.

4. Hereby we shall be enabled most resolvedly to suffer being called to it,
when it is for the great things of the Gospel, the mystery of God, and of the
Father, and of Christ, clearly and with assurance understood and acknowledged.
Such a faith will not be without its pleasant relishes. It Is an uncomfortable
thing to suffer either for the mere spiritless, uncertain, unoperative notions
and opinions, or for the unenlivened outward forms of Religion, that we never
felt to do us good, in which we never tasted sweetness, or felt power, that we
were really nothing ever the better for. But who will hesitate at suffering for
so great things as the substantials of the Gospel, which he has clearly
understood, whereof he is fully assured, and which he has practically
acknowledged, and embraced, so as to feel the energy and power of them, and
relish their delicious sweetness in his soul! And tho by such suffering he
himself perish from off this earth, his Religion lives, is spread the more in
the present age, and propagated to after ages. So seminal and fruitful a thing
is the blood of Martyrs! as has always been observed.

And as such a faith of the Mystery of the Gospel appears to have this tendency
to the best, firmest, and most lasting union among Christians (and the
consequent preservation of the Christian Interest) this mystery being more
generally considered only; So this tendency of it would be more distinctly
seen, if we should consider the more eminent and remarkable parts of it. The
mystery of the Redeemers person. The Emmanuel, God uniting himself with the
nature of man. His Office. A reconciler of God and Man to each other. His
Death, as a propitiatory sacrifice to slay all enmity. His victory and conquest
over it, wherein is founded his universal Empire over all. His triumphant
entrance into Heaven, whither he is to collect all that ever loved, trusted and
obeyed him, to dwell and be conversant together in his eternal love and
praises. How directly do all these tend to endear and bind the hearts and souls
of Christians to God, and him, and one another in everlasting bonds!

Thus then we have the answer to our question in the two parts of the Text. The
former pointing out to us the subjects of our union, with the uniting principle
by which they are to be combined with one another. The other the center of it
with the uniting principle, whereby they are all to be united in that center.

these two principles, And, to our uttermost, endeavor the revival of them.

1. We have great cause to lament their decay; for how visible is it! and how
destructive to the common truly Christian Interest! It was once the usual
cognizance of those of this holy profession, See how these Christians love one
another, and even refuse not to dye for each other! Now it may be, How do they
hate! and are like to dye and perish by the hands of one another! Our Lord
himself gave it them to be their distinguishing character. By this shall all
men know that ye are my Disciples if you love one another. Good Lord! what are
they now to be known by!

And what a cloudy, wavering, uncertain, lank, spiritless thing is the Faith of
Christians in this age become! How little are the ascertaining grounds of it
understood, or endeavored to be understood! Most content themselves to profess
it only as the Religion of their Country, and which was delivered to them by
their forefathers. And so are Christians but upon the same terms as other
Nations are Mahometans or more gross Pagans, as a worthy Writer some time since
took notice Pink's Trial of a Christians love to Christ.
. How few make it their business to see things with their own eyes, to believe,
and be sure that Jesus is the Christ, the son of the living God! How far are we
from the riches of the full assurance of understanding! How little practical,
and governing is the faith of the most! How little does it import of an
acknowledgment of the mystery of God, viz. of the Father, and of Christ! How
little effectual is it! which it can be but in proportion to the grounds upon
which it rests. When the Gospel is received, not as the word of man, but of
God, it works effectually in them that so believe it, 1 These. 2.13.

2. Let us endeavor the revival of these principles. This is that in reference
whereto we need no humane laws. We need not Edicts of Princes to be our warrant
for this practice, loving one another, and cleaving with a more grounded lively
Faith to God and his Christ. Here is no place for scruple of Conscience in this
matter. And as to this mutual love: What if others will not do their parts to
make it so? What shall we only love them that love us, and be fair to them that
are fair to us, salute them that salute us? do not even the Publicans the same?
What then do we more than others? as was the just expostulation of our Savior
upon this supposition, Mat. 5.47.

And let us endeavor the more thorough deep radication of our faith, that it
may be more lively and fruitful: which this Apostle you see (not forgetting his
scope and aim) further presses in the following verses, testifying his joy for
what he understood there was of it among these Christians. Tho I be absent in
the flesh, yet I am with you in the Spirit, joying and beholding your order,
and the stedfastness of your faith in Christ. verse. 5. And exhorting them to
pursue the same course. As ye have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye
in him; rooted and built up in him, stablished in the faith, as ye have been
taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving. verse. 6, 7.

And what also, must we suspend the exercise and improvement of our Faith in
the great Mysteries of the Gospel, till all others will agree upon the same
thing! Let us do our own part, so as we may be able to say, Per me non stetit,
it was not my fault, but Christians had been combined, and entirely one with
each other, but they had been more thoroughly Christian, and more entirely
united with God in Christ, that Christianity had been a more lively, powerful,
awful, amiable thing. If the Christian community moulder, decay, be enfeebled,
broken, dispirited, ruined in gteat part, this ruin shall not rest under my
hand. We shall have abundant consolation in our own souls, if we can acquit our
selves that as to these two things, we lamented the decay and loss, and
endeavored the restitution of them, and therein as much as in us was, of the
Christian Interest.

Quest. How ought we to bewail the Sins of the Places where we live? SERMON V.
2 PET. II. 7, 8. And delivered just Lot, vexed with the filthy Conversation of
the wicked.
verse. 6. recollects the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, as the Ensamples of
the Punishment that should befall those impure Seducers against whom he wrote.
By occasion whereof he mentions Gods delivering care of Lot, whose holy
carriage being so contrary to the unholy Practices of the Sodomites, God made
his Condition happily different from theirs also, for so says the Text, he
delivered just Lot vexed, etc.



1. Gods happy Delivering of Lot; delivered just Lot.

2. Lots holy Severity to himself, for he was not only vexed, but he vexed
himself, he vexed his righteous soul with their unlawful deeds.

The Second part is the subject of my ensuing Discourse, which presents us with
this doctrinal Observation.

It is the disposition and duty of the righteous, to be deeply afflicted with
the sins of the Places where they live:

In the discussing of which divine and seasonable Truth, I shall 1. Produce
those obvious Scripture- Examples that clearly agree with it. 2. Principally
show after what manner the righteous ought to Mourn for the sins of others. 3.
Show the Reasons why it is the Disposition and Duty of the Righteous to be so
afflicted and mournful for the sins of others. 4. Lastly, I shall endeavor to
Improve the whole by Application.


I. For the obvious Scripture- Examples. Our Lord Jesus shall be the pattern
herein amounts to a Precept. Mark 3.5. Christ (says the Text) was grieved for
the hardness of their hearts, viz. in opposing his holy and saving Doctrines.
David professes that rivers of water ran down his eyes because men kept not
Gods Law; and that when he beheld the Transgressors he was grieved, because
they kept not his Word, Psalm. 119.136.158. The next Example shall be Ezra's,
who hearing of the sins of the People in marrying with Heathens, in token of
bitter grief for it, rent his garment and mantle, and plucked off the hair of
his Beard and Head, and sat down astonished, Ezra 9.3. And Chap. 10.6. he did
neither eat bread nor drink water, for he mourned because of the transgression
of them that had been carried away. To these I might add the Example of
Jeremiah, who Chap. 13. verse. 17. tells the wicked, that if they would not
bear, his Soul should weep in secret places for their pride, and his eyes weep
sore and run down with tears. I shall conclude this with that expression of
holy Paul, Philip. 3.18. Many walk of whom I tell you weeping, that they are
enemies of the Cross of Christ.

II. The Manner how this Duty of Mourning for the Sins of others

1. How we should mourn in respect of God before whom we mourn.

2. How we should mourn in respect of the Wicked for whom we mourn.

3. How we should mourn in respect of our selves who are the Mourners.

1. For the first Branch, as our Mourning respects God: It is to be performed
with advancing of those perfections of his that relate to those great Sins and
Sinners for which and for whom we mourn. And in our mourning for the Sins of
others in respect of God, we must advance

1. His great and unparalled Patience and Long-suffering extended toward
those whose Sins we mourn and lament over. This was evident in Nehemiah's
confessing and bewailing the sins of the sinful Jews, Nehem. 9.30. At large he
confesses their sins in that Chapter, but verse. 30, 31. he adds the
admiration and acknowledgment of Gods forbearing goodness toward them. Yet
(says he verse. 30.) did thou forbear them, or as it is in the Hebrew,
protract, defer, Memusbeka, Ezekiel. 12.15.
prolong over them; yea many years did thou forbear them; and verse. 31. when
the Jews were in their Enemies hands, for their sins, yet nevertheless (says
he) for thy great mercies sake thou did not utterly consume nor forsake them.
When we mourn for the sins of our Places, we should much admire Gods forbearing
Goodness, that he defers to punish those Sins and Sinners which we must not
defer to mourn for. We should lay Man low, but at the same time set up God
high, and in nothing more than in his Patience toward Sinners: Patience I say
infinitely exceeding any ever exercised by Man. 1. All the Sins we mourn for,
are most clearly seen by God and known to him. He sees sin wherever it is, and
infinitely more plainly understands, all the odious Circumstances and
aggravations of sin, than we can do that mourn for them, or than they can that
did commit them. And 2. As he sees sin in all its odiousness, so he infinitely
more hates it than all the Saints and Angels in Heaven can do, as being the
only object of his hatred, all the Streams whereof are collected in this one
Channel. Sin being also against his very nature and being, a destroying him in
the desire of the Sinner, and that which should he in the least measure love,
or less than infinitely hate, he would cease to be God. Further admire his
Patience 3. In sparing those that are perfectly in his power to destroy, Rebels
that are under his feet: Yea, lastly, whom in all their Rebellions, he invites
to repentance, yea feeds, supplies, maintains daily and richly. Say then in thy
Mourning for the Abominations of others, How patient art thou in forbearing to
punish those sins, which it is my duty with an holy impatience to see and hear!

2. In mourning for the sins of the Wicked, advance God in the acknowledgment
of his Justice and spotless Righteousness, should he with utmost severity take
vengeance upon Offenders. This we shall find also to be the temper of holy
Nehemiah in the forementioned Chapter the 9th, and the 33d verse, where
mourning for the sins of the People, he clears and acquits God from any
injustice in executing his heavyest severities upon sinners. So Ezra 9.15.
Psalm. 15.
Howbeit (says he) thou art just in all that is brought upon us, for thou have
done right, but we have done wickedly. Say, Lord, I wonder not at the evils
that do, but those that do not befall us: Were the fire of thy wrath
proportioned to the fuel of our sins, we should be utterly consumed. It Is thy
Mercy Lord we are not so; Thou would be infinitely just and to be justified
if we were so.

And 3. In spreading before God the wickednesses of great Sinners, admire his
infinite Power, that can not only stop the worst of men in, but turn them from
their course of opposing God by their Rebellions. We are not so to mourn for,
as to despair of the Conversion of the worst. They are as much within the
Converting reach, as the Destructive reach of Gods hand. Say, 1. This great
Sinner whose Impieties I bewail, can easily by thy irresistible Grace, which no
hard heart can reject, (as was Saul) be made not only of a Wolf, a Sheep, but
even a Shepherd too. I censure his way, but I dare not determ ine his end. Thou
have made white Paper of as black and filthy dunghill rags. What cannot the
infinite Power of God accomplish for the Conversion of the greatest Sinner? I
now bewail him Lord, but thou can also make him more to bewail himself, and
make him as zealous in setting up, as now he is in destroying thy People. It
should more comfort thee that thou sinnest not with them, than trouble thee
that thou suffer from them. God can make strait timber of a crooked piece.
God can take his Garden out of Satan's Waste. Oh! how glorious would pardoning
Grace and converting Power appear in causing such a change!

4. In mourning admire that Grace and Power that has kept thee from their
Excesses and Extravagancies.

2. The second Branch of the Manner how we must bewail the Sins

1. We must bewail the Sins of our bitterest Enemies, as well as of our most
beloved Relations. A rare and seldom practiced duty I fear that this will be
found. I suppose there is no godly man but bitterly mourns for the Impieties of
his dear Yoke Fellow, or Child, but to mourn because a cruel Enemy either
dishonours God, or damns his own Soul, I doubt there are very few that are
conscientious therein. Nothing is more common than to rail at our Enemies for
their Impieties, and to expose them to Obloquy, and public Hatred; but I fear
there is nothing more unusual than to bewail their Soul, their self-destroying
Sins before God in secret. The former, Pride, and Self-love, will easily put us
upon; the latter only flows from Christian Charity, and holy sanctified Zeal
and Compassion. Jer. 13.17.
To embrace the former, and neglect the latter, is to exchange a Duty for a
Sin. A miserable exchange! The holy temper of Christ, Luke 19.41.
and Paul acted by his Spirit, discovered their bewailings and shedding tears
for those that desired to shed their blood. Doubtless such a mourning as this,
would, if not prevail for the Conversion of Enemies, yet be a comfortable
evidence to our Consciences of the truth, yea the strength of Grace in us, and
of pardoning Grace bestowed upon us, who discover so high a degree of forgiving
our Enemies. It Is a thousand times more eligible that mine Enemies Sins should
suffer Shipwreck in a Sea of my tears, than their Persons should be born down
by the stream of my Power.

2. We ought to bewail the Sins of our near and dear Relations, Paul for his
Kinsmen in the flesh, that they should be saved! Romans 10.1.
Never did a godly man in the World, never durst he neglect the Duty of
bewailing the Sins of his Children. Job offered Sacrifices, Job 1.5.
and Prayers, and Tears too (no doubt) for very fear his Children might offend
God. There is in the Saints a spiritual Storge, a natural affection
Spiritualized: No Godly man knows how to spare any one Child of his for the
Devil: it must needs trouble him to fear that they who are so near in this,
should be so distant in the next Life. His Soul desires especiasly Soul-mercies
for his Children. To see them poor in the World, will not so much afflict him
as to fear they will never be rich to God. Besides the Sins of those that are
nearly related, are most frequently presented to our eyes and ears; they cry
nearest us, and therefore they should cry loudest to us: They are most
committed to our care, and therefore their miscarriages should be the greatest
objects of our Fear. Near Relations may also probably more endanger the residue
of those that belong to our Family. Sin in one or two, though in a large
Family, may endanger and infect the whole. We most strive to quench those
Flames that destroy houses near us, we are more fearful of them, than of those
at a greater distance: A Snake in ones Bed is more formidable, and a Toad there
more odious and ugly, than in my Field or Garden.

their Sins, than their Afflictions and outward Troubles. They must be more
troubled for the poysonful root of Sin, than for the Branches and Fruits of
Sufferings that spring from the Root. We must more mourn for the sin of a
Child, than for the sickness of a Child. More lay to heart what our Children
have done, than what they have undergone: more for their Impiety, than for
their Poverty: more because they have left God, than because their Trades or
Estates have left them: more for fear they died in Sin, than because they died.
The Troubles of the outward man must not so afflict us, as the Unrenewedness of
their Hearts and Natures. To be afflicted for the death of thy Child's Body,
and not for his Soul-death in Sin, is as if a fond Parent, should when his
Child is drowned, only lament the loss of the Child's Coat and Garment, and not
for the loss of the Child's Person.

Proportion of the Sins of the times and places where we live. When Sin grows
impudent, and has a brazen brow, when it is declared as Sodom, Jer. 3.3.
and not hidden; when men are ashamed of nothing but not being impudent in
sinning; when Sinners cannot blush, Jer. 6. v. 8, 12. have lost the very color
of Modesty; then is a fit Season for Gods People with Ezra, 9.6. to say, We are
ashamed and blush to lift up our faces to thee our God: to bewail and blush
before God for those Sins of which Sinners are not ashamed, and for which they
have not a tear to shed. Further, when the Sinners of the times are obstinate
and inflexible in Impiety, as Nehem. 9.16. Harden their Necks: 17. refuse to
obey: 20. are disobedient and rebel, cast the Law behind their back: 29:
withdraw the shoulder, and will not hear, when they make their face as an
Adamant Stone. When the Wicked say, as Jer. 44. As for the Word that thou have
spoekn, we will not hearken to thee, we will do whatever goes forth out of our
own mouth; then is the time for the Godly to have broken and melted Hearts,
when the Wicked are so Obstinate and Obdurate. Next, when Sin becomes
universal, when Governers and Governed, from the sole of the foot to the crown
of the head are all profane and impious, Isa. 1.6. When a man cannot be found
in the streets of Jerusalem, Jer. 5.1. that will stand up for God and his
Interest; when (as in days of Noah) all flesh has corrupted it self, then is
the time for all Gods People to mourn before God, and to oppose an holy
universality to a profane. Lastly, When not ordinary, but the most horrid and
gross Impieties are committed, as Murder, Sodomy, Perjury, broad-fac'd
Adultery, when these mountainons Wickednesses are acted, then is the time for
the Godly to endeavor to overtop these high towering abominations with a Flood
of tears.

5. We ought to mourn for the Sins of others advantageously to Prayer for their
Conversion, and Gods pardoning them. My hearts desire and prayer to God (says
Paul) is that Israel might be saved: Romans 10.1. He tells, Chap. 9.1. how he
bewailed them, that he had great heaviness, and continual sorrow in his heart
for them, but here we see he mingled his tears with prayers for them. We cannot
mourn for those for whom we cannot pray; for every Evil that makes us grieve
because of its continuance, we must needs desire may be removed. Exodus 32.11.27.
Tho Moses when he was with the People, maintained the Cause of God with the
Sword, yet when he was with God, he endeavored the preservation of the People
with prayer. 2. We must endeavor to follow the Mourning for Sinners with
restraining them from Sin (if we have it) by Power. We must not hate Sinners,
and suffer them to sin: we destroy those whom we suffer to sin, if we can
hinder them. None may permit Sin in another, if he can restrain it, but he that
can produce a greater Good out of it, than the permission is an Evil.
Restraining of Inferiors is as great a duty as Prayer for Superiors. See it in
the case of Eli's negligence to restrain his Sons from their Impieties. 3. We
must mourn for Sinners with advantaging them by Example, that they may never be
able to tax us with those Sins for which we would be thought sorrowful.
Examples sometimes have a louder voice than Precepts. Tears will not in secret
drown those Sins which public Examples encourage. We confute our Tears and
Prayers before God, by an unsuitable Example before the Offender. The blots of
others cannot be wiped off with blurred fingers. 4. We must follow our mourning
for others Sins, with laboring to advantage them by holy Reproof for the Sins
we mourn for. If our place and opportunities allow us, we must not only sigh
for their Sins, but cry against them: Ezekiel. 9.4. Lot was not only a Mourner for
the Sodomites Sins, but a Reprover. I know not whether it be a greater sign of
a Godly man, to give a Reproof duly, or to take a Reproof thankfully. 1. But be
sure Reproofs be given with Zeal for Gods Glory, not either out of hatred to
the Person reproved, or out of desire to promote thine own Reputation and
Interest by the Reproof. The Apostles, Acts 14.14.17.16. reproved Idolaters;
but Zeal for God purely put them upon it. Paul and Barnabas rent their Clothes,
as well as reproved Idolaters. And Paul's Spirit was stirred with inward Zeal,
Act. 17.16.
before his Tongue stirred against the Athenians. Let Reproofs 2. Be mingled
with Meekness. Passion is seldom prevalent with a Sinner. Sweep not Gods House
with the Devils Besom. Let the Sinner see thee kind to himself, when thou art
most unkind to his Sin. 3. Let Reproofs be qualified with Prudence, by
observing the nature and degree of the Offense, and the temper of the Offender.
A small Offense, like a Fly on the forehead, is not to be killed with a Beetle,
nor is a Venice Glass (and so tender are some tempers) to be scowred with as
much strength as we scowre an Iron Pot with. Prudence is also to be observed in
Reproofs, by care to preserve our own safety, and not to expose our selves by
indiscreet and lavish expressions, to the malice of those whom we reprehend. 4.
Reprove Sinners with Patience; knock twice, nay thrice, at the door of a
Sinners Conscience. Importunity may prevail with a Sinner for his own Soul, if
with the unjust Judge for another. Wait, if peradventure God may give the
Sinner Repentance. 5. With expressing that Commiseration toward a Sinner in
private, which thou expressest for him before God in secret. A profane person
going once to hear a Play, and telling of a Godly man whom he met, whither he
was going; this good man entreated him to forbear, and not to go to so wicked a
Meeting, that might easily endanger his Soul: but the man was obstinate, and
notwithstanding all the Arguments the good man could use to hinder him from
going, he told him he was resolved to go to the Playhouse: with that the good
man shed abundance of tears upon the beholding his obstinacy. They part one
from the other; the one, the resolute person goes toward the Playhouse; but
just as he was entering into it, the remembrance of the tears shed by the godly
disswader, so wrought upon him that he durst not adventure to go into that
hurtful place, but returned from it without incurring the danger of that
temptation.

advantageous to our selves. Tho a Sin may bring us profit, or honor, yet it
must bring us no Pleasure, if it bring God dishonor, and the Sinner
destruction. Act. 14.
It Is very observable in Paul and Barnabas, that they rent their Clothes (the
usual sign of mourning) for a Sin that did cast the greatest Honor imaginable
upon them, that attributed a Divinity to them, by doing Sacrifice to them. Act.
14.14. We must never endure the advancement of our Interest, by the diminution
of Gods Glory through Sin. As God will not give his glory to another, so God
not giving it, we must not dare to take it. That he may be advanced, we must be
willing to be debased, and depressed. We should not desire any Glory that
promotes not his, nor should we shun any disgrace, that sets up his honor. All
our Glory and Gain are unprofitable to us, that further not the End why we had
out beings. Nothing done to a Tree is profitable to it, which makes it not more
fruitful. Though its Leaves be gilded, though its Branches should have Pearls
and Diamonds hung thick upon them, tho the Body be adorned with Sattens, and
Cloth of Gold, yet this makes not the Tree better as a Fruit-tree. It would be
better for the Tree to dung it than to adorn it. To cut its bark, than to
beautify its body. We should embrace the vilest debasures, and the most torn
and poor condition, if they conduce to our end, the glorifying of God, rather
than by any ones Sin, to shine and be advanced in the World. 'Twas an excellent
option of that ingenious Writer Nierembergius to this purpose. I had rather, L.
4. de ador. c. 11.
Lord, could it be without Sin, that all should hate me, than that they should
love me for my self; for if all should hate me, I should have but what is mine;
if they should love me for my self, I should usurp what is thine. Besides, we
purchase any temporal Benefit at too dear a rate if it be with the loss of an
eternal Soul, that sins to obtain it for us. If David poured out the water to
the Lord, 2 Samuel 23.17.
and would not drink thereof, because it was brought with the jeopardy of the
lives of the bringers; how far should we be from delighting in those Gains that
are obtained by endangering the Souls of those that procure them for us. A
Factor, an Apprentice, by whose sin thou gainest, should more grieve thee, than
if by his weakness thou had been never so great a loser.

3. I shall consider how we should mourn for the Sins of others, of our selves.

1. They whom God has set in any Place or Station of Superiority over others,
either more public, or in Families, should be the most eminent Mourners for
the Sins of those committed to their charge. Persons who have public
Relations, must have public Affections. They have greater opportunities, and
authority to advance Gods Glory, and benefit Souls, than their Inferiors have:
To them much is given, and of them much shall be required. They are more
responsible to God for public abuses, than the Common People. The Heads of
Places and People are more concerned to reform than private members. If they
lay not the Sins of Inferiors to their Hearts, they shall be laid to their
charge. One great if not the greatest reason why England is so full of
Ungodliness, is because it is so full of Gallio's, Acts 18.17.
who regard none of those things. Now they who resent no Sin, will reform no
Sinners. All must give account for their idle words, and Governors, especially
Magistrates and Ministers, for their idle Silence. Superiors will not reform
those Sinners publicly, for whom they do not mourn privately. How abominable
is it for base Bribery or Face-fearing to deterr Governors from reforming.
It Is as cruel to spare all as to pare none. Solomon's Throne was not held up by
Apes, but by Lions. Tenuisse silentia Clerum; it is the basest tenure in the
World, for a Minister to hold his Living by holding of his Peace. Luther once
said, That sinful silence in a Minister was Peccatum irremissibile, an
unpardonable fault: That blessed man See his Life in his Works.
Mr. Samuel Hieron mourned upon his Deathbed, for his defectiveness in the
Duty of private Reproof, tho (blessed Saint) he knew upon whom to lay that and
his other Sins. I doubt not but God makes the World so bitter to us by
sufferings, Joel 2.17.
because we make their Sins no bitterer to them by Reproofs. A Minister and
Magistrate in Love and Christian Condescension ought to be flexibiliores
arundine, but in opposing of Sin duriores adamante; 2 Cor. 11.29. Heb. 23.17.
in the former as flexible as a reed, in the latter harder than an adamant.

open Sinners in their unconverted state, should more lay to Heart the Sins of
the openly wicked than those who have lived more Civilly, and without scandal:
The greatest Sinners converted, should have the greatest Compassion. They who
have obtained most, should show most Mercy. Ye know (says God) the Heart of a
Stranger, Exodus 23.9. and therefore they are enjoined to be kind to Strangers:
Great Sinners converted know the addictedness of an unconverted man's Heart to
his Corruptions. They have tasted most of the bitterness of Sin, and of the
sweetness of pardoning Mercy. They know most of the terror of the Lord, and
therefore they should be most in persuading of, 2 Cor. 5.11.
and sorrowing for Sinners. Paul so eminent in Sin, was as famous for
Compassion to Sinners: Gal. 6.1. The overtaken with a fault, he wills should be
gently set in joint with the Spirit of meekness: He could not speak of Sinners
without Weeping, Phil. 3.18. He had great heaviness and sorrow of Heart for his
unconverted Brethren, Romans 9.2. Who is weak and I am not weak? who is offended
and I burn not? 2 Cor. 11.29. He commends meekness toward Sinners upon this
very ground; for we (says he Tit. 3.3.) our selves were sometimes foolish,
disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice and
envy, hateful, and hating one another.

dishonorable to God, and hurtful to Sinners, than because they are injurious
to themselves, that mourn over them: To mourn for Sins of the times because
hurtful to us, is not Zeal for God, or Charity to Sinners, but self-love. Godly
Sorrow is when we sorrow for Sin as against God: All Sorrow for our selves, and
our worldly Interest, is but worldly Sorrow, and dedolendus est iste dolor.
It Is to be repented of, when it puts the other-out of place. We frequently
mourn for the miscarriages of the times, but more as they are afflictive than
Sinful, because we suffer rather than because Gods Honor or Souls suffer: If
we were not our selves concerned in the suffering of our worldly Interest, few
would hear of our mourning. The complaint of, What wilt ^^ou do to thy great
Name, is much rarer than What shall become of my Family, my Estate? The
precious Water of our Tears is not to be cast upon such Dunghils, into such
Sinks. Sin brought in Tears, and they should be principally shed for Sin. It Is
observed by some, that God who in times of public mourning for Sin commands
baldness, forbids it for worldly troubles, Isa. 22.12. Lev. 21.5.

4. They that mourn for others Sins, should mourn more in secret Jeremy, chapter
17. v. 13. I will mourn in secret places for your Pride. Our Father (says
Christ) sees in secret, Mat. 6.18.
though he recompenseth openly. Public Exercises of Religion may gain most
applause, and be most advantageous to observers, but they testify not so much
sincerity to the Conscience as those in secret. He mourns most truly, that has
no other Witness thereof but the alseeing God. Fasting and so Mourning is
Feasting and Rejoicing to one that eyes only the eye of man in these services,
when men observe them. Mat. 6.16. Our Savior forbids appearing unto men to
fast, by putting on a wreathed, grim, sour Countenance, a lowering Look; not
that he forbids open expressions of sorrow used by Saints of old, but the
counterfeit semblance of Sorrow, to make an Ostentation of Sanctimony to be
noted by men. Nor does Christ here tax Mourners for seeming to fast when they
did not; but for desiring to be known abroad to fast, when they fasted in
private. 2 Kings 10.16.
It Is a Jehu's zeal which may be seen only, and desires to be so.

5. They that mourn for others Sins, must mourn to an high degree, occasions,
furtherers, and promoters of their Sins, either by neglecting to reprove them
for, restraining them from, or giving them Examples of Sinning: This Sanctified
Conscience will make one of the bitterest ingredients into Sorrow for the Sins
of others. 'Twas the trouble of David that he had occasioned the Death of the
Priests, by receiving relief from Ahimelech. 1 Samuel 22.22.
I have occasioned the Death (said David to Abiathar) of all the Persons of thy
Fathers House. I doubt not but some whom God has converted may say, Lord, I
have some way or other, furthered the Sins of this or that great Offender: if
so, what can thou do less than drop the Balsom of thy Tears into his wounds
of Sin? Tho God have pardoned the Sin to thee, and lays it not to thy Charge,
holy Compassion should put thee upon laying it to thy Heart: This undoubtedly
is a due piece of Spiritual Restitution of what thou have wronged him of. Can
thou do less than beg with Tears and Sobs, that God would be more merciful to
his Soul than thou have been? Can thou do less than with an holy ingenuity
endeavor to bring him home to that God from whom thou taughtest him to wander?

6. They that mourn for the Sins of others, must mourn with an Reflection upon
themselves, and that in these three particulars.

1. They must reflect upon themselves with Sorrow, because they have the same
impure Natures that the most to be lamented Sinner in the World has. The
holiest in the World may say, Lord, this most extravagant Sinner speaks but the
Sense of my Nature. My Nature answers his as Face answers Face in the Glass.
But of this before.

2. With a Reflection of Examination.

1. Whether you have not some way or other furthered this Sinner in his much to
be lamented impieties, either by not endeavoring to hinder him from Sin so
much as you might, or by prompting him to it more than you ought: If so, how
deeply this is to be resented, you heard before.

2. Whether the same open Sins that are acted by him the noted Offender, or
Sins almost or altogether as bad, are not acted and entertained by thee in
secret places, 2 Chro. 28.10. Are there not with you, even with you, sins
against the Lord your God?
or at least in thy Heart. If so, doubtless it is thy duty to cast the first
Stone at thy self; and (as Christ said to the Daughters of Jerusalem) to weep
first under the sense of thy own Unholiness; and to remember, tho thy Sins are
not so infamous as those of a public Sinner, yet by being secret, they may be
Sins of greater danger: And that, First, by occasioning Hypocrisy, in
contenting thy self with visible appearances of Holiness, and freedom from open
impieties. Facile accedit tentator, ubi non timetur reprehensor.
2. Thy secreet Sins may be more dangerous, in regard by their secrecy, thou
shall not be so happy as to meet a reprover. The loudly snorting Sinner every
one will be ready to jog with a Reprehension, whilst thou that sinnest
silently in secret, shall be freed from any wholesome molestation by holy
Reprehension: He that would be watchful wants either a severe Censurer or a
faithful Reprover. 3. Thy secret Sins are not so like to trouble and awaken thy
drowsy Conscience, the Sins of public offenses having often been the occasion
to make People both ashamed of Sin and afraid of Vengeance.

3. With a reflection of Care and Watchfulness, that thou may never dare to
fall into the Sins that thou bewailest in another; and that thou may never
admit a temptation to a Sin in thy self, which is the object of thy Lamentation
in another: That thou who labourest to quench the fire that has seized upon
thy Neighbors house, may be careful to preserve thine from being set on fire
also. To conclude, that thou may not dare to do that which does, or should
grieve thee to see another do.

why this holy Mourning is, 1. The Disposition; and 2. Duty of the Righteous. I
shall express the Reasons of both distinctly.

1. It is their Disposition; and that under a threefold qualification.

1. Because they are a knowing People: They know what tears and heart-breakings
Sin has stood them in; they know that Sin will cost the Wicked either Tears of
Repentance, or Damnation: They know that Sin is but gilded Destruction, and
Fire and Brimstone in a disguise: Knowing the terror of the Lord, (says Paul)
we persuade men. 2 Cor. 5.11. It Is as true, we mourn for men that will not be
persuaded. In one word, the Godly know that when the Wicked sin, they know not
what they do. The Word threatening Sin, makes Woe as present to a knowing Saints
Faith, as the evil threatened can in its execution be present to a Sinners
sense. To a Saints eye, sinning is but the Seeds-time of Wrath, and Eternal
Vengeance in the root: But principally the Godly know what Sin has cost
Christ; not tears of Water only, but great and many drops of Blood.

2. As to a Saints Disposition. He is Compassionate, and tenderhearted.
Bowels, Col. 3.12. and Christ's Bowels. Phil. 1.8. The Wicked (as the High
Priests were to Judas) are hard-hearted in drawing to Sin, and in leaving those
whom they have drawn into it. Good men are full of tears: see it in David,
Ezra, Joseph, Josiah, Jeremiah. Quanto quisque sanctior, tanto fletus uberior.
The more holy, the more plentiful are our tears. Saints have received, and
return Compassion. Grace kills not, but only cleanses Affection.

3. The Righteous are a purified, sanctified People. A Saint as such

Further, every sanctified Soul labors to keep it self holy. Now sorrow for
Sin, puts us upon carefulness to avoid it. 2 Cor. 7.11. All take heed of that
which occasions their grief.

2. It Is the Duty as well as the Disposition of the Righteous to threefold
Relation.

1. In their Relation to God: they are his Sons. Phil. 2.15. As the Sons of God
they are commanded to be blameless, without Rebuke in the midst of a crooked
and perverse Nation. This Relation of Sonship does as truly make us mourn for
the Sins of others, as it engages us to avoid Sin in our selves. It suffers us
not to put up dishonor offered to God our Father with sinful Patience: It
makes us quietly to bear our private troubles, but not quietly to suffer the
Sufferings of Gods Name. Exodus 32.11.27.
Tho Moses when with God prayed for the People, yet when with the People he
vindicated the honor of God with the Sword. Job 2.10.
Tho Job when a Sufferer from God was holily patient; yet when an hearer of the
Counsel of his Wife to curse God, he was as holily impatient. A Son of God
cannot bear the abuses offered to his Father. Saints can no more endure the
dishonor done to their heavenly Father, according to that measure of Grace
given unto them, than the Angels which are in Heaven do according unto theirs.
Jesus wept for Lazarus's death because his Friend, and should not we much more
weep for Gods dishonor because our Father? Gods Glory should be dearer to us
than our Lives. He that touches it, should touch the Apple of our Eye, and
that soon makes it water.

Mediator, the Lord Christ. Here I shall mention only a double relation between
Christ and Saints, that engages them to mourn for the Sins of others. The
first is his Relation to us as a suffering Surety, in respect whereof he
sustained and paid the debt of Penalty which we owed to Gods Justice; for
'twas Sin in man that made Christ a man of Sorrows: Saints have but one Friend,
and He but one Enemy; how then is it possible that that Enemy when seen should
not be the Object of Sorrow? Sin drew not from our dear Lord Jesus's eyes only
tears of Water, but from his sacred face great drops of Blood: 'Twas Sin that
pierced not his feet, hands, and side only, but his Soul. Who can look upon the
bloody Knife that stabbed Christ, without some Sorrow? 2. There Is a second
Relation between Christ and Saints, that should make them mourn for the Sins of
the Wicked; and that is the Relation of Teacher and Instructor. We are his
Disciples and Scholars, and it is our. Duty as much to make him our Example, as
to expect he should obtain our Pardon. Christ never had a Pollution, but often a
Commotion of Affection: Christ never wept but for Sin, or its effects. How full
of Zeal was he for his Father, when he saw his Glory blemished, Joh. 2.17. Joh.
19.9, 10, 11. Mar. 3.5.
his House defiled! did it not after a sort eat him up, and consume him? The
Reproaches of them that reproached God fell upon Christ. Romans 15.3. It Is
observable, tho Christ in his own cause gave Pilate no answer, but stood
silent; yet when he heard Pilate arrogate to himself the Power of Life and
Death over Christ, he could not forbear to show Pilate his Sin, by telling him
of an higher Power than his, from whence his was derived. How full of grief was
Christ, Luke 19.41.
seeing the hardness of the Jews hearts to their own destruction! In his
approach to Jerusalem, filled with Enemies to God and him, he wept over it for
their Blindness, and Impieties, and approaching Destruction: He bewailed the
Sins of those that rejoiced in them; and shed his tears for those that thirsted
to shed his blood. Either resemble Christ or lay off the name of Christian.

Wicked, for whose Sins they should mourn.

1. The Saints are men with the worst, they have the Relation of humane nature
to the greatest Sinners upon Earth: they are ex eodem luto formati; In the Body
as the Apostle expresses it, Heb. 13.3. It Is a wickedness to hide our selves
from our own flesh, Isa. 58.7. Humanity in respect of common nature, should
cause Humanity in regard of Affection. To see Man's Nature so depraved, that was
once so beautiful; so like the Devil, that once so much resembled God; so
swiftly running to Hell, that was once an Heir of Heaven; should draw forth
Pity, unless our hearts be Flint and Marble. A man's Beast deserves thy Pity,
much more his Soul.

2. The Righteous are the same with the Wicked in respect of corrupt depraved
Nature; born in Sin as much as they, Ephesians. 2.3.
with a Principle of inclination to all their Impieties. Saints by nature grew
upon the same Root; flowed from the same Fountain; were Stones dug out of
the same Quarry. Should it not then make thee mourn to consider by the
wickedness of others, thine own inbred depravation! What thou had done thy
self, if God had not either renewed or restrained thee! yea, what thou would
do if God should leave thee, and withdraw his Grace from thee! What are all the
visible Impieties in the World, but Comments and Expositions upon thy depraved
Nature? This Drunkard, Adulterer, Sodomite, Murderer, and I (say Lord) were
both cut off from the same piece, and only Free Grace came between us. If it
have made thee white Paper, thou were by Nature as very a Dunghill rag as the
filthiest Sinner.

3. Perhaps the Holiest men have been some way or other Furtherers Elies among
Godly men, who have too negligently reproved and animadverted upon the Sins of
those under their charge? It Is possible to be a good man, and yet a bad
Magistrate, Minister, Parent, by not restraining the Sins of those committed to
us. Cold Reprovers cause bold Sinners. An idle silence may sometimes be more
pernicious than Idle, yea profane Words.

4. In this Relation of Saints to Sinners that should put them upon Godly and
the Wicked make up one Community, or political Body, in the places where they
live, in which respect, the Sins of some particular offender or offenders may
pull down Judgments upon the whole body, or lump of persons that abide where
those offenders live. So that every one had need do his utmost by mourning, and
in whatever other way he can to redress the Sins, and so to prevent the Plagues
of the place where he lives. It Is very evident, Deuteronomy. 21.1, 2, 3. etc. the
Blood of one man murdered, defiles the whole bordering Land, and provokes the
Lords displeasure against a people, even all the place where one notorious
Wickedness is committed. The Sin of making the Golden Calf, tho 'twas not the
Sin of all, yet it endangered all. The Altar built by the two Tribes and an
half, which the rest of the Tribes thought had been built for Sacrifice, was
thought by Phineas to be so great a provocation, as that Josh. 22.18. for it
the Lord would be wroth with the whole Congregation of Israel. For the villainy
by some of the Inhabitants of Gibeah committed in abusing the Levites
Concubine; Judge. 20.46.
the Vengeance came not only upon the City where it was committed, Josh. 7.12.
2 Samuel 21.1.
but upon all the Tribe of Benjamin: Achans Sin troubled all Israel: There came
a Famine upon Israel for three years together, for the Sin of Saul in killing
the Gibeonites contrary to his Fidelity. This was the chief Cause of the
custom, which was at the public Fasts in Israel for the finding out of
notorious Offenders, and offenses to have Vengeance taken on them openly. Hence
was the pretense of Jezabel for the killing of Naboth, 1 King. 21.9, 10.
under a show of Execution of Justice against a Blasphemer, to pacify Gods
anger. By all this it is evident, what just cause the Godly have to mourn for
all the Abominations committed among them, which else may pull down Divine
Vengeance upon them.



1. Use of Information in sundry Branches.

1. Godliness is Uniform in all times, places, and companies. Saints in the
worst of these, keep up their Integrity, and are so far from joining with
Sinners in their Sins, that they by lamenting their Sins before the Lord, enter
their Protestation against them. A Righteous man is not (as the Swine in a
Meadow) clean only in clean places; he will maintain opposition to Sin, in the
midst of Inducements to Sin. Lot did so in Sodom. His goodness may justly be
suspected that only shows it self in good Places, Companies, and Times.

The greatest Sinners cannot Constrain us to sin. They cannot extort our
consent to Sin. Sodom could not, tho never so filthy, make Lot so. No external
inducement can take from a Godly man either his Peace or Purity. Men may
constrain thee to be poor, not impure: The worst Creatures either among Men or
Devils cannot take away what is best. The greatest temptation is no plea for
committing the least Sin: if we give not away, none can take away our Holiness.

3. One Cause may produce contrary Effects. Others sins draw the Wicked
bewailing them. The coming of the Angels into Sodom, stirrs up in Lot a desire
to exercise Hospitality in the entertaining them, but it stirs up in the
impure Sodomites the heat of Lust, and the most horrid Uncleanness. That which
sets the Graces of Saints on work, puts the Wicked upon Acts of Impiety. A
Godly man is drawn nearer to God, by that very thing that drives the Wicked
farther from God. It Is the Disposition of the Person that makes what befalls
him, good or bad. David's beautiful House of Cedar puts him upon setting up Gods
House. Nebuchadnezzar's Palace puts him upon thoughts of haughtiness, and proud
self-admiration.

4. It Is our Duty to rejoice in the Holiness, if to mourn for the Sins Love to
Gods house in others was David's gladness. Psalm. 122.1. 'Twas the greatest joy
of holy John that his spiritual, Children walked in the truth. 3 Epist. 4. Holy
ones were Paul's Joy, Crown, and Glory. 1 These. 2.19, 20. This rejoicing in the
Grace of others must be, tho their Grace out-shines and eclipseth ours. They
who have but a little Grace themselves, must rejoice that others have and act
more than they. The Preaching of Christ by those that envyed, made Paul joyful.
Phil. 3.18. It should please us though another can do more service to God than
our selves.

5. Christianity abolisheth not Affection, but rectifies it. It dries not etc.
but only turns them into the right Channel; it removes not away their Being,
but their ill Being. Religion non mactat sed sanctificat; it slayes not, but
sanctifies affections; It does not unman a man, but only undevil him. Grace is
like the percolation, or dreining of Salt water through the Earth, it only
takes away the brackishness and unsavouriness of our affections and faculties:
It kills not Isaac, but the Ram: it does not break, but only tune the string of
nature. Non tollit, sed attollit; it destroys not, but advances Nature. When
you are Godly, you have more innocent Humanity than ever. You may exercise
humane affections and actions as much as you can desire, only not to damn your
selves. You may eat, tho not be Gluttons; drink, tho not be drunk; buy and
sell, so as you make not sale of a good Conscience. Grace gives leave to every
thing besides damning your Souls.

6. Every thing betters a Saint. Not only Ordinances, Word, Sacraments,

A Saint sails with every wind. As the Wicked are hurt by the best things, so
the Godly are bettered by the worst. Because they have made void thy Law,
therefore do I love thy Commandments. Psalm. 119.127. Holiness is the more
owned by the Godly, the more the world despises it. The most eminent Saints
were those of Caesar's (Nero's) house. Phil. 4.22. They who kept Gods name, were
they that lived where Satan's Throne was. Rev. 2.13. Zeal for God grows the
hotter by opposition; and thereby the Godly most labor to give the Glory of
God reparation. Lime by casting Water upon it, grows inflamed; and opposition
confirms the upright Christian in Holiness. Winds make the trees more firmly
rooted. 'Twas said of old, Grave bonum a Nerone damnari; the best action,
Saints account that which is opposed by the worst men. Elijah's Jealousy for
Religion was the more kindled by its being opposed by Idolaters. 1 King. 19.14.
Lot showed himself a better man in Sodom than in the Cave. Genesis 19.30.


The great Misery Sin has brought into the World, to make Sorrow and Mourning
necessary. Could we live so holily (as we cannot) as not, to see cause of
trouble from our selves, we must be troubled by observing others. Ever since
the coming in of Sin, Sorrow is become a Duty. What is to live long in the
World, but to be Mournful, and Afflicted long? It should make us long for a
better World, where that which is here our Duty to practice, shall for ever be
our Privilege to be freed from. And

There must needs remain a better State for the Saints. Surely tho here Sorrow,
yea, because Sorrow is here their Duty, it must not always last, here and
hereafter too, in both Worlds; for then their Condition in this regard would be
worse than that of the Wicked, who have their good things here.

How ought Sinners to mourn for their own Sins! The nearer the Enemy is, the
more dreadful he is. Nothing more dismal than to see a Sinner to go, not
swiftly only, but merrily to Eternal Mourning. Maxim gemendus, qui non gemit.
He that has no tears for himself, should be helped by ours.



reproach the holy mourning of Saints, for others Sins. They count it at the
best but melancholy Mopishness. First they cause them to mourn, and then they
deride them for mourning: like some that beat a person till he cries, and then
they beat him for crying. It Is better to be a Mourner for Sin, than a Mocker
for mourning. Some account mourning for public Sins, a sign of disaffection to
the Public Government: As Jeremy who mourned for the Sins of his time, was
charged to be an Enemy to the State. They are not to be accounted the troublers
of Israel, who are the only persons troubled for the cause of Isreal's troubles.
They are falsely esteemed the Incendiaries in a State, whose great study is to
quench Gods burning Wrath. If Sinners kindle the Fire, let Saints quench it.

2. This Doctrine of Mourning for the Sins of others, speaks Reproof that take
pleasure in the Sins of others. Romans 1.32. I fear there are many who would be
glad, were Sin more common, that there might be none to make them ashamed of
Sin; that delight in the frowardness of the Wicked, Prove. 2.14. that recreate
themselves with others Sins, that say of Sinners as the Philistines of Blind
Samson, Let them come and make us sport by Sinning; that cannot be merry unless
a Sinner be in their Company: Fools make a mock of Sin, Prove. 14.9. Some have
observed, that among all Solomon's delights he never had a Fool to make him
merry. Of all Fools, Sinners are the greatest, but especially they that are
delighted with the sinful follies of others. To be delighted with the Holiness
of others, is a good sign; but to be delighted with the Sins of others, is a
black mark. Holy David was of a contrary temper. Depart (says he, Psalm.
119.115.) from me ye Workers of Iniquity. No Wicked man's Company is to be
desired, unless to do him good. We should not be with the Wicked as Companions,
but Physicians. The Wicked's good Fellowship will have a bad Conclusion.

3. This Doctrine reproves those that mourn for the Holiness of others. Turk or
Papist should be honored for their silly self-contrived preciseness and
Fopperies, and that a Saint should be derided for real Sanctity! I have known
some Parents that have greatly desired their Children should be good Husbands,
to get and increase their Estates, but then have been very fearful lest they
should be too Godly; and it has been the righteous Judgment of God that their
Children proved Spendthrifts; neither Godly, nor Good Husbands: It Is often seen
that as Gardiners with their Sheers ship off the tops of the tallest sprigs, so
men most labor to discountenance the tallest in Christianity.

4. This Doctrine reproves those that put others upon Sin; so far burning Coals
to inflame others with love to God, are blacking Coals to defile others with
Sin! They are not willing to go to Hell alone: It Is little enough to be a
Leader to Heaven, but too much to be a Follower to Hell; what then to be a
Leader?

Of Exhortation, to mourn for the Sins of the Wicked among whom

1. If we mourn not for others Sins, theirs become ours. We are justly to be
accounted approvers of others Sins, if we enter not this Protestation of
Mourning against them. If sin be not laid to thy heart (thou knowing it) it
will in some degree be laid to thy Charge. When the Corinthians mourned for the
sin committed among them, the Apostle pronounced them clear of this matter, 2
Cor. 7.11. Their Hatred of it did not clear them till followed with mourning
for it.

awaken thy Conscience for thine own former Sins. It will mind thee what thou
have done in thy former unconverted state. It will bring to remembrance, as
Paul speaks Tit. 3.3. what thou did in times past, and cause a fresh bleeding
in thy Soul for Sin.

Without Mourning for Sinners, you will never seek the Reformation of Sinners. The
greatest Mourners have been the greatest Reformers. See it in Nehemiah, Ezra,
David: Neh. 9.16. Ezra 9.6, 7. -- 6.10. We only seek to redress what is
burdensome. If Reformation be our Joy, Sin to be reformed will be our Sorrow:
All mourners will desire to remove the Cause of their Mourning. Private Sorrow
increases public Care.

This mourning for others Sins, will make us more fearful to admit Sin into our
selves. It will keep us at a greater distance from temptation to Sin; the best
way to keep us from infection by Sin. Who will dare to do that which he grieves
to see another do? He that is afraid of a Plague Sore upon another, will fear
it should come upon himself.

Mourning for others Sins speaks thee a man of public usefulness to thy
Country. That thou have an holy Care of it: that thou art to be reckoned among
the Chariots and Horsemen of it, and a Pillar of thy Nation, a Defender of it,
and one that stands in the gap to prevent the incursion of what would destroy
it: That in a public Conflagration thou had rather bring thy bucket of
Tears, than take thy sleep: A public Spirit is only truly Noble.

Mourning for others Sins, makes the Sins of others beneficial to thee. Instead
of infecting thee by sinful Example, it stirs up thy Graces of Zeal, Compassion
and holy Charity. It speaks thee like to Christ, who had a Commotion without
Pollution of Affection: That thou have an Heart like a Garden of Roses, or a
well of Rose Water, which the more blown upon and stirred, smell the more
delightfully: For this

Holy Commotion of Soul for others sins, sends forth a most acceptable and
fragrant savor into the Nostrils of God. It speaks thee marked out for Mercy;
God bottles thy Tears: He likes it that thou art good in bad times, and highly
approves our mourning for them. He will shortly wipe all these Tears from thine
Eyes; and bring thee to that state, where thou shall have neither Sin in thy
Soul nor Sinner in thy Society, where thou shall be freed from the power and
presence of both; in one word, where thou shall find that thou who did
contend in secret, have prevailed openly.

4. I shall add, tho but name one Use more, and that is Direction
self-Exemption, as if it belonged only to the highest in the practice of
Religion, or persons in Office: The whole Church of Corinth were bound to mourn
for that great Sin among them. All desire to be marked, 1 Cor. 5.2.
and therefore should be Mourners. 2. Look upon mourning for Sin to be no Legal
practice, but an Evangelical Duty; the Gospel Grace makes Tears sweeter, not
fewer. 3. Preserve tenderness of Conscience in respect of thine own Sins. 4.
Strengthen Faith in divine Threatenings against Sin. 5. Be Holily not curiously
inquisitive into the state of the times, Lastly, Take heed of being drowned in
sensual Delights.

Quest. How a Child of God is to keep himself in the Love of God. SERMON VI.
JUDE, Verse. 21. Keep your selves in the Love of God.
Sir. has it thus: Let us keep our selves in the Love of God: But the Greek,
Arab. Aethiop. have it as we read it.
THIS is the Scripture upon which we ground this solemn Case, and Question. And
a weighty one it is to every Soul that pretends to the Love of God, and the
happy Privileges of it. Now the sum of this short Epistle, which is but one
Chapter, is this. I say, the design of the Spirit of God by the Apostle, is in
two things.

1. To confirm true Believers in the Faith of Christ. 2. To caution them
against the Enemies of it. These Enemies are described in four things.
Verse 4.
1. By their Qualities: they turned the Grace of God into Laesciviousness, and
denied the only Lord God and our Lord Jesus Christ.

Such were the Carpocratians, and Gnostics: this they did both in Doctrine,
and Manners.

(...).
2 In their Entrance into the Church: Subtly and secretly: as Foxes into the
Fold, or like Wolves in Sheeps-clothing, the proper mark of False Teachers.

3. By their End. Which is Condemnation, whereunto they are appointed, verse. 4.

4. By their Parallel of the Evil Angels, the old World, Sodom and Gomorrah,
Verse. 14. to 19.
ver. 7. 8. Such were foretold by Enoch and the Apostles. Of these the Apostle
Jude warns the Saints, and withal shows, how they should quit themselves,
principally in two things.

1. As to themselves. 2. As to others.
The First consists in four things.

1. Building up our selves in the Holy Faith. 2. Praying in the Holy Ghost.
verse. 20. 3. Keeping of our selves in the Love of God. 4. Looking for the Mercy
of our Lord Jesus Christ unto Eternal Life. verse. 21.
The second what they must do to others.

1. They must put a difference between them that are fallen off, Verse 22, 23.
and them that are falling, as being of different Complexions: having
Compassion on some with the Spirit of Meekness; others treating with some
quickness, pulling them out of the Fire.

2. They must hate the Appearance of Evil; even the Garment spotted with the
Flesh

3. Pray for them, that God would keep them from falling. Verse 20. 24.
For the Grace of Christ, by which we alone stand; without which neither they
nor we can do any thing, he both can and will do it faithfully.

4. Praise the Lord who has made such Provision for our Preservation and
Salvation. verse. 24, 25.

Now that which I shall confine my self to, is in verse. 21. the first Clause.
Keep your selves in the Love of God. And then the Case and Question is this.

What we must do to keep our selves in the Love of God?

A solemn and weighty Question, and wherein every Soul of us is nearly
concerned.

There are three things that require some Explication.

Q. 1. What is meant by your selves?

A. Every one himself, and every one each other so far as he can.

2. What is meant by the action which each is to see put forth? (...).
to keep, to observe, to preserve, firmly, safely, constantly. I have kept the
Faith. 2 Timothy 4.3. Thus we keep, and thus God keeps us. Jam. 1. ult. John 3.22.
Rev. 12.17. Joh. 17.11. John 17.15. In all which Places the word is the same in
the Text, to keep fast and safe; and faithfully, with all Care, and Diligence,
and Conscience; as we would keep a thing for our Life. Prove. 4.23. Keep thy
Heart with all Diligence, for out of it are the Issues of Life.

From all which thus explained, arises this Proposition.

It is the Duty of every Child of God, Obs.
to keep themselves in the Love of God.

This Proposition is grounded upon a threefold Supposition.

1. That some men are in the Love of God really, and eternally.

2. That this Love wherewith God loves his Chosen, Romans v. 8. 11, 12, 13.
is a special Love, a peculiar and distinguishing Love.

3. That it is a Duty, as well as a Privilege to keep our selves in the Love
of God: our Activity, as well as Gods Act. Which will be hereafter more
explained.

Before we come to the main Question, we will answer this Question: How Love
can be said to be in God? for Love is a Passion in the Creature, and Passions
are Imperfections, which are contrary to Gods Perfection.

A. 1. It is true: Nothing of Imperfection is in God; but Love is in God as a
Perfection: because Love is in God in the abstract, that is essentially; for
Abstracts speak Essences. God is Love. 1 John 4.8.

The Love of God is either natural or voluntary, thus Divines distinguish, and
that well.

Mat. 3.17. Joh. 3.35. Joh. 5.20. Joh. 17.24.
1. The Natural Love of God is that wherewith God loves himself. That is, the
reciprocal Love whereby the three Persons love each other.

This Essential Natural Love of God is therefore necessary. God cannot but love
himself.

2. The Love of God is voluntary: thus he loves his Creatures with a general
Love.

1. Because he made them, and made them good, therefore he preserves them: Genesis
1.31.
for though Sin be really evil, and none of Gods making, but contrary to God,
and hated of God; yet God loves the Creatures as his Creatures, although
sinful, with a general Love.

Mat. 5.44, 45.
2. He loves some Creatures with a special Love, and by this he loves Jesus
Christ as Mediator.

Joh. 3.35. Ephesians. 1.6. 1 John 4.9. Romans 8. ult.
1. This Love of God to Christ as Mediator, is the Foundation of Gods Love to
his Elect.

2. By a special Love God loves his Elect. John 13.1. Of this Love it is said
that it is inseparable.

Now this is the peculiar Love which God bears to some above others. Not
because they were more lovely than others, nor because God foresaw they would
believe and love him; but because God loved them first antecedently to all
those things: Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 5. Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7, 8. Ephesians. 2.3, 4, etc. to 10.
and because he loved them therefore Christ shall come and die, and therefore
they shall believe in him and love him. The sum is this: Our Love to God is
the Effect, and not the Cause of Gods Love to us: yea Christ himself as
Mediator is the Effect of Gods Eternal Love. This is primitive Doctrine.

John 6.37. All that the Father has given me shall come unto me. V. 44. No man
can come unto me, except the Father which has sent me draw him.

1 John 4.19. He has loved us first.

Romans 10.20. I am found of them that sought me not.

Romans 5.8.10. God commended his love toward us, that while we were yet Sinners
and Enemies, Christ died for us. Upon which I would have old and new Donatists,
which make God to love all alike, in order to their Salvation; and that there
is no special Grace, let them read St. Augustine, Tom. 9. Tract. 102. on John.
Tom. 7. Lib. contra Donatistas post Collat. p. 403. also page 402. likewise in
Brevic. p. 387. Collat. cum Donatistis Collat. tertii diei. Item Tom. 9. Tract.
87. on John. Item Tom. 2. Epist. 48. p. 118. and many more places.

I have therefore named all these, because there is a sort of Men risen up
among us, Gal. 1.6.7.
corrupters and perverters of the Word and Ways of God, who raise up Donatism
and Pelagianism from the Death.

I know some make this Love of God in the Text, to be meant not of Gods Love to
us at all, but of our Love to God only: Contrary, I judge it spoken principally
of Gods Love to us, not excluding our Love to God, but comprehending it, as a
great sign that God loves us, when we truly love God. According to this sense I
shall proceed to speak to the present Case; which is a practical Question.

How Christians shall do to keep themselves in the Love of God?

(1.) In General. One whom God loves and favors, Ephesians. 5.17.
to know what is the will and Pleasure of God, and to conform to it. The Reason
whereof is this: Because,

1. The Will of God is a Sovereign Will, to all the World, therefore to thine,
and mine; there is no controuling of it: Who can say unto God, What do thou?
When any man's will comes in competition with Gods Will, thou know what thou
have to answer, Dan. 3.16, 17.
and what thou have to do. Act. 4.19.

But if man's commanding Will be agreeable to Gods revealed Will which is the
Standard, then we please and not displease God in submitting to man, because
subordinate things do not clash.

2. Because the Will of God is a holy Will; and we can never keep our selves in
the Love of God, 1 Pet. 1.15.16.
but by what is agreeable to his Holiness, and that is when we our selves are
Holy: because this is not only the Will of God, but the Image of God. Ephesians.
4.24. created after God. Now God loves Children that are most like him, for
Likeness is the Cause of Love. Thus much in General.

(2.) But now more particularly:

I. He that will keep himself in the Love of God, must he himself love God; for
Love deserves Love, and Love begets Love: Gods Love works thus toward
us, and therefore our Love must work toward God. Prove. 4.6. Prove. 8.17.
Our Love to God is but the Reflection of the Beams of Gods Love upon us. Love
Wisdom and she shall love thee; I love them that love me. And thus the Beams
are doubled, and the Love of God to the Soul, and the Souls love to God
increases the heat between both, as it is with the Sun shining on the Earth.

II. He that loves God loving him, Magnes amoris amor.
is drawn to God by the attractive Beams of Divine Love: these are called the
Bands of Love, Hos. 11.4.

He that loves God loving him, is inflamed with Gods Love; as it is in a
Burning Glass. This is a Heavenly Fire, kindled from Heaven, and not easily
quenched. Cant. 8.7.


He that loves God loving him, finds the strongest Obligation upon him to Love
God, as constrained to it, 2 Cor. 5.14. and God endears him to love God from
his Heart; for Love ravisheth the Heart beyond all things in the World. The
Lord and his Spouse ravish one another. Cant. 4.9.


III. He that will keep himself in the Love of God, must mind and meditate on
four Attributes and Properties of Gods Love, which will have great influence
upon his Heart and Love.

1. On the Eternity of Gods Love to him; which has been ever, of old, time out
of Mind; yea, before all Time he has been thy Friend, and thy Fathers friend,
therefore forget him not. Prove. 27.10.

Because Election which is the effect of Gods Eternal Love, is Eternal. Ephesians.
1.4.

And because he is Love essentially, 1 John 4.8. therefore his Love is Eternal
as himself.

Hos. 14.4.
2. On the Freeness of Gods Love. All the Arguments of his Love are drawn out of
his own Breast; therefore this free Love of God is called Grace, 2 Timothy 1.9.
which is no Grace unless it be gratuitous and free. Not according to works,
says the Apostle, the great Champion of Free Grace, which Bradwardin calls the
Cause of God; but according to his own purpose and grace which was given us in
Christ Jesus, Romans 11.5, 6.
before the world began. And again, There is a remnant according to the
election of grace: and if by grace, then it is no more of works, otherwise
grace is no more grace. O meditate on this! How should the consideration of
this keep us in the Love of God!

Mark and mind this well. Free Grace and Love sent Jesus Christ into the World,
and all the train of Spiritual Blessings. Joh. 3.16. 1 John 4.9.

1. The free Love of God was the Cause of Election. Romans 11.5.

2. The free Love of God is the cause of our effectual Vocation. Gal. 1.6.15.

3. The free Grace and Love of God is the cause of our Adoption. Ephesians. 1.5, 6.

4. The free Love and Grace of God is the cause of our Justification. Romans 3.24.

5. The free Love and Grace of God is the cause of the Pardon of Sin. Romans 5.20.

6. The free Grace and Love of God is the cause of true, and thorough
Conversion. 1 Cor. 15.10.

7. The free Grace and Love of God is the Cause of true Faith. Act. 18.27.

8. The free Grace and Love of God is the cause of Christ's suffering for us.
Heb. 2.9.

9. The Free Grace and Love of God is the Cause of that inestimable Jewel and
Blessing, the Word of God. Act. 14.3.

10. The free Grace and Love of God is the cause of our Salvation. Ephesians. 2.5, 8.

O meditate and mind the infinite free Love of God in all the sweet Streams of
it, and dwell upon the meditation of it, and be ravished with it, and give the
God of Grace and Love the Glory of it for ever.

3. Mind the Immensity of Gods Love. This is so vast an Ocean, that thou will
find neither Bounds, nor Bottom in it. Hear the Apostle upon it, Ephesians. 3.18.
That ye may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the Breadth, and
Length, and Depth, and Height; and to know the Love of Christ which passes
knowledge. To know it to pass all knowledge.

The Consideration of this alone has so amazed some devout Souls, that they
have been in an Ecstasy, above and besides themselves with it.

4. Mind and meditate on the Unchangeableness of Gods Love. This is grounded
upon two immutable things by which it is impossible for God to lie. This, O!
Heb. 6.17, 18.
this gives sure Anchor-hold and comfort to a true Believer in a Storm. v. 19.

This Assurance God has given his People of old. Jer. 31.3. I have loved thee
with an everlasting love. Romans 8. ult. Joh. 13.1.
It is an Inseparable Love. It is a final Love, but not finite Love: It is to
the end, and without end.

It is Invincible Love. Cant. 8.6.

It is an Unquenchable Love. Cant. 8.7.

Obj. If this be so, what need then of the Apostles Exhortation to keep our
selves in the Love of God?

Answ. 1. Because Gods Promises and Believers Privileges, do not exclude, but
include the use of Means. For instance, Phil. 2.12, 13. Work out your own
Salvation with fear and trembling, for it is God that works in you to will
and to do of his good pleasure.

Ephesians. 1.5. According as he has chosen us in him, before the foundaon of the
World, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love.

2 Pet. 1.4. to verse 10. He tells them, God has given them exceeding great
and precious Promises, yet bids them to give all diligence to make their
Calling and Election sure, by adding Grace to Grace.

Ephesians. 2.3. He says, we are saved by Grace, through Faith, which is the Gift
of God, without Works: and yet he says, we are created to good Works, that we
should walk in them, and this God has ordained, v. 9, 10.

1 These. 5. After he had Exhorted them to many Duties, he adds this: Faithful
is he that has called you, who also will do it.

Mark our Text, and compare it with the Context after, when he bids us keep our
selves in the love of God, he says, Verse. 24.
God is able to keep us from falling, and to present us faultless before the
presence of his glory, with exceeding joy.

2. God who prevents us with his Grace, and works upon us, and in us, unto
Conversion, and Regeneration, hereby puts into us an Active Principle; and
helps and recruits it continually by auxiliary Grace: Our habits of Grace cease
acting, if God suspends the influence of Grace: as we see in Peter's ease, both
upon the Waters when he began to Sink, till the Lord gave him a Hand; and went
on denying his Master, till the Lord looked upon him, and melted him into
Tears. God will ever have us beholding to him, and lean upon him; h. 15.4, 5.
and we are made up of nothing else but Dependency and Frailty, Luc. 22.61. Now
this active principle is chiefly Faith, and Love. Faith working by Love.
Faith gives us union to Christ, and maintains that Union: Now as we are kept
by Faith, so we and our Faith are kept both by the power of God to salvation, 1
Pet. 1.4, 5. Our Inheritance is kept in Heaven for us, and we are kept in Earth
for it, till we possess it in Heaven. Quis custodiet ipsos custodes. We should
be poorly and Miserably kept, if the Lord were not our keeper. How did Adam
keep his Estate, and the Angels theirs, and Esau his Birthright, and the
Prodigal his Portion, when all was trusted in their own hands? One lost all for
an Apple, and another for a Mess of Dainty Broth, and another for his carnal
pleasures: but happy Believers whose All is in better Trustees hands; 1 Pet. 4.
ult.
even the hand of a Faithful God.

IV. He that will keep himself in the Love of God, must keep himself free from
the Love of the World: because the Love of this World is contrary to the Love
of God, 1 John 2.15, 16.
and therefore inconsistent with it.

1. Because the Love of the World and its Trinity, or threefold Lust, is a
dangerous Heart-thief, it Steals away the Heart from God, as Absalom stole away
the Hearts of the People from David by his Kisses, 2 Samuel 15.5, 6.
and Flatteries. Hos. 4.11. What the Prophet speaks of Wine and Whoredom, is
true of all other worldly things.

2. The Love of the World makes God jealous, because Worldlings make an Idol of
it; and it is the worst Idolatry, being that of the first Commandment. M^t.
6.24.
So is Covetousness, and Mammon, when the Heart is inordinate upon Creatures,
Silver, Gold, Relations, that is our Treasure, Luc. 12.34. Colos. 3.5.

Therefore says the Lord, take heed and beware of Covetousness: Luke 12.15. A
double caution; all little enough. And of this nature is Luxury, and Epicurism
also. Phil. 3.18, 19, 20. Drunkenness, the Love of Pleasure more than God;
(...).
Belly-gods.

Nay thus it is likewise in the inordinate Love of Children, which is soon
done: and they become Idols, and God in his jealousy breaks them, 1 Samuel 2.21.
or breaks us for them, as he did old Eli, honoring his Sons above God. And he
that loves Son or Daughter more than me, is not worthy of me, (Math. 10.37.)
says Christ.

3. Because the Love of the World is a Choak-pear to all that is truly good; as
is clear in the Thorny Ground. Math. 13. v. 7.22. Experience teaches this
universally; and the nature of the things being contrary one to the other, and
killing one of another Like the Torment of Mezentius putting the Living to the
Dead, which corrupts and kills the Living.
: one being Spiritual and Heavenly, the other Carnal, Sensual, and Destructive;
yea both are destroyers of each other. Romans 7.24. Who shall deliver me from the
Body of this Death?
Do not we see what mortal Enemies worldly men are to Divine things? The Word
says, the world lies in wickedness; the Devil is the Prince of the wicked
World, and rules in the children of disobedience; it feeds the Flesh, and
nourishes the carnal part, and is not subject to the Law of God, nor can be,
Romans 8.7. Yea it is a deadly thing to the Soul; Romans 6.6. Gal. 5.17. Romans 8.13.
Gal. 6.14. Gal. 2.20. Gal. 5.24.
and such deadly things are these two Lovers, that is, these two Lusts, that
they hunt for the life of each other, fighting against each other to the death;
and the quarrel always ends in the death of one or the other. If ye live after
the flesh ye shall dye, but if ye through the Spirit mortify the deeds of the
flesh ye shall live. See the Scriptures in the Margin.

4. The Love of the World has Sorcery, and Witchcraft in it: when once men
drink of the Worlds Cup, they are intoxicated. We read of Simon Magus, how he
bewitched the People, Act. 8.9. We read of Jezebels Witchcrafts, 2 King. 9.22.
Nahum 3.9. Rev. 17.2, 3, 4. Falsus, and fallax est mundus, exterius aurens,
interius lutens. N. N.
and Babylons Sorceries and Witchcrafts: and it is joined with the Works of the
Flesh, Gal. 5.17. to ver. 21. Sixteen in number. Rev. 22.15. Maxima totius
orbis venefica: The greatest Witch in the world, is the World. Her Honors are
bewitching Honors; Her Delights and pleasures are bewitching: Her Riches and
Profits are bewitching. How then is the Love of the World consistent with Gods
Love? Therefore for the Love of God, love not the World.

5. The Love of the World, makes Men Apostates from Christ: So it made Demas, 2 Timothy 4.10. and so it has made thousands more, and thee among the rest if thou
look not well to thy Self.

6. Psalm. 17.14. Phil. 3.18, 19, 20.
Because the Love of the World makes men take up their Heaven on this side
Heaven: Of those men the Apostle could not speak without Weeping: This is like
the Prodigal, that preferred a Tavern, and a Brothel-House, before his Fathers
House, Luc. 15.13.

V. He that will Love God, and keep himself in the Love of God, must not be a
Self-lover: there is no greater Enemy to the Love of God than to Love our
selves. 2 Timothy 3.2.
Mark the place for it is a remarkable place: He tells you of perilous times a
coming, and there gives nineteen marks of such men as make the times perilous:
Of all which Lovers of themselves leads the Van; for where once this Principle
prevails, it opens a Floodgate to all Sin, and shuts the door upon all Holy
Motions: If Self be beloved, admired and idolized, it is the worst Idol in the
World; this is an Idol in a secret place, continually adored; this is Dagon set
above the Ark, and a Man above God, and provokes to jealousy; this perverts
the course of Nature, and Gods order, who is one God, and uppermost, and only
to be adored: and men set up themselves in Gods Throne, and Ungod him by
deifying themselves: and for one God, they set up millions of gods; as many
gods as Creatures. This is man's misery by losing the Integrity wherein God made
him, and seeking out many Inventions. And when the Lord Christ came into the
World, he he speaks our Love, and wooes us for it, and commands self-denial as
the first Lesson to be learned in his School, Mat. 16.24, 25. Mat. 10.37.
whereby the great Stumbling Block to Gods Love is taken away.

VI. If ye would keep your selves in the Love of God, be very shy of Sin, both
in the Risings of it, and as to the Temptations to it. For the love of God, and
the love of Sin are more contrary to each other than Heaven and Hell. Because
they are Morally contrary.

Romans 8.
1. Sin is Enmity against God in the Abstract.

2. Sin is hateful to God, therefore inconsistent with the Love of God. These
six things the Lord hates, yea seven, which his Soul hates. Prove. 6.16.

Psalm. 97.10. Math. 6.24.
Therefore, ye that love the Lord, hate evil.

These are two Masters which we cannot hate and love both.

3. Sin separates from God, therefore we cannot keep our selves in the love of
Sin, and in the love of God. Sin makes us depart from God, and God to depart
from us.

Therefore Conversion reconciles God to us, because it mortifies Sin in us, by
virtue of Christ's Death for us.

VII. He that will keep himself in the Love of God, must clear up his Interest
and Union to Jesus Christ.

1. Because Jesus Christ was sent us as the greatest Instance, and the greatest
Token of Gods Love in the World, 1 John 4.9.

2. Because the Lord Jesus purchased the Love of God to us, when we were the
greatest Enemies to each other, Romans 5.8, 10.

3. Because Jesus Christ is the Souls Love, Cant. 3.1.

4. Because Jesus Christ is all Loves, Cant. 5.16.

5. Because this was the End of Christ's coming into the World, to save us from
our sins, the sole cause of Gods hatred to Sinners, Math. 1.21.

6. Because the Father loves whom Christ loves, and he loves them that love
Christ, Joh. 16.27.

7. Because our Interest in Christ puts a Soul out of all danger. Romans 8.1.
Romans 5.1. Chap. 7.24, 25.

8. Because the Lord Jesus makes the Fathers Love to him, the measure of his
love to us: As the Father has loved me, so have I loved you, continue in my
love. Joh. 15.9. i. e. By this ye keep in Gods Love.

9. Because the Lord Jesus teaches us the way how to keep in his Love. Joh.
15.10.

Consider all this, and how cogently they prove this Head, of clearing up our
Interest and Union unto Christ, to keep our selves in the Love of God.

VIII. An eighth way of keeping our selves in the Love of God, is by keeping
Gods Commandments: I do not mean as to a Covenant of Works, but upon a Gospel
account. If ye keep my Commandments ye shall abide in my Love, as I have kept
my Fathers Commandments, and abide in his Love. John 15.10. Verse. 14. Ye are my
Friends if ye do whatsoever I command you. O! mind that. Again mark this: Joh.
14.21. He that has my Commandments, and does them, he it is that loves me,
and he that loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and we
will make our abode with him. This Love is the fulfilling of the whole Law, and
the Gospel too. There be many that will complement a Love to God, but will do
nothing for him. The greatness of Abraham's Love to God, and of David's Love,
and of Peter's Love, and of Mary's Love, of Paul's Love, and of the Martyrs
Love, was in doing and in dying for him. And is not the greatness of Gods Love,
and of Chists Love to us, Joh. 15.13.
in Doing and Suffering?

We read of Labor of Love; because true Love is Laborious: as it was in
Jacob's Love for Rachel.

There is nothing God hates more than pretending to love, therefore the Lord
hates Hypocrites. Not every (Mat. 7.21.) one that says unto me Lord, Lord,
shall enter into Heaven, but he that does the Will of my Father which is in
Heaven. As God says: This People (Deuteronomy. 5.29,) have well said in all that they
have spoken; O that there were such a Heart in them, that they would fear me,
and keep all my Commandments always. So I say of Professors, and great
Pretenders, that show much kindness with their Mouth, but their Heart is not
right with God. O that there were such a Heart in them, that they would make
Conscience to do the Will of God.

If the Lord loved the young man, that was in a fair way of keeping the
Commandments of God, and was not perfect and thorowpac'd; how much more will he
have a Love for them that have a respect to all the Commandments of God? Psalm,
119.6.

IX. The way to keep our selves in the Love of God, is to walk closely with God
in ways of strict Holiness.

This is a Commendation and Character upon Record, of Gods chiefest Favorites.
Thus it was with Abraham, Genesis 17.1. Thus it was with Enoch, Genesis 5.22. Thus it
was with Noah, Genesis 6.9. Thus it was with Caleb, Number. 14.24. And thus David;
Psalm. 73. ult. Now we shall see how such a one is to God, who desires to keep
in the Love of God. We have known (1 John 4.16.) and believed the Love that God
has to us. God is Love, and he that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God
in him. O sweet dwelling!

You shall shall find that the Holiest Persons were always the highest
Favorites of God. Witness those beforementioned, and these following
Instances.

Job 1.1, 2, 3. How did God bless him, and praise him, and try him, and reward
him for his eminent Holiness!

Zachary and Elizabeth, Luke 1.6, 7. How singularly did they shine in Holiness,
and in the Favor of God; to whom God gave a Son in their old age, the
Harbinger of Christ!

Mary the Mother of Christ, Luke 1.28.
how was she for her Holiness pronounced (...), highly favored!

And Simeon, Luke 2.25, etc. and Anna, verse. 36, 37, 38.

Holiness and Purity brings us to the fight of God, which is called Beatifical;
which is the Souls highest Happiness, and ultimate end; Math. 5.8. Psalm. 24.4.
Heb. 12.14. and therefore is pronounced Blessed. Psalm. 119.1, 2.

X. They keep themselves in the Love of God, who do not wave or abate their
Profession and Practice of Godliness in evil times, and do not baulk the ways
of God under severe Providence, and sharp Trials: this was eminent in all
Christ's Worthyes.

Thus David, Psalm. 44.17. to verse. 22. Mind that Place; Though they were sore
broken, and smitten into the Place of Dragons, and covered as with the shadow
of death, yet we have not forgotten thee, nor declined from thy way, etc.

Job 13.15. cap. 3.17, 18.
Thus Job. Though he slay me, yet I will trust in him.

Thus Habakkuk. Although the Fig Tree shall not blossom, the Vine, Olive, and
Field shall fail of their Fruit, and not any Flocks or Herds left; yet I will
rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of my Salvation. The Lord God is my
strength.

And thus all the Champions of God. Let Paul be one Instance more. Romans 8.35,
36, 37, 38, 39.

Prove. 3.11, 12.
1. A Friend loves at all times, and a Brother is born for the day of
Adversity. Prove. 17.17.

2. They know the Lords Chastenings are in Love. Heb. 12.6. Rev. 3.19.

Psalm. 119.67, 71, 72.
3. They know that all the Lords Severities are for good, many ways. To drive
them to Ordinances, and Duties, to sweeten them, and to teach them to profit by
them; to know more of the Will of God by them, and to give us a better Relish
of the Word by the Rod: as Shepherds let loose their Dogs to hunt the straggling
Sheep into their Bounds. As Parents use Bug-bears to make their Children run
into their Arms, all in Love, and to keep them in it by keeping them from
excursions.

XI. Another Means to keep our selves in the Love of God, is to keep in our
Hearts a quick sense of the Pardon of Sin; of the wonderful love of the Lord
to a poor sinful Soul, to pardon great and many sins: This puts such an
Obligation upon a Sinner, that he cannot choose but express his great love to
the Lord for it.

See a famous Instance of this in Mary Magdalen, who having received this great
Mercy from the Lord, Luc. 7.38, 47. (...).
came where he was in Simon the Pharisees house, kneeled down at her dear
Saviors feet, and instead of Water her Eyes were Ewers, and she wept tears
upon the feet of Christ, and washed his feet with them, so abundant were they;
and then instead of a Towel she wiped his washen feet with the hair of her
Head! and not only so, but kissed his feet: All which, tho the envious Pharisee
blamed, yet the Lord Jesus allowed and highly praised, with tart reflection upon
the proud Pharisee, who omitted those Civilities which that humble loving
Convert performed. Moreover the Lord that knew her Heart testifies for her,
(...).
she did it all in much love to him, for the forgiveness of her many sins.

1. Because Forgiveness of Sin is an act of the greatest Grace, condescension
and kindness of God to a poor Soul: Because by the guilt of Sin a Soul is bound
over to eternal Death and Wrath in Hell, there to make satisfaction, which will
be ever a doing, and never done: Pardon of Sin loosneth the Sinner from that by
Christ's satisfaction for him.

2. Because every one thus Pardoned, Psalm. 51.12. Uphold me (...) with thy
ingenuous or generous Spirit.
is made truly sensible of the Kindness of God to him in it, and by converting
Grace has an ingenuous and noble Spirit created in his heart, that will never
suffer him to forget it, nor think he can ever sufficiently prize or express it.

XII. A further Means to keep our selves in the Love of God, is not only to
love the Lord, but to keep up our Love to him to the height. Such a love as the
Bride and Bridegroom have to each other, which is brisk and highest then. Jer.
2.2. Rev. 2.4, 5.
I remember (says the Lord) the love of thine espousals. And again, I have
somewhat against thee, because thou art fallen from thy first love; repent and
do thy first works.

The Lord commands our Love toward him in the most intense degree of
Affection; with all the heart, with all the soul, with all thy might, Cum omni
valde t^o. (...).
with all thy utmost power, Deuteronomy. 11.1.13.22. Cap. 19.9.

Cursed be the deceiver that has this Male in his flock, Mal.
this Masculine Love, and yet gives God the lame, and the lean. The highest
Love of the Soul is a Present for the greatest King in the world. Therefore
labor to keep up thy Love to the height toward God. Thou can never be
excessive in thy Love to God; to the Creature thou may, and commonly art: But
behold the perverseness of Man in this Affection! We stint our Love to God where
it should know no bounds, nor measures; and we are boundless in our love to
Creatures, which always ought to be bounded.

XIII. If we will keep our selves in the Love of God, let us labor to grow in
Grace, and to carry on the work of it in our Souls to the highest perfection:
This is grounded upon the Verse immediately before the Text, viz. Ye beloved
building up your selves in your most holy Faith; where the Participle
(building) agrees with the Verb in the Text, (keep) your selves in the love of
God: Noting this growth in Grace and Knowledge, to be an effectual means to
keep our selves in the Love of God: Whether we understand this Clause, building
up your selves in your most holy Faith, to be understood of the Doctrine of
Faith, or the Grace of Faith, or of both, for we cannot well sunder them, they
being helps to each other; according to that of Peter, who puts them both
together, to grow in Grace and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ; and this is a Sovereign Remedy against falling away, 2 Pet. 3.17, 18.

Now there is good reason why our growth in Grace, and particularly in Faith,
is a principal means to keep our selves in the Love of God.

1. Because the Power of God goes with Faith to keep us firm unto salvation; 1
Pet. 1.5. (...), we are kept thereby as with a strong Guard.

2. Because by building up our selves in our most holy Faith, we please God,
without Faith we cannot do that; and we gain upon his Love, for we are in the
way of God, and doing his Will; this is the Will of God, even our
Sanctification. He that has my commandments and does them, Joh. 14.21.
he it is that loves me, and he that loves me, my Father and I will love him.
Joh. 15.9, 10. As the Father has loved me, so have I loved you, continue in my
love. If ye keep my commandments ye shall abide in my love, even as I have kept
my Fathers commandments, and abide in his love.

XIV. A great Means of keeping our selves in the Love of God is this, to Pray
in the Holy Ghost, ver. 20. the verse after my Text: Now we shall see how
forcible and cogent this means is. Consider,

1. All good things come from God, Jam. 1. Prayer is the Key of Gods Closet,
and Treasury; we are mere Beggars, and have nothing of our own, but are fain to
beg our daily Bread of God, who keeps us from Hand to Mouth: God will have it
so, because he will have us know to whom we are beholding for all.

Moreover, he Loves to see our Face, and hear our Voice, and the oftener the
more welcome: And this he does as tender Fathers use to do with their Children,
who know what they need, but will have them come to them for all, with bended
knees for their Fathers Blessing; nor shall they come in vain.

1. For the Lord commands it, and approves it, Mat. 6.9.

2. He has annexed great Promises to Prayer.

3. Even the Holy Spirit, Romans 8.15, 26, 27.

And has given us a Mediator to Intercede and plead for us by Office, Heb.
4.15, 16.
and this is the great Office of his High-Priest-hood, Heb. 2. two last verses.
By all which we see, how seasonably the duty of Prayer and the Privilege of
Prayer is here annexed, ver. 20. to keep our selves in the Love of God.

How can Friends maintain their Amity, without frequent converse? Abraham was
called the Friend of God, Jam. 2.23. Genesis 18.17. to the end.
and ye see what power he had with God in Prayer for wicked Sodom; God
communicated his Secrets to him as one Friend to another; and Abraham made
Intercession to him, as Favorites of Princes for Malefactors: So did he for
Sodom, and ye know how far he prevailed; for he was a Righteous man, Jam. 5.16.
and such a man's Prayer prevails much. And what was Abraham's Righteousness?
even the Righteousness of Faith by Imputation, Romans 4.
and this Faith living, and working.

XV. We keep our selves in the Love of God, when we declare a public Spirit
for the Cause of God in his Church against the Enemies of it; by being zealous
for his Glory, and valiant for his Truth in our Station. Judge. 5.
This is lively asserted in the Song of Deborah and Barak, who after she had
praised some for their appearing, and others for not appearing in this Cause,
dispraised; the Lord she praised above all for his presence with his People,
and for that Spirit of Love he poured out upon them, in these Words. verse. 31.
So let all thine Enemies perish, O Lord, but let them that love him be as the
Sun when he goes forth in his might.

Now the Reason why this public Spirit in the Cause of God is expressed by our
Love to God, is this, Because God is so much concerned in it.

1. As to his Honor, to defend and deliver his People from his, and their
Enemies, as the Midianites were.

2. As to his Power, in reducing thirty thousand to three hundred, Jud. 7.
as in Gideons case, all that lapped. He as a poor Barley Cake tumbled all the
Enemies down, and by a small company: And a Woman, in Deborahs case, that is by
her self, and Jael, Judge. 4.21. destroyed Jabin, and Sisera's mighty Host. To
omit many other instances, of public Hearts in this case signally owned by
God, because they signally appeared for God. Thus Moses, Exodus 2.11, 13. Judge.
5.9.
This was their Love. Thus says Deborah, My Heart is toward the Governors of
Israel, that offer themselves willingly; bless ye the Lord. Zebulun and
Napthali jeoparded their lives unto Death in the high places of the Field; and
thus did Issachar, ver. 15. But Reuben, Gad, Manasseh, Dan, and Asher, are
branded for their Cowardice. I say all this appearing in the defense of all
that was dear to God and them, is called Love to God. Therefore we may in no
wise exclude this Noble public Spirit in the cause of God and his People, from
the Love of God; for there is no principle in the World, like to the Love of
God, (...) Joh. 3.8. Deum odisse, in sacris literis peculiariter illi dicuntur,
qui falsos deos colunt. Maimon. Which love me, and keep my Commandments. Illa
praecipue quae ad arcendas pravas superstitiones pertinent. Grot. Hinc (...)
and (...) pij dicti sunt. Ezekiel. 16.33, 36, 37. chap. 23.5. Jer. 2.2. I remember
the love of the Espousals.
to animate and inflame the Soul to do great things for God: This Spirit was
mavelous in David, whose very Name was from Love: Therefore it is the duty of
every Child of God, to pray for the Spirit of God, which only sheds all divine
Love abroad in the Heart, Romans 5.5. which God inspires as he pleases.

XVI. A great means of keeping our selves in the Love of God, is to be Sincere
and Sound in the Worship of God. Mark this well, for herein lies the Love or
Hatred of God; as appears plainly in the second Commandment, Exodus 20. ver. 6.

Therefore Idols and Idolaters are called our Lovers, Hosea 2.5, 7. Jer. 8.1.
Hosea 13. They kissed the Calves, ver. 2. Therefore our Hankering, and
embracing of a false Worship provokes God to jealousy.

Therefore the Lord deals with Superstition and Idolatry in his People, after
the Law of Harlots and Adulterers.

The Scripture is full of this Language.

There is no higher Act of Love in God, than to espouse a People to be his own,
and to give them a Rule of Worship of his own Institution, and to hold them to
it, as he did Israel: And when a People follows God, and serves God according
to his own appointments, there are no higher Acts of Love toward him in Gods
account. God is enamoured with such a People, God in his highest acts of
jealousy was enraged against his Idolatrous people. Psalm. 78.59. They kissed
their Idols, giving them all the tokens of Love and Homage. 1 King. 19.18. Job
31.27. They burnt their Children to them as the costlyest Sacrifice: as Abraham
would his Isaac in Love to God: but God only tried him by it. Mark 7.7. Colos.
2.22. Mat. 15.2, 3, 6. Rev. 17.4, 5.
he calls them his Hephsibah, and his Beulah, Isa. 62.4.

We see it also in the instance of good Kings, how the Lord prized, and praised
them, for this very thing, for Reforming and setting up the true Worship of
God; as David, Asa, Jehosaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah; how the Lord prospered them,
because their Hearts were right, and perfect with God in this thing.

On the other side, how he has branded, and blasted all those that were false
herein.

For this, was David a man after Gods own Heart, fulfilling all his Wills,
which is chiefly meant in the point of Gods Worship, Act. 13.22.

As for the Wills of men in the Worship of God, by their Inventions,
Traditions, and Commandments, he tells you he hates them, and they are
Abomination to him. And no wonder, for what intrencheth more upon the Honor of
Gods Wisdom, and Sovereignty, than this, That he does not know best how to
appoint his own Worship, but must be fain to be beholding to Man, for his
devices and dictates in the Case?

This, though it seems very gay, is Whorish, and Poisonous; this golden Dress,
and Cup is intoxicating.

XVII. A great Means of keeping in the Love of God, is keeping up the Communion
of Saints, in all the parts and duties of it: What this is, we shall see
according to Scripture. The Communion of Saints, is our Participation of all
the good things of God in common, whereunto all the Saints, and only they, have
right, consisting in our Union to God, as our chiefest good; this is with God
as a Father, with the Son, and Holy Spirit, 1 John 1.3. 2 Cor. 13.13.

1. We have Communion with the Father as Children: and all in the greatest
Love, 1 John 3.1. Romans 8.16, 17.

This is procured by Christ, 1 John 2.23. only obtained by Believing, Joh.
1.12. And maintained by the Spirit, Romans 8.14. Who walk not in darkness but in
light, 1 John 1.6, 7.

2. We have Communion with Jesus Christ the Son of God.

By which we are made partakers of him, of his Nature, and of his Grace, and of
his Glory; all which is done by Faith, that uniteing and marrying Grace; and
this works such Conjugal Love between Christ and his Church, as makes them
spiritually Bone of each others Bone, and Flesh of each others Flesh, Ephesians.
5.25. to verse. 33.

We maintain our Communion with Christ not only by Eating with him, Joh. 6.53.
to ver. 57.
but also by Eating of him.

God the Father calls us into Fellowship with his Son Jesus Christ our Lord.

Ephesians. 3.12.
Christ is said to dwell in our Hearts by Faith; and by his Spirit also, for he
that has not the Spirit of Christ is none of his.

Heb. 3.14.
This our fellowship and Communion with Christ, is evidenced by our Perseverance
in Grace firmly to the End.

This our Fellowship with Jesus Christ is confirmed by the Sacraments.

1. He that is Baptized into Christ, has put on Christ, Gal. 3.27.

2. By the Supper, which is therefore called the Communion, because the Saints
gather together in that, as the highest act of their Fellowship with the Lord
and with one another.

1 Cor. 10.16. The Bread that we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of
Christ? The Cup that we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ?

The Children of God walking in the light have thereby fellowship with Christ,
and one with another, 1 John 1.7.

As Christ is God and Man in one Person, so we have fellowship with him in both
Natures.

1. In his Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4.

2. In his Humane Nature, Heb. 2.14. Partaking with him in the same Flesh and
Blood.

In the Spirit. He that is joined to the Lord, is one Spirit: 1 Cor. 6.17. Romans
8.11.
There is one Body and one Spirit, Ephesians. 4.4.

In Afflictions, Phil. 3.10. That I may know the fellowship of his sufferings,
being made conformable to his death.

We have Communion with Christ in Glory, Romans 8.17, 18. If so be we suffer with
him, that we may be glorified together: Who shall change our vile Body, and
fashion it like to his glorious Body. So Joh. 17.21, 22, 23, 24.

In all good things, Wisdom, Righteousness, Redemption, Faith, 1 Cor. 1.30.
Repentance, Regeneration, Adoption, Justification, Sanctification, and
Spiritual Liberty. All these are Benefits, and high blessings communicated from
the Father, by the Spirit, through the Purchase and Merit of Jesus Christ. See
that place, it is very Pregnant, (2 Cor. 5.17.) and apposite. 1. He tells you,
We know Christ no more after the Flesh: Because that Dispensation is over, we
are now under the dispensation of the Spirit. 2. Therefore, If any man be in
Christ, he is a new Creature. 3. Our Communion with Christ is not hereby lost,
but advanced Higher; if any be in Christ, he is a new Creature: In Christ
still, and a New Creature by Christ's Spirit working in us all new things, and
working out all old. 4. All this is the Work of God in us, and for us, by the
Son reconciling us, and the Spirit perfecting us in the Ministry of
Reconciliation, ver. 18, 19.5. All this arose from Love, ver. 14. the Root of
the Communion of Saints with the Blessed Trinity. 6. As ye have heard, founded
in Union, expressed in a Communication of all good things by Christ, our Head
and Husband, with Reciprocation and returns of Love on our part, in all the
Acts of it, by entire and Sincere Obedience; also in mutual Interchanges of
Duties, respecting our fellow members of the same Body: This is so fully set
forth by the Apostle Paul, according to the Grace of God given to him, that I
need say no more about it, but commend the reading of that whole Chapter to
you, 1 Cor. 12. from ver. the 4th. to the end. I fear this Relation and
Fellowship is little minded with the Duties of it, by many, that yet think
themselves in the Body, and presume of the Privileges of it: Mark these few
things for your help.

1. The differences of Gifts, and Administrations, Offices and Services in the
Body Spiritual, as in the Body Natural, verse. 4. and 12.

2. All these coming from one Spirit, and one Head Jesus Christ, the Fountain
Head of all, ver. 13.

3. That all these Gifts and Graces are divided to every member as the Lord
pleases, for the same use and end, to profit withal: without Schism, without
a conceit of self-sufficiency, and unconcernedness for others, ver. 7. and 11.

4. All this called Christ, to show the near, and Blessed Communion of Saints,
ver. 12.

XVIII. The last Means I shall name to you is in the words immediately
following my Text, Verse. 21.
in the same verse: Which doubtless the Holy Ghost points us to, as an
Effectual means to keep our seives in the Love of God.



2. The Lord that has provided Eternal Life for us, will have us always walk
in Expectation of it, Genesis 49.18. Tit. 2.13.

3. We have no Ground at all to expect Eternal Life from God, without keeping
our selves in the Love of God. Romans 8.23. compared with the last verse.

4. We keep our selves in Gods Love, by being found in such a State, and in
such a Way as leads to Life, which is chiefly Faith and Obedience.

5. Such as are found out of this Way and State, are not Children, but
Strangers and Enemies, therefore have no Reason to expect an Inheritance; they
have no Title nor Right to it. Now a Son that is Heir apparent by Adoption in
Christ to such an Estate of Eternal Life in Heaven, he will not only be always
in Expectation of it, but will judge himself bound to study all the ways he
can possibly do to please God, to keep in his Love and favor; and withal fear
and take heed of forfeiting the Love of God.

1. Because it is an Act of Mercy, and free Grace; it is not a Debt, or any
thing thou can challenge; the Lord Jesus is sole purchaser. Text.

Romans 6. ult.
The Gift of God is Eternal Life through Jesus Christ our Lord.

2. If we look for all as an Act of Mercy, it will keep the Soul humble, Jam.
4.6. 1 Pet. 5.5.
and thankful. Such a frame of Soul the Lord loves and favors, Micah 6.8.

2 Cor. 4.18. chap. 5.1.
3. The Prospect of Eternal Life will keep us from being much enamoured with
this Life, which is Vain and Sinful, and Sorrowful, and Transient.

4. The Prospect of a better Life will make us prepare for it, 1 Timothy 6.12.
Rev. 21.2. Phil. 3.12, 13, 14.
and lay hold on it, 2 Pet. 11.12, 13, 14.

By Watchfulness, as the wise Virgins, Math. 25.4, 10.

By Constancy in our course, and race, 1 Timothy 6.19.

By casting away every Clog, Heb. 12.1, 2.

5. Because all Creatures wait for this Glory, and are ( Romans 8.19.) in earnest
Expectation of it.

6. Because all Saints have ever lived up to it; 1 These. 4. ult. Heb. 4.1, 9,
Heb. 6.19, 20.
this is the Haven of their rest, here they cast Anchor; with this they comfort
themselves, for this they groan. Now let me propound a few Incentives to blow,
and stir up the dying embers of Divine Love in our Souls.

1. No man can love God truly, unless he know God truly, 1 Cor. 8.3. If any man
love God, the same is known of him; therefore examine what knowledge thou have
of God, especially what practical Knowledge. It is clear, practical, Gospel
Knowledge, to know God in Christ, this is saving, and brings Life Eternal, Joh.
17.3.

This is Knowledge that transforms, 2 Cor. 3.18.

This is a Sanctifying Knowledge, Ephesians. 4.21, 22.

This is a justifying Knowledge, or the Knowledge of Faith, Isa. 53.11. Philip.
3.8, 9, 10.

This Light and Knowledge comes in to the Soul by the Illumination of the
Spirit of God, turning our darkness into light, and is the teaching of God, and
the anointing of God, teaching all things. Joh. 6.46. Joh. 2.20, 27.
This principally teaches us these two things.

1. The Love of God in Christ to us. 2. The Loveliness of Christ, to inflame
our love to him, by his Beauty and Excellency.
Now when we clearly see, and duly consider this, our Hearts are marvellously
drawn out in Love to the Lord: And without this knowledge of God we can never
truly love him: O pray for it, and attend, and improve the Means of it.

This is that which the Apostle points at, as the most transcendent of all
other in the World, which carnal Hearts are no ways capable of without the
work of Gods Spirit in the Soul. 1 Cor. 2.9. to the end; read and mind that
Scripture well. There are some things which we can never see in their
Excellencies, without the help of Telescopes and Perspective glasses; by reason
of the weakness and dimness of our sight: In like manner we can never see the
Amiableness of God in Christ, without the help of Gods Spirit. This sets the
Soul upon the Top of a high Mountain, (as Moses upon the Top of Pisgah) whereby
he gains a prospect of the Heavenly Canaan; or as Christ and his Disciples upon
Tabor in the Transfiguration, 2 Pet. 1.17, 18. 2 Cor. 12.2, 3, 4.
from that excellent Glory.

Or such a sight as Paul had in his Rapture.

2. A second means and Motive to blow up the Flame of Divine Love in us, is to
consider; That the Lord is incomparably the most lovely Object in the World;
Psalm. 119.68. Mat. 19.16, 17.
being the chief of all good, and goodness: For which reason our Savior says,
Why call thou me good? there is none good but one, that is God.

If we Love a drop of good in the Creature, how should we be ravished with an
Ocean, Psalm. 36.7, 8.9, 10.
many Oceans in God! Happy he that enjoyes the Fountain of good, for with him
is the well of Life, etc.

God is purely good without Mixture, infinitely good without Measure,
absolutely good without Dependency, communicably good without Failure,
eternally good without End, say the Schools; therefore most amiable: O consider
this.

And this good, this God is ours, for ever and ever, may every Believer say. O
let this inflame our Love to this good.

3. Examine thy Faith in the Truth of it, and labor for the growth of it, and
observe the working of it: for true Faith works by Love; and the stronger thy
Faith is, the stronger thy Love is, Gal. 5.8.

The Apostle Peter showing the excellency of Faith, and of a tried Faith, that
it is more precious than Gold, he says, by it we love Jesus Christ though we
never saw him with our bodily Eyes; and we love him by Believing, and rejoice
in it with unspeakable glorious Joy, 1 Pet. 1.7, 8.

Aug. Tract. 7. in 1 John
Faith is the first Principle, and chief root of all Operation in the Soul; and
it is therefore a vain thing to talk of loving God, without Believing, Bern.
for whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin: God does not put the Oil of his Mercy,
but into the Vessel of Faith: We believe, therefore we speak, says the
Apostle; we believe, therefore we love. What made the Saints not value worldly
Treasures, and Delights? What made them Love not their lives to the Death? What
made them so wonderful, in their Active and Passive Obedience for Christ, but
their Faith, by seeing him that is invisible? for there is not such an Eye on
Earth, Heb. 11.24, 25, 26, 27.
that see Spiritual things in their Spirituality, and notwithstanding their
remotest distance; such a Faith does break forth in the flames of Love to God,
that thereby the Heart, where it is, is ravished by it; the Lord says, his
Heart is also ravished with that Eye, Cant. 4.9.

4. Consider, that God best deserves thy Love: All the World cannot vye with
God in loving us, therefore are not worthy to be Rivals with him: It is a
horrid and an amazing thing, how the glorious God should so far be provoked by
such Rivals, and bear so long. Of this he complained severely in his People of
old: Jer. 2.5, 11, 12, 13, 31, 32.
Read the Prophets, and that one Chapter for instance. And this is true of the
greatest part of the World; one silly Idol or other courts all of them; yet
they never did any man any good, nor can it, but hurt: By loving them they
cannot love us again; they cannot save us in our trouble; they cannot hear us
when we cry, Jer. 2.28.
no more than Baal did his Priests, 1 Kings 18.26. Our love is lost upon them,
they distress us but help us not: Like Summer-Brooks that are dry when we most
need them, Job 6.15, 16, 17, 18.

What say you, does not the Lord best deserve your Love? what is there that he
has not done for you? you owe him not only for your Blessings, but for your
Being: You stand indebted to him for all things pertaining to life and
godliness, for all in hand and hope: And how many grow fat and wanton under the
Mercyes of God, Deuteronomy. 32.
yea Jeshurun, kicking at his Bowels, and beating the Breasts that feed them!
Strange, degenerate Brats, Isa. 1.2, 3. Jer. 3.1.
so far that the Lord cries out to Heaven and Earth to be astonished at it; yet
for all this continues loving them still, and like a good Shepherd seeks after
straying Sheep, that of themselves would never return, without fetching. Will
any Creature in the world whom thou Idolizest, do this for thee? Is this after
the manner of men? No, it is the peculiar kindness of God only; think on it.

5. Consider, if thou love the Lord truly, and keep thy self in his Love, thy
heart will cease to love any thing else in the World, and be dead to Creatures,
and they will be dead to thee. Gal. 6.14. Si cor amore Christi inardescit,
omnis creatura vilescit; All things are contemptible to one that truly loves
God. Phil. 3.8. When the Sun shines, the Stars vanish; and when it shines upon
a Fire, it puts the Fire out. So does the Love of God in the Soul extinguish
all worldly love: And this is an infallible sign of the love of God in the
Soul; for they two are contrary, and mortal Enemies one to the other, and seek
the destruction of each other. The reason is plain:

(1.) They differ in their Rise, and Offspring; one is Heaven-born, Gal. 5.17.
the other is Earthly.

(2.) They differ in their Quality, one hates what the other loves.

(3.) They differ in their Objects: One loves God, the other loves the Creature.

(4.) They differ in the Means of their Seize; one minds the Will and
Word of God, to follow that only; the other minds the Wills and Lusts of the
flesh, to fulfill them, Ephesians. 2.2. and to make provision for them, Romans 13.
last v.

(5.) They differ in their End. The love of Creatures is disappointed, and
lost, the Love of God enjoyes him for ever, Psalm. 42.1, 2.
and rests satisfied in that enjoyment, and not before.

6. Consider, thou can never keep thy self in the Love of God, if thou art
not quit, and utterly disengaged from the love of the World, in the Lusts and
Vanities of it, by thy inordinate desires and hankerings after it.

God never comes into the Soul till the World go out, Taulerus.
and then the Soul moves nobly when it moves to its Principle. This makes the
Circular motion of the Heavens to be most Noble, because it returns always to
the same point where it began. Thus Noah's Dove found no rest out of the Ark,
but returned to it after long fluttering about, because it found no food among
the Carrion, but the Raven did, and therefore abode by it. A Bird as long as it
flies aloft in the Air, is free from the Fowlers Gin; but when it lights down
on the ground, and falls a picking in the Earth, then is nearest unto danger:
Thus it fares with men of the Earth. O poor Soul (says St. Aug.) how do thou
debase thy self! thou love earthly things, and thou art better than them;
thou admirest the Sun, and thou art more beautiful and excellent than the Sun;
only God is above thee, and thou were made to love him only.

A Child of Heaven, and a Son of the Earth differ in this as much as Heaven and
Earth, Phil. 3.18, 19, 20.

2 Pet. 3.10.
The Ground is cursed, and this World shall be burnt up, why art thou enamored
with it?

Therefore the Lord imbitters the Worlds Breasts to his Children, that they may
be weaned, and no longer suck of them; and then when the world begins to be
bitter to us, the Lord begins to be sweeter to us.

Math. 17.4.
When Peter had found some Sweetness on Mount Tabor, he was loath to come down,
and would dwell there above the World, in that heavenly Company.

That Wife never truly loved her Husband that loves her Jewels above him. Did
not Israel do so when they made a Calf of the Jewels God gave them, and a God
of that Calf, and themselves Beasts in worshipping of it: What abominable
Idolatry, what Apostasy, what Ingratitude is here!

1. All that has hitherto been said of this great Duty of Keeping our selves
in the Love of God, is Practical, and carries Application with it, containing
true signs of such as keep themselves in Gods Love. What is that but a great
Use of Examination of our State and of our Practice? 1. Whether we are in the
Love of God? 2. Whether we do indeed walk so as to keep our selves in it? Be
not deceived, compare your State, Heart and Life with these Rules; be serious
and solemn in it.

2. You have had by way of contrary, sufficiently hinted, the cross Practice of
the greatest part of the World herein, who keep themselves out of Gods Love, by
keeping in an evil State of Enmity between God and them: And though God has
long beseeched them by his Ambassadors to be reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5.20.
yet they will not, but stand out in open defiance against God, Job 21.14.
and desire not the knowledge of his ways; they prefer the Love of men before
the Love of God: They prefer the love of Money and carnal Delights before the
love of God. Luke 8.14. 2 Timothy 3.4.

They hate the Knowledge of God, they hate the People of God, they hate the
Ways of God, they love those that hate God, and whom God hates: Can these
think themselves in the Love of God? Can they keep themselves in the Love of
God before they are come into it? And this carries in it a Use of Reprehension,
Conviction, Discrimination, and Lamentation, all of them respectively. O mind
and consider it well.

3. We have a Use of Exhortation. The Text is properly such a Use: It contains
a Duty to be practiced all your Life, perform the Duties of that State; study
what does please God; Qui in amore Dei se custodiunt suaviter habitant instar
apum in alvearibus in favis meilis; ut Sponsa in finu Sponsi. Cant. 1.2, 3.
cap. 2.4, 5, 6, 12, 13.
take heed of that which does offend God; shun all that is inconsistent with
the Love of God. Meditate on the happy Privilege of such a State: Thou art a
Candidate of Heaven, a Favorite of God; such are out of the reach of danger,
they have a sweet Calm, and Sunshine in their Conscience: They have a pleasant
Spring of singing of Birds, and like the fragrant smell of a Garden of Spices;
and the fill of Divine Flagons in Christ's Banqueting House, Cant. 4.16. Cap.
5.1.

4. If thou keep thy self in the Love of God, thou need not to fear the
Hatred of men: This is to be feared of all that are not in the Love of God:
Those that are in Gods love, have no cause in the world to fear worldly men's
hate; they have the strongest security against it:

1. From the Power of God, which is omnipotent, Genesis 15.1.

2. From the Promise of God, which is faithful, and never fails. Romans 8.31. to
39. Heb. 13.5, 6, 8.


3. From the Eternity of Christ, the same to day as yesterday, and for ever: He
has said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. So that we may boldly say,
The Lord is my Helper, and I will not fear what man can do unto me. Read Deuteronomy.
33. and the four last Verses.

God will be a wall of fire about those that are in his Love: Zach. 2.5.
Read Deuteronomy. 32.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.

What higher expressions can be uttered, to set forth the tender love of God to
his People, while they are under his Wing?

Will ye have more? consider that of the Prophet Isaiah, in Chap. 60.5. As one
whom his Mother comfort, so will I comfort you, and you shall be comforted.
And when ye see this, your heart shall rejoice, and your bones shall flourish
like an herb.

5. If ye mind this Duty aright, to keep your selves in the love of God, (1)
You must labor to understand the love of God to his Elect truly, and then
meditate duly on it, and then walk worthy of it: Now this Love of God, I
cannot more compendiously declare, than by that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 1.3,
etc. Blessed be God, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed
us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ, etc.

In which ye are to observe six remarkable things, in Gods blessing of us, for
which we are to bless him.

1. That God the Father of Christ is the Author of all our Blessings,
especially of Spiritual Blessings, Election, Redemption, and all that flow from
thence, are given us upon the account of Christ, by whom God becomes our
Father, that is by Adoption; by which we have the right of Inheritance, that is
Salvation.

2. That by the word Blessings, he includes all things pertaining to Salvation,
because he says with all spiritual Blessings, alluding to Gods Promise made to
Abraham in Christ, saying, In thee shall all the Nationss of the earth he
blessed.

And therefore he will give the consummation of this Blessing at the day of
Judgment to his Elect, saying, Come ye blessed of my Father, receive the
Kingdom prepared for you, i. e. from his Everlasting Love, ver. 6.

3. That the Father loves and blesses us, that is his Chosen ones, and none
else; Verse. 4, 5.
who declare themselves such, by their Faith, and Holiness, and Love, verse. 4.

4. That these Blessings are principally Spiritual Blessings, such as the Elect
only receive, in a peculiar and distinguishing way; and that under two
Considerations.

1. They are not carnal Blessings, though the Father denies not these to his
Children, for which his Child must bless him; but here they are called
spiritual, because chiefly such.

2. They are not common spiritual Blessings neither; such are temporary Faith,
Heb. 6. 1 Cor. 13.
a great degree of Knowledge even in Spiritual things, yea a taste also of the
Holy Ghost, and the Beginning of a pious Life, etc. But only saving Grace, and
Eternal Glory, the Fruit of Eternal Election; for all other spiritual Blessings
follow and flow from that, as the true Knowiedge of God, a living Faith,
effectual Calling, Justification, Sanctification, a Christian Life, Love to the
Saints, and Life Eternal; this the Apostle calls (...), all Blessing, as
containing and comprehending all fully, and perfectly.

5. But there is one thing more to be noted from that word, in heavenly places:
For as carnal Blessings have their Beginning in the Earth, and there they end;
so heavenly Blessings come from Heaven, and terminate there in Glory without
end. Therefore we render it in heavenly places, because it notes the Place of
it which is Heaven, where Christ is exalted in Glory as our Head, to
communicate and accumulate all spiritual Blessings on his elected, and redeemed
Members. There it is said, Cap. 1.19. to Verse. ult.
in heavenly places in Christ: All this is amplified in this first, and more
particularized in the second; where he says, He has quickened us together,
Ephesians. 2.4, 5, 6.
and raised us up together, and made us sit together with Christ in heavenly
places. All this is an high act of Divine Love toward us. By which three things
here and in Heaven, all Grace and Glory is meant, and that Saints do partake of
them with and by Christ: And this leads to a

6. Sixth thing, wherein the Love of God to us is declared in the place before
cited, Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 5. viz. in Christ, by which, is assigned the material
Cause of all Spiritual Blessings, namely, Christ as Mediator and High Priest.

1. We are blessed in Christ, i. e. for Christ's sake, and upon his account.

2. In Christ, by the Merits of Christ, by his Obedience, Passion and Death.

3. In Christ as our Head, from whom as such all our Blessings flow, in our
Souls and Bodies; therefore is he called the Lord our Righteousness, Jer. 23.6.
1 Cor. 1.30. That is, in the Person of Christ: We are raised with him, and sit
in Heaven with him; i. e. We are counted raised, and sitting there, by his
Dignity and Glory, as our Head.

By this Imputation, the Papists Justification by Inherent Righteousness is
fully confuted.

Also we have infinite Privilege and Comfort, that the Lord Jesus is made to
us his members, Righteousness and Holiness, which can never be had any other
way, either within us, or without us, but in Christ our Head only, and there
only it is perfect and sure; and all this in love. For the Father has
demonstrated his love to Christ for this his undertaking, and his love to us
because he appointed him for us, and accepts us in him, Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 5, 6.

This is the first Branch of the fifth Use, of Studying the Love of God to us
in Christ, in all the Causes of it, and in all the Parts of it: For this is a
strong Motive to keep us, in this Love, to understand it, and to believe it,
and to walk up to it.

2. The second Branch: To understand and practice our Love to the Lord,
answering his Love to us.

1. Understand what Love that is wherewith we are to love the Lord, and whereby
we keep our selves in his Love to us: Matthew. 22.36, 37.
In order unto this, ye are to know, that the whole Worship of God consists in
the Love of God. Hence Ambrose says, The Love of God is the form of all
Virtue, yea the Head and Foundation of all true Religion.

The end of the Law is Love out of a pure heart, a good Conscience, 1 Timothy 1.5.
and Faith unfeigned.

There are three things that are in true Love: 1. To be affected with a
desirable Object, upon our knowledge of it to be good. 2. To be carried out
strongly in our Desires after it, that we may be united with it. 3. When we
enjoy it, to Rejoice in it, and to rest in it, as in our End, and Center of our
Desires.


This the word signifies in the Original Hebrew and Greek: (...).
To rest greatly in the enjoyment of the thing beloved; as Etymologists have
it, Phavorinus, etc.

So true Love contains in it, Affection, Desire, Joy, as the Beginning,
Progress, and End of it; and this will be perfect in Heaven, and our Perfection
and Happiness. In this, Love outvyes all other Grace, 1 Cor. 13.

We have an excellent Saying of St. Augustine to this purpose: Tom. 4. libro de
substantia dilectionis. Cap. 6.
This is then the rest of the Soul, when it is fixed by the Love of God, as to
its desire, nor desires any thing or Object besides, but having got possession
of that which it desires, is wholly taken up with the Delight of it, and is
happy in the secure enjoyment of it.

Whence we are to learn, wherein the true Nature of our Love of God stands;
that the Heart rest in the enjoyment of what it desires, which it can do in
nothing else: And only our Love to God is true, and perfect Love, because our
Souls find rest in God only.

St. Bernard makes four degrees of our Love to God:

1. When a man loves Himself for himself; but herein he can have no rest nor
content, for it is not to be found in him.

2. When he loves God for himself, and not for God; when he would have God make
him happy.

3. When he loves God for God himself, as judging him most worthy of all love.

4. When he loves himself, and all things else for God only, and is therein
satisfied, desiring nothing more.

This is indeed to love God, when we love him for himself, and our selves and
all other things subordinately unto God, in him, and for him only. Our Soul as
Noah's Dove has no rest till it return to this Ark.

This Enjoyment satisfies, Psalm. 17. ult. ye shall be abundantly satisfied,
Psalm. 36.8, 9. because it is the water of life, which being once drunk of,
quenches thirst for ever.

I conclude all with this, that considering the Circumstances into which we are
cast, it is our Duty, Wisdom and Privilege to keep our selves in the Love of
God; from the transcendent Advantages we have by it above the love and favor
of men; which is hard to get, and yet not worth the pains when gotten; yea when
gotten, it is as hard to keep, and yet not worth the keeping; yea it is easily
lost, and better lost than kept: Therefore never labor to keep thy self in the
Love of Men, by which thou may lose the love of God; but keep your selves in
the Love of God, and that will keep you safe here and for ever.

The Lord gives it as a Reason why he would not cast off his People, though he
threatened them as if he would do it, Hos. 11.8, 9.
Because, says he, I am God, and not Man: It is not after the manner of men,
to be constant in their Love, but is like Himself, and never breaks off or
keeps in his Love.

Ezekiel. 16.5, 6, 7, 8.
The Lord will be called Husband of his People; and is he not the best and
dearest in the World? Does he take any People or Soul to Wife, for rare Beauty
or rich Dowry? Alas! there is none. Did he not find us in our gore-blood, and
yet loved us when such? verse. 8. Now whom he loves he cleaves to, (...).
Genesis 2.24. Ephesians. 5.31. Thus he that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit, 1
Cor. 6.16. The word is glued, to show the close Union of divine Love: Pray then
to God for the Holy Ghost, which he has promised to give to them that ask,
that he may shed abroad the love of God in your hearts; 2 Thessalonians. 3.5. Romans 5.5.
for hereby you will keep your selves in the love of God.

Quest. What may gracious Parents best do, for the Conversion of those Children
whose wickedness is occasioned by their sinful Severity, or Indulgence? SERMON
VII.
MAL. IV. 6. He shall turn the hearts of the Fathers to the Children, and the
hearts of the Children to their Fathers.
THis intricate Text (proposed to me, on which I preached,) speaking but
indirectly, and by consequence only, (as I then said) to the Question proposed;
upon mature deliberation, I have thought good, to adjoin Another, which, I
conceive, looks with a more direct aspect on both the parts of our Bipartite
Question: Viz.

EPHESIANS. VI. 4. Ye Fathers, provoke not your Children to wrath; but bring them up
in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord. AS Malapertness, frowardness,
sauciness, self-will, stubbornness, sullenness, disobedience, yea contempt, and
scorning of Parents, specially the more indulgent, and weak, are Vices too
common with Children and Youth: So, on the other side Parents, unless modeled
and confirmed, by the Word and Spirit of God, are very prone to fall into one
of these two extremes, either immoderate severity and rigid abuse of the
Parental Authority; or fond indulgence, and sinful neglect of just, and
discreet discipline.

Against Both these extremes, our Apostle does here Arm, and fortify gracious
Parents, by instructing them, how equally to hold the Balance, and Discreetly
to manage the reins, and rudder of their Parental Power and Discipline, so as
they may not provoke their Children to a just disgust, and wrath on the one
side, nor expose themselves to a base contempt, and scorn, on the other. And
this he does,

1. By forbidding a Vice. Ye Fathers, provoke not your Children to Wrath,
(...), ad iram, ad irae exuberantiam ne provocate, ne irritate: q. d. Fathers,
I know, your Children are apt to be Vain, rash, foolish, disobedient, stubborn,
able to roil the most sedate Spirit, to try the patience of a Job: and it is
fit, yea necessary, that you admonish, reprove, rebuke, chastize them; but yet
take heed, that while though they provoke you to a just displeasure; you, by an
unjust abuse of your just authority, in a too strict, rigid, immoderate
severity against them, give your offending Children any just occasion of, or
urgent temptation to, any sinful anger, or inveterate wrath against you; whilst
you are correcting for one sin, do not provoke them to commit another. Whilst
you are plucking them out of a gulf, do not dash them against a Rock. Fathers
provoke not your Children to wrath. But

Observe we here the Apostles prudence. Having verse. 1, 2, 3. allotted to
Children their share, viz. Obedience -- Children obey your Parents in the Lord,
and backed it both with divine Precept, and Promise; the just consequence seems
to require, that he should have invested the Parents with Command, and
Government for their Portion; but he fairly waves that, and as supposing, he
had sufficiently fixed the Parents Authority, by putting their Children under
the yoke of Obedience, he now consults the child's interest, or rather the
mutual comfort both of Parent and Child, by advising Parents, to use the Power,
that God had given them, moderately and tenderly; on the one hand, he sweetens
the Obedience of the Child; on the other, tempers the Authority of the Parent.
That the precept of Obedience may not fright the Child, nor the Prerogative of
Power swell the Parent, let them both know; The child, that he is in subjection
and must obey, but then it is his Father, who either does or should love him:
and the Father, that he has Authority, and may command, but whom? It Is his
Child, whom he must govern with that tenderness as not in the least to provoke.
Thus by forbidding a Vice.

2. By enjoining them the contrary Grace or duty: But bring them up in the
Nurture and admonition of the Lord. Children, as they must not be provoked to
wrath, so they must not be indulged in folly. As they must not be discouraged,
so they may not be cocker'd. Our Children naturally are too too like the wild
Horse, or Asses colt, who, if they once begin to know their strength and get
the bit between their Teeth, will first cast their Rider, and then run in a
full Carieer to their own Destruction. And therefore, take heed, do not indulge
them in their foolish Humors, but bring them up, etc.

Having thus fixed our Corner-stones, now to our Building. In the CASE before
us, I find two Truths supposed, and one question in form, but really bipartite,
proposed.

1. The two Truths, and those sad ones, supposed.

1. That it has been, is, and may be the Lot of gracious Parents to have
unconverted, wicked Children.

2. That this wickedness of these unconverted Children has been, and is too
too often occasioned by their gracious Parents sinful 1. Severity, 2.
Indulgence.


2. The Question, or case of Conscience to be resolved, which is Bipartite.

What may gracious Parents best do toward the Conversion of those their
Children, whose wickedness is occasioned by their sinful 1. Severity? 2.
Indulgence?


I. Of the First Truth.

1. The first Truth supposed: viz. That it has been, is, and may be the Lot of
gracious Parents, to have unconverted, wicked Children. Let me add, of the
Best of Parents to be afflicted with very wicked, yea the worst of Children.

Had not Adam, an envious, murtherous Cain? Genesis 4.8.11. The first branch of
the Universal Root wholly rotten? Noah, a cursed Genesis 9.22.
Cham? Abraham, a mocking, persecuting Ishmael? Genesis 22.9. Gal. 4.29. Lot, a
Moab, and Ammon, the Sons of Incest, and the Fathers of an Idolatrous brood,
that to the death hated Gods chosen Israel? Genesis 19.37, 38. Isaac, a profane
Esau? Genesis 25.25. Heb. 12.16. Eli, two Sons, Hophni, and Phineas, both Sons of
Belial, prodigies of Lust, and Wickedness? 1. Sam. 2.12. to 17. and ver. 22.
David, an ambitious Adonijah, 1 King. 1.5. and 2.13. an incestuous Amnon? 2 Samuel 13.14. a murtherous, traitorous, rebellious Absalom? 2 Samuel 13.28, 29. and
15.10. Jehosaphat, a bloody, idolatrous Jehoram? 2 Chronicles. 21.4, 6, 11, 13.
Josiah, a wicked Jehojachin, and another as bad, if not worse, a wretched,
false, perjured, Covenant Breaking Zedekiah? 2 Chronicles. 36.5, 12, 13. Ezekiel.
17.15, 18. -- But enough of this; sigh even to the breaking of your hearts,
when you think of many, very many others, in former Ages, and in our Own days,
and City, that might be added to fill up this Black Catalogue.

2. This wickedness of these unconverted Children has been, and is too too
often occasioned, yea advanced by the Sinful severity, or indulgence, of their
unwary, tho gracious Parents. This Head divides it self into TWO Branches: viz.
Parents Sinful severity, and indulgence.

1. Sinful severity, and of this, 1. What it is not. 2. What it is.

(1) What it is not? 1. A grave, wise, holy, strict demeanor toward our
Children; such a carriage, as whereby we may procure Glory to God, Honor to
our selves, and so to preserve and keep up that Authority which God has stamped
upon us, is not sinful Severity. To carry it so, and so to keep our distance,
as to give our Children no occasion to undervalue, or despise us: 1 Timothy 4.12.
Tit. 2.15.
So, as that they may see, and own the Wisdom of God shining in us; that our
Children may pay us that reverence, and respect that God requires of them, 1
King. 3.28. This is not to be accounted sinful Severity, but behaving our
selves worthily in Ephratah, Ruth 4.11.

2. All just anger, or the rising up of the Heart in an holy displeasure
against Sin in our Children, is not sinful severity. Parents may be angry, and
yet not sin. Ephesians. 4.26. Nay Parents would certainly sin, if, on just occasion
given by their Children, they should not be angry; but with these proviso's:

1. That the cause, for which they are angry, be good, and warrantable. Such as
we can give a good Account of to God. An anger, like that of our Savior, who
looked round about on his malicious observers with anger, being grieved for the
bardness of their hearts, Mark 3.5. When our anger is accompanied with grief,
because God is dishonored by our Childrens offending against Truth, Piety,
Justice, Humanity; because we see them neglect their duty, hurt their own, or
others Souls, or Bodies.

2. That the Object of this anger be right: i. e. when that which we are angry
at, is not so much the persons of our Children that offend, as their offense it
self; their Sin, Fault, Disobedience. Not so much the Patient, as the Disease.

3. That the End be right, viz. that the fault we are offended at, may be
amended by our Children, and that they for the future may be warned not to
offend in the like again.

4. That a due decorum may be observed both as to the measure, and duration of
our Anger. When it is neither too hot, nor too long. When it is a Rational,
Holy, Temperate displeasure, a moderate anger, when right Reason, and Scripture
fit in the Box, and Guide the Chariot, saying as the Lord to the Sea, Thus
much, thus long, and no more, no longer: Thus far no sinful severity.

2. Grave counselling, and admonishing our Children in and to that which is
truly good, Ephesians. 6.4. All serious discountenancing of, and severe frowning on
them, when in an evil way; nay sharp reproofs, and rebukes. Tit. 1.13. Yea
being so far a terror to them, as to let them know, we bear not the stamp of
Gods Authority in vain. Romans 13.3, 4. Nay farther, smart chastising of them
proportionable to their Age, and offense. Prove. 29.15. Provided, we express
fatherly love and tenderness in all, out of a true desire of their Repentance,
and Reformation.

All this is not to be looked upon as sinful Severity, but as the faithful
discharge of a necessary parental duty; which is by so much the more excellent,
because it is so much neglected, and so hard to be performed in a right manner.

(2.) What Sinful Severity is; or wherein it discovers it self. Sinful Severity
betrays it self in and by the irregular passions, austere looks, bitter words,
and rigid Actions of those Parents, who abuse their Parental Power.

2. That the wickedness of unconverted Children is oftentimes occasioned by
this Sinful severity of their Parents. They are provoked, and that to Sin,

(1.) By irregular Passions, specially that of an inordinate, and immoderate
Anger.

1. Rash anger; when Parents are soon angry with their Children, when they will
not give leave to their Judgments to consider, before they are angry. The wise
man tells us, Jam. 1.19. Multos absolvemus, si prius coeperimus judicare, quam
irasci. Sen. de ira.
the discretion of a man defers his anger, and that it is his Glory, to pass
over a Transgression. Prove. 19.11. But brands rash anger with the mark of
folly. He that is soon angry, deals foolishly, Prove. 14.17. 'Twas grave
advice to one, not to be angry at any time, till he had first repeated the
Greek Alphahet. To be angry without any cause, or upon every trivial, slight
occasion; for any thing, that is not material in it self, or in it is
consequent; for mere involuntary, and casual offenses, and slips in our
Children, such as without great care could not have been prevented; and for
these to be so far exasperated, as to begin to hate, or more remisly to love
them, is for a Father to fire the Beacon of his Soul, for the Landing of a
Cock-boat. It Is that, that exposes the Father to his Child's contempt, and Gods
judgment. Mat. 5.22.

2. When a Parents anger is too frequent, too hot, or too long. Anger must be
used as a Medicine, only now, and then, and that only on a just occasion:
otherwise, it loses its Efficacy, or hurts the Patient. Again, Anger, when too
hot, vehement, excessive, provokes. It Is True: It must be serious, there must
be some Life, and warmth in it: the Potion must be warmed, Ira sic dicta, quasi
hominem faciat ex se ire, and non esse apud. se.
that it may operate the more vigorously toward the Reformation of offending
Children: but then when it swells into an excess, and transport of passion, it
provokes. Such an excess of Anger, like a Ball of Wildfire, is very apt to
inflame the Child's breast, and to provoke him into a sinful return of wrath and
strife, Prove. 15.18. Lastly, Anger, when too long, when it lies soaking in the
breast, is apt to putrify. If the Sun arises, and sets on a man in his wrath,
the Text tells us, who is like to be his Bedfellow, Ephesians. 4.26, 27. Anger rests
in the Bosom of a fool, Eccl. 7.9. And well may it provoke a Child, tho
criminal, to see his Fathers Bosom, where once he lay, to be now become Angers
Couch, and Satan's Pillow.

Thus you see, that Irregular Passions in severe Parents are no little
Provocations and spurs to Sin, and wrath in their disobedient Children: They
are like those smart Cantharides, or Spanish-flies, the most speedy, and
effectual means to raise blisters.

(2.) By an austere look, grim, sour, louring, frowning countenance; when a man
seems to carry revenge, daggers, death in his Face; when a man usually looks on
his Child, Genesis 4.5, 6.
as Cain did on his Brother, as one highly displeased, that bears Ill Will, and
ones him a grudge, and will be sure to pay it in due time. When the Child
observes his Ancestors Crest portrayed on his Fathers forehead, and instead of
smiles can see nothing there but cruel Lions, Bears, Tigers: This must needs
highly provoke, and it is not to be wondered at, if the Child, in a fright, and
dreadful indignation, cries out roaring, I do well to be angry, even to the
Death. Better to be killed outright, than buried alive: No grave so dark, so
dismal, as those deep furrows in my frowning, constantly frowning Fathers
forehead.

(3.) By bitter, hasty, biting, testy, disdainful, reproachful, railing,
taunting, menacing, threatening words; Words steeped in the Venom of Asps. Oh,
these pierce deep, like the Tails of Scorpions, and do highly provoke. More
particularly,

1. Hard Words. Soft Words, and hard Arguments work powerfully. A soft Tongue
breaks the bones, Prove. 25.15. or one that is stiff, and hard. Abigail found it
true in her address to David, when he was in his rough: 1 Samuel 25.4. But an
hard Tongue hardens the Heart. A soft Answer puts away wrath, but grievous
words stir up anger, Prove. 15.1.

Ob. But what do you speak of Words, which are but Wind?

Jam. 3.5.
Sol. True, but this Wind many times kindles a dreadful fire, and increases it,
when once kindled. As Coals to burning Coals, and Wood to Fire, so is a
contentious man to kindle strife.

2. Contumacious, reproachful, disgraceful words. These are far remote from
fatherly Love, and respect. Aristotle in his Rhet. tells us, that the grand
scope, drift, design of contumely is, that a man may rejoice, and triumph in
the disgrace of Him, whom he reproacheth. How barbarous is it then, to rejoice
in the disgrace and infamy of a Child of a man's own Bowels? This cannot but
provoke. That Is a thunderclap in the ears of Testy, reproachful Parents,
Whosoever shall say Thou Fool, shall be in danger of Hell fire, Mat. 5.22.
Reproachful words are no less than sharp darts, and keen Swords; nay they carry
with them no less than stings, and poison, so that even the wisest, and best of
men can hardly bear the dine of them. Thus Saul to the height provokes his
Son, when he foams at the Mouth, and breaks out into that nasty drivel, 1 Samuel
20.30. Thou Son of the perverse, rebellious Woman, (and why not in our English
dialect, Thou Son of a Whore?) and so lasheth his Son on his Wives back; what
could have been spoken more sharply to provoke?

3. Menacing, threatening Words, and that, it may be, for little tripps, or
slips of youth, nay, tho there be no resolution to execute what they threaten.
Suppose it only Brutum Fulmen, A Flash without a bolt, or Bullet. The very
Wind, and noise is enough to sink the trembling Child into a Swoon. If Masters
must not threaten Servants, much less may Parents threaten Children. Ephesians. 6.9.

(4.) By rigid Actions. When Parents utterly unmindful of their parental
Relation, bowels, duty, prove tyrants; and use, or rather abuse their Children,
as Servants, or indeed as Slaves, and vassals. These should know, that the
great God never commissioned them to be more than tender Governors, not
domineering Tyrants, or Egyptian Taskmasters. This Tyranny is exercised diverse
ways.

1. When Parents either deny to, or take from their Children those things,
which either belong to their necessities, or their just comforts, in that rank,
and Relation, in which their heavenly Father by birth has placed them. When
they deny them that Education, that Provision, that Encouragement, which is
Just, and Equal; that Food, Raiment, Portion, that becomes the Children of such
a Father. This is to act beneath an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8. Nay more, even beneath
the Bruit beasts, who by a natural instinct diligently nourish, and cherish
their young ones; and cannot but provoke. Even an Horse, when too strait
rein'd, Favors unequally distributed highly provoke.
will rise up, and fling. When the cocker'd Idol, tho a younger Brother, or
Sister, (and it may be less deserving) shall be called to the Table, Closet,
bosom, and there treated at the height of Sweetness, whenas the poor,
neglected, discountenanced, despised Elder, must stand without, and either blow
his fingers, or (...).
employ his Hands in some base, sordid, servile, commanded drudgery, which
would better become a Slave, than a Son. This, this goes near the Heart of an
ingenious, and observant Child Even a worm thus trod on would turn again.
. This must needs create in him an enraged jealousy, and envy against his
Equals, or Inferiors, and without a vast stock of Love, Humility, Patience, a
boiling rancorous disdain, and wrath against his Superiors.

2. When Parents load their Children with unjust Commands. This is to Ape that
wretched Saul, who commanded Jonathan to surprise his Innocent, dearest Friend,
and Brother, David, the upright, valiant David, that had so well deserved of
the whole Kingdom, one designed by God himself to succeed in the Throne of
Israel; yea and against his solemn Oath sworn unto him; to bring him to him,
that he might be murdered. 1 Samuel 20.31. This both grieved, and provoked
Jonathan, ver. 34. Or, with that incestuous bloody Creature Herodias, who
commands Her Dancing Daughter to ask of Herod more than half His Kingdom, viz.
John Baptists head, Mat. 14.8.

3. When Parents, merely to gratify their Humor, Self-will, Lusts, Passions,
Fury, chastise, beat, and almost kill their Children with unjust, and
immoderate lashes, stripes, punishments.

1. Unjust; when the Parent has no lawful cause, or reason so to do. What just
Plea could that unnatural Saul make for casting his Javelin, to smite his
Innocent Son Jonathan? 1 Samuel 20.33. After he had spit out the Poison of his
Heart in his words, he fills up the measure of his wickedness in this bloody
deed, suitable to his murtherous Heart.

2. Immoderate; when the sharpness of the punishment exceeds the greatness of
the Crime. Here the Lord, the Righteous-Judge, takes care, by his Supreme
Authority, that those, that have authority over others, should not according to
their own Lusts, Will, and Pleasure, rage, and vent their fury, and passion on
criminals. Deuteronomy. 25.2, 3. Now if Justice oblige us to keep our mind free, and
composed, in punishing the greatest Strangers, and most heinous Malefactors,
that we may exactly proportion the penalty to their fault; how much more should
a Father (whose Name breathes nothing but benignity and sweetness) observe the
same moderation, when his business is to chastize the Child of his own Bowels!
And if not, instead of reforming, he does but provoke his Child.

Thus much concerning Sinful Severity, what it is, and how far provoking; in
all which, I neither have nor could bring one instance, either Father or
Mother, in the whole Scripture, that had the Character of a Godly Person, that
is charged with the crimson-guilt of a Sinfully severe Parent.

3. What may godly Parents best do for the Conversion of those Children, whose
wickedness is occasioned by their sinful Severity? To this I answer

1. More generally. Physician heal thy self: To cleanse the polluted stream,
let us begin at the puddl'd fountain.

1. As much as may be, cease your complaints to men, of finding so much cause
of grief and sorrow in your untoward Children, instead of Joy, and Comfort.
That they are pungent thorns, instead of refreshing roses, stabs instead of
staffs. Exclaim no more, at least not morosely, or in passion, against the
pride, Levity, vanity, frowardness, obstinacy, debauchery, incorrigibleness, of
your wretched Children, especially in the hearing of those Children. It Is too
probable, they will be apt to lay their own Bastards at their Fathers door; and
impute all their gross miscarriages to their rigid Fathers harshness, contempt,
and want of Love. Had not I been unhappy in so stiff a Father, he might have
been happy in a more complaisant Son. Had my Father treated me with more
Bowels, it is possible, I should have readily answered his tenderness, with a
melting heart, bended knee, and sincere obedience.

2. Instead of opening your mouths to men, go immediately, and in sincerity
unbosom your whole Souls to God. Cast your selves at his foot, humbly
acknowledge your great defects, and failings in the management of that
Authority, that God, the supreme Father, has stamped upon you. Humble your self
deeply before the Lord for all your former Irregular, and exorbitant Passions,
stabbing looks, hard speeches, morose behavior, partial demeanor, dreadful
Omens, and forejudgeings of the sad fate of your at present disobedient Child.
Weep (I say not, not so much, but) not only for your Child, but for your self.
Had the root been sound, as it ought, the branch had not been so rotten, as it
is. Had the Father been more a Fig Tree, the Son had not been so much a
Thistle. If the Vine has the least taint of Sodom, no wonder if the Wine has
an ugly tang of Gomorrha. Weep, I say, and pray, pray and weep, and instead of
a Bead, drop a Tear at the close of every Petition for the full, and free
pardon of these thy Relational Sins, in and through the Blood of that Son, that
never offended his, and thy Father: Beg, and Beg earnestly for Grace,
Strength, Wisdom, which is first pure, then peaceable, that thou may be kept
from the like misdemeanour for the future.

3. Act toward your Children in all things, as a Father. Keep your Relation in
your Eye.

1. Love your Children, as a Father. A Man would think this advice were 1 These.
4.9. As touching Love, ye need not that I write unto you, for ye your selves
are taught of God to Love. Isa. 49.15.
needless. It seems all one, as if I should persuade the Sun to shine, the Fire
to burn, nay a man to be a man. This Law of Love to Children is written by the
Finger, drawn by the Pencil, stamped and engraven by the deepest impress of
Nature on the Hearts, and bowels of all Parents. Indeed I have spent more than
a few minutes in searching the Scriptures on this account; and, tho I find many
express Texts that oblige us to Love God, Christ, our Neighbor, the
Brotherhood, our Wives, yea our Enemies, yet I can light but on one that does
in express Terms command Parents to Love their Children, viz. Tit. 2.4. where
we find the young Women are to be taught to Love their Children. For which the
Best reason that I can give for the present, is the same that he gave, why the
Romans, among all their Laws, had enacted none against the horrid Sin of
Parricide, viz. Because the Romans either could or would not suppose men to be
such Monsters, as to be guilty of so black a Crime. The Scripture supposes,
that, while we retain the Nature of men, or own the Name of Fathers, we cannot
but love our Children. Well then, Love your Children, but, Love them as
Fathers. Fathers! This very single Word contains an Iliad of Arguments. Were I
at leisure, 'twere easy to draw out all the Rhetoricans Topics of Persuasion
out of its Bowels. Father! (...).
the very Name is as an ointment poured forth, it sends forth nothing but the
perfume of L^ve, meekness, tenderness. Do but sincerely Love your Children, as
Fathers, and then be sinfully severe, if you can? Love your Children, not so
much for their lovely countenance, their pleasing Grace, and sweetness, which,
how charming soever, is but a fading flower, a skin-deep vanity; but
principally, as those that are bone of your bone, flesh of your flesh, to whom
you have communicated your blood, and very nature. And let not this Love be
like a dead picture, or Idol in your breast, without Life, or Action; but a
living active principle, a spring that may vigorously, and effectually
influence all the powers of your Soul for the procuring of all that which is
truly good to your poor Children.

Obj. But how can I possibly love such naughty, such provoking Children?

1. Does your Duty of loving your Children admit of that exception? Love them,
i. e. If they are, or while they are free from all fault; did not the Lord that
enjoins this Duty, know full well that no mortal man is without his Spots,
Imperfections, Failings? In vain is that Precept that is limited to a
Condition, which is impossible to fulfill.

Jam. 3.2. Tangat memoriam communis fragilitas.
2. Look inward, and then look upward: Are not you naught? have not you often,
and do not you daily, hourly provoke your Heavenly Father? and yet would you
not desire that he should Love you? Let your own Prayers and Tears be Witnesses
in the Case: Had a man laid his ear close to your Closet, might he not have
heard you Ephraim-like bemoaning your self thus? Heavenly Father, I am vile, I
have done Iniquity, I have not only touched upon the verge of Vice, but entered
the Circle; nay my sins are aggravated by Perverseness in ill-doing, and by
resisting counsel; I cannot, dare not clear my self by a just defense, nor,
being rightly deprived of thy love and favor, seek for any other Mediators,
but thy Christ, and free Grace, for my relief. And therefore give me leave to
hope, that a Fathers Bowels are as Potent Orators as a Sons Misery; and that,
while my Transgressions Damm up the way to favor, fatherly Compassion will not
forget to be merciful: he that bears the name of a Father, cannot forget the
tears of a Child. Tell me, severe Parents, is not this a true Echo of some of
your most pathetick Prayers? But what answer have you expected, and your
Heavenly Father returned?

3. Possibly, while you have been speaking, God has answered; as he did, Jer.
31.20. Is Ephraim my dear Son, is he a pleasant Child? No, no, he is naught, he
is a Prodigal. True! but yet he is a repenting, a returning Prodigal; though
not a pleasant Son, yet a Son, a Child, and therefore since I spoke against
him, I do earnestly remember him still; Therefore my Bowels are troubled for
him, I will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord: Read, consider, and
often Pray over those pertinent Texts, Deuteronomy. 32.36. Isa. 63.15, 16. Hos. 11.7,
8, 9. Luke 15.19, 20. All this is true to a repenting Ephraim, but my Child
lies stinking in his filth.

4. But I pray, In what case, and posture did your Heavenly Father find you,
when he first manifested his Love unto you? Ezekiel. 16.6, 8. I saw thee polluted
in thine own blood, and I said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood, Live;
ver. 8. Behold, this time was the time of thy Gods Love: God the Father
commended his Love toward you, in that while you were yet Sinners Christ died
for you, Romans 5.8.

2. Govern your Children as a Father, and so remember,

1. That your Parental power is not absolute, or despotical, but regulated, and
circumscribed within due bounds and limits: Parents may not think they may do
what they list, according to their own Will and Pleasure with their Children;
Stat pro ratione voluntas, is the language of a Tyrant, not of a Father: And
here,

1. Beware of secret Pride, of inordinate self-exalting; of magnifying your
Office, and overvaluing your selves, and of esteeming your selves to be greater
than indeed you are, and an Eager desire that your Children should so think of
you, and so treat you.

2. Beware of thinking, more of the dignity of your place, than of your duty
you owe to God, and your Children, in that Station, wherein God has fixed you.

3. Beware of being excessively hard, and difficult to be pleased, and of being
too rigid an Exactor of observance, and respect from your Child, and of
slighting, undervaluing, vilifying, of him, when he has done his utmost; of
discontent, and murmuring, if you have not all you desire in your Child.

4. Beware, that you respect not your Child more for the seeming regard he
shows to you, than for any real worth that is in him.

All these are dangerous Rocks, to which your secret Pride exposes you, enough
to destroy Pilot and Vessel.

3. Be Angry with your Child, but be Angry, and sin not, Ephesians. 5.26. Be angry,
but then let it be the Anger of a displeased Father against an offending Child,
not the Anger of a Bloody enemy against an Irreconcilable Foe; be angry as your
Heavenly Father is said to be Angry: Of this before.

4. Exhort, admonish, reprove, rebuke, chastize, offending Children, but then
still Remember, whose deputy you are, whom you represent, even your heavenly
Father. Fury is not in him, Judgment is his strange work: But he delights in
mercy. When he is as it were forced to put forth his Anger, he then makes use
of a Fathers rod, not an Executioners Ax; Psalm. 89. from 30. to 35. 2 Samuel 7.14.
He will neither break his Childrens bones, nor his own Covenant. He lashes in
Love, Heb. 12.6. Rev. 3.19. in measure, in pity, and compassion. In all their
Affliction he is afflicted. Every stroke on his Child's back recoils on his own
Bowels: and if the member be gangrened, and there is an absolute necessity to
cut it off, to save the Life, the Soul of his Child, then like a Chyrurgeon,
who is the Father of the Patient, He makes use of the Saw, not forgetting, that
he is now cutting off his own flesh, and would never do it, but for the Child's
good; Romans 8.28. Go you, and do likewise.

5. In all you do, take heed you do not provoke them on the one hand, nor
discourage them on the other.

1. Not provoke them. Of this somewhat before. Let me add, when Children find
themselves, contrary to their hopes, and it may be, their deserts, to be
hardly, and sharply dealt withal; and that nothing, which they attempt, or
perform, finds acceptance with their morose, and rigid Parents, specially if of
fiercer Spirits, in the heat, and bitterness of their enraged Souls, they are
apt to throw off all Reverence, to break their bands asunder, and to cast away
their cords from them. Like wild and untamed Colts, to kick, and winch, and
harden their necks, foreheads, hearts, against all admonitions, and
threatenings; against all words, and blows. Their Father hates them, say they,
sink they must, and sink they will: but not alone, if possible, they will draw
their cruel Fathers Heart, and Peace into the same gulf with them. Oh dreadful!
Take heed therefore, do not provoke.

Ne animam despondeant.
2. Not to discourage, dishearten, dispirit them; Col. 3.21. Fathers provoke not
your Children, least they be discouraged. (...). There is nothing, that does
more deject, and sink the heart of a poor Child, specially if ingenious, and of
a softer, and more meek temper, than the severe rigor, and roughness of a
Father. It quite unsouls the poor Child, when in the countenance, and
deportment of his Father, to whom of all men in the World, he should in reason
be dearest, he sees nothing but anger, and aversation. It intimidates the
Child, destroys his mettle, and courage for any honest, or honorable
undertaking; smothers, yea extinguishes all his fire, and vivacity, transforms
him into a mere sot, mope, dullard, block, utterly unfit for use, and service:
nay more, it often throws him into the deepest gulf of grief and melancholy,
sickness, death, and then, it may be, when too late, the unhappy Parent will
see cause to relent, and abhor himself for his unjust severity.

6. Parents, remember they are Children, and but Children. Their age may be
some Apology for them. Their Heads are green, yours are gray. More years may
teach them better manners. They are your Children, your own Flesh, Blood,
Bowels. (...), says Aristotle, your Children. If the stream be corrupt, it
derives it from your selves the Fountain, Psalm. 51.5. The young Serpent came
from the old Cockatrice.

7. Since Severity will not do the feat, see what sweetness, mildness,
gentleness, holy tenderness, and indulgence will do: Peragit tranquilla
potestas, quod violenta nequit. The pillow may help to break the flint, which
the Hammer, and Anvil cannot. It prevailed with flinty Saul, 1 Samuel 24.16. The
cordial may prevail, where the corrosive cannot. The sight of the pardon more
commands the heart of the desperate Traitor, than that of the Ax, or Gibbet.

8. To All these add Scriptural admonition, fervent, Supplication, Patient
waiting on, and humble Submission to the Will of God, Mic. 7.7, 8, 9.

Thus much concerning Sinful Severity, we proceed to the Second, and that is
Sinful Indulgence. Our Apostle knowing right well, how apt Parents are to
swerve from the golden mean of Parental discipline; and, whilst they Labor to
avoid the Rock of Sinful Severity, how prone they are to plunge themselves into
the gulf of Sinful Indulgence, does, in the same Text, prescribe a Sovereign
Antidote against that fatal pleurisy of fond Affection, in these words, but
bring them up in the Nurture, and Admonition of the Lord. Whilst the severe
Parent is breathing a vein in his distempered Child, he cautions him to take
care, he does not pierce an Artery: Fathers, provoke not your Children to
wrath. But, on the other Hand, if the Child, labors under an imposthume, and
needs the L^ncet, our Apostle does here command the discreet use of it, and
^^ll by no means permit, that the sinking Child should be soothed, or stroakt,
and demulc'd into certain ruin. Children must be nurtured, tho they may not be
provoked. Parents must not be cruel Ostriches, and leave and expose their young
ones, to harm and danger; nor yet must they be such fond Apes, who are said to
hug, their Cubs so closely, as that they kill them with their embraces: And
that on this Account; because,

2. The wickedness of unconverted Children is too too often occasioned, yea and
advanced, by the sinful Indulgence of their godly Parents. Sinful Severity,
with Saul has slain it is thousands; sinful Indulgence, with David, it is ten
thousands. Poor, cocker'd Children, when it is too late, find the little Finger
of a fond Mother, to weigh far heavier, and to sink the Soul far deeper than
the weighty Loins of a severe Father; and at a long run will find more of Sting
in a Rod of Roses, than in a scourge of Scorpions. In the Stating of this case,
I shall proceed as before, and show you,

(1.) What Sinful Indulgence is not: And so,

1. Natural, ordinate, moderate, parental Love, and such as is mixed with the
most yerning bowels, most deep and tender compassions, is not sinful
Indulgence. Nay, to be without these Natural Affections, Romans 1.31.
is not only wretched Stoicisme, but sinful, cursed, and more than brutish
astorgy. Even the Storks, and Sea Monsters will teach us to love our
Offspring. Love my Children I may, and must,

1. With all the sorts, and kinds of Love; of desire of Union, and Communion
with them, of the sweet enjoyment of them, of benevolence, and good will,
willing, ready, and prepared, to desire, and wish them all good: of beneficence
and bounty, Tit. 2.4. Genesis 21.19. 1 King. 3.25.26. and 1.7, 10, 18, 19. 1 Timothy
5.8.
actually endeavoring to do them all good possible, both as to their Souls and
Bodies. All our Spiritual gifts must be for the profit of their Souls, for
their Direction, Consolation, Salvation; and as for their Bodies, their Backs
must be our Wardrobes, their Bellies our Barns, and their Hands our Treasuries.
And with a Love of Complacency and delight. Our Children may, and ought to be
the joy and rejoicing of our Hearts; no greater joy, than to see our Children
like Olive-plants round about our Table, specially if we see, and find them
walking in the Truth. John 2. Ep. 4. and John. 3. Ep. 4.

2. With all the properties of parental Love, viz. Sincere and unfeigned; a Love
not in word, and tongue only, but from the Heart, in Deed, and in Truth. A
forward, cheerful Love, not drawn, or driven, but flowing as from a Fountain.
An expensive, open-handed, as well as open-hearted Love. A fruitful Love,
producing not only fair Leaves, Buds, and blossoms of pleasing smiles, and
large promises, but the mature fruits of beneficial performances. An holy,
just, fervent, constant Love, a most gentle, dear, tender, compassionate Love,
whereby we are ready to Sympathize with them, and forward to succor them in
their misery; to regard them, when they neither regard us, nor themselves: To
take in good part the desires of their Souls, when they find not to perform. To
accept of a sigh, in regard of a service, a mite instead of a Talent, a groan
instead of a duty, the very stammering of my Child above the eloquence of a
Beggar, Mal. 3.17. Looking on a returning Prodigal as a Son, and pitying as a
Father, not punishing as a Judge; Psalm. 103.13, 14. Remembering their frame, and
knowing, that both they, and we are poor dust. All this, and much more is not
sinful Indulgence. To carry them in our Bosoms, as Moses did the Israelites,
Number. 11.12. or so in our Hearts, as to be willing to impart our very Souls unto
them in, and for God, because they are dear unto us, as Paul, 1 These. 2.7, 8,
11. To Bless them in Gods Name, Faith, Fear, as Jacob did, Genesis 49.28. To
countenance and encourage them in, and reward them for well doing, 1 Pet. 2.14.
Est. 6.3. To Love those most, that Love God most, to give such Benjamins five
messes, a double, treble Portion, an Isaak's Inheritance; this is not sinful
Indulgence.

(2.) What sinful Indulgence is.

It stands in the Excess and exuberancy of our Love, and affections; and in too
much slacking, and remitting the reins of Government: When we do as it were
abandon, and give up our minds and studies, to coax, and please, and gratify
the humors, yea satisfy the Lusts of our foolish Children: when we make their
Wills our Laws, our Rules; when the doting Parent is led by the Heart, shall I
say, or Nose, by his audacious Child, and must be at his beck, at his command.
When the Child may and must speak, or do what he pleases, and the Parent either
may, or dare not say, What do thou? let him act what, and when, and how he
pleases, he must not be displeased, disturbed, contradicted in the least. When
the Child, grown insolent, and intolerable, is too gently treated, and born
withal, when a forced frown, or a gentle soft whisper, is looked upon as a
smart Rebuke, and the lash of a Rod, no less than the wound of a Sword. When,
it may be, we mildly snip the unthrifty Darling, and, at the same time, that we
pretend to chide, do fondly add fuel to his excess. This, O this is sinful
Indulgence. A sin of a crimson dye, and dreadful consequence. More particularly,

1. When our extravagant Love prevails with us, in too mild, and gentle a
manner, to bear with our wicked Children in contemning of, or Rebellion against
Gods Laws, or our own lawful commands, and counsels, Isa. 3.5. 1 Samuel 15.1, to
12. 1 Samuel 3.13.

Math. 14.8.
2. When our inordinate love to them causes us to counsel them to, or encourage
them in that which is evil. This was a deep blot, and indeed the only one I
find in that godly Mothers, Genesis 25.28. and 27.6. etc.
good Rebekah's Scutcheon, Genesis 25.28. It Is said, that Isaac loved Esau,
because he did eat of his Venison, but Rebekah loved Jacob: Isaac being old was
too much held by the teeth, and too fond of Esau, for his Venisons sake, but
Rebekah her self was not a little in fault. Her Jacob by his red Pottage had
got the Birthright, and now she is resolved that he should have the Blessing
too. On this account she furnishes him with a lie in his mouth, and skins on
his neck and hands, and so, in her great love, exposes her dressed Jacob instead
of a Blessing, to his Fathers Curse and his own Damnation. It Is true, he
narrowly escaped, and ran away with the Blessing; But both Mother and Son had
both their Bellies full of the Sauce in which the Mothers Indulgence had
sinfully soakt it. 'Twas this chiefly that made poor Jacob go halting to his
Grave.

3. When Parents will not endure to see that Natural Fierceness, Pride,
Self-will, Impatience, that peeps out in their Children, to be severely checked,
and grubb'd up by the Roots. When Children must not be nurtured in Truth,
Modesty, Bashfulness, Reverence, Courtesy, Obedience, Diligence; No, no, this
is Harshness: But even whilst little Children, scarce out of the shell, shall
be taught, and encouraged to brazen their Foreheads, to throw off all humble
Shamefacedness, all Respect of Superiors, to talk, and strut, and swagger,
Their Tongue is their own, and who is Lord over them? Oh intolerable, tell it
not in Gath, publish it not in the Streets of Askelon.

4. When we feed our Children with more dainty Fare, trick them up with more
gorgeous Apparel, and even loosen, and break the nerves of their Souls, and
Bodies with too soft, and delicate an education, no way suitable either to our
own Estates, or their Condition: Which was the serious complaint of Quintilian
of old, and is the sin, and shame of this present Age. This, this is that
sinful Indulgence here intended. This is that that too often occasions, yea
inflames, and heightens our Childrens daring Wickedness, and prepares them,
makes them fit Vessels for Temporal, and Eternal ruin. Now concerning this I
shall give you my thoughts under these two generals.

1. I shall lay before you plain Instances of this sinful Indulgence in three
Parents, all of them Fathers, (for, after a most exact search throughout the
whole Scriptures, I cannot find one, no not one of all the godly Mothers in
Israel guilty of, or charged with this sin, Rebekah only excepted,) two of
these Fathers were beyond all contradiction, truly, yea eminently godly, the
third probably so, by the tender respect he showed the Levite: We begin with
him.

1. That the Indulgence of Parents is the bane of Children, a Pandar of their
wickedness, the Asylum of their vanity. How easily is the Thief induced to
Steal, when he knows his Receiver? When the looseness of Youth knows where to
find pity and toleration, what mischief can it forbear? See this in the Levites
Concubine or Wife, Judge 19.1, 2. This Concubine plays the Whore against the
Levite, whom she owned at least as an Husband. Her guilt makes her fly, but
whither shall she cause her shame to go? whither indeed, but to her own dear
Fathers House? She that had deserved to be abhorred by her loving and faithful
Husband, doubts not to find shelter from her fond and indulgent Father, his
heart, and house, and bosom, she knew would all be open to her. Well, home she
speeds to her Father at Bethlehem Ephratah. But, does her good old father
receive her? what, does he suffer his house to become a Brothel-house, to be
defiled with an Adulteress, though she sprang out of his own Loins? Methinks I
hear him, in a just indignation thus accosting her. Why, How now Impudence!
what make thou here? do thou think to find my house a shelter for thy sins?
the Stews are a fitter receptacle for thee. Whilst: thou were a faithful Wife
to thy Husband, thou were a beloved Daughter to me: But, now thou art neither.
Thou art not mine, I gave thee to thine Husband. Thou art not thy Husbands,
thou have betrayed his Bed. Thy filthiness has made thee thine own, and thine
Adulterers, go seek thine entertainment, where thou have lost thine honesty!
thy Lewdness has brought a necessity of shame upon thy abettors. How can I
countenance thy person, and abandon thy sin? I had rather be a just man, than a
sinfully-kind Father. Get thee home therefore to thy Husband, crave his
Forgiveness upon thy Knees; redeem his Love with thy Modesty, and Obedience.
When his Heart is once open to thee, my doors shall not be shut; in the mean
time, before thou art humbled both before God and man, Know, I can be no Father
to an Harlot. Thus methinks I should have heard him say; but lo, fond Father
that he was, he treats and caresses her at another rate, and seems to bespeak
her, as Jael did Sisera, Judge. 4.18. Turn in my dear Child, turn in to me: He
brings her into his House, covers her with a Mantle, instead of Water gives her
a Bottle of Milk, yea he brings forth Butter in a Lordly dish! treats her at
the Kindest rate, and that for four whole Months. And now let the most
indulgent Parent judge, whether this was a just dealing with this Strumpet,
whose Crime God had long before Sentenced with Death, Lev. 20.10. But yet
remember, that this Courting Jael proved a most fatal, Executioner. The vile
Sisera bowed and fell at her feet, Judge. 4.21. -- and 5.25, 26, 27. For ought I
know, had her Father been more severe, he might have prevented her farther
defiling, and Murder by the filthy Gibeathites, Judge. 19.25, 28. Indulgence is
a Siren, that first sings, and then slayes; worse than Jael, her Hammer and
Nail destroy only the Body, but this destroys the Soul, and that even by its
Lullabys, when the unhappy fondling sleeps and snoars in the Parents bosom.

2. Indulgent Parents are, really cruel to themselves, their Posterity, and the
Church of God. For this, we have two such instances in two Stars of the
greatest magnitude, that ever shone in the Churches Horizon, such indeed, as
are not to be mentioned without the greatest dread and trembling, with respect
to their plunge into this deep pit of gross Indulgence, ELI, and DAVID. Nay
startle not. These are the men, even good Eli, and better David. The best of
men, and I had almost said the worst of Parents, and then no wonder, if Plagued
with the worst of Children.

1. Eli. His Tragical Story we find 1 Samuel 2.12. to the 4th chap. v. last.

He had two Sons, Sons of Belial, a brace of Hell Hounds, Hophni and Phinehas,
whose names do almost stain the Sacred Writ; wretches, that were as desperately
lewd, as himself was eminently holy. And this appears on these acounts.

1. If the goodness of Example, Precept, Education, Profession, could have been
Antidotes against the extremity of sin, these Sons of so holy a Father had not
been so hellishly wicked: But now neither Parentage, nor Education, nor
Priesthood, could restrain the Sons of Eli, from degenerating into the Sons of
Belial: Yea, their wickedness was most desperately improved, boiled up, and
fermented to the highest Paroxysm.

2. Had they not been the Sons of Eli a Priest, yet, being themselves by Office
Priests of the most high, and Holy God, who would not have thought, hoped,
concluded, that their very calling and function should not have at least
dictated, if not infused some Holiness into them? But, Oh dreadful, even their
white and clean Ephods, are but Cloaks of their fouler sins: Nay, though they
serve at the Altar, yet, degenerating from their duty, their wickedness is so
far from being extenuated and made less, that it rises so much above others, as
their Place and Station is holyer than others. A wicked Priest is the worst,
the Vilest Creature on Gods Earth. Devils in Mascarade. Who are Devils now, but
they, that were once Angels of Light? The worst of Dung comes from the best of
Meat. The most deadly Poison out of the sweetest Mineral.

3. That God, who had promised to be the Levite's Portion, had set forth the
fair Portion of these Levites; and God will not only feed them, but feast them
too, and that at his own Table, at his own Altar. They shall eat of his own
Morsel, and drink of his own Cup. The breast and the right Shoulder of the
Peace Offering was their allowed Commons, Lev. 7.14, 15. Well, They are
satisfied, they are thankful, are they not? No such matter. These bold and
saucy Priests will rather have their Flesh-hook their Arbiter, than God, and
whatever their Trident fastens on, shall be for their dainty Tooth, 1 Samuel
2.13, to 17. They were weary of one or two Joints, their delicacy affects more
variety: God is not worthy to carve for these men, but their own hands. And
thus they do not receive, but take, or snatch, violently, audaciously,
unseasonably, sacrilegiously. It had been but fit, that God should have first
been served; but their presumption will not stay Gods leisure. E're the fat be
burnt, e're the flesh be boiled, they must and will snatch their share from the
Altar; as if the God of Heaven should wait on their curious Palate, as if the
Jews had come thither, not so much to Sacrifice to the Lord Jehovah, as to
these Priests Bellies. But beyond all this,

4. Hear O Heavens; and give ear, O Earth, and be astonished with all those that
bear the name, guilt and shame of such debauched Priests of the Altar, even
then, and there, at the very Altar, the most Holy God his throne on Earth, even
there, they are no sooner fed, but like cursed Stallions, they neighed after
the modest Mothers of Israel. Holy women assemble at the door of the
Tabernacle; and these Varlets, blackest Miscreants (worse by far than Zimri and
Cozbi, all Circumstances considered, Numb. 25.6. and well it had been, if that
other Phinehas had been nigh them with his avengeful Javelin) tempt, if not
force them to adultery, that came thither for devotion. These wretches had
Wives of their own, yet their unbridled desires rove after strange flesh, and
fear not to pollute even that holy place with abominable filthiness. Oh! sins
too shameful for common men, much more for the spiritual guides of Israel. That
Ark, which expiated other men's sins, dreadfully added to the sins of these
Sacrificers. Jer. 2.8. Ezekiel. 23.38. Romans 2. -- 17.25. Thus far as to the Sin,
and Wickedness of these miscreants, the Children and Sons of Eli.

2. As to old Eli. Did he Know all this? It Is true, especially of Great men,
that they, usually, are the very last, that are informed of the Evil of their
own House: but yet as to Eli,

1. It could not probably be, but when all Israel rang of the lewdness of his
Sons, he only should be ignorant of it. But

2. Or, if He knew it not, can his Ignorance be excused? It being not an
Ignorance merae privatis, but pravae dispositionis: for where should Eli have
been but in the Temple? either for action or oversight? The very presence of
the Priest keeps Gods House in order. 'Twas his grand duty carefully to inspect
them, at least diligently to enquire after the due administration of Gods
Ordinances, and a just and seasonable rebuke, and restraint might have happily
prevented this extremity and height of prodigious debauchery. Nothing but Age
can plead and apologize for Eli, that he was not the first Accuser of these his
Sons will you call them, or monsters. But

3. Now, when their Enormities come to be the cry of the Multitude, when it
thunders, and he must perforce hear it, and this loud clap must of necessity
pierce not his ears only, but his heart, bowels, conscience. But with what holy
fervor, zeal, justice, indignation?

1. Was it, as with Judah, when 'twas told him, Tamar thy daughter-in-law has
played the harlot; bring her forth, and let her be burnt? Genesis 38.24. * These my
Sons are Adulterers.

2. Or as the Parents of the stubborn and rebellious Son, lay hold of them and
carry them forth to the Elders of the City, and say to the Elders of the City:
These my Sons are stubborn, and rebellious, they have not, will not obey my
voice, let them be stoned to death. So God commanded, Deuteronomy. 21.18. to 22. Thus,
even thus, should Eli, who was not only the chief Priest, but the supreme Judge
of Israel, impartially have judged his own corrupted flesh; and never could he
have offered a more pleasing Sacrifice, than the corrupt gore blood of so
wicked Sons.

1. Doubtless Eli knew full well, that 'Twas in vain to rebuke those sins
abroad, which we tolerate at home: That that man makes himself a ridicule, that
leaves his own house on fire, and runs to quench his Neighbors; and quitting
his own Family infected with the Plague, hastens to the cure of his Neighbor.

2. We find, this good Eli, as old as he was, could be tart, and sharp enough
to another, to godly, mourning, praying Hannah, when he thought only, she had
been drunk before the Lord, upon but the bare suspicion of a sin: How long will thou be drunken? put away thy wine from thee; 1 Samuel 1.13, 14. It Is true, his
reproof arose from misprision, but that misprision sprang from zeal.

3. But what now? In the Case before us, you cannot but expect to find him
screwed up to a note beyond Ela, inflamed ad Octo; the zeal, the fire, the
furnace heated seven times more than usually, the burning zeal of his Gods
House must needs consume him. For satisfaction, read 1 Samuel 2.22. to 26. Now
Eli was very old, and heard All that his Sons did unto all Israel, and how they
lay with the women, that assembled at the door of the Congregation: and he said
unto them: To shame, To Torment, To hell with them, To the Worm that dies not,
To the fire that never shall be quenched! Was this his Sentence? No, no. But to
amazement; Hear what he says:

4. He said unto them, Why do ye such things, for I hear of your Evil dealings
by all this People? ver. 24. Nay, my Sons, for it is no good report, that I
hear, ye make the Lords People to trangress. 25. If one man sin against
another, the Judge shall judge him, but if a man sin against the Lord, who
shall entreat for Him?

See here Indulgence to a prodigy; to the notorious Crimes of his Wicked Sons.

1. How soon do we find the case altered! to Hannah he spoke as an Holy Priest,
a just Judge; to these, as a fond indulgent Father. If corrupt nature be
allowed to speak in Judgment, and to make difference not of Crimes, but
Criminals; not of Sins, but Offenders, the Scales will not be Equal.

2. Had these wretches but a little slack'd their duty, or heedlesly omitted
some rites of the Sacrifices, this Censure had not been so unbecoming.

3. But, to punish the thefts, rapines, sacriledges, Adulteryes of his Sons
with a mere Why do you so; was no other than to shave that head, that deserved
the Ax.

As it is with Ill humors; A weak dose does but irritate, and anger them, not
purge them out: so it fares with habituated Sins, and so it did here; ver. 25.
They hearkened not to the voice of their Father.

An easy reproof does but encourage wickedness, and makes it think it self so
slight, as that Censure imports. Nay, a vehement reproof, if no more; to a
capital Evil is, at most, but like a smart Shower to a ripe Field, which only
lays that Corn, which is worthy of a Sickle.

It is a breach of Justice, not to proportion the Punishment to the Offense; to
Whip a man for murder; to punish the purse only, for incest; to burn Treason
in the hand; to award the Stocks to Burglary; to lay on the Verge, where the Ax
or Gibbet are deserved; is to patronize Evil, instead of avenging it.

Thus we have seen the Childrens Wickedness, and the Fathers Indulgence. But is
there not a Melius inquirendum in the case? Yes, yes. From a fond, and partial
Bar, to a strict, and impartial Tribunal.

3. God himself, and the greatest party concerned, and the most injured,
interposes.

Poor Eli could not have devised, or studied a more compendious, and effectual
Way, to have plagued himself, his House, his Posterity; than by this his sinful
kindness to his Childrens Sins. What variety of judgments does he now hear of,

1. From the Messenger of God! 1 Samuel 2.27. to the end. Because he had now
doated in his old age, there should not be an old man left of his house for
ever; because it vexed him not enough, to see his Sons Enemies to God, he shall
see his own Enemies in the habitation of the Lord, ver. 32. Because himself
forbore to take vengeance of his Sons, and esteemed their lives above the Glory
of his God, and Master; therefore God himself will take the Sword into his own
hand, and kill them both in one day. ver. 34. and chap. 4.11. Because he abused
his Authority, and connived at Sin, and honored his Sons before God, therefore
his house shall be stripped of his honor, and it should be translated to
another. ver. 30.32.35. Because he suffered his Sons to please their wanton
appetites, in taking meat from off Gods Trencher, therefore those, which remain
of his house, shall come to his Successors, and beg a piece of Silver to buy a
morsel of Bread. ver. 36.

Because he was fond, and partial to his Sons, God will execute all this, and
more, on him and them, severely, and impartially. 1 Samuel 3.11. to 15.

2. Observe, I beseech you observe, indulgent Citizens, we do not read of any
Sin, that Eli was charged with, but with that which is Epidemical, I fear,
among you, and looked upon as a peccadillo, and if a Sin, at most but venial.
What were these dreadful menaces against Eli, but Premonitions to us? these
murdering Canons to Him, but our Warning-pieces? God says, yea God Swears,
that he will judge Elies house, and that with beggary, with death, with
desolation: And that the wickedness of his house should not be purged with
Sacrifices, or Offerings for ever. 1 Samuel 3.11. to 15. Do not your Ears tingle
at the mention of these things? do you not wonder, that the Neck, and Heart
both of Poor Eli were broken at the report of them?

4. We have heard the Sentence, and, (notwithstanding Elies Repentance, and the
Saving of his Soul, yet) for the necessary Vindication of Gods Honor,
Holiness, Justice, here below, see the dreadful Execution.

1. The Philistines and Israel join in Battel^ Israel is smitten and fled.
There fell of Israel thirty thousand footmen; and the Ark of God taken. 1. Sam.
4.10, 11. 2. The two Caitiffs, that had lived before to bring Gods Ark into
contempt, and had now lived to carry it into captivity, both slain by the
Philistines. 3. Eli, now ninety eight years old, at the news of this, falls
backward from his Seat, and breaks his Neck. 4. To make the Tragedy complete,
the Wife of that cursed Phinchas, as not minding Father, Husband, Self, Child,
with her last breath pants out a doleful Epitaph on the captive Ark, and stamps
it on her Child's forehead. Call it Ichabod, for the Ark of God is taken. 1 Samuel
4.21.

Before we proceed, let us cast our Eye back and but glance on the Sin, that was
the grand cause of this strages. 1 Samuel 2.29. Because he honors his Sons
above me: for the iniquity, which he knows, because his Sons made themselves
vile, and he restrained them not. 1 Samuel 3.13. Hinc illae Lachrymae. O Cruel
Indulgence, The Jury has sat upon thee, and give in this, as their Just and
unanimous Verdict, that thou art guilty of the death of Father, and Children;
of Priests, and People, of the captivity of the Ark at least, if not the
destruction of Religion. By this time, I suppose, your Ears, and Hearts may be
full, if not laden. If not, take the third, and last, and that who is, but

3. DAVID: who was no less unhappy in, than indulgent to three of his Children;
Adonijah, Amnon, Absalom.

1. Adonijah, is much made of, greatly Cocker'd, his Fathers darling, and
delight, from his Infancy his Father David had not displeased him at any time,
do he what he would, no not in so much as saying, Why have thou done so? 1
King. 1.6. And well might the cocker'd youngster think, since he had got the
Throne of his Fathers Heart, 'twould not be so high a leap, to usurp the Throne
of his Fathers Kingdom, ver. 5.25. and that, whilst his Father was yet living,
specially since his elder Brother Absalom was now dead; (but yet he might have
remembered, how that Phaeton fell,) nay more, tho he knew, that his Father,
according to Gods special Appointment, had declared Solomon to be the Heir
apparent of his Crown, and Kingdom. For all this, David did, or durst not
reprove him. No. His Treason is no such great matter: but a light thing, and to
be looked upon only as the brisk effort of a vain, if not a gallant Spirit. For
all this yet, not such a word from David, as Why have thou done so, Adonijah?
Well, if the fond Father will not, the Wise Son shall, and will make this vain
fondling know himself, especially when his subtle ambition so far discovered it
self, in asking Abishag the Shunamite, David's Concubine, by creeping into his
Fathers Bed, to make his way to his Brothers Throne. This Solomon was well
aware of, and commands him to be put to death, as a Just reward of his old
practiced, and new intended Treason. 1 Kin. 2.25. There Is Adonijahs exit

2. The next is Amnon, guilty of Incest with his own Sister, yea and this
incest committed with rape. 2 Samuel 13.14. Amnon, a person to be anathematized
by the whole Congregation, Deuteronomy. 27.22. and to be punished with Death. Lev.
20.17. But what does David do in the Case? The Text says: When King David
heard of all these things, he was very wroth. ver. 21.

1. But was that all? Alas, what was that, but a great flash, and noise without
a Bullet? and this Absalom, that ravished Virgins own Brother, deeply resents,
and is resolved upon a Just revenge. ver. 22. Certainly the incestuous Son,
might justly have expected more, than a sudden Aguish fit of hot displeasure
of a Father. viz. The danger of the Law, the indignation of a Brother, the
shame, and outcry of the World.

2. What a stab in the Heart, a Sword in the Bowels must this needs be to
Tamars Father David, whose command, out of Love to Amnon, had cast his dearest
Daughter into the Den and jaws of this Lion! ver. 7. What an insolent affront
must he needs construe this to be offered, by a Son to a Father, that the
Father shall be made as it were a pandar of his own Daughter, to his own Son!

3. David, that tender Father, that lay upon the ground, and would eat no
bread, for the sickness of a Child (which yet was but the spawn of an
Adulterous bed;) How vexed, enraged, inflamed must he needs be, with the
villainy of His Son, with the Ravishment of his Daughter, both of them more
deeply wounding than many deaths? What revenge can he think of for so heinous a
crime less than death, and that in its most bloody dress?

4. And yet what less than death is it to this indulgent Father to think of a
due revenge! Rape was, by the Law of God capital, Deuteronomy. 22.35. How much more,
when seconded with Incest! Anger, tho never so hot, and eager, is not
punishment enough for so high, so complicated an offense. Such mild injustice
is no less provoking to Heaven, and perilous to a Commonwealth, than the
fiercest cruelty: For ought I know, the blood of Souls murdered by foolish
Pity, cries as loud in the ears of divine Justice, as the Blood of Bodies slain
by cruel Severity. And yet this is all we hear of from so indulgent a Father;
unless perhaps he makes up the rest with Sorrow, and so punishes his Sons
miscarriage on himself; v. 37. But

5. If David, perhaps out of the Consciousness to himself of his late Adultery
and Murder, will not punish this horrid fact, his Son Absalom shall: And that,
not so much out of any Zeal, or of Justice, as desire of Revenge: 2 Samuel 13.28,
29. See Amnon there weltring in his blood, murdered by Absaloms command, when
he was drunk, and so for ought we Know, Soul and Body sunk at once, and that
eternally. One Act of Injustice draws on Another: The injustice of indulgent
David in not punishing the Rape of Tamar, procures the injustice of Absalom, in
punishing Amnon with Murder. That, which the Father should have justly
revenged, and did not, the Son revengeth unjustly. However, in all this the
Lord, the Supreme Judge is Righteous; To reckon for those Sins which humane
Partiality or Negligence had omitted; and whilst he punishes Sin with sin, to
punish sin with death. Had David called Amnon to a severe Account for this
unpardonable Villainy, the Revenge had not been so desperate. Thus, to David's
Horror, fell Amnon. The third and last, that brings up the Rear of those
Serpents, that lay so warm in David's Bosom, was that great Gallant, the
glistring Minion of the Court,

3. Absalom; Absalom the Murderer, Absalom the Rebel, and yet for All that,
Absalom the Beloved.

1. Absalom the Murderer, and that of his own Brother Amnon, as we have heard,
that for two full years had sat close brooding the deepest Revenge: Having
dispatched his Brother, (...); away he flies to Geshur, and for three years
hides and shelters himself in his Grandfathers Court. 2 Samuel 13.34, 37. and
3.3. But does not David post his Ambassadors after, and demand him thence, to
be returned, and delivered up as a Sacrifice, to stop the cry of his Brothers
Blood, that roared for Vengeance? At least in three years time? No, not a Word
of that. But see, and be amazed at the quite contrary workings of his
distempered Heart, v. 39. The soul of King David longed, or was even consumed,
to go forth, for he was comforted concerning Amnon. The three years absence
seemed not so much a Banishment to the Son, as a Punishment to the Father. It Is
true, David, out of his Wisdom, so inclines to favor, as that he conceals it;
and yet so conceals it, as that Joab, who could see Light through the smallest
chink, by his piercing Eye, could clearly discover it. Joab reads David's Heart
in his Countenance, and knows, how to humor, and serve him in that, which he
would, and yet seemed, he would not have accomplished, and by that cunning fetch
of the Woman of Tekoah, brings into the light that birth of desire, whereof he
knew David was both bigg, and ashamed, 2 Samuel 14.21. See here the mask of Royal
Indulgence. It is not David, that recalls Absalom: Not He, he only does it, to
answer the humble Petition of an importunate Subject, and to follow the advice
of Joab a discreet Councellor. The King said, Behold now I have done this
thing, that ye desire, go therefore, bring the young man Absalom again. But
stay: Another fetch; Let him turn to his own House, and let him not see my
face, v. 24. for fear the People should cry shame on this unjust Indulgence.

2. Absalom the Rebel, Absalom the Traitor. 2 Samuel 15.10. Having prepared the
People for a Rebellion by a wicked insinuation of his Fathers unjust
Government, he sets up, as King, in Hebron, and the Conspiracy was strong. His
Eye is on the Metropolis. His first March must be to Jerusalem: To make room
for the young Rebel, the poor old Father must pack up, and be gone; v. 14. with
an heavy heart, weeping eye, covered head, and bare feet as it were. Never did
he with more Joy come up to this City, than now left it with Sorrow: And how
could he do otherwise, when the Insurrection of his dearly beloved Son drove
him out from his chief City, and Throne, yea from the Ark of God?

1. His first Prank was a sufficient Earnest of what was like to ensue. An Act
of the highest incestuous Uncleanness, that ever the Sun saw. They spread
Absalom a Tent upon the top of the House, and Absalom went in to his Fathers
Concubines in the sight of All Israel. 2 Samuel 16.2.22, 23. The Practice was
like the counsel, v. 22. as deep as Hell it self. An Act incapable of
Forgiveness. Beside the usurping the Throne, to violate the Bed of his Father;
unto his treason, to add incest, is no less unnatural; that the World might
see, that Absalom, neither hoped nor cared for the reconciliation of a Father:
And, as if the villainy could not have be^n shameful enough in secret, he sets
up his Tent in the top of the House, and lets all Israel be witness, of his own
sin, and his Fathers shame. Ordinary sins are for Vulgar Offenders: but Absalom
sins like himself; eminently, transcendently, and does that, which may make the
World at once to blush, and wonder. The filthiness of the Sin is not more
great, than the impudence of the Matter.

2. His pursuit; 2 Samuel 15.14. Absalom is now on his High march, ready to make
his onset. David rallies up all the forces he could make, not so much to
Assault his Son, as to defend himself. But see his charge, 2 Samuel 18.5. The
King commanded Joab and Abishai, and Ittai, his three Generals, saying; Fight
neither against small, nor great, for they, poor deluded Souls, are come forth
in the simplicity of their hearts, are merely drawn in, and Know not any thing:
2 Samuel 15.11. but against the Head and Ringleader of these Rebels, that Son, or
traitor rather, that came forth of my Bowels, and seeks my life; 2 Samuel 16.11.
Is not this David's Charge? No, not such a Syllable in their Commission: But
thus, which is not to be mentioned without a blush, Deal gently for my sake
with the young man, even with Absalom, 2 Samuel 18.5. But stay, what do I hear?
Is this the voice of David? what, that David, that formerly was forced to
employ his Arms for his defense against a tyrannous Father-in-law, and is now
forced to buckle them on against an unnatural Son? What, he that has mustered
his men, commissioned his Generals, marshaled his Troops? what, is this his
charge, and word, and signal for the Battle? Does he at once seem to encourage
them, by his eye, and restrain them, with his tongue? Oh! David, what means
this ill-placed Love? this unjust, cruel mercy? Deal gently with a traitor! of
all Traitors, with a Son! of all Sons, with an Absalom! The graceless,
murtherous, incestuous, traitorous Son of so good, so tender a Father! And all
this, for my sake, whose Crown, Kingdom, Blood he hunts after! For whose sake
must this wretch be pursued, if he must be forborne for thine? He was still
courteous, tho hypocritically, to thy followers, affable to Suitors, plausible
to all Israel, that so he might be perfectly cruel to thee. Wherefore are these
Arms, if the sole cause of the quarrel, must be the Attractive, persuasive
motive of Mercy? Yet thou say, Deal gently: We see, even in the holiest
Parents on Earth, corrupt Nature may be guilty of most unjust tenderness, of
bloody Indulgence. But let us advance a step farther.

3. The Battle is joined. The God of Justice takes part with Justice; lets
Israel, foolish Israel, feel, what it is to take part with, and to bear Arms
for a traitorous Usurper; 2 Samuel 18.6. to 9. the Sword devours twenty thousand
of them; and the Wood devoured more than the Sword. Among the rest, the loyal
Oak singles out the Ringleader of this horrible Conspiracy, and by one of his
spreading Arms becomes at once, his Gaol, and Gibbet? The Justice of God twists
an Halter of his locks; and no marvail, if his own Hair turned traitor to him,
who durst rise up against his Father. Joab is informed, that the Beast is
noos'd; comes and sees him hanging, makes no demurr, but immediately thrust
three darts through the Heart of the bloody Traitor: W^^t the poor Soldier
forbore to do in obedience, v. 12, 13. that the General does in zeal, v. 14.
not fearing to prefer his Sovereigns safety before and beyond all little
respects whatever, as being more tender of the Life of his Prince, and the
peace of his People, than the weak, or strohg affections of a misguided Father,
v. 14, 15.

4. Now for the Catastrophe, the last Scene: the Battel's ended: David hears
the Trumpets sound a Retreat. What news? Our Care is wont to be, where our Love
is. How fares the Army? Joab, Abishai, Ittai, my Generals, how is it with them?
My Crown, does it stand more firm, and fixed? or is it fallen? Speak Ahimaaz,
say Cushi: None of this in the least, but, to the everlasting reproach of fond
Parents, Is the young man Absalom safe? v. 29. Ahimaaz prudently answers, The
Lord has delivered up the men, that lift up their hand against my Lord the
King, v. 28, 29. Ahimaaz turn thou aside, and stand thou here. Behold here
comes Cushi, with a joyful heart, and open mouth: Tidings, my Lord the King,
for the Lord has avenged thee this day of all them, that rose up against thee,
v. 32. But these are not the Tidings, that David so much pants after. Cushi,
thou must learn to distinguish betwixt the King, and the Father, and tell him
plainly, Is the young man Absalom safe? v. 32. That murtherous, incestuous,
Traitor, whom thou call the young man, is dead, O King! And let the Enemies
of my Lord the King, and all that rise against thee, to do thee hurt, be as
that young man is.

5. And what says King David to this? Methinks I hear him say, Psalm. 81.1. etc.
Come, my dear People: Come, and let us sing aloud unto God our strength, and
make a joyful noise unto the God of Jacob. 2. Take a Psalm, and bring hither
the Timbrel, the pleasant Harp with the Psaltery. 3. Blow up the Trumpet, as in
the new Moon, as on a solemn feast day. 4. Let this be a Statute for Israel,
for this is the day that the Lord has made, we will rejoice and triumph in it.
The King shall joy in thy strength, and greatly rejoice in thy Salvation. The
Lord is known by the judgment, that he has executed; the wicked is snared in
the work of his own hands. Higgaion-Selah. Is this the Io Triumph, wherewith
he makes the Earth to ring again? No, but, on the contrary, the poor Father
being as it were Thunderstruck with the words of his Blackmore, forgets that
he was a King, and Father of his Country, looks like Jephthah when he met his
devoted Daughter, and as if bereaved of all Comfort, breaks out into a flood of
tears, and into such an indecent Lamentation, as no Records either Sacred or
Humane can parallel. The King was much moved, and wept, v. 33. and as he went
he said, O my Son, Absalom, my Son, my Son Absalom, would God I had died for
thee! O Absalom, my Son, my Son! My just Indignation at this more than Womanish
Transport forbids me to descant on it. I shall barely lay before you Joab's
smart Repartee, whereby, he endeavored to stop this Deluge, 2 Samuel 29.5, 6.
Joab said to the King, Thou have this day shamed the faces of all thy Servants,
which this day have saved thy Life, and the Lives of thy Sons, and of thy
Daughters, and the Lives of thy Wives. 6. In that thou love thine Enemies,
and hate thy Friends: For thou have declared this day, that thou regardest
neither Princes, nor Servants: For this day I perceive, that if Absalom had
lived, and all we had died this day, then it had pleased thee well.

And thus we have seen the Malady. Turn we now to the Remedy. The Plague Sore
has been opened, now for the Bunch of Figgs.

II. What may gracious Parents best do, for the Conversion of those, their
Children, whose Wickedness have been occasioned by their own sinful Indulgence?

1. Reflect seriously on your heart, and ways. Beg, and beg sincerely,
earnestly, believingly, constantly of the Lord, effectually to convince you of
the great sinfulness and mischief of your Indulgence, and to humble you deeply
for it. O cast your selves at the foot of God, lament it, weep over it, mourn
as Doves before the Lord, when you see, ( if indeed you can see, and fondness
has not quite put out your eyes) Pride, Stubborness, Profaneness, Averseness
from God, all sorts, and degrees of sins, and corruptions break forth in your
Childrens Lives. And that

(1.) With respect to your Children. And this

1. Not only as the natural roots, from whom all this their Lewdness springs.
They drew it from the Womb, and breast. They were poisoned in the very Spring,
Psa. 51.5. Job 14.1. and 15.14. and 25.4. This consideration only, if no more,
to see your Children rotting, sinking, dying with a loathsome Disease, which
they drew from your Loins, were enough to rend your hearts, and Caul: But,

2. By your wretched Indulgence, you have added much fuel to this flame, you
have heated your Furnace seven times hotter. Your Indulgence has fomented,
yea, inflamed their Wickedness. You have heightened their feavour into a Plague,
and that worse a thousand times, than that of the Body, which ends in a
temporal Death, but this is of their Souls, and is like to sink them for ever
into a gulf of fire and brimstone.

(2.) With respect to God. The Lord was wroth with the Serpent, and cursed him
for ever, because but an instrument used by Satan; for corrupting our first
Parents, though no cause at all of it, Genesis 3.14. May not the Lord be much more
angry with us, and cause his Wrath to smoke against us, that have not only been
instruments really to convey this Poison, and corruption of nature into our
Childrens bosoms, but the principal occasions of of their superadded
Wickedness? You see on both these accounts matter of deep Humiliation.

2. Love your Children; hearken indulgent Parents, I say it again, Love your
Children. Yea Love them, I say not more, but better, than ever yet you Loved
them; you can never Love them too well. You may, and have Loved them too much.
One says well, None is to be Loved much, but He only, whom we can never Love
too much. Love them with all the kinds, degrees, properties of Love before
mentioned.

1. Love them so, as to be tender of their Bodies, their outward man: let that
want nothing, that is necessary, convenient, comfortable, suitable to their age
or quality: but above all Love their Souls, their inward man. The Cabinet must
not be neglected, but the Jewel is to be most regarded. The Ring is to be only
esteemed, but the Diamond in it, most highly to be prized.

The Love of our Childrens Souls, is the very Soul, and Spirit, and Elixir of
True parental Love. If we truly Love their Souls, we shall unfeignedly desire,
and vigorously endeavor their Spiritual, and Eternal Salvation. If you Love
their Souls indeed, your Hearts desire, and prayer to God for them will be,
that they may be saved. Romans 10.1. You will put forth your utmost affections,
and strength, to lift them up out of that pit of Sin and Misery in which they
lie, and to raise them into, and fix them in a state of Grace. If we do not
really grieve to see our Children lie weltring in their Sins of Ignorance,
unbelief, folly, profaneness, and so under the power and paw of Satan: If we do
not faithfully labor to preserve them from perishing, but suffer sin upon
them, pretend what we will, let us show never so much Love with our mouth, God
says, we really hate them in our Hearts. Lev. 19.17. See how Solomon's Parents
expressed their Love to Him, Prove. 4.3, 4. I was my Fathers Son; tender, and only
beloved in the sight of my Mother. 4. He taught me also, and said unto me, Let
thy heart retain my Words, keep my Commandments and Live. If you Love them
indeed, and in truth, you will, you can have no greater joy, than to see your
Children walking in the Truth. Joh. 3. Ep. 4. That foolish Son who is now an
heaviness to his Mother, being made Truly wise, will make a glad Fatther.
Prove. 10.1. Oh what a lovely sight, what a Soul-ravshing object in a godly
Parents eye is an hopeful Timothy, an obedient godly Joseph! Prove. 23.24, 25.
Well then, Love your Children, and in the first place their precious Souls. If
you find your Love, and care goes out more for their Bodies, than Souls, so far
mistrust your Love. It Is Carnal.

2. Love your Children, truly, tenderly, but yet take heed that you do not
over-love them. But when is that? Certainly, when you Love them more than you
Love God and Christ, you over-love them. But who does so? I shall not charge
you but give me leave to ask you a question or two. Tell me, when your Gods
Glory, and your Child's good are nearly concerned, for which does your zeal most
hotly glow? Are not your Affections most fiery, where they should be most cool,
and where they should burn, there they freeze? Does not your Heart make you
believe, it Loves God, and gives him Pledges of your affection, while it
secretly doats chiefly on the dandled Child? Like some false Strumpet that
entertains her Husband with her Eyes, and on the mean time treads on the Toe of
her Paramour. Do you not often think, you love God enough, and when, your Child
most, yet but enough, nay never enough: your head, heart, hand, purse,
mandrakes, five messes, breasts, bowels; All, but little enough, too little for
your Child, your Idol; is it so as to your God? So to Love our Child, as
thereby, to lesson our Love to God, yea or to equalize it with our Love to God,
is not only indulgence but idolatry. And an Idol of Flesh and Blood is to be
abhorred as well as that of Wood, or Sone. Assuredly the best way to quench
this exorbitant Love to Children on Earth, is to set your Hearts and Affections
more on your Father in Heaven; on God, his Christ, Spirit, Word, ways,
rewards. Luke 10.32. Isa. 33.6. 1 Pet. 1.24, 25. Look but directly, on that Sun
and thine eyes will quickly be dazzled to these glittering glowworms here
below. Make that invaluable Pearl but thy Treasure, and thou will lightly
esteem these Bristol-Stones. Take but Christ fully, and wholly into thy heart,
and bosom, and thou will quickly yield, thy Child's proper place is but thy
Foot, or Knee. In a word, If God in Christ be thy God indeed, thou will abhor
the thought, and practice of making thy Child his Corrival.

3. Love your Children, but Love them wisely, give them your Hearts into their
Bosoms, but not the reins, on their necks. When you do so, at the same time,
mount them on your fiercest Beast, furnish them with Switch, and Spur, but
without bit, or bridle, and then do but pause and think soberly of the period
of their full carier. Love 'em I say, but still be careful to maintain that
just authority and preeminence, that God has given you over them. A Parent
that has lost his Authority, is as salt, that has lost its savor. Like the
Logg sent from Jupiter, every frog in the Family apt to leap upon him. And
remember it, fond Parents, there is nothing in the world, that renders you more
vile, cheap, contemptible in the eyes, even of your Children themselves, when
they begin to put forth the first buds of Reason: nothing that lays your
authority more in the dust, and exposes you to the foot and spurn of your
Child, than sinful Indulgence. A foolish man dispiseth his Mother. Prove. 15.20.
His Mothers folly made him a Fool, of a foolish Child he at length grows up
into a man, but a foolish man, and this foolish man despises his Mother. If you
are Fathers then, take care of your Honor; if Mothers, be sure to carry it so,
as to preserve in your Children, that awful respect, and reverence, which they
owe you. Mal. 1.6. Heb. 12.9.

4. Love your Children, but love them in God, and for God. Love his image in
them, more than your own. In a word, Let Gods Spirit be the Principle, Gods
Word the Rule, Gods Example the Pattern, and his Glory the end of your dearest
Love to your dearest Children. Love them, as God Loves his Children. But How?

(1.) God so loves his Childrens persons, as that he infinitely hates their
sins. Nay, because he loves their persons, for that very reason he hates their
sins. Bacause I love my Child, therefore I hate the Toad, that I see crawling
on his bosom: God does infinitely love his People, and yet, in this Life, he
shows more hatred against the Sins of his own People, than he does against the
Sins of any other men in the World.

1. Here, He afflicts all his own people for sin, one way or other: Every
Mothers Son of them, Heb. 12.6, 8. Job 10.14. Isa. 31.9. and 48.10. but is
patient toward the wicked: lets them run riot without control. Psalm. 50.21.
and 13.5. 2 Pet. 2.9.

2. When he intends to bring a general judgment on a Nation, he uses to begin
with his own people. Isa. 28.18. 1 Pet. 4.17. Jer. 25.17, 18. Luke 21.10, 11.

3. When he makes any an Example unto others of his Hatred against sin, makes
choice of his own people before wicked men. Isa. 8.18. 1 Cor. 4.9. 1 King.
13.24, 33.

4. Judgments more sharp on his own people than others. Psalm. 89.7. Lam. 1.12.
Dan. 9.12.

(2.) All this he does out of the purest, eternal and unchangeable Love, that
he bears his Children, God chastens, and corrects his Children, that he may
keep them from sinning as others do, and as themselves have done; and from
perishing for ever in their sins as others shall. He meddles not with thorns,
and briars, but prunes his Vines, that they may no more yield such sour Grapes.
He casts his Children as Gold into a Furnace here, to refine, and purify them,
that he may not be forced to cast them, as stubble into an Eternal flaming Oven
hereafter: And this in Love, Exo. 4.24. Job 7.17, 18, 19. Psalm. 119.71, 75. and
89.30, to 38. Jer. 59.7. Lam. 3.33. Hos. 4.14. Am. 3.2. Heb. 12.6, 7. Rev.
3.19. 1 Cor. 11.30, 32. And now Parents, as you have seen your Heavenly Father
do, do you. In his strength follow his Example.

1. Love your Childrens persons, and, because you love them, hate their sins.
The sins of those most, whom you Love most. You see your God does so. Be not so
blinded, as that you can see no fault in them: nor so madly doting, as to
delight in their Blemishes, to kiss their Plague-sores: Nor so Indulgent, as to
be loath to grieve or displease them, when grossly Criminal. Especially,

2. Let your holy strictness show it self against those, whom you most affect:
TELL them; Child, I Love you, and therefore I cannot, will not behold the least
iniquity in you, Hab. 1.13. So Christ acted toward his beloved Disciples, Mat,
15.16, 17. and 17.17. Tell 'em, you cannot, will not pardon them, Exo. 23.21.
Let them know, that you can be Angry, and if words will not do, the Rod shall,
and that you can make that Rod smart, Exo. 4.24. Tell them, though they may
presume to provoke you to bewail them, you will not suffer them to provoke God
to Hate them, Isa. 63.10. Psalm. 78.58, 59. and that you had rather hear them
cry, and see them bleed, yea and dye here, than hear them howl, and see them
burned and damned hereafter. Correct 'em therefore, but in Love, Wisdom,
Measure, Season.

Obj. But I hear the bleatings of fond Parents. O forbear, good Sir, forbear.
These are hard sayings. The Land, the City is not able to bear them. It Is
nothing but Love that makes us to bear with our Children. Alas! who could find
in their Hearts to beat so sweet a Child?

Sol. Nothing but Love. That Is not so, the Holy Ghost gives thee the lie. It is
not Love, but real Hatred, Pro. 13.24. and 22.15. and 29.15, 17. not to Correct
offending Children.

Obj. But they are little: and time enough hereafter.

Sol. Betimes. While there is hope. Nip them in the bud, Prove. 19.18. small
hopes afterward, if neglected now.

Obj. I cannot endure to hear him cry.

Sol. Let not thy Soul spare for his crying. It Is strange to see how the Holy
Ghost meets with these fond Parents at every turning.

Obj. But would you have me cruel to my own Child?

Sol. No. And therefore Correct him. Thou art unmerciful and cruel to thy
Child, if thou do not Correct him, Pro. 23.13. He will dye, and perish, if
thou Correct him not. His Arm is gangreen'd, he dies if thou do not cut it
off. He is in an Apoplexy, cup him, lance him, scarifie him, or he is gone, and
that for ever.

Obj. Alas! Childrens faults are nothing.

Sol. What, is their Stubornness, Pride, Lying, Disobedience, it may be
Cursing, Swearing, nothing? These all lead to Hell, from whence thy Rod is
ordained and sanctified by God to deliver him, Prove. 23.14.

Obj. But this is the way to make my Child hate me: yea to make him a Dullard,
a Sot, so that I shall never have any comfort in him.

Sol. Better that thy Child should hate thee for doing thy Duty; than thy God
for committing sin, yea a comprehensive complicated sin: (All the sins thy
child commits upon thy neglect of Correction are thine own;) but read and
believe Solomon, Pro. 29.17. Correct thy Son, and he shall give thee rest, yea
he shall give delight unto thy Soul.

3. When ever you Correct, be sure you admonish your Child. So in the Text,
(...) and (...) joined. Thus David says, thy Heavenly Fa-doth. He Chasteneth
first and then teaches, Psalm. 94.12. Lay Gods Law, and his sin against that
Law before him. I have known a man, that when he Corrected his Child would
bring his Bible forth, cause his Child to read such a Scripture, as spoke home
to the Case, and this has pierced deeper than the Rod. Not beat with rigor,
nor yet with silence, nor give strokes without words, which may possibly cause
the Child to see his fault, and come to an amendment. In public Justice there
goes Eviction of the fact before the Sentence, and a word of Admonition before
Execution. If our Child heedlesly, fall into the dirt, we do not let him lie,
and beat him, but first help him up, settle all rhings well about him, after
that Correct him, but close all with charging him to look better to his feet.

4. To Correction and Admonition Add faithful, fervent, constant supplications.
Without this all other means are ineffectual. It Is thy Heavenly Father, that
must do the feat at last. It Is he alone must work effectually in thy poor
Child, both to will, and do. Bring him to Bethesda, put him in there, beg thy
God to stir the waters, and to make them healing. With the woman of Canaan,
carry thy Child to Christ, Mat. 15.22. Remember Job. He sent, and sanctified
his Children, Job 1.5. Would thou have thy Child a Samuel, a Solomon, an
Austin? Be thou an Hannah, a Bathsheba, a Monica, 1 Samuel 1.12, to 19, 20. Pro.
31 2. Let thy Child be the Child of thy Prayers, Vows, Tears, and that is the
way to make him a Child of thy Praises, Joys, and Triumphs; with the Father in
the Parable, Luke 15.32.

5. For a close of all, Add a good Example. Cause it to appear to thy Child's
Conscience, that thou have begun to mend first, to repent of thy darling sin of
Indulgence. That done, thou may fairly hope, that this Lodestone may draw
him to Repentance. Parents Examples are high Magneticks, 2 King. 14.3. and
15.3.34.

Obj. Say, both Severe, and Indulgent Parents: These things have we done, and
that faithfully, and yet our Children remain wicked.

Sol. 1. However, none have more cause to expect and with patience to wait for
Gods blessing on use of means, because your Children are certainly under Gods
faithful Promise, Genesis 17.7. Isa. 44.3. 2. You have delivered your own Souls,
Ezekiel. 3.19. 3. Your Endeavors graciously accepted, Isa. 49.4. 2 Cor. 8.12. 4.
Your Prayers shall return into your own bosom, Psalm. 35.13.

Quest. How may we best cure the Love of being Flattered? SERMON VIII.
PROVE. XXVI. v. 28. A Lying Tongue hates those that are afflicted by it, and a
flattering Mouth works ruin.
IT was the Psalmist's complaint of that Age he lived in, That there was no
faithfulness in their mouths, that while they flattered with their tongue,
their throat was an open Sepulcher, Psalm. 5.9, 10. equally devouring, and
insatiable. In these words we may take up as mournful a complaint of our own
Age, or in the words of the Psalm. 12.1. The faithful fail from among the
Children of men: whilst Lying Tongues first afflict the Innocent, and then hate
those they afflict, which is the Method that opener Enemies do observe, and is
the subject of the former part of the Verse: Among these men Truth and Justice
have no place, nor bear sway, but is it any whit better among pretended
Friendships? Flattering mouths work Ruin, such smooth and Oily tongues, do
more slily, and yet not less surely undo us: The former ruin us by others, the
latter ruin us by our selves, and these the more dangerous and cruel, because
they do destroy under the Covert of abused friendship, making that which should
be sacred among men, a means to effect the most barbarous Tragedies: of this
the latter part of the Verse speaks, which does present us with a Picture,
that in different positions sets forth the counterfeit of the greatest and most
amiable beauty: the counterfeit of Friendship appears in the face, and at first
view; but if you change your place, and view it at nearer distance, it presents
to your view a secret, dangerous and destructive Enemy, one that works ruin:
With this I must entertain you, who either hear or read me, and make it (as I
suppose Solomon designed it) a Preservative against the ruin which Loved and
affected flattery draws upon men. There are few, (I think none,) but have been
sometime or other, more or less wounded with the sting of this Scorpion; I beg
you will patiently suffer me to bruise the head, on the wound the Sting has
made, that you may be healed, at least the deadlyness of the Venom may be
prevented. This I am to endeavor while I state this Case, How may we best Cure
the Love of being flattered?

Solomon in our Text tells us what the Flatterer is, and what he does, and
leaves us to conclude what ought be our deportment, and affection toward him;
whether our heart should be toward him that has no Heart for us, but is all
Mouth; or whether we should Love his Flattery which designs and effects our
ruin; or whether we ought not to hate his flattery with perfect hatred, and
fly from it as from a Hellish Fiend, if I may allude to that of the Poet, (...),
(...).


The Case put into my hand, and the Text assigned for the Foundation of this
discourse, do fairly offer an occasion to me to acquaint you with these
following remarks, which will, as clear the Reason, so justify the choice of
the Method I observe in my discourse. The Text tell's you what Flattery is,
what it does, and the case proposed does take it for Granted, that Love of this
Flattery is a disease, if not cured will kill; that there is some Cure may be
had, and hereupon enquires what is the best way of Curing this Love of being
Flattered. In compliance with both Text and Case, I shall cast my discourse
into this method.

1. Enquire what Flattery is, which we ought not love. The general method of
the discourse.
2. Love of it is a Malady, a disease of the Soul. 3. Where not Cured, it is
pernicious and destroy's. 4. What the best method for our Cure in this case.
To begin then with the first, what Flattery is. What Flattery is.
Might we guess at it by the Signification of the words used to express it, we
should not much err in our notion of it; Solomon in the Text, calls it a (...)
Mouth that flatter's: all that comes from the Flatterer is Complaisant, as
Softness to the Touch, Sweetness to the Taste, Prettiness to the Eye, and
Harmony to the Ear; only Heartiness and Sincerity is wanting; And the whole is
framed in As (...) notes in Is. and Jer.
Hypocrisy and designed to ensnare or As Psalm. 5.12.
deceive Amadouer gallic.
, by glozing, alluring, tickling, delighting, and lulling asleep the mind and
affections of the persons flattered. All that appears is a fair semblance, yet
very falsehood, as it is expressed, Ils faisoyent beau semblance de lour bouche.
Psalm. 78.36. and is elegantly and fully comprised in the Character and
deportment of a strange Woman (...) Qui migrade ses parales.
, Prove. 2.16. who Dalilah-like dandle's Sampson that she may make him think how
much, and ere long know how little, she loved him. For all these Sugared Words
do cover sublimated Poison, which (...)
works Ruin. It will certainly end in the fall, or dangerous stumbling of
the deceived: So the (...) from (...) Impulit, depulit, expulit, evertit.
word implies. One thing more I may add to this, that the Actor in this
Tragady never forgets himself and his own advantage, stripping the Novice he
has coaxed, and living on him whom he deceived. So that the Blunt School-man
spoke not amiss, describing Flattery to be Peccatum quo quis supra debitum
virtutis verbis vel factis in communi conversatione alicujus commodi
consequendi intention alium delectare studet. Tho. Aquin. 2a. 2 ae. 9. 115.
a Sin wherein any one in word or deeds, for obtaining some advantage, does
study to please in their ordinary converse by praises above the desert of
virtue. (...). gr. Ad.
It is certainly a specious, but deceitful praise, laid as a train to ensnare,
and hurt the unwary, and to profit him which laid the train: Like a concealed
Robber, first promises to be a Convey and defense, then perswade's the
unthinking traveller to appear like himself, Rich and Splendid in his richest
attire, which shall be the Robber's prey in convenient time and place, when and
where none can relieve him.

It is the basest counterfeit of Friendship, and Justice; it seems to do you
right as justice bind's, but it is with design to injure you; it seems to do it
with love, and Endeared affection, but as the Crocodile which weep's over the
Skull of the man he has devoured: If you will consult the Scripture's, Psalm.
10.9, 10. Psalm. 12.2, 4, 5. Psalm. 52.1, 2, 3, 4.
you will find it variously expressed, but ever in a Character that includes it is
Notorious falsehood and mischeivous tendency; while the flatterer Croucheth and
Humbles himself, it is that you might fall a prey to him as to a Lion. David
describes him, Psalm. 12. as one who speaks Vanity with his Neighbor, with
flattering lips and double heart, purposing by such words to prevail; and the
next you hear, is the poor oppressed, the needy sigh, both are in danger: Which
words of the Prophet contain the definition that the Schoolman gives of
Flattery, and superadde the mischievous consequents of it, whose Foundation is
in a formed Lie, whose aim is to please for an advantage, by a Neighbor, one
we ordinarily converse with, whose Good is unduly magnified, whose vice or
defects are unduly lessened. In brief, it is the greatest cheat that Wit,
dissimulation, and Covetousness, can put on mankind, a false Glass that
represents every thing untruly, much fitter to be broken in pieces, and trod
under foot, than to be kept by any. If you will know it in its particular
branches, The Kinds of Flattery.
there is, (1.) A selfflattery, Luke 18.11.
I am not as other men, Rev. 3.17.
I am rich, increased in substance, Hos. 12.8.
they shall find no iniquity in me: So they flatter themselves in their own
Eyes, Psalm. 36. ver. 2. (2.) A Flattery from others, who represent our Good or
Evil very untruly, by making the good seem better than it is, and making the
evil seem less than is it, and deceiving in both for advantage. As the false
Prophets, false Teachers, Romish Priests, Covetous Clergymen, Seducing
Heretics, Factious Dividers, Hungry Courtiers, and Sneaking Parasites: If you
look to the qualities of Flattery, The Qualities of Flattery.
and would range it according to these, you^ find.

1. Hellish. Pro. 1. 2 Samuel 13.5.
1. A Hellish flattery, that tends to an ensnaring us in Sin: such are the
enticeings of Sinners, such was that of Jonadah to Amnon. Such was that of
Satan, ye shall be like God, which ruined our Protoplasts; (...) Genesis 3. Mat.
4. ver. 6.
such was that of Satan to Christ, He shall give his Angels charge over thee,
etc.

2. A Revengeful Flattery, Kisses of an Enemy, 2. Revengeful.
the Treaty of Simeon and Levi, with the Shechemites, and Joabs embraces of
Abner, or Amasa: such flattery entertains you with Milk in a Lordly dish first,
but when you sleep there is the Nail and Hammer to be feared.

3. A servile, Hungry flattery; 3. Hungry.
when the flatterer Croucheth for a Morsel of bread, as 2 Samuel 2. ult. and
magnifieth the gift of a meals meat to the Skies; such as Romans 16.18. is
serving of the belly by fair words.

4. A Cowardly flattery; when men dare not tell what is, 4. Cowardly.
and what they think, the truth concerning the Virtues or Vices of men.

5. A Covetous Flattery, which aims at Gain, 5. Covetous.
and increasing our wealth by advantage on the flattered.

6. An Aemulous, and Envious flattery; wherein the Good, virtuous, 6. Aemulous.
praiseworthy Qualities or Practices of any one of our Own party, are extolled
and magnified above all measure. So the old Heretics, so the present dividing
Parties in the world, exclude others from the number of Virtuous, Wise,
Learned, Pious and Loyal; this is a kind of Flattery which prevails at this
day: Loved too much by all, and dangerous to all. Were that true, which such
factious flattery suggests, how very small a remnant should escape with their
Life? In all these there is an officiousness, or pretense of Kindness, Honor,
and Zeal for your Good, your Credit, your Advantage and Right; which draws your
Affection and Love to these undue courses, and which is the disease to be
Cured. And what this is, What Love to be Flattered is.
we are to enquire in the second place.

Love to be flattered, a disease of humane nature, I would rather call, 2.
General.
a Love to be praised in Good, or excused in Evil more than justly may be. I
cannot conceive any one, who understands the falsehood of a Flatterer, and his
foul designs, can love the flattery; but yet we all are prone to love the
Praises, and Apologies, are made on our behalf by those that indeed do Flatter,
and unduly praise or excuse. So that in the General, an affecting and liking of
men's praises and apologies above the nature and circumstances of our Good and
Evil, is the Love to be flattered in our Case. I will present it to you in it is
distinct parts: It is,

1. An immoderate desire, 1. In immoderate desire of praise.
that our best and worst might be represented in fairer colors than those that
are native; that where Good, we may seem better; where Evil, we may seem less
evil, than we are: as other Species of Love, first appear in our desire; so
here, a great weakness, and distemper of our nature thus to desire the
forbidden fruit. When this desire prevails, we

2. Believe what the Flatterer says, tho he believes not himself, 2. In blind
credence of all that is said for us.
in the Praise or Apology he makes for us. A blind, secure, unsearching
credence and belief, of what is glozingly and deceitfully said by this
deceiver, makes a part of this Love: As other Love, so is this, Credulous and
in a high degree Confident, believes a strangers mouth in bar to our own Eyes,
and in affront to our own senses Credit a Lying Elogy. And then

3. In valuing ourselves by them.
3. Set the value on our selves by what such affirm of us: the valuation and
Love mankind has for any thing, are inseparable; indeed Love is an
appretiating affection, and so it is here; when the False Coiner has been
suffered to stamp the base alloy'd metal of our Imperfect Virtues with the
impress of divine Perfection, we deceived mortals Prize and Love them as if
they really were what they seem to be. So did Alexander M. think his extract
was Divine, and valued himself on his supposed Divinity; so did Herod the Great
when he believed their flattery, The voice of a God and not a man.

4. Affecting occasions to set forth our praise.
4. Another branch of Love to be Flattered, is an Affected seeking to our selves
or giving unto others, unnecessary occasions of setting forth the worth of our
Persons, Actions, and qualifications, according to the standard of flatterers:
He loves flattery, who loves to search out his own praise: we know he dotes on
the person who unseasonably breaks out into their commendation, and would have
every mouth as Resonabant Phyllida Sylvae.
he fancied every Wood did, echo the praises of his Love.

5. Acquiescence in what is given as our praise.
5. A well-pleasedness to hear the Great and Good things, by dissembling
Flatterers ascribed to us, which either we never did, or did in manner much
below what they report them: it is a disease of the mind that thus is pleased
with vanity, with a Lying vanity, yet sick of this disease are the besotted
Culleys. How sick were the Pygmees mind, who should be persuaded to think his
Stature and strength equal to Goliah's, and his feats against the Cranes equal
to the great achievements of David, the Macchabees, or those mighty Captains
who purchased to themselves the Surname of Great?

6. Choice of such for our Company.
6. A choice of such for our intimate and inseparable Companions, with License
given them without control to lie for us. He is deeply in love who cannot live
without what is loved. Many thousands among great ones and rich ones, cannot
live without such extravagant applauders of their Persons and Menages: And we
justly wonder how they bear with patience the extravagant, notorious and
incredible falsities of these Parasites. This I have made the last part of this
culpable Love of flattery, which as other Love, discovers it self by its
choice. Summarily. Every part of this Love is a particular weakness and
distemper of the mind wherein it is, and the whole is much more it is disease.
This Love of being flattered is a very immoderate Affection, longing after, and
delighting in ungrounded praises; a feeding upon lies, the effect of a secreter
disease, Self-love, and cause of many culpable Distempers in our life. Love to
undue praise is pernicious. 3. General. Nullum animantium genus assentatoribus
perniciosius. Lud. Gr.
It is, to conclude this point, originally, formally and effectively a malady
of mankind, and unless cured proves pernicious and destructive, which is the
Third thing proposed. Solomon tells you in our Text, that it works ruin. And
beside the unaccountable multitudes of those who have perished by it already,
the Scriptures assure us that where it is not cured it does kill.

Psalm. 5.9. Where there is no faithfulness in the mouth, i. e. where flattery
and glozings are, the inward part is wickednesses, destroying wickednesses: An
open Sepulcher and a flattering tongue are inseparable. If the Glutton diggeth
his own Grave with his Teeth, the designing Flatterer digs other men's with his
Tongue: Psalm. 12.1, 2, with the 5. ver. you find ruin attending on prevailing
flattery; the Poor oppressed, the Needy sigh, when such unfaithful tongues are
successful.

Prove. 5.3. Words that drop as an Honeycomb, and Mouth softer than Oil: Which
is an accurate description of the visible part of Flattery; but what is
concealed from our eye is Bitterness and Wounds, ver. 4. And tho this place
speak of the Flattery of a strange woman, whose flattery in some cases may be
more dangerous and deadly, yet the Flatteries of others, strange Sons, is
dangerous and destructive also; Psalm. 55.21. The words of such are smoother
than Butter, Perniciem aliis ac postremo sibi inveniunt. Tacit. annal. l. 1.
but war is in their Heart: softer than Oil, yet drawn Swords: Wherewith others
are first slain, and which does first or last enter their own bowels. God does
in his own season send forth commissioned Officers to destroy an hypocritical
Nation, as Isa. 10. ver. 6. In a word, wheresoever you find Flattery
predominant, and culminating, it presages an approaching ruin, whether in
Kingdoms, and States, or in Church, in Families, or particular Persons.
Flattering and Fawning Counselors ruin Princes and Principalities, Flattering
Clergy ruin the Church, Flattering Captains their General, Lawyers their
Clients, Physicians their Patients, and flattering Companions destroy those
that keep them Company. For fuller declaration of this, Affection to undue
praise destroys
I will tell what is ruined by that flattery which becomes predominant by our
love to it, under the Notion of Praise and friendship due to our virtues.
Uncured Love of such praise and smoothing us, is pernicious

1. To Good moral Principles and virtuous Habits, 1. Virtuous principles.
implanted by the care and wisdom of such as had the Educating of us: so we may
observe Men and Women too often degenerate, and wear out the Impressions of
virtuous Habits, and imbibe the quite contrary Vices: Of Modest become
Impudent, of Chaste become Unclean, Adulterers and Adulteresses, etc. How many
in our Age have by the help of Flatterers conquered their virtuous Education,
and triumphed over it in a debauched Bravery, which is to glory in their shame!

2. To All the remainders of any tolerable, innate, 2. Natural Inclinations to
Good.
and congenite capacity of receiving Good advice, Examples, and helps for their
recovery. The very Stock is corrupted, that no Graffe of Virtue can be planted
on them: They become reprobate to every good work. There is in many from the
Birth a promising Receptivity, we look on them as more susceptible of Virtue
than others: Now love to vicious Flatterers, and hearkening to them very
frequently, overthrows these very foundations on which we might build, that the
person remains for ever a Cage of unclean Birds, and leaves such hopeless.

3. To their Wealth and Estates: 3. Estates.
So many an imprudent and unexperienced Heir is gulled out of his Estate and
Inheritance. The Flatterer by his wiles derives the Substance and Labors of
the deceased Father from the Children to himself and his. Solomon notes this,
Prove. 5.10. as the consequence of love to be flattered, Strangers are filled
with the wealth of such.

4. Reputation.
4. To their Honor and Reputation: A vicious Seducer hearkened to, and his
Flatteries yielded to, will blast all the Credit of those that are seduced, how
great soever their Reputation might have been before their turning aside.
Solomon proposes this as argument to dissuade us from harkening to Flatteries,
Prove. 5. verse. 9.

5. Safety and Life.
5. To the Safety, Peace and Life of the imprudent lover of Flattery: When
nothing else remains, nor surviveth the wasting, and consumptive mouth of a
Flatterer, but the disgraced, impoverisht, and miserable Life of the deceived,
this is made a prey too; and the unthankful, unsatiate, and unmerciful Seducer
hunts for the precious Life also.

6. Soul and its Happiness.
6. To the Soul and its happiness: The Flatterer is too powerful, and too
successeful an Instrument in promoting sin, and ruining of Souls; he draws
into Sin, into remisness, and neglect of Good: Such seduced ones call evil
Good, and then do it; think great evil little, and repent not of it; are
persuaded their Good is great enough already, and are surpised in a sinful and
Impenitent state.

Thus pernicious is Flattery loved: A dangerous disease you see, yet curable,
if proper means be applied: And what those means are which may best effect this
Cure, 4th General.
is the last but chiefest of our Enquiry; these in the Fourth place we must
speak of. And here I propose that

1. Ill name of Flattery.
1. You would impartially consider the bad name that Flattery has ever had, and
still has, and ever will have among all sorts of men. How all condemn it as
unworthy of the least degree of their love, as worthy of their utmost hatred
and abhorrence. Mellitum venenum Circes pocula.
It is sugared Poison, a bewitching Cup; the greatest Plague in Societies, and
the most barbarous Torturers Nulla in amicitiis pestis est major quam
assentatio, etc.
; for they pick out the Eyes, and flay off the flesh of the Living; worse than
hungry Crows, as Antisthenes observed: Like corroding Worms, which eat out the
substance, verdure and life of the root they were bred in. That very man who
too soon was perverted by Flattery to think himself greater than to be Philip's
Son, Dignior eras qui eodem pracipitareris.
yet in soberer temper judged a Flatterer worthy to be thrown into that River
in which his flattering History was cast, and drowned. Tho, Aeneas Sylvius, de
dict. Sigism.
as Sigismund the Emperor observed, we affect pleasant flattering Companions,
yet he professed he hated them like as he hated the Plague. Would you look on
the Flatterer as Condemned, and most worthy to be cut off from humane Society,
you would neither over-love him, or his Flatteries. It is but rarely that a
foolish Virgin falls in Love, begs the Life, and chooses the most intimate
converse of a Condemned Felon: Let us look on this condemned Vice as most do on
the handsomest condemned Felon and Murderer; A fair and goodly outside, but
not worthy to live.

2. Look how ill an uncured love of Praise becomes another: 2. Ill becomes
other men.
see how great a blemish and stain it is to them, how it lessens all other
commendable Qualities: It is to dote on our own Shadow, and perish in the Love
of it, as the Mythologists report of Narcissus. Such one is the most unfit of
all men for humane Society, whether in a Converse of Friendship, Service or
Command. A most untractable and useless piece; not fit to rule others, who
wants a Prudence to rule himself; nor fit to receive Commands, while he admires
himself, and dotes on his own contrivance; not fit to be a Friend, since all
his Love runs waste on himself. The Emblem of such Persons is ingeniously drawn
from the Ape, the ugliest (as the Lord Bacon observes) of Creatures, the most
mischievous in his Pranks, useless and saucy: And are such worthy to be loved?
How comely a sight do you think an ill shaped Ape, grinning on his own Features
in a flattering Glass, would be? Such is the man that loves to see himself in
Flattery's Mirror. How glorious was Alexander M. while he rejected Fawners!
How lovely! but how Eclipsed, how despicable when he believed, and loved them!
which the Athenians did generously enough witness, when they fined their Envoy
ten Talents, for calling him a God, and put to death Evagoras for Adoring him.
There was more than ordinary in Herod, which gave him the Name of Great, but
when he over-loved the Praise of men, God left him a Monument and Warning to
all Posterity, giving up so contemptible a Slave of his own vainglory, to the
most contemptible, loathsome and shameful death: Lice bred in his own Bowels,
destroy his Body, as the Vermin of Self-love, and Self-admiring reflections had
destroyed his Mind. Look first on the deformity of a Self-admirer, next on the
beauty of a self-denying Humility, and this will cure this distemper. As the
sight of the Putrid Carcass once cured the fond desire of Friends, who doted on
their own Fancy for his Picture whilst living; or as the sight of the
Loathsomeness in Serapis's Temple, cured the Superstitious Egyptians: So the
sight of the deformity of our Love of the undue Praise of men, would cure this
disease. But

3. Thou who love to be unduly praised, come, with me, 3. Deplorable miseries
of it.
view the many, great, deplorable miseries it has filled the World with; read
the Tragedies it has acted, and all these mostly upon it is Friends; as it
would cure the excessive praises men bestow on the great Commanders of
conquering Armies, if they would recount with themselves how many fair and
goodly Countries they laid desolate, how many Cities they razed, how many
millions of Souls Innocent and peaceable they Sacrificed to their Ambition; so
here, the bloody Paws of the disguised Lion, would cure us of our dotage on
the Foxes Skin. It has ever proved a Mortal and (...).
deadly Cup. If you Travel through waste and desolate Kingdoms, and enquire who
ruined them, you will find the Flatterers about Prince and Court: so true is that
known Observation of the Historian Regnum saepius ab assentatoribus quam
abbostibus everti solet. Q. Curtius, de gest. Al.
, Flatterers do more frequently overthrow a Kingdom, than open Enemies.

But did Flatterers find such great ones Ears stopped, and their minds fortified
against, or alienated from their flatteries, the danger were not considerable.
The Flatterer can but attempt, our Love to the flattery gives the success: the
Head and Shaft of the Arrow cannot fly to endanger the Eagle, 'twas his own
Feathers that contributed to his Wound and Death: Scarce a City, Family, or
Person whose Calamities were fit to be noted in the World, but you may find
some Parasites, some close undermining Flatterers charged as a great occasion
of those Calamities, and the love, affection and delight those Flaterers found,
much more the Cause of those fatal Calamities. Ahab fell more by his own Love
of Flattery, than by the Artifices of the Son of Chenaanah and his Accomplices,
1 Kings 22. So in the Parable, Ezekiel. 13.12, 16. the Wall fell, for the Builders
built it with untemper'd Mortar, and the People loved to see the building thus
go forward: Scarce one that dislik't it, as Ezekiel. 22. ver. 28. observes, the
consequence of which is, ver. 29. I (says the Lord) have poured mine
Indignation upon them, I have consumed them with the fire of my wrath, etc.
When Prophets prophecy falsely, and Priests bear rule by their means, and the
people love to have it so: what will you do in the end thereof? Jer. 5.31. In a
word, can you love that flattery which never had extorted a Tear, a Sigh, a
Grief, or complaint from you, if you had hated it, which has filled you, or
yours, whole Families, Cities, Kingdoms, yea the whole World in all ages, with
the complaints and sorrows, which Treachery loved and trusted could bring upon
those that were so much over-seen? We show you the scattered bones about the
Dens mouth, and desire to ask whether you think fit to Love the Couching Lion
which lurks in it?

4. Would you be cured of immoderate Love of an undue praise, then so often as
you perceive any one soothing you therewith, suspect there may be, and search
what likeliest is, the design such have upon you. We may with good manners
question the Integrity of his purpose, who does, on our Knowledge, transgress
the rules of Truth in the words we hear from him; such men lie for advantage:
the discovery of this designing, wheedling Projector will, if you have any
Spirit of a man in you, take off your Love, yea turn it into hatred. No man can
love to be imposed upon; be assured there is a snare hid, search after it, keep
a watchful Eye upon it, in time you will discover what you prevented, and never
love what endangered you; in vain is the Net spread in the sight of any Bird.
And there is much in that of Diogenes to a Flatterer. Nihil proficis cum te
intelligam. Seneca in Epist.


It is the great care of these Lurkers to lie concealed, and to hide their
purposes, and to blindfold those they lead; for it is but one labor to expose
them to our view, and to our hatred. Could weeping Parents give their seduced
Children Eyes to see the seducing projects of corrupt Flatterers, they need be
no farther solicitous, their Children would find Hearts to hate them. There is
nothing truly amiable in flattery, and none that know it approve or love it.
Solomon therefore takes so much pains for discovery of the designs of a
flattering Mouth, and then counsels us to decline, and reject it, Prove. 5.
The monster in the dark does not, but in the light he will make us recoil with
abhorrence. Find him out then, Adulatio periculosa est quae latet.
view him exactly, and I know 'twill do much toward your Cure.

5. If you would be cured, you must resolutely and peremptorily reject the
Friendship of the man who turns due praises into Flattery: Let such know they
please least when they praise most, and that you make their first offense an
opportunity to inform them, that the second offense in this kind is and shall
be unpardonably punished with loss of your Friendship. I know not any reason,
why I may not interpret that of Flatterers, which David speaks of Liers; He
that tells Lies shall not come into my House, Psalm. 101. This he did know was
the way to prevent Love of Flatteries and Flatterers, to keep them out of his
presence. This Tympany is never cured, while Sycophants are suffered to blow up
weak minds with conceits of worth greater than is due to their Persons. It is
not unfitly resembled to those distempers which increase on us by our
Indulgence. It Is an Itching humor runs in our blood, as Sigismund the Emperor
observed, and when it breaks out, the tickling Flatterer does increase it: if
you would cure, you must let none such have the stroaking of it; it is a Tetter
that is never cured with sweet and pleasing applications, a sharp and drying
medicine is best; so the Angry Countenance of a resolved hater of Flattery is
both a good Preservative and a good healing Receipt against this disease. You
lose nothing if you part with such, you get a dangerous disease if you retain
them.

6. Look on Flattery and your Love to it, in their Diametrical opposition, and
irreconcileableness to God in the Truth of all his Word, and in the
Righteousness of all his judicial Sentence on men and things: To call evil
good, or to make those seem consummate, which are defective, are an abomination
to God; A just balance is his delight, and he abhors the false balance. When
a Parasite extols thy Good or extenuates thy Evil, he weighs thee in a false
balance; when thou art pleased with this, thou weighest thy self in the same
false Balance, and God who stands by, abhors both of you: Now methinks this
should affect your Hearts; dare you love what God hates? will you not
henceforward cease to love the undue Praises of men, least you fall under the
dreadful, but just abhorrence of God? He will never lessen truth to magnify
any, he will never entrench on Justice to gratify any; he is a God of Truth
and Righteousness, what your Good or Evil is he will impartially declare, and
abhors such who love a Lie, and unrighteousness, in their valuing of
themselves and Actions; will it be good that God should search you out? Quod si
divina quaedam res sit veritas ex qua cenfonte Diis pariter ac hominibus omnia
bona preficiscuntur, videndum ne adulator Diis omnibus sit hostis, etc. Ex
Plutarcho Lud. Gran.
Truth is Divine, whence as from a Fountain, all Good, Divine and Humane flow;
so that the Flatterer appears an Enemy to God: This was the Philosophers
argument long since, and it is not less cogent, because so very ancient. None so
hateful to God, as these deep, ravening, and insatiable Impostors; nothing is
more contrary to him who is all Truth and Goodness: Let Flatterers, and
besotted Lovers of Flattery read well that, Psalm. 52.2, 3, 4. ver. Thy Tongue
devises Mischiefs, like a sharp razour, working deceitfully; thou love evil
more than Good, and Lying rather than to speak righteousness, etc. Here is the
black Character of the Flatterer; and his miserable End you have ver. 5. God
will destroy him for ever, etc. The sharp arrows of the mighty, and the Coals
of Juniper, are prepared for the lying Lips and false tongue, Psalm. 120.2, 3,
and 4. ver. Since this is one of the things God hates, Pro. 6. v. 17, 18, 19.
let it not be one of the things you love.

7. Get such a prevailing degree of Generous and pure Love to all that is Good,
and such a degree of Hatred unto Evil, that you may want neither the good word
of men to be a spurr to doing Good, nor the sharp Reproofs of men to restrain
from evil; who hates evil, will not need any one should put a color on it to
lessen the apparent evil: We are glad that what we hate appears so evil, that
it justifies our Hatred. Get an Antipathy to all that is Vice, or looks like
it, and then you cannot but dislike all that would commend it to your Choice,
or excuse it to your Judgment. Get that frame of Heart David had, I hate every
false way, and then you are safe from this Disease: And to make the Cure
complete, add that Pure, Generous, Universal and Divine Love of Good, for its
own sake, that will account it a rich Recompense, and Praise enough to have
done it: There will be little need of man's just Praises; where our Love to
doing Good is set on it for its own sake, there will need none of the undue
Praises of any: None need praise the Person of Rachel to Jacob, he would have
scorned the Flatteries of any who should have lessened her real Loveliness by
false Colors: How should we disdain the labor, and condemn the folly of a
Madman, that would persuade us he could add Loveliness to the light of a
Glorious Morning? Open your eyes, ye Lovers of Virtue, look on all her
Daughters, they are all Glorious; if any are Veiled, it is because you cannot
bear the luster of their Excellency: Awake ye dreaming Mortals, you will see
enough in Naked Virtue to fall in Love with it; (as all would, if they saw it,
according to Plato's Judgment.) They are weak Stomachs that must be allured by
superadded Sauces to eat of Good Viands, there is no need of them where Food is
loved, and the Appetite in right order: so here, when you Love Good for the
Goodness that is in it, you will desire Flatterers to forbear their labor, lest
they mar what you Love, by adding of their own, which you hate and suspect.
When God would put us in a sure way of keeping his Commandments, and
persevering in a Praiseworthy Life, he does direct us to encourage our selves
by the large Praises of men, but Commands we should Love his Law with all our
Heart: This will Cure indeed.

8 Get and keep that humble frame of Heart, which being ever sensible of its
present Condition, sees so great Defects in all its Good, that it dares not
think there is a sufficient ground for any Praise beyond the ordinary laudable
temper. The Good I would I do not: And as to what may be culpable, let no man's
Flattery pervert your Judgment, but humbly acknowledge you better know your own
Inclinations, than any glozing, fawning Hypocrite in the world; and so long as
you can maintain such a humble sense of your Imperfections, your Humility will
be your Antidote against the Infection and danger of this Disease. The Flies
blow when the Sun is warm and gotten high; so when we are high in our own
Opinions of our selves, these Flesh-flies, base Colloguers, blow us: In a cold
Season, and the Sun, i. e. our Opinions, low, and in the Brumal Solstice, when
we have colder Thoughts of our own Goodness, these Flies are nummed and
Impotent, etc. It is our own Pride that gives these Creatures an Opportunity to
hurt us. Whilst Alexander M. kept a sense of his humane Original, he kept
himself from this Disease; as Pride grew on him, he opened his Ears to seducing
Flatterers, and at last fell into the highest Frenzy, in the height whereof
he dreams of a Divine Original, and will be better than a man, whilst he is
lower than a beast. I know no better Prophylactique to keep from, nor better
Therapeutique to Cure us if tainted, than that of Christ, if we had done all,
yet (...), When you have done Good and it is praised, Luke 17.10.
remember what Humility would say both of the Praise and the Praiser; did the
Praiser know you as you know your selves, he had never spent so many words, and
put you to the blush; and since the Praise is but a mistake, you may not
account it to your Gain, for it must be discounted when the reckoning is stated
aright. Who so owns it is Candor in our Neighbor, and Grace in our God that
covers the faults we are guilty of, and accepts the Good we are doers of, and
humbly acknowledges, is in great measure Cured of this loathsome Disease.

9. Remember, what degree of this Love you permit, whether greater or lesser,
the more you abate of your future Reward; and he that pays you more respect
than is due for your Good done, and you accept it, this man makes you spend on,
and lessens your future Reward, as Mat. 6. ver. 1. -- you have no reward of
your Father.

10. It will contribute to your Cure, if you will remember, that this Love of
the Praise of men is a Sacrilegious Robbery of God: It is not possible to love
this Flattery, but you will with Herod take to your selves the whole, or part
of that Glory is due to God, and who knows what the danger of such Sacrilege
will be? Remember Herod's Fault and Punishment, and have it often before your
Eyes, that they may not look for, much less dote on, but abhor the undue
Praises of men.

It is scarce possible you should affect an overgrown Praise, and keep your
selves from Robbery against God: As therefore you would abhor open and
notorious Sacrilege, because of the greatness of the Sin, so watch against the
secret Sacrilege which God so remarkably revenged on Herod, thereby t^lling
us, 'twas no little sin that received so great a Punishment.

To conclude, you that heard me, you that read these Lines, think not you are
little concerned in these Counsels; they give you those Directions which will,
if well followed, deliver you from the Paths of the Destroyer: You who are more
than others in danger of this Disease, such are Superiors, Rich,
Unexperienced, Haughty ones and Self-lovers, and if there be any other such
like, take more heed to these Cures prescribed, and at least keep some of them
by you as Antidote against this Poison: In the use of these prescribed, because
they are our Duty as well as Means, Forget not this word I close with. 1. Your
great Exemplar Christ Jesus refused great Praises; Why call thou me Good?
there is none Good but one. 2. The Scriptures Condemn and Threaten Flatterers,
and such as love them. 3. Pray for the Spirit of Wisdom, Holiness, Humility and
Self-denial, that Wisdom received may discover the Snare, Holy Principles may
set you above vain Praises, and Humble Self-denial may content you without
them. And 4. Then a Gracious Providence will deliver from them.

Quest. By what means may Ministers best win Souls? SERMON IX.
1 TIMOTHY IV. 16. Take heed unto thy self, and unto thy Doctrine, continue in
them; for in doing this, thou shall both save thy self, and them that hear
thee.
THE words are a substantial part of the good Counsel, and Direction the
Apostle gives unto Timothy, and in him unto all the Ministers o^ the Gospel.

In them are two things:

1. A threefold duty laid on Gospel Ministers. Take heed unto thy self, and
unto thy Doctrine; continue in them.

2. A double Advantage consequent upon the discharge of this duty: For in doing
this, thou shall both save thy self, and them that hear thee.

1. Ministers duty is in three things here.

(1.) Take heed unto thy self. Thou art set in a high Office, in a dangerous
place; take good and narrow heed, look (...) to thy self, thy heart and way.

(2.) Take heed unto thy Doctrine. Though thou be never so well gifted, and
approved both of God and Men; though thou be an extraordinary Officer (as
Timothy was) yet take heed unto thy Doctrine. These two we pass at present,
because we shall resume them at greater length, when we take their help to the
resolving of this Question.

(3.) Continue in them. This has relation, it appears, unto verse. 12. and 15.
as well as unto the preceding part of this Verse. I shall dismiss this part of
the Verse with these.

1. Continue in thy work. Thou who art a Minister, it is a work for thy
Lifetime, and not to be taken up and laid down again, according as it may best
suit a man's carnal inclinations, and outward conveniences. The Apostles that
labored with their hands, have by that Example set the Conscience of a
Minister at liber^^, to provide for the Necessities of this Life by other
Employments, when he cannot live of the Gospel; yet certainly no man that is
called of God to this work, can with a safe Conscience abandon it wholly. Paul
for Example rather than Necessity, both Preached, and wrought in a Handy-craft:
As Preaching does not make working unlawful, so neither should any other
business of a Minister make Preaching to cease.

2. Continue in Endeavors after greater fitness for thy Work. No seize
in fitness and qualifications for this work, can free a man of the Obligation
that lies on him to increase and grow therein more and more. It is not enough
that a man study and be painful 'ere he enter into the Ministry, but he must
labor still to be more fit for his great work.

3. Continue in thy Vigor, and Painfulness, and Diligence. Young Ministers
that are sound and sincere before God, are usually warm and diligent in the
first years of their Ministry; and many do decline afterward, and become more
cold and remiss. This Exhortation is a check thereunto: Continue in them.

The Second thing in the words, is the double Advantage proposed to encourage
Ministers to this hard Duty.

(1.) Thou shall save thy self. Thy own Salvation shall be promoted and secured
thereby.

How becoming is it for a Minister to mind his own Salvation? and to mind it so
heartily as to be animated from the hopes of it, unto the greater diligence in
his Ministry.

But how does Faithfulness in the Ministry of the Gospel further the Ministers
Salvation?

1. Faithfulness in a man's Generation-work, is of great use and advantage to
Salvation. Well done good and faithful Servant, from the Lords own Mouth, is a
great Security; and diligence and faithfulness in improving the Talents we are
entrusted with, through Grace, procure that Test^^ony.

2. Thou s^^^^ save thy self from the guilt of other men's Sins and Ruin, if
thou be faithful in the Ministry. Ezekiel. 33.9. Thou have delivered (or saved)
thy Soul, says the Lord to the Prophet in the case of unsuccesseful
Faithfulness. So Paul, Acts 18.6. I am clean, your blood be upon your own
heads; and Acts 20.26, 27. I take you to record this day, that I am pure from
the blood of all men; for I have not shunned to declare unto you all the
counsel of God. Every Minister pledgeth his Soul to God, that he shall be a
faithful Servant; and he that is such, may freely take up his Stake, whatever
his Success on others be.

3. Faithfulness and Painfulness in the Ministry of the Gospel, promotes a man's
own Salvation, in so far as the work of Christianity is woven in with the right
discharge of the Office of the Ministry. Many Ministers can say, that if they
had not been Ministers, they had in all appearance lost their Souls. The
Subject of the Ministers work is the same with that of a Christian's; and above
all men should he be careful of his Heart and Intentions, that all be pure and
spiritual: No man in any work he is called to, is under so strict a necessity
of dependence on the influence and assistance of the Holy Ghost, both for Gifts
and Grace. And are not all these great helps unto our own Salvation?

(2.) The Second advantage is, thou shall save them that hear thee. There is
little hope of that man's being useful to save others, that minds not his own
Salvation: And therefore the Apostle puts them in this order, thy self, and
then, them that hear thee.

This description of the People, them that hear thee, says, that the principal
work of a Minister is Preaching; and the principal benefit People have by them,
is to hear the Lords Word from them; though there be a seeing (i. e. of their
holy Conversation) that is also useful, Phil. 4.9. But the Apostle knew no such
Ministers as were only to be seen in worldly Pomp and Grandeur, and seldom or
never heard Preaching.

Thou shall save them: The great End of both Preaching and Hearing is
Salvation; and if Salvation were more designed by Preachers and Hearers, it
would be more frequently the effect of the action.

Thou shall save them. Thou shall by the Lords blessing on thy Ministry be
successeful in converting Sinners, and in building up of Saints in Holiness and
Faith unto Salvation. Not that Ministers are of themselves able by all their
Endeavors to carry on this great End; they are only Gods Tools and
Instruments, 1 Cor. 3.6, 7. Concerning this

1. We find that the Lord has appointed this great Ordinance of the
Gospel Ministry for this end, the Saving of men. Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. It is
through their Word that men believe, Joh. 17.20. And Divine appointment of the
Means, declares both it to be useful, and the End to be hopeful.

2. He has also given many Promises of his presence, blessing and success to
follow and attend them whom he sends on this great Errand. Christ's first
calling of the Apostles had this Promise in it, I will make you Fishers of men;
which not only declared what that Employment was he called them unto, but it
assured them of success in it. At his leaving of them, Matthew. 28.20. he
promised to be with them unto the End of the World; and this Promise is as good
to us as it was to them.

3. He has also revealed much of his Mind about Ministers Duty in order to
this end of Saving men. This also makes the End more hopeful.

4. We find that the Lord does qualify and fit them whom he makes successeful.
He makes men able Ministers of the New Testament, the Word of Life, 2 Cor. 3.5,
6. And still according to the success the Lord has a mind to bless a man with,
gifts and qualifications and assistance are proportionably given. The Apostles
that had the greatest Harvest to gather in, were made the strongest Laborers;
and though in a far inferior degree, the same method is observed by the Lord
in dealing with and by ordinary Ministers. It Is true, that always the most
able and learned Ministers are not most successeful; yet generally the most
skillful Laborers are most blessed: Neither are the most Learned and able men
for parts, most fit and skilful in dealing with Souls at all times.

Now having opened the words, we shall return to the Question to be resolved,
By what means may Ministers best win Souls? In speaking to which, I shall first
show, What this Text says unto this purpose. 2ly. And then give some further
account thereof from other Scriptures. 3ly. And apply it both to Ministers and
People.

1. What this Text speaks about this matter. It looks two ways upon this
Question. 1. It gives a direct Answer unto it; and points forth Duty. 2. It
gives an encouraging Promise of the good Effect and Fruit of the discharge of
the Duty. I shall carry on both together.

(1.) Take heed unto thy self. Would thou be a saved and successeful
Minister, take heed unto thy self. Such Warnings imply always a Case of
difficulty and danger wherein he is that gets them.

Take heed unto thy self in these things.

1. Take heed that thou be a sound and sincere Believer. The importance of
sincere Godliness in a Minister, is written in the deep wounds that the Church
of Christ has received by the hands of ungodly Ministers. It has been made a
question, Whether an ungodly Man can be a Minister; but it is none, That such
men are in a most desperate condition. Matthew. 7.22, 23. Depart from me, not
because you ran unsent, or preached Error instead of Truth, or preached poorly
and meanly, (all great sins in themselves) but because you work iniquity, the
usual expression of entire ungodliness. What use the Lord may make of the Gifts
(for great Gifts he gives to the worst of men) of ungodly men, even in the
Ministry of the Gospel, is one of his deep Paths. But no man can reasonably
imagine, that a walker in the way to Hell, can be a fit and useful Guide to
them that mind to go to Heaven. If a man would have peace in his Conscience,
and success in his work of the Ministry, let him take good heed to this, that
he be a sound Christian. There is a special difficulty for a Minister to know
his Grace; Gifts and Grace have deceived many with their likeness, although the
difference be great both in it self, and to an enlightened Eye.

2. Take heed to thy self, that thou be a called and sent Minister. This is of
great importance as to Success. He that can say, Lord, thou have sent me, may
boldly add, Lord, go with me, and bless me. It is good when a man is serious
in this Inquiry. It is to be feared that many run, and never ask this Question;
so is it seen in their speed and success. Jer. 23. I sent them not, therefore
they shall not profit this people at all, is a standing rule to this day.

These things if found, may serve to satisfy a Ministers Conscience, that
Jesus Christ has sent him.

1. If the Heart be filled with a single desire after the great end of the
Ministry, the Glory of God in the Salvation of men. Every work that God calls a
man to, he makes the End of it amiable. This desire sometimes attends men's
first Conversion; Paul was called to be a Saint and an Apostle at once, Acts 9.
and so have many been called to be Saints and Ministers together. If it be not
so, yet this is found with him that Christ calls, that when he is most
spiritual and serious, when his Heart is most under the impressions of
Holiness, and he is nearest to God in Communion with him: Then are such desires
after the serving of Jesus Christ in the Ministry, most powerful. And the
Sincerity of his desire is also to be examined, and when it is found, it adds
greatly to a Man's peace: When his Heart bears him witness, that it is neither
Riches, nor Honor, nor Ease, nor the Applause of men, that he seeks after, but
singly Christ's Honor in the saving of men.

2. It helps to clear a man's Call, that there has been a conscientious
diligence in all the Means of attaining fitness for this great work. That Love
to the End, that does not direct and determine unto the use of the appointed
Means, may justly be suspected as irregular, and not flowing from the Holy
Ghost. Even extraordinary Officers seem not to have been above the use of
ordinary Means. 2 Timothy 4.13. Old dying Paul sends for his Books and Papers.

3. A competent fitness for the work of the Ministry, is another proof of a
man's Call to it. The Lord calls no man to a work, for which he does not
qualify. Though a sincere humble man (as all Ministers should be) may and
should think little of any measure he has, whether compared with the greater
measures of others, or considered with regard unto the weight and worth of the
work; yet there must be some confidence as to his Competency, for clearing a
man's Call. 2 Cor. 3.5, 6. What this Competency is, is not easy at all times to
determine. Singular Necessities of the Church may extend or intend this matter,
of competent Fitness: But in general there must be 1. A competent Knowledge of
Gospel-Mysteries. 2. A competent Ability of Utterance to the Edifying of
others. This is aptness to Teach, required of the Apostle in 1 Timothy 3.2. and
Tit. 1.9. That a Minister be able by sound Doctrine to exhort, and to convince
gainsayers.

4. The savor of a man's Ministry on the Hearts and Consciences of others, both
Ministers and People, helps much to clear a man's Call. So that indeed
ordinarily a man can never be so well confirmed in the Faith of his being
called of God, until he make some Essay in this work. Deacons must first be
proved, 1 Timothy 3.10. much more Ministers. A single Testimony given by Ministers
and Christians, that the Word dispensed by the Man is savoury, and has Effect
on the Conscience, is a great Confirmation; especially if sound Conversion of
some follow his Labors. That is indeed a Seal of his Ministry; 2 Cor. 3.3. and
1 Cor. 9.2.

3. Take heed unto thy self, that thou be a lively thriving Christian. See that
all thy Religion run not in the Channel of thy Employment. It is found by
Experience, that as it fares with a Minister in the frame of his Heart, and
thriving of the work of God in his Soul, so does it fare with his Ministry both
in its vigor and effects. A carnal frame, a dead heart, and a loose walk, makes
cold and unprofitable Preaching. And how common is it for Ministers to neglect
their own Vineyard? When we read the Word, we read it as Ministers, to know
what we should teach, rather than what we should learn as Christians. Unless
there be great heed taken, it will be found, that our Ministry and Labor
therein, may eat out the Life of our Christianity; not that there is any
discord betwixt them, but rather a friendly Harmony, when each has its place
and respect. The honest Believer meditates that he may excite his Grace; and
Ministers too often meditate only to increase their Gifts. When we Preach, the
sincere Hearer drinks in the Word, and it may be we seldom mix Faith with it,
to grow thereby. O how hard is it to be a Minister and a Christian in some of
these acts! We are still conversant about the things of God; it is our study
all the Week long: This is our great advantage; but take heed to thy self, lest
ordinary meddling with Divine things, bring on an ordinary and indifferent
impression of them; and then their Fruit to thee, and thy benefit by them, is
almost gone, and hardly recovered.

4. Take heed unto thy self in reference to all the Trials and Temptations thou
may meet with. Be on your guard, watch in all things, 2 Timothy 4.5. No men are
shot at more by Satan than Ministers, and he triumphs not more over the foyls
of any, than theirs. And Christ is liberal in his warnings of Dangers, and in
his Promises of help in them.

(2.) The Second word in the Text, to this purpose of directing Ministers how
to be useful to others, is, Take heed unto thy Doctrine. Art thou a Minister,
thou must be a Preacher; an unpreaching Minister is a sort of contradiction.
Yea every sort of Preaching is not enough; thou must take heed unto thy
Doctrine what it is.

Here is warrant for Studying what we are to teach, and what we have taught
People. But the great matter is to take heed, or study aright. Students
commonly need little direction about ordinary study. But concerning the
Doctrine, I shall entreat to take heed unto it in these things.

1. Take heed unto thy Doctrine, that it be a divine Truth: Let a man speak as
the Oracles of God, 1 Pet. 4.11. And therefore it is needful that Ministers be
well acquainted with the Holy Scriptures. A bad token of the Temper of that man
that relishes any Book more than the Word of God. The World is full of Books
written on pretense and design to explain the Scriptures, and men's Studies are
full of them; there is also a Blessing in them, and good use to be made of
them. But also a bad use is made of them: Many Ministers have found that they
have preached better and to more profit to the People, when they got their
Sermon by Meditation on the Word and Prayer, than by turning over many Authors.
From this neglect of the Word also comes a great many Doctrines, that are
learned by Man, and borrowed from Philosophy; which though they may have some
Truth in them, yet since it is divine Truth that a Minister should bring forth
to the People, he should not rest on such low things.

2. Take heed unto thy Doctrine, that it be plain, and suited to the capacity
of the hearers. Learned Preaching (as it is called) is a Vanity, pleasing
principally to such as neither design nor desire Edification. True godly
Learning consists in preaching Plainly, and therein is no no small difficulty.
Two things would help to plain Preaching. 1. Clearness of Knowledge. The
alleged depth of our Doctrine often proceeds from our own darkness. 2.
Humility and Self-denial. We must not seek our selves nor the Applause of men,
but Gods glory and men's Salvation. It is found that the holiest Ministers
preach most plainly, and the plainest Preachers are most successeful.

3. Take heed unto thy Doctrine, that it be grave, and solid, and weighty.
Sound Speech that cannot be condemned, Tit. 2.8. Deep and weighty Impressions
of the things of God upon a man's own Heart, would greatly advance this. A
Ministers Spirit is known in the gravity or lightness of his Doctrine.

But now we come to the second thing proposed, to give some Answer to this
Question from other things in the Word.

And I shall 1. Show some things that must be laid to heart about the End, the
saving of Souls. 2. And then shall give some advice about the Means.

1. About the End, the winning of Souls. This is to bring them to God; it is
not to win them to us, or to engage them into a Party, or to the espousal of
some Opinions and Practices, supposing them to be never so right and consonant
to the Word of God. But the winning of them is, to bring them out of Nature
into a state of Grace, that they may be fitted for, and in due time admitted
into everlasting Glory.

Concerning which great End, these few things should be laid deeply to heart by
all that would serve the Lord in being instrumental in reaching it.

1. The exceeding height and excellency of this End is to be laid to heart. It
is a wonder of condescendence, that the Lord will make use of men in promoting
it. To be workers together with God in so great a business, is no small honor.
The great value of men's Souls, the greatness of the misery they are delivered
from, and of the Happiness they are advanced to, with the manifold Glory of God
shining in all, makes the work of saving men great and excellent. Preaching the
Gospel and suffering for it, are Services that Angels are not employed in. Mean
and low thoughts of the great End of the Ministry, as they are dissonant from
Truth, are also great hindrances of due endeavors after the attaining the End.

2. The great difficulty of saving Souls must be laid to heart. The difficulty
is undoubted. To attempt it, is to offer violence to men's corrupt Natures, and
a storming of Hell it self, whose Captives all sinners are. Unless this
difficulty be laid to heart, Ministers will be confident of their own strength,
and so miscarry and be unfruitful. Whoever prospers in winning Souls, is first
convinced that it is the Arm of Jehovah only can do the work.

3. The duty of winning Souls must be laid to heart by Ministers. That it is
their principal work, and they are under many Commands to endeavor it. It Is a
fault to look on Fruit only as a reward of endeavors; so it is indeed and a
gracious one; but it should be so minded as the End we would strive for, Col.
1.28, 29. which when attained, is still to His Praise; yet most commonly when
it is missing, it is to our reproach and danger, when it is (as alas! it is
often) through our default.

4. The great advantage there is to the Labourer by his success, is to be
pondered. Great is the gain by one Soul; he that wins Souls is happy as well
as wise, Prove. 11.30. Dan. 12.3. Won Souls are a Ministers Crown, and Glory,
and Joy, Phil. 4.1. 1 Thessalonians. 2. last. How far is this account above all others
that a man can give of his Ministry? These things fixed upon the Heart, would
enliven us in all endeavors to attain this excellent End.

2. For advice about the Means; I shall add these few, besides what has been
said.

1. Let Ministers, if they would win Souls, procure and retain amongst the
People, a persuasion of their being sent of God; that they are Christ's
Ministers, 1 Cor. 4.1. It is not confident asserting of it, nor justifying the
lawfulness of our Ecclesiastical Calling, though there be some use of these
things at some times: But it is ability, painfulness, faithfulness, humility
and self-denial, and in a word, conformity to our Lord Jesus in his Ministry,
that will constrain People to say and think that we are sent of God. Nicodemus
comes with this Impression of Christ, Joh. 3.2. A teacher come from God. It is
certain, that these thoughts in people further the reception of the Gospel,
Gal. 4.14. Ye received me as an Angel of God, even as Christ Jesus.

2. Let Ministers, if they would win Souls, purchase and maintain the Peoples
Love to their Persons. And this is best done by loving of them, and dealing
lovingly and patiently with them. There should be no striving with them,
especially about worldly things; yea meekness to them that oppose themselves, 2 Timothy 2.24, 25, 26. It is of great advantage to have their Love; how carefully
does Paul sue for it, in several Epistles, and condescend to entreat and make
Apologies, when indeed he had not wronged them, but they only did imagine he
had wronged them! 2 Cor. 11.

3. It would further the winning of Souls, to deal particularly and personally
with them. Not always nor altogether in public, Col. 1.28. Acts 20.20, 21.
Great fruit has constantly followed the conscientious discharge of this duty.
The setting of it up in Geneva, did produce incredible Fruits of Piety, as
Calvin reports: when the Ministers and some of the Elders went from House to
House, and dealt particularly with the Peoples Consciences. And we are not
without many Instances of the Fruit of this mean, in our own time, and in these
Nations. Blessed be the Lord for the Laborers and their success.

4. Ministers must Pray much, if they would be successeful. The Apostles spent
their time this way, Acts 6.3. Yea, our Lord Jesus preached all day, and
continued all night alone in Prayer to God. Ministers should be much in Prayer.
They use to reckon how many hours they spend in Reading and Study; it were far
better both with our selves and the Church of God, if more time were spent in
Prayer. Luthers spending three hours daily in secret Prayer; Bradfords studying
on his knees, and other instances of men in our time, are talked of rather than
imitated. Ministers should pray much for themselves, for they have Corruptions
like other men, and have Temptations that none but Ministers are assaulted
with. They should pray for their Message. How sweet and easy is it for a
Minister (and likely it is to be the more profitable to the People) to bring
forth that Scripture as Food to the Souls of his People, that he has got
opened to his own Heart by the Power of the Holy Ghost, in the exercise of
Faith and Love in Prayer. A Minister should pray for the Blessing on the Word;
and he should be much in seeking God particularly for the People. It may be
this may be the reason why some Ministers of meaner Gifts and Parts are more
successeful than some that are far above them in abilities; not because they
preach better, so much as because they pray more. Many good Sermons are lost,
for lack of much Prayer in Study.

But because the Ministry of the Word is the main instrument for winning Souls,
I shall therefore add somewhat more particularly concerning this; and that
both as to the matter and manner of Preaching.

1. For the Subject Matter of Gospel Preaching it is determined by the Apostle
expressly, to be Christ crucified, 1 Cor. 2.2. Two things Ministers have to do
about Him, in preaching Him to them that are without. 1. To set him forth to
People, Gal. 3.1. to paint him in his Love, Excellency, and ability to save. 2.
To offer him unto them freely, fully, without any limitation as to Sinners or
their sinful State. And then Christ's Laws or Will to be published to them that
receive Him, and are his, for the Rule of their walk, and his promises for the
measure and foundation of all their hopes and Expectations, and his Grace and
fullness for their supply in every case, till they be brought to Heaven. This
was the simplicity of the Gospel, that remained but a little while in the
Christian Church; for Ceremonies amongst the Jews, Col. 2.
and sinful mixtures of vain Philosophy amongst the Gentiles, did by degrees so
corrupt the Gospel, that the Mystery of Iniquity ripened in the production of
Antichrist. It was a sad Observation of the Fourth Century, that it became a
matter of Learning and Ingenuity to be a Christian: The meaning was, that too
much weight was laid on Notions and matter of Opinion; and less regard had unto
the soundness of the Heart, and Holiness of the Life. In the beginning of the
Reformation from Popery, the Worthies whom God raised up in several Countries,
did excellently in retrieving the Simplicity of the Gospel, from the Popish
mixtures; but that good work took a stand quickly, and is on the declining
greatly. How little of Jesus Christ is there in some Pulpits! It is seen as to
success, that whatever the Law does in alarming Sinners, it is still the Gospel
voice that is the Key that opens the Heart to Jesus Christ: Would Ministers win
Souls? let them have more of Jesus Christ in their dealing with men, and less
of other things that never profit them that are exercised therein.

2. As for the manner of successeful Preaching, I shall give it in a Negative
and Positive from these two places: 1 Cor. 1.17. and 2. 1. -- 4. What this
negative disowns, is our inquiry: The Words are full; for Christ sent me not to
baptize, but to Preach the Gospel; not with wisdom of Words, lest the Cross of
Christ should be made of none effect. Again, I came not to you with excellency
of speech, or of Wisdom, declaring to you the Testimony of God. Again, And my
speech and my Preaching was not with enticing words of man's Wisdom. These are
the words of the Holy Ghost concerning a way of Preaching that is unprofitable;
a way that seems was in use and respect with the Corinthians, and honest Paul
was despised by them, for his simple and plain way, different from theirs. I
shall only instance in things that this Scriptural Negative does check and
reprove in the way of Preaching.

1. The establishing and advancing of Divine Truth upon the Foundation of
humane Reason. As if there were some weakness and insufficiency in those
methods and arguments of working on men's Consciences, that the Holy Ghost
prescribes. The great Foundation of all a Minister has to say, is, Thus says
the Lord, and a grave declaring of the Testimony of God in this matter, is
Ministers Duty, 1 Cor. 2.1. and will have more Authority on men's Consciences
than many humane Reasons. There is a rational Preaching (as it is called)
wherein men do not satisfy themselves to make use of Reason as a Tool and
Instrument (and then its use is excellent,) but will establish it as a Judge
and Dictator in all Divine matters and Truth; and so in effect turn all their
Preaching into little better things than the Lectures of the Philosophers of
old, save that the poor Pagans were more sincere in their Morals, and serious
in delivering their Opinions.

Let a Minister therefore still think with himself, that a plain Scripture
Testimony is his main argument; and accordingly let him use it. When he
teaches Philosophy, and when he teaches men the Will of God about Salvation,
he is in distinct Provinces, and his management of his work therein should be
very different.

2. It is to Preach with excellency of Speech, and words of man's Wisdom, when
men think to reach the Gospel-end on Sinners by force of even spiritual reason
and persuasion. This corrupt thought rises in some from an imagination that
moral suasion is all that is needful for converting a Sinner; and in some this
thought rises on a better account; the Light of the Glory of God in the Gospel
shines so brightly in upon their own Hearts, that they fall into this Conceit,
That no man can stand before that Light which they can hold forth. Melancthon's
mistake at first, till Experience made him wiser. Have thou a clear Knowledge
of Gospel Mysteries, and the word of Exhortation is with thee also, so that
thou art qualified to urge, beseech, and plead warmly with sinners on Christ's
behalf? Take heed of this Snare, lest thou think that thy Wisdom and Gifts can
promote and carry on the Gospel-design on men.

3. This also is checked in the Apostles words, the setting forth the beauty of
the Gospel by humane Art. The truth of the Gospel shines best in its bare
Proposal, and its Beauty in its simple and naked discovery. We may observe from
Church History, that still as Soundness of Doctrine and the Power of Godliness
decayed in the Church, the Vanity of an affected way of speaking and writing of
Divine things came in. Quotations from the Fathers, Latin and Languages are
pitiful Ornaments unto Preaching, if a man design Conversion and
Soul-edification. And yet more despicable are all playing on words, Jinglings
and Cadencies (which things are in all the Rules of true Eloquence justly
exploded) and yet some men reckon much on them. But would any man think his
Friend in earnest with him, that would accost him in any affair with such sort
of Language and Gesture?

(2) The Positive is, in demonstration of the Spirit, and of Power, 1 Cor. 2.5.

1. Paul preached so, as gave a demonstration that the Holy Ghost was in him,
sanctifying Him. This is a plain and blessed thing; happy is the Minister that
manageth his work so, that if the hearers get not a demonstration of great
Parts and Learning, yet they have a demonstration of the sanctifying Spirit of
God in the Minister.

2. Paul preached so, as gave a demonstration that the Spirit of God was with
him, assisting and helping him in his work: even when he was amongst them in
much weakness, fear and trembling, verse. 3. Happy is the Minister that can
preach this way; he must be a depender upon assistance from the Holy Ghost.

3. Paul preached so, as a demonstration of the Power of the Holy Ghost was
given to the Hearts of the Hearers. The Spirit of God so wrought on them by his
Power in and by 2 Cor. 4.2. Commending our selves to ^^ery man's Conscience in
the sight of God.
Paul's Preaching; this is the principal thing to be aimed at, and it is the
proper source of all profitable Preaching.

To conclude: You that are Ministers, suffer a Word of Exhortation.

Men, Brethren and Fathers, you are called to an high and holy Calling; your
Work is full of Danger, full of Duty, and full of Mercy. You are called to the
winning of Souls, an Employment near akin unto our Lords work, the saving of
Souls; and the nearer your spirits be in conformity to his holy temper and
frame, the fitter you are for, and the more fruitful you shall be in your
work. None of you are ignorant of the begun departure of our Glory, and the
daily advance of its departure, and the sad appearances of the Lords being
about to leave us utterly. Should not these Signs of the times rowse up
Ministers unto greater seriousness? What can be the reason of this sad
Observation, that when formerly a few Lights raised up in the Nation, did shine
so, as to scatter and dispell the darkness of Popery in a little time; yet now
when there are more, and more Learned men amongst us, yet the Darkness comes on
apace? Is it not because they were men filled with the Holy Ghost, and with
Power; and many of us are only filled with Light and Knowledge, and
inefficacious Notions of Gods Truth? Does not always the Spirit of the
Ministers propagate it self amongst the People? A lively Ministry, and lively
Christians. Therefore be serious at heart, believe and so speak, feel and so
speak, and as you teach so do, and then People will feel what you say, and
obey the Word of God.

And lastly, for People: It is not unfit that you should hear of Ministers
Work, and Duty, and Difficulties; you see that all is of your Concernment: All
things are for your sakes, as the Apostle in another case.

Then only I entreat you, 1. Pity us. We are not Angels, but men of like
Passions with your selves. Be fuller of Charity than of Censure: We have all
that you have to do about the saving of our own Souls, and a great Work
besides, about the saving of yours. We have all your difficulties as
Christians, and some that you are not acquainted with, that are only Ministers
Temptations and Trials.

2. Help us in our Work. If you can do any thing, help us in the work of
Winning Souls. What can we do, say you? O! a great deal: Be but won to Christ,
and we are made Make haste to Heaven, that you and we may meet joyfully before
the Throne of God and the Lamb.

3. Pray for us. How often and how earnestly does Paul beg the Prayers of the
Churches! and if he did so, much more should we beg them, and you grant them,
for our Necessities and Weaknesses are greater than his. 2 Thessalonians. 3.1, 2.
Finally, Brethren, pray for us, that the Word of the Lord may have free course,
and be glorified, even as it is with you; and that we may be delivered from
unreasonable and wicked men, for all men have not Faith.

THE CHAMBER of IMAGERY IN THE Church of ROME laid open; OR AN Antidote against
Popery. Quest. How is the Practical Love of Truth the best Preservative against
Popery? SERMON X.
1 PET. II.III. If so be ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious.
WHen false Worship had prevailed in the Church of old, unto its Ruin, God
showed and represented it unto his Prophet, under the name and appearance of a
Chamber of Imagery, Ezekiel. 8.11, 12. For therein were pourtraied all the
Abomination wherewith the Worship of God was defiled, and Religion corrupted.

Things relating unto Divine Truth and Worship, have had again the same event
in the world, especially in the Church of Rome. And my present Design is to
take a view of the Chambers of their Imagery, and to show what was the
occasion, and what were the Means of their Erection; and in them we shall see
all the Abomination wherewith the Divine Worship of the Gospel has been
corrupted, and Christian Religion ruined.

Unto this end it will be necessary to lay down some such Principles of Sacred.
Truth, as will demonstrate and evince the Grounds and Causes of that
Transformation of the Substance and Power of Religion into a Lifeless Image,
which shall be proved to have fallen out amongst them. And because I intend
their benefit principally who resolve all their Persuasion in Religion into the
Word of God, I shall deduce these Principles from that Passage of it in the
first Epistle of the Apostle Peter, Chap. 2. and the three first Verses.

The first Verse contains an Exhortation unto, or an Injunction of universal
Holiness, by the laying aside, or casting out whatever is contrary thereunto;
wherefore lay aside all Malice, and all guile, and hypocrisy, and envy, and
all evil speaking; the Rule whereof extends unto all other vicious habits of
Mind whatever.

And in the Second, there is a Profession of the Means whereby this End may be
attained; namely, how any one may be so strengthened in Grace, as to cast out
all such sinful Inclinations and Practices as are contrary unto the Holiness
required of us, which is the Divine Word; compared therefore unto Food, which
is the Means of preserving Natural Life, and of increasing its strength. As new
born Babes desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby.

Hereon the Apostle proceeds to declare the Condition whereon our profiting,
growing and thriving by the Word, does depend; and this is an experience of its
Power, as it is the Instrument of God, whereby he conveys his Grace unto us; if
so be that ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious. See 1 These. 1.5. Therein
lies the first and chief Principle of our ensuing Demonstration; and it is this;

All the Benefit and Advantage which any men do or may receive by the Word, or
the Truths of the Gospel, depend on an experience of its Power and Efficacy, in
communicating the Grace of God unto their Souls.

This Principle is evident in it self, and not to be questioned by any but such
as never had the least real sense of Religion on their own Minds. Besides, it
is evidently contained in the Testimony of the Apostle before laid down.

Hereunto three other Principles of equal Evidence with it self, are supposed,
and virtually contained in it.

1. There is a Power and Efficacy in the Word, and the Preaching of it, Romans
1.16. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it (...) P^^^r of God unto
salvation. It has a divine Power; the Power of God accompanying it, and put
forth in it, unto its proper Ends; for the Word of G^d is quick and powerful,
Heb. 4.12.

2. The Power that is in the Word of God, consists in its efficacy to
communicate Grace of God, unto the Souls of man; in and by it they taste that
(...) Lord is gracious; that is is efficacy unto its proper Ends. These are
Salvation, with all things requisite thereunto; such as the Illumination of our
Minds, and the Renovation of our Natures, the Justification of our Persons, the
Life of God in holy Worship and Obedience, all leading unto our eternal
enjoyment of him. These are the Ends whereunto the Gospel is designed in the
wisdom of God, whereunto its efficacy is confined.

3. There is an Experience to be obtained of the power and efficacy of the
Word. In that place of the Apostle it is expressed by tasting. But there is
something antecedent unto their tasting specially so called, and something
consequent unto it, both inseparable from it, and therefore belonging unto the
Experience whereof we speak.

1. Wherefore; The first thing required hereunto is Light; that is, a spiritual
supernatural Light, enabling us to discern the Wisdom, Will and Mind of God in
the Word, in a spiritual manner, without which, we can have no experience of
its Power. Hence the Gospel is hid unto them that perish, though it be
outwardly declared unto them, 2 Cor. 3.4. This is the only Means which lets
into the Mind and Conscience a sense of this efficacy. This, in the increases
of it, the Apostle prays for on the behalf of Believers, that they may have
this experience, Ephesians. 1.16, 17, 18, 19. Chap. 3.16, 17, 18, 19. and declares
the Nature of it, 2 Cor. 4.6.

2. The Taste intended follows hereon; wherein consists the Life and Substance
of the Experience pleaded. And this Taste is a spiritual sense of the Goodness,
Power and Efficacy of the Word, and the things contained in it, in the
conveyance of the Grace of God unto our Souls, in the Instances mentioned, and
others of a like nature: for in a Taste, there is a sweetness unto the Palate,
and a satisfaction unto the Appetite. By the one, in this Taste our Minds are
refreshed; and by the other our Souls are nourished: Of both Believers have an
experience. And this is let into the Mind by Spiritual Light, without which
nothing of it is attainable. God, who commanded Light to shine out of Darkness,
shine into your hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of his Glory in the
face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6.

3. To complete the Experience intended, there follows hereon a Conformity in
the whole Soul and Conversation unto the Truth of the Word, or the Mind of God
in it, wrought in us by its power and efficacy. So the Apostle expresses it,
Ephesians. 4.20, 21, 22, 23, 24. If so be that you have heard him, and have been
taught by him as the Truth is in Jesus; that you put off concerning the former
Conversation, the old man which is corrupt, according to the deceitful lusts.
and be renewed in the Spirit of your Mind, and that you put on the new man,
which after God is created in Righteousness and true Holiness.

Hereupon follows our last Principle, which is the immediate foundation of the
ensuing Discourse, or that which is to be confirmed; and it is this:

The Loss of an Experience of the Power of Religion, has been the Cause of the
loss of the Truth of Religion; or it has been the Cause of rejecting its
Substance, and setting up a Shadow or Image in the room of it.

This Transformation of all things in Religion, began and proceeded on these
Grounds. Those who had the Conduct of it, were always possessed of the General
Notions of Truth, which they could not forget without a total Renunciation of
the Gospel it self. But having lost all Experience of this power in themselves,
they wrested them unto things quite of another nature, destructive to the
Truth, as well as devoid of its Power: Hereon it came to pass that there was a
dead Image made and set up of Religion in all the parts of it, called by the
Name of that which was true and living, but utterly lost. All Experience, I
say, of the power and efficacy of the Mystery of the Gospel, and the Truths of
it, in communicating the Grace of God unto the Souls of men being lost,
retaining the general Notion of it, they contrived and framed an outward Image
or Representation of them, suited unto their Ignorance and Superstition.

Thus was the truth of Religion once almost totally lost in the world, as we
shall see; neither will it ever be lost any other way, or by any other means.
When Churches or Nations are possessed of the Truth and the Profession of it,
it is not Laws, nor Fines, nor Imprisonments, nor Gibbets, nor Fires, that
shall ever dispossess them, or deprive them of it.

Whilst an Experience of the Power of Religion continued in the Primitive
Times, all the bloody Rage and Cruelty of the world, all the Craft of Satan,
and the Subtilty of Seducers, who abounded, did utterly fail in attempting to
deprive Christians of the Truth, and the Profession of it. But when this began
to decay, and be lost amongst them, they were quickly deceived, and drawn off
from the Simplicity of the Gospel.

Upon the Reformation of Religion in these parts of the world, when the Truth
was received in the Love and Power of it, and multitudes had experience of the
spiritual benefit and advantage which they received thereby, in Liberty,
Holiness and Peace; all the Prisons, Tortures, Swords and Fires, that were
applied unto its extirpation, did nothing but diffuse the Profession of it, and
root it more firmly in the minds of men. It cannot be lost but by another way,
and other means.

The Jesuits and their Associates, have been for an hundred years, contriving
Methods and Arts for the dispossessing Nations and Churches of the Truth which
they have received, and the introducing the Romish Superstition. They have
written Books about it, and practiced according to their Principles in every
Kingdom and State of Europe, who own the Protestant Religion. But the folly of
most of their pretended Arts and Devices unto this end, has been ridiculous
and unsuccessless; and what they have added hereunto of Force, has been
divinely defeated.

There is but one way, one effectual Engine to deprive any People of the
Profession of the Truth which they have once received; and that is, by leading
them into such Profaneness and Ignorance, as whereby they may lose all
Experience of its Power and Efficacy in communicating the Grace of God unto
their Souls, and therein of all sense of the advantage which they might have
had by it. When this is done, men will as easily lay aside the Profession of
Religion, as burdensome Clothes in Summer.

There is much talk of a Plot and Conspiracy to destroy the Protestant
Religion, and introduce Popery again amongst us; they may do well to take care
thereof, who are concerned in public Affairs: but as unto the Event, there is
but one Conspiracy that is greatly to be feared in this matter, and that is
between Satan and the Lusts of men; if they can prevail to deprive the
Generality of men of an Experience in their own minds of the Power and Efficacy
of the Truth, with the spiritual Advantage which they may have thereby, they
will give them up to be an easy prey unto the other Designers. And there are
two Engines that are applied unto this purpose; the one is Ignorance, the other
is Profaneness, or Sensuality of Life. Whenever either of these prevails, the
Experience intended must necessarily be lost and excluded: And the means of
their prevailing, are want of due Instruction by those who are the Leaders of
the People, and the encouragement of Sensuality, by Impunity and great Examples.

This is the only formidable Conspiracy against the Profession of the Truth in
this Nation, without whose Aid, all power and force will be frustrate in the
Issue. And as there is a great appearance in Divine Permission of such a state
of things at present amongst us, so if they be managed by Counsel also, and
that those ways of Ignorance and Sensuality, are countenanced and promoted for
this very End, that the power of Truth being lost, the Profession of it may be
given up on easy terms, there is nothing but Sovereign Grace that can prevent
the Design. For the Principle which we have laid down, is uncontrollable in
Reason and Experience; namely, That the loss of an Experience of the power of
Religion, will issue one way or other, in the loss of the Truth of Religion,
and the Profession of it.

Whence is it that so many corrupt Opinions have made such an Inroad on
Protestant Religion, and the Profession of it? Is it not from hence, that many
have lost an Experience of the power and efficacy of the Truth, and so have
parted with it? Whence is it that Profaneness and Sensuality of Life, with all
manner of corrupt Lusts of the Flesh, have grown up, unto the shame of
Profession? Is it not from the same Cause, as the Apostle expressly declares it
comes by? 2 Timothy 4, 2, 3, 4, 5. One way or other the loss of Experience of the
power of Truth, will end in the loss of the profession of it.

But I proceed unto the Instance which I do design in the Church of Rome; for
the Religion of it at this day, is nothing but a dead Image of the Gospel,
erected in the loss of an experience of its spiritual power, overthrowing its
Use, with all its Ends, being suited to the Taste of men, carnal, ignorant and
superstitious.

This I shall make evident by all sorts of Instances in things relating to the
Person and Offices of Christ, the State, Order and Worship of the Church, with
the Graces and Duties of Obedience required in the Gospel. And in all, my
principal Design is to demonstrate what is the only way and means of securing
our own Souls, any Church or Nation, from being ensnared with, or prevailed
against by Popery.

1. It is a general Notion of Truth, that the Lord Christ in his Person and
Grace, is to be proposed and represented unto men as the principal Object of
their Faith and Love. He himself in his divine Person, is absolutely invisible
unto us, and as unto his humane Nature absent from us. For the Heavens must
receive him until the time of the restitution of all things. There must
therefore an Image or Representation of him be made unto our Minds, or he
cannot be the proper Object of our Faith, Trust, Love, and Delight. This is
done in the Gospel, and the preaching of it; for therein he is evidently set
forth before our eyes as crucified amongst us, Gal. 3.1. So also are all the
other Concerns of his Person and Offices therein clearly proposed unto us; yea,
this is the principal End of the Gospel, namely, to make a due Representation
of the Person, Offices, Grace and Glory of Christ, unto the Souls of men, that
they may believe in him, and believing, have eternal Life, John 20.31.

Upon this Representation made of Christ and his Glory in the Gospel, and the
Preaching of it, Believers have an Experience of the power and efficacy of the
divine Truth contained therein, in the way before mentioned, as the Apostle
declares, 2 Cor. 3.18. For we all with open face, beholding as in a Glass, the
Glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image from Glory to Glory, even as
by the Spirit of the Lord.

Having a Spiritual Light to discern and behold the Glory of Christ, as
represented in the Glass of the Gospel, they have experience of its
transfo^ming power and efficacy, changing them into the likeness of the Image
represented unto them, that is, of Christ himself; which is the saving effect
of Gospel-power.

But this Spiritual Light was lost among men, through th efficacy of their
Darkness and Unbelief; they were not able to discover the Glory of Christ, as
revealed and proposed in the Gospel, so as to make him the present Object of
their Faith and Love. And this Light being lost, they could have no experience
of the power of Divine Truth concerning him, changing them into his Image. They
could make no affecting discovery of him in the Scripture. All things therein
were dark and confused, or at least seemed an inaccessible Mystery, which they
could not reduce to practice.

Hence those who had got the public conduct of Religion, drove the people from
Reading the Scripture, as that which was of no use, but rather dangerous unto
them.

What shall these men then betake themselves unto? shall they reject the notion
in general, that there ought to be such a representation made of Christ unto
the minds of men, as to inflame their devotion, to excite their Faith, and stir
up their affection to him? This cannot be done without an open Renunciation of
him, and of the Gospel as a Fable.

Wherefore they will find out another way for it, another means, unto the same
end. And this is, by making Images of him of wood and stone. or Gold and
Silver, or painting on them. Hereby they supposed he would be made present unto
his Worshippers, That he would be so represented unto them, as that they should
be immediately stirred up unto the embraces of Faith and Love. And herein they
found sensible effects unto their great satisfaction: For their minds being
dark, carnal and prone to superstition, as are the minds of all men by nature,
they would see nothing in the Spiritual Representation of him in the Gospel,
that had any power on them, or did in any measure affect them. In these Images,
by the means of sight and imagination they found that which did really work
upon their Affections, and as they thought, did excite them unto the love of
Christ.

And this was the true Original of all the Imagery in the Church of Rome, as
something of the same nature in general was of all the Image Worship in the
World. So the Israelites in the wilderness when they made the Golden Calf, did
it to have a representation of a Deity near unto them, in such a visible
manner, as that their Souls might be affected with it; so they expressed
themselves, Exodus 32 1.

Wherefore in this State, under a loss of Spiritual Light and Experience, men
of superstitious minds, found themselves entangled. They knew it necessary that
there should be such a Representation made of Christ as might render him a
present Object of Faith and love, wherewith they might be immediately affected.
How this was done in the Gospel, they could not understand, nor obtain any
experience of the power and efficacy of it unto this end. Yet the Principle it
self must be retained, as that without which there could be no Religion;
wherefore to explicate themselves out of this difficulty, they break through
all Gods Commands to the contrary, and betook themselves to the making Images
of Christ, and their adoration. And from small beginnings, according as
Darkness and Superstition increased in the minds of men, there was a progress
in this practice, until these Images took the whole work of representing Christ
and his Glory, out of the hands, as it were, of the Gospel, and appropriated it
unto themselves.

For I do not speak of them now so much as they are Images of Christ, or
Objects of Adoration; as of their being dead Images of the Gospel; that is
somewhat set up in the room of the Gospel and for the ends of it, as means of
teaching and instruction. They shall do the work which the Gospel was designed
of God to do: For as unto this end of the representation of Christ, as the
present object of the Faith and Love of man, with an efficacy to work upon
their affections, there is in the Church of Rome a thousand times more ascribed
unto them, than unto the Gospel it self.

The whole matter is stated by the Apostle, Romans 10.6, 7, 8. The Righteousness
which is of Faith, speaks on this wise, say not in thine heart who shall
ascend unto heaven (that is to bring Christ down from above) or who shall
descend into the deep (that is to bring Christ up again from the dead) but what
says it? The word is nigh thee in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that is the
word of faith which we preach. The Enquiry is, how we may be made partakers of
Christ, and righteousness by him; or how we may have an interest in him, or
have him present with us. This, says the Apostle, is done by the word of the
Gospel which is preached, which is nigh unto us in our mouths, and in our
hearts; No say these men, we cannot understand how it should be so; we do not
find that it is so, that Christ is made nigh unto us, present with us by this
word. Wherefore we will ascend into Heaven to bring down Christ from above; for
we will make Images of him in his glorious state in Heaven, and thereby he will
be present with us, or nigh unto us. And we will descend into the deep, to
bring up Christ again from the dead, and we will do it, by making first
Crucifixes, and then Images of his glorious Resurrection bringing him again
unto us from the dead. This shall be in the place and room of that word of the
Gospel which you pretend to be alone useful and effectual unto these ends.

This therefore is evident, that the Introduction of this Abomination in
principle and practice, destructive unto the Souls of men, took its Rise from
the loss of an Experience of the Representation of Christ in the Gospel, and
the transforming power in the minds of men, which it is accompanied with, in
them that believe. Make us Gods say the Israelites to go before us; for as for
this man Moses (who represented God unto us) we know not what is become of him.
What would you have men do? would you have them live without all Sense of the
presence of Christ with them, or being nigh unto them? Shall they have no
Representation of him? no, no, make us Gods that may go before us; let us have
Images unto this end; for how else it may be done, we cannot understand.

And this is the Reason of their obstinacy in this practice against all means
of conviction: yea they live hereon in a perpetual contradiction unto
themselves: Their Temples are full of Graven Images like the house of Micah,
houses of God; and yet in them, are the Scriptures (though in a Tongue unknown
to the people) wherein that practice is utterly condemned that a man would
think them distracted to hear what their Book says, and to see what they do in
the same place. But nothing will reach unto their conviction, until the vail of
Blindness and Ignorance be taken from their minds; until they have a Spiritual
Light enabling them to discern the Glory of Christ as represented in the
Gospel, and to let in an Experience of the transforming power and efficacy of
that Revelation in their own Souls, they will never part with that means for
the same end, which they are sensible of, to be useful unto it; and which is
suited unto their inclination. Whatever be the issue, though it cost them their
Souls, they will not part with what they find, as they suppose, so useful unto
their great end of making Christ nigh unto them; for that, wherein they can see
nothing of it, and of whose power they can have no experience.

But the principal Design of this Discourse, is to warn others of these
Abominations, and to direct unto their avoidance: for if they should be
outwardly pressed unto the practice of this Idolatry, whatever is of carnal
Affection, of blind Devotion, or Superstition in them, will quickly be won over
unto a Conspiracy against their Convictions. Nothing will then secure them but
an experience of the efficacy of that Representation which is made of Christ in
the Gospel. It is therefore the Wisdom and Duty of all those who desire a
stability in the profession of the Truth, continually to endeavor after this
Experience, and an increase in it. He who lives in the exercise of Faith and
Love in the Lord Jesus Christ, as revealed in the Gospel, as evidently
crucified, and evidently exalted therein, and finds the fruit of his so doing
in his own Soul, will be preserved in the time of Trial. Without this, men will
at last begin to think that it is better to have a false Christ than none at
all; they will suppose that something is to be found in an Image, when they can
find nothing in the Gospel.

SECT. II.
II. It is a prevalent Notion of Truth, That the Worship of God ought to be
beautiful and glorious: The very Light of Nature seems to direct unto
Conceptions hereof. What is not so, may be justly rejected, as unbecoming the
Divine Majesty; And therefore the more holy and heavenly any Religion pretends
to be, the more glorious is the Worship prescribed in it, or ought so to be:
Yea, the true Worship of God is the height and excellency of all Glory in this
world; it is inferior unto nothing, but that which is in Heaven, which it is
the beginning of, the way unto, and the best preparation for. Accordingly even
that Worship is declared to be glorious, and that in an eminent manner, above
all, the outward Worship of the Old Testament in the Tabernacle and Temple,
whose Glory was great, and as unto external Pomp, inimitable. To this purpose
the Apostle disputes at large, 2 Cor. 3.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. This therefore is
agreed, that there ought to be Beauty and Glory in divine Worship, and that
they are most eminently in that which is directed and required in the Gospel.
But withal the Apostle declares in the same place, that this Glory is
Spiritual, and not Carnal; so did our Lord Jesus Christ foretell that it should
be; and that unto that end all distinction of places, with all outward
advantages and Ornaments belonging unto them, should be taken away, John 4 20,
21, 22, 23, 24.

It belongs therefore unto our present Design, to give a brief Account of its
Glory, and wherein it excels all other ways of divine Worship that ever were in
the world; even that under the Old Testament, which was of divine Institution,
wherein all things were ordered for Beauty and Glory. And it may be given in
the Instances that ensue.

1. The express Object of it is God, not as absolutely considered, but as
existing in three Persons, of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. This is the
principal Glory of Christian Religion and its Worship. Under the Old Testament
the Conceptions of the Church about the Existence of the Divine Nature in
distinct Persons, were very dark and obscure, for the full Revelation of it was
not to be made, but in the distinct actings of each Person in the works of
Redemption and Salvation of the Church; that is, in the Incarnation of the Son,
and Mission of the Spirit, after he was glorified, John 7.39. And in all the
ways of Natural Worship, there was never the least shadow of any respect
hereunto. But this is the foundation of all the Glory of Evangelical Worship.
The Object of it in the Faith of the Worshipper, is the Holy Trinity, and it
consists in an Ascription of Divine Glory unto each Person in the same
individual Nature by the same Act of the Mind; where this is not, there is no
Glory in Religious Worship.

2. Its Glory consists in that constant respect which it has unto each Divine
Person, as unto their peculiar work and actings for the salvation of the
Church; so it is described, Ephesians. 2.18. Through him (that is, the Son as
Mediator) we have our access by one Spirit unto the Father. This is the
immediate Glory of Evangelical Worship, comprehensive of all the Graces and
Privileges of the Gospel. And to suppose that the Glory of it does consist in
any thing but the Light, Graces and Privileges which it does it self exhibit,
is a vain Imagination: It will not borrow Glory from the Invention of men; we
shall therefore a little consider it as it is here represented by the Apostle.

1. The Vltimate Object of it, under this consideration, is God as the Father;
we have an access therein unto the Father. And this Consideration in our
worship of God as a Father, relating unto the whole dispensation of his Love
and Grace, by Christ Jesus, as he is God, and our God, his Father, and our
Father, is peculiar unto Gospel Worship, and contains a signal part of its
glory. We do not only worship God as a Father; so the very Heathens had a
Notion that he was a Father of all things; but we worship him, who is the
Father, and as he is so, both in relation to the eternal Generation of the Son,
and the communication of Grace by him unto us, as our Father; so no man has
seen God at any time, the only begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father,
he has declared him, John 1.18. This Access in our worship unto the Person of
the Father, as in Heaven, the holy Place above, as on a Throne of Grace, is the
glory of the Gospel. See Mat. 6.9. Heb. 4.16. ch^p 10.19, 20, 21.

2. The Son is here considered as Mediator; through him we have this access
unto the Father. This is the Glory that was hidden from former Ages, but
brought to light, and displayed by the Gospel. So speaks our blessed Savior
himself unto his Disciples; Whatsoever you shall ask the Father in my Name, he
will give it you: Hitherto ye have asked nothing in my Name, ask, and ye shall
receive, John 16.23, 24. To ask God expressly in the Name of the Son, as
Mediator, belongs unto the Glory of the Gospel Worship.

The chief of them may be reduced to these three Heads.

1. It is he who makes both the persons of the Worshippers, and their Duties
accepted of God. See Heb. 2.17, 18. chap. 4.16. chap. 10.19.

2. He is the Administrator of all the worship of the Church in the holy place
above, as its great High Priest over the House of God, Heb. 8.2. Rev. 8.3.

3. His Presence with and among Gospel-worshippers in their worship, gives it
Glory. This he declares and promises, Mat. 18.19, 20. If two of you shall agree
on earth as touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them
of my Father which is in heaven; for where two or three are gathered together
in my Name, there am I in the midst of them. All Success of the Prayers of the
Church depends on, and arises from the presence of Christ amongst them: He
is so present for their assistance, and for their conso^ation. This presence of
a Living Christ, and not a dead Crucifix, gives Glory to Divine worship. He who
sees not the Glory of this Worship, from its relation unto Christ, is a
stranger unto the Gospel, with all the Light, Graces and Privileges of it.

3. It is in one Spirit that we have Access unto God in his Worship; and in his
Administration does the Apostle place the glory of it in opposition unto all
the glory of the Old Testament, as does our Lord Jesus Christ also in the place
before referred unto; for,

1. The whole Ability for the observance and performance of it according to the
Mind of God, is from him alone. His communication of Grace and Gifts unto the
Church, is that alone which makes it to give glory to God in his Divine
Service: If this should cease, all acceptable Worship would cease in the world.
To think to observe the Worship of the Gospel, without the Aid and Assistance
of the Spirit of the Gospel, is a lewd imagination. But where he is, there is
Liberty and Glory, 2 Cor. 3.17, 18.

2. By him the sanctified Minds of Believers are made Temples of God, and so
the principal Seal of Evangelical worship, 1 Cor. 3.16. chap. 6.8. This Temple
being of God's own framing, and of his own adorning by his Spirit, is a much
more glorious Fabric than any that the hands of men can erect.

3. By him is the Church led into internal Communion and Converse with God in
Christ in Light, Love, and Delight, with holy boldness; the glory whereof is
expressed by the Apostle, Heb. 10.19, 21, 22.

In these things, I say, does the true Glory of Evangelical Worship consist;
and if it does not, it has no Glory in comparison of that which did excel in
the Old Legal Worship. For the wit of man was never yet able to set it off with
half the outward Beauty and Glory that was in the Worship of the Temple. But
herein it is that it not only leaves no Glory thereunto in comparison, but does
unspeakably excel whatever the wit and wealth of men can extend unto.

But there is a Spiritual Light required that we may discern the Glory of this
Worship, and have thereby an Experience of its Power and Efficacy in reference
unto the Ends of its appointment. This the Church of Believers has. They see
it, as it is a blessed Means of giving Glory unto God, and of receiving
gracious Communications from him, which are the Ends of all the Divine
Institutions of worship; and they have therein such an Experience of its
efficacy, as gives Rest, and Peace, and Satisfaction unto their Souls. For they
find, that as their worship directs them unto a blessed view by Faith, of God
in his ineffable Existence with the glorious actings of each Person in the
dispensation of Grace, which fills their hearts with Joy unspeakable; so also
that all Graces are exercised, increased and strengthened in the observance of
it, with Love and Delight.

But all Light into, all Perceptions of this Glory, all Experience of its
Power, was amongst the most lost in the world. I intend in all these Instances,
the time of the Papal Apostasy* Those who had the conduct of Religion could
discern no Glory in t^^^e things, nor obtain any experience of their Power: Be
the Worship what it will, they can see no Glory in it, nor did it give any
satisfaction to their minds; for having no light to discern its glory, they
could have no Experience of its power and efficacy. What then shall they do?
The Notion must be retained, that Divine Worship is to be beautiful and
glorious. But in the Spiritual Worship of the Gospel, they could see nothing
thereof; wherefore they thought necessary to make a Glory for it, or to dismiss
it out of the world, and set up such an Image of it, as might appear beautiful
unto their fleshly minds, and give them satisfaction. To thi^ end they set
their Inventions on work, to find out Ceremonies, Vestments, Gestures,
Ornaments, Music, Altars, Images, Paintings, with prescriptions of great
bodily Veneration. This Pageantry they call the Beauty, the Order, the Glory of
Divine Worship. This is that which they see and feel, and which as they judge,
does dispose their Minds unto Devotion; without it they know not how to pay any
reverence unto God himself; and when it is wanting, whatever be the Life, the
Power, the Spirituality of the Worship in the Worshippers, whatever be its
efficacy unto all the proper ends of it, however it be ordered according unto
the prescription of the Word, it is unto them empty, indecent, they can see
neither Beauty nor Glory in it.

This Light and Experience being lost, the introduction of Beggarly Elements
and Carnal Ceremonies in the Worship of the Church, with attempts to render it
d^corous and beautiful, by Superstitious Rites and Observances, wherewith it
has been defiled and corrupted, as it was and is in the Church of Rome, was
nothing but the setting up of a deformed Image in the room of it; and this they
are pleased withal. The Beauty and Glory with Carving, and Painting, and
imbroidered Vestures, and Musical Incantations, and Postures of Veneration, do
give unto Divine Service, they can see and feel, and in their own imagination
are sensibly excited unto Devotion by them.

But hereby, instead of representing the true Glory of the Worship of he
Gospel, wherein it excels that under the Old Testament, they have rendered it
altogeth^^ ^inglorious in comparison of it; for all the Ceremonies and
Ornaments which they have invented for that end, come unspeakably short for
Beauty, Order and Glory, of what was appointed by God himself in the Temple,
scarce equalling what was among the Pagans.

It will be said, that the things whereunto we assign the Glory of this Worship
are spiritual and invisible. Now this is not that which is enquired after; but
that whose Beauty we may behold, and be affected with. And this may consist in
the things which we decry, at least in some of them: though I must say, if
there be Glory in any of them, the more they are multiplied, the better it must
needs be; but this is that which we plead, Men being not able by the Light of
Faith, to discern the Glory of things spiritual and invisible, do make Image,
of them unto themselves, as Gods that may go before them, and these they are
affected withal: but the Worship of the Church is spiritual, and the Glory of
it is invisible unto eyes of Flesh. So both our Savior and the Apostles do
testify in the Celebration of it; We come unto Mount Sion, and unto the City
of the Living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable Company of
Angels, to the general Assembly and Church of the first born, which are written
in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the Spirits of Just men made
perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, and to the Blood of
sprinkling, that speaks better things than that of Abel, Heb. 12.22, 23, 24.
The Glory of this Assembly, though certainly above that of Organs, and Pipes,
and Crucifixes, and Vestments, yet does not appear unto the Sense or
Imaginations of men.

That which I design here, is to obviate the Meritricious Allurements of the
Roman Worship, and the Pretenses of its efficacy to excite Devotion and
Veneration by its Beauty and Decency. The whole of it is but a Deformed Image
of that Glory which they cannot behold. To obtain and preserve in our hearts an
experience of the power and efficacy of that Worship of God which is in Spirit
and Truth, as unto all the real Ends of Divine Worship, is that alone which
will secure us. Whilst we do retain right Notions of the proper Object of
Gospel Worship, and of our immediate approach by it thereunto, of the way and
manner of that approach through the Mediation of Christ, and assistance of the
Spirit; whilst we keep up Faith and Love unto their due exercise in it, wherein
on our part the Life of it does consist, preserving an experience of the
spiritual benefit and advantage which we receive thereby, we shall not easily
be inveagled to relinquish them all, and to give up our selves unto the
Embraces of this lifeless Image.

SECT. III.
It is an universal unimpeachable Persuasion amongst all Christians, that there
is a near intimate Communion with Christ, and Participation of him in the
Supper of the Lord. He is no Christian who is otherwise minded. Hence from the
beginning, this was always esteemed the principal Mystery in the Agenda of the
Church, and the ^eservedly; for this Persuasion is built on infallible Divine
Testimon^^^. The Communication of Christ herein, and our participation of him,
are expressed in such a manner as to demonstrate them to be peculiar; such as
are not to be obtained in any other way, or divine Ordinance whatever; not in
Praying, not in Preaching, not in any other exercise of Faith on the Word or
Promises. There is in it an eating and drinking of the Body and Blood of
Christ, with a spiritual Incorporation thence ensuing, which are peculiar unto
this Ordinance. But,

This especial and peculiar communion with Christ, and participation of him, is
Spiritual and Mystical, by Faith, not carnal or fleshly. To imagine any other
participation of Christ in this life but by Faith, is to overthrow the Gospel.
To signify the Real communication of himself and benefits of his Mediation unto
them that believe, whereby they should become the food of their Souls,
nourishing them unto eternal Life, in the very beginning of his Ministry, he
himself expresses it by eating of his flesh and drinking of his blood, John
6.53. Except you eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood you have
no life in you. But hereon many were offended, as supposing that he had
intended an oral, carnal eating of his flesh and drinking of his blood, and so
would have taught them to be Cannibals. Wherefore to instruct his Disciples
aright in this mystery, he gives an Eternal Rule of the interpretation of such
expressions, v. 63. It is the Spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits
nothing; the words that I speak unto you, they are Spirit, and they are Life.
To look for any other communication of Christ, or of his flesh and blood, but
what is Spiritual, is to contradict him in the Interpretation which he gives of
his own words.

Wherefore this especial Communion with Christ, and Participation of him is by
Faith. If it were not, unbelievers ought all partake of Christ as well as those
that believe, which is a contradiction: For to believe in Christ, and to be
made partakers of him are one and the same. We must therefore find this
peculiar participating of Christ in the special actings of Faith with respect
unto the especial and peculiar exhibition of Christ unto us in this Ordinance.
And these actings of Faith are diverse and many; but may be referred unto four
Heads.

1. It acts it self by Obedience unto the Authority of Christ in this
Institution. This is the foundation of all Communion with Christ, or
p^rticipation of him in any Ordinance of divine Worship whatever, tha^ is
peculiarly of his own Sovereign Appointment, and that in, and with such
circumstances as unto the Time, or Season, and manner of it, as requires
especial actings of Faith with respect thereunto; For the Institution of this
Ordinance was in the close of his Ministry or Prophetical Office on the Earth,
and in the entrance of the exercise of his Priestly Office in offering himself
a Sacrifice unto God for the sins of the Church between them both, and to
render them both effectual unto us, he interposed an act of his Kingly Office
in the Institution of this Ordinance. And it was in the same night wherein he
was betrayed; when his holy Heart was in the highest exercise of zeal for the
glory of God, and compassion for the Souls of sinners, s^ith has herein an
especial regard unto all these things. It does not only act it self by a
subjection of Soul and Conscience unto the Authority of Christ in the
Institution, but respects also the exerting of his authority in the Close of
his Prophetical and entrance of the exercise of his Sacerdotal Office, on the
Earth; with all those other circumstances of it, which recommend it unto the
Souls and Consciences of Believers.

This is peculiar unto this Ordinance, and unto this way of the participation
of Christ. And herein faith in its due exercise gives the soul an intimate
converse with Christ.

2. There is in this divine Ordinance, a peculiar Representation of the Love
and Grace of Christ in his death and Sufferings, with the way and manner of our
Reconciliation unto God thereby. The principal design of the Gospel is to
declare unto us the Love and Grace of Christ, and our Reconciliation unto God
by his Blood. Howbeit herein there is such an eminent Representation of them,
as cannot be made by words alone. It is a Spiritual Image of Christ proposed
unto us, intimately affecting our whole Souls. These things, namely, the
ineffable Love and Grace of Christ, the bitterness of his Sufferings and Death
in our stead, the Sacrifice that he offered by his Blood unto God, with the
effect of it in Atonement and Reconciliation, being herein contracted into one
entire Proposal unto our Souls, Faith is exercised thereon in a peculiar
manner, and so as it is not in any Divine Ordinance or way of the Proposal of
the same things unto us.

All these things are indeed distinctly, and in parts, set before us in the
Scripture for our Instruction and Edificacion. But as the Light which was first
made and diffused unto the whole Creation, did suffice to enlighten it in a
general way, yet was far more useful, glorious and conspicuous, when it was
reduced and contracted into the Body of the Sun; so the Truths concerning
Christ, as they are diffused through the Scripture, are sufficient for the
Illumination and Instruction of the Church; but when by divine wisdom and
institution they are contracted into this Ordinance, their taste and efficacy
is more eminent and communicative unto the eyes of our Understandings, that is,
our Faith, than as merely proposed by parts and parcels in the Word.

Hereby Faith leads the Soul unto a peculiar Communion with Christ, w^^ch is
thereon made partaker of him in an especial manner.

3. Faith herein respects the peculiar way of the communication and exhibition
of Christ unto us, by symbols, or sensible outward Signs of Bread and Wine. It
finds the divine Wisdom and Sovereignty of Christ in the choice of them, having
no other foundation in Reason or the Light of Nature; and the Representation
that is made herein of him, with the Benefits of his Death and Oblation, is
suited unto Faith only, without any aid of Sense or Imagination: for although
the Symbols are visible, yet their Relation unto the things signified, is not
disce^nible unto any Sense or Reason. Had he chosen for this end an Image or a
Crucifix, or any such Actions as did by a kind of natural and sensible
Resemblance, show forth his Passion, and what he did and suffered, there had
been no need of Faith in this matter. And therefore as we shall see, such
things are found out unto this end, by such as have lost the use and exercise
of Faith herein. Besides, it is Faith alone that apprehends the Sacramental
Union that is between the outward Signs and the Things signified by virtue of
Divine Institution: And hereby the one, that is, the Body and Blood of Christ,
are really exhibited and communicated unto the Souls of Believers, as the
outward Signs are unto their bodily Senses, the Signs becoming thereby
Sacramentally unto us, what the things signified are in themselves, and are
therefore called by their Names. Herein there is a peculiar exercise of Faith,
and a peculiar paricipation of Christ, such as are in no other Ordinance
whatever. Yea the Actings of Faith with respect unto the Sacramental Union and
Relation between the Signs and Things signified, by virtue of divine
Institution and Promise, is the principal Use and Exercise of it herein.

4. There is a peculiar Exercise of Faith in the Reception of Christ, as his
Body and Blood are tendered and exhibited unto us in the outward Signs of them;
For though they do not contain carnally the Flesh and Blood of Christ in them,
nor are turned into them, yet they really exhibit Christ unto them that believe
in the participation of them, Faith is the Grace that makes the Soul to receive
Christ, and whereby it does actually receive him. To as ma^y as received him,
even to as many that believe in his Name, John 1.12. And it receives him
according as he is proposed and exhibited unto us in the Declaration and
Promise of the Gospel, wherein he is proposed, it receives him by the gracious
Assent of the Mind unto this Truth, the choice of him, cleaving and trusting
unto him with the Will, Heart, and Affection, for all the Ends of his Person
and Offices, as the Mediator between God and man; and in the Sacramental
Mysterious Proposal of him, his Body and Blood, that is in the efficacy of his
Death and Sacrifice, in this Ordinance of worship, Faith acts the whole Soul in
the Reception of him unto all the especial Ends for which he is exhibited unto
us, in this way and manner. What these Ends are which give force and efficacy
unto the actings of Faith herein, this is not a proper place to declare.

I have mentioned these things, because it is the great Plea of the Papists at
this day in behalf of their Transubstantiation, That if we reject their oral or
carnal manducation of the Flesh of Christ, and drinking of his Blood, there
cannot be assigned a way of the participation of Christ in the receiving of him
in this Sacrament, distinct from that which is done in the Preaching of the
Word: But hereby, as we shall see, they only declare their ignorance of this
heavenly Mystery.

But of this blessed intimate Communion with Christ, and participation of him
in the Divine Institution of worship, Believers have Experience unto their
satisfaction and ine^^able Joy. They find him to be the spiritual food of their
Souls, by which they are nourished unto eternal Life, by a spiritual
incorporation with him. They discern the Truth of this Mystery, and have
experience of its Power. Howbeit men growing carnal, and being destitute of
Spiritual Light, with the wisdom of Faith, utterly lost all Experience of any
Communion with Christ, and participation of him in this Sacrament, on the
Principles of Gospel Truth, they could find nothing in it, no Power, no
Efficacy, nothing that should answer the great and glorious things spoken of
it, nor was it possible they should. For indeed there is nothing in it, but
unto Faith; as the Light of the Sun is nothing to them that have no eyes: a Dog
and a Staff are of more use to a blind man, than the Sun, nor is the most
melodious Music any thing to them that are deaf; yet notwithstanding this loss
of spiritual Experience, they retained the Notion of Truth, that there must be
a peculiar participation of Christ in this Sacrament, distinct from all other
ways and means of the same Grace.

Here the Wits of men were hard put to it to find out an Image of this
spiritual Communion, whereof in their minds they could have no Experience; yet
they fashioned one by degrees, and after they had greatned the Mystery in words
and expressions (whereof they knew nothing in its power) to answer unto what
was to be set up in the room of it, until they brought forth the horrid Monster
of Transubstantiation, and the Sacrifice of the Mass; for hereby they provided
that all those things which are spiritual in this Communion, should be turned
into, and acted in things carnal: Bread shall be the Body of Christ carnally,
the Mouth shall be Faith, the Teeth shall be the Exercise, the Belly shall be
the Heart, and the Priest shall offer Christ unto God, A Viler Image was never
invented; and there is nothing of Faith required herein, it is all but a
fortifying of Imagination against all Sense and Reason.

Because there is a singular Mystery in the Sacramental Union that is between
the external Signs and the things signified, whence the one is called by the
Name of the other, as the Bread is called the Body of Christ, which Faith
discerns in the Exhibition and Receiving of it, they have invented for a
Representation hereof, such a prodigious Imagination of the real Conversion or
Transubstantiation of the Substance of the Bread and Wine into the Substance of
the Body and Blood of Christ, as overthrows all Faith, Reason, and Sense also.

And in the room of that Holy Reverence of Christ himself in his Institution of
this Ordinance, in the Mystical Exhibition of himself unto the Souls of
Believers, in the demonstration of his Love, Grace, and Sufferings for them,
they have set up a wretched Image of an Idolatrous Adoration and Worship of the
Host, as they call it, to the Ruin of the Souls of men.

And whereas the Lord Jesus Christ, by once offering perfected for ever them
that are sanctified, appointing this Ordinance for the Remembrance of it,
having lost that spiritual Light whereby they might discern the efficacy of
that one Offering so long since accomplished, in the application of it by this
Ordinance unto the actual perfecting of the Church; they have erected a new
Image of it, in a pretended daily Repetition of the same Sacrifice, wherein
they profess to offer Christ again for the sins of the living and the dead,
unto the overthrow of the principal foundation of Faith and Religion.

All these Abominations arose from the loss of an Experience of that spiritual
Communion with Christ, and the participation of him by Faith, which there is in
this Ordinance by divine Institution. This cast the thoughts of men on
Invention of these Images, to suit the general Notion of Truth unto the
Superstition of their carnal minds. Nor is it ordinarily possible to retrieve
them from these infatuations, unless God be pleased to communicate unto them
that Spiritual Light, whereby they may discern the Glory of this Heavenly
Mystery, and have an Experience of the Exhibition of Christ unto the Souls of
Believers therein, without these; from innumerable prejudices, and inflamed
affections toward their Idols, they will not only abide in their darkness
against all means of Conviction, but endeavor the temporal and eternal
destruction of all that are otherwise minded.

This Image, like that of Nebuchadnezzar; was once set up in this Nation, with
a Law, that whoever would not bow down to it and worship it, should be cast
into the fiery Furnace. God grant it to be so no more, But if it should, there
is no preservation against the Influence of Force and Fires, but a real
experience of an efficacious Communication of Christ unto our Souls in this
holy Ordinance, administered according to his appointment.

This therefore is that we ought with all diligence to endeavor; and this not
only as the only way and means of our edification in this Ordinance, by an
exercise in Grace, the strengthening of our Faith, and present Consolation, but
as the effectual means of our preservation in the profession of the Truth, and
our deliverance from the Snares of our Adversaries. For whereas it is
undeniable, that this peculiar Institution distinct from all other, does intend
and design a distinct communication and exhibition of Christ; if it be pressed
on us, that these must be done by Transubstantiation and Oral Manducation
thereon, and can be no otherwise; nothing but an Experience of the power and
efficacy of the Mystical Communion with Christ in this Ordinance, before
described, will preserve us from being ensnared by their Pretenses. There is
not therefore on all accounts of Grace and Truth any one thing of more
concernment unto Believers, than the due exercise of Spiritual Light and Faith,
unto a satisfactory experience of a peculiar participation of Christ in this
Holy Institution.

The same is fallen out amongst them with reference unto the Church, and all
the principal Concerns of it; having lost or renounced the things which belong
unto its primitive Constitution, they have erected a deformed Image in their
stead, as I shall manifest in some Instances.

SECT. IV.
IV. It is an unquestionable Principle of Truth, that the Church of Christ is
in it self a Body, such a Body as has an Head, whereon it depends, and without
which it would immediately be dissolved; a Body without an Head, is but a
Carcass, or part of a Carcass; and this Head must be always present with it. An
Head distant from the Body, separated from it, not united unto it by such ways
and means as are proper unto their Nature, is of no use. See Ephesians. 4, 15, 16.
Col. 2.19.

But there is a double Notion of an Head, as there is of a Body also; For they
both of them are either Natural or Political. There is a Natural Body and there
is a Political Body; and in each sense it must have an Head of the same kind. A
Natural Body must have an Head of Vital Influence, and a Political Body must
have an Head of Rule and Government. The Church is called a Body, compared to
it, is a Body in both Senses, or in both parts of the comparison, and in both
must have an Head. As it is a Spiritually living Body, compared to the Natural,
it must have an Head of Vital Influence, without which it cannot subsist; and
as it is an Orderly Society for the common Ends of its Institution, compared
unto a Political Body, it must have an Head of Rule and Government, without
which neither its Being, nor its Use can be preserved.

But these are only distinct Considerations of the Church, which is every way
one and the same. It is not two Bodies, for then it must have two Heads, but it
is one Body under two distinct Considerations, which divide not its Essence,
but declare its different Respects unto its Head.

And in General all who are called Christians, are thus far agreed; nothing is
of the Church, nothing belongs unto it, which is not dependant on, which is not
united to the Head. That which holds the Head, is the true Church, that which
does not so, is no Church at all.

Herein we agree with our Adversaries, namely, that all the Privileges of the
Church, all the Right and Title of men thereunto, depend wholly on their due
Relation to the Head of it, according to the distinct Considerations of it, be
that Head who, or what it will, that which is not united unto the Head, which
depends not on it, which is separated from it, belongs not to the Church.

This Head of the Church is Christ Jesus alone; for the Church is but one,
although on various considerations it be likened unto two sorts of Bodies. The
Catholic Church is considered either as believing, or as professing; but the
Believing Church is not one, and the professing another. If you suppose another
Catholic Church, besides this one, whosoever will may be the Head of it, we are
not concerned therein; but unto this Church Christ is the only Head. He only
answers all the Properties and Ends of such an Head to the Church: This the
Scripture does so positively and frequently affirm, without the least
intimation either directly or by consequence of any other Head, that it is
wonderful how the imagination of it should befall the Minds of any, who thought
it not meet at the same time to cast away their Bibles.

But whereas an Head is to be present with the Body, or it cannot subsist, the
Enquiry is, how the Lord Christ is so present with his Church? And the
Scripture has left no pretense for any hesitation herein; for he (...) so by
his Spirit and his Word, by which he communicates all the Powers and Virtues
of an Head unto it continually. His Promises of this way and manner of his
Presence unto the Church, are multiplied, and thereon does the Being, Life, Use
and Continuance of the Church depend; where Christ is not present by his Spirit
and Word, there is no Church; and those who pretend so to be, are the
Synagogues of Satan, and they are inseparable and conjunct in their operation,
as he is the H^^d of influence unto the Church, as also, as he is an Head of
Rule; for in the former sense the Spirit works by the Word, and in the
latter, the Word is made effectual by the Spirit.

But the Sense and Apprehension hereof, was for a long time lost in the world,
amongst them that called themselves the Church. An Head they did acknowledge
the Church must always have, without which it cannot subsist; and they would
confess that in some sense he was an Head of influence unto it; they know not
how to have an Image thereof; though by many other pernicious Doctrines, they
overthrew the Efficacy and Benefit of it. But how he should be the only Head of
Rule unto the Church they could not understand; they saw not how he could act
the Wisdom and Authority of such an Head, and without which the Church must be
headless. They said, he was absent and invisible, they must have one that they
could see, and have access unto; he is in Heaven, and they know not how to make
Address to him, as occasion did require; all things would go to disorder,
notwithstanding such an Headship. The Church is visible, and it must, they
thought, have a visible Head. It was meet also that this Head should have some
such Grandeur and Pomp in the World as became the Head of so Great and Glorious
a Society as the Church is. How to apply these things unto Christ and his
Presence with the Church, by his Word and Spirit, they knew not.

Shall they then forgo the Principle, That the Church is to have such an Head
and Supreme Ruler? That must not be done, but be sacredly retained; not only
because to deny it in general, is to renounce the Gospel; but because they had
found out a way to turn it unto their own advantage; they would therefore make
an Image of Christ, as this Head of the Church, to possess the Place, and act
all the Powers of such an Head; for the Church, they say is visible, and must
have a visible Head, as though the Catholic Church, as such, were any other
way visible, but as the Head of it is, that is, by Faith. That there must be an
Head and Center of Union, wherein all the Members of the Church may agree and
be united, notwithstanding all their distinct Capacities and Circumstances, and
how this should be Christ himself, they know not; that without a Supreme Head
present in the Church, to compose all Differences, and determine all
Controversies, even those concerning himself, which they vainly pretend unto,
they expressly affirm, that there was never a Society so foolishly ordered as
that of the Church. And hereon they conclude the Insufficiency of Christ to be
this f^le Head of the Church, another they must have for these Ends.

And this was their Pope, such an Image as is one of the worst of Idols, that
ever were in the world. Unto him they give all the Titles of Christ, which
relate unto the Church, and ascribe all the Powers of Christ in and over it, as
unto its Rule, to him also. But here they fell into a Mistake; for when they
thought to give him the Power of Christ, they gave him the Power of the Dragon,
to use against Christ, and those that are his. And when they thought to make an
Image of Christ, they made an Image of the First Beast, set up by the Dragon,
which had two Horns like a Lamb, but spoke as a Dragon, whose Character, and
Employ is at large described, Rev. 13.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.

This is the Sum of what I shall offer on this Head; Those who called
themselves the Church, had lost all Spiritual Light enabling them to discern
the Beauty and Glory of the Rule of Christ over the Church as its Head; and
hereon their Minds became destitute of all Experience of the power and efficacy
of his Spirit and Word, continually to order the Affairs thereof, in the ways,
and through the use of Means by himself appointed; they knew not how to
acquiesce in these things, nor how the Church could be maintained by them:
Wherefore in this case, they helped every one his Neighbor, and every one said
to his Brother, be of good comfort; so the Carpenter encouraged the Goldsmith,
and he that s^^^teth with the Hammer, him that smites the Anvil. They set
themselves in their several capacities, to frame this Idol, and set him up in
the place and stead of Christ, so fixing him in the Temple of God, that he
might show himself from thence to be as God.

Neither will this Idol be ever cast out of the Church, until the Generality of
Christians become spiritually sensible of the Authority of Christ, exerting it
self in the Rule of the Church, by his Spirit and his Word, unto all the Ends
of Unity, Order, Peace, and Edification; until that be done, a Pope or something
like him, will be thought necessary unto these Ends.

But never was there a more horrid deformed Image made of so beautiful and
glorious an Head: All the Craft of Satan, all the Wits of men cannot invent any
thing more unlike Christ, as the Head of the Church, than this Pope is. A worse
Figure and Representation of him cannot possibly be made.

This is he, of whom, nothing not great, nothing common, nothing not exceeding
the ordinary state of Mankind, on the one hand or the other, is thought or
spoken. Some say, he is the Head and Husband of the Church, the Vicar of
Christ, over the whole World, God's Vicegerent a Vice-God, Peter's Successor,
the Head and Center of Unity, unto the whole Catholic Church, endued with a
plenitude of Power, with other Ascriptions of the same nature innumerable;
whereon it is necessary unto every Soul under pain of Damnation, to be subject
unto him.

Others aver that he is Antichrist, the Man of Sin, the Son of Perdition, the
Beast that came out of the Earth with two Horns like a Lamb, and a Voice like
the Dragon, the false Prophet, the Idol Shepherd; the evil Servant that beats
his Fellow Servants, the Adulterer of a Meretricious and false Church; and
there is no Mean betwixt these; He is undoubtedly the One or the Other. The
Lord Jesus Christ, who has determined this Controversy already in his Word,
will ere long give it its ultimate Issue in his own glorious Person, and by the
brightness of his coming. And this is an eminent Idol in the Chamber of Imagery
in the Roman Church. But at present it is evident wherein lies the preservation
of Believers from being inveagled to bow down to this Image, and to worship it.
A due sense of the sole Authority of Christ in and over his Church, with an
experience of the power of his Word and Spirit unto all the Ends of its Rule
and Order, will keep them unto the Truth herein, and nothing else will so do.
And if once they decline from this in any Instances, seem they never so small,
so as to admit of any thing in the Church or its Worship which does not derive
immediately from his Authority, they will be disposed to admit of another Guide
and Head in all other things also.

SECT. V.
Again, it is a Notion of Truth, That the Church of Christ is beautiful and
glorious. There are many Prophesies and Predictions concerning it, that so it
should be; and there are sundry descriptions given of it as such. Its Relation
unto Christ, with his Love unto it, and valuation of it, do require that it
should be so glorious; yea his great Design toward it, was to make it so to
be, Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. This therefore all do agree in who profess Christian
Religion; but what that Glory is, and wherein it does consist, whence it is,
and is said to be glorious, is not agreed upon.

The Scripture indeed plainly declares this Glory to be Spiritual and internal,
that it consists in its Union unto Christ, his presence with it, the
communication of his quickening Spirit unto it, the clothing of it with his
Righteousness, in its Sanctification and Purification from the defilement of
Sin, with its fruitfulness in Obedience unto the praise of God. Add hereunto
the Celebration of Divine Worship in it, with its Rule and Order, according to
the C^mmandments of Christ, and we have the Substance of this Glory.

And this Glory Believers do discern, so as to be satisfied with its
Excellency. They know that all the Glories of the World are no way to be
compared to it; for it consists in and arises from such things as they do value
and prefer infinitely above all that this world can afford. They are a
reflection of the Glory of God, or of Christ himself upon the Church, yea a
Communication of it thereunto. This they value in the whole, and in every
Member of it; neither the Nature, Use, nor End of the Church will admit that
its Glory should consist in things of any other Nature.

But the Generality of mankind had lost that Spiritual Light, wherein alone
this Glory might be discerned. They could see no Form or Beauty in the Spouse
of Christ, as only adorned with his Graces. To talk of a glorious State of men,
whilst they are poor and destitute, it may be clothed with rags, and haled
unto Prisons or Stakes, as has been the Lot of the Church in most Ages, was in
their Judgment a thing absurd and foolish. Wherefore seeing it is certain, that
the Church of Christ, is very Glorious and illustrious, in the sight of God,
holy Angels, and Good men, a way must be found out to make it so, and so to
appear in the World. Wherefore they agreed on a lying Image of this Glory,
namely, the Dignity, Promotion, Wealth, Dominion, Power and Splendour of them
that had got the Rule of the Church. And although it be evident unto all, that
these things belong unto the Glories of this World, which the Glory of the
Church is not only distinguished from, but opposed unto, yet it must be looked
on as that wherein it is glorious; and it is so, though it have not one saving
Grace in it, as they expressly affirm. When these things are attained, then are
all the Predictions of its Glory accomplished, and the Description of it
answered.

This corrupt Image of the true Spiritual Glory of the Church, arising from an
Ignorance of it, and want of a real experience of the worth, and excellency of
things internal, Spiritual and Heavenly, has been attended with pernicious
consequents in the World. Many have been infatuated by it, and inamoured of it,
unto their own perdition. For as a Teacher of Lies; it is suited only to divert
the minds of men from a comprehension and valuation of that real Glory, wherein
if they have not an Interest they must perish for ever.

Look into Foreign parts, as Italy and France, where these men pretend their
Church is in its greatest Glory, what is it, but the wealth and pomp and power
of men, for the most part openly ambitious, sensual and worldly? Is this the
Glory of the Church of Christ? do these things belong unto his Kingdom. But by
the setting up of this Image, by the Advancement of this notion, all the true
Glory of the Church has been lost and despised. Yet these things being suited
unto the Designs of the carnal minds of men, and satisfactory unto all their
lusts; having got this paint and gilding on them, that they render the Church
of Christ Glorious, have been the means of filling this World with Darkness,
Blood and Confusion. For this is that Glory of the Church, which is contended
for with Rage and Violence. And not a few, do yet dote on these Images, who are
not sharers in the advantage it brings unto its principal worshippers; whose
infatuation is to be bewailed.

The means of our preservation from the Adoration of these Images also is
obvious, from the principles we proceed upon. It will not be done; without
Light to discern the Glory of things Spiritual and invisible; wherein alone the
Church is glorious. And in the Light of Faith they appear to be what indeed
they are in themselves, of the same nature with the Glory that is above. The
present Glory of the Church, I say, is its imitation unto the Glory of heaven,
and in general of the same nature with it. Here it is in its dawnings and
entrances, there is its fullness and perfection. To look for any thing that
should be cognate, or of near Alliance unto the Glory of Heaven, or any near
resemblance of it, in the outward Glories of this World, is a fond Imagination.
And when the mind is enabled to discern the true beauty and glory of spiritual
things, with their Alliance unto that which is above, it will be secured from
seeking after the Glory of the Church in things of this World, or putting any
value on them unto that end.

That Self-denial also which is indispensably prescribed in the Gospel unto all
the Disciples of Christ, is requisite hereunto; For the power and practice of
it, is utterly inconsistent with an Apprehension, that secular Power, Riches
and Domination, do contribute any thing unto the Churches Glory. The mind being
hereby crucified unto a value and estimation of these things, it can never
apprehend them as any part of that Raiment of the Church wherein it is
glorious. But where the minds of men through their native Darkness, are
disenabled to discern the glory of Spiritual things, and through their carnal,
unmortified affection, do cleave unto and have the highest esteem of worldly
Grandeur, it is no wonder, if they suppose the beauty and glory of the Church,
to consist in them.

SECT. VI.
I shall add one Instance more with reference unto the State of the Church and
that is in its Rule and Discipline. Here also has been as fatal a miscarriage
as ever fell out in Christian Religion. For the Truth herein being lost, as
unto any sense and experience of its Efficacy or Power, a bloody Image
destructive to the Lives and Souls of men was set up in the stead thereof. And
this also shall be briefly declared: There are certain principles of Truth,
with respect hereunto, that are acknowledged by all; as

1. That the Lord Christ has appointed a Rule and Discipline in his Church,
for its good and preservation; no Society can subsist without the power and
exercise of some Rule in it self. For Rule is nothing but the preservation of
Order, without which there is nothing but confusion. The Church is the most
perfect Society in the Earth as being united and compacted by the best and
highest bonds, which our nature is capable of, Ephesians. 4.16. Col. 2.19. It must
therefore have a Rule and Discipline in it self, which from the wisdom and
authority of him, by whom it was instituted must be supposed to be the most
perfect.

2. That this Discipline is powerful and effectual unto all its proper ends. It
must be so esteemed from the wisdom of him by whom it is appointed, and it is
so accordingly. To suppose that the Lord Christ should ordain a Rule and
Discipline in his Church, that in it self and by its just administration,
should not attain its ends, is to reflect the greatest dishonor upon him. Yea,
if any Church or Society of professed Christians, be fallen into that State and
condition, wherein the Discipline appointed by Christ cannot be effectual unto
its proper ends, Christ has forsaken that Church or Society. Besides the Holy
Ghost affirms, that the Ministry of the Church in the Administration of it, is
mighty through God, unto all its ends, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5.

3. The ends of this Discipline, are the order, peace, purity, and Holiness of
the Church, with a Representation of the Love, Care and Watchfulness of Christ
over it, and a Testimony unto his future Judgment. An Imagination of any other
ends of it, has been its ruin.

And thus far all who profess themselves Christians are agreed, at least in
words. None dare deny any of these principles, no not to secure their abuse of
them, which is the Interest of many.

4. But unto them all we must also add, and that with the same uncontrollable
Evidence of Truth, that the Power and Efficacy of this Discipline which it has
from the Institution of Christ, is Spiritual only, and has all its effects on
the Souls and Consciences of those who profess subjection unto him, with
respect unto the Ends before mentioned. So the Apostle expressly describes it, 2
Cor. 10.4, 5. For the Weapons of our Warfare are not carnal, but mighty through
God to the pulling down of strong holds, casting down imaginations and every
high thing, that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, bringing into
captivity every thought unto the Obedience of Christ. These are the Ends, as of
preaching of the Gospel, so of the Discipline of the Church; and these are the
ways and means of its efficacy: it is spiritually mighty to God, unto all
these Ends, and others it has none. But we shall immediately see the total
Reverse of this Order, in an Image substituted in the room of it.

5. Of the Power and Efficacy of this Spiritual Discipline unto its proper end,
the primitive Christians, at least, had experience. For 300 years, the Church
had no other way or means for the preservation of its Order, Peace, Purity and
Holiness, but the spiritual efficacy of this Discipline, on the Souls and
Consciences of professed Christians. Neither did it fail therein, nor were the
Churches any longer preserved in peace and purity, than whilst they had this
Discipline alone for their preservation, without the least contribution of
assistance from secular power, or any thing that should operate on the outward
concerns of mankind. And there can be no other reason given, why it should not
be of the same use and efficacy still unto all Churches, but only the loss of
all those internal Graces, which are necessary to make any Gospel Institution
effectual; wherefore,

All Sense and Experience hereof, of the Spiritual Power and efficacy of this
Discipline was utterly lost, amongst the most of them that are called
Christians. Neither those who had assumed a pretense of the administration of
it, nor those toward whom it was administered, could find any thing in it, that
did affect the Consciences of men, with respect unto its proper ends. They
found it a thing altogether useless in the Church, wherein none of any sort
would be concerned.

What shall they now do? what course shall they take? Shall they renounce all
those Principles of Truth concerning it, which we have laid down, and exclude
it both name and thing out of the Church? This probably would have been the end
of it, had they not found out a way to wrest the pretense of it unto their
unspeakable advantage; wherefore they contrived and made an horrid Image of the
holy, spiritual Rule and Discipline of the Gospel: An Image it was, consisting
in outward Force and Tyranny over the persons, liberties and lives of men;
exercised with weapons, mighty through the Devil to cast men into prison, and
to destroy them. Hereby that which was appointed for the Peace and Edification
of the Church, being lost, an Engine was framed under its name and pretense
unto its ruin and destruction; and so it continues unto this day.

It had never entered into the hearts of men, to set up a Discipline in the
Church of Christ, by Law, Courts, Fines, Mulcts, Imprisonments and Burnings,
but that they had utterly lost in themselves, and suffered to be lost in others
concerned, all experience of the Power and Efficacy of the Discipline of
Christ, toward the Souls and Consciences of men.

But herein they laid it aside, as an useless tool, that might do some Service
in the hands of the Apostles and the primitive Churches, whilst there was
Spiritual Life and Sense left amongst Christians; but as unto them and what
they aimed at, it was of no use at all.

The Deformity of this Image in the several parts of it, its universal
dissimilitude unto that whose name it bears, and which it pretends to be, the
several degrees whereby it was forged, framed and erected, with the occasions
and advantages taken, for its exaltation, would take up much time to declare:
For it was subtly interwoven with other abominations, in the whole mystery of
Iniquity, until it became the very Life or animating Principle of
Antichristianism.

For however men may set light by the Rule and Discipline of Christ in his
Church, and its Spiritual Power or Efficacy toward the Souls and Consciences
of men, the Rejection of it, and the setting up of an horrid Image of worldly
power, domination and force, in the room of it, and under its name, is that
which began, carried on, and yet maintains the fatal Apostasy in the Church of
Rome.

I shall instance only in one particular; on the change of this Rule of Christ,
and together with it, the setting up of Mauzzins, or an Image, or God of Forces
in the stead of it; they were compelled to change all the ends of that
Discipline, and to make an Image of them also. For this new Instrument of
outward Force, was of no use with respect unto them: For they are as was
declared, the Spiritual Peace, Purity, Love and Edification of the Church.
Outward Force is no way meet to attain any of these ends. Wherefore they must
make an Image of these also, or substitute some dead Form in their room; and
this was an universal subjection unto the Pope, according unto all the Rules,
Orders and Canons which they should invent. Uniformity herein and Canonical
Obedience, is all the end which they will allow unto their Church Discipline;
And th^se things hang well together, for nothing but outward force by Law and
Penalties, is fit to attain this end. So was there an Image composed and
erected of the Holy Discipline of Christ, and its blessed Ends, consisting of
these two parts, outward Force and fained Subjection. For hardly can an
Instance be given in the World, of any man who ever bowed down to this Image,
or submitted unto any Ecclesiastical Censure, out of a conscientious respect
unto it. Force and Fear rule all.

This is that Discipline, in whose execution, the blood of an innumerable
company of Holy Martyrs has been shed; that wherein all the vital Spirits of
the Papacy do act themselves, and whereby it does subsist; and although it be
the Image of Jealousy or the Image of the first Beast, set up by the Dragon,
yet it cannot be denied, but that it is very wisely accommodated, unto the
present State of the Generality of them, that are called Christians amongst
them. For being both blind and carnal, and having thereby lost all Sense and
Experience of the Spiritual Power of the Rule of Christ, in their Consciences,
they are become an Herd not fit to be governed or ruled any other way. Under
the Bondage of it therefore they must abide, till the vail of Blindness be
taken away, and they are turned unto God by his Word and Spirit, for where the
Spirit of the Lord is, there and there alone, is Liberty.

SECT. VII.
Unto the foregoing particular Instances, with respect unto the Church, I shall
yet add one more general, which is indeed comprehensive of them all: or the
root from whence they spring; a root-bearing Gall and Wormwood. And this is
concerning the Catholic Church.

What belongs unto this Catholic Church, what is comprised in its Communion?
The Apostle declares, Heb. 12.22, 23, 24. It is the Recapitulation of all
things in Heaven and Earth in Christ Jesus. Ephesians. 1.10. His Body, his Spouse, or
Bride, the Lambs Wife, the glorious Temple, wherein God does dwell by his
Spirit. An holy mystical Society, purchased and purified by the blood of
Christ, and united unto him, by his spirit, or the Inhabitation of the same
spirit in him, and those whereof it does consist. Hence they with him, as the
body with its head, are mystically called Christ, 1 Cor, 12.12. And there are
two parts of it, the one whereof is already perfected in Heaven, as unto their
spirits, and the other yet continued in the way of faith and obedience in this
world. Both these constitute one family in Heaven and Earth. Ephesians. 3.15. In
Conjunction with the holy Angels, one Mystical-Body, one Catholic Church. And
although there is a great difference in their present state and condition,
between these two branches of the same Family, yet are they both equally
purchased by Christ, and united unto him as their Head, having both of them
effectually, the same principle of the life of God in them. Of a third part of
this Church, neither in Heaven nor in Earth, in a temporary State participant,
somewhat of Heaven, and somewhat of Hell, called Purgatory, the Scripture
knows nothing at all, neither is it consistent with the Analogy of Faith, or
the promises of God unto them that do believe, as we shall see immediately.

This Church even as unto that part of it which is in this world, as it is
adorned with all the graces of the Holy Spirit, is the most beautiful and
glorious effect, next unto the forming and production of its Head in the
Incarnation of the Son of God, which Divine Wisdom, Power and Grace will extend
themselves unto, here below: But these things, the glory of this State is
visible only unto the eye of Faith; yea it is perfectly seen and known only to
Christ himself. We see it obscurely in the light of Faith and Revelation, and
are sensible of it, according unto our participating of the graces and
privileges wherein it does consist.

But that spiritual light which is necessary to the discerning of this Glory,
was lost among those of whom we treat. They could see no reality nor beauty in
these things, nor any thing that should be of advantage unto them. For upon
their principle, of the utter uncertainty of men's spiritual estate and
condition in this world, it is evident that they could have no satisfactory
persuasion of any concernment in it.

But they had possessed themselves of the notion of a Catholic Church, which
with mysterious Artifices they have turned unto their own incredible secular
Advantage. This is that whereof they boast, appropriating it unto themselves,
and making it a pretense of destroying others, what lies in them both
temporally and eternally. Unto this end they have formed the most deformed and
detestable Image of it, that ever the world beheld. For the Catholic Church
which they own, and which they boast that they are instead of that of Christ,
is a company or society of men, unto whom in order unto the constitution of
that whole society, there is no one real Christian grace required, nor
spiritual Union unto Christ the Head, but only an outside profession of these
things, as they expressly contend. A Society united unto the Pope of Rome, as
its head by a subjection unto him, and his rule according to the Laws and
Canons whereby he will grant them. This is the formal reason and cause
constituting that Catholic Church which they are, which is compacted in it
self by horrid Bonds and Ligaments, for the ends of Ambition, worldly
Domination and Avarice. A Catholic Church openly wicked in the generality of
its rulers, and them that are ruled; and in its State cruel oppressive, and
died with the blood of Saints, and Martyrs innumerable.

This I say is that Image of the Holy Catholic Church, the spouse of Christ
which they have set up. And it has been as the Image of Moloch, that has
devoured and consumed the Children of the Church, whose cries, when their cruel
stepmother pitied them not, and when their pretended Ghostly Fathers cast
them into the flames, came up unto the ears of the Lord of Hosts; and their
blood still cries for vengeance on this idolatrous generation.

Yet is this pretense of the Catholic Church, pressed in the minds of many,
with so many Sophistical Artifices, through the slight of men and cunning
craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive; proposed with the allurements
of so many secular advantages, and imposed oftimes on Christians with so much
force and cruelty, that nothing can secure us from the Admission of it, unto
the utter overthrow of Religion, but the means before insisted on. A spiritual
light is necessary hereunto, to discern the internal spiritual beauty and glory
of the true Catholic Church of Christ: Where this is in its power, all the
paintings and dresses of their deformed Image will fall off from it, and its
abominable filth will be made to appear. And this will be accompanied with an
effectual experience of the glory and excellency of that grace in the souls of
those that believe, derived from Christ the sole head of this Church, whereby
they are changed from Glory to Glory, as by the spirit of the Lord. The Power,
Life, and sweetness hereof, will give satisfaction unto their souls, to the
contempt of the pretended order, of dependence on the Pope as an head. By these
means the true Catholic Church, which is the body of Christ, the fullness of
him that fills all in all, growing up unto him in all things who is the head,
despises this Image, and Dagon will fall to the ground when this ark is
brought in, yea though it be in his own Temple.

SECT VIII.
In the farther opening of this Chamber of Imagery, we shall yet if it be
possible, see greater Abominations. At least that which does next ensue, is
scarce inferior unto any of them that went before.

It is a principle in Christian Religion, an acknowledged verity that it is the
duty of the Disciples of Christ, especially as united in Churches, to propagate
the faith of the Gospel, and to make the doctrine of it known unto all, as they
have opportunity: yea, this is one principal end of the constitution of
Churches and officers in them, Mat. 5.13, 14, 15, 16. 1 Timothy 3.15.

This our Lord Jesus Christ gave in special charge unto his Apostles at the
beginning, Mat. 28.19, 20. Mark 16.15, 16. Hereby they were obliged unto the
work of propagating the faith of the Gospel, and the knowledge of him therein
in all places, and were justified in their so doing. And this they did with
that efficacy and success, that in a short time like the light of the Sun,
their sound went into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the
world, Romans 10.18. And the Gospel was said to be preached unto every Creature
which is under Heaven, Col. 1.23.

The way therefore, whereby they propagated the faith, was by diligent
laborious preaching of the Doctrine of the Gospel unto all persons in all
places, with patience and magnanimity in undergoing all sorts of sufferings on
the account of it, and a declaration of its power in all those virtues and
graces, which are useful and exemplary unto mankind.

It is true, their Office, and the discharge of it, is long since Leased;
Howbeit it cannot be denied but that the Work it self is incumbent in a way of
duty on all Churches, yea on all Believers, as they have providential Calls
unto it, and Opportunities for it. For it is the principal way whereby they may
glorify God, and benefit men in their chiefest Good, which without doubt they
are obliged unto. This notion of Truth is retained in the Church of Rome; and
the work it self is appropriated by them, unto themselves alone, unto them, and
them only, as they suppose, it belongs to take care of the propagation of the
faith of the Gospel, with the conversion of Infidels and Heretics. Whatever is
done unto this purpose by others, they condemn and abhor.

What do they think of the primitive way of doing it, by personal Preaching,
Sufferings and Holiness? Will the Pope, his Cardinals, and Bishops, undertake
this work or way of the discharge of it? Christ has appointed no other, the
Apostles and their Successors, knew no other; no other becomes the Gospel; nor
ever had Success. No they abhor and detest this way of it.

What then is to be done? Shall the Truth be denied? Shall the work be wholely
and avowedly laid aside? neither will this please them, because it is not
suited unto their honor; wherefore they have erected a dismal Image of it unto
the horrible reproach of Christian Religion.

They have indeed provided a double painting for the Image which they have set
up. The first is the constant consult of some persons at Rome, which they call
congregatio de propaganda fide, a Counsel for the Propagation of the Faith,
under the effect of whose consultations Christendom has long grieved. And the
other is, the Sending of Missionaries as they call them, or a Surcharge of
Friars from their over numerous Fraternities upon their errands into remote
Nations. But the Real Image it self, consists of these three parts.

1. The Sword. 2. The Inquisition. 3. Plots and Conspiracies.
By these, it is that they design to propagate the Faith and promote Christian
Religion. And if Hell it self can invent a more deformed Image, and
Representation of the sacred Truth and Work, which it is a counterfeit of, I am
much mistaken.

Thus have they in the first way, carried Christian Religion into the Indies,
especially the Western Parts of the World, so called. First the Pope out of the
plenitude of his power, gives unto the Spaniard all those Countries, and the
Inhabitants of them, that they may be made Christians. But Christ dealt not so
with his Apostles, though he were Lord of all, when he sent them to teach and
baptize all Nations. He dispossessed none of them, of their Temporal Rights or
Enjoyments; nor gave to his Apostles a foot breadth of Inheritance among them.
But upon this Grant, the Spanish Catholics propag^ted the Faith, and brought
in Christian Religion amongst them. And they did it by killing and murdering
many millions of innocent persons, as some of themselves say more than are
alive in Europe in any one Age. And this savage Cruelty has made the name of
Christians detestable amongst all that remained of them, that had any Exercise
of Reason; some few slavish Brutes being brought by force to submit unto this
new kind of Idolatry. And this we must think to be done, in obedience unto that
command of Christ. Go ye into all the World, and preach the Gospel unto every
Creature, he that believes and is baptized shall be saved, and he that
believes not shall be damned. This is the deformed Image, which they have set
up of Obedience unto his holy Commands; whereunto they apply that voice to
Peter with respect unto the eating of all sorts of Creatures, Arise, Peter,
kill and eat. So have they dealt with those poor Nations whom they have
devoured.

But Blood, Murder and unjust War (as all War is for the Propagation of
Religion) with persecution, began in Cain, who derived it from the Devil, that
Murderer from the beginning; for he was of that wicked one, and slew his
Brother. Jesus Christ the Son of God was manifes^ to destroy these works of the
Devil, Heb. 2. And he does it in the world by his Word and Doctrine, judging
and condemning them. And he does it in his Disciples by his Spirit, extirpating
them out of their minds, hearts, and ways; so as that there is not a more
assured Character of a Derivation from the Evil Spirit, than force and blood in
Religion for the propagating of it.

The next part of this Image, the next way used by them for the propagating of
the Faith, and the conversion of them they call Heretics is the Inquisition.
So much has been declared, and is known thereof, that it is needless here to
give a Portraicture of it. It may suffice, that it has been long since opened
like Cacus's Den, and discovered to be the greatest Arsenal of Cruelty, the
most dreadful Shambles of blood and slaughter, that ever was in the World.

This is that Engine, which has supplied the Scarlet Whore with the blood of
Saints, and the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, until she was drunk with it. And
this is the Second way, or means whereby they propagate the Faith of the
Gospel, and endeavor, as they say, the conversion of the Souls of men. This is
the second Part of that Image which they have set up instead of the Holy
Appointment of Jesus Christ.

The Third Way they insist on unto this purpose, the third part of this Image
consists in Plots and Contrivances to murder Princes, to embroil Nations in
Blood, to stir up Sedition unto their Ruin, inveagling and alluring all sorts
of Vicious, Indigent, Ambitious Persons, into an Association with them, so to
introduce the Catholic Religion in the places which they design to subvert.
This Engine for the Propagation of the Faith, has been plied with various
Successes in many Nations of Europe, and is still at work unto the same
purpose. And hereunto belong all the Arts which they use for the infatuation of
the Minds of Princes and Great men, all the Baits they lay for others of all
sorts to work them over unto a compliance with their Designs.

Of these Parts, I say, is that dreadful Image made up and composed, which they
set up, embrace and adore, in the room of the Holy way for the propagation of
the Gospel appointed by Jesus Christ. In his way they can see no Beauty, they
can expect no success; they cannot believe that ever the world will be
converted by it, or be brought in subjection unto the Pope, and therefore
betake themselves unto their own. Faith, Prayer, Holiness, Preaching,
Suffering, all in expectation of the promised Presence and Assistance of
Christ, are no ways for efficacy, success, and advantage, to be compared unto
the Sword, Inquisition, and underhand Designings.

And this also is that which they call Zeal for the Glory of God, and the
Honor of Christ; another deformed Image which they have brought into Religion.
For whereas that Grace consists principally in postponing Self, and all
Self-concerns, with an undervaluation of them, unto the Glory of God, and the
special Duties whereby it may be promoted, this Impious Design to destroy
Mankind by all ways of Subtilty, and Cruelty, unto their own advantage, is set
up in the room of it.

But the consideration of the Nature and Spirit, of the Use and End of the
Gospel, of the Design of Christ in it, and by it, is sufficient to preserve the
Souls of men not utterly infatuated, in an abhorrency of this Image of its
Propagation. It is that wherein the God of this World, by the help of their
Blindness and Lusts, has put a cheat on mankind, and prevailed with them,
under a pretense of doing Christ Honor, to make the vilest Representation of
him to the World, that can be conceived. If he has appointed this way for the
propagating of the Gospel, he cannot well be distinguished from Mahomet: But
there is nothing more contrary unto him, nothing that his holy Soul does more
abhor. And had not men lost all spiritual Sense of the Nature and Ends of the
Gospel, they could never have given up themselves unto these Abominations. For
any to suppose that the Faith of the Gospel is to be propagated by such Cruelty
and Blood, by Art and Subtilty, by Plots, Conspiracies, and Contrivances, any
way but by the foolishness of Preaching, which, unto that end, is the Power and
Wisdom of God, is to declare his own Ignorance of it, and inconcernment in it.
And had not men conceived and embraced another Religion, than what is taught
therein, or abused a pretense thereof unto Ends and Advantages of their own,
this Imagination of the propagation of it, had never taken place in their
Minds, it is so diametrically opposite unto the whole Nature, and all the Ends
of it.

SECT. IX.
There is yet amongst them another Image of a General Principle, no less horrid
than that before mentioned, and that with respect unto Religious Obedience. It
is the great foundation of all Religion, and in especial of Christian Religion,
That God in all things is to be obeyed absolutely and universally. Of all our
Obedience; there is no other Reason, but that it is his Will, and is known unto
us so to be. This follows necessarily from the infinite Perfections of the
Divine Nature. As the first Essential Verity he is to be believed in what he
reveals above, and against all contradiction from pretended Reasons, or any
Imaginations whatever; and as he is the only absolute Independent Being,
Essential Goodness, and the Sovereign Lord of all things, he is without further
Reason, Motive, or Inducement, to be absolutely obeyed in all his Commands. An
Instance whereof we have in Abraham offering his only Son without dispute or
hesitation, in compliance with a Divine Revelation and Command.

It will seem very difficult to frame an Image hereof amongst men, with whom
there is not the least shadow of these Divine Perfections, namely, Essential
Verity, and absolute Sovereignty, in conjunction with infinite Wisdom and
Goodness, which alone renders such an Obedience lawful, useful, or suitable
unto the Principles of our rational Natures: But these of whom we speak, have
not been wanting unto themselves herein, especially the principal Craftmen of
this Image-Trade. The Order of the Jesuits have made a bold Attempt for the
framing of it. Their Vow of blind Obedience (as they call it) unto their
Superiors, whereto they resign the whole conduct of their Souls, in all the
concernments of Religion, in all Duties toward God and man, unto their Guidance
and Disposal, is a cursed Image of this absolute Obedience unto the Commands of
God, which he requires of us. Hence the Founder of their Order, was not
ashamed in his Epistle ad Fratres Lusitanos, to urge and press this blind
Obedience from the Example of Abraham yielding Obedience unto God, without
debate or consideration; as if the Superiors of the Order were Good and not
Evil and Sinful men.

Whilst this Honor was reserved unto God, whilst this was judged to be his
Prerogative alone, namely, that his Commands are to be obeyed in all things,
without Reasonings and Examinations as unto the Matter, Justice and Equity of
them, merely because they are his, which absolutely and infallibly conclude
them good, holy and just, the righteous Government of the world, and the
Security of men in all their Rights, was safely provided for; for he neither
will nor can command any thing but what is holy, just and good. But since the
Ascription of such a Godlike Authority unto man, as to secure blind Obedience
unto all their Commands, innumerable Evils, in Murders, Seditions and
Perjuries, have openly ensued thereon.

But besides those particular Evils in matter of Fact, which have proceeded
from this corrupt Fountain, this persuasion at once takes away all grounds of
Peace and Security from Mankind; for who knows what a Crew or Sort of men,
called the Jesuits Superiors, known only by their restless Ambition, and evil
Practices in the world, may command their Vassals, who are sworn to execute
whatever they command, without any consideration whether it be right or wrong,
good or evil?

Let Princes and other great men flatter themselves whilst they please, that on
one consideration or other, they shall be the Objects only of their kindness,
if these men, according to their Profession, be obliged in conscience to
execute whatever their Superiors shall command them, no less than Abraham was
to sacrifice his Son on the Command of God; they hold their Lives at the Mercy,
and on the good Nature of these Superiors, who are always safe out of the reach
of Revenge.

It is mavelous that Mankind does not agree to demolish this cursed Image, or
the Ascription of a Godlike Power unto men, to require blind Obedience unto
their Commands, especially considering what effects it has produced in the
world. All men know by whose Device it was first set up and erected; by whom,
what means, and unto what end it was confirmed and consecrated; and at this day
it is maintained by a Society of men, of an uncertain Extract and Original,
like that of the Janissaries in the Turkish Empire, their Rise being generally
out of obscurity, among the meanest and lowest of the People. Such they are who
by the Rules of their Education, are taught to renounce all respect unto their
Native Countries, and Alliances therein, but so as to make them only the way
and matter for the advancement of the interest of this new Society. And this
sort of men being nourished from their very first entrances into the conduct of
the Society, unto hopes and expectations of Wealth, Honor, Power, Interest in
the disposal of all public Affairs of Mankind, and the Regulation of the
Consciences of men, it is no wonder if with the utmost of their Arts and
Industry, they endeavor to set up and preserve this Image which they have
erected, from whence they expect all the advantage which they do design. But
hereof I may treat more fully, when I come to speak of the Image of Jealousy
it self.

SECT. X.
From these Generals, I shall proceed unto more particular Instances; and those
for the most part in important Principles of Religion, wherein Christian Faith
and Practice are most concerned. And I shall begin with that which is of signal
Advantage unto the Framers of these Images, as the other also are in their
degree; for by this craft they have their Livelihood and Wealth, and most
pernicious to the Souls of other men.

It is a Principle of Truth, that such as wherein the whole course of Christian
Obedience is concerned, that there is a Spiritual defilement in Sin: This the
Scripture every where declares, representing the very Nature of it by spiritual
Uncleanness. And this Uncleanness is its contrariety unto the Holiness of the
Divine Nature, as represented unto us in the Law. This Defilement is in all men
equally by Nature; all are alike born in Sin, and the pollution of it; Who can
bring a clean thing out of an unclean? And it is in all personally, in various
degrees; some are more polluted with actual Sins than others, but all are so in
their degree and measure.

This pollution of Sin must be purged and taken away before our entrance into
Heaven; for no unclean thing shall enter into the Kingdom of God. Sin must be
destroyed in its Nature, Practice, Power and Effects, or we are not saved from
it.

This Purification of Sin is wrought in us initially and gradually in this
Life, and accomplished in Death, when the Spirits of just men are made perfect.

In a compliance with this work of Gods Grace toward them, whereby they
purify themselves, consists one principal part of the Obedience of Believers
in this world, and of the exercise of their Faith.

The principal, internal, immediate efficient cause of this purification of
Sins, is the Blood of Christ; the Blood of Jesus Christ the Son of God,
cleanses us from all our Sins, 1 John 1.7. The Blood of Jesus purges our
Consciences from dead works, Heb. 9.14. He washes us in his own Blood, Rev.
1.5. And there is an external helping Cause thereof, which is Trials and
Afflictions, made effectual by the Word, and accomplished in Death.

But this way of purging Sins by the Blood of Christ, is mysterious. There is
no discerning of its Glory but by spiritual Light, no experience of its Power,
but by Faith. Hence it is despised and neglected by the most that yet outwardly
profess the Doctrine of the Gospel. Men generally think there are a thousand
better ways for the purging of Sin, than this by the Blood of Christ, which
they cannot understand. See Micah 6.6, 7. It is Mysterious in the Application
of it unto the Souls and Consciences of Believers by the Holy Ghost; it is so
in the Spring of its efficacy, which is the Oblation of it, for a Propitiation,
and in its relation unto the new Covenant, which first it establishes, and
then makes effectual unto this end. The Work of it is gradual and unperceptible
unto any thing but the eyes of Faith, and diligent spiritual Experience.

Again, It is so ordered by Divine Wisdom, as strictly to require, to begin,
excite, and encourage the utmost diligence of Believers in a compliance with
its efficacy unto the same End. What Christ did for us, he did without us,
without our aid or concurrence. As God made us without our selves, so Christ
redeemed us; but what he does in us, he does also by us; what he works in a way
of Grace, we work in a way of Duty. And our Duty herein, consists as in the
continual exercise of all gracious Habits, renewing, changing, and transforming
the Soul into the Likeness of Christ (for he which hopes to see him, purifieth
himself as he is pure) so also in universal, permanent, uninterrupted
Mortification unto the end, whereof we shall speak afterward. This also
renders the Work more Mysterious and difficult. The improvement of Afflictions
unto the same end, is a principal part of the Wisdom of Faith; without which
they can be of no spiritual Use unto the Souls of men.

This Notion of the Defilement of Sin, and that of the Necessity of its
purification, were retained in the Church of Rome; for they could not be lost,
without not only a rejection of the Scripture, but the stiffling of natural
conceptions about them, which are indelibly fixed in the Consciences of men.
But Spiritual Light into the Glory of the thing it self, or the mystical
Purification of Sin, with an experience of the power and efficacy of the Blood
of Christ, as applied unto the Consciences of Believers unto that end, by the
holy Ghost, were lost amongst them. In vain shall we seek for any thing of this
Nature, either in their Doctrine, or their Practice.

Wherefore having lost the Substance of this Truth, and all experience of its
Power, to retain the Use of its Name, they have made sundry little Images of
it, creeping things, whereunto they ascribe the power of purging Sin; such as
Holy Water, Pilgrimages, Disciplines, Masses, and various commutations. But
they quickly found by experience, that these things would neither purify the
Heart, nor pacify the Consciences of sinners, any more than the Blood of Bulls
and Goats could do it under the Law; yea, any more than the Lustrations and
Expiations of Sin amongst the Heathen could effect it. Wherefore they have at
length formed a more stated and specious Image of it, to serve all the turns of
convinced Sinners; and this is a Purgatory after this Life; that is, a
subterraneous place, and various means where, and whereby, the Souls of men are
purged from all their Sins, and made meet for Heaven, when the Lord Christ
thinks meet to send for them, or the Pope judges it fit to send them to him.
Hereunto, let them pretend what they please, the People under their conduct, do
trust a thousand times more for the purging of their Sins, than unto the Blood
of Christ: But it is only a cursed Image of the virtue of it, set up to draw
off the minds of poor sinners, from seeking an interest in a participation of
the efficacy of that blood for that end, which is to be obtained by faith
alone. Romans 3.25.

Only they have placed this Image behind the curtain of mortality, that the
cheat of it might not be discovered; none who find themselves deceived by it,
can come back to complain or warn others to take care of themselves; and it was
in an especial manner suited unto their delusion, who lived in pleasures, or in
the pursuit of unjust gain, without exercise of afflictions in this world. From
these two sorts of persons, by this Engine they raised a revenue unto
themselves, beyond that of Kings or Princes; for all the endowments of their
Religious houses and Societies, were but commutations for the abatement of the
fire of this Purgatory.

But whereas in its self, it was a rotten Post, that could not stand or
subsist, they were forced to prop it, with many other imaginations; for unto
this end to secure work for this Purgatory, they joined the distinction of Sin
into mortal and venial; not as unto their end, with respect unto Faith and
Repentance, not as unto the Degrees of sin with respect unto the aggravations,
but as unto the nature of them; some of them being such, namely those that are
Venial, as were capable of a purging expiation after this life, though men die
without any repentance of them. And when this was done, they have cast almost
all the sins that can be named under this order; And hereon this Image is
become an Engine to disappoint the whole Doctrine of the Gospel, and to
precipitate secure sinners into eternal Ruin, And to strengthen this deceiving
security, they have added another invention of a certain storehouse of
Ecclesiastical merits, the keys whereof are committed to the Pope, to make
application of them as he sees good unto the ease and relief of them that are
in this Purgatory. For whereas many of their Church and Communion have as they
say, done more good works then were needful for their salvation (which they
have received upon a due balance of Commutative Justice) the Surplusage is
committed to the Pope, to commute with it, for the punishment of their sins,
who are sent into purgatory to suffer for them, then which they could have
found out no engine more powerful, to evacuate the efficacy of the blood of
Christ, both as offered and as sprinkled, and therewith the Doctrine of the
Gospel concerning faith and repentance.

Moreover, to give it farther countenance (as one-lie must be thatched with
another, or it will quickly rain through) they have fancied a separation to be
made between guilt and punishment, so as that when the guilt is fully remitted
and pardoned, yet there may punishment remain on the account of sin. For this
is the case of them in Purgatory, their sins are pardoned, so as that the Guilt
of them shall not bind them over to eternal damnation, though the wages of sin
is death, yet they must be variously punished for the sins that are forgiven.
But as this is contradictory in it self, it being utterly impossible, there
should be any punishment properly so called, but where there is guilt as the
cause of it, so it is highly injurious both to the Grace of God and blood of
Christ, in procuring and giving out such a lame pardon of sins, as should leave
room for punishment next to that which is eternal.

These are some of the rotten Props, which they have fixed on the minds of
persons credulous and superstitious, terrified with guilt and darkness to
support this tottering deformed Image, set up in the room of the efficacy of
the blood of Christ, to purge the souls and consciences of Believers from sin,

But that whereby it is principally established and set up, is the darkness,
ignorance, guilt, fear, terror of conscience, accompanied with a love of sin,
that the most among them are subject and obnoxious unto, being disquieted,
perplexed, and tormented with these things, and utterly ignorant of the true
and only way of their removal and deliverance from them, they greedily embrace
this sorry provision for their present ease and relief, being accommodated unto
the utmost that humane or Diabolical craft can extend unto, to abate their
fear, ease their torments, and to give security unto their superstitious minds.
And hereby it is become to be the life and soul of their Religion, diffusing it
self into all the parts and concerns of it, more trusted unto then either God
or Christ, or the Gospel.

Spiritual light and experience, with the consequents of them in peace with
God, will safeguard the minds of Believers from bowing down to this horrid
image, though the acknowledgments of its divinity should be imposed on them
with craft and force, otherwise it will not be done, for without this, there
will a strong inclination and disposition arising from a mixture of
superstitious fear and love of sin, possess the minds of men to close with this
pretended relief and satisfaction. The foundation of our preservation herein
lies in Spiritual light, or an ability of mind, from supernatural illumination,
to discern the Beauty, Glory, and efficacy of the purging of our sins by the
blood of Christ, when the glory of the wisdom and grace of God, of the love and
grace of Christ of the power of the Holy Ghost herein, is made manifest unto
us, we shall despise all the paintings of this invention, Dagon will fall
before the Ark; and all these things do gloriously shine forth and manifest
themselves unto believers in this misterious way of purging all our sins by the
blood of Christ.

Herein will ensue an experience of the efficacy of this heavenly truth, in our
own souls. There is no man whose heart and ways are cleansed by the blood of
Christ, through the effectual application of it by the Holy Spirit, in the
ordinance of the Gospel, but he has or may have a refreshing experience of it
in his own soul, and by the power which is communicated therewith, he is
stirred up unto all that exercise of Faith, and all those duties of obedience,
whereby the work of purifying and cleansing the whole person may be carried on
toward perfection, see 2 Cor. 7.1. 1 These. 5.2^. 1 John 3.3. And he who is
constantly engaged in that work with success, will see the folly and vanity of
any other pretended way for the purging of sins here or hereafter.

The consequent of these things, is peace with God, for they are assured
pledges of our justification and acceptance with him, and being justified by
Faith, we have Peace with God, and where this is attained by the Gospel the
whole Fabric of Purgatory falls to the Ground, for it is built on these
Foundations, that no assurance of the love of God, or of a justified state can
be obtained in this life: For if it may be so, there can be no use of
Purgatory. This then will assuredly keep the souls of believers in a contempt
of that which is nothing but a false relief for sinners, under disquietment of
mind for want of peace with God.

SECT. XI.
Some other instances of the same abomination, I shall yet mention, but with
more brevity and sundry others must at present be passed over without a
discovery.

It is granted among all Christians, that all our helps, our relief, our
deliverance from sin, Satan, and the world, are from Christ alone. This is
included in all his Relations unto the Church, in all his offices and the
discharge of them; and is the express Doctrine of the Gospel. It is no less
generally acknowledged, at least the Scripture is no less clear and positive in
it, that we receive and derive all our supplies of Relief from Christ by Faith,
other ways of the participation of any thing from him, the Scripture knows
not. Wherefore it is our duty on all occasions to apply our selves unto him by
Faith, for all supplies, Reliefs and deliverances: But these men can find no
life nor power herein, at least if they grant that somewhat might be done this
way, yet they know not how to do it, being ignorant of the life of Faith and
the due exercise of it. They must have a way more ready and easy, exposed to
the capacities and abilities of all sorts of Persons good and bad, yea, that
will serve the turn of the worst of men unto this end. An Image therefore must
be set up for common use, instead of this spiritual application unto Christ for
relief, and this is the making of the sign of the Cross. Let a man but make the
sign of the Cross on his forehead, his breast or the like, which he may as
easily do as take up or cast away a straw, and there is no more required to
engage Christ unto his assistance at any time. And the virtues which they
ascribe hereunto are innumerable, but this also is an Idol, a teacher of Lies,
invented and set up for no other end; but to satisfy the carnal minds of men,
with a presumptuous supposition, in the neglect of the spiritually laborious
exercise of Faith, an Experience of the work of Faith in the derivation of all
supplies of spiritual Life, Grace and Strength, with deliverance and supplies
from Jesus Christ, will secure Believers from giving heed unto this triffling
deceit.

SECT. XII.
One thing more amongst many others of the same Sort may be mentioned; it is a
notion of Truth which derives from the Light of Nature, That those who approach
unto God in divine Worship, should be careful that they be pure and clean,
without any Offensive defilements. This the Heathen themselves give Testimony
unto, and God confirmed it in the Institutions of the Law. But what are these
defilements and pollutions which make us unmeet to approach unto the presence
of God, how and by what means we may be purified and cleansed from them, the
Gospel alone declares. And it does, in opposition unto all other ways and means
of it, plainly reveal, that it is by the sprinkling of the blood of Christ upon
our Consciences, so to purge them from dead Works, that we may serve the Living
God, see Heb. 9.14. chap. 10.19, 20, 21. But this is a thing mysterious;
nothing but spiritual Light and saving Faith can direct us herein. Men
destitute of them could never attain an Experience of purification in the way.
Wherefore they retained the notion of Truth it self, but made an Image of it
for their use, with a neglect of the thing it self. And this was the most
ludicrous that could be imagined, namely the sprinkling of themselves and
others with that they call Holy Water, when they go into the places of sacred
Worship; which yet also they borrowed from the Pagans; So stupid and sottish
are the minds of men so dark and ignorant of heavenly things, that they have
suffered their Souls to be deceived and ruined by such vain superstitious
Trifles.

This Discourse has already proceeded unto a greater length than was at first
intended; and would be so much more, should we look into all parts of this
Chamber of Imagery, and expose to view all the abominations in it. I shall
therefore put a close unto it, in one or two instances, wherein the Church of
Rome, does boast it self as retaining the Truth and Power of the Gospel in a
peculiar manner, whereas in very deed, they have destroyed them, and set up
corrupt Images of their own, in their stead.

SECT. XIII.
The first of these is the Doctrine and Grace of Mortification; That this is
not only an important Evangelical Duty, but also of indispensable necessity
unto Salvation, all who have any thing of Christian Religion in themselves,
must acknowledge.

It is also clearly determined in the Scripture, both what is the nature of it,
with its causes, and in what acts and duties it does consist. For it is
frequently declared to be the crucifying of the Body of Sin with all the Lusts
thereof. For Mortification must be the bringing of something to death; and this
is sin, and the dying of sin, consists in the casting out of all vicious habits
and inclinations arising from the Original depravation of nature; it is the
weakening and graduate extirpation, or destruction of them, in their roots,
principles, and operations: Whereby the Soul is set at liberty to act
universally from the contrary principle of Spiritual Life and Grace.

The means on the part of Christ, whereby this is wrought and effected in
believers, is the communication of his Spirit unto them, to make an effectual
application of the virtue of his death, unto the death of sin; for it is by his
Spirit that we mortify the deeds of the flesh, and the flesh it self, and that
as we are implanted by him into the likeness of the death of Christ. By virtue
thereof, we are crucified, and made dead unto sin; in the Declaration of which
things the Scripture does abound.

The means of it on the part of Believers, is the exercise of Faith in Christ,
as crucified; whereby they derive virtue from him, for the crucifying of the
Body of death: And this Exercise of Faith is always accompanied with diligence
and perseverance in all holy Duties of Prayer, with Fasting, Godly Sorrow,
daily renewed Repentance, with a continual watch against all the Advantages of
sin.

Herein consists principally that Spiritual warfare and conflict that believers
are called unto, this is all the killing work which the Gospel requires. That
of Killing other men for Religion, is of a latter date, and another Original.
And there is nothing in the way of their Obedience, wherein they have more
experience of the necessity, power, and efficacy of the Graces of the Gospel.

This Principle of Truth concerning the necessity of Mortification is retained
in the Church of Rome; yea, she pretends highly unto it, above any other
Christian Society. The Mortification of their Devotionists, is one of the
principal Arguments which they plead to draw unwary Souls over unto their
Superstition. Yet in the height of their pretenses unto it, they have lost all
experience of its nature with the power and efficacy of the Grace of Christ's
therein, and have therefore framed an Image of it unto themselves. For,

1. They place the eminency and height of it in a Monastical Life, and
pretended Retirement from the World. But this may be, has been, in all, or the
most, without the least real work of Mortification in their Souls: For there is
nothing required in the strictest Rules of these Monastic Votaries, but may be
complied withal, without the least effectual Operation of the Holy Spirit in
their minds, in the application of the virtue of the death of Christ unto them;
Besides, the whole course of life which they commend under this name, is
neither appointed in, nor approved by, the Gospel. And some of those who have
been most renowned for their severities therein, were men of blood, promoting
the cruel slaughter of multitudes of Christians upon the account of their
profession of the Gospel, in whom there could be no one Evangelical Grace; for
no Murderer has eternal Life abiding in him.

2. The Ways and Means which they prescribe and use for the attaining of it,
are such as are no way directed unto by the Divine Wisdom of Christ in the
Scripture; such as multiplied Confessions to Priests, irregular ridiculous
Fastings, Penances, Self-Macerations of the Body, unlawful Vows, Self-devised
Rules of Discipline, and Habits, with the like Trinkets innumerable. Hence
whatever their Design be, they may say of it in the issue, what Aaron said of
his Idol, I cast the Gold into the Fire, and there came out this Calf; they
have brought forth only an Image of Mortification, diverting the Minds of men
from seeking after that which is really and spiritually so. And under this
Pretense, they have formed a State and Condition of Life, that has filled the
world with all manner of Sins and wickedness; and many of those who have
attained unto some of the highest degrees of this Mortification, on their
Principles, and by the Means designed unto that End, have been made ready
thereby for all sorts of Wickedness.

Wherefore the Mortification which they retain, and whereof they boast, is
nothing but a wretched Image of that, which is truly so, substituted in its
room, and embraced by such, as had never attained any Experience of the Nature
or Power of Gospel Grace in the real Mortification of Sin,

SECT. XIV.
The same is to be said concerning Good Works; the second Evangelical Duty
whereof they boast. The necessity of these Good Works unto Salvation, according
unto men's Opportunities and Abilities, is acknowledged by all. And the Glory of
our Profession in this World, consists in our abounding in them; but their
Principle, their Nature, their Motives, their Use, their Ends are all declared
and limited in the Scripture, whereby they are distinguished from what may seem
materially the same, in those which may be wrought by Unbelievers.

In Brief, they are the Acts and Duties of true Believers only; and they are in
them Effects of Divine Grace, or the Operation of the Holy Ghost; for they are
created in Christ Jesus unto good Works, which God has ordained, that they
should walk in them. But the principal Mystery of their Glory, which the
Scripture insists upon, is, that although they are necessary, as a Means unto
the Salvation of Believers, yet are they utterly excluded from any influence
unto the Ju-stification of Sinners; so there was never any Work Evangelically
good, performed by any, who were not before freely Justified.

Unto these Good Works, those with whom we have to do, lay a vehement claim, as
though they were the only Patrons of them, and Pleaders for them: But they have
also excluded them out of Christian Religion, and set up a deformed Image of
them, in defiance of God, of Christ, and the Gospel: For the Works they plead
for, are such, as so far proceed from their own free will, as to render them
Meritorious in the sight of God. They have confined them partly unto Acts of
Superstitious Devotion, partly unto those of Charity, and principally unto
those that are not so; such are the Building of Monasteries, Nunneries, and
such pretended Religious Houses, for the maintenance of Swarms of Monks and
Friars, filling the World with Superstition and Debauchery. They make them
meritorious, satisfactory, yea, some of them, which they call of
Supererrogation, above all that God requires of us, and the Causes of our
Justification before God. They ascribe unto them a Condignity of the heavenly
Reward, making it of Works, and so not of Grace, with many other defiling
Imaginations; but whatever is done from these Principles, and for these Ends,
is utterly foreign unto those good Works which the Gospel enjoyneth, as a part
of our New or Evangelical Obedience. But having, as in other Cases, lost all
Sense and Experience of the Power and efficacy of the Grace of Christ, in
working Believers unto this Duty of Obedience, unto the Glory of God, and
Benefit of mankind, they have set up the Image of them, in defiance of Christ,
his Grace, and his Gospel.

These are some of the Abominations which are pourtraied on the Walls of the
Chamber of Imagery in the Church of Rome; and more will be added in the
consideration of the Image of Jealousy it self, which, God willing, shall
ensue in another way.

These are the Shadows which they betake themselves unto, in the loss of
Spiritual Light to discern the Truth and Glory of the Mystery of the Gospel,
and the want of an Experience of their Power and Efficacy unto all the Ends of
the Life of God, in their own Minds and Souls. And although they are all of
them expressly condemned in the Letter of the Scripture, which is sufficient to
secure the Minds of true Believers from the admission of them, yet their
establishment against all Pleas, Pretenses, and Force, for a compliance with
them, depends on their experience of the Power of every Gospel Truth, unto its
proper End, in communicating unto us the Grace of God, and transforming our
Minds into the Image and Likeness of Jesus Christ.

THE CVRE of MELANCHOLY AND OVERMUCH-SORROW BY FAITH and PHYSIC. Quest. What
are the best Preservatives against Melancholy and Overmuch Sorrow? SERMON XI.
2 COR. II.VII. Lest perhaps such a one should be swallowed up with overmuch
sorrow.
THe Brevity of a Sermon not allowing me Time for any unnecessary Work, I shall
not stay to open the Context, nor to enquire whether the Person here spoken of,
be the same that is condemned for Incest, in 1 Cor: 5. or some other; nor
whether Chrysostom had good Tradition for it, that it was a Doctor of the
Church, or made such after his Sin? nor whether the late Expositor be in the
right, who thence gathers that he was one of the Bishops of Achaia, and that it
was a Synod of Bishops that were to excommunicate him; Dr. Hammond.
(who yet held that every Congregation then had a Bishop, and that he was to be
excommunicated in the Congregation, and that the People should not have
followed or favored such a Teacher: It would have been no Schism or sinful
Separation to have forsaken him.) All that I now intend, is to open this last
Clause of the Verse, which gives the Reason why the censured Sinner being
penitent, should be forgiven and comforted, viz. Lest he should be swallowed up
with overmuch sorrow; as it includes these three Doctrines, which I shall
handle all together, viz: 1. That Sorrow, even for Sin, may be overmuch. 2.
That overmuch Sorrow swalloweth one up. 3. Therefore it must be resisted and
assuaged by necessary Comfort (both by others, and by our selves)


In handling these, I shall observe this Order; 1. I shall show you when Sorrow
is overmuch. 2. How overmuch Sorrow does swallow a man up. 3. What are the
Causes of it. 4. What is the Cure.

I. It is too notorious that overmuch Sorrow for Sin, is not the ordinary Case
of the World. A stupid blockish Disposition is the common Cause of men's
perdition. The Plague of a hard Heart and seared Conscience keeps most from all
due sense of Sin, or Danger, or Misery, and of all the great and everlasting
Concerns of their guilty Souls. A dead sleep in sin does deprive most of the
use of Sense and Understanding; they do some of the outward Acts of Religion,
as in a Dream; they are vowed to God in Baptism by others, and they profess to
stand to it themselves; they go to Church, and say over the Words of the Creed,
and Lords Prayer, and Commandments, they receive the Lords Supper, and all as
in a Dream! They take on them to believe that Sin is the most hateful thing to
God, and hurtful to man, and yet they live in it with delight and obstinacy;
they dream that they repent of it, when no persuasion will draw them to forsake
it, and while they hate them that would cure them, and will not be as bad and
mad as they who feel in them any effectual sorrow for what is past, or
effectual sense of their present badness, or effectual resolution for a new and
holy Life. They dream that there is a Judgment, a Heaven and a Hell; but would
they not be more affected with things of such unspeakable Consequence if they
were awake? would they be wholly taken up with the Matters of the Flesh and
World, and scarce have a serious thought or word of Eternity, if they were
awake? O how sleepily and senselesly do they think, and talk, and hear of the
great Work of man's Redemption by Christ, and of the need of Justifying and
Sanctifying Grace, and of the Joys and Miseries of the next Life, and yet they
say that they believe them! When we preach or talk to them of the greatest
things, with the greatest evidence, and plainness, and earnestness that we can,
we speak as to the dead, or to men asleep; they have Ears, and hear not;
nothing goes to their hearts. One would think that a man that reads ^n
Scripture, and believes the everlasting Glory offered, and the dreadful
punishment threatened, and the necessity of Holiness to Salvation, and of a
Savior to deliver us from Sin and Hell, and how sure and near such a passage
into the unseen world is to us all, should have much ado to moderate and bear
the sense of such overwhelming things. But most men so little regard or feel
them, that they have neither time nor heart to think of them as their Concern,
but hear of them as of some foreign Land, where they have no interest, and
which they never think to see. Yea, one would think by their senseless neglect
of preparation, and their worldly minds and lives, that they were asleep or in
jest, when they confess that they must die, and that when they lay their
Friends in the Grave, and see the Skulls and Bones cast up, they were but all
this while in a Dream, or did not believe that their Turn is near. Could we
tell how to waken Sinners, they would come to themselves, and have other
thoughts of these great things, and show it quickly by another kind of Life:
Awakened Reason could never be so befooled and besotted as we see the wicked
world to be. But God has an awakening day for all, and he will make the most
senseless soul to feel, by Grace or Punishment.

And because a hardened Heart is so great a part of the Malady and Misery of the
unregenerate, and a soft and tender Heart is much of the New Nature promised by
Christ, many awakened Souls under the work of Conversion, think they can never
have Sorrow enough, and that their danger lies in hard-heartedness, and they
never fear overmuch sorrow till it has swallowed them up; yea though there be
too much of other Causes in it, yet if any of it be for sin, they then cherish
it as a necessary Duty, or at least perceive not the danger of Excess; and some
think those to be the best Christians who are most in doubts, and fears, and
sorrows, and speak almost nothing but uncomfortable Complaints; but this is a
great mistake.

1. Sorrow is overmuch, when it is fed by a mistaken Cause: All is too much
where none is due; and great sorrow is too much when the Cause requires but
less.

If a man thinks that somewhat is a Duty, which is no Duty, and then sorrow
for omitting it, such sorrow is all too much, because it is undue, and caused
by error. Many I have known that have been greatly troubled, because they
could not bring themselves to that length or order of meditation, for which
they had neither Ability nor Time. And many because they could not reprove sin
in others, when prudent instruction and intimation was more suitable than
reproof. And many are troubled because in their Shops and Callings they think
of any thing but God; as if our outward Business must have no thoughts.

Superstition always breeds such sorrows, when men make themselves Religious
Duties which God never made them, and then come short in the performance of
them. Many dark Souls are assaulted by the erroneous, and told that they are in
a wrong way; and they must take up some Error as a necessary Truth, and so are
cast into perplexing difficulties, and perhaps repent of the Truth which they
before owned. Many fearful Christians are troubled about every Meal that they
eat, about their Clothes, their Thoughts and Words, thinking or fearing that
all is sinful which is lawful, and that unavoidable infirmities are heinous
sins. All such as these are Troubles and Sorrows without Cause, and therefore
overmuch.

2. Sorrow is overmuch when it hurts and overwhelmeth Nature it self, and
destroys bodily Health or Understanding. Grace is the due qualification of
Nature, and Duty is the right employment of it; but neither of them must
destroy it. As Civil, and Ecclesiastic, and Domestic Government are for
edification, and not for destruction, so also is personal self-government. God
will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice, and he that would not have us kill or hurt
our Neighbor on pretense of Religion, would not have us destroy or hurt our
selves; being bound to love our Neighbor but as our selves. As Fasting is a
Duty no further than it tends to some good, as to express or exercise true
humiliation, or to mortify some fleshly Lust, etc. so is it with sorrow for
sin; it is too much when it does more hurt than good: But of this next.

II. When Sorrow swalloweth up the Sinner, it is overmuch, and to be
restrained: As,

1. The Passions of Grief and Trouble of mind do often overthrow the sober and
sound use of Reason; so that a man's Judgment is corrupted and perverted by it,
and is not in that case to be trusted: As a man in raging Anger, so one in fear
or great trouble of mind, thinks not of things as they are, but as his Passion
represents them, about God and Religion, and about his own Soul, and his
Actions, or about his Friends or Enemies, his Judgment is perverted, and
usually false; and like an enflamed Eye, thinks all things of the color which
is like it self. When it perverteth Reason, it is overmuch.

2. Overmuch Sorrow disableth a man to govern his Thoughts; and ungoverned
Thoughts must needs be both sinful, and very troublesome; Grief carries them
away as in a Torrent: you may almost as easily keep the Leaves of Trees in
quietness and order in a blustering Wind, as the Thoughts of one in troubling
Passions. If Reason would stop them from perplexing Subjects, or turn them to
better and sweeter things, it cannot do it; it has no power against the stream
of troubling Passions.

3. Overmuch Sorrow would swallow up Faith it self, and greatly hinders its
Exercise. They are Matters of unspeakable Joy which the Gospel calls us to
believe; and it is wonderful hard for a grieved troubled Soul to believe any
thing that is matter of Joy; much less of so great Joy, as Pardon and Salvation
are. Though it dare not flatly give God the Lie, it hardly believes his free
and full Promises, and the expressions of his readiness to receive all penitent
returning Sinners. Passionate Grief serves to feel somewhat contrary to the
Grace and Promises of the Gospel; and that feeling hinders Faith.

4. Over much Sorrow yet more hinders Hope; when men think that they do
believe Gods Word, and that his Promises are all true to others, yet cannot
they Hope for the promised Blessings to themselves: Hope is that Grace by which
a Soul that believes the Gospel to be true, does comfortably expect, that the
benefits promised shall be its own; its an applying Act. The first act of Faith
says, the Gospel is true, which promises Grace and Glory through Christ: The
next act of Faith says I will trust my Soul and all upon it, and take Christ
for my Savior and Help: And then Hope says, I hope for this Salvation by him:
But Melancholy, overwhelming Sorrow and Trouble, is as great an Adversary to
this Hope, as water is to fire, or snow to heat. Despair is its very pulse and
breath. Fain such would have hope, but they cannot. All their thoughts are
suspicious, and misgiving, and they can see nothing but danger and misery, and
a helpless state. And when Hope, which is the Anchor of the Soul, is gone, what
wonder if they be continually tossed with storms.

5. Over much sorrow swalloweth up all comfortable Sense of the Infinite
Goodness and Love of God, and thereby hinders the Soul from Loving Him. And
in this it is an Adversary to the very Life of Holiness: It is exceeding hard
for such a troubled Soul to apprehend the Goodness of God at all; but much
harder to judge that he is good and amiable to him: But as a man that in the
Deserts of Lybia is scorched with the violent heats of the Sun, and is ready to
dy^ with draught and faintness, may confess that the Sun is the Life of the
Earth, and a Blessing to mankind, but it is misery and death to him; even so
these Souls overwhelmed with Grief, may say that God is good to others, but he
seems an Enemy to them, and to seek their destruction: They think he hates
them, and has forsaken them; and how can they love such a God, who they think
does hate them, and resolve to damn them, and has decreed them to it from
Eternity, and brought them into the world for no other end. They that can
hardly love an Enemy that does but defame them, or oppress and wrong them, will
more hardly love a God, that they believe will damn them, and has remedilesly
appointed them thereto.

6. And then it must needs follow, that this distemper is a false and injurious
Judge of all the Word and Works of God, and of all his mercies and corrections.
Whatever such a one reads or hears he thinks it all makes against him: every
sad Word and Threatening in Scripture, he thinks means him as if it named him.
But the Promises and Comforts he has no part in, as if he had been by name
excepted. All Gods mercies are extenuated and taken for no mercies, as if God
intended them all but to make his sin the greater, and to increase his heavy
reckoning and further his damnation: He thinks God does but sugar over poison
to him, and give him all in Hatred, and not in any Love, with a design to sink
him the deeper in Hell. And if God correct him, he supposes that it is but the
beginning of his misery, and God does torment him before the time.

7. And by this you see that it is an Enemy to Thankfulness; it rather
reproacheth God for his Mercies, as if they were Injuries, than gives him any
hearty thanks.

8. And by this you may see, that this distemper is quite contrary to the Joy
in the Holy Ghost, yea and the Peace, in which Gods Kingdom much consists:
Nothing seems Joyful unto such distressed Souls. Delighting in God and in his
Word and Ways is the flow^r and life of true Religion: But these that I speak
of can delight in nothing, neither in God nor in his Word, nor any Duty: They
do it, as a sick man eats his meat, for mere necessity, and with some
loathing and aversness.

9. And all this shows us, that this Disease is much contrary to the very
Tenor of the Gospel: Christ came as a Deliverer of the Captives, a Savior to
reconcile us to God, and bring us glad Tidings of pardon and everlasting joy;
where the Gospel was received, it was great rejoicing, and so proclaimed by
Angels and by men. But all that Christ has done and purchased and offered and
promised seems nothing but matter of doubt and sadness, to this Disease.

10. Yea it is a Distemper which greatly advantageth Satan to cast in
Blasphemous thoughts of God, as if he were bad, and a hater and destroyer even
of such as fain would please him. The Design of the Devil is to describe God to
us as like himself, who is a malicious Enemy, and delights to do hurt. And if
all men hate the Devil for his hurtfulness, would he not draw men to hate and
blaspheme God, if he could make men believe that he is more hurtful. The
worshipping God, as represented by an Image, is odious to him, because it seems
to make him like such a Creature as that Image represents: How much more
blasphemous is it to feign him to be like the malicious Devils, Diminutive low
thoughts of his Goodness as well as of his Greatness, is a sin which greatly
injureth God. As if you should think that he is no better or trustier than a
Father or a Friend; much more to think him such as distempered Souls imagine
him. You would wrong his Ministers, if you should describe them as Christ does
the false Prophets, as hurtful Thorns, and Thistles and Wolves: And is it not
worse to think far worse than this of God.

11. This overmuch sorrow does unfit men for all profitable meditation, it
confounds their thoughts, and turns them to hurtful Distractions and
Temptations; and the more they muse the more they are overwhelmed.

And it turns Prayer into mere Complaint, instead of Child-like believing
Supplications.

It quite undisposeth the Soul to Gods Masses; and especially to a comfortable
Sacramental Communion, and fetches greater terror from it, lest unworthy
receiving will but hasten and increase their Damnation.

And it renders Preaching and C^unsel too often unprofitable; say what you will
that is never so convincing, either it does not change them, or is presently
lost.

12 And it is a distemper which makes all sufferings more heavy, as falling
upon a poor diseased soul, and having no comfort to set against it: And it
makes Death exceeding terrible, because they think it will be the gate of
Hell, so that life seems burdensome to them, and death terrible: They are a
weary of living, and afraid of dying. Thus overmuch sorrow swalloweth up.

III. Quest. What are the causes and cure of it

Answ. With very many there is a great part of the cause in distemper, weakness
and diseasedness of the body, and by it the soul is greatly disabled to any
comfortable sense. But the more it arises from such natural necessity, it is
the less sinful and less dangerous to the soul, but nevertheless troublesome
but the more.

Three Diseases cause overmuch sorrow.

1. Those that consist in such violent pain, as natural strength is unable to
bear: But this being usually not very long, is not now to be chiefly spoken of.

2. A natural passionateness and weakness of that reason that should quiet
passion. It is too frequent a case with aged persons that are much debilitated
to be very apt to offense and passion: And children cannot choose but cry when
they are hurt, but it is most troublesome and hurtful in too many Women (and
some men) who are so easily troubled and hardly quieted, that they have very
little power on themselves, even many that fear God, and that have very found
understandings and quick wits, have almost no more power against troubling
passions, anger and grief, but especially fear, than they have of any other
persons.

Their very natural temper is a strong disease, of troubling sorrow, fear and
displeasedness. They that are not melancholy, are yet of so Childish, and
sick, and impatient a temper, that one thing or other is still either
discontenting, grieving or affrighting them. They are like an Aspen leaf, still
shaking with the least motion of the air: The wisest and most patient man
cannot please and justify such a one, a word, yea or a look offends them,
every sad story or news or noise affrighteth them, and as children must have
all that they cry for before they will be quiet, so is it with too many such.
The case is very sad to those about them, but much more to themselves. To dwell
with the sick in the house of mourning, is less uncomfortable. B^t yet while
reason is not overthrown the case is not remediless nor wholly excusable.

3. But when the Brain and Imagination is Crazed and Reason partly overthrown
by the Disease called Melancholy, this makes the cure yet more difficult, for
commonly it is the foresaid Persons, whose natural temper is timorous and
passionate and apt to discontent and grief, who fall ito Crazedness and
Melancholy: And the conjunction of both, the Natural Temp^r and the Disease do
increase the misery.

The sig^s of such diseasing Melancholy, I have often elsewhere described. As,

1. The trouble and disquiet of the mind does then become a settled habit, they
can see nothing but matter of fear and trouble: all that they hear or do does
feed it, danger is still before their eyes, all that they read and hear makes
against them, they can delight in nothing, fearful dreams trouble them when
they sleep, and distracted thoughts do keep them long waking, it offends them
to see another laugh or be merry, they think that every Beggars case is happyer
then theirs, they will hardly believe that any one else is in their case, when
some two or three in a week, or a day, come to me in the same case, so like
that you would think it were the same persons case which they all express, they
have no pleasure in Relations, Friends, Estate or any thing, they think that
God has forsaken them, and that the day of Grace is past, and that there is no
more hope: they say they cannot pray, but howl and groan and God will not hear
them; they will not believe that they have any sincerity and grace; they say
they cannot repent, they cannot believe, but that their hearts are utterly
hardened: usually they are afraid lest they have committed the unpardonable sin
against the Holy Ghost; In a word fears and troubles and almost despair are the
constant temper of their minds.

2. If you convince them that they have some evidences of sincerity, and that
their fears are causeless and injurious to themselves and unto God, and they
have nothing to say against it, yet either it takes of none of their trouble,
or else it returns the next day: for the cause remains in their bodily
Disease, quiet them an hundred times, and their sears and hundred times return.

3. Their misery is, that what they think, they cannot choose but think: You
may almost as well persuade a man not to shake in an Ague, or not to feel when
he is pained, as persuade them to cast away their self-troubling thoughts, or
not to think all the enormous confounding thoughts as they do, they cannot get
them out of their heads night or day: tell them that they must forbear long
musing, which disturb them, and they cannot: tell them that they must cast out
false imaginations out of their minds, when Satan casts them in, and must turn
their thoughts to something else, and they cannot do it: Their thoughts, and
troubles, and fears are gone out of their power, and the more, by how much the
more, melancholy and crased they are.

4. And when they are grown to this, usually they seem to feel something
besides themselves, as it were speaking in them, and saying this and that to
them, and bidding them do this or that, and they will tell you now it s^ith
this or that, and tell you when and what it has said to them, and they will
hardly believe how much of it is the disease of their own imagination.

5 In this case they are exceeding prove to think they have Revelations, and
whatever comes into their minds, they think some Revelation brought it thither,
They use to say, This Text of Scripture at such a time was set upon my mind,
and that Text at another time was set on my mind; when often the sense that they
took them in was false, or a false application of it made to themselves, and
perhaps several Texts applied to contrary conclusions, as if one gave them
hope, and another contradicted it.

And some of them hereupon are very prone to Prophesies, and verily believe
that God has foretold them this or that, till they see that it comes not to
pass, and then they are ashamed.

And many of them turn Heretics and take up errors in Religion, believing
verily that God believed them, and set such things upon their minds: And some
of them that were long troubled, get quietness and joy by such changes of their
opinions, thinking that now they are in Gods way, which they were out of all
this while, and therefore it was that they had no comfort: Of these I have
known diverse persons comforted, that have fallen into the clean contrary
opinions, some have turned Papists and superstitious, and some have run too far
from Papists, and some have had comfort by turning Anabaptists, some
Antinomians, some contrarily called Arminians, some Perfectionists, some
Quakers, and some have turned from Christianity it self to Infidelity, and
denied the life to come, and have lived in licentious uncleanness. But these
melancholy Heretics and Apostates, usually by this cast of their sadness, and
are not the sort that I have now to deal with.

6 But the sadder better sort, feeling this talk and stir within them, are often
apt to be confident that they are possessed by the devil, or at least bewitched,
of which I will say more anon.

7 And most of them are violently haunted with blasphemous injections, at which
they tremble, and yet cannot keep them out of their mind, either they are
tempted and haunted to doubt of the Scripture or Christianity, or the life to
come, or to think some ill of God; And ofttimes they are strangely urged, as by
something in them, to speak some Blasphemous word of God, or to renounce him,
and they tremble at the suggestion, and yet it still follows them, and some
poor souls yield to it, and say some bad word against God, and then as soon as
it is spoken, somewhat within them says, now thy damnation is sealed, thou
have sinned against the Holy Ghost, there is no hope.

8 When it is far gone they are tempted to lay some law upon themselves, never
to speak more, or not to eat, and some of them have famished themselves to
death.

9 And when its far gone they often think that they have apparitions and this and
that likeness appears to them, especially lights in the night about their
beds: and sometimes they are confident that they hear voices and feel something
touch or hurt them.

10 They fly from company, and can do nothing but sit alone and muse.

11 They cast off all business, and will not be brought to any diligent labor
in their callings.

12 And when it comes to extremity, they are weary of their lives, and
strongly followed with Temptations to make away themselves, as if something
within them were either urging them either to drown them selves or cut their
own throats, or hang themselves, or cast themselves headlong, which alas too
many have done.

13 And if they escape this when its ripe, they become quite distracted.

These are the doleful symptoms and effects of melancholy: And therefore how
desirable is it to prevent them, or to be cured while it is but beginning,
before they fall into so sad a state.

And here it is necessary that I answer the doubt, whether such persons be
possessed with the Devil or not, and how much of all this aforesaid is from him.

And I must tell the melancholy person that is sincere, that the knowledge of
the Devils Agency in his Case, may be more to his comfort than to his despair.

And first, we must know what is meant by Satan's Possession, either of the Body
or the Soul. It is not merely his Local Presence and Abode in a man that is
called his Possession; for we know little of that, how far he is more present
with a bad man than a good: But it is his exercising Power on a man by such a
stated effectual operation. As the Spirit of God is present with the worst, and
makes many holy Motions to the Souls of the impenitent, but he is a settled
powerful Agent in the Soul of a Believer, and so is said to dwell in such, and
to possess them, by the Habit of Holiness and Love; even so Satan makes too
frequent Motions to the Faithful; but he possesses only the Souls of the
ungodly by predominant Habits of Unbelief and Sensuality.

And so also he is permitted by God to inflict Persecutions and Crosses and
ordinary Diseases on the just, but when he is Gods Executioner of extraordinary
Plagues, especially on the Head, depriving men of Sense and Understanding, and
working above the bare Nature of the Disease, this is called his Possession.

And as most evil Motions on the Soul have Satan for their Father, and our own
Hearts as the Mothers, so most or many bodily Diseases are by Satan, permitted
by God, though there be Causes of them also in the Body it self. And when our
own Miscarriages, and Humors, and the Season, Weather, and Accidents may be
Causes, yet Satan may by these be a superior Cause.

And when his Operations are such as we call a Possession, yet he may work by
means and bodily dispositions; and sometimes he works quite above the power
of the Disease it self (as when the unlearned speak in strange Languages, and
when bewitched Persons vomit Iron, Glass, etc) And sometime he does only work
by the Disease it self (as in Epilepsies, Madness, etc.)

From all this it is easy to gather, 1. That for Satan to possess the Body, is
no certain S^gn of a graceless state, nor will this condemn the Soul any, if
the Soul it self be not possessed: Nay there are few of Gods Children, but its
like are sometime affl^cted by Satan, as the Executioner of Gods correcting
them, and sometime of Gods Trials, as in the Case of Job; whatever some say to
the contrary, it is likely that the ^rick in the Flesh, which was Satan's
Messenger to b^sset Paul, was some such Pain as the Stone, which yet was not
removed (that we find) after thrice praying, but only he had a promise of
sufficient Grace.

2. Satan's Possession of an ungodly Saul is the miserable Case which is a
thousand times worse than his possessing of the Body; but every Corruption or
Sin is not such a possession; for no man is perfect without Sin.

3. No Sin proves Satan's damnable possession of a man, but that which he
loves more than he hates it, and which he had rather keep than leave, and
wilfully keeps.

4. And this is matter of great comfort to such Melancholy honest Souls, if
they have but understanding to receive it, that of all men none love their Sin
which they groan under, so little as they; yea, it is the heavy Burden of their
Souls. Do you love your Unbelief, your Fears, your distracted Thoughts, your
Temptations to Blasphemy? Had you rather keep them, than be delivered from
them? The proud man, the ambitious, the Fornicator, the Drunkard, the Gamester,
the Time-wasting Gallants, that sit out hours at Cards and Plays, and idle
Chats, the gluttonous pleasers of the Appetite, all these love their Sins, and
would not leave them; as Esau sold his Birthright for one Morsel, they will
venture the loss of God, of Christ, and Soul, and Heaven, rather than leave a
swinish Sin: But is this your Case? Do you so love your sad condition? You are
weary of it, and heavy laden, and therefore are called to come to Christ for
ease, Mat. 11.28, 29.

5. And it is the Devils way, if he can, to haunt those with troubling
Temptations, whom he cannot overcome with alluring and damning Temptations. As
he raises storms of Persecution against them without, as soon as they are
escaping from his Deceits, so does he trouble them within, as far as God
permits him.

We deny not but Satan has a great hand in the Case of such Melancholy
persons; for,

1. His Temptations caused the Sin which God corrects them for.

2. His Execution usually is a Cause of the Distemper of the Body.

3. And as a Tempter, he is the Cause of the sinful and ^^^ublesom Thoughts,
and Doubts, and Fears, and Passions which the (...) holy causes. The Devil
cannot do what he will with us, but wh^^ (...) ^ive him advantage to do. He
cannot break open our doors, but (...) enter if we leave them open. He can
easily tempt a heavy phlegmatic Body to sloth, a weak and choleric person to
anger, a strong and sanguine man to Lust, and one of a strong Appetite to
Gluttony, or to Drunkenness, and vain sportful Youth to idle Plays, and gaming,
and Voluptuousness, when to others such Temptations would have small strength:
And so if he can cast you into Melancholy, he can easily tempt you to overmuch
Sorrow and Fear, and to distracting Doubts and Thoughts, and to murmr against
God, and to despair, and still think that you are undone, undone; and even to
blasphemous thoughts of God; or if it take not this way, than to Fanatic
Conceits of Revelation and a prophesying Spirit.

6. But I add that God will not impute his mere Temptations to you, but to
himself, be they never so bad, as long as you receive them not by the will, but
hate them; nor will he condemn you for those ill effects which are unavoi^^ble
from the power of a bodily Disease, any more than he will condemn a man for
raving thoughts or words in a Fever, Frenzy, or utter Madness: But so far as
Reason yet has power, and the Will can govern Passions, it is your fault if
y^^ ^^se not the power, though the difficulty make the Fault the less.

II. But usually other Causes go before this Disease of Melancholy, (except in
some Bodies naturally prone to it) and therefore before I speak of the Cure of
it, I will briefly touch them.

And one of the most common Causes is [ Sinful Impatience, Discontents and
Cares proceeding from a sinful love of some bodily interest, and from a want of
sufficient submission to the will of God, and Trust in him, ^^d t^king Heaven
for a satisfying Portion.]

I must necessarily use all these words to show the true Nature of this
complicate Disease of Souls. The Names tell you that it is a Conjunction of
many Sins, which in themselves are of no small malignity; and were they the
predominant be^^ ^^d habit of Heart and Life, they would be the Signs o^ (...)
^hil^ they are hated, and overcome not Grace, but ^^r heav^nly (...) ^^re
esteemed, and c^^sen, and sought, than earthly prosperi^y ^he M^^cy of Go^
through Christ, do^^ pardon it, and will at last deliver us from all. But yet
it besee^^^^h ^ven a ^^^doned Sinner to know the greatness of his Sin, that
(...) may not favor it, nor be unthankful ^^r forgiveness.

I wi^^ therefore distinctly open the parts of this Sin, which brings many
(...) ^^smal Melancholy.

It i^ pr^supposed (...) God tries his Servants in ^his Life with manifold
Afflictions, and Christ will have us b^ar the Cross, and follow him in
submissive Patience. Some are tried with painful D^seases, and some with (...)
oug^^ Enemies and so^e with the unkindness of Friends, and (...) ^^o^ard
provoking Relatives and Company, and some (...) ^^d some with Per^e^^tion, and
many with Losses, Disapp^ (...)

(...) here Impatie^^^ (...) beginning of the working of the sinful M^^^^^ Our
Natures are all too regardful of the Interest of the flesh, and (...) ^eak in
bearing ^ea^y burdens; and Poverty has those Trials (...) ^^ll and wealthy
Persons that feel them not, too little pity; especially i^ ^wo Cases.

1. When men have not themselves only, but Wives and Children in want, to quiet.

2. And when they ar^ (...) debt to others, which is a heavy Burden to an
ingenuous mind; though thievish Borrowers make too light of it. In the^e
Straights and Trials men are apt to be too sensible and impatient: wh^^ they
and their Families want Food and Raiment, and Fire, and other Necess^ries to
the Body, and know not which way to get supply; when Landlords, and Butchers,
and Bakers, and other Creditors are calling for their Debts, and they have it
not to pay them, its hard to keep all this from going too near the heart, and
hard to bear it with obedient quiet submission to God; especially for Women,
whose Nature is weak, and liable to too much Passion.

2. And this Impatience turns to a settled Discontent and Unquietness or
Spirit, which affects the Body it self, and lies all day as a Load or
continual Trouble at the Heart.

3. And Impatience and Discontent do set the Thoughts on the Rack with Grief
and continual Cares, how to be eased of the troubling Cause; they can scarce
think of any thing else; and these Cares do even feed upon the Heart, and are
to the Mind as a consuming Fever to the Body.

4. And the secret Root or Cause of all this, is the worst part of the Sin,
which is, too much Love to the Body, and this World. Were nothing ov^^loved, it
would have no power to torment us; if Ease and Health were not overloved, Pain
and Sickness would be the more tolerable; if Children and Friends were not
overloved, the Death of them would not overwhelm us with inordinate sorrow; if
the Body were not overloved, and worldly wealth and Prosperity overvalued, it
were easy to endure hard Fare, and Labor, and Want, not only of Superfluities
and Conveniences, but even of that which is necessary to Health, yea, or Life
it self, if God will have it so; at least, to avoid Vexations, Discontents, and
Cares, and inordinate Grief and Trouble of mind.

5. There is yet more Sin in the root of all, and that is, it shows that our
Wills are yet too selfish, and not subdued to a due submission to the Will of
God, but we would be as Gods to our own choosing, and must needs have what the
Flesh desi^^ (...) ^^^t a due Resignation of our selves and all our Concerns to
God, and (...) as Children, in due dependence on him for our daily Bread, but
^^^t needs be the keepers of our own Provision.

6. And this shows that we be not sufficiently humbled for our sin, or else
we should be thankful for the lowest state, as being much better than that
which we deserved.

7. And there is apparently much Distrust of God, and Unbelief in these
troubling Discontents and Cares; could we trust God as well as our selves, or
as we could trust a faithful friend, or as a Child can trust his Father, how
quiet would our minds be in the sense of his Wisdom, All Sufficiency, and Love?

8. And this Unbelief yet has a worse Effect than worldly Trouble; it shows
that men take not the Love of God and the Heavenly Glory for their suff^cient
portion; unless they may have what they want, or would have for the Body this
world, unless they may be free from Poverty, and Crosses, and Provocations, and
Injuries, and Pains, all that God has promised them here or hereafter, even
everlasting Glory, will not satisfy them; and when God, and Christ, and
Heaven; are not enough to quiet a man's mind, he is in great want of Faith,
Hope, and Love, which are far greater matters than Food and Raiment.

III. Another great cause of such trouble of mind, is the guilt of some great
and wilful sin, when conscience is convinced, and yet the foul is not
converted, sin is beloved and yet feared: Gods wrath does terrify them; and
yet not enough to overcome their sin; some live in secret fraud and robbery,
and many in drunkenness, in secret fleshly lusts, either self-pollution or
fornication, and they know that for such things the wrath of God comes on the
Children of disobedience; and yet the rage of appetite and lust prevails, and
they despair and sin, and while the sparks of Hell fall on their consciences,
it changes neither heart nor life, there is some more hope of the recovery of
these, then of dead hearted or unbelieving sinners, who work uncleanness with
greediness, as being past feeling, and blinded to defend their sins, and plead
against holy obedience to God. Bruitishness is not so bad as Diabolisme and
malignity. But none of these are the persons spoken of in any Text, Their
sorrow is not overmuch but too little, as long as it will not restrain them
from their sin.

But yet if God convert these persons, the sins which they now live in, may
possibly hereafter plung their souls into such depths of sorrow, in the review,
as may swallow them up.

And when men truly converted, yet dally with the bait, and renew the wounds of
their consciences by their lapses, it is no wonder if their sorrows and
terrors are renewed. Grievous sins have fastened so on the consciences of
many, as have cast them into uncurable melancholy and distraction.

IV. But among people fearing God, there is yet another cause of Melancholy,
and of sorrowing overmuch; and that is Ignorance and mistakes in ma^^^^ which
their peace and comforts are concerned in, I will name some particulars.

1. One (...) Ignorance of the tenor of the Gospel or Covenant of Grace, as
some Libertines (called Antinomians) more dangerously mistake it, who tell men
that Christ has Repented and believed them, and that they must no more
question their Faith and Repentance, than they must question the righteousness
of Christ; so many better Christians understand not that the Gospel is tidings
of unspeakable joy to all that will believe it; and that Christ and Life are
offered freely to them that will accept him, and that no sins, how great or
many soever are excepted from pardon, to the soul that unfeignedly turns to
God by faith in Christ, that whoever will may freely take the water of life,
and all that are weary and thirst are invited to come to him for ease and rest.

And they seem not to understand the conditions of forgiveness, which is but
true consent to the pardoning, saving (baptismal) Covenant.

2. And many of them are mistaken about the use of sorrow for sin, and about
the nature of hardness of heart they think that if their sorrow be not so
passionate as to bring forth tears and greatly to afflict them they are not
capable of pardon, though they should consent to all the pardoning Covenant,
and they consider not that it is not our sorrow for it self that God delights
in, but it is the taking down of pride, and that so much humbling sense of sin,
danger and misery, as may make us feel the need of Christ and mercy, and bring
us unfeignedly to consent to be his Disciples, and to be saved upon his
Covenant terms. Be sorrow much or little, if it do this much, the sinner shall
be saved.

And as to the length of Gods sorrow, some thinks that the pangs of the new
birth must be a long continued state, whereas we read in the Scripture, that by
the penitent sinners, the Gospel was still received speedily with joy, as being
the gift of Christ, and pardon, and everlasting life; humility and
self-loathing must continue and increase, but our first great sorrows may be
swallowed up with holy thankfulness and joy.

And as for hardness of heart, in Scripture it is taken for such a stiff
rebellious obstinacy, as will not be moved from their sins to obedience, by any
of Gods commands or threats, and is called often an Iron sinew, a stiff neck,
etc, but its never taken from the mere want of tears or passionate sorrow in a
man that is willing to obey; the hard hearted are the rebellious; sorrow even
for sin may be overmuch, and a passionate woman or man may easily grieve and
weep for the sin which they will not leave, but obedience cannot be too much.

3. And abundance are cast down by ignorance of themselves, not knowing the
sincerity which God has given them, grace is weak in the best of us here, and
little and weak grace is not very easily perceived, for it acts weakly and
unconstantly, and it is known but by its acts, and weak grace is always joined
with too strong corruption; and all sin in heart and life is contrary to grace,
and does obscure it; and such persons usually have too little knowledge, and
are too strange at home, and unskilful in examining and watching their hearts,
and keeping its accounts: And how can any under all these hindrances, yet keep
any full assurance of their own sincerity; if with muchado they get some
assurances, neglect of duty or coldness in it, or yielding to temptation, or
unconstancy in close obedience, will make them question all again, and ready to
say it was all but hypocrisy, and a sad and melancholy frame of mind is
always apt to conclude the worse, and hardly brought to see any thing that is
good and tends to comfort.

4. And in such a case, there are too few that know how to fetch comfort from
bare probabilities, when they get not certainty, much less from the mere offers
of Grace and Salvation, even when they cannot deny but they are willing to
accept them; and if none should have comfort, but those that have assurance of
their sincerity and salvation, despair would swallow up the souls of most,
even of true believers.

5. And Ignorance of other men increases the fears and sorrows of some: They
think by our preaching and writing that we are much better then we are: And
then they think that they are graceless, because they come short of our
supposed measures, whereas if they dwelt with us and saw our failings, or knew
us but as well as we know our selves; or saw all our sinful thoughts and
vicious dispositions written in our foreheads, they would be cured of this
error.

6. And unskilful Teachers do cause the griefs and perplexities of very many;
some cannot open to them clearly the tenor of the Covenant of grace; some are
themselves unacquainted with any spiritual heavenly consolations; and many have
no experience of any inward holiness, and renewal by the Holy Ghost, and know
not what sincerity is, nor wherein a Saint does differ from an ungodly sinner,
as wicked deceivers make good and bad, to differ but a little; if not the best
to be taken for the worst; so some unskilful men do place sincerity in such
things as are not so much as duty, as the Papists in their manifold inventions
and superstitions, and many Sects in their unsound opinions.

And some unskilfully and unsoundly describe the state of grace, and tell you
how far an hypocrite may go, so as unjustly discourageth and confounds the
weaker sort of Christians, and cannot amend the misexpression of their Books or
Teachers; One of my Hearers fell distracted with reading some passages in Mr.
Sheepherds sincere Believer, which were not justifiable or sound.
And too many Teachers lay men's comforts, if not Salvation, on controversies
which are past their reach, and pronounce heresy and damnation against that
which they themselves understand not: even the Christian world these one
thousand three hundred, or one thousand two hundred years is divided into
parties, by the Teachers unskilful quarrels about words, which they took in
several senses. Is it any wonder if the hearers of such are distracted?

IV. I have told you the causes of distracted sorrows, I am now to tell you
what is the cure, but alas it is not so soon done as told, and I shall begin
where the disease begins, and tell you both what the Patient himself must
do, and what must be done by his friends and Teachers.

I. Look not on the sinful part of your troubles, either as better or worse
than indeed it is.

1. Too many persons in their sufferings and sorrows, think they are only to be
pittyed, and take little notice of the sin that caused them, or that they still
continue to commit, and too many unskilful friends and Ministers do only
comfort them, when a round chiding and discovery of their sin should be the
better part of the Cure, and if they were more sensible how much sin their is,
in their overvaluing the world and not trusting God, and in there hard thoughts
of him, and their poor unholy thoughts of his goodness, and in their
undervaluing the heavenly Glory, which should satisfy them in the most
afflicted State, and in their daily Impatiences, cares, and discontents, and in
denying the mercies or grace received, this would do more to cure some, than
words of comfort, when they say as Jonah, I do well to be angry, and think that
all their denials of Grace and distracting sorrows, and wrangling against Gods
love and mercy are their duties, its time to make them know how great sinners
they are.

2. And yet when as foolishly they think that all these sins are marks of a
graceless state, and that God will take the Devils temptations for their sins,
and condemn them for that which they abhor, and take their very disease of
melancholy for a crime, this also needs confutation and reprehension, that
they may not by error cherish their passions or distress.

II. Particularly, Give not way to a habit of peevish impatience; though it is
carnal love to somewhat more than to God and Glory which is the damning sin,
yet Impatience must not pass for innocence, did you not reckon upon sufferings,
and of bearing the Cross when you first gave up your selves to Christ: And do
you think it strange, look for it, and make it your daily study to prepare for
any trial that God may bring you to, and then it will not surprise you and
overwhelm you: Prepare for the loss of Children and Friends, for the loss of
Goods, and for Poverty and Want; prepare for slanders, injuries or poisons, for
sickness, pain and death: It is your unpreparedness that makes it seem
unsufferable.

And remember that it is but a vile body that suffers, which you always knew
must suffer death and rot to dust, and whoever is the instrument of your
sufferings, it is God that tries you by it, and when you think that you are
only displeased with men, you are not guiltless of murmuring against God, or
else his overruling hand would persuade you to submissive patience.

Especially make conscience of a settled discontent of mind: have you not yet
much better than you deserve? And do you forget how many years you have enjoyed
undeserved mercy? Discontent is a continued resistance of Gods disposing will,
that I say not some rebellion against it. Your own wills rise up against the
will of God. It is Atheistical to think that your sufferings are not by his
providence; and dare you repine against God, and continue in such repining, to
whom else does it belong to dispose of you and all the world?

And when you feel distracting cares for your deliverances, remember that this
is not trusting God: Care for your own duty and obey his command, but leave it
to him what you shall have, tormenting care do but add to your afflictions, It
is a great mercy of God that he forbids you these cares, and promises to
care for you: Your Savior himself has largely, though gently reprehended them
Math. 6. and told you how sinful and unprofitable they are, and that your
father knows what you need, and if he deny it you, it is for just cause, and
if it be to correct you, it is yet to profit you, and if you submit to him and
accept his gift, he will give you much better than he takes from you, even
Christ and everlasting life.

III. Set your selves more diligently than ever, to overcome the inordinate
love of the world: It will be a happy use of all your troubles, if you can
follow them up to the Fountain, and find out what it is that you cannot bear
the want or loss of, and consequently what it is that you overlove. God is very
jealous even when he loves, against every Idol that is loved too much, and
with any of that love which is due to him. and if he take them all away, and
tear them out of our hands and hearts, it is merciful as well as just. I speak
not this to those that are troubled only for want of more faith and holiness
and communion with God, and assurance of Salvation: These troubles might give
them much comfort if they understood aright from whence they come and what they
signify. For as impatient trouble under worldly crosses does prove that a man
loves the world too much, so impatient trouble for want of more holiness and
Communion with God does show, that such are lovers of Holiness and of God. Love
goes before desire and grief. That which men love they delight in if they have
it, and mourn for want of it, and desire to obtain it. The will is the love:
and no man is troubled for want of that which he would not have.

But the commonest cause of passionate melancholy, is at first some worldly
discontent and care, either wants, or crosses, or the fear of suffering, or the
unsuitableness and provocation of some related to them, or disgrace or
contempt, do cast them into passionate discontent, and selfwill cannot bear the
denial of something which they would have, and then when the discontent has
muddied and diseased a man's mind, temptations about his soul do come in
afterward, and that which begun only with worldly crosses, does after seem to
be all about Religion, Conscience, or merely for sin or want of Grace.

Why could you not patiently bear the words, the wrongs, the losses, the
crosses that did befall you? Why made you so great a matter of these bodily
transitory things? Is it not because you overlove them, were you not in good
earnest when you called them vanity, and covenanted to leave them to the will
of God? would you have God let you alone in so great a sin as the love of the
world, or giving any of his due to creatures; If God should not teach you what
to love and what to set light by, and cure you of so dangerous a disease as a
fleshly earthly mind, he should not sanctify you and fit you for heaven, souls
go not to Heaven as an arrow is shot upward, against their inclination; but as
fire naturally tends upward and earth downward to their like, so when holy
men are dead, their souls have a natural inclination upward, and it is their
love that is their inclination; they love God and Heaven, and Holy company and
their old godly friends, and holy works, even mutual love and the joyful
praises of Jehovah: And this Spirit and Love is as a fiery nature, which
carries them heavenward; and Angels convey them not thither by force, but
conduct them as a Bride to her marriage; who is carried all the way by love.

And on the other side the souls of wicked men are of a fleshly worldly
inclination, and love not heavenly works and company, and have nothing in them
to carry them to God; but they love worldly trash and sensual beastial
delights, though they cannot enjoy them, as poor men love riches, and are vexed
for want of what they love, and therefore it is no wonder if wicked souls do
dwell with Devils in the lower regions, and that they make Apparitions here
when God permits them, and if holy souls be liable to no such descent. Love is
the Souls poise and spring, and carries souls downward or upward accordingly.

Away then with the earthly fleshly Love. How long will you stay here? And what
will Earth and Flesh do for you? So far as it may be helpful to Holiness and
Heaven, God will not deny it to submissive Children; but to overlove is to turn
from God, and is the dangerous Malady of Souls, and the poise that sinks them
down from Heaven. Had you learnt better to forsake all for Christ, and to
account all but as Loss and Dung, as Paul did ( Phil. 3.8.) you could more
easily bear the want of it. When did you see any live in discontent, and
distracted with Melancholy, Grief and Cares for want of Dung, or of a Bubble, a
Shadow, or a merry Dream? If you will not otherwise know the world, God will
otherwise make you know it to your Sorrow.

IV. If you are not satisfied that God alone, Christ alone, Heaven alone is
enough for you, as matter of felicity and full content, go study the Case
better, and you may be convinced: Go learn better your Catechism, and the
Principles of Religion, and then you will learn to lay up a Treasure in heaven,
and not on Earth, and to know that its best to be with Christ, and that death
which blasteth all the glory of the world, and equalleth the rich and the poor,
is the common Door to Heaven or Hell: And then Conscience will not ask you,
whether you have lived in pleasure or in pain, in riches or in want? but
whether you have lived to God, or to the Flesh? for Heaven or for Earth, and
what has had the pre-eminence in your hearts and Lives. If there be shame in
Heaven, you will be ashamed when you are there, that you whined and murmured
for want of any thing that the flesh desired upon Earth, and went thither
grieving because your bodies suffered here. Study more to live by Faith on
hope, on the unseen promised Glory with Christ, and you will patiently endure
any Sufferings in the way.

V. And study better how great a Sin it is, to set our own Wills and Desires in
a discontented opposition, to the wisdom, will and providence of God; and to
make our Wills instead of his, as Gods to our selves. Does not a murmuring
heart secretly accuse God: All accusation of God has some degree of blasphemy
in it: For the accuser supposes that somewhat of God is to be blamed; and if
you dare not open your mouths to accuse him, let not the repineings of your
hearts accuse him, know how much of Religion and Holiness consists in
bringing this rebellious self-will to a full resignation, submission and
conformity to the Will of God. Till you can rest in Gods Will, you will never
have rest.

VI. And study well how great a Duty it is wholely to Trust God, and our
blessed Redeemer both with Soul and Body, and all we have. Is not infinite
Power, Wisdom and Goodness to be trusted? Is not a Savior that came from
Heaven into flesh, to save sinners by such incomprehensible ways of Love, to be
trusted with that which he has so dearly bought? To whom else will you trust?
Is it your selves, or your friends? Who is it that has kept you all your
Lives, and done all for you that is done? Who is it that has saved all the
Souls, that are now in Heaven? what is our Christianity but a Life of Faith?
And is this your Faith, to distract your selves with cares and troubles, if God
do not fit all his Providence to your Wills: Seek first his Kingdom and
Righteousness, and he has promised that all other things shall be added to
you, and not a hair of your head shall perish; for they are all as it were
numbered: A Sparrow falls not to the ground without his Providence, and does he
set less by those that fain would please him. Believe God, and trust him, and
your Cares and Fears and Griefs will vanish.

O that you knew what a mercy and comfort it is for God to make it your Duty to
trust him: If he had made you no promise, this is equal to a promise; If he do
but bid you Trust him, you may be sure he will not deceive your Trust. If a
faithful friend that is able to relieve you, do but bid you trust him for your
relief, you will not think that he will deceive you. Alas, I have friends that
durst trust me with their Estates and Lives and Souls, if they were in my
power, and would not fear that I would destroy or hurt them, that yet cannot
trust the God of Infinite Goodness with them, though he both command them to
trust him; and promise that he will never fail them nor forsake them. It is the
refuge of my Soul, that quieteth me in my fears, that God my Father and
Redeemer has commanded me to trust him with my Body, my health, my liberty, my
estate, and when Eternity seems strange and dreadful to me, that he bids me
trust him with my departing Soul! Heaven and Earth are upheld and maintained by
him, and shall I distrust him?

Obj. But it is none but his Children that he will save.

Answ. True; And all are his Children that are truly willing to obey and please
him: If you are truly willing to be holy, and to obey his commanding Will, in a
godly, righteous, and sober Life, you may boldly rest in his disposing Will,
and rejoice in his rewarding and accepting Will for he will pardon all our
Infirmities through the Merits and Intercession of Christ.

VII. If you would not be swallowed up with sorrow, swallow not the Baits of
sinful Pleasure. Passions, and Dullness, and defective Du^ies have their degrees
of guilt; but it is pleasing Sin that is the dangerous and deep wounding Sin. O
fly from the Baits of Lust, and Pride, and Ambition, and Covetousness, and an
unruly Appetite to Drink or Meat, as you would fly from guilt, and grief, and
terror. The more pleasure you have in Sin, usually the more sorrow it will
bring you; and the more you know it to be Sn, and Conscience tells you that God
is against it, and yet you will go on, and bear down Conscience, the sharplier
will Conscience afterward afflict you, and the hardlier will it be quieted when
it is awakned to Repentance: yea, when a humbled Soul is pardoned by Grace, and
believes that he is pardoned, he will not easily forgive himself. The
remembrance of the wilfulness of sinning, and how poor a Bait prevailed with
us, and what Mercies and Motives we bore down, will make us so displeased and
angry with our selves, and so to loath such naughty hearts, as will not admit a
speedy or easy reconciliation. Yea, when we remember that we sinned against
knowledge, even when we remembered that God did see us, and that we offended
him, it will keep up long doubts of our Sincerity in the Soul, and make us
afraid lest still we have the same hearts, and should again do the same if we
had the same Temptations. Never look for Joy or Peace as long as you live in
wilful and beloved Sin: This Thorn must be taken out of your hearts before you
will be eased of the pain; unless God leave you to a senceless heart, and Satan
give you a deceitful peace, which does but prepare for greater sorrow.

VIII. But if none of the forementioned Sins cause your Sorrows, but they come
from the mere perplexities of your mind, about Religion, or the state of your
Souls, as fearing Gods wrath for your former sins, or doubting of your
Sincerity and Salvation, then these foregoing Reprofs are not meant to such as
you; but I shall now lay you down your proper Remedies; and that is the Cure of
that Ignorance and those Errors which cause your Troubles.

1. Many are perplexed about Controversies in Religion, while every contending
party is confident, add has a great deal to say, which to the ignorant seems
like to Truth, and which the Hearer cannot answer; and when each party tells
them that their way is the only way, and threatens Damnation to them if they
turn not to them. The Papists say, There is no Salvation out of our Church;
that is, to none but the Subjects of the Bishop of Rome: The Greeks condemn
them, and extol their Church; and every Party extols their own. Yea, some will
convert them with Fire and Sword, and say, Be of our Church, or lie in Gaol; or
make their Church it self a Prison, by driving in the incapable and unwilling.

Among all these, how shall the ignorant know what to choose?

Answ. The Case is sad, and yet not so sad as the case of the far greatest part
of the world, who are quiet in Heathenism, or Infidelity, or never trouble
themselves about Religion, but follow the Customs of their Countries, and the
Princes Laws, that they may not suffer. It is some sign of a regard to God and
your Salvation, that you are troubled about Religion, and careful to know which
is the right; even Controversy is better than Atheistical Indifferency, that
will be on the upper side, be it what it will. If you cast Acorns or Pulse
among them, Swine will strive for it; or if it be Carrion, Dogs will fight for
it; but if it be Gold or Jewels, Dogs and Swine will never strive for them, but
tread them in the dirt: but cast them before men, and they will be all together
by the ears for them. Lawyers contend about Law, and Princes about Dominion,
which others mind not; and Religious Persons strive about Religion; and what
wonder is this? It does but show that they value their Souls and Religion, and
that their Understandings are yet imper-But if you will follow these plain
Directions, Controversies need not break your Peace.

I. See that you be true to the Light and Law of Nature, which all Mankind is
obliged to observe. If you had no Scripture nor Christianity, Nature (that is,
the works of God) do tell you that there is a God, and that he is the rewarder
of them that diligently seek him; it tells you that God is absolutely perfect
in Power, Knowledge and Goodness, and that man is a reasonable free Agent made
by him, and therefore is his own, and at his Will and Government: It tells you
that a man's Actions are not indifferent, but some things we ought to do, and
some things we ought not to do, and that Virtue and Vice, moral Good and Evil
do greatly differ; and therefore that there is some universal Law which
obliges us to the Good, and forbids the Evil; and that this can be none but
the Law of the universal Governor, which is God; it tells all men, that they
owe this God their absolute Obedience, because he is their most wise and
absolute Ruler, and that they owe him their chiefest Love, because he is not
only the chief Benefactor, but also most perfectly amiable in himself: It tells
us, that he has made us all sociable Members of one world, and that we owe
Love and Helps to one another: It tells us that all this Obedience to God can
never be in vain, nor to our loss; and it tells us that we must all die, and
that fleshly pleasures and this transitory world will quickly leave us. There
is no more cause to doubt of all or any of this, than whether man be man: Be
true to this much, and it will be a great help to all the rest.

II. And as to Gods Supernatural Revelation, hold to Gods Word (the Sacred
Bible, written by the special Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, as the sufficient
Records of it.)

It is not Divine Faith, if it rest not on Divine Revelation; nor is it Divine
Obedience, which is not given to Divine Government or Command: Man's word is to
be believed but as it deserves, with a humane Faith, and man's Law must be
obeyed according to the measure of his Authority, with a humane Obedience: but
these are far different from a Divine. There is no universal Ruler of all the
World or Church, but God; no man is capable of it, nor any Council of men. Gods
Law is only in Nature, and in the Holy Scripture, and that being the Law by
which he will judge us, it is the Law which is the only Divine Rule of our
Faith or Judgment, our Hearts and Lives. Though all in the Scripture is not of
equal clearness or necessity, but a man may be saved that understands not a
thousand Sentences therein, yet all that is necessary to Salvation, is plainly
there contained; and Gods Law is perfect to its designed Use, and needs no
Supplement of man's: Hold close to Scripture-Sufficiency, or you will never know
what to hold to. Councils and Canons are far more uncertain, and there is no
agreement among their Subjects, which of them are obligatory, and which not;
nor any possible way to come to an Agreement.

III. Yet use with thankfulness the help of Men, for the understanding and
obeying the Word of God.

Though Lawyers, as such, have none of the Legislative power, you need their
help, to understand the Use of the Law aright: And though no men have power to
make Laws for the Church Universal, yet men must be our Teachers to understand
and use the Laws of God. We are not born with Faith or Knowledge; we know
nothing but what is taught us, except what Sense or Intuition perceives, or
Reason gathers from thence.

If you ask, Whom must we learn of? I Answer, of those that know, and have
learnt themselves. No Name, or Title, or Relation, or Habit, will enable any
man to teach you that which he knows not himself.

1. Children must learn of their Parents and Tutors.

2. People must learn of their able faithful Pastors and Catechizers.

3. All Christians must be Teachers by Charitable Helps to one another.

But Teaching and Law-making are two things. To Teach another, is but to show
him that same Scientifical Evidence of Truth, by which the Teacher knows it
himself, that the Learner may know it as he does. To say, You shall believe
that is true which I say is true, and that this is the meaning of it, is not
Teaching, but Law-giving; and to believe such an one, is not to learn or know;
though some humane Belief of our Teachers is necessary to Learners.

IV. Take nothing as necessary to the Being of Christianity, and to Salvation,
which is not recorded in the Scripture, and has not been held as necessary by
all true Christians in every Age and Place.

Not that we must know men first to be true Christians, that by them we may
know what Christian Truth is; but the plain Scripture tells all men what
Christianity is, and by that we know whom to take for Christians. But if any
thing be new, and risen since the Apostles writing of the Scripture, that can
be no Point essential to Christianity; else Christianity must be a mutable
thing, and not the same now as it was heretofore; or else there were no
Christians before this Novelty in the world. The Church were not the Church,
nor were any man a Christian, if they wanted any essential part of Faith or
Practice.

But here take heed of Sophisters deceit: Though nothing is necessary to
Salvation, but all sound Christians have still believed, yet all is not
necessary, or true, or good, which all good Christians have believed or done;
much less all which the tempted worser part have held: For though the Essence
of Christianity have been ever and every where the same, yet the Opinions of
Christians, and their Mistakes, and Faults have been none of their imitable
Faith or Practice. Humane Nature is essentially the same in Adam, and in all
men; but the Diseases of Nature are another thing. If all men have Sin and
Error, so have all Churches; their Christianity is of God, but the Corruptions
and Maladies of Christians are not. You must hold nothing but what Christians
of old have held as received from Gods Word; but because they have all some
Faults and Errors, you must not hold and do all those.

V. Maintain the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace, with all true
Christians as such, and live in Love in the Communion of Saints.

That is, with them that live in the Belief, and in holy Obedience to the
Christian Faith and Law. By their Fruits you shall know them. The Societies of
Malignants, who suppress true Practical Knowledge and Piety, and hate the best
men, and cherish Wickedness, and bloodily persecute those that in Conscience
obey not their Usurpations and Inventions, are not the Communion of Saints:
Wolves, Thorns and Thistles are not the Sheep or Vines of Christ.

VI. Prefer not any odd or singular Sect before the Universal Consent of the
Faithful, in your Learning or Communion, so far as the Judgment of men is to be
regarded.

Though we take not our Faith from the Number of Believers, and though the most
be usually none of the best, and some few are much wiser than the most, and in
a Controversy a few men of such knowledge are to be believed before the
multitude, of less knowledge, yet Christ is the Head of all true Christians,
and not of an odd Sect or Party only; and he has commanded them all to live as
Brethren in Love and holy Communion: And in all Sciences, the greater number of
agreeing men are liker to be in the right, than some straggling persons, who
show otherwise no more ability than they: At least, which side soever you like
best in less necessary Points, you must always be in unity with all true
Christians, and not unnecessarily differ from them.

VII. Never set a doubtful Opinion against a certain Truth or Duty: reduce not
things certain to things uncertain; but contrarily uncertain things to certain:
for instance, It is certain that you ought to live in Love and Peace with all
that are true Christians, and to do good to all, and wrong to none: Let not any
doubtful difference make you violate this Rule, and hate, and slander, and
backbite, and hurt them for a doubtful, indifferent or unnecessary thing: Set
not your Mint or Cummin, Tithes or Ceremonies, against Love and Justice, and
the great and certain things of the Law: It Is an ill Sect or Opinion that is
against the Nature and common Duty of Christianity and Humanity.

VIII. Faithfully serve Christ as far as you have attained, and be true to all
the Truth that you know; sin not by omission or practice against the Knowledge
which you have, lest God in justice give up your Understanding to believe a Lie.

IX. Remember that all men on earth are ignorant, and know but as in a Glass,
and in part, and therefore the best have many Errors: No man knows the
smallest Grass or Worm with an adequate perfect knowledge. And if God bear with
multitudes of Errors in us all, we must bear with such as are tolerable in each
other: It Is well if men be humble, and teachable, and willing to know. As we
have seen few more imperfect than the Sects that have asserted sinless
perfection, so we see few so fallible and erroneous, as the Roman Sect, which
pleads their Infallibility; when they tell you that you must believe their
Popes and Councils, that you may come to an end of Controversy: Ask them
whether we may here hope for any end of Ignorance, Error and Sin; if not, what
hope of ending all Controversies before we come to Heaven, where Ignorance is
ended? The Controversies against the Essentials of Christianity, were ended
with us all; when we became true and adult Christians, and the rest will be
lessened as we grow in knowledge. Divinity is not less mysterious than Law and
Physic, etc. where Controversies abound.

X. Yet sti^t not your selves in Knowledge, nor say we have learnt enough, but
continue as Christ's Scholars in Learning more and more to the Death: the
wisest know little, and may still increase. There is a great difference in
Excellency, Usefulness and Comfort between men of clear digested Knowledge, and
confused undigested Apprehensions.

These ten Rules practiced, will save you from being perplexed with Doubts and
Controversies of all Pretenders in Religion.

II. But if your trouble be not about Doctrinal Controversies, but about your
Sins, or want of Grace, and Spiritual state, digest well these following Truths
and Counsels, and it will cure you.

I. God's Goodness is equal to his Greatness; even to that Power that rules
Heaven and Earth. His Attributes are commensurate. And Goodness will do good to
capable Receivers: He loved us when we were Enemies; and he is essentially Love
it self.

II. Christ has freely taken Humane Nature, and made Satisfaction for the Sins
of the world, as full as answers his Ends, and so full that none shall perish
for want of sufficiency in his Sacrifice and Merits.

III. Upon these Merits Christ has made a Law, or Covenant of Grace, forgiving
all Sin, and giving freely everlasting Life to all that will believingly accept
it; so that all men's Sins are conditionally pardoned by the Tenor of this
Covenant.

IV. The Condition of Pardon and Life, is not that we sin no more or that by
any price we purchase it of God, or by our own works do benefit him, or buy his
Grace; but only that we believe him, and willingly accept of the Mercy which he
freely gives us, according to the Nature of the Gift; that is, that we accept
of Christ as Christ, to justify, sanctify, rule and save us.

V. God has Commissioned his Ministers to proclaim and offer this Covenant and
Grace to all, and earnestly entreat them in his Name to accept it, and be
reconciled to him; he has excepted none.

VI. No man that has this Offer, is damned, but only those that obstinately
refuse it to the last Breath.

VII. The Day of Grace is never so past to any Sinner, but still he may have
Christ and Pardon if he will; and if he have it not, it is because he will not.
And the Day of Grace is so far from being past, that it is savingly come to all
that are so willing; and Grace is still offered urgently to all.

VIII. The Will is the Man in God's account, and what a man truly would be and
have, he is and shall have: Consent to the Baptismal Covenant, is true Grace
and Conversion, and such have right to Christ and Life.

IX. The number and greatness of former Sin, is no exception against the pardon
of any penitent converted Sinner: God pardons great and small to such; where
Sin abounds, Grace superaboundeth; and much is forgiven, that men may be
thankful, and love much.

X. Repentance is true, though Tears and passionate Sorrow be defective, when a
man had rather leave his Sin than keep it, and sincerely, though imperfectly
endeavors fully to overcome it: No Sin shall damn a man which he more hates
than loves, and had truly rather leave than keep, and shows this by true
endeavor.

XI. The best man has much evil, and the worst have some good; but it is that
which is preferred and predominant in the Will, which differenceth the Godly
and the wicked. He that in estimation, choice, and life performs God, and
Heaven, and Holiness before the world and the pleasure of sin, is a true godly
man, and shall be saved.

XII. The best have daily need of Pardon, even for the faultiness of their
holiest Duties, and must daily live on Christ for pardon.

XIII. Even Sin against Knowledge and Conscience, are too often committed by
regenerate men; for they know more than others do, and their Consciences are
more active: Happy were they indeed if they could be as good as they know they
should be, and love God as much as they know they should love him, and were
clear, from all the Relicts of Passion and Unbelief, which Conscience tells
them are their Sins.

XIV. God will not take Satan's Temptations to be our Sins, but only our not
resisting them. Christ himself was tempted to the most heinous Sin, even to
fall down to the Devil and worship him: God will charge Satan's blasphemous
Temptations on himself alone.

XV. The Thoughts, and Fears, and Troubles which Melancholy and natural
Weakness and Distemper irresistably causes, has much more of Bodily Disease,
than of Sin, and therefore is of the least of Sins; and indeed no more Sin than
to burn or be thirsty in a Fever, further than as some Sin did cause the
Disease that causes it, or further than there is left some power in Reason to
resist them.

XVI. Certainty of our Faith and Sincerity is not necessary to Salvation, but
the Sincerity of faith it self is necessary. He shall be saved that gives up
himself to Christ, though he know not that he is sincere in doing it. Christ
knows his own Grace, when they that have it, know not that it is sound. It is
but few true Christians that attain to certainty of Salvation; for weak Grace
clogged with much Corruption, is hardly known, and usually joined with fear and
doubting.

XVII. Probability of Sincerity and Trust in Christ, may cause a man justly to
live and die in Peace and Comfort, without proper certainty; else few
Christians should live and die in peace; and yet we see by experience that many
do so. The common Opinion of most Church-writers for 400 years after Christ,
was, that the uncontinued sort of Christians might fall from a state of Grace,
in which had they continued, they had been saved, and therefore that none but
strong confirmed Christians at most could be certain of Salvation: and many
Protestant Churches still are of that mind, and yet they live not in despair or
terror. No man is certain that he shall not fall as heinously as David and
Peter did; and yet while they have no cause to think it likely, they need not
live in terror for the uncertainty. No Wife or Child is certain that the
Husband or Father will not murder them, and yet they may live comfortably, and
not fear it.

XVIII. Though Faith be so weak, as to be assaulted with doubts whether the
Gospel be true, and there be any Life to come; and though our Trust in Christ
be not strong enough to banish our Fears and Troubles, yet if we see so much
evidence of Credibility in the Gospel, and Probability of a better Life
hereafter, as causes us here to fix our Hopes and Choice, and to resolve for
those Hopes to seek first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, and let go
all the world rather than sell those Hopes, and live a holy Life to obtain it,
this Faith will save us.

XIX. But God's Love and Promise through Christ, is so sure a ground for Faith
and Comfort, that it is the great Duty and Interest of all men confidently and
quietly to trust him, and then to live in the joy of holy Trust and Hope.

XX. If any man doubt of his Salvation because of the greatness of his Sin, the
way to quietness, is presently to be willing to forsake them. Either he that
complains is willing to be holy, and forsake his Sin, or not; if you be not
willing to leave them, but love them, and would keep them, why do you complain
of them, and mourn for that which you so much love? If your Child should cry
and roar because his Apple is sour, and yet will not be persuaded to forbear to
eat it, you would not pity him, but whip him as perverse. But if you are truly
willing to leave it, you are already saved from its damning guilt.

XXI. If you are in doubt of the Sincerity of your Faith, and other Graces, and
all your Examination leaves you uncertain, the way is pres^ntly to end your
doubt by actual giving up your self to Christ. Do you not know whether you have
been hitherto a true believer, you may know that Christ is now offered to you,
consent but to the Covenant, and accept the offer, and you may be sure that he
is yours.

XXII. Bare examining is not always to be done for assurance, but labor to
excite and exercise much the grace that you would be assured of; The way to be
sure that you believe and love God, is to study the promises and goodness of
God, till active Faith assure you that you believe, and you love God and Glory
till you are assured that you love them.

XXIII. It is not by some extraordinary act good or bad, that we may be sure
what state the soul is in; but by the predominant bent and drift and tenor of
heart and life.

XXIV. Though we cry out that we cannot believe, and we cannot love God, and we
cannot pray aright, Christ can help us, without his grace we can do nothing;
but his grace is sufficient for us, and he denies not his further help when
once he has but made us willing; but has bid us ask and have, and if any lack
wisdom let him ask it of God, who gives to all liberally, and upbraideth not
with former folly, but gives his spirit to them that ask him.

XXV. This sin called the blasphemy of the Holy Ghost is the sin of no one that
believes Jesus to be the Christ, nor of any that fear it, no nor of every
infidel, but only of some few obstinate unbelieving enemies, for it is only
this [When men see such miracl^^ of Christ and his spirit as should or could
convince them that he is of God, and when they have no other shift, they will
rather maintain that he is a C^nju^^r (...) wrought them by the Devil.

XXVI. Though sinful fear is very troublesom^ and not to be cherished God often
permits and uses it to good; to keep us from being bold with sin, and from
those sinful pleasures and love of the world, and presumption and security,
which are far more dangerous, and to take down pride, and keep us in a sensible
watchful state, for just fear is made to preserve us from the hurt and danger
feared.

XXVII. He that goes fearing and trembling to Heaven, will there quickly be
past all fear and doubts and heaviness for ever.

XXVIII. When Christ for our sins was in his agony, and when he cried out My
God, my God, why have thou forsak^n me? He was then nevertheless beloved of his
Father: And he was tempted that he might succor them that are tempted, and
suffered such derision, that he might he a Compationate High Priest to
sufferers.

XXIX. By how much the more the troubles and blasphemous temptations, and
doubts, and fears of a man are grievous, displeasing, and hateful to him, by so
much the more he may be assured that they shall not condemn him, because they
are not beloved sins.

XXX. All our troubles are over ruled by G^d, and it is far better for us to be
at his choice and disposal than our own, or our d^a^est friends; and he has
promised that all things shall work together for our good, Romans 8.28.

XXXI. A delight in God and goodness, and a joyful praising frame of soul, from
the belief of the love of God through Christ, is far more to be desired than
grief and tears, which do but sweep away some dirt that love, joy and
thankfulness may enter, which are the true Evangelical Christian temper, and
likest to the heavenly state.

Digest these Truths and they will cure you.

III. But if Melancholy have got head already, there must be besides what is
said, some other and Proper remedies used, and the difficulty is great, because
the disease makes them self-conceited, unreasonable, wilful and unruly, and
they will hardly be persuaded that the disease is in their bodies, but only in
the souls, and will not believe but they have reason for all what they think
and do, or if they confess the contrary, they plead disability, and say, we can
think and do no othe^w^se then we do.

But supposing that there is some use of reason left, I will give them yet some
further Counsel, and what they cannot do their friends must help them to their
power, which I shall add.

1. Consider that it should be easy for you in your confounding, troubling
thoughts, to perceive that your understandings are not now so sound and strong
as other men's; and therefore be not wiiful and self-conceited, and think not
that your thoughts are righter then theirs, but believe wiser men, and be ruled
by them.

Answer me this question; Do you know any Minister or friend that is wiser than
your self? If you say no, how foolishly proud are you, if you say yea, then ask
the Minister or friend what he thinks of your condition, and believe him, and
be ruled by him, rather then by your crazed self.

2. Do you find that your troubles do you more good or hurt? Do they make you
fitter or unfitter to believe and love God, and rejoice in him, and praise him?
If you feel that they are against all that is good, you may be sure that they
are so far from the Devils temptations, and are pleasing to him, and will you
cherish or plead for the work of Satan, which you find is against yourselves
and God.

3. Avoid your musings, and exercise not your thoughts now too deeply nor too
much; long Meditation is a duty to some, but not to you, no more than it is a
man's duty to go to Church that has his leg broken, or his foot out of joint:
He must rest and ease it till it be set again and strengthened, you may live in
the faith and fear of God, without setting your self to deep disturbing
thoughts.

Those that will not obey this counsel, their friends must rouse them from
their musings; and call them off to something else.

4. Therefore you must not be much alone, but always in some pleasing cheerful
Company, solitariness does but cherish musings,

Nor must such be long in secret prayer, but more in public prayer with others.

5. Let those thoughts which you have, be laid out on the most excellent
things: pore not all on your selves, and on your distempered hearts, the best
may find there much matter of trouble: As Milstones wear themselves if they go
when they have no Cor^; so do the thoughts of such as think not of better
things then their own hearts, if you have any power of your own thoughts, force
them to think most of these four things.

1. The infinite goodness of God, who is fuller of Love than the Sun is of
light,

2. Of the unmeasurable Love of Christ in man's Redemption, and of the
sufficiency of his sacrifice and merits.

3. Of the free Covenant and offer of Grace, which gives pardon and life to
all that do not prefer the pleasure of sin before it, and obstinately refuse it
to the last.

4. Of the unconceivable Glory and Joy which all the blessed have with Christ,
and which God has promised with his Oath and Seal, to all that consent to the
Covenant of Grace, and are willing to be saved and ruled by Christ. These
thoughts will cure melancholy fears.

6. Use not your selves to a complaining talk, but talk most of the great
mercies of God which you have received. Dare you deny them? if not, they are
not worthier of your discourse than your present sufferings, let not all men
know that you are in your troubles, complaining does but feed them, and it
discourageth others: Open them to none but your secret Councillors and
friends, use much to speak of the love of God, and the riches of Grace, and it
will divert and sweeten your sowrer thoughts.

7. Especially when you pray, resolve to spend most of your time in
Thanksgiving and Praising God. If you cannot do it with the joy that you
should, yet do it as you can. You have not the power of your comforts, but have
you no power of your tongues, say not that you are unfit for thanks and
praises, unless you had a praising heart and were the Children of God: For
every man good and bad is bound to Praise God, and to be thankful for all that
he has received, and to do it as well as he can rather then leave it undone:
And most Christians want assurance of their Adoption; and must they therefore
forbear all praise and thanksgiving to God. Doing it as you can is the way to
be able to do it better: Thanksgiving stirs up thankfulness in the heart,
but by your objection you may perceive what the Devil drives at and gets by
your melancholy, he would turn you off from all thankfulness to God, and from
the very mention of his Love and goodness in your praises.

8. When vexatious or blasphemous thoughts are thrust into your mind by Satan,
neither give them entertainment nor yet be overmuch troubled at them. 1st. Use
that reason and power that is left you, resolutely to cast them out, and turn
your thoughts to somewhat else; do not say I cannot: If you can no otherwise
command and turn away your thoughts, rise up and go into some company or to
some employment which will divert you and take them up. Tell me what you would
do if you heard a scold in the street reviling you, or heard an Atheist there
talk against God, would you stand still to hear them, or would you talk it out
again with them, or rather go from them and disdain to hear them, or debate the
case with such as they. Do you in your case, when Satan casts in ugly or
despairing or murmuring thoughts, go away from them to some other thoughts or
business.

If you cannot do this of your self, tell your friend when the temptation
comes, and it is his duty who has the care of you to divert you with some
other talk or works, or force you into diverting Company.

Yet be not too much troubled at the temptation; for trouble of mind does keep
the evil matter in your memory, and so increase it, as pain of a sore draws the
blood and spirits to the place. And this is the design of Satan, to give you
troubling thoughts, and then to cause more by being troubled at those, and so
for one thought and trouble to cause another, and that another, and so on, as
waves in the Sea do follow each other, to be tempted is common to the best: I
told you to what Idolatry Christ was tempted: When you feel such thoughts,
thank God that Satan cannot force you to love them, or consent.

9. Again still remember what a comfortable Evidence you carry about with you,
that your sin is not damning, while you feel that you love it not, but hate it
and are weary of it: Scarce any sort of sinners have so little pleasure in
their sin as the melancholy, nor so little desire to keep them, and only
beloved sins undo men.

Be sure that you live not idly, but in some constant business of a lawful
calling, so far as you have bodily strength, Idleness is a constant sin, and
labor is a duty: Idleness is but the Devils home for temptation, and for
unprofitable distracting musings: Labor profits others and our selves, both
souls and body need it: Six days must you labor, and must not eat the bread of
idleness, Prove. 31. God has made it our duty, and will bless us in his
appointed way: I have known grievous dispairing melancholy cured and turned
into a life of Godly cheerfulness, principally by setting upon constancy and
diligence in the business of families and callings, It turns the thoughts from
temptation, and leaves the Devil no opportunity, it pleases God if done in
obedience, and it purifieth the distempered blood: Though thousands of poor
people that live in want, and have Wiv^s and Children that must also feel it,
one would think should be distracted with griefs and cares, yet few of them
fall into the disease of melancholy, because labor keeps the body sound and
leaves them no leisure for melancholy musings: whereas in London and great
Towns, abundance of Women that never sweat with bodily work, but live in
idleness (especially when from fullness they fall into want) are miserable
objects, continually vexed and near distraction with discontent and a restless
mind.

If you will not be persuaded to business, your friends if they can should
force you to it.

And if the Devil turn Religious as an Angel of light, and tell you that this
is but turning away your thoughts from God, and that worldly thoughts and
business are unholy and fit for worldly men, tell him that Adam was in
innocence to dress and keep his Garden, and Noah that had all the world was to
be Husbandman, and Abraham Isaac and Jacob kept Sheep and Cattle, and Paul was
a Tent maker, and Christ himself is justly supposed to have worked at his
supposed Fathers Trade, as he went on fishing with his Disciples: And Paul
says, idleness is disorderly walking, and be that will not work let him not
eat: God made souls and body, and has commanded work to both.

And if Satan would drive you unseasonably upon longer secret prayer then you
can bear, remember that even sickness will excuse the sick from that sort of
duty which they are unable for, and so will your disease: And the unutterable
groans of the spirit are accepted.

If you have privacy out of hearing, I would give you this advice, that instead
of long meditation or long secret Prayer, you will sing a Psalm of praise to
God, such as the 23, or the 133, etc. This will excite your Spirit to that sort
of holy affection, which is much more acceptable to God, and suitable to the
hopes of a believer, than your repining troubles are.

IV. But yet I have not done with the duty of those that take care of
distressed melancholy persons, especially Husbands to their Wives (for it is
much more frequently the disease of Women than of men) when the disease
disableth them to help themselves, the most of their helps under God must be
from others: And this is of two Sorts, 1. In prudent carriage to them. 2. In
Medicine and Diet: A little of both.

1. A great part of their cure lies in pleasing them, and avoiding all
displeasing things as far as lawfully can be done: Displeasedness is much of
the Disease, and a Husband that has such a Wife, is obliged to do his best to
cure her, both in Charity and by his relative Bond, and for his own peace. It
is a great weakness in some men, that if they have Wives, who by natural
passionate weakness, or by melancholy or crazedness, is wilful and will not
yield to reason, they show their anger at them to their further provocation:
You took her in marriage for better and for worse, for sickness and health: If
you have chosen one that, as a Child, must have every thing that she cries
for, and must be spoken fair, and as it was rockt in the Cradle, or else it
will be worse, you must condescend to do it, and so bear the burden which you
have chosen, as may not make it heavier to you. Your passion and sourness
toward a person that cannot cure her own unpleasing carriage, is a more
unexcusable fault and folly than hers, who has not the power of reason as you
have.

If you know any lawful thing that will please them in speech, in company, in
apparel, in rooms, in attendance, give it them: If you know at what they are
displeased remove it, I speak not of the Distracted that must be mastered by
forces, but of the sad and melancholy, could you devise how to put them in a
pleased condition, you might cure them.

2. As much as you can divert them from the thoughts which are their trouble,
keep them on some other talks and business, break in upon them and interrupt
their musings, rouse them out of it, but with loving importunity; suffer them
not to be long alone, get fit company to them, or them to it, especially suffer
them not to be idle, but drive or draw them to some pleasing works, which may
stir the body and employ the thoughts: If they are addicted to reading, let it
not be too long, nor any books that are unfit for them, and rather let another
read to them than themselves: Doctor Sibbes Books, and some useful pleasing
History or Chronicles, or news of great matters abroad in the world, may do
somewhat to divert them.

3. Often set before them the great truths of the Gospel which are fittest to
comfort them: And read them informing comforting Books, and live in a loving
cheerful manner with them.

4. Choose for them a skilful prudent Minister of Christ, both for their secret
counsel and public audience: One that is skilled in such cases, and one that
is peaceable and not contentious, erroneous or fond of odd opinions: one that
is rather judicious in his preaching and praying than passionate, except when
he urges the Gospel Doctrines of consolation, and then the more fervently the
better, and one that they much esteem and reverence, and will regardfully hear.

5. Labor to convince them frequently, how great a wrong it is to the God of
Infinite Love and Mercy, and to a Savior who has so wonderfully expressed his
Love, to think hardlier of him than they would do of a Friend, yea or of a
moderate Enemy; and so hardly to be persuaded of that Love, which has been
manifested by the most stupendous Miracle; Had they but a Father, Husband or
Friend that had ventured his Life for them, and given them all that ever they
had, were it not a shameful Ingratitude and Injury, to suspect still that they
intended all against them, and designed mischief to them, and did not love
them. How has God and our Savior deserved this: And many that say, it is not
God that they suspect, but themselves, do but hide their misery by this
mistake, while they deny Gods greatest Mercies, and though they would fain have
Christ and Grace, will not believe that God who offers it them, will give it
them; but think he is one that will remedilesly damn a poor Soul that desires
to please him, and had rather have his Grace, than all the sinful pleasures of
the world.

6. Carry them often abroad into strange Company; usually they reverence
strangers, and strange Faces do divert them, especially traveling into other
parts, if they can bear the Motion.

7. Its a useful way if you can to engage them in comforting others, that are
deeper in Distresses than they: For this will tell them, that their Case is not
singular, and they will speak to themselves, while they speak to others. One of
the chief means which cured my fears of my Souls Condition about Forty eight
years ago, was often comforting others that had the same doubts, whose Lives
persuaded me of their sincerity.

And it would be a pretty diversion to send to them some person that is in some
Error, which they are most against, to dispute it with them, that while they
whet their wits to convince them, and confute them, it may turn their thoughts
from their own Distress. F^^^stus tells us, that a Melancholy Patient of his,
that was a Papist, was cured when the Reformation came into the Country, by
eager and often disputing against it. A better Cause may better do it.

8. If other means will not do, neglect not Physic; and though they will be
averse to it, as believing that the Disease is only in the mind they must be
persuaded or forced to it. I have known the Lady deep in Melancholy, who a
long time would neither speak nor take Physic, nor endure her Husband to go
out of the room; and with the restraint and grief he dyed, and she was cured by
Physic put down her ^hroat with a Pipe by force.

If it were as some of them fancy, a possession of the Devil, its possible
Physic might cast him out: For if you cure the Melancholy, his Bed is taken
away, and the advantage gone by which he works: Cure the Choler and the
Choleric Operations of the Devil cease. It is by means and humors in us that
he works.

But choose a Physician that is specially skilled in this Disease, and has
cured many others; meddle not with Women and ignorant boasters; nor with
young, unexperienced men, nor with hasty, busy, overdoing, ventrous men, that
cannot have time to study the Patients Temper and Disease; but choose
experienced, cautelous men.

Medicinal Remedies and Theological use not to be given together by the same
hand; but in this case of perfect complication of the Maladies of Mind and
Body; I think it not unfit, if I do it not unskilfully: My advice is, that they
that can have an ancient, skilful, experienced, honest, careful, cautelous
Physician, neglect not to use him, nor meddle with any of the medicines which I
hereafter mention, nor with any other Receipts whatever, but by their
Physicians Advice; for there is so great diversity of bodily Temperatures, Age
and many Accidents, and of the roots and causes of the same Symptoms, as that
the same Medicine may cure one and hurt another, and may cure the same man at
one time which at another time it may hurt; Skill in managing of it does much
of the Cure; and not the Medicine without it.

But yet because there are Multitudes of persons so very poor, that they cannot
give a shilling to a Physician, and the dearness of Physicians and Apothecaries
so discourageth them, who have not money, that they do not seek to any for
helps, but some Women that tell them of their Receipts; And there are many in
the Countries that are quite out of the reach of a skilful physician; And
because there are now so great a number of Empricks and young, unexperienced
Physicians, that will rashly venture, before they thoroughly understand the body
or the Disease; And because overdoing and venturing rashly kills so many: For
these Reasons I will add a few safe and cheap Medicines, which the poor may
make themselves, and which will not cause much loathing to their stomachs;
though I venture on the Censure of some Physicians; I am none my self, but I
see many score much younger than I that venture much farther, when they have
got a License, to the great cost of the purfes and bodies of their Patients.

The Disease called Melancholy is formally in the Spirits, whose distemper
unfits them for their office, in serving the Imagination, understanding, memory
and affections; so by their distemper the thinking faculty is diseased, and
becomes like an inflamed eye, or a foot that is sprained or out of joint,
disabled for its proper work.

The matter which is the root and foundation, is usually a depravation of the
Mass of Blood, which is the Vehicle of the spirits, and that is usually
accompanied with some diseases of the Stomach, Spleen, Liver or other parts
which are for the due concoxion, motion, and purification of the blood: which
Diseases are so various that they are seldom the same in many persons, and
hardly known to the wisest physicians: The Spleen is most commonly accused, and
often guilty, and the Stomach, Pancreas, Mesentery, Omentum, Liver, yea and
Reigns not rarely are the root, sometimes by obstructing humors, and that of
several qualities, and sometimes by Stones, and sometimes by various sorts of
humors, and sometime by Vesicles; But obstructed if not tumified Spleens are
most suspected.

Such a black distinct humor called Melancholy which has of old been
accused, is rarely, if ever found in any, unless you will call either blood, or
excrementitious humors by that name, which are grown black by mortification,
for want of motion and spirits: But the blood it self may be called Melancholy
Blood, when it has contracted that distemper and pravity by feculency,
sluggishness or adustion, which disposes it to the Melancholy effects.

But sometimes persons that are sound, are suddenly cast into Melancholy by a
fright, or by the death of a friend, or by some great loss or cross, or some
sad Tidings, even in an hour; which shows that it comes not always from any
humor called Melancholy, nor for any foregoing Disease at all.

But the very act of the mind does suddenly disorder the passions, and perturbe
the Spirits, and the Disturbed Spirits in time vitiate the blood which
contains them, and the vitiated blood does in time vitiate the Viscera and
parts which it passes through; and so the disease beginning in the Senses and
Soul, does draw first the Spirits, and then the humors, and then the parts,
into the Fellowship, and Soul and Body are sick together.

And it is of great use to the Physician to know where the Depravation did
begin, whether in the mind or in the body, and if in the body, whether in the
blood or in the Viscera, for the cure must be fitted accordingly.

And yet the Melancholy Brains may be eased, and the mental depravation much
kept under, though an obstructed, yea a scarrhifyed Spleen continue uncured
many years.

And though the Disease begin in the mind and Spirits, and t^^ ^ody be yet
sound, yet Physic even Purging often cures it; ^^ough the Patient say that
Physic cannot cure Souls: For the Soul and Body are ^onderfully copartners in
their diseases and c^re, and if we know not how it does it, yet when experience
te^^eth us that it does it, we have reason to use such means.

I. Right usage and diet are a great part of the Cure: Of the first I spoke
before. The Patient must be pleased, delighted; dealt with as capable, kept
from solitude and from musing, and from sad and troubling words and things, and
their objections wisely answered; and their judgments in Religion kept from
troubling mistakes, by right information, especially they must be kept in
diverting business, and if it could be hard labor, even to good transpiration
and sweat, to actuate, contemperate, and purify the blood, and excite the
igneous spirits (which are the instruments of the motion and purification of
the blood, and of life it self) it would greatly help the Cure, especially such
exercise twice a day, before Dinner and Supper, an hour or two together,
discipate and concoct indigested matter, excit natural heat, and expels
excrements.

As to Diet, it must as Physic be fitted to the case of the body.

The Disease is sometimes in dry bodies, and sometime in those that are moist
and fat. It is sometime in overheated blood, and sometime in that which is
overcold and sluggish; And these must have quite different cures. You may thus
perceive the differences in the main: One sort of Melancholy Persons are only
sad, misgiving, fearful of troubled thoughts, despairing, as undone, and
solitary musing, and cannot be satisfied and comforted, much silent and dull to
action, and will hardly stir, rather over cold, than hot, troubled with wind
and ill dige^^ion.

But there is another sort that have overheated blood, that are fierce,
talkative, bold, boasting, laughing, that have seeming visions and raptures,
unruly, confident, and these must have another manner of remedy, and are almost
mad already.

And those that have dry lean bodies, must have a moister diet and medicine,
than the cold, moist and fat.

I. For the most part all of them are merely melancholy, and not overheated
near to madness, should eat but sparingly, so as may not spoil digestion
(though some of them have a greedy Appetite) they should forbear Cheese and
Beef, and Swines Flesh and raw Fruits, and for other things not be over curious
in the quality.

But those that have hot and dry bodies should avoid fasting, and eat as much
as they can well digest (but not more) and should eat boiled Burrage and
Lettice and Stewed Prunes, Stewed or Roasted Apples half an hour before meat,
and raw Apples, if experience of windiness or Rheum forbid it nor.

II. And for Physic, though the overheated talkative confident sort, be near
to Bedlam, I shall briefly offer a little for prevention, if there be hope.

1. Be sure that they taste no Brandy or hot waters, unless you would have them
presently stark Mad: no nor any hot Wines, strong Liquors or aromatic things;
such as Ginger, Pepper, Cloves, or any of the like, nor Mustard, Horseradish,
Garlike, Onyons, or any biting thing.

2. Let them purge much with Sena in Whey: Take three Gallons of clarified
whey, put in it two handful of Balm, and as much fumitory (if the time of years
serve) and as much Borage, boil it to two Gallons, and put it into a stean Pot
of earth that has a Spigot at the bottom, (or a small barrel) and put into it
in a thin Canvass Bag, two ounces of Sena, an ounce of Epithyme, an ounce of
bruised Anniseed, and an handful of ground Ivy (called Ale-hoof) bruised, and
two gads of Steel to sink it; when it has stood two days or less, drink a Pint
every morning in bed, and lie an hour after it, and if it give not three
stools, drink near a pint more at five a Clock, continue this three weeks at
least every day, having another vessel ready when the first is done.

Or else boil all the same herbs in three points of Whey to half the quantity,
strein it, and put in it three drams of Senna, and a dram of bruised Anniseed:
let it stand cold an hour and half, and after warm on gentle Embres one hour:
drink it the next morning, and so on for three weeks.

3. Boil six sliced Pippens or Permains in three pints of Whey to a quart:
strein it and drink a pint every morning in bed (and if you can sleep an hour
after it) and the other pint at night, instead of other Breakfast or Supper: Do
this many weeks when you take not the purging Whey.

And if you drink the like instead of beer, at Dinner to a hot dry body it is
best.

4. But it is the ordinary colder, sad, despairing Melancholy that I intend in
these Prescripts; And for such use these following means.

1. If it be in the heat of Summer, and they be not very cold, the foresaid
purging Whey is good for them: But otherwise instead of it use this following
diet Drink, which is not very loathsome to the Stomach.

1. Take pretty strong Wort, and boil in five Gallons, till it come to three,
of the leaves of Balm, Bo^age, Agrimony, Sca^i^us and Wild-Marjorum (or Pot
Marjorum, where the other cannot be got) each two small handful of the Roots of
Dandelion and Polipody, each two ounces, use it as you do other Beer; and when
you turn it up (casting out the Herbs and Roots before you put Barm to it) put
in it this following bag to three Gallons.

1. Take of Sena three ounces and an half, of Wild-Marjorum and S^^^t-Marjorum
each a small handful, of Liquorice scrapt and Anniseed bruised each an ounce,
of Chalk pund a pound, and three gads of Steel, put all in a thin Canvass bag,
and so hang it by a Thread, that the bottom only may touch the bottom of the
Vessel, when it has stood two days drink a pint every morning till it is done
(a full body that can bear more purging, may take another draught at five a
Clock, and one that suspecteth a bilious lives and Gall, may put but three
ounces of Senna, and one of Rhubarb.

3. One that loves the taste of Wormwood to overcome the Senna taste, and is
in haste, may take this following instead of the former.

Take of good beer ready to drink three Gallons, put into a wooden or earthen
Vessel as aforesaid, and hang in it a bag that has of Wormwood, Agrimony, and
Wild-Marjorum each two handful, of Centaury one handful, of Senna three ounces,
of Liquorice and Anniseed of each an ounce, of Steel three gads, at two days
end drink it as before.

If it be a weak thin body, he may take it with intermission as he is able, and
forbear every third and fourth day.

4. These Diet Drinks are not all so effectual as this that follows, but
easier to most Stomachs: but the deeper melancholy persons were better take
the next.

Take of Senna an ounce, of Liquorice scrapt two scruples, of Cynamon bruised
one scruple; put all in forty four spoanfuls of water, let it stand in a Pot
stopped, one hour and an half cold, and another hour and an half warm on the
Embers, but not boiling; strein it, and let it stand in a Pot well stopped still
two hours: Take of this twelve or fourteen spoonfuls, of Syrup of Vinegar an
ounce, of Cremor Tartari powder a dram, disolve it on the Embres and drink it
warm in bed, and lie an hour after, but do not sleep or sweat: at four hour
ends, drink a draught of broth made of Veal or Cock till it will gelly, which
had boiled in it some Epithyme, Polypody, Balm and a little Rosemary, with a
little Nutmeg.

Take this potion in this manner three next days together, every week for a
body that can bear it, in ordinary Melancholy for seven weeks together, in old
obstinate Melancholy for twelve or fourteen weeks: But if it be a body not
full and strong enough to bear three days, take it the two next days every
week: It gripeth more than the ordinary ways of using Senna, but that need not
be feared, for it never brings the Bloody Flux nor uses to weaken: And the
griping does good, by drawing down the troubling matter from the head into the
common passages.

5. If it be a thin tender body, aged or weak, that has sharp humors, and can
bear none of the aforesaid more effectual purges, such a one may either in
Chicken broth, or in Barley water, or rather in Whey or Posset Drink boyld
strong with Pippens, infuse all night (or rather three hours) some Senna (in a
Cloth) and drink it in the morning as often as he can bear it, that is two drams
for very weak Persons, or three ordinarily, in near a point of the liquor,
putting a little Cynamon into it.

6. If the foresaid remedies do but begin the cure, use this next to perfect
it; or this alone for tender and cold Stomachs that cannot bear the other,
which yet may much better go before this, and this come last.

Take for a hot body white Wine, for a cold body Sherry, two quarts, put it in
a great bottle, and put to it of Senna an ounce, of Cynamon bruised two drams,
of Saffr^^ one dram, of Cremor Tartary powdered half an ounce if it be Sherry,
or two drams if it be white Wine. Let it stand close stopped three days (shaking
it often) then put it out into several bottles (to keep the better) take of this
three spoonful fasting every day, two may serve when it is for prevention in a
weak body, or four when you would purge more. If the taste seem the worse for
the Tartar to any, you may leave it out, and put instead of it half an ounce of
Epithyme, and take a dram of Cremor Tartary dissolved in a draught of good
broth and hour or more after it.

This Medicine is not loathsome, or nauseous to the stomach, and is magnified by
former and later Physicians of the greatest experience and success in this
Disease: But all such things must be patiently long continued, and no violent
Medicines used.

7. Chalybeat Medicines also are usually profitable in this Disease, but
because Country people cannot themselves make them, I am loath to insert them,
one I will prescribe for them that can have an Apothecary to make it.

Take of unprepared filings of Steel six ounces, make it red hot in an iron
ladle; and quench it in five or six ounces of white Wine: Do this thrice, then
put to the wine of Worwood Water, and of Scurvy-Grass-Water, each a pint, of
Aqua Mirabilis two ounces (or instead of them all a quart of Compound
Radish-wader) of Sugar six ounces, of Senna an ounce and half, of Cremor
Tartary three drams, of Saffron a dram, of Cynamon a dram, let it stand in a
warm place three days, (often shaking it) Take two ounces, four or five
spoonfuls, fasting many weeks together, and walk or labor, after it.

Or after sufficient purging fresh Succory Roots make into a Conserve, and
taken with a little prepared Steel, for poor people that have obstructions, may
do well, half an ounce of the Conserve with half a scruple of Steel.

8. If they be Costive, so as to effect the head the more, else let them do as
follows.

1. Fast not, especially in the mornings, but take some iight breakfast and eat
the less at dinner, either half a dish of Pannado, with four or five spoonfuls
of white Wine in it (when they eat it;) or Gruel, or broth made of Veal or
Chicken, or on old Cock with a Sheeps head, boyld till it will gelly, and a
little white Wine put in at the eating, and the same at Supper, unless the
Stomach be clogged with crudities, and then forbear Supper or Dinner.

2. Some find a little Saffron in broth a cure of Costiveness, and it is one of
the truest Cordials known in the World.

3. With some, a Dram of Cremor Tartary in broth will do it, in the Morning.

4. Sit not down nor walk as soon as you rise in the Morning, but stand still
upright a quarter of an hour when you are dressed, and as long after Dinner; it
helps the excrements too descend. And if you feel the least possibility, go
to Stool, and make not too much haste away.

5. If you have no Rheum or cold windiness of Stomach, eat sometimes ten or
twelve stewed Prunes, and sometimes four or five roasted Pippens half an hour
before Dinner.

6. Take Chio Turpentine (or Venice Turpentine if that cannot be had,) wash it
well and make it into hard Pills with Powder of Epithyme, as much as you can
get it to take up: Let the Pills be small, and take a Dram or more or less as
you are able to get them down all at a swallow covered in a Spoonful of Syrup
of Apples, or of Balm, or of Mallows, a little before a late Supper, to work
the next morning; or Turpentine with Liuqorice powder, or of it self, in an
Egg, or any way got down may serve.

7. If more be needful make the same Turpentine into Pills with Rubarb
powdered, or Senna powdered, or both together, and take it before Supper. It
goes down easily in a Spoonful of any pleasant Syrup.

But use no more Clysters, nor purging things, when once the Melancholy is
overcome then you needs must, for it difuseth nature as to its proper office.

8. Their drink is of great moment, that unless in cold bodies, they take no
strong Wines nor Claret, but either Ale or good Beer with a little white Wine,
or Possit drink made but with little Milk, and some strong Ale and White Wind,
or Posset drink made with Syder, Ale and a little white Wine.

Or take a quart of the juice of Balm, with a little ground Ivey, and put it
into a Vessel of good Ale or Beer, of about three or four gallons, and drink
this at meat. Or sometimes some Wormwood Ale, but not long.

But cold dull bodies may drink good strong Beer or Ale, that is not hard, and
fat cold persons may endure Sack.

The Devil has another cure for the sad and Melancholy than such as I have
here prescribed, which is to cast away all belief of the immortality of the
soul, and the life to come, or at least not to think of it, and for to take
Religion to be a superstitious, needless fancy, and for to laugh at the
threatenings of the Scripture, and go to Play Houses and Cards, and Dice, and to
drink and play away Melancholy; Honest Recreations are very good for
Melancholy Persons if we could get them to use it, but alas this Satanical
cure is but like the Witches bargain with the Devil, who promises them much,
but pays them with shame and utter misery. The end of that mirth is
uncureable sorrow, if timely repentance cure not the cause, the Garrison of
Satan in the hearts of Sinners are strongly kept when they are in peace, but
when they have fooled away time, and Mercy, and Hope, dye they must, there is no
remedy, and to go merrily and unbelievingly to Hell, after all Gods calls and
Warnings, will be no abatement of their torment, to go out of the world in the
guilt of Sin, and to end life before they would know the use of it, and to
undergo Gods Justice for the mad contempt of Christ and Grace, will put a sad
end to all their mirth, for there is no Peace to the wicked says my God, Isa.
48.22. and 57.21. But Christ says to his mourners, Mat. 5.4. Blessed are you
that mourn, for you shall be comforted, and John 16.20. Ye shall weep and
lament, but the world shall rej^^c^, and ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow
shall be turned into joy. And Solomon knew that the House of Mourning was
better than the house of feasting, and that the heart of the wise is in the
House of Mourning, but the heart of Fools in the house of mirth. Eccles. 7.2,
3, 4. But holy joy of Faith and Hope is best of all.

Quest. How we may grow in the Knowledge of Christ? SERMON XII.
2 PET. III.XVIII. And in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Petrus Cruci affigitur capite in terram verso elevatisque in sublime pedibus.
Plat. in vit. Pet. p. 14.
THE Apostle Peter when he wrote this Epistle, looked upon himself as a Dying
Man; (the Ministers of the Gospel would preach with more Life, if Death were
but more within their view) His Death which was violent, (for he ended his days
upon a Cross) had been foretold by Christ himself; accordingly he was
persuaded, that quickly he should be made to put off his earthly Tabernacle.
But like a good Shepherd, before he departed, he expresses his care of the
flock, which he was to leave behind him. He commends the Gospel to them, as
that which is of the Highest Authority, of the Greatest Certainty; That their
Faith might be firm, and that they might persevere in their Obedience.

The Apostle having looked as far as the Grave, he looks farther, he beheld his
own and likewise the Worlds Dissolution; he plainly foresaw the end of all
things; and tells them to whom he writes, That the Day of the Lord will come as
a Thief in the night, and that the Heavens will pass away with a great noise,
the Elements melt with fervent heat, the Earth and the Works therein will be
burnt up, and then most rationally infers, seeing all these things shall be
dissolved, Mali sunt int^rp^^^es qui in argu^^s speculationibus multum
consumunt oper^, cum Apostolus totam hanc do ^rinam ad pia^ ex^^rtationes
accommod^t. Ca vin ad loc.
what manner of Persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and Godliness!

He speaks of a new Heaven, and a new Earth wherein dwells Righteousness.
Interpreters conclude that this refers not to the substance of the World which
will remain, but to the qualities of it, which will be changed, and even at
last qu^te purged out of it. Calvin thinks meet here to give a caution against
Curiosity, and too great Inquisitiveness, which will be unprofitable, which may
prove dangerous, and tells us that the scope of the Apostle is mainly to be
attended, which is to awaken and exhort unto serious Holiness; since this World
must be purged by Fire, all that are Christians should endeavor after a
greater measure of Purity, and ought to be growing in Grace, and in the
Knowledge of Christ continually.

In the words we find,

1. A growth and Increase urged, the word (...) supposes Imperfection, but also
that perfection ought to be aspired unto; and that the Christians growth does
make him truly great.

2. This growth must be in the Knowledge of Jesus Christ; the Object Christ is
high and large unto Infiniteness, his fullness, his riches unsearchable; the
Knowledge of this Object must not be merely notional, verbum notitiae connotat
affectum, light and heat, clearer views and dearer and stronger Loves must go
together.

3. The Persons who are to labor after a greater measure of Knowledge and those
are real Christians, who have attained to some degree of spiritual
Understanding; that Light which is as the Light of the Moon, should be
increased, so as to equal the Light of the Sun; and that which is as the Light
of the Sun, should be augmented so as to equal the light of seven days, should
grow more and more glorious.

4. The Arguments to persuade; and they are two, Christ is their Lord, Christ
is their Savior.

1. Christ is their Lord; a Lord most great, most gracious, the more this is
understood, the better will his Service be liked, as honorable and
advantageous; and Obedience will be yielded with greater cheerfulness and
constancy.

2. Christ is their Savior; a Savior from the greatest Evils; Sin and the
miserable effects of it, in time, in eternity; a Savior to the greatest
Blessedness, an everlasting Kingdom and Glory; a Savior of that which is most
precious; the Soul, which if safe, the whole man must needs be secured. The
Text may be considered with a double reference, to what goes before, to what
follows after.

1. To what goes before, grow in Grace and Knowledge (...), and hence we may
observe, That the way to increase in Grace is to increase in the Knowledge of
Christ, the means of Grace will be found inefficacious and empty, will convey
nothing, if Christ be not with them, and in them; if he be not understood by
those that use them. All that fullness out of which the Church is replenished
from the beginning of the world to the very end of it; it has pleased the
Father should dwell in Christ Col. 1.19.

If a man know where a vast Treasure lies hid, he may quickly go and enrich
himself; the way to have more Grace is to understand, that Christ is the
Fountain from whence all Grace is derived. He is head over all things to his
Church, which is his Body, and is called to show the reality and plentifulness
of Communication, the fullness of him who fills all in all, Ephesians. 1. ult.

2. The Text may be referred to what follows after. To him be Glory both now
and for ever, Amen. Hence observe, that the gr^^^^r Kn^^l^^^^^^ Christ we
attain to, the more we shall ^^^^^r, and s^^ (...) glorify him; his Godhead is
the same with the Fathers, his (...) Dominion equal and eternal. The Church
millitant mu^^ (...) begin to glorify her Lord and Savior; and when she comes
to be (...) praises will be vastly higher; and to magnify, to love, to a^^ire
and to rejoice in him, will be her everlasting business.

But I shall wave the Connection, and from the words themsel^^^ r^^se this
Doctrine; That it highly concerns all s^^cere (...) to grow and i^crease in the
Knowledge of Christ. The Gospel which rev^^ls Christ, (...) mystery, which the
Angels themselves desire to (...) looking, they admire the manifold wisdom of
God, the exceeding riches of his Grace and love; and shall not the Saints
search farth^^ into this Gospel, shall they not look more unto and into Jesus,
what (...) him the nature of Angels, but the Seed of Abraham? The better Christ
is understood, the better will they understand how happy he has ma^^^ them, and
that Christ being theirs all is theirs.

The question that in this exercise I am to answer is this; How (...) grow in
the Knowledge of Christ, and make use of, and (...) K^^wledg? Now that the
Answer may be the more full; I shall do the^^ four things.

First, I shall tell you, what it is to grow in the Knowledge of Christ, (...)
the telling you this, will tend to the advancement of this gro^th.

Se^ondly, What Properties are required in this Knowledge?

Thirdly, The Directions are to follow, that you may increase in the Knowledge
of him.

Fourthly, What Use and Improvement you are to mak^ of t^is K^^wledg or of
Christ known.

I begin with the first of these, What it is to grow in the K^^wledg of Christ?
Here several Propositions are to be premised.

1. The Knowledge of Christ is of the greatest Excellency. The Apostle calls
this (...), Phil. 3.8. Yea doubtless, and I c^^^t ^ll things but loss for the
Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord; other kind of Knowledge is
like Light from the S^ars, this like b^am^ from the Sun. Christ is called the
Sun of Righteousness. He is called Wisd^m in the abstract, Sapientiae omnimoda
sapientia.
Prove. 1.20. in the Hebrew it is (...) Wisdom; in him i^ ^he Sum, the
Perfection of Wisdom. To know him does assimu^ate and make us like him, and
when we shall have a full view of him in glory, we shall to our utmost capacity
fully resemble him: To know him is Life eternal; and they that seek Life any
other way, will find death, (...) themselves mistaken in the end. No wonder the
Apostle glories in (...) Knowledge; and that an ancient Father said he was gl^d
he had somet^^^^ of value, he meant Phil^sophy, to despise in comparison.

2. This Knowledge of Christ is of absolute necessity. Stat invicta haec rupe s.
Ego sum Via and nullus a in s: quicquid ante m via haec non fuerit, error and
lubricum and te nebraesunt Luther. Tom. 2. p. 507.
In Scripture he is compared to those things, which are so needful that we
cannot be without them (...) M^^t and Drink and Raiment. Christ is the Bread of
Life; the fountain of Living Water; we are to put on the Lord Jesus, his
righteousness is t^^ Garment, which must cover and secure us: To be totally
ignorant ^f him must needs be death eternal; for there is not Salvation in any
other^; (...) 4.12.

3. The Knowledge of Christ is by supernatural revelation. Much of God may be
r^^d in the Book of nature, his visible Works do make the wisdom, power, and
goodness of the Worker also visible. But Christ is a mystery h^d from Ages and
Gen^rations; and would have remained hid still if the Gospel had not revealed
him, Col. 1.26. Who could ever have thought of God, his being manifested in the
flesh, and redeeming the Church with his o^^^ Blood, if this had not been
brought to Light by the Gospel? Th^se are indeed the deep things of God, which
the Spirit reveals, 1 Cor. 2.10, 11. and power to discern them, and believe
them, is from the same Spirit.

4. The Knowledge of Christ was communicated in a degree under the old
Testament. The Prophets spoke of him; and if they had not; what they had said
besides had been insignificant. The Law was a Schoolmaster to bring Israel to
Christ, Gal. 3.24. The Ceremonial Law requiring the blood of so many
sacrifices, (...).
showed plainly that the Sacrificers themselves deserv^d to die, and therefore
is said to be against them, Col. 2.14. but withal it did direct them to the
Lord Jesus who was to appear once in the end of the World to put away Sin by
the Sacrifice of himself. The Moral Law discovered their duty, convinced them
of Sin, and declared the necessity of a Mediator to make an Atonement, The
Apostle when he witnessed, that Christ should suffer and be the first that
should rise from the dead, and show Light to the People and to the Gentiles; he
sticks not to affirm, that he said no other things ^^an what Moses and the
Prophets did say should come, Act. 26.22, 23. Moses saw Christ and his Cross,
and esteemed the reproach of Christ greater riches th^^ the Treasures of Egypt,
Heb. 11.26. Abraham rejoiced to see his day, h^ saw it and was glad, Joh. 8.56.
Nay several thousands of years before the actual rising of this Sun of
righteousness, there was some Light which caused a day break presently after
the fall. That promise the seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpents head,
shows that the First Adam was not altogether ignorant of the Second.

5. The Revelation of Christ under the new Testament is more clear; therefore
to be ignorant of him is the more without Apology; the veil upon the Face of
Moses did signify the obscurity of the Mosaic Dispensation, but that vail is
done away in Christ, and we all may now with open Face behold as in a Glass the
Lords Glory, 2 Cor. 3.18. The New Testament helps us to understand the Old, and
adds de novo a far more glorious Light than ever shined before; God spoke more
by his Son, than he had done by his Servants, the Prophets, that lived in the
Ages before his Manifestation in the flesh. Such a clear Discovery of things
which before were but darkly intimated, is a privilege which should be taken
notice of, and thankfully improved, Mat. 13.16, 17. Blessed are your Eyes for
they see, and your ears for they hear; for verily I say unto you that many
Prophets and righteous men have desired to see those things which ye see and
have not seen them, and to hear those things which ye hear and have not heard
them.

6. All true Believers in Christ have some Knowledge of him, Romans 10.14. How
shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? As it was in the first
Creation, God said let there be Light and there was Light; so it is in the New
Creation; Darkness overspreads the Soul; but God does shine into the heart, and
gives the Light of the Knowledge of Jesus Christ. And Christ being thus
revealed, the heart is taken with him, gladly opens and receives him, relies
and believes in him to Life everlasting: Let the Church of Rome boast of the
conveniences of Ignorance, and the sufficiency of implicit Faith; we shall
show our selves Children of Light by pleading for Light; and it shall be our
desire, That God would deliver us from the Ignorance of the Church of Rome, as
well as from the Tyranny of the Bishop there.

7. Those that know most of Christ know him but in part; therefore are to be
urged to grow in Knowledge. The Apostle Paul, who equalled James Cephas; and
John, for in conference they added nothing to him, Gal. 2.6. who was caught up
to the third Heaven, and there had abundance of revelations, and heard words
which was not lawful to utter; yet humbly acknowledges, that he knew in part,
and prophesied in part, 1 Cor. 13.9. and that he saw but through a Glass
darkly, v. 12. Knowledge in this World is imperfect as well as Holiness, and
where both these are true, there will be an industrious longing; that both may
be still carried on toward perfection.

These things being premised, I shall tell you what it is to grow in the
Knowledge of Christ; in these particulars,

I. Growing in the knowledge of Christ implies a fuller apprehension of his
Godhead. Here is Majesty, Immensity, Glory, that may presently amaze and
overwhelm us. Alas it is but a small portion of this that we can understand, but
this must be known, that the self same perfections which are in the Father are
likewise in the Son; for He and his Father are one: Christ is the true God and
Eternal Life, 1 John 5.20. it is a destructively heretical Gloss, to say he is
styled God, only by a Figure. He is affirmed to be over all God blessed for
ever, Romans 9.5. He created all things in Heaven and in Earth, visible and
invisible; whether they be thrones or dominions or Principalities or Powers,
and he is before all things, and by him all things consist, Col. 1.16, 17. And
those excellent Creatures; all the Angels of God are commanded to worship him,
Heb. 1.6.

This Truth that Christ is God is more and more to be looked into. He that
denies it loses his Christianity according to Necessarium est credere and
confiteri articulum, de divinitate Christi; quem ubi Arrius negavit necesse
fuit etiam negare articulum R^demptionis: vincere enim peccatum mundi mortem
maledictionem, and iram lei in semetipso, ^on est ullius ^reaturae, sed ^ivinae
potentiae opus. Quare negantes divinitatem Christi amittunt tandem totum
Christianismum, fiuntque prorsus Gentiles Luther. Tom. 4. p. 92. b.
Luther, and the prop and foundation of his Faith. Here is the Rock upon which
the Church is (...) so as the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, Mat.
16.18. The Godhead of Christ makes his blood a price of infinite value; full
satisfaction has been made to divine Justice, by the payment of it. The Godhead
of Christ puts merit into his obedience and sufferings, so that believers
cannot ask for more, than he has deserved they should receive. The Godhead of
Christ gives efficacy to Ordinances, so that the dead are quickened, the blind
are enlightened, the weak are strengthened and confirmed. The Godhead of Christ
puts life and vigor into the Christians Faith, he may safely be trusted who is
God only wise, who is the Lord Almighty, whose mercy and faithfulness endure
for ever.

2. Diabolus lapsus est invidia illa qua invidit hominibus tantam dignitatem
quod Deus futurus esset homo. Bernard.
Growing in the knowledge of Christ implies a clearer sight of his humanity,
how often is he called the Son of Man as well as the Son of God. One of the
Fathers imagined that this was the fault and the fall of the reprobate Angels,
a proud enviousness, at the forethought of the Son of God his advancing; by
taking upon him the humane nature. And Luther supposed this was the occasion
upon which Satan suggested to Mahomet in his Alcoram; that many of the good
Angels became Devils, because they refused to worship Adam. It Is a great
Mystery of Godliness, that God is manifested in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16. Videtur
Diabolus ipse autori Alcorani suggessisse, quod id o Daemones facti essent ex
bonis Angelis, quia noluerint Adamum adorare. Hoc suum peccatum non potuit
celare Satan. Luther. Tom. 3. p. 82. b.
The Word was made flesh and dwelt among us, says the beloved Disciple, Joh.
1.14. He had a true body and a reasonable soul, which soul of Christ
considering its nearest union to the Divine nature, and the light and joy and
glory it must needs be full of, may be looked upon by Milions of Degrees, as
the highest of Creatures, and the chief of all the ways of God.

The Holy Ghost took care in the conception of Christ, that his human nature
should not be in the least defiled, and his whole life was perfectly free from
sin, he did no evil, neither was guile found in his mouth, and his heart was
always pure. And having taken man's Nature God is well pleased with that nature
in Christ: The man Christ Jesus always did those things which were pleasing to
the Father. The Sons of men may come with boldness to this Mediator, who is
bone of their bone, and flesh of their flesh, He bears good will to men, as the
Angels sang aloud at his Nativity. Man may be confident of a kind reception,
since Christ is so near akin to them, and was in all things excepting sinful
infirmities made like unto them, that he might be a merciful and faithful High
Priest, to make Reconciliation for their Iniquities, Heb. 2.17. Christ is man,
and this man is Gods greatest favorite, far greater than Joseph to Pharaoh, or
Mordecai to Ahasuerus. Extra Christum oculos and aures claudatis. Vbi Jesus est
ibi est totus Deus seu tota divinitas, ibi Pater and Spiritus. Extra hunc
Christum Deus nusquam invenitur. Deus in car^e illa sic apparet ut extra hanc
carnem coll and cognosci non possit. Luther. Tam. 4. p. 491. a.
He has the highest place in Heaven, as well as in his Fathers heart, let
Saints search into his truth and they will find matters of unspeakable
encouragement. Here is the way to know the Father, to worship him acceptably,
and to attain to fellowship with him, here and for ever.

3. Growing in the knowledge of Christ implies a more plain discerning and full
persuasion, that he was foreordained to be a Redeemer. Christ was the person
pitched upon from eternity to be the Savior of the Elect of God, 1 Pet. 1.20.
Who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world but was manifest
in these last times for you. He is therefore caled the elect One in whom Gods
Soul delights. There was a compact and agreement made between the Father and
the Son, The Son agrees in fullness of time to be made of a Woman, to take a
body, to offer up himself without spot to God, and the Father promises eternal
Life and Salvation, and that he should have a Church giv^^ him out of the
world, though the world is fa^^en into wickedness, upon which Church this
eternal life is to be bestowed. The Prophet Zachariah tells ^s of a Counsel of
Peace between the Lord of H^^^ and Christ, whose name is the Branch, Zach.
6.12, 13. And the Apostle speaks of the promise of eternal life, which God, who
cannot lie, promised before the world began; Tit. 1.2. This promise may very
well be conceived to be made to the Son, that he should give eternal life, to
all that were given him of the Father. And when the Saints behold that Christ
is the Person from eternity designed to be a Savior, they may include that God
has a love to them, a care of them; and a purpose of Grace toward them from
everlasting, and how securely and sweetly may they rest upon the blessed Jesus,
not doubting but he is a person every way fit and sufficient to finish that
work of Redemption, which he undertook according to the appointment of his
Father.

4. Growing in the Knowledge of Christ, implies a greater insight into his
sufferings; It is not without reason that the History of these is so largely
penned by all the four Evangelists, certainly there is much in his Crucifixion,
which it concerns Believers to pry into. The sufferings of Christ were great,
and that both in his body and in his soul, his body was in a bloody sweat, and
his soul was amazed sore, and full of heaviness and sorrow, and in an Agony,
before he was condemned and fastened to the Cross, but then all the pain and
shame which he did undergo, his Death was violent and accursed, and just before
he breathed out his last, his Father hid his face, his sufferings were
unconceivably increased by a dreadful desertion, which made him roar out my
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me.

When Christ died, the sins of the whole Church were laid upon the head of the
Church, how many stings then had the death of Christ?

Isa. 53.6. All we like sheep have gone astray, we have turned every one to his
own way, and the Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of us all. And if all
were laid upon him, none shall be laid to the charge of them who believe in
him. But how came it to pass that Christ did not sink under such a burden? The
first sin of the first man, was enough to sink all the world into Hell, how
could Christ bear up under all the sins of so great a multitude? The reason is
because he is God; the blood of Christ is the blood of God, how loud does it
cry for Pardon and Salvation, and how easily does it drown the cry of sin for
vengeance? The blood and sufferings of Christ applied and relied on by Faith,
justify the sinner, silence Satan the accuser, purge the conscience from dead
works, and open a way into the holiest of all, by the Cross of Christ we are to
climb up to the Throne of Glory. The more the death of Christ is studied, the
Spirit will be more contrite, the heart more clean, the conscience more calm
and quiet. The death of Christ puts the sin to death, but delivers the sinner
from it.

5. Growing in the Knowledge of Christ, implies a more fruitful eying of his
Resu^rection and going to his Father. Hark to the Apostle Phil. 3. 10. That I
may k^^^ him, and the power of his Resurrection. The Justice of God had Christ
under an ^rrest, and has cast him into the Grave as unto a Prison, and if he
had not fully paid the debt of those whose surety he became; it would have held
him in prison to this hour. If Christ were not risen, faith would be vain, the
guilt and power of sin would refrain. But being risen, true believers are
delivered from sins punishment and power: Sin and death and Satan are triumphed
over. Know that there is a very great power and virtue to be derived from the
resurrection of our Lord. A power to raise a drooping Spirit: When Christ was
rise^ d^e sends this Message to his Disciples, that they might be well assur^^
his God was theirs, his Father their Father. John 20.17. Go in my Brethren and
say to them, I ascend to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God. A
power to spirituallize carnal affections, Col. los^ 3^.^. If ye then be risen
with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ sits at the
right hand of God, set your affecti^n on things ^bove, and not on things upon
the earth. Finally a power to con^^rm and establish the soul in Grace, for
Christ being ^^ised from the ^ead di^th no (...), death has no more dominion
over him, and they that are once really quickened by him, shall never more
become dead in sins and (...) passes, but shall continue faithful to the death,
and may confidently expect a joyful resurrection, Christ is risen as the first
fruits of them that slept. 1 Cor. 15.20. Therefore there will be an Harvest at
the end of the world, when all the bodies of the Saints that were sown in
Corruption, shall be raised in Incorruption, that were sown in dishonor, shall
be raised in Glory.

6. Growing in the Knowledge of Christ implies greater satisfaction above his
imputed righteousness. The Apostle having spoken of the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ, presently declares his desire to be found in him, not
having his own Righteousness, but that which is through the Faith of him the
righteousness which is of God by Faith, Phil. 3.9. This righteousness of Christ
is called the righteousness of God. Because it is that which God accepts, and
upon the account of which he justifies the ungodly; moreover Christ himself is
Jehovah, the true God, else his obedience and sufferings would not have been
sufficient to have been our justifying Righteousness; Cur insane Sophista
ass^ris dilection^m spem, and alias virtutes? scio has esse insignia Dei dona
divinitus mandata per Spiritum sanctum in nostris cordibus excitari and ali.
Scio fidem sine his donis non ^xistere. Sed nunc nobis quaestio ^st quid
cujusque proprium sit. Tenes manu varia semina, non autem quaero quae cum
quibus conjuncta sint Sed quae cujusque propria virtus. Hic aperte dic quid
faciat sola fides, non cum quibus virtutibus sit conjuncta. Sola fides
apprehendit promissionem, credit promittenti deo, deo porrigenti admovet manum,
et accipit, hoc proprium soliu^ fidei opus est. Charitas, spes, and patientia
habent alias materias circaquas v^rsantur, habent alios limits intra quos
consistunt, non en^m complectuntur promissionem sed mandata exequuntur. Luther.
Tom. 2. in Genesis p. 57. a.
This Righteousness is said to be imputed; and imputed by the Lord himself; and
that without works, and this Doctrine was preached in the Old Testament by
David, as well as in the New, by the Apostle Paul, Romans 4.6. Nay as Christ is
called the Lord our Righteousness, Jer. 23.6. So Jerusalem, the Church is
called after her Husbands Name, the Lord our Righteousness, Jer. 33.16. to show
the reality of the imputation of this righteousness, and the real and blessed
benefits that follow upon it. It Is by this righteousness applied by Faith, that
we are justified from all our Transgressions of the Law; and from our sins
against the Gospel. That guilt which we have contracted by our impenitency and
unbelief, which are sins against the Gospel, can be removed out of Gods sight
only by the righteousness, by the blood and death of his Son. All Justification
therefore before God, whether our sins have been against the first or the
second Covenant is purely, merely by this righteousness of Jesus Christ;
whereof Faith is medium applicationis; a means to apply. Oh the compleatness
and perfection of this Righteousness of Christ! there is no need of any
addition. He is called the Sun of Righteousness; and therefore in the business
of Justification, all other righteousness should vanish, as the Stars do at the
Sun rising. Let Satan rage, let Rome deride and reproach; this Article of
imputed righteousness must stand, or the Church will fall. And the better
Christ is known, the more confidently shall we own his righteousness.

7. Growing in the Knowledge of Christ implies, a more constant and fiducial
eying of his Intercession, and the pity and compassions of him that intercedes.
Believers should better know this Friend and Advocate in the Court of Heaven,
who always appears for them there. He presents to his Father what he did and
suffered upon Earth, and how effectual is this on the Churches behalf! Though
the head be in Heaven, yet he is mindful of his Members on Earth, and is ready
to plead for them; here is the ground of boldness in coming to the Throne of
Grace; for we have a great high Priest that is passed into the Heavens Jesus
the Son of God, Heb. 4.14, 16. Here is the reason why the Saints Prayers are so
mighty and prevalent; they are backed with the Intercession of Christ; nay, it is
upon this that the Apostle concludes believers Salvation to the uttermost, Heb.
7.25. Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto
God by him, seeing he ever lives to make Intercession for them.

8. Growing in the knowledge of Christ, implies being better acquainted with his
great Power, and continual presence with his Church which is so nearly related
to Him. Behold! All Power is given to him both in Heaven and Earth, at his Name
every knee does bow, and every tongue if it will speak truth must confess that
Christ is Lord. He is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords. The mightiest Monarchs are more under his Power then their
meanest Slaves are under theirs. He has all the reprobate Angels in a Chain,
the Key of Hell is in his hand, he commands all there: and in Heaven the elect
Angels are his Ministers to fulfill his pleasure. He is indeed exalted far above
all Principality and Power, and Might and Dominion, and every name that is
named, not only in this World, but also in that which is to come. Ephesians. 1:21.
Now this Lord, who is so powerful, has assured his Church, which is his Spouse,
nay his Body, that he will be with her always to the end of the world, Mat. 28.
ult. The Church therefore in spite of Earth and Hell shall last while the
world lasts. Let fear give way, and Faith increase; Believers may contemn their
proudest adversaries. See Zions carriage toward Sennacherib, the great King of
Assyria, Esa. 37:22. The Virgin Daughter of Sion has despised thee and laughed
thee to scorn: the Daughter of Jerusalem has shaken her head at there.

9. Growing in the knowledge of Christ implies a better understanding him as
Mediator of the new Covenant, so he is called Heb. 12:23. On this Covenant,
pardoning mercy, renewing grace, and eternal glory are promised, Earth and
Heaven, the Creature, and the Creator himself, by himself are made over to
Believers. Now you must know that all their promises are yea and Amen in
Christ, 2 Cor. 1:20. The Covenant was made for his sake, 'twas ratified and
confirmed by his death, his blood is called the blood of the everlasting
Covenant, Heb. 13:20. his blood being shed, the Covenant stands good unto
eternity. Here is vast encouragement to lay hold upon the promises: If you come
to God, and ask, Lord! have thou not made promises of pardon, to the penitent
and believing? promises of grace to the humble? promises of satisfaction to the
hungry Souls? promises of joy and comfort to the mourners? In his Word God
answered Yea. If you farther add, Lord! Let these promises be accomplished for
thy Christ's sake: the answer is Amen it shall be so, they shall be all
fulfilled.

10. Growing in the knowledge of Christ implies a more earnest looking for his
Word appearing. The day of this appearing is appointed, it draws very near,
being hastened by the Prayers and sufferings of Saints, by the Sins and security
of the World. Yet a little while, and he that shall come will come and will not
tarry, Heb. 10.37. If Christ were better known, this day would be more longed
for by the Saints. Innocence will then be cleared, all enemies more then
conquered, salvation will be perfected, the whole Church of Christ with all its
members glorified, Col. 3:4. When Christ who is our life shall appear then
shall ye also appear with him in glory. Thus you see what it is to grow in the
knowledge of Christ; and the telling you this, is indeed a directing you how to
grow in this knowledge.

In the second place I am to show you what properties are required in this
Knowledge.

1. This knowledge of Christ would grow more and more certain. The Apostle
speaks of Riches of full assurance of understanding to the acknowledgement of
the Mystery of God and of the Father and of Christ, Col. 2:2. The truths of
Christ are certain in themselves, the mind should understand them as most
certain, there should be an assurance of their certainty, a full assurance of
it; such an assurance is a rich thing, a thing of great value, for 'twill have
a great virtue and efficacy both upon the heart and life.

2. This Knowledge of Christ should more and more (...) when he sees the
treasures of W^sdom in Christ* he should be sensible of his own folly: when he
views the robe of Christ's ^^ghteousness, he should be sensible that his own
righteousn^^^ are but rags. When he studies Christ's fullness and Power, he
should be sensible of his own emptiness and weakness. Finally he should see
himself to be nothing, when he perceives that Christ is all in all, Col. 3.11.

3. This Knowledge of Christ should grow more Spiritual. He is not to be known
after a carnal manner; and therefore Popish Images are very unfit
representations of him; not that his flesh is swallowed up of his Divinity as
Servetus dreamed: but his flesh is glorified, and as transcendently glorious we
must now look upon him. We must also know him as the purchaser and bestower of
all Spiritual gifts and graces, that we may be further renewed by his Spirit:
the Apostle ^s th^^ (...) be understood when ^e s^^s 2 Cor. 5.16, ^^. Though
(...) after the Flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no more; therefore if
(...) in Christ he is a new Creature.

4. This Knowledge of Christ should encourage to a m^^^ (...) upon him; when we
see what a sure and everlasting foundation Christ is, here we should build
higher and higher till the top reach Heaven; there is no fear that the
foundation will not bear the superstructure. We may safely depend upon Christ
for a lasting peace with God; for perfecting the work of grace, and abundant
entrance into the everlasting Kingdom. He that believes in him shall never be
confirm did, 1 Pet. 2:6. Let (...) this R^lya^^e be called a ^^lling faith; but
without scoffing at her, let the Church of Christ be permitted to lean upon her
Beloved while she is so weak as she is in the Wilderness of this World, Cant.
8.5.

5. The Knowledge of Christ should raise him higher and (...) Christians
estimation. The more we know of him, new beauties will still be discovered in
him. He is greater than Jonas a Prophet, gr^^^^ t^^^ Solomon a King, who was
the most famous King of Israel: He is altogether lovely; nay he is the Angels
wonder, Heavens darling, the brightness of his Fathers glory. Here is no danger
of an over value of an excessive love. Therefore let the Spark be blown up into
a fla^^ that may not be quenched by many Floods of Water, that may be too
strong for Death and Hell it self to conquer, Cant. 8.6, 7.

6. The Knowledge of Christ should have a great Aspect upon whatever else is
revealed in the Word of God. It Is a great matter to know the truth as it is in
Jesus, Ephesians. 4:21. The Apostle tells us that he desired to know nothing else but
Jesus Christ and him crucified, 1 Cor. 2:2. will plainly intimate that he looked
upon other things with a respect unto Christ, and indeed without such a respect
what knowledge can be profitable, what knowledge can be comfortable? Luther
said, In Christ's Crucif^^ (...) Theologia, and cognitio De^. There cannot be a
right knowledge of God, if there be an ignorance of Christ crucified.

7. The Knowledge of Christ it should be operative still in a greater measure.
It is inexcusable to be slothful, where the Master is so good, the promised
assistance so great, the commands far from grievous, and the reward eternal.
The better we know our Lord Jesus, we shall s^^^^ him wit^ a more perfect
heart, with a more willing mind. Obedience is reasonable, pleasant, necessary,
we should be steadfast, and always abound herein. Labor shall not be in vain, 1
Cor. 15:58.

8 The Knowledge of Christ should cause great glorifying and joy. Well may
believers who have no confidence in the Flesh, who worship God in the Spirit
rejoice in Christ Jesus, Phil. 3:3. God in Christ is become their Father, and
he will not disinherit any of his Children (...) he has adopted, but they shall
abide in the House forever, nothing shall separate them from his love. The
marriage union between Christ and them shall never be dissolved: Mansions are
preparing for them in Heaven where there is everlasting light and pleasantness;
and they are fitting for these Mansions and shall not be long out of them. Well
may they love their Lord, and believing rejoice with joy unspeakable and full
of glory, 1 Pet. 1:^.

In the third place the Directions follow, how you may increase and grow in the
Knowledge of Jesus Christ. The directions are these:

1. Be sensible of your remaining ignorance, and how great the hindrance is,
how great the harm is, that is the effect of it. You that are the Children of
light and of the day have much of night and darkness in you A perfect day you
cannot indeed expect in this world, but that it is possible that your darkness
may be much more dispelled, and it is your fault if it be not. So far as
darkness remains, the Prince of darkness has Power, the world has an advantage;
and there is danger of being reduced to the works of darkness. The want of
greater light, is the cause of doubts and fears, disconsolateness and
confusion. How little do you know of Christ in comparison of what you ought or
might? Are you got beyond the surface of Gospel Mysteries? how far from
searching into the heart of them, and discerning the depths of wisdom, the
^eig^th of love in them? Hence it is, that your admiration and affection are no
greater. You are engaged in a warfare, it is dangerous fighting in the dark,
especially with an enemy that fights best there. You are traveling in a very
narrow way, the less of light is in you; you will find it the more difficult to
keep this way. For shame be not Babes in knowledge but in understanding be ye
men, 1 Cor. 14:20. Let it very much humble you to consider the small progress
you have made in knowledge, notwithstanding the great advantages you have had
of improvement.

2. Compare all other Knowledge and this Knowledge of Christ together, and see
the vast difference in point of excellency; and this will stir you up to grow
therein. The Philosophers of old, how restless were their minds, how endless
their inquiries! the farther they went, the more they were puz'led; and after
long study they came to understand that they fully understood nothing. That
Wise King of Israel after he had diligently employed his large understanding
about humane knowledge; he cries out as a man exceedingly vexed and
disappointed. Eccles. 1:18. In much Wisdom there is much grief, and he that
increases knowledge increases sorrow. But the knowledge of Christ is of another
nature. He that rightly understands the Lord Jesus, understands how to have his
guilt removed, his heart renewed, his conscience calmed, his Soul secured, and
that for ever. This knowledge is not a vexation but a satisfaction to the
Spirit, both because of its certainty, and because of the superabundant grace
and fullness in Christ who is known. Here it may truly be said, Intellectus est
in quiet; the better Christ is understood, the more the Soul that understands
him is at rest.

3. You must not lean to your own parts and understandings. Men of the greatest
natural capacities, have been men of the greatest mistakes, and the foolest
errors; and herein they have embraced for the truths of Christ, and the reason
is, because their hearts being proud, God thwarted them, and their pride
blinded them. In your ordinary secular affairs, it is not safe to confide in
your own wisdom; but even here you are to acknowledge God. Certainly then when
searching into the Mysteries of the Gospel, you must be sensible that the
sharpest understanding has need of illumination from above. You must indeed be
fools that you may be wise, 1 Cor. 3:18. A sight of your folly and weakness
must make and keep you very humble. Such the Lord has promised to guide in
judge^^nt, and to teach his way, Psalm. 25:9.

4. Heedfully attend to the word of the truth of the Gospel; this is the great
means to infose and to increase the knowledge of Christ. It Is called the word
of Christ, Col. 3:16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom.
Because Christ is the Author of it, and the principal subject therein treated
of. The Gospel informs you of his Natures, divine and humane, of his Offices
Prophetital, Priestly, Kingly; of his benefits justification, adoption,
regeneration, strong consolation, and such like: Conarer in animos summa vi
inserere infigere, infulcire amorem: amorem autem? imo vero ardorem potius
literarum vere Sacrarum. Conarer ad legendum illas extimulare, ad perscrutandum
animare, ad medirandum, nocturra versandum manu, versandum diurna; ad
insenescendum; a^ immoriendum denique quanta maxima possem v^^^mentia
inflammare. Mart. Dorpiu^ De laud. Pauli p. 6.
The Gospel informs you what he did, what he suffered; and how he eyed his
Churches good in both. It informs you where Christ is gloriously present, in
the highest Heavens, where he is graciously present; he walks in the midst of
the Golden Candlesticks: and accompanies his own institutions with a mighty and
gracious efficacy. Oh study this Gospel more, take it in at your eyes by
reading it; at your ears by hearing it; nay receive it into your very hearts;
the Gospel is that which brings you to the knowledge of Christ, and so makes
you w^fe unto Salvation.

5. Look unto Jesus himself, for in him are had all treasuries of Wisdom and
Knowledge, Col. 2:3. The Sun is seen by its own light, the knowledge of Christ
is derived from himself. He is the greatest and best of Prophets, who teaches
like him? He not only reveals the things of peace, but also gives the power of
spiritual discerning: it is from Him that we have the Ey-salve to make us see,
Prove. 3:18 and the more of this Ey-salve we see the clearer. What kind of
Master would that be that were well skilled in all sorts of learning, and were
able also to give parts and capacities to all his Scholars, that they might be
all excellent! Christ is such a Master as can give subtl^^y to the simple, and
reveal those things to babes, which are above the wise and prudent of the
world. It Is said of Jesus, that He opened the Disciples understandings that
they might understand the Scriptures, Luke 24.45. There was good reason why the
Apostle should wish that the Lord Jesus might be with Timothy's Spirit, 2 Timothy
4:22. that he might be better instructed, and that he might be a better
instructor.

6. Cry for more Knowledge, and eye the promise of the Spirit of Wisdom and
revelation. The Psalmist who was wiser then his enemies, that understood more
then his teachers, that had greater understanding then the Ancients Psalm.
119:98, 99, 100 how often and how earnestly does he cry to be taught of God, v.
33, 34. Teach me O Lord the way of thy Statutes and I shall keep it to the end;
give me und^rstanding and I shall keep thy Law, yea I shall observe it with my
whole heart. He that has the greatest measure of knowledge, has reason to beg
for more. And that which is an encouragement to prayer, is the readiness of the
Father of lights to give Wisdom liberally without upbraiding; and likewise the
promise he has made of his Spirit, who is styled by the Apostle (...) the
Spirit of wisdom and revelation. Ephesians. 1:17. The Spirit searches all things
even the deep things of God; these are the truths of Christ in the Gospel, and
the Spirit reveals them, which also could more have entered into the heart of
men, 1 Cor. 2:9, 10. Lay hold of the promise of the Spirit, which the Father is
more forward to give; then earthly Parents bread to their hungry Children; take
heed of grieving this holy Spirit, deliver up your selves to his guidance, and
hear what he says unto the Churches, and he will lead you farther into all
truth, and glorify Christ, Joh. 16:14. by causing you to see more of his
beauty, more of his glory.

7. Take heed of seducing Spirits. Hearken to the Apostle Joh. 14:1. Beloved
believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether they are of God, and the
Trial is to be made with reference to Christ, v. 2. It is much to be observed,
that Satan the Father of lies in broaching of heresies, has struck at our Lord
Jesus in a special manner. Arrius of old denied his Godhead, Eutyches his
Manhood; Nestorius denied the Union of his Nature in one Person; Pelagius
opposed his Grace, and Antichrist would fain banish his Gospel, and hinder him
from being looked unto as the only Mediator. You that are the Sheep of Christ
hearken not to the voice of such strangers, but flee from them. Be not like
Children toss't too and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine, as
you would become perfect men in the knowledge of the Son of God, and attain to
the measure of the Stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4:13, 14.

8. Abstain from worldly and fleshly lusts, these put out the Souls ey^ and
take away the heart. These lusts are called deceitful and foolish lusts, for
they make mere fools of those that make provision to fulfill them. The cleaner
your hearts are from pride, envy, passion, malice, evil concupiscence and
covetousness; the clearer will the eyes of your understandings be to see the
Lord Jesus. The Apostle bids the Ephesians Chap. 4:22, 23. to put off
concerning the former conversation the old man, which is corrupt according to
the deceitful lusts: and then adds, be ye renewed in the Spirit of your mind.
So Col. 3:5, 10. Mortify your members which are upon Earth, fornication,
uncleanness, inordinate affection, etc. and then it follows put on the new man
which is renewed in knowledge after the Image of him that created him.

9. Associate your selves with them who have a great measure of the Knowledge
of Christ. Solomon tells us, He that walks with the wise shall be wise, but a
companion of fools shall be destroyed, Prove. 13:20. Value the communion of
Saints, and delight in them as the most excellent Company, and like them best
when they show the best of themselves, and most of all manifest that light and
heat that is in them. Oh what an improvement might Saints make one of another,
as to wisdom, grace and consolation, if they were not wanting ^ne to ^^other
and to themselves also! The weaker Christians should learn of the stronger
^specially of their Teachers, and Teachers themselves by i^^^^ing light to
others, would find then own light increased: Ego ex little numero me ess^
profiteor, qui scribunt proficiendo, and scribendo proficiunt. August. Epist. 7.
Knowledge being lik^ the Widows oil, which the more it was drawn out the more
it was augmented.

10. Let your end in desiring a greater degree of the Knowledge of Christ be
right; not that you may be pa^^ up in your own minds, or admired by men, but
that Christ may b^ more admired and esteemed by you. If knowledge pulls you up,
you ^re not really great and grown, but only swelled and diseased, Apparet
Christus humilis ad superbos. Est enim superbia non magnitudo sed tumor: quod
autem tumes videtur mag^^^sed non est sa^ number. Augustine. Sermon. 27. de Temp.
as a Father observes, Superbia non est magnitude sed tumor; More talents will
be committed to your trust, if you ask more, that you may improve them. Let
this be your design in desiring to grow in the knowledge of Christ, that your
Faith may grow exceedingly, that your love may grow more ardent, and that over
all things in your hearts Christ may know the pre-eminence. Long to know him
better that this knowledge may more perfectly cleanse both your hearts and
conversations; Follow on to know him, that you may follow harder after him.

In the fourth and last place I am to tell you, what Use and improvement you
are to make of this knowledge of Christ; or of Christ known.

And here I might speak largely, first of all to them that are without Christ;
you that are in this state, must needs he also without hope, and with us God in
the world. You that are such, pray consider what you have heard concerning the
Lord Jesus, and seriously weigh with your selves, whether you have reason still
to slight him. Much good has been told you concerning him; and none but a lying
Spirit can suggest, and a foolish heart believe; that it is best still to keep
at a distance from him. Christ calls after you to this day, though you have
long rejected him; behold he stand at the door and knocks, Prove. 3.20. waiting
that he may be gracious. Oh that at length you would he prevailed with to come
to him. I shall only use these two arguments to persuade you.

1. Christ is willing to receive the very must of you upon your returning and
believing, he will take you with all your faults, and obtain your full and free
pardon: he will take you with all your debts, and cross your scores, cancel
your bonds, though you debts amount to many thousand talents: He will take you
with all your infirmities though ^ever so soul and loathsome, and heal and
cleanse your Souls by his Blood and Spirit. The Apostle Paul speaks of his
being apprehended of Jesus Christ, Phil. 3:12. And when our Lord Jesus
apprehended him and graciously received him, whom did he receive? it was a
Blasphemer, (...) Persecut^r and Injurious: and yet he obtained mercy. I^ the
Apostle had ransack all he could hardly have found a worse ^rue, the^ those
mentioned, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. Fornicatours, Idolaters, Adulterers, ^ffiminate
abusers of themselves with Mankind, Thieves, Covetous, Drunkards, Revilers,
Extortioners: and yet these were washed and sanctified first, and saved
afterward. Here is a strong inducement to the very worst to come to this
Gracious, this mighty Savior.

2. Christ is willing to give himself to you, so that all that he is and has
shall be yours; you are not only called, but woo^d, you are solicited to give
your con^ent marriage: and this is the greatest and the b^^ Match of all, to be
married to the Prince of life and Lord of all. Be but willing to be his, he is
much more willing to be yours. Oh wonder at his condescending love, wonder at
your own madness in standing out: and presently yield your selves to Jesus,
saying, Lord we repent, we believe; help th^^ our and ^^belief, and heal the
impenitency and ^ardness of our hearts.

I shall say no more at present to the unbelievers but address my self to you
that are Saints who have known Christ with, a saving Knowledge, and shall show
you how Christ and the knowledge of him may be used and improved.

1. Improve the knowledge of Christ with reference to God himself. God out of
Christ is very dreadful; thus considered, sinful man must look upon him as the
Devils do, and tremble, Jam. 2.19. He has fury in his Face, curses in his
mouth, and a glittering Sword in his hand, and what flesh can stand before him.
But you that are Believers are to look upon him as he is in Christ, now his
wrath is taken away, he is the God of Love and Peace and Grace and comfort, you
may discern his bowels yearning toward you, his everlasting arm embracing you,
his Language is most sweet and full of kindness: nay He swears he will bless
you with all sorts of blessings, but especially with the best, namely spiritual
and everlasting. Under the Old Testament God was called the Lord that brought
Israel out of Egypt. Afterward, the Lord that brought Judah out of the Land
of the North. But under the New Testament, he is styled again, The God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1.3 1 Pet. 1.^. Behold him in Christ and
you will see him to be a Father, a Guide a Shield, an exceeding great reward;
you may abound in Faith and Hope and Joy in the Lord, for he is the God of your
Salvation.

2. Improve the Knowledge of Christ with reference to the Law of God. The Law
considered in it self, since the fall of Man is the ministration of Death; it
condemns the Transgressors and concludes and leaves them under wrath, and it is
so weak through the flesh, that it can give righteousness and Life to none; but
if this Law be looked upon in the hand of Christ the Mediator, its Curse is
removed, its rigor abated: The Believer may delight in the Law of God, Ps.
1.2. and prefer it before thousands of Gold and Silver, Ps. 119.72. and is to
account it one of the choice new Covenant Blessings to have this Law written in
his very heart, Heb. 8.10. Christ heals the natural enmity against the Law of
God, which was in the hearts of believers; and strengthens them to yield
obedience to it, and that promise is fulfilled, Ezeck. 36.^7. I will put my
Spirit within yo^, and cause you to walk in my Stutures, and ye shall keep my
Judgments and do them.

3. Improve the knowledge of Christ with reference to Sin. Behold the Lord
Jesus for Sin condemning Sin in the flesh; that is by being made a sin
offering, he condemned sin; Sins cause Falls, sin is as it were cast, and the
sinner believing in Jesus is acquitted. If you are in Christ, Sin, though it
has damned thousands,, yet you are freed from it is condemning Power, Romans 8.1.
There is therefore no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus: Behold
this Lamb of God, who bare your sins himself, a Load too heavy for you to bear.
Are you afflicted with the remainders of Lusts and Corruptions? Still look to
Jesus: No Lust so strong, but he can easily mortify it: The death of Christ has
a killing Power in reference to sin, without this all means of mortification
will be of little efficacy. The Apostle speaks of, (...).
being planted together in the Likeness of his death, Romans 6.5. As the branch
derives virtue from the Vine, so the Christians mortifying Power from Christ's
death: When he the second Adam was crucified, the old Adam was crucified with
him, and truly the old Man with his Lusts and Deeds must be mortifyed, by the
improvement of Christ's Crucifixion, Romans 6.6. Knowing this that our Old Man is
crucified with him, that the Body of Sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we
should not serve Sin.

Hoc ben^ficium Christo acceptum far convenit, quia sine ipso hostile potius
Angelis nobiscum di^cidium est quam familiaris juvandi nostri cura. Ideo super
ipsum ascendere and descendere dicuntur, non quod illi soli ministrent: sed
quod ejus respectu and in ejus honorem complectantur sua cura totum Ecclesiae
corpus Calvin in Johan. c. 1.
4. Improve the Knowledge of Christ in reference to Angels, and that both good
and evil Angels. The good ones have Christ to be their Head, Col. 2.10. And
they holding this Head are confirmed and established. These good Angels are
said to ascend and descend upon Christ, John. 1.51 Which Luther refers to their
Contemplation of Christ's divinity and humanity, V. der^ in ead^m Persona, summa
and infima conjunctissima. But Calvin refers it to the Angels Ministration:
here is an allusion to Jacob's Ladder, Christ is that Ladder, whereby we may
ascend, it is through Him that Heaven is open, and it is upon his Account that
the Angels are ready to do Offices of kindness to believers, and are so ready
to be ministering Spirit to minister for them that are Heirs of Salvation, Heb
1.14. And as from Christ you are to expect care from the good Angels, so he can
easily defend you from the bad ones. He stops the mouth of the Devil who is the
Accuser of the Brethren, by that full satisfaction he ha^ made to divine
Justice. He detects him as a Liar, and discovers his wiles and devices. He
opposes Satan as a Murderer, and hinders him from devouring the least Lamb of
his flock; he is ready to a^m you with the whole armor of God, and strengthens
you both to combat and to conquer. He has tried Satan's Strength in his own
person, and had got the Victory. He had spoiled Principalities and Powers and
made a show of them openly triumphing over them, Col 2.15.

5 Improve this Knowledge of Christ with reference to this present World. Christ
in the days of his flesh had little of the world, and in the hour of Temptation
he despised the offer of the whole. Surely it is a thing of small value, and it
usually proves a great snare, else Christians should have more of it. They are
enemies to the C^oss of Christ, who mind e^rthly things, Phil. 3.18, 19. They
are Strangers to the power of his resurrection, whose hearts and Treasure are
not in Heaven. Look unto Jesus, and look off from the World, or look upon it
with contempt. Be not so eager after that which Christ lost his Life to deliver
you from, Gal. 1.4. He gave himself that he might deliver us from this present
evil world, acccording to the Will of God and our Father.

6. Improve this knowledge of Christ with reference to Duties, Grace and
perseverance in Grace. Let all your Duties be done in his Name, Gal. 3.17. that
is in his Strength, and with expectation of acceptance, ^^^^rely upon the
account of his Mediation. Apply your selves to him for grace to help in every
time of need; Heb. 4.16. for grace to do, for grace to suffer, for grace to
persevere, and stand perfect and complete in all the will of God, Col. 4.12.
The Believer in Christ, notwithstanding all weaknesses and remainders of
indwelling sin is much safer than innocent Adam in Paradise; because Christ has
engaged for believers, that they shall endure to the end, and that he will give
them eternal, Life, and none sh^^^ pluck them out of his hand, and the hand of
his father. In such hands they must need be safe indeed.

7. Improve this Knowledge of Christ with reference to comfort. It Is He that
sends the Comforter who abides with the Church for ever, Joh. 16.7. The Church
and the Churches comfort are built upon the same Rock, Christ. Your Cons^lation
then will be strong, if you fly for refuge, to lay hold upon the hope set
before you. Heb. 6.18. You that are Saints, well may you rejoice in Christ
Jesus, since by him you have received the atonement. Peace he has left you for
a legacy, a peace that will abide in the midst of the greatest outward
troubles, a comfort that most abounds, when sufferings are most abundant. 2
Cor. 1.5. Consider the Lord Jesus, and be filled with everlasting consolation
and good hope through grace. How strong is his hand, how tender his heart, how
unchangeable his kindness; Jesus is the same yesterday, and to day, and for
ever. Heb. 13.8.

8. Improve the knowledge of Christ with reference to his Churches enemies. He
is above their match, and he will make them know it, they cannot hide their
counsels from him, who searches the Reins and Hearts. and they must needs at
last be disappointed and worsted, for Christ will Reign till all his foes be
made his footstool, Heb. 10.13. Julian the Emperor wanted neither Policy nor
Valor, nor an armed power, and yet of a sudden he had a deadly wound given
him; and cries out Vicisti Galliaee, O Galilean (so he called Christ) thou have
overcome me. This will be the end of the stoutest and proudest of the Churches
Adversaries. Christians are as dear to Christ as the Apple of his Eye. They are
bold fellows that will venture to give Christ a blow on his very eye; this
affront will not be born long, and what a deadly stroke will this judge of the
world at last return. Mirabili modo fit dum mors Christum devorat devoratur,
dum occidit occiditur, dum vincit vincitur. Luther. Tom. 4. p. 679-b.


9. Improve the knowledge of Christ with reference to Death. He has grappled
with Death, and has been to hard for it, he has taken away its Sting, which was
the worst thing in it, and is ready to deliver from that Bondage which the fear
of Death causes, Heb. 2.15. The Apostle having eyed Christ and the Resurrection
insults over this last enemy, 1 Cor. 15.53. O Death where is thy Sting? O Grave
where is thy Victory? Christ has sanctified the Grave into a bed of rest, and
to use Luthers expression, Mors est (...) vitae, Death is the Gate to life and
immortality. The dying Christian, when he lifts up his eyes to his Lord and
Savior, he may say then with Laurentius, No^^^^ (...) non habet, the night of
Death has no darkness in it, but is an entrance into the light that is
everlasting.

10. Improve the Knowledge of Christ with reference to Eternity. So vast and
endless a thing may well be of an amazing consideration, and when ^^ce in
Eternity, th^^^ is no correcting of mistakes. Look therefore unto Jesus (...)
prove you, and to keep you sincere, and without offense unto the last. And when
Time is just come to an end, behold your Lord entered into everlasting joy
himself, and ready to receive you into the same. Christ is none already, as
your forerunner, nay as your representative, and has taken possession of the
incorruptible and undefiled inheritance, Heb. 6.20. do you gladly follow him,
as knowing that when this earthly house of your Tabernacle is dissolved, you
have a building of God, an house not made with hands, Eternal in the Heavens.

Quest. How may our belief of Gods Governing the world support us in all wordly
distractions? SERMON XIII.
PSALM XCVII. 1, 2. The Lord reigns, let the Earth rejoice, let the multitude
of Isles be glad thereof. Clouds and darkness are round about him,
righteousness and judgment are the habitation of his Throne.
THE State of affairs is oftentimes (and so it is at this day) so involved and
confused, that we need not wonder if we see men of wisdom greatly perplexed in
their spirits, and almost sunk into discouragement. The best of Saints, whose
hearts are most furnished and fortified with grace, would be of all others most
subject to discomposure, were it not that they feel peace and comfort flowing
into them from the remembrance and sweet consideration of a God above. What
good man could possibly have any tolerable enjoyment of himself, or possess his
Soul in patience, while he observes the scentrick and irregular motions of
things below; the restlesness, tumblings and tossings of the world, desirable
comforts and delights blasted in a moment, afflictions and troubles breaking in
with a sudden surprise, order quite subverted, Laws violated, and the edge of
them turned against those that are faithful and peaceable in a Land, and all
things indeed turned upside down: Wickedness rampant, and Religion oppressed: The
spurious brood of Babylon clothed in Scarlet, and prospering in the world,
when at the same time the precious Sons of Zion, comparable to the finest Gold,
are esteemed as earthen pitchers, yea broken potsherds, and so thrown upon
dunghils, or cast into Prisons, and filled full with the contempt of them that
are at ease; these things, I say, would soon break his heart, did he not see
him who is invisible, and firmly believe a wheel within a wheel, an unseen
hand, which steadily and prudently guides and directs all things, keeping up a
beautiful order where reason can discern nothing but at ataxie and confusion.
Those that are conversant in the sacred Scriptures, do find, that the
flourishing state of ungodly men, and the afflicted condition of gracious
Presons, has proved to some of the Saints so hard a knot, as they have gone to
God for the untying of it, and to others it has been the occasion of so
furious and violent temptations, as had almost tript up their heels, and broken
the neck of their Religion. Upon that very score holy Asaph was almost ready to
conclude, he had in vain cleansed his heart, and washed his hands in innocence.

But if we will repair unto the Sanctuary, and consult the divine Oracles,
and believe them when they tell us that the eternal God, our God is the Rector
and Governor of the world, it will revive our Spirits, reduce our Souls into
their right frame, and preserve them in a due composure, when the scene of
affairs is most ruffled. To entertain you with a discourse upon this choice and
seasonable subject is the work allotted me at this time, and the Question now
to be discust and answered is this.

Quest: How may our belief of Gods Governing the world support us in all
worldly distractions?

The Text which I have now read is the precious and sure foundation, on which I
am to build; in that we find these things observable.

1. A comfortable assertion, the Lord reigns, i. e. Jehovah, God, or if you
please, our Lord Jesus Christ, unto whom all power is given both in Heaven and
in Earth; For that he is particularly intended in this Psalm, may be gathered
from verse 7. Confounded be all they that serve graven Images, and boast
themselves of their Idols, worship him all ye Gods; which last words relate to
Christ, as the Apostle Paul assures us; Heb. 1:6. When he brings in the first
begotten into the World, he says, and let all the Angels of God worship him.

2. Here is an Exhortation to joy and gladness upon account of the Lords
reigning. Let the Earth rejoice, and let the multitude of Isles be glad
thereof. i. e. Let all the world rejoice, at least all those that are the
subjects of this mighty Lord, who have bowed to his Scepter, and submitted
themselves to his Government, as a willing people in the day of his power.
Christ was the desire of all Nations, and there is reason why he and his
Government should be the delight and satisfaction of all Nations. Both those in
the Earth, by which some understand the Continent, and those in the Isles,
England, Scotland, and Ireland among the rest; or if you please, you may
understand the Gentiles, because that passage of the Prophet, Isa. 42:4. The
Isles shall wait for his Law, is by the Evangelist rendered thus, Mat. 12:21.
In his name shall the Gentiles trust.

3. We have here the manner how the Lord administers his Kingdoms, and
mannageth his Government, and that is laid down in two things.

1. First, with terrible majesty and mysteriousness, this you have in the
former part of the second Verse. Clouds and darkness are round about him. Which
words do intimate to us the tremendous majesty of the Lord, which may well
strike an awe upon his Subjects and friends, and much more fill his enemies
with dread and horror. He was terrible at his giving forth the fiery Law upon
Mount Sinai. As we read Deuteronomy. 11:4. The Mountain burnt with fire unto the midst
of Heaven with darkness, Clouds, and thick darkness. So he is and will be still
in his present and future appearances and dispensations. Mala. 3:2. Who shall
abide the day of his coming, and who shall stand when he appears; well may
that question be propounded, for Mat. 12:3. His Fan is in his hand, and he will
thoroughly purge his Floor, and gather his wheat into the garner, but burn up
the chaff with unquenchable fire.

And as these Clouds and darkness do signify the terrible Majesty, so the
mysteriousness of his proceedings. He often goes so much out of our sight,
that we are unable to give an account of what he does or what he is about to
do. Frequently the Pillar of divine Providence is dark throughout, to
Israelites as well as Egyptians, so that his own People understand not the
Riddles till he is pleased to be his own Interpreter, and so lead them into his
Secrets. Psalm 77:19. His way is in the Sea, and his path in the great Waters,
and his footsteps are not known, etc.

The Lord mannageth his Kingdom and Government with perfect equity and
unspotted Justice. Righteousness and Judgment are the habitation of his Throne.
Righteousness, whereby he preserves, saves and rewards the good Judgment,
whereby he punishes, confounds, and destroys the wicked. These are the
habitation of his Throne, his Tribunal, his Seat of Judicature. These are the
Basis or foundation, which give unto his Throne is (recritudinem and
stabilitatem) rectitude and establishment. His Throne is established in
righteousness, and the Scepter of his Kingdom is a right Scepter. Though there
be Clouds, yet no blemishes, though darkness, yet no deformities. Psalm 92:15.
The Lord is upright, he is our Rock, there is no unrighteousness in him. The
Doctrine I shall speak to is this:

In the midst of all outward distractions and confusions, Gods Governing the
world may and should be the support and joy of his Saints. In the handling
thereof I shall observe this method.

1. Enquire what Government is. 2. Prove that God does Govern the World. 3.
Show why this should support and comfort his People? 4. Improve the whole in a
way of use.
I begin with the first of these.

What is Government?

Government is the exerting or putting forth of that Power which any one is
justly clothed with, for the ordering and directing of Persons, and things to
their right and proper ends. In this description of Government are three things
to be considered and spoken to.

In all Government there is an end fixed and aimed at. Thus it is in Domestic
or Family Government, which Parents have over their Children by nature, and
Masters over their Servants by virtue of Contract. The end of that Government
is the good of the Family, and every one that is a member thereof. The Parent
or Master ought not to be wholly addicted to himself, nor to aim solely at his
own honor; pleasure and advantage, but to desire, study, and by all lawful
means to promote the good and welfare of the whole. And just so it is with
Political Government, both in Cities and Provinces, and Kingdoms or Empires.
When People did at first excogitate and constitute such or such a form of
Government, and place one or more at the Helm, and submitted themselves to him
or them, no rational man can doubt, but it was for some wise end. Government
and Governors are not set up for nothing, but for an end; which end is either
supreme and ultimate, or inferior and subordinate. The supreme and ultimate
end is, and ought and deserves to be the glory of God, the exalting of his
Name, the preserving, securing, and enlarging of his interest, the maintaining
and promoting of Religion and Godliness. None can shoot at a fairer mark, nor
drive a nobler design; this is worthy of men, of the best and greatest men: It
is the great end which God himself aims at in all the works of his Hands. He
both made all things for himself, and for himself likewise he does uphold and
order them. And unto this end all Magistrates are in duty bound to have an eye,
and direct their rule and all their actions. This is the great work of their
place, the main and principal business of their Office. The good Lord give them
all an heart to consider it, and to act accordingly. As they rule by God, so
they are obliged to rule for him; they ought not so much to design the lifting
up of themselves, as the lifting up the Name of God and Christ in the world,
especially in their own Dominions. That Magistrate who does not make the glory
of God his principal end, is himself degenerated into a Beast.

The inferior and subordinate end is the good of the Communities, the happiness
and welfare of the whole Country, the peace, comfort and prosperity of all the
People, over whom Governors are set. The supreme Magistrate is to his
Dominions what the Head is to the body natural, and so influence belongs to him
as well as preeminence, he is engaged to think, contrive, study, care, order,
and provide for the comfort of the body, and all the members of it. Paul says
Romans 13:4. He is the Minister of God to thee for good, for a fourfold good, as
learned Partus says.

1. In bonum natural, for natural good, that he may secure thy person and life
from danger, and thy outward Liberty, comforts and enjoyments from the Sons of
violence.

2. In bonum morale, for moral good, that he may curb thy unruly passions, and
base lusts, and restrain or hinder them from breaking out into vicious and
enormous practices.

3. In bonum civil, for civil good, that he may preserve public Society, and
keep up common honesty and Justice.

4. In bonum spirituale, for spiritual good, that he may defend the true
Religion, that which is pure and undefiled before God and the Father, and keep
up and encourage the Worship of God, which is warranted by the Scripture. And
all this is according to the word, which does direct and command that we should
pray for Kings, and all that are in Authority, that under them we might lead
peaceable and quiet lives, in all godliness and honesty. So that the end of
Government is the securing peace and quietness, and the encouraging of honesty
and godliness.

2. In all Government there is supposed a power sufficient for the ordering of
things unto these ends, not only natural power, but also moral Authority,
lawfully come by, for without that there can be no just, right, and good
Government. Magistrates therefore are called Powers. Romans 13:1. Let every Soul
be subject to the higher Powers, for there is no power but of God, the powers
that be are ordained by God. Lawful Governors are invested with Authority and
Power; there are put into their hands the Scepter to rule, and the Sword to
protect and punish as there is cause. They have a legislative Power, to make
Laws, and issue out commands which shall oblige their Subjects; they have a
right to do this, so they use their power rightly, and obedience is due from
their People, obedience to all their just and lawful commands; they ought to
rule in the fear of God, and their Subjects ought to obey in the fear of God,
Romans 13:5. Ye must needs be subject, and that not only for Wrath, but also for
Conscience sake; as knowing that this is the will of God concerning you, and
when any wilfully fail herein, they contract guilt, and break their own peace.
And as there is an Authority to enact Laws, so a Power to suppress the
Rebellions, and animadvert on those that are refractorie and stubborn, and also
to defend, reward and encourage all persons studious and careful of performing
their duty. Where all this Power is not, there is a miserable defect in the
Government, which will in time dwindle and come to nothing, and confusion and
every evil work step up in its place.

3. In Government this Power is reduced into act; there is a prudent seasonable
exerting and putting forth of the Power in order to the attaining of these
ends. This is the complement of all, for it is folly for any to make that his
end which is quite out of his reach; and that Power is in vain, which always
lies dorment. Power is not put into the Rulers hand merely for ornament but for
use. It is no other than a trust committed to him; therefore though he be a
Magistrate over men, yet he is a Minister of God, and is obliged to serve his
great Lord according to the best of his skill, and to act toward the end
formerly mentioned. As he is advanced to high and honorable places, so he is
engaged to great and excellent work. Romans 13:4. He is not to bear the Sword in
vain; and it may be said, He wears not the Crown in vain, he holds not the
Scepter in vain, not for nothing, not for a mere show, an empty Pageantry, but
for a good end, for excellent and noble purposes. The Crown and Scepter are not
so glorious as that for which he is advanced, the Sword committed to him must
be drawn against the enemies of God, and truth and holiness; he must be an
Avenger to execute wrath, not upon the pious and peaceable (that would be an
abuse of his Power) but upon them that do evil. Thus have I showed you what
Government is. Viz, Using of lawful Power for excellent ends.

The second thing propounded was to prove and evidence to you that God does
Govern the world. As he made it at first, so he does still uphold and order it.
In a Nation you know there are many inferior Magistrates and Underofficers,
yet it follows not but the King is supreme, who authorizeth, influences,
directs and limits them by his Laws. There are upon Earth many Governors,
various forms of Government, yea the Angels in Heaven are ministering Spirits,
employed in special and weighty matters. But all of them are set up and set
forth by God, and fulfill his pleasure. God himself sits at the helm, and steers
the course, he overrules and orders all from the highest to the lowest. For the
evidenceing hereof take these following particulars.

1. First, the light of nature has discovered this, and by the glimmering
thereof (though it burn dimly as a Candle in the Socket) many among the
Heathens have been led to the knowledge of it, and constrained to acknowledge it.
It must be granted that they groped, and were exceedingly in the dark,
differing much one from another in their Sentiments about the Deity and his
Providence. Some plainly denied a God; some owned and asserted the being of a
God, but denied the creating of the World, but that it was from everlasting, or
rose up through a fortuitous concurse of atoms. Some granted that the World
was of God, as of the first cause, yet he did not see nor observe what is done
in it among men. Some held he does indeed see all things that are and be done
in the world, but he is only an insignificant idle Spectator, who minds and
regards nothing. Some were of opinion, that God does not attend to the meaner
and inferior Creatures, nor take any cognizance of small inconsiderable
matters, but only superintended the affairs and concernments of mankind. Does
God take care of Oxen? Some did again assert, that God did look after and care
for all things, yet he acted only in a way of common general influences, and by
second causes, doing nothing immediately and by himself. Others again on the
contrary side did affirm, that God does immediately and by himself so work all
in all, as that they left almost no place for second Causes. Thus, poor
Creatures were they divided among themselves, having their understandings
miserably darkened. But many among the Heathens, yea their most learned men,
and of their most famous Sects, Platonists, Stoickes, Pythagoreans, did own the
Divine Providence and Government, and so did the Poets also; and for particular
Persons, the learned Plato, Seneca, Tully, (with many others) subscribe
thereunto. Hence it is that they call God the Rector and keeper of the world;
the Soul and Spirit of the world, and do expressly compare him to the Soul in
the Body, and to the Master in a Ship, who does command, rule, direct, steer
and turn it what way and to what port he himself thinks good. But so much may
suffice for that, I pass on.

2. Secondly, the Sacred Scriptures do abound with testimonies, which may
afford us full satisfaction in the point. When he was about to punish the world
for the wickedness of them that dwelt therein, and to sweep away the
inhabitants of it with a Flood, he took care that all mankind should not be
destroyed, But Noah and his Family were preserved, yea and some of all the
general species of animals too, that so Seed might be continued upon Earth, and
that in the ordinary way of Generation; which was a famous and eminent instance
of Divine Providence, and its ordering and Governing the World. Besides that
attend to these passages of Scripture, Job 5:9. God does great things and
unsearchable, mavelous things without number. He gives rain, s^nd water,
sets upon high those that be low, disappoints the devices of the crafty,
taking them in their own craftiness, and carrying the counsel of the froward
headlong: Isa. 45. I am the Lord, and there is none else, I form the light,
and create darkness, I make peace and create evil, I the Lord do all these
things, Psalm. 34: 16, 17. The face of the Lord is against them that do evil, to
cut off the remembrance of them from the Earth; The Righteous cry, and the Lord
hears, and delivers them out of all their distresses: Ephesians. 1:11. He
works all things according to the counsel of his own will. Not only some
things, those which are momentous and stupendous, such as strike men with
wonder and amazement, but all things, all is of God, and all not according to
the will and pleasure of others, but according to his own eternal Counsel, Dan.
4:34, 35. His Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, and his Kingdom is from
generation to generation, and all the Inhabitants of the Earth are accounted as
nothing, and he does according to his will in the Armies of Heaven, and all the
Inhabitants of the Earth, who are counted as nothing, and none can stay his
hand, or say unto him, what do thou. Mat. 10:29. Are not two Sparrows sold
for a Farthing, and one of them shall not fall on the ground without your
Heavenly Father. Scriptures to this purpose might be multiplied, I will add but
one more, Psalm, 103:19. The Lord has prepared his Throne in Heaven, and his
Kingdom rules over all. But further consider,

3. Thirdly, God has a most unquestionable right to order and Govern the
world; it does properly appertain unto him. The belief and acknowledgement
hereof does necessarily follow upon the owning of a God, to own such a being as
God, and yet to deny or question his right to Govern is a gross absurdity.

That being which we call God is the first, highest, noblest, and incomparably
the most excellent Being of all, infinite and unchangeable in all perfections,
and therefore he has a right to order others that are not so. Man is endued
with reason and understanding, and so is the most noble and excellent creature
in this lower world, therefore it pleased his great Creator to put the Lordship
into his hand, and to give him Dominion over the Fish and Fowl, and every
living thing that moves upon the Earth; the Psalmist tells us, He has put all
things under his feet. How much more then is an absolute and universal Rule due
to God, whose understanding is infinite, and in whom are all the inexhaustible,
unfathomtable treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Besides that, consider God as
the Fountain of Being, the first cause and original of all Being. The world and
all things in it are the works of his Hands. He made them and fashioned them,
and seeing He made all, seeing by his power and for his pleasure all things are
and were created; it is highly reasonable that all things should be ordered,
directed, and disposed of according to his pleasure. Has the Potter power over
the clay, so as to make of it a Vessel of honor or dishonor, and has not God
much more power over his Creatures? If a Father has an undoubted right to rule
his own Children, and a Master to order his own Family; it cannot rationally be
questioned, but God has a right to rule all the Persons and Creatures in the
world, for we are all his offspring, and of him the whole Family both in
Heaven and Earth is named, of him it was made, and by him it does consist. Who
can be so impudent and brutish, so much sunk below man, and run so cross to the
principles and dictates of right reason, as to deny him a right to give Laws to
them unto whom he gave life. It is highly decorous, every way fit, that he,
from whom all things had their being, and unto whose power and goodness they
own their continuance, should appoint them all their ends, and direct their
steps, and cast their lines, and cut out their works, and overrule all their
actions.

4. For God to Govern the world is no dishonor to him; it does not
unhandsomely reflect upon his divine Majesty, nor cause the least Eclipse or
diminution of his most excellent Glory. It is true, as I before hinted unto
you, though some men cheerfully acknowledged a Governing and overruling
Providence over humane actions and affairs, yet they conceived, it extended not
its self to more vile and contemptible creatures, or to minute and
inconsiderable things. Jerome, though a learned and holy man, seemed to be of
this opinion: for he grants a general order and disposal, how such an
innumerable multitude of Fishes should breed and live in the Sea, and how
brutes and creeping things should gender upon the Earth, and with what they
should be maintained, but he fancieth it a solecisme to debase and bring down
the Majesty of the ever blessed God so low, as to mind and order the breeding
and death of gnats, or to concern himself about the number of flies and fleas
that are upon the Earth, or how many Fishes swim in the Sea and Rivers, or
which among the smaller ones should become a prey to the greater, for they did
fancy this to be altogether unworthy and unbecoming of God; judging of him by
earthly Potentates, who take State upon them, and trouble not themselves with
any but the more weighty and momentous affairs of their Dominions, and leave
things of smaller importance to their inferior Officers.

But this is not the manner of the God of Jacob, nor does he count his care of
the meanest and most minute beings, to be any reflection upon him, unless it be
of honor and glory. Therefore he expressly tells us in his Word, that the young
Lions seek their meat of God; that he gives to the Beasts their food, and to
the young Ravens when they cry. He clothes the Lillies, and Sparrows are not
forgotten by him, not one of them falls to the ground without him; the v^ry
hairs of our head are numbered, he knows our wanderings, counts our steps,
and puts our ^^ar, into his Bottle. And what dishonor can all or any of this
be to him? is it possible, that his doing so should render him cheap to the
children of men? nay, it is not enough to commend him to all wise and thinking
persons, that he is so great a God, as that he can extend his care to so many
millions of Objects, and so graciously condescending, as to look after the
lowest of the works of his hands.

Surely since i^ was not unworthy of his divine Power to make the meanest
Creature, it cannot be unworthy of his goodness to maintain and order it. If
his eternal Power and Godhead are clearly seen in the things that are made,
then his goodness does likewise display it self in providing for them, and his
wisdom in Governing and directing them. It is true, he humbles himself when he
beholds those things which are above, much more when he regards those that are
here below, but that humbling of himself is glorifying of himself, and it does
deservedly commend and endeare him to his People, Psalm 36:6, 7. O Lord, thou
preservest man and beast, how excellent is thy loving kindness!

5. Lastly, Our God is abundant in mercy and goodness; He is the Father of
mercies, and a God of compassions, and as that does render him fit to Govern
the world, so it may work in us an assurance that he does and will do it. Shall
we fancy him like unto the Ostrick, concerning which it is said, Job 39:14.
That she leaves her Eggs in the Earth, and warmeth them in the dust, and
forgets that the foot may crush them, or that the wild beasts may break
them; she is hardened against her young ones, as if they were not hers. Thus to
do is utterly inconsistent with the divine goodness: to fancy such a thing of
God would be to blaspheme him; He has a love and kindness for the works of his
hands, as such, and that will carry him out to a caring for them, and ordering
of them. The world will love its own, and does not God much more? A good
Prince, who is the Father of his Country, and deserves that name, will to the
best of his skill guide and rule his Kingdom, at the helm whereof Providence
has placed him, that his own honor, and his peoples welfare might be secured
and promoted. That man deserves not the place nor name of a Master, who
neglects to make provision for his own Family, and keep up order in it. That is
an unnatural Father, unworthy indeed to be called man, who does not according
to his best knowledge and ability, mind his children and Govern them.

Now, tampius nemo, tam Pater nemo; none is so good as God, none such a Father
as God, no love comparable to his love. All that love which may be found in the
Creatures is but a drop from his Ocean, a spark from his flame; and as I have
said, all the world is his own, and all that is therein the works of his hands:
He built this huge and stately Fabric, and he furnished it with all its
Inhabitants, from the highest and most glorious Angel to the meanest and most
contemptible Insect; and how can we possibly think otherwise, but that the
pity and love which he has for the works of his own hands, will draw out his
wisdom, and power and care for the ruling and directing of them. For any one to
deny this care, nay to hesitate about it, would be an unworthy base
disparagement, dishonor, and affront to him.

The third thing we have to do is to show how our belief of Gods Governing the
world may support us in all worldly distractions, this is a great question,
very seasonable, and of singular use, and that we may draw out the sweetness of
this truth, and fetch comfort from it, we must consider these following
particulars: 1. Gods accomplishment for the work. 2. The extent of his
Government. 3. The properties thereof. 4. Several things relating to the Church
and its living Members.


First, God is most fit and accomplished for this great work. It is indeed a
business too hard for a Creatures hand to dispatch, and a burden too heavy for
a created shoulder to bear up under* some ambitious Princes have been, and are
said to be aspiring afte^ an Universal Monarchy, which they never did, nor
never shall attain, it is bigger than their graspe, a thing too high and too
hard for them. And indeed those Princes which rule well, and mind their work
and duty, find the Crowns which they have, are lined with cares enough to make
their heads ache, and their hearts too sometimes. But to Govern the world is a
thing utterly impossible to a created Being, not only to the wisest man on
Earth, but also to the highest Angel in Heaven. None can Govern the whole
world, but He that did create it. Creation is peculiar to God, the greatest
Angel cannot create the smallest spire of grass, nor a contemptible flea, no,
not the least atome. The most minute drop of being can proceed only from him,
who is the Original and Fountain of all Being. So the Government of the whole
world is peculiar to God, because there is so much contraritie in it, so many
antipathies, things lie so cross, men have unruly passions, they interfere in
their several interest, and while they are carrying of them on, quarrel and
jossle one another, and who but God can order all, and direct them to most
noble and excellent ends, who but God can take these several scattered sherds
and unite them together in one curious and amiable piece of workmanship, who
but God can take these jarring discords and turn them into an admirable and
delightful harmony. That God is perfectly accomplished for the work, so that
he can not only do it, but the doing thereof will be no pain nor trouble to
him, may thus appear.

1. He is an immense Being; Heaven is his Throne, and the Earth his footstool.
Those that have many Irons in the fire, business scattered up and down, must
needs suffer some of those Irons to cool, some of that business to lie by
neglected, because they themselves are confined and limited Creatures. Some
things may be amiss and out of order under the Government of the most prudent
and pious Prince, because he cannot be at once in all parts of his Dominions;
but God is omnipresent, filling Heaven and Earth. If thou go up to Heaven he
is there; if thou make thy Bed in Hell, behold! he is there; if thou dwell
in the uttermost parts of the Sea, there shall his Hand lead thee, and his
right Hand shall guide thee. All things are within his reach, wheresoever any
thing is doing or to be done there God is; who is present in every place and
with every person? He stands at our right hands, and so may well guide them, so
to do will cost him no travel nor trouble. In him we live and move and have our
being; not at a distance from him, not out of him, but in him.

2. God can easily Govern the world, because of his almighty Power, he is
stronger than all, his Word is enough to accomplish all his will. The wisest of
men are foolish creatures; and the strongest are weak. Kingdoms and Nations
have frequently proved ungovernable to potent Princes. Such breaches have been
made as they could not heal; and such tempests have risen as they could not
lay. Nay that man is not found in the world, who has Power sufficient to
Govern himself. How often does his will rebel against his reason. Video meliora
proboque, deteriora sequor; His judgment sees and votes for that which is
good, but his will chooses what is worse, his sensual appetite longs for it,
and that must be gratified whatever the cost be. We sometimes see that wise
men, gracious and holy men cannot curb their own passions, but they take he^d,
and hurry them into great and uncomely extravagancies. But now God is of
infinite Power, as he has an arm long enough to reach, so strong enough to
rule all things. He binds the Sea with a girdle, and stays its proud waves,
saying, hither shall ye go and no further. He makes the wrath of man to praise
him, though it be more boisterous than the Sea, and the remainder thereof he
shall restrain. Job has sundry passages to this purpose, worthy of our remark,
Job. 26. take some of them thus. He hangs the world upon nothing. He has
compassed the waters with bounds; He divides the Sea with his Power, the
Pillars of Heaven tremble and are astonished at his reproof. And then he
closes thus in verse 14. Lo, these are part of his ways, but how little a
portion is heard of him, and the Thunder of his Power who can understand? The
Power of his Thunder is great, which discovered the forest, and makes the
hinds to calve, what then is the Thunder of his Power when God does but whisper
a rebuke into the ear of a man, that makes his beauty to consume like a moth?
what then can he do, nay what can he nor do when he thunders from Heaven? In
short, his Power is irresistible, and his will in all things efficacious. He
can master all difficulties, and conquer all enemies, and overcome all
opposition; when he has a mind to work, who shall let him? he asks no leave,
he needs no help, he knows no impediment. Mountains in his way become plains;
his counsel shall stand, and the thoughts of his heart to all generations.

3. Thirdly, God is fit to Govern the world upon the account of his wisdom and
knowledge. His eyes run too and fro through the Earth. He observes all the
motions and ways of men. He understands what has been, is, and shall be. Hell
is naked before him, how much more Earth. His eye is upon the conclave of Rome,
the Cabals of Princes, and the closets of particular Persons. Excellently does
David set forth the divine Omniscience, Psalm. 139. Thou know my
down-sitting, and my up-rising, and understandest my thoughts afar off. Thou
compassest my path, and my lying down, and art acquainted with all my ways,
there is not a word in my tongue, but, O Lord, thou know it altogether, thou
have, beset me behind and before. He knows not only what is done by man, but
also what is in man, all his goodness, and all his wickedness; all his
contrivances, purposes and designs; The heart is deceitful above all things,
and desperately wicked, who can know it? do you ask who, the answer is ready,
Jehovah. He searches the heart, he tries and possess^th the reins. Those are
dark places, far removed from the eyes of all the world; but Gods eyes are like
a flame of fire, they carry their own light with them, and discover those
recesses, run through all the Labyrinths of the heart, they look into each
nooke and corner of it, and see what lurks there, what is doing there. O! what
manner of Persons should we be! with what diligence should we keep our hearts
since God observes them with so much exactness! Men may take a view of the
practices of others, but God sees their principles, and to what they do incline
them. Yea, He knows how to order and command the heart; not only how to
affright it with terrors, and to allure it with kindnesses, and persuade it
with arguments, but likewise how to change and alter and mend it by his Power.
He cannot only debilitate and enfeeble it when set upon evil, but also how
confirm and fix and fortify it, when carried out to that which is good. The
hearts of Kings are in the hands of the Lord, and he turned them as the Rivers
of Water.

4. Fourthly, God is fit to Govern the world upon the score of his
long-suffering and forbearance. Those that have the reins of Government put
into their hands, had need be Persons of excellent and cool Spirits; for if
they have a great deal of Power, and but a small stock of patience, they will
soon put all into a flame. That man who has but a little Family to manage,
will in that meet with trials and exercises enough; How much more he that is
set over a Kingdom; and unspeakably more yet he that is to Govern the world?
especially considering the present State of the degenerate world, and how
things have been ever since Sin made an entry into it. The whole world now
lies in wickedness; there is not a man in it, but does every day offer a
thousand affronts to God, and provokes him to his face. Angelical patience
would soon tire and be spent, and turn into such fury as would quickly reduce
all into a Chaos. There is not an Angel in Heaven, but if there were a
commission given him, he would do immediate execution, and sheath the Sword of
vengeance in the bowels of malefactors. But now, to his glory be it spoken, God
is infinite in patience, slow to anger and of great kindness. Though he be
disobeyed, abused, grieved, vexed, pressed with the sins of men even as a cart
is pressed that is laden with sheaves, yet he spares and bears, and waits. How
loath is he to stir up all his wrath, and to pour out the Vials thereof. He
counts that his strange work, when he goes about it, his bowels do often
yearne, and his repentings are kindled together. In the 11. Hosea 8.9. He
seemed to stand with his hand stretched out, as one resolved to give a
consuming blow, but he laid aside his Weapons of indignation, and in the
greatness of his compassion cried out, How shall I give thee up Ephraim? how
shall I deliver thee Judah? how shall I make thee as Ad^nah, how shall I set
thee as Zeboim? my heart is turned within me, I will not execute the fierceness
of mine anger, I will not return to destroy Ephraim, for I am God and not man.
Thus we see God is accomplished for the Government ^f the world.

In the second place let us enquire concerning the extent of Gods Governing
Providence, how far and unto what it reaches. And take this in general, The
whole world, and whatsoever is contained within the compass of Heaven and
Earth, are ordered by him as his Family, the Church is regarded and cared for
by him as his endeared Spouse, and all the Saints as his children. All men even
the worst and vilest, with all their actions, and all Creatures, even the
meanest are ordered by God, and directed to their appointed ends. But we will
descend to particulars.

First, The governing Providence of God extends it self to all Creatures
whatsoever have being, both animate and inanimate, the greatest and the least.
He rules the Stars, the Influences of Pleiades, and the Bands of Orion are from
him. He causes the Sun to shine, sets him daily and anual Journeys, and when
he pleases, stops him in his course, and turns him back, when he comes out of
his Chamber as a Bridegroom or a Giant refreshed with Wine. He makes small the
drops of Rain, and causes them to fall upon one City and not upon another, he
feeds the Fouls, and musters Caterpillars, Locusts, Flies as his Armies, Angels
are his Servants, absolutely at his beck, ready to execute his Will, and by him
they are sent forth to minister unto his Children, and to punish his Enemies.
He has enraged Devils in a Chain, and both confines them, and imploys them as
he himself thinks good. He suffered one to be a lying Spirit in the mouth of
Ahabs Prophets. He permitted Satan to do much against Job, yet kept him from
touching his Life. He cast Devils out of the possessed, and gave them leave to
enter into an Herd of swine. He governs men too, keeping Abimelech from
violating Sarahs Chastity and Laban from touching Jacob's Liberty or Goods, and
Esau from offering violence to his Life, the meanest Creatures are the Objects
of his Cure, and the noblest are overruled by his Power.

Secondly, the Governing Providence of God extends it self to all motions and
actions, without him we can do nothing, as a special assistance is necessary to
gracious Acts, so is a general concurse to natural ones, unless he support we
cannot stir a step, nor strike a stroke, nor speak a word nor form a thought,
God suspends the Creatures Actions when he pleases, thus he kept the Fire from
burning the three Children, that were thrown into it, when put into its
greatest rage. He stopped the mouths of Lions, and kept them from preying upon
Daniel, when hunger was feeding upon them. And it was he that taught and
commanded the rapacious Raven to forget it self, that it might carry food to a
Prophet. God orders and directes actions to ends never designed by the doer,
yea he makes the most vile and wicked actions subservient to most excellent and
most noble ends. Adams sin issued in the glorifying of Gods name in a mixed way
of Justice and Mercy. Pharoahs Cruelty made Israel multiply, so that the more
they were deprest, the more they flourished, Romes persecutions have been Sions
Enlargements, and the blood of the Martyrs the Seed of the Church Joseph's
Brethrens selling him was a step to his preferment in the Court of Pharaoh, and
a sending him before to preserve the use of his Father and of his Family. The
crucifying of our dear Jesus was the saving of Believers, and by his most
precious blood, which the Jews and Romans most wickedly spilt, were all the
Elect of God redeemed from Hell and everlasting destruction. The King of
Assyria thought of nothing else but to destroy and c^^t off Nations not a few,
but God sent him as an Executioner of his Justice to punish an hypocritical
Nation, and the people of his wrath. Thus God does not only uphold his
Creatures in their Beings, and assist and strengthen them in their Actions, but
he does also direct, order and overrule those actions, so that their product
and issue shall be admirable, wicked men have base and sordid ends in the
Commission of Sin, but God has holy ends in his permission thereof, while they
gratify their Lusts, he fulfills his pleasure, and while they act like Devils,
He acts like God, i. e. like himself.

Thirdly, This Governing and overruling Providence of God extends it self to
all issues and results of things, both good and evil; the lot is cast into the
Lap, but the Disposal thereof is of the Lord. He is the Fountain of all the
good and comforts which we enjoy, for which we are under everlasting
Obligations to praise his Name, and not to sacrifice to our own Net, That the
House is built, we owe more to God than to the Workmen; and in the preservation
of the City God is more to be thanked and acknowledged than the Watchman. It is
unquestionably men's duty to follow their Callings, and mind their business; and
study good Husbandry, for the sluggard shall be clothed with rags, and the
prodigal will be glad of husks; but if after all endeavor and care an Estate
comes in, it is more of Gods sending than of Man's fetching. The Blessing of God
makes rich, and not man's diligence without it, when you are sick, it is your
wisdom and duty to send for the most able, skilful and faithful Physicians, and
to follow the method, and use the means, which they prescribe, but when your
Distempers are removed, and your Health is restored, you are beholden more to
God than to Men and means; for notwithstanding them your Souls would dwell in
silence, if the Lord himself were not your help. The Battle is not to the
strong, nor the race to the swift, nor does promotion come from the East, or
the West, but the Lord pulls down one, and sets up another.

So for evil things, we are too prone to rest in second Causes, and care not to
look so high as God, but whether we take notice of him or no, there is no rod
under which we smart, but Gods hand lays it on. Eliphaz tells us, 5. Job. 6.
Affliction comes not forth from the dust, neither does trouble spring out of
the ground, i. e. they do not come by chance, though many things be
contingences, yet all things have a cause, to us indeed they are casual, but to
God they are certain. He himself foresaw and foreappointed them. There is
nothing of Fortune, but all is of Counsel. Is there any evil in the City, and
the Lord has not done it? i. e. any penal Evil, any afflictive Evil. There is
not sickness nor pain thou groanest under, not a Loss thou meetest with, not a
Cross that pinches thee, but thou may write the Name of God upon it. He
creates Darkness as well as Forms the Light. When things run cross to men's
desires and Interest, and expectations, they grow teachy and froward, and
quarrel at this and that, but let this silence them, and work them to an humble
and patient submission, that all is of God. Israel rebelled against the House
of David, thereupon Rehoboam armed Judah and Benjamin to bring the Kingdom
again to him; stay, said God, ye shall not go up, nor fight against your
Brethren, the Children of Israel, return every man to his house, for this thing
is of me, all good is of God, that obliges us to thankfulness, and grateful
acknowledgments; all Evil is of God, and that should teach us humbly, patiently
and silently to submit. I was dumb said David, and opened not my mouth,
because, Lord, thou did it.

In the third place we shall enquire after the Properties of Gods Government,
or the manner how he orders and governs all things; take that in these few
particulars.

1. God does govern the World misteriously, so the Text tells us, Clouds and
Darkness are round about him, as there are mysteries in the word, so in the
works of God. (...), things hard to be understood, many riddles, which nonplus
and puzzle men of the largest and most piercing Intellectuals, 23. Job. 8, 9,
10. Behold, I go forward, but he is not there, and backward, but I cannot
perceive him; on the left hand where he does work but I cannot behold him, but
he knows the way that I take. God knows our ways, and counts our steps,
but the wisest of men do not know all Gods ways. His way is frequently in the
Sea, and his Chariot in the Clouds, so that he is invisible, not only in his
essence, but also in the design and tendence of his operations, those that
behold him with an Eye of Faith, do not yet see him with an Eye of
Understanding, so as to discern his way, and whether he is going. Paul assures
us, his judgments are unsearchable, and his ways past finding out. Some of them
indeed are obvious, plain and easy, we may upon the first view give a
satisfactory account of them, we may read righteousness, equity, mercy,
goodness, love in them, because written in Capital Letters, and with such beams
of Light as he that runs may read them. But others of Gods ways are dark and
obscure, so that they are out of our reach, and above our sight. He that goes
about in them so trace Gad, may quickly lose himself. They are like that
handwriting upon the Wall, which none of Belshazzars wise men could read or
give the interpretation of. There are arcana imperii, secrets of State and
Government, which are not fit to be made common. But this may be our comfort,
though God does not now give any account of his matters, nor is he obliged
thereunto, yet he can give a very good and satisfactory account, and one day
his people shall be led into the mystery, and though many things which God does
they know not now, yet they shall know them afterward, and when they know, they
shall approve, and admire, both the things and the reason, and the end, they
shall then be perfectly reconciled to all Providence, and see that all were
worthy of God, and that in all he acted (...), as did highly become himself.

2. God does govern the world wisely; He did indeed threaten it as a dreadful
judgment upon Judah and Jerusalem, Isa. 3:4 that He would give children to be
their Princes, and Babes should rule over them; not meaning children in years,
for Josiah a child was one of the best of their Kings, but children in
understanding; such as had no prudence, nor skill, nor conduct, knew not how to
hold the Reign, nor use the rod, nor direct the course. It is certainly fatal
to the world, when a young, heady and foolish Phaeton is got into the chariot
of the Sun. Whither will not fiery steads carry an Ass and others with him, but
into destruction? when an ignorant unskilful Pilot ^^ts at helm, the passengers
of the Ship will soon be brought to their last prayers. But God is wise in
heart, yea infinite in wisdom; All the treasures of wisdom are in him, and no
wisdom is to be found in Angels or men, but what came from him, and all that
(were it united in one) would not be comparable to what is in him. The very
foolishness of God is wiser than men.

There are two things of which wisdom consists, and both are in God most
eminently. Knowledge of the nature of things, and prudence to dispose, and order
them. God knows all things perfectly, and orders them all exactly; all things
are naked and opened before him, and almost curiously and accurately managed
by him. Men in place of authority and power do sometimes mistake and miscarry,
doing many things amiss. David was so ingenuous as to acknowledge it, I have
sinned greatly in that I have done, I have done very foolishly. But in all
things God acts very wisely. He is not a man that he should err or repent;
ever since the Creation all things have been done with that unreprovable
exactness, that if the world were to begin again, and the affairs of it to be
acted over again, there should not be an alteration in a tittle. All has been
so well, that nothing can be mended. Those dark and obscure passages of
Providence, at which good men are startled, and by which all men are posed, are
most excellent and curious strokes, and as so many well placed shades, which
commend the work, and admirably set off the beauty of Providence. That is a
great Scripture, most worthy of our very particular notices, Ephesians. 1:11. He
works all things according to the counsel of his will; which words plainly
speak these two things 1. The independency of God in his operations. He asks
not leave of any, neither Men nor Angels; He is not beholden to them, he does
not advise with them, he cannot be forced nor hindered by them. He acts not
according to their will, ^ut his own, and fulfils all his pleasure. 2. The
wisdom of God in his working, He does all according to his counsel; He is a God
of Judgment, a most judicious God, and all his works are done in judgment, the
whole plot was laid before hand.

It is said of God Isa. 28:29. that he is wonderful in counsel and excellent in
working; this latter necessarily follows upon the former. He must needs be
excellent in working because he is wonderful in counsel; All that he does is
the result of a most admirable judgment and mature counsel. The Holy Prophet
therefore was ravished in his Spirit upon the consideration of Gods work, both
for their number and for their wisdom; Psalm. 104:24. O Lord, how manifold are
thy works, in wisdom have thou made them all. They are very many, yet all very
good; notwithstanding their multitude and variety. God miscarried in none;
there is an impress of wisdom upon them all.

3. God governs all things powerfully; where the word of a King is, Solomon
tells us, there is power, what power then does the Word of God carry along with
it? He orders, and rules, turns and overturns things as he thinks good. That is
a notable and very comfortable place which we have Isa. 33:11. The Counsel of
the Lord stands for ever, and the thoughts of his heart to all generations.
The counsel of the Lord does so stand, as that all things shall certainly fall
before it that rise up in opposition to it. The counsel of the Heathen, when
contrary thereunto, is brought to naught, and the devices of the people are
made of no effect. As the rod of Moses prevailed against the rods of the
Magicians, so do the thoughts and counsels of God against all other thoughts
and counsels that run counter and bid defiance to them, Psalm. 135:6. Whatsoever
the Lord pleased, that he did, in the Heaven, and in the Earth, and in the
Seas, and in all d^ep places Gods will obtains and has the upperhand every
where Down Man, down Pope, down Devil, you must yield, things shall not be as
you will, but as God will. We may well say, who has resisted his will? many
indeed disobey and sin against the will of his precept, but none ever did, none
ever shall frustrate or obstruct the will of his purpose, for he will do all
his pleasure, and in his way Mountains shall become a plain.

Many men think, and some say, they will do what they will, especially great
men who are advanced in place, and armed with power, they love to be arbitrary,
stat pro ratione voluntas, their will is their own reason, and shall be other
men's Law; but to say, I will have my will, is a Speech too lofty for a
Creature. When they exalt their wills God can bind their hands, and break their
necks. How resolved was Pharaoh, he would do this and that, I, that he would,
Exodus 15:9. The enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the
spoil, my lust shall be satisfied upon them, I will draw my Sword, mine hand
shall destroy them But God was full out as much resolved* that as high and
great and proud as Pharaoh was, yet he should not have his will, and God was
too hard for him, verse 10. Thou did blow with the wind, the Sea covered
them, they sunk down as lead in the mighty waters, by the blast of God they
perished, and by the breath of his Nostrils they were consumed. God did ^asily
scatter and consume them, as if they had been but dust or chaff; the breath of
Gods nostrils stopped the breath of their nostrils. Nay God need not send forth a
blast, when he did but give a look, the Host of the Egyptians was troubled.
When God hides his face from his people, he troubles them, and when he looks
upon his enemies, he can trouble them.

Nay more, God cannot only bind the hands of men, but he likewise can bind
their wills, yea and turn their hearts too as the Rivers of water. He can make
enemies to be at peace, and Lions to lie down with Lambs, and Leopards with
Kiddes, and Egyptians to lend their Jewels unto Israelites; yea he cannot only
pacify them, but reconcile them, turning their enmity into friendship, and
their hatred into love. Esau resolved to kill his Brother Jacob, but he
embraced him, and fell on his neck and kissed him. Observe that passage, which
plainly speaks Gods power over the Spirits and wills of men, Exodus 34:23, 24.
Gods command there was this, thrice in the year shall all your men children
appear before the Lord God of Israel; And his promise was this, no man shall
desire thy Land, when thou shall go up to appear before the Lord thy God thrice
in the year. The Jews were environed with enemies, and those enemies might very
well desire their Land, because it was a good and pleasant Land, flowing with
milk and honey; and when all the males were gone up to Jerusalem, and so the
borders of the Country were left naked, that was a fit opportunity for an
invasion. But says God, trouble not your selves, do your duty, go up when I
bid you, and I will take care and overrule in the case; look you to your duty,
and I will look to your borders; I will so order the Spirits of your enemies,
that not a man among them shall have any mind to give you a disturbance, or to
make an inroad into your Country. And this may afford strong consolation to us
in the very worst of times, and when things are darkest, that God, whom we own
and serve, has such a mighty and effectual influence upon the hearts and wills
of men, even of those that are his peoples most desperate and enraged enemies.

4. God does govern the world most righteously. So the Text tells us,
Righteousness and Judgment are the habitation of his Throne. It is true, many
times affairs are so managed, and things at such a pass good men deprest so
low, and wicked men advanced so high, vice encouraged, and virtue frowned upon,
godliness trampled under foot, and profaneness rampant and triumphing; that
thereby some have been induced to question and deny a Providence, and even good
men have been stumbled, as we may see in several precious and eminent Saints,
Joh, Jeremy, Habakkuk, Asaph, whose names stand upon record in the Sacred
Scripture. But it does not become any of us to call the great and glorious God
down to the bar of our reason, nor to measure his dealings with our line. It is
not for us to be his Counselors nor his Judges. Rather, where we cannot
comprehend him, let us adore him, and give him the justification of faith,
still resolving with Jeremy to hold fast this conclusion, Righteous art thou, O
Lord. And this is certain, whatsoever advantages some wicked men may have as to
temporal, outward enjoyments, yet even here good men have the better of them,
their lines are cast in more pleasant places, so that they have no cause of
envy nor complaint.

Have wicked men at any time the smiles of the world, the favor of great ones,
waters of a cup full wrung out to them, do they ruffle in Silks, and glister
with Jewels, and abound with sensitive comforts? The Saints, though they be
poor and afflicted and despised, and counted the offscouring of the world,
have the love of Gods heart, which is most cordial, better than wine, and the
graces of his Spirit, which do outworth the gold of Ophyr; and oftentimes the
light of his countenance, and beams of his favor, which makes the most
lightsome and comfortable day. They are arrayed with the robe of righteousness
and garment of Salvation, which adorn them more than garments of wrought gold.
Christ leads them into his Banqueting House, and there spreads over them the
banner of his love, which affords the surest protection, and the sweetest
shade. Who but themselves are able to tell or conceive what unspeakable and
glorious joy they have, what triumphs and exultings of Soul, when their best
beloved Jesus kisseth them with the kisses of his lips, and by his own Spirit
witnesses with theirs that they are the Children of God, and with his most
ravishing consolations does delight their Souls! what are mines of gold, and
rocks of Diamonds, what are Lordships and manors, what are Crowns and
Scepters, what Kingdoms and Empires to one drachme of grace, one smile from
Heaven, one whisper of divine love, one embrace of a Savior? Cursed, said
noble Galeacius, be that man, who counts all the world worth one hours
communion with Jesus Christ, and if one hour of Communion be so precious, what,
O, what is a life of Communion?

But then, stay till the winding up of the bottom, till that last and great day
shall dawn, in which there will be a revelation of the righteous Judgment of
God, and of the mavelous goodness of God, wherein the wicked shall be stripped
of all their honor and power, of all their riches and pleasures, and turned
into Hell, for the wrath of God, and the worm of Conscience eternally to feed
upon them; And those who have believingly closed with Christ, and bowed to his
Scepter, and walked closely with God, and studied the power of godliness and
strictness of Religion, shall enter into peace, and be clothed with glory, and
sit upon Thrones, possessed of a fullness of joy, and sporting themselves in
Rivers of pleasure, under the brightest and warmest beams of divine love, and
in the most endearing embraces of the Lord Jesus, and in the plenarie
uninterrupted enjoyment of those things, which eye has not seen nor ear heard,
nor have entered into the heart of man, without any disquieting apprehensions or
fears of being ejected out of that possession, or disturbed in it. Then all the
world, the most stupid and unteachable part of it will be thoroughly convinced,
that there is a reward for the righteous, a God that Judges in the Earth, and
that true godliness is profitable for all things, both for the life that now
is, and for that which is to come, and that however things go now, yet it was
not in vain to serve God. And therefore in the mean time, though Clouds and
darkness are round about the Throne, yet let us rejoice in the firm belief of
what the Prophet tells us, Psalm 145:17. The Lord is righteous in all his ways,
and holy in all his works.

The last thing promised for the proof of the point, that Gods governing the
world may well support us in the midst of all distractions, is to present to
your consideration several things more particularly relating to the Church and
People of this God. And they are these:

1. The nearness, dearness, and intimacy of that relation, in which the Church
and Saints stand to God. What may not the wife and children of a loving and
mighty King promise themselves from his government? Certainly they may well be
assured, so long as he keeps his Throne, and has power in his hand, they shall
want neither defense nor comfort. The Church is Gods Vineyard, and will he not
water it, and keep it every moment, lest any hurt it? She is the Spouse of
Christ, and will he not be tender over her, and kind to her? He is a Father to
his people, and will he not look after them, and afford them maintenance and
necessary supplies? He is more than a Mother to them, and will he not draw out
his breasts of consolation, that they may suck and be satisfied, milk out and
be delighted. Doubtless they may believingly expect all good from him, all
kindness, all comforts from him, who has been graciously pleased to put
himself into all relations unto them. In the 23. Psalm. v. 1. holy David looked
with an eye of Faith but to one Relation in which God stood to him, the Lord is
my Shepherd; and from thence he saw sufficient encouragement to conclude that,
he should not want. What may thou then, O believer, argue from all Gods
relations. He is my God, my King, my Master, my Father, my Husband; therefore
surely I shall not want. He is a Sun and Shield, a Sun for comfort, and a
Shield for security. In his beams then his children shall rejoice, and in his
shadow shall they sit safely, and no good thing shall he withold from them
that walk uprightly. Jerusalem is the City of the great King* and if she be
Gods City, God will be her security. Never fear that, O Saints, for he is
known, famously known in her Palaces for a refuge.

2. The special interest which God has in his Church and People, they are his
Portion and Inheritance; And no one will, if he can help it, lose his portion.
Na^oth would not part with his Inheritance upon any terms, neither fell nor
change it; much less will Christ with his, who is so greatly taken with it, as
to count the lines fallen to him in a pleasant place, and that he has a goodly
heritage. His people are his Jewels, and will he suffer them to be lost? They
are his Treasure, and what! shall his enemies rob him of that? no, no, where
his treasure is, there his heart is also, and where his heart is, there shall
his eye be watching, and his hand of power shall be stretched out, and his
wings of protection shall be spread abroad, and Salvation it self shall be for
Walls and Bulwarks. The interest which God has in all the world is not
comparable to that interest which God has in the Church. The rest are but his
Slaves, these are his Children; the rest are but the rude wilderness, the
Devils waste, these are his Gardens enclosed. In others he sees his power, but
in these his Image and his Son. Others are the work of his hands, but these are
the Workmanship of his Spirit.

3. That most endearing and entire affection which he bears unto his Church
and People. As be stands in all relations to them, so he has all affections
for them. You that understand what love is, do feel within your selves what a
noble active, liberal principle it is, and what a mighty power and vigor there
is in it. Now there is no love in the world comparable to the love of God. He
has a flame to our spark, an Ocean to our drop. The dearest of Gods love is
placed upon Christ, and in and for Christ's sake the same love is placed upon
the Church and people of Christ; thou have loved them as thou have loved me.
And what will not such love do? it will awaken care, and call forth power, and
engage wisdom, and open the Exchequer, and stick at no pains, no expense, Isa.
43:4. Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou have been honorable, and I
have loved thee, therefore will I give men for that, and people for thy life.
God loves the gates of Zion more than all the dwellings of Jacob, and the
dwellings of Jacob more than all the Tents and Palaces of wickedness, and more
than all the Thrones of iniquity that frame mischief by a Law, for these shall
have no fellowship with him. He loves one Saint more than he does ten thousand
ungodly wretches, (with whom he is angry every day) and his poor Church more
than all the world. Christ preferres his little flock before the hugeherds and
droves which the Devil will have fall to his share. And since this God, who is
so much your Friend, gouerns the world, sit down and think how much you may
expect from him; nay, what good is there which you may not expect?

4. God has especially charged himself with his Church and People, as a good
King looks upon it as his duty to study and promote the weal and comfort of all
his Dominions, and all his Subjects, but in a more particular manner, the
happiness of his Consort, and Children and favorites.

There is, as I have shown you, a general Providence of God, which extends it
self to the whole world, and for which all things fare the better; but besides
that there is a special Providence exercised about the Saints, of whom he is as
tender as the apple of his eye. Next to his own interest that of his People
lies closest to his heart, and does most engage his thoughts. Others are under
his eye which runs to and fro through the Earth, but these are under his wing.
Does God take care of Oxen? yes, that he does, and of Asses too, and of young
Lions, and Wolves and Bears and Tigers, and all the Beasts of prey; but he
takes another manner of care for his Lambs, and his Dove in the clefts of the
Rock, and in the secret places of the stairs. You read, and rejoice when you
read, 1 Timothy 4:10. That he is the Savior of all men, but especially of those
that believe. They are his peculiar people, and so the objects of his peculiar
care; whatsoever God does he minds them: and whoever are neglected and left to
shift for themselves, to be sure they shall not. What! Noah drowned in the
waters of deluge, or Lot burnt with Sodom and Gomorrha and the Cities of the
plain. No, no, it could not possibly be; Noah must be secured in the Ark before
the windows of Heaven were opened, and the Fountains of the great deep were
broken up. And Lot must be arrived at Zoar the City of his refuge, before the
storm of Fire and Brimstone could fall. Zion is engraven upon the palms of
Gods hand, and her Walls are continually before him.

5. God has already done great and mavelous things for his Church and
People, not only being at charge upon them in the ordinary way of his common
Providence, but likewise putting forth extraordinary and magnificent acts
whenever their case did call for them. Miracles have been nothing to him at
such a time; he has not only wrought one or two, but multiplied them; there
has been a series of them, as if he counted them cheap. His arm has awakened
and put on strength, and also put forth strength. No less than ten wonderful
plagues did he send upon that proud King Pharaoh, Isreal's cruel oppressor; and
rather than he should not have let them go, I question not but he would have
sent a thousand more. And if after they were gone, Pharaoh would pursue them,
God would make for Israel a way through the Sea, and for Pharaoh, and his host
a grave in it. The course of nature was for a while stopped, and the Sun made to
stand still upon Gibeon, and the Moon in the Valley of Ajalon, that his People
might avenge themselves upon their enemies. Clouds have showred down Manna upon
them, and flinty Rocks, as hard and dry as they are, have powered out water. And
though such kind of works have not been performed in the latter days, yet God
in them has not left himself without witness, neither is his arm shortened, nor
has he lost his old wont; Miracles are as easy to him now as they were
formerly, and if need were, he would do them. But besides them consider these
three things which God has done all along.

1. He has in all times preserved and kept up a Church in the world; though
Christ has but a little flock, and that is encompassed with ravenous Wolves,
yet he has always had a flock. When all flesh had corrupted their way, there
was a Church in Noah's Family. When Israel had generally perverted their way,
and turned aside to abominable idolatry, there were still reserved seven
thousand faithful worshippers, that had not bowed the knee to Baal. In the
thickest darkness and most furious rage of Popery there were those that owned
and pleaded, and suffered for the truths of the Gospel. The four mighty
Monarchies of the world have been shaken down and broken into shivers, but the
Kingdom of the Lord is an everlasting Kingdom, and his Dominion is from
generation to generation. The Church indeed has not been always alike
conspicuous, nor has it always been in the same state of purity, peace and
prosperity, but it has always had a being. Christ was never without some
militant Subjects, nor his truth without some faithful witnesses, two at least.

2. God has employed Angels for his Churches comfort and advantage, who
knowing it to be the will and pleasure of their great Creator, do most readily
comply and cheerfully obey. As the gates of Hell set themselves against it, so
does the Host of Heaven engage for it, Heb. 1:14. They are all ministering
Spirits sent forth to minister for them, who shall be Heirs of Salvation? When
the Prophet Elisha was in some danger from environing enemies, the Mountain was
immediately garrisoned with Horses and fiery Chariots, that came in to be his
guard. They have it given them in express charge to bear the Saints up in their
hands, and to encamp round about them, and may not this be a singular comfort
to believers? what, though they be the objects of Hells envy, and Earths
malice, yet they are Gods darlings, and Angels charge! And whatsoever work
Angels have to do for them, they not only dispatch it faithfully, but delight
to do so.

3. God has turned all things to the Churches advantage, so that it has not
been a loser in the upshot; from what corner soever the wind has blown, it
has done Christ's garden a real and sensible kindness, both the North and the
South wind have made spices to flow forth. You know what Paul says Romans 8:28.
All things work together for good to them who love God, that are called
according to his purpose. Comforts and crosses too, mercies and judgments too;
Sunshine and storms, Ordinances and afflictions, every thing, all things are
employed, all busy, all at work, and all at work for good. Take a wicked man,
and all things are against him; take a Child of God, and all things are for
him; all are sent upon a gracious excellent design, and shall prosper in it.
More particularly, oppositions, persecutions and fiery Trials have issued in
these three things, which are choice advantages.

1. By these things God makes a discrimination, and separates between the good
and the bad the precious and the vile. In those Fields where there is care
taken to sow the best and cleanest corn, the envious one will come and scatter
ears. Churches do contract filth and corruption as well as other bodies, and
though they were very pure in their first erecting and constitution, yet
afterward they do degenerate, and ill humors flow and abound in them. Some
among them leave their first love, and their first works, and are drawn aside
from the simplicity of the Gospel, and live not according to the rules of the
Gospel. Yea there are not only decaying Professors, but also false hypocritical
pretenders creep into Churches; Afflictions now are the Physic God gives for
the purging them out; these are the Fan of Christ, with which he cleares his
Floor: they are his Fire for the refining of his Gold, and severing it from the
dross. When storms arise, the rotten and unsound fruit falls off. When
persecution arises, stony ground hearers are offended: then away go
formalists, hypocrites, and all such as were strangers to the power of
godliness. And it is a good riddance, for God and his Church need them not.
What loss is it when greedy Wolves and filthy Swine in Sheeps clothing forsake
the fold? they never did good in it, and never will.

2. By troubles and persecutions the good are bettered; In such times and by
such means their corruptions are mortified, and their graces are brightned. The
trees of righteousness, which are planted in Gods Courts, do root the faster
for being shaken with Tempests, and flourish the more for their pruning. Their
fierce Trials do refine their Souls, and heat them into a greater. zeal for God
and holiness. The very rage and malice of their enemies does strengthen their
care, and raise their resolution, so that they grow stronger and stronger.
Michal jeered and stouted at David for this zeal, but he plainly and bravely
told her, if that was to be vile, he would be yet more so. Upon these two
accounts, when times are saddest, and persecution hottest, whatever may be said
of the actings of men, there is no cause to complain of male administration on
Gods part, so long as the Church is made purer, and the Saints are made better.
But I will add this further.

3. By these persecutions the Church is enlarged, and the number of her
Children is increased. The oppressing of the Israelites by hardened Pharaoh
issued in their multiplying. When the Church at Jerusalem was scattered, the
Kingdom of Christ was amplified the more by it. Those afflictions and bands
which happened to Paul, tended to and ended in the furtherance of the Gospel.
The blood of the Martyrs has all along been the Seed of the Church.
Persecutors are fools as well as mad men, they lose what they do, Christ and
the Gospel gain. So does God outshoot his enemies in their own bow, and makes
their very wrath to praise him. And let Trials and Persecutions come to never
so great an height, I know no reason why the joy of Believers should not be
increased, when the Nation of Saints is multiplied. Do you, all you that
profess Religion and godliness, look to it that the number of Christians be not
diminished and lessened through your wretched Apostasy, and then it shall be
augmented through your firmeness and holy constancy. That is the fifth thing by
which we may support and comfort our selves, viz. The great things which God
has done for his People.

6. There are very great and glorious things which God has further to do. If
all were accomplished which God has in his heart and purpose to do for his
Church, none of us should be here, the world would have an end, and time would
be no more. The world does upon some account owe its continuance to the Church.
The world is but the stage upon which God is acting for his Name and for his
Church, and when the Act is finished, the stage shall be pulled down. When
wicked and ungodly men are plotting against the Church, and persecuting of her
Children, they act indeed like unreasonable men, in digging up those very
foundations, on which themselves stand, and pulling down the Pillars that
uphold them. And as God continues the world for the sake of the Church, so he
has great of things yet in his purpose and promise, which must by no means
fail for their accomplishment. Such as these, the giving great peace to her
Children, the bringing down her proud and insulting enemies, especially that
grand and implacable one, Babylon. The bringing in both his ancient people the
Jews, and the fullness of the Gentiles. The making the place of his feet
glorious, and setting up the Mountain of his House in the top of the Mountains,
and causing the Kings of the Earth to bring their glory and the honor of the
Nations into it.

7. God has laid upon himself strong obligations to do these and such like
things, and therefore we are on the surer hand. God has bound himself by
promise; and that is as good security as heart can desire; Gods Word is better
than man's bond, It is settled in Heaven, It is yea and amen. God can as soon
cease to be as falsify his Word whatsoever thou have a promise for; O Believer,
thou may be as sure off, as if thou had the thing in thine own possession.
And how dark soever, and cross soever Providence may seem to be, do not you
fear them, for there always is a sweet harmony and perfect agreement between
Providence and promises, yea the great work and business of Providence is to
give accomplishment to the promises. Divine Providence is the Midwife of
promise, and is to give Birth to those blessed and admirable mercies which it
travails with. And though sometimes Providence acts somewhat roughly, yet it
always proceeds very safely, so that there never is a miscarriage.

8. God is greatly concerned in the good and welfare of his Church and People;
He is more concerned than we are, and all the men in the world. It is very
true, we are nearly concerned in the prosperity of the Church and true
Religion, in the Churches peace it is that we shall have peace. Our all is
indeed imbarqued in this Ship, if that should be cast away, we are ruined; you
may reckon upon that. Let Religion be lost, and we are lost, farewell
prosperity and all that you can call good, and therefore none of us should be
careless, or wanting to Prayer or duty. But know, God is more concerned than we
are. The Church is much concerned in the present motions and commotions,
Antichrist and his Jesuits are fishing in these troubled waters, but let us be
comforted, God is concerned in the Church, and that more than we all are. Who
should speak his glory, and live his praise, and load his Altars, if the gates
of Hell and endeavors of Rome should prevail against the Church? would
Atheists, Papists, or profane Persons exalt and advance his honor? As to this
lower world, Gods stock of glory lies in the hands of his Church and People,
and his Revenue is brought in by them, and will He not look after them? let us
not fear where no fear is; let us not fear in the midst of fears. We may be
confident that God will wisely steer the course, and carry the Ship of the
Church safe into its Harbor, in which he has his Name and Honor imbarqued.
He will never give his glory to another, nor his praise to graven Images; and
if not to graven Images, then not to Papists. Suppose those cursed Philistines
should take the Arc, yet know assuredly, the captivated Ark will be too hard
for Dagon; graven Images and all Idolatry shall fall before it.

9. Lastly, let us comfort our selves with this, that the Government is laid
upon Christ's shoulder, and the Scepter put into his hand, and all power both in
Heaven and Earth is committed to him. God the Father has set him up for his
King upon his holy Hill of Zion, and has so established and fixed his Throne,
that he looks with scorn and contempt upon all the attempts of his enemies. And
all that power which He has was committed to him, and is to be employed by him
for the continuance and comfort of his Church. He is made Head over all things
to the Church. Whatsoever He has as Head, is for the advantage of that his
mystical body. And what may we not expect from such a Father as God, from such
a King as Jesus? And with what peace and delight may we sit under his shadow!
well might the holy Psalmist say Psalm. 149:2. Let Israel rejoice in him that
made him, let the Children of Zion be joyful in their King. From what Christ
has done, we may strongly argue to that which He will do. He was incarnate for
his Church, He was made under the Law for her, He became poor for her, He
humbled himself for her, He laid down his Life for her, He bare the rage of
man, and the wrath of God for her, He endured the Cross, and despised the
shame, because it was for her, and therefore question not but he will rule and
govern her. Read and rejoice while you read that account given of him, Isa.
9:7. Of the increase of his Government and peace there shall be no end, upon
the Throne of David, and upon his Kingdom, to order it, and to establish it
with Judgment, and with Justice from henceforth even for ever. And that you may
not in the least doubt hereof, it is added, the zeal of the Lord of Hosts will
perform this. Having thus finished the Doctrinal part, I come to the
Application, and I shall only speak to an use of Exhortation, in two
particulars.

First, I exhort and advise you that are the people of God, to fetch support
and consolation from this sweet and precious truth. The times in which we live
are indeed very dark and tempestuous, God is shaking all Nations. Specially it
is a day of perplexity and casting down in the Valley of Vision the Church of
God; After all our Prayers and endeavors, and hopeful expectations things are
come to a sad pass, and Israel is brought back to the Red Sea. We may now take
up that complaint, Isa. 26:17, 18. Like a Woman with Child that draws near
the time of her delivery, is in pain, and cries out in her pangs, so have we
been in thy sight, O Lord. We have been with Child, we have been in pain, we
have as it were brought forth wind. The People of the most High in all places
are in soar trouble, a cup of trembling full of the Wine of astonishment is put
into their hands, and God carries as if he were resolved to give up the dearly
beloved of his Soul for a time into the hand of her enemies. The Antichristian
Popish party is rampant, and think they have the Ball at their foot, and shall
now carry all before them. But at such a time as this, let this support, and
quiet and comfort you, that however things go, God still governs the world. And
that this may be sweet to you follow these directions.

1. Make sure that you be in the number of Christ's Subjects; such as have bowed
to his Scepter, submitted to his Government, and are devoted to his fear. If
you have once kissed the Son with a kiss of love and homage, you shall not
perish in the way; Then you may rejoice at the thoughts of Gods governing the
world, when you feel and are assured of his ruling and governing in your
hearts. Then may the remembrance and consideration of his universal Kingdom be
cordial to you, when you find that he has erected a Kingdom within you, and
that you are members of the Kingdom of his Grace. This is firm gr^^nd of strong
consolation, and of qu^^^^^e and assurance for ever. If you have been made
willing in the d^y of Gods power, and are the Loyal Subjects of Christ's
Kingdom, th^^ you are the favorites of Gods Court, yea the Children of his
Family, and you may promise yourselves that he will carefully look after you,
and graciously provide for you. He has a peculiar respect to his peculiar
people, for them he has his Chambers, a strong Tower, in which they shall be
safe, when he comes out of his place to punish the Inhabitants of the Earth
for their iniquity. Judgment begins at the House of God, and that is to make
way for mercy, those judgments prepare for deliverances here and glory
hereafter, for victories here, and triumps hereafter. But O! the dreadful
storms of wrath that shall fall upon the wicked and incorrigible of the world,
what Thunderbolts will God assail them with, that shall strike them down into
that lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone, and shall never be quenched.
Come Christians, make it out that you trust in the Lord, and have given up your
selves unto the Lord, and then you may be sure that when enemies threaten you,
and dangers face you, and fear is on every side, even then mercy shall compass
you about.

2. Heedfully look to it, that you govern your selves according to the will and
Law of God. Then may you take the comfort of Gods governing the world when you
are a well governed People. When you wisely rule your own Spirits, and order
your own affections, and your lives and conversations, there is a promise, that
unto such God will show his Salvation. The Laws of a Land protect the Subjects
so long as they keep them. A transgression of the Law is the endangering of a
Subject; He shall give his Angels charge ever thee to k^ep thee in all thy
ways. Their commission, as large (...) it is, reaches no further; when you
leave that, you lose your guard; but while you keep your way, Angels, yea the
God of Angels will keep you. Do not so much fear loosing your Estate, or your
liberty or your lives, as losing your way, and leaving your way, fear that more
than any thing; nothing but Sin exposes you to misery. So long as you keep
your way, you shall keep other things, or if you lose any of them you shall get
that which is better; though you may be sufferers for Christ, you shall not be
losers by him. Noah was a just man, and perfect in his generation, and walked
with God, and he was secured in the Ark before the world, was drowned with the
Flood. Let the worst come that can, it is not so bad as carnal reason
represents it; if a good man should be deprived of his temporal comforts, it
will commend spiritual ones the more to him, so that he shall the better
relish and taste them. Gods voice is never so sweet, as when he speaks
comfortably in a wilderness. If a Child of God should be cut off by a violent
stroke, he is thereby brought the sooner to his Father, such a death is the
shortest way home. If enraged Persecutors add to his sufferings, in so doing
t^^y add to his Crown; and by making his burden heavy, they make his glory the
more exceeding weighty.

3. Let Gods governing the World be the matter of your Faith: no Truth will be
a Staff of Support, unless you carry it in a believing hand, precepts will not
prevail, threatenings will not awe you, and promises will not comfort you, and
the most precious Scripture-Revelations will not cheer you any farther than as
they are believed. Let a Minister of the Gospel present you with never so
precious a Cordial, made up of the most choice and excellent Ingredients, it
will do you no good unless it be mingled by you with Faith; therefore believe
that the management and ordering of all things is in the hand of God, and pray
that you may have a well confirmed and improved Faith hereof, when the Faith is
weak, it affords but weak comfort, do you strengthen your Faith, and that will
greaten your peace, and raise your joy, to this end.

Be careful of this, that you do nothing to the prejudice of your Faith, do not
you weaken that which must support you; what a madness was it for Sampson to
let his Locks be cut, when he knew he should lose his strength together with
them. Now, there is nothing in the World so prejudicial to Faith as Sin is. A
guilty Conscience does always make a palsey-hand, which is tremulous and
shaking, whenever it goes about to lay hold upon God and Christ and the
Covenant or any promise. Rebukes of Conscience are severe checks to Faith. O!
says the poor soul, when snib'd from within: What! shall I look upon God as my
God? alas, I have disobeyed and dishonored him. Shall I trust in Christ as my
Savior? I have crucified him afresh, and put him to an open shame. Shall I
rejoice in the Covenant? I have broken it, and dealt falsely in it. Shall I
delight in the promise, and live upon it? where is the Condition, I cannot find
it in my self. Such Reflections as these produce inward Troubles and Disquiets
and Fears, so that the very sweet meats of the Gospel are imbittered to such an
one. He cannot relish them, because he questions his Interest in them. What is
all God, to one that cannot say, my God? Guilt makes Faith and Comfort run low;
whereas, Great Peace have they that love the Law, and nothing shall offend
them: they have peace in trouble, joy in sorrow, calms in storms, inward
sedateness in the midst of outward Commotions, If our hearts condemn us not,
then have we boldness toward God, and if so, then comfort comes in from every
Prospect, which we have of God. Let us then Look upon him which way we will, we
shall see smiles and delights, that very appearance, which is dark to others,
will give Light to us.

Lastly, Be very serious and frequent in your Meditations upon Gods Governing
the World, transient and fleeting thoughts make either none, or but little and
slight and short Impressions. The Burning-Glass will not Fire any combustible
matter, unless it be held some considerable time with a steady hand in the
beams of the Sun, so it is here, dwell therefore in your thoughts upon this
Subject, consider it, and return to consider, repeat the Work again and again,
and again. 25. Ps. 15. Mine Eyes are ever toward the Lord, that is, often and
often, at all times, and upon all occasions, Was he in straits, he looked to
God? Was he in danger, he looked to God? Was he in fears, he still looked to
God? and that supported him, as you may gather from the next Words. He shall
pluck my Feet out of the Net, though mine Enemies have got me in their Net, and
I am so entangled in it, that I cannot make my own Escape, yet God shall pluck
me out, from him I shall have my Deliverance and a Song. And in such Cases and
Conditions we should specially look to God, under the notion of Supreme Rector
and Governor of the World. Are there confusions and distresses up and down in
the World? Are Foundations out of course, yet comfort your selves with this,
that God sits at the helm, and he is our refuge and strength, a very present
help in time of trouble, you will find serious reiterated meditation will be
exceeding influential upon you. David remembered God upon his Bed, and meditated
upon him in the night-watches, and called to mind his former mercies, how he
had been his help, 63. Psalm and this greatly supported and comforted him;
therefore, says He, in the shadow of thy wings will I rejoice, he would both
hide under it and rejoice, Gods shadow should be both his shelter and his
Paradise, and so it may well be, for his Name is not only a strong Tower, but
likewise an Ointment poured forth, having in it strength and sweetness.

In the second Use I exhort and beseech you to evidence it unto the World, That
your Belief of Gods Governing the World does really support and cheer you in
the midst of the present Distractions, when many Men's hearts are failing for
fear of those things, which may come to pass. The Truth is, the day in which
Providence has cast us is a day of Distraction; the World is stark mad: wicked
men are mad upon sin and vanity, and superstition and idolatry, and mad against
Religion and Godliness. Well, Christians, if they will be mad, let them be so,
God knows how to tame them, and how to chain and fetter them too, he has hooks
for their Noses, and bridles for their Jaws. Only, be you sober, and in
patience possess your souls. Oh that, when it may be said, here is the cursed,
hellish rage, and Bedlam, frantic Fury of Atheists and Papists, it may also be
said, here is the Faith, and Patience of the Saints.

When there are those that make it their design and business to destroy and
confound all things, do you rejoice in this, That God Governs all wisely,
powerfully, graciously, so that those things which have the most frightful
aspect, the most amazing passages which we hear of, or meet with, are the
Products of an Eternal Counsel, and shall at last (it may be ere long) issue in
an happy close, however affairs go now, God has bid us, say to the Righteous,
it shall be well with him. Do you evidence the powerful and comfortable
influence that Gods Government has upon your Spirits, by these three things.

1. First by the k eping up your spirits, yet have need of Patience, ye may
find a little will not serve your turn, lay up therefore good store of it, and
then fetch out of that store, and let patience have its perfect work, but
withal cast not away your confidence, for it has great recompense of reward.
We will not fear, such the Church, though the Earth be removed, and the
Mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea, let the wicked fear where no
fear is, but let the Saints be fearless in the midst of fears. Why are ye
fearful, said Christ to his Disciples, when the Ship was almost covered with
Waves. He sets men above God in his thoughts, whose fear of man prevails
against his faith in God, that man either is altogether forgetful of God, or
his thoughts of him are low and unbecoming, for certain he does not sanctify
the Lord of Host in his heart, let your faith be preserved in vigor and
exercise: What though the Beast have seven Heads and ten Horns, great subtilty,
and no less power, yet the Lamb shall overcome.

2. Evidence it by your perseverance in Godliness, hold on your way, make not
use of any sinful means, neglect not any part of your duty to secure your
selves and avoid danger; do not offend God, be not beholden to the Devil for
your liberty and peace, what though there be Lions in the way, go on, and
proceed boldly, so long as it is the way of God, you may live by faith, while
you walk by rule, you may walk believingly and cheerfully while you walk
regularly, the wound that a man gets by sin, will put him to far greater smart
and pain, that all his sufferings for God and godliness would have done. He
than purchases the favor of men with the frowns of Conscience, will find he
has made a very hard bargain, every step from God is a step to ruin, if any
man draw back, Gods soul will have no pleasure in him, whereas he that walks
uprightly walks safely.

3. Make it to appear by the Raisedness of your expectations, so the Church did
in her low condition, Micah c. 7. v. 8. Rejoice not against me, O mine Enemy,
though I fall I shall rise, when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light
unto me, at midnight she looked for the dawning of a glorious day, and so do
you, that is a very sweet place which you have in the 2d. Joel of 20, 21. where
the Prophet speaking of the Northern Army, says, his stink shall come up, and
ill savor shall come up, because he has done great things, and then he adds,
f^^^ not O Lord (...) rejoice, for the Lord will (...) great things, and so we
may say ^t (...) day, God will do great things, such as shall out do all that
his ^n ^^^les have done Gods last works in the world will be his greatest
works, and by them he will get himself a glorious name, and I hope he will
speed it, he that shall come, will come and will not tarry, therefore encourage
your selves in the Lord your God, do your duty, and quietly wait, for your
expectation shall not be cut off.

Quest. What are the hindrances and helps to a good Memory in Spiritual things?
SERMON XIV.
I. COR. XV.II. By which also ye are saved, if ye keep in Memory what I
Preached unto you, unless ye have believed in vain.
THere is no Complaint more common among Religious Persons, than the weakness
of their Memories; thinking perhaps that defect does imply least guilt; or it
may be, mistaking their carelessness for forgetfulness; or else there is really
some special frailty in that faculty, to heal which is the design of this
Discourse.

For the Occasion and coherence of these words in the Text, it is evident that
the Apostle Paul in the Verse foregoing begins to recite and prove the Doctrine
of the Resurrection from the Dead, which he does there declare to be a great
point of that Gospel which he had preached unto them, which also they had
received, and wherein they did stand. And then he adds here, By which (Gospel)
also ye are saved, if ye keep in memory what I preached unto you, unless ye
have believed in vain.

In which words we have a Discovery,

1. Of men's utmost happiness, viz. Salvation, ye are saved, that is, not only
rescued out of your Pagan State; nor only that ye stand fair for salvation; but
ye are saved already. For Heaven does really begin upon Earth, and every true
Saint is at present a Citizen of the Heavenly Jerusalem.

2. Of the only means for the Attaining of it, viz. the Gospel, by which ye are
saved. For that reveals the Object, That directs lost Man which way to arrive
at it; That assures us that a passage is opened into Heaven; That incourages
and inclines us seriously to endeavor after it.

3. Of the special Grace necessary in respect of this Gospel, viz. believing,
unless ye believe, etc. for hereby we credit what is revealed, we embrace what
is offered, and we rely on what is promised, without which acts of Faith, the
Gospel signifies nothing to us: And Hearing, by which Faith comes, is included
in it; for so the Apostle joins them, verse. 14. then is our Preaching vain, and
your Faith is also vain.

4. Of the particular Faculty that is requisite for this end, viz. the Memory,
if ye keep in memory what I have preached unto you. For though the main thing
hereby intended be to keep in the heart a constant and effectual belief of the
Gospel, and particularly of this Article of the Resurrection; yet to keep in
memory the Form of sound Words, is also necessary in order thereunto; and
therefore it is said in the TEXT, that ye retain with what WORDS, (...)
Quibusdam verbis, Tremel. Qu^ sermon, Bez. Arab. Qua ratione, Sir. Vulg.
or REASONS, I preached unto you.

5. The Relation or Influence which this last (of keeping in memory) has upon
all the rest. And this expressed, 1. By way of Condition, in the beginning of the
Verse; ye are saved, if ye keep in memory. Our Salvation in some sort depends
upon it. For without the Gospel, no Salvation; without Faith, no benefit by the
Gospel; and without Hearing and Retaining what we hear, no saving Faith. 2. By
way of Exception; in the end of the Verse, unless ye have believed in vain,
your Hearing is in vain, and your Believing is in vain, if ye do not steadfastly
cleave to the Gospel, and to this material Doctrine of it, the RESURRECTION,
and keep in Memory, what I have preached unto you concerning it.

The Lesson then that we may learn from hence is this, viz.

If m^n would be saved by the Gospel, they must keep in memory what is preached
unto them.

And under this Proposition I am to handle the Causes and Cure of a bad Memory,
or the Hindrances and Helps of a good Memory in Spiritual Things. And in order
hereunto I shall show, 1. What the Memory is. 2. The Excellency of this
Faculty, especially in its primitive State. 3. The Corruption of it. 4. The
Restoration or Sanctification of it. 5. The Ordinary Impediments thereof. 6.
The proper Helps unto it. 7. Answer some Cavils of the wilful and some of the
Doubts of the weak about it. And 8. make Application of all. And the good Lord
help us all now to remember what is preached to us. Memoria est animus, dicimus
enim, vide ut illud in animo habeas, and cum obliviscimur, dicimus non fuit in
animo, Aug. Confess. l. 10. c. 14. Non est in Homine memoria distincta ab
intellectu, Cajet.


I. What the Memory is, it is that Faculty of the Soul, wherein are Reserved
the things we know. Though it belong to the Sensitive Soul, and so is in some
Measure common to Brutes with Men, yet I shall handle as it is seated in the
rational Soul, where it is the Storehouse not only of whatsoever is brought in
by the Eye and Ear, which are the two Senses of Discipline, but also of what is
imparted by the understanding. For the Memory is nearly allied to the
Understanding, if it be not the same as many think. Its Office however is 1. to
Receive such things as are presented to it, wherein it is fitly enough compared
to soft Wax, which is prepared to receive any Impression made upon it. 2. To
Retain and preserve what is laid up therein; wherefore it is often called by the
Ancients, Venture animae, the belly of the Soul. Aug. to. 10. p. 509.
There is a little Kingdom in the Soul of Man. The King or rather Viceroy is
the Will, the Privy Counsel is the Understanding, the Judge is the Conscience,
and the Great Treasurer is the Memory. 3. To Recall or recover what was out of
mind. Quorum certe recordamur eorum est memoria; quicum penitus obliti sumus,
eorum oblivio, quorum partim meminimus, partim obliti sumus, eorum est reminis.
centia, Zanch. tom. 3. l. 2. c. 5.
And this is proper to Mankind and is not in Brutes: For it proceeds from the
motion of the Images of things in the brain by the activity of Reason, which
considering the time, place, persons, and such like circumstances of things, by
degrees recovers what was out of the way; for as things themselves, so the
phantasms of things are connexed together, and by one we recover another. And
this intellectual memory is inseparable from the rational Soul; in that the
Soul undoubtedly remembers, when it is quite separate from the body. Luke
16.25. But Abraham said (to the Rich man in torments) Son, remember that thou
in thy life time receivedst thy good things.

II. The Excellence of this Faculty, the Soul of man is a Subject of wonder,
and nothing more wonderful in it than the Memory, Quicquid sit, jurarem esse
divinum, Cic.
that such innumerable Images of things should be lodged in a finite Faculty;
and that what seems to be utterly lost in it, should be fully recovered;
wherefore it is justly deemed by the learned a miraculous Mercy. Zanch. Memoria
nobis est surdorum auditio and visio caecorum, Plut. Omnium rerum thesaurus and
custos est memoria nec enarrari potest, tam grandis est ejus perplexitas and
anima ipsa est. Aug. de Epic. and anim. Plin. Hist. l. 7. cap. 24. Casc.
Rhodig. l. 2. cap. 10. Tantum scimus quantum memoria tenemus. Erasm.
It has power to make things that are in themselves absent and past, to be
present. By the help of Memory, we retain what we have read in Books, and what
we have heard in Sermons or other Discourse, the Examples of Gods Mercies and
Judgments for our Encouragement and Warning: All these and ten thousand things
more are laid up in the Memory, which is the Souls Treasury, so that the Soul
would be a poor Soul without the Memory, we may see the worth of this Faculty
by those that are deprived of the use of it, that can remember no body, nor the
last question that they did ask. Thus we read of Messala Corvinus an Orator
that forgot even his own Name; and of Atticus the Son of Herod the Sophist,
that could never remember the Names of the Letters of the Alphabet, till his
Father was fain to name four and twenty Boys by the Names of the several
Letters, that he might retain them. All a man's past life would be lost if his
Memory were lost, so are the comforts of the Soul lost, so far as they are
forgotten. So that the Soul would be poor in Knowledge, poor in gifts, poor in
comfort without the Memory. Especially this Faculty was happy in its primitive
State, for then its Reception was easy, the Impressions firm, the Recovery (if
any use of it) ready, then 'twas like a clear Crystal Glass, wherein all that
was contained in it, was easy seen, now it is cracked and muddy; then 'twas like
an iron Chest, now like a Bag with Holes. It had the Neighborhood of a clear
Understanding, and of an holy Will, and Adam could not but remember his Creator
in those Days of his Youth.

III. The Corruption or Depravation of this Faculty: For by the Fall of Adam,
each Faculty of the Soul was woefully depraved, when a curious Watch falls to
the ground, though it be sorely maimed, yet some wheel or pin may have received
no hurt; but here it is otherwise. Our Fall was like that of some rare Glass,
which thereby is shattered all to pieces; there remains all the Materials of
it, so does Reason and Memory with the Soul, but they must be melted and cast a
new before they be good for any thing. The Corruption of the Memory stands.

1. In remembering those things which we should forget: As 1. Things
unprofitable, there are a thousand needless and useless matters that fill the
memory, and keep out better things. Like as if one should crowd wast Paper,
Rags, and broken Pitchers into a Cabinet, which should be stored with things of
value. There is, in all Actions and Accidents, two things considerable, 1. The
Action, for example such a Text was handled, such a charitable Action done,
such a Man brake his Leg, was drunk or the like 2. The Inference or Observation
to be gathered from thence: for all Events, whether good or bad, are intended
by the wise God for man's Instruction. Now the Memory lays up the former and can
retain it a long time, but the Lesson which we should learn from it, that is
neglected, that is forgotten. 2. Things Hurtful to us, to wit, Injuries, These
usually stick in the memory, when better things slip out. If any body has
spoke or done evil to us, the memory is trusty enough about these. As one says,
we can remember Old Songs and Old Wrongs long enough; yea, those, whom we
profess to forgive, yet we declare that we cannot forget them. Not but that a
man may have a natural remembrance of an injury, so that he have not an angry
remembrance of it. As our heavenly Father himself remembers all a Believers
sins, but puts away his anger; so we may rationally remember them, but we must
spiritually forget them, for else the remembrance of them generally does us a
great deal of hurt, but no good at all; it cools our love, weakens our trust,
and prepares us for revenge as did Amnon toward Absolon, 2 Samuel 13.32. 3.
Things Sinful, thus we can remember a filthy Story seven years, when we do
forget a saving Sermon in seven hours. And herein the Memory is the great Nurse
of Contemplative wickedness, and represents to the idle and sinful heart, all
the sins it wots of, with renewed delight, and so strengthens the impression,
and doubles the guilt, Ezekiel. 23.19. She multiplied her Whoredoms in calling to
remembrance the days of her youth, wherein she had played the Harlot in the
Land of Egypt. The depraved Memory is herein fitly compared to a Sive, that
lets the good Corn fall through, and reserves only the chaff; by which its
plain, that the Faculty is not lost, but poisoned. So that in this respect we
may say, as Themistocles did to Simonides, when he offered to teach him The Art
of Memory, rather, says he, teach me The art of Forgetfulness, for the things
which I would not, I remember, and cannot forget the things I would.

2. The cortuption of the Memory stands in Forgetting those things which we
should remember. But these things being so exceeding many, great and useful,
though I cannot enumerate them, yet I shall comprize the chief of them in these
following general heads.

1. Our Creator, and what he has done, and what he has done for us, Eccles.
12.1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth. And yet whom do we
more forget? Jerem. 2.32. Can a Maid forget her Ornaments, or a Bride her
Attire? yet my people have forgotten me days without number. And our
Forgetfulness here is most inexcusable, because we may see, taste, and feel him
every moment; forasmuch as he is not far from every one of us, seeing in him we
live, and move, and have our Being, and yet we can make shift to forget Him,
which shows the great Craze we had by the Fall. And then, the great things
which he has done, to wit, in the Works of Creation and Providence, especially
for his Church; these we early forget but should remember, Psalm. 77.11. I will
remember the Works of the Lord surely I will remember thy wonders of Old: And
particularly what he has done for us; the many and great Mercies and
Deliverances, especially, the most remarkable of them, which every good
Christian should have a Catalogue of, in his mind, or in his Book, Deuteronomy. 8.2.
And thou shall remember all the way which the LORD thy GOD led thee these Forty
Years, etc.

2. Our Redeemer and what he has suffered for us. Never was there such an
Instance of free and transcendent Love in the World, as that the Eternal Son of
God should give himself to be a Sacrifice to expiate our Sin, and yet we that
can profess, of far less kindnesses from men, that we shall never forget them,
can forget this; else he had never instituted the Lords Supper on purpose to
keep up the solemn and useful Remembrance thereof; which Remembrance sets a
work all our Graces, our Faith, Love, Repentance, Thankfulness, etc. And
without the frequent Use of this Ordinance, where it may be had, a defect will
be forced in these Graces for the greatest things wear off with time, and Holy
David himself found cause to charge it uopn his Soul, Ps. 102.3. Bless the Lord
O my soul, and forget not all his benefits, etc.

3. The Truths of Religion, especially the most weighty, Malach. 1.4. Remember
ye the Law of Moses my Servants, which I commanded unto him in Horeb for all
Israel, with the Statutes and Judgments. And of these the Apostle Peter says 2
Pet. 1.12, 13, 15. he would put the Christians in remembrance, though they knew
them, that they might be established, in present Truth, yea he would stir them
up by putting them in remembrance, as long as he lived. The Doctrine of God, of
Christ, of the Creation, of the Fall, of the Covenant of Grace, of Faith,
Repentance, the Resurrection (as in my Text) and Judgment to come; these things
should be so ingrafted into the hearts of Christians, that they should know and
remember as well as their own Names or the rooms of their Houses; and yet it is
a shame to find how easily and almost utterly these things are forgotten by too
many. How few do we find, that have been long Hearers of Gods Word, that can
give any tolerable account of the Nature of that Faith by which the Soul lives!

4. The Duties of Religion. The Scripture that so often requires us to remember
them, plainly implies that we are apt to forget them, what is the meaning of
that, Exodus the 20 Chap. Verse 8. Remember the Sabbath to keep it holy, but
that we easily forget it, we are surprised by it, it returns ere we are aware;
so that Heb. 13. Verse 2, 3, 16. which is called by some, a Chapter of
Remembrance, be not forgetful to entertain Strangers. Remember them that are in
Bonds, to do good, and to Communicate forget not. All which as they show our
duty, so do they imply our defectiveness herein, though to forget those, and
such like, are as absurd, as if we did forget to eat or sleep: For as
Christians, we live by Faith, and breath by Prayer, so to forget to repent, to
believe, to pray, and to discharge the duties of our Relation, Callings, and
all other duties toward God and toward men, is to forget Christianity it self.

5. Our Sins. As there is a culpable, so there is an useful and necessary
remembrance of them, when we remember sin, to renew our love to it, that is
damnable, but when we remember it to loath it, and to loath our selves for it,
that is saving. Ezekiel. 36.31. Then shall ye remember your own evil ways, and
your doings that were not good, and shall loath your selves in your own sight,
for your iniquities and your own abominations. How much of his wickedness does
the profane sinner forget? Lies, Oaths, rotten Language, Slander, Iniquities,
all forgotten, till God in mercy or in wrath awaken their Consciences, and then
all is set in order before them, either to their conversion or confusion. Hence
that emphatical charge, Deuteronomy. 9.7. Remember and forget not how thou provokest
the Lord thy God to wrath in the Wilderness, etc.

6. Our Vows and Obligations to God. The corruption of our memories appears
plainly in this. There is first our great vow in Baptism, that we would
sincerely renounce the World, the Flesh and the Devil, and pay unto our Lord
and Redeemer unfeigned obedience to all his Commandments. This is seldom
actually remembered by any of us, too seldom virtually, especially by such as do
directly run counter to it in the usual scene of their Lives. And then our
Sickness vows, when our Lives or the comforts of our Lives have been in hazard.
What serious and fair Promises did we make? what was our Frame then? and what
is it now? either then thou wast a great Hypocrite, or else now thou art a
great Apostate. But be not deceived, God is not mocked. He has diverse ways to
wet up such Memories.

And our Obligations to others, which should stick in our Memories, as soon
worn off, whether they are formal, by promises; or virtual by kindnesses
received; neither whereof signify any thing with a false or unthankful man; of
whom we usually say, that they have ill Memories. But against these will rise
in Judgment not only God, his Word, their own Consciences, and the Heathens,
but even the brute Creatures themselves. One of whom, even a Lion is credibly
reported to have spared and cherished one Androdus, Aul. Gel. lib. 5. cap. 14.
that was thrown to be devoured, having remembered that that very man had
formerly pulled a thorn out of his foot in his Den.

7. The Church of God, the whole Catholic Church does every day implicitly
beg of us, O remember me in your Prayers. And holy David said, Psalm. 137.56. If
I forget thee O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning. If I do not
remember thee let my Tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth. And there is not a
more genuine Token of our Adoption, than a feeling and constant remembrance of
Gods Jerusalem; and especially in this Juncture of time; wherein the Christian
Church is almost every where so sorely distressed, that were it not for the
Scripture and former Experience we might fear to hear her last groans. And yet,
if the secret and Family Prayers of very many were well searched, its to be
doubted that their Memories were very bad here also.

8. Our Latter End. This should be much, and this is little remembered by most
men. As the Prophet said to the people of his time, Isa. 47.7. Thou did not
lay these things to thy heart, neither did remember the latter End of it. And
the Other laments it, Lament. 1.9. She remembered not her last end, therefore
she came down wonderfully. And so they are like to do, that remember not their
end. Its true, in propriety of Speech, remembrance is only of things past, or
at least of a thing which now is not first known, yet in the Phrase of
Scripture we are required to remember death, resurrection, judgment, hell and
heaven, partly because these are foretold, and chiefly because it behoofs us to
meditate and consider of them, which cannot be done without the Memory. But
there are no deaths-heads so effectual to mind us of this, as a firm
persuasion, that we are but strangers here, and that our true Country is in the
World to come; an heart mortified to the World, sick of sin, and an heavenly
frame of Soul, which being restless here, will of its own accord groan to have
mortality swallowed up of Life. And so much may be sufficient to explain and
demonstrate the corruption of the Memory, which is the third Point.

IV. The Sanctification of the Memory, which is the Restoring this Faculty to
its former Integrity, and to its proper Objects. For when a man's corrupt Nature
is changed, all the Faculties are renewed, there is a new Creation of him, This
is done,

1. By Purging the Faculty; and so conversion is said to begin here, Psalm.
22.27. All the Ends of the World shall remember and turn unto the Lord; for he
that remembers, what man's Estate was by Creation, must needs find that there is
a sad change; and consequently, that there is need of restoration. The same
method is prescribed after second falls, Revel. 2.6. Remember therefore from
whence thou art fallen and repent. And without doubt, as the Holy Spirit of God
burns up the dross of the powers of the Soul, so of this with the rest, and
razeth out of it many sinful impressions which were there.

2. By strengthening it; for as sin weakens; so Grace strengthens the faculty.
This effect it has upon the understanding and will, and so it has upon the
memory: it is apparent that many who before their Conversion to God, would
forget whole Chapters and Sermons, yet after their new birth would carry away a
great deal of them. Gods spirit then helps them, and according to our Saviors
promise, John 14.26. Brings all things to our Remembrance. Grace stops the
lakes in that vessel which sin has made.

3. By reconciling it to good things and setting it against evil. Before
regeneration, as the Heart, so the memory nauseates good things, as a foul
stomach does wholesome meat and delights in trash, it can hold nothing that is
good, so is it with our vitiated memories they cannot hold Savory and pious
things, these things are like a spark of fire in green wood, it soon goes out,
but when Grace comes and changes the whole frame of the heart, this faculty
begins to relish and make room for spiritual things, when the heart begins to
delight in them, the mind retains them, Psalm. 119.16. I will delight my self in
thy Statutes, I will never forget thy word. So on the other side, those sins
which the memory delighted to keep in mind; to review them, and in a sort to
repeat them over and over; when God has been at his new Creation within, then
the remembrance of those sins is bitter. Then the poor Creature can say as the
Church did in another case, Lament. 3.20. My soul has them still in
remembrance, and is humbled in me.

4. By filling it with good things. For when the new creature is once born
again, no new born Child does more desire and long for milk, than the Soul does
for knowledge and wisdom; and then the memory consequently is stored with
Scripture-Truths, Promises, Rules, and Helps. Then the substance of all that is
apprehended by the sanctified understanding is conceived to the memory and
lodged there. And then as it is Mat. 12.35. The good man out of the good
Treasure of the heart brings forth good things. And you may commonly know
what treasure is within, by what is brought out. As if you go among vain or
wordly men, their foolish carnal and worldly discourse plainly shows, what
Treasure they have within: So the wise religious and godly communication that
good men entertain you with, does evidence what is laid up in their memories,
as he that has nothing but farthings in his Pocket, can produce nothing from
them but Brass, but he that has all Guineys there brings forth Gold.

5. By fitting things laid up in memory for use and practice, which is plainly
the work of God by his Grace. For a notional memory is of little use without a
practical. As Treasure in a Chest is no way so useful, though there be much of
it, as a penny in the Purse, when there is occasion for it. The Fringes that
were appointed to the Children of Israel. Numb. 15.39, 40. Were to this end,
that ye may look upon it and remember all the Commandments of the Lord and do
them. And that everlasting Mercy of God is promised, Psalm. 103.18. To those
that remember his Commandments to do them. And certainly they why commit things
to their memories on this design to practice them, shall be able to remember
them, when they have need of them in the course of their practice. And thus the
Memory is by sanctifying grace restored which is the fourth Point.

V. I come in the fifth plac^ ^o show the Ordinary Impediments of a good
memory, or the Causes of a bad one, which as ever you desire better memories,
you must beware and seriously strive against. And they are these,

1. A weak or dark Understanding. Such indeed may have a great sensitive
memory, as we see in Children, yea in some brute Creatures, but a sound
rational memory they cannot have; for except a thing be clearly known, it can
never be clearly remembered. If reason be weak and the mind be poor, what can
the memory be stored with, but from the senses? And you shall observe that your
ignorant people commonly have the worst memories, especially of spiritual
matters. Mat. 13:19. When any one hears the Word of the Kingdom and
understands it not, then comes the wicked one and catches away that which
was sour in his heart. Words will be remembered to little purpose, when things
are not understood; And therefore labor for more knowledge and a clearer
understanding. Beg it of God, and according to your capacities use all means to
increase it.

2. A Carnal careless Heart, that is mindless of good things; for those things
which we little heed, we never remember. Vt impressio fortior, ita memoria
tenacior. Holdsw. Lect. p. 231.
According to the impression on the heart, is the Retention in the memory. Such
an heart as this can retain abundance of a Play or a Song, but of a Chapter or
Sermon next to nothing; for every thing keeps what is connatural to its self.
Nay a good man's memory in a remiss negligent frame, quite differs from what it
was in a religious frame; and some Scriptures which were utterly insignificant
to him at one time, read and heard and forgotten, have bin quite new to him at
another, when his heart has bin rightly disposed. As you know wax, when it is
hard receives no impression while it is so, but soften the same wax, and then
it receives it: and nothing can be retained in the memory, if it be not first
re^eived by the memory. And therefore many of you that complain of your bad
memories, have more reason to lament your old dead and hard hearts, and to be
restless till they be renewed.

3. A Darling Sin. Any bosom Sin, as it fills and imploys every faculty, so it
debauches, monopolizes and disorders them all. Grace though it rule every
Family, yet ruffles none, it composes the mind, and imploys the memory in a
rational manner; It rules like a just King orderly, but the serving of any lust
breeds a civil war between one faculty and another, and that distracts the
whole Soul whereby every power thereof is weakened. And particularly the memory
being pressed to serve the stronger side, is so stuffed with the concerns of that
tyrant lust, that it cannot intend any spiritual matter. And therefore whatever
right eye offend thee, pluck it out and cast it from thee, Mat. 5:29. or else
thy memory will never be ^ured. A Table Book that is written and blotted all
over, must be wiped before you can write any new matter upon it; and so must
the lines of thy darling Sin be effaced by real mortification, before any good
things will abide legible in thy memory.

4. Excess of ^o^ldly cares is destruct^^^ to the memory, Our Savior has
plainly told us that no man can serve God and Mammon. The memory is but finite
though capacious, and a superabundance of wordly thoughts within, must needs
shoulder out better things that should be th^re. Especially these thoughts
being more natural to our depraved hearts, and arising from sensible things
will so stuff the memory, that there is no room for spiritual matters. Hereupon
we find that young persons, that have few wordly cares, have better memories
than others, Qui magis reminiscirentur quam pueruli ut recentiores animae ut
nondum immersae domesticis and publicis curis. Tertull. de Anima, cap. 24.
as some of the Ancients observe: More especially, when such cares and thoughts
crowd in, just after we have been Reading or Hearing Gods Word, Mat. 13:22. He
also that received seed among thorns, is h^ that hears the Word: and the care
of this world and the ^eceitfulness of riches choke the Word, and he becomes
unfruitful. And therefore, if you would heal your memories, moderate your
ears; considering that immoderate care or labor is justly blessed or cursed
of God, so that it does no man any real good; you would not overload a Beast,
why will you overload your own Spirits? particularly be sure that if possibly
you can, you settle and digest your spiritual matters in your mind after
Reading and Hearing, before they be disordered and confounded with worldly
cares.

5. Surfeiting and Drunkenness are great enemies to the Memory; These do each
of them infallibly disorder the brain, and disable it from its functions.
Excess of meat does this, more insensibly but yet really; a full belly seldom
has a clear head, but that of drink is most evident, Prove. 31:4, 5. It is not
for Kings, o Lemuel, it is not for Kings to drink Wine, nor for Princes strong
drink [that is in excess] lest they drink and forget the Law. Its plain that a
drunken man forgets what he said and did; and too many sad instances are
apparent, of many that have drunk away not only their Estates, their Health,
their Credit, but their very Souls and b^^ins and all, and are grown very
sotts, for Hos. 4:11. Whoredom and Wine and new Wine take away the heart. And
therefore keep a strict watch over your selves, and if you loath those
Christian Rules to which you are sworn, yet do not abhor morality, do not
renounce humanity.

6. Violent passions spoil the Memory, such as of Anger, Grief, Love, Fear.
Passions we must have, but Constitution and Education allay them in some,
Reason moderates them in others, and Grace regulates them in the Godly. Where
these briddles are wanting, they shake all the faculties, as an Earthquake
does a Country. For example, Anger when it rages, manifestly alters and
inflames the blood, and consequently the Spirits, and melts off the impressions
in the brain, just as the fire melts the wax, and the impressions that by the
Seal were fixed upon it. So excessive Grief, Fear and Love you cannot but
perceive in your selves and others, how your poor memories have suffered by
some or all of them. And therefore labor to mortify your passions, and to that
end endeavor for strength of grace; strong passions had need of strong grace,
as you know a heady Horse had need of a strong bridle: for you will find, that
as there is much guilt in them, so much harms comes by them. Where by the way
you may see the excellency of our blessed Religion, which tends to the health
and quieting as well as to the saving of the Soul.

7. A multitude of indigested Notions. If a man have a stock of methodical and
digested knowledge, it is admirable how much the Memory will contain; as you
know how many images may be discerned at once in a glass; but when these
Notions are heaped incoherently in the Memory without order or dependence, they
confound and overthrow the Memory. As a Scholar that has read abundance, but
digested nothing, he knows not where to find any thing, it breaks his Memory.
As excess of meat cloys the stomach, so an unreasonable, an unmeasurable
heaping of things in the memory confound it. Thus many read or hear much, very
much, too much perhaps for their capacities, they have not stowage for it, and
so they are ever learning and never come to the knowledge of truth, Omnis
festinati^ caca, Senec.
like them 2 Timothy 3:7. Therefore look that ye understand and digest things by
meditation; run not on too fast; he that rides post, can never draw maps of the
Country. When one is impatient to stay on things, Rectius illi, qu^ multus non
multa legenda censent, si memoriae consulendum. Magir.
they leave but a shallow impression; as grediness of the appetite hinders
digestion. When a thing is well studied and clearly apprehended, it will be
much better remembered. And thus I have showed the hindrances of the memory, or
what be the common causes of a bad memory, which is the fifth Point.

VI. The sixth thing to be handled is the proper Helps to it: And they may be
ranked under three Heads. 1. Natural Helps. 2. Artificial. 3. Spiritual. Of
these in order.

1. As to natural helps, as I must not invade the Province of the learned
Physician, so I would omit nothing that is in general necessary for this
purpose. And so it is observed that as too much coldness and moistness of the
brain is a great cause of Forgetfulness; so on the other side a convenient heat
and dryness of it, is a great help to the memory. For the heat thereof
disposes it sooner to receive, and the dryness of it to retain the impression.
As the wax you know being warmed, receives; and then being dry, preserves the
prints of the wax. Hence some think that (...) to Remember, signifies the
male-kind, which has more heat in its constitution, and (...) used for the
Female which implies forgetfulness, that sex being colder; another reason being
also given of that Etymology; to wit, because the remembrance of the former
induces, whereas the Woman being incorporated into another Family is sooner
forgotten. Two things I would here recommend. 1. A sober Diet. For if excesses
in meat and drink do disturb the brain, and consequently weaken the memory,
then certainly a sparing and temperate diet do preserve the Blood and Spirits
in order; and so by consequence, Plato, in Timao.
together with a good air, where it may be had, are a certain (though not so
sensible) help to the memory. And therefore take heed to your selves, lest at
any time your hearts be overcharged with f^rfeiting and ^^^kenness and cares of
this life, and so you quite forget that day that (...) on men unawares, Luke
21:34. The Heathens went far in this moderation, how far then should Christians
go before them? and what a base thing it is to destroy our Reason by gratifying
our Appetite!

2. A Quiet Mind. For if all Passions that are violent weaken, then a sedate
and quiet mind greatly strengthens the Memory. Its true, Man is born unto
trouble, as the Spark do fly upward, Job 5:7. And if we subject our minds unto
them, our Souls will be like the raging Sea in perpetual agitation, and then
the memory shattered; As in a pool of water, when it is clear, you may see the
Fishes and every thing easily in it, but when it is troubled, every thing
disappears: So is it with our Reason and Memory, as long as the mind is quiet,
we may tell where to find any thing in the memory, but when it is distracted,
every thing is hid from us. Let Faith therefore ply its business upon Almighty
God and his Promises, and then Isa. 26:3. Thou will keep him in perfect peace,
whose mind is staid on thee, because he trusts in thee.

Saepe recordari, med^c^mine fortius omni.
2. Artificial or outward helps are 1. The Repettiion of those things which we
would remember. Revolving them in the mind, that makes the impression deeper,
and then the audible repeating of them greatly fixes them there, Deuteronomy. 11:18,
19. Ye shall lay up these my words in your heart and in your Soul, and shall
teach them your Children, speaking of them when thou sit in thy House, and
when thou walk by the way, when thou lie down, and when thou risest up.
Upon this account, some great Orators have used to pronounce their harangues in
their studies, to fix them the better on their memories. And it is recorded of
Pythagoras, that he appointed his Scholars to recollect every night before
they went to bed, what they had heard or done all that day. How much more
should you on the Lord's Day at night revive what you have heard, confer of it
with others, repeat it to your Family, by all which you will relieve the
weakness of this Faculty.

2. Writing what we would remember is a merciful help to the memory. Ephaenicia
Mare literas, memoriae adversu^ oblivionem remedium accivit. Plutarch.
Socrates indeed held, that Letters proved the ruin of the memory, because
before the invention of Letters, people committed worthy matters to memory, but
afterward to Books; but certainly both Memory and Books are little enough to
preserve those things that should be remembered. The Holy Ghost teaches better,
Deuter. 11:20. And thou shall write them upon the door-posts of thine House,
and upon thy Gates; yea Chap 17:18. The King himself was to write him a Copy of
the Law in a Book, that he might remember it the better; The very writing of
any thing, fixes it deeper in the mind. And therefore I should still recommend
the writing of Sermons, not only as a help to the memory, but also as a good
preservative from sleeping under Gods ordinance, as also from gazing about, to
the great distraction of the thoughts at that Sacred employment. For alas! how
many excellent Doctrines, Directions, and Marks have you heard, that are quite
forgotten, which a discreet use of writing might have preserved unto you. I
have seen a large Common Place-Book of famous Mr. Bru^n filled with choice
sentences out of good Authors; and digested under fit heads for his own use
being a private Gentleman.


3. Custom or Using your Memories is an excellent way of improving t^^^: Thus
many wise persons charge their memories at the present and thereby strengthen
them, and then commit what they have remembered to writing, when they come home,
that no time may wear it away; For every Faculty is improved and strengthened
by employing it. We say, use legs and have legs; and so use the memory, and
thou wilt have a memory. So if you oblige your Children and your Servants to
bring you away an account of a Sermon, or so much of a Catechism, you will see
that use and custom will make that easy, which before they thought impossible.
I have seen some of an old man's girdle, who could not read a word, yet by the
only help of a girdle which he wore, which was hung about with some knotted
points, he could bring home every particular of a Sermon. And therefore charge
your memories with those things that are sit to be remembered, and doubt not but
use will make you perfect. I purposly avoid discoursing of that which is called
an Artificial Memory, both because the inconveniences thereof are great, and
the handling of it unfit for a Sermon.

3. The Spiritual Helps for Memory are these; 1. Bewail your Forgetfulness.
There Reformation and amendment, when it is sound, begins. The Jews say, that
when Adam looked toward Paradise, he wept in the remembrance of his Fall; I am
sure, we have cause to mourn and weep, and weep again at the remembrance of it.
To consider not only the great guilt, but the sad fruit of that Apostasy; and
that as in other particulars, so in respect of our Memories, which have born
their share in that convulsion. And we have cause to mourn also for all such
excesses and follies, which have concurred to make them worse, wherein no man
is guiltless; so that, though you may reckon a sorry memory but a small fault,
yet you will find that it is both the effect, and the sign, and the cause of
much evil. In so much that Idolatry and the worst Sins are in Scripture styled
the forgetting of God, Psalm. 9:17. etc. Few of us would reckon it a small
fault, to have a Servant frequently neglect his business and run into Errors,
and still to excuse all by saying, I quite forgot it. For generally such
forgetfulness is the effect of supine negligence, and therefore we have the
more cause to be humbled seriously for this Sin.

2. Prayer is a second Help: For every Good and perfect Gift, whereof this is
one, is from above, and comes down from the Father of Lights, Jam. 1:17. and
therefore is to be sought by frequent and earnest Prayer; which is the Golden
Key to unlock the Treasures of Heaven to the needy soul. O beg it then of him,
that as he sanctifies the Soul, he would sanctify this with the rest. And you
have a ground for your Prayer in that Joh. 14.26. where our Savior has said,
that the Father will send the Holy Ghost, to teach us all things, and to bring
all things to our remembrance, And this Spirit you may have for asking, Luke
11.13. Your Heavenly Father shall give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him:
understand, that God will grant your Prayer herein, there being joined with the
same, a due use of all other means, on which earnest Prayer brings a Blessing.
And you must not only crave this in your solemn Prayers, but also when you are
reading or hearing, you should dart up an Holy Ejaculation, or short desire,
Lord write this Truth in my heart and bless it to me! This is like the
clenching of a nail. And when you have heard a Sermon, look the Chest with
David's Prayer, 1 Chronicles. 29.18. O Lord keep this for ever in the imagination of
the thoughts of my heart. And be assured, that God will hear the breathings of
his own Spirit, and give thee a Memory to serve thy turn.

3. Diligent Attention: If the mind wander in hearing, the Memory will be weak
in remembering. Confine therefore your thoughts to the Holy Work you are about,
and fetch in your straggling Fancies with a hearty sigh. Remember that Almighty
God speaks to you by every good Book or Sermon that you read or hear; every
Chapter and Sermon is a Letter from the God of Heaven, and directed in
particular to you, and you know, we read with attention the meanest Letter that
is directed to us, and we observe every period of it, The Gospel is our
Saviors Will and Testament; and how carefully does every Child attend to every
Clause in his Fathers Will! Now the more diligent your Attention is, the better
you will remember: As you know the greater weight we lay on the Seal, the
deeper Impression it does make: Holy David could say, Ps. 119.93. I will never
forget thy Precepts; for with them thou have quickened me. The Scripture, the
Sentence that has quickened us, we shall not easily forget; when all the heart
is engaged, then all the head is employed also. And it is no marvel, that
diverse remember so little, when they are so palpably careless in hearing, and
their wandering Eyes do plainly discover their wandering minds.

4. Due Estimation: The more we love and admire any thing, the better we
remember it. This is the reason given of Childrens remembering things so well,
because they admire every thing, as being new to them. And of old People, the
saying is known, That they remember all such things as they care for: For when
we esteem and affect any thing, the Affections work upon the Spirits, which are
the Instruments of the Memory, and so seat things upon it. Why is it, that a
Woman cannot forget her sucking Child? because she does vehemently love it: and
the like affection in us to good things, would keep us from forgetting them.
And to this accord that saying of Mr. Guentianus, Page, 25.
That the best Art of Memory is to be humbled at Gods threatenings, and
comforted at his Promises; for great griefs and Joys leave great Impressions on
us. And therefore apprehend spiritual things to be very excellent, and also
receive the Truth in the love of it, and you will remember it better; but when
we have a mean and low opinion of heavenly Truths, or only a common kindness
for them, they are then easily forgotten, Ps. 119.16. I will delight my self in
thy Statutes: and what then? why, I will never forget thy word.

5. Serious Meditation: is the last help I shall mention. When people read or
hear, and presently plung themselves in foreign business, then generally all
is lost, Jam. 1.24, 25. For he beholds himself, and goes his way, and
straightly forgets what manner of man he was. But who so looks (the word
signifies to penetrate into a thing with his Eye) and continues therein (that
is, so considering) he being not a forgetful hearer, but a door of the Work,
this man shall be blessed in his deed. By which is not meant a speculative and
fruitless meditation, but that which is practical, that is, which digests the
things we read or hear for use and practice, Psalm. 119.11. Thy word have I
hi^^^ my heart, that I might not sin against thee. Here Is a truth or a duty, or
promise for such a time or case. Such rolling good things in our thoughts, does
habituate and familiarize them to the Soul, and they abide the longer. This is
clear in other Cases: for if one has received an injurious or unkind word, if
it go out at one Ear as it came in at the other, it leaves no great impression;
but if you set your self to ruminate upon it, and to aggravate it, then, its a
long time ere you forget it. And so in some measure it would be in good things;
give them a little heart-room, bestow some second thoughts upon them, shut the
Book when you have read a little; and think of it, and it will abide; it is the
soaking rain that enters deepest into the Earth, when a sudden shower slides
away. Hence what one Evangelist Mat. 26.75. calls remembering the word of Jesus
that is spoken of Peter, the other calls it thinking, when he thought thereon
he wept. But herein our ordinary Hearers are strangely negligent; they read,
they hear, they forget, for they never think nor meditate of it: They turn down
Leaves in their Bibles in the Congregation, but they seldom turn them up again
in reflecting upon what they heard, and so their labor is lost and ours also.
And so much for the Helps to a better Memory, which is the sixth point.

VII. I come in the next place to answer some Cavils of the wilful, and also
some Doubts of the weak. The former use to Object and say,

Obj. 1. Why, The Scripture tells us, that to fear God and keep his
Commandments, is the whole Duty of man; what need then is there of such
Remembering?

Answ. Why, this which you mention, does plainly require Remembering: Must he
not remember the Commandments that will keep them? and not the mere words only,
but the true extent of them, or else how can he possibly keep them? There are
Ten Commandments, but there are ten hundred Duties commanded, and Sins
forbidden; and how shall those be performed, and these avoided, unless we
remember them? And is there nothing but Commandments to be remembered? Are not
the Promises of the Covenant, Are not the Doctrines of Life and Salvation to be
remembered also? Surely this Apostle was of this mind, when he tells in the
Text, that if the Corinthians kept not in memory what was preached unto them
concerning that only Doctrine of the Resurrection from the dead, they would
believe in vain, and their Salvation was in danger.

Obj. 2. I, but it is impossible to remember so many Scriptures, so many
Doctrines, so many Uses as we have heard; what man in the world can do it?

Answ. It is true, that Perfection in this Faculty is not attainable in this
Life; but it is is as true, that every Christian ought to endeavor to reach as
far as he can. We cannot keep all the Commandments perfectly in this Life; yet
we should strive to do what we can, and then our heavenly Father will accept
and assist us. But it is plain sloth to be urging impossibilities in opposition
to Duty; I say, carnality and sloth; for these same men can readily remember a
thousand vain Matters, and there is no difficulty in it: But ye were best to
beware of that Curse, Mal. 1.13. Cursed be the deceiver, which has in his
flock a Male, and sacrifices to the Lord a corrupt thing. If you have a
Masculine strong Memory for other things, and only a corrupt cracked Memory for
God and Godliness, ye are near to Cursing.

Obj. 3. O but we have as good Hearts as the best, though we have not such
strong Memories, and an honest Heart's worth all.

Answ. 1. This is a proud boasting; for no humble modest man will thus vaunt
himself.

2. This is mere shuffling; for when you are reproved for the defectiveness of
your Faculties, or the immoralities of your Lives, then you plead the honesty
and goodness of your Hearts; and when you are convinced and urged concerning
the newness and holiness of your hearts, then you boast of the innocence and
orderliness of your lives; but you cannot mock God thus; he beholds the
unregeneracy of your hearts, and is witness to all the evil of your lives; but
if you have as good hearts, how is it that you have not as good Memories? for
the honest heart is good all over; and though ye cannot remember as much, yet
ye will remember as well as they. Do not deceive your selves; do not imagine
that ye are spiritually rich, when ye are poor, and miserable, and blind and
naked. If many of your Memories were dissected, I am afraid they would be found
to be stuffed like that Roman Legates Sumpter, that was gorgeous enough
without, but being broken up by a fall in the street, was filled with nothing
but Boots and Shoos, and such like worthless trash, but I must turn now to the
other Branch of this Point, which is to answer the doubts of the weak Christian
in this case about the memory.

Doubt 1. If no Faith, nor Salvation without remembering Spiritual things, then
cries the poor soul, to be sure I have no Grace, for I can remember little or
nothing; I hear and love to hear, and so I read, but nothing abides with me, I
shall believe in vain.

Ans. There is an Historical memory, and there is a Practical memory. The
former is either a great natural faculty, or a particular gift: Now though this
be a great help to Grace, yet it is not absolutely necessary. What advantage is
it to a man's Salvation, if he could do as it is reported of Cyrus and of
Scipio, Cael. Rhodig. Ant. q. p. 525.
that they could repeat two thousand Names in order; or as Seneca that could do
the like, and also repeat two hundred Verses, beginning at the last, if the
same person cannot remember those directions and promises which conduce to his
practice and comfort. But now a Practical memory is a sanctified faculty,
wherein good things are received, perhaps not so distinctly, yet safely,
sweetly, readily for use. As an ill Husband may have more tools in his Shop,
but seldom working with them, he scarce knows where to find them; whereas a
good Workman, though he has fewer, yet he knows where to find them, and how to
work better with them. So thy memory may serve thy turn, if thou can remember
his Commandments to do them; if thou can remember the Antidote, when in
danger of the poison, the cordial when thy Spirits are fainting; if thou can
then hear the voice behind thee, saying, This is the way, when thou art ready
to turn aside on the right hand or on the left. A rich miser may have great
sums in his Chests or in his Papers, but in respect of use, the poor Woman's
Leather purse by her side shall be readier. Be not dismayed at thy shallow
memory, if thou can remember what is necessary for thee in time of need.

Doubt. 2. My misery (says a poor Soul) is this, That one thing puts out
another, when I am secure of one notion, and grasping for another, I lose them
both.

Ans. Memory may be said to be Present and Actual, or Future and Potential.
Many things may slip out of a present and actual Memory, that yet may stick in
the memory potentially, like things that are mislaid, but not lost. In this
case, Endeavors are construed by our heavenly Father for Seize, and all
you grasp for, is counted by him your own; As a covetous oppressor that would
devour every fair House or Estate he sees, is guilty, though he obtain them
not: So every blessed Truth thou reachest after, shall be reckoned thy own,
though some of them be stolen from thee. But here the former direction has
place, namely, To send up an holy Ejaculation, when you lock up any thing, that
God would secure it and produce it in due time. Many things poor Christians
have thought that they had quite forgot, till the time of need came; For
example, Christ had said Mat. 17:22, 23. That the Son of Men should be
betrayed, killed and rise again the third day, which at the present they
understood not; but in Luke 24:8. it is said then, that they remembered his
words; And so through Gods grace it will be with you.

Object. 3. But (says another) my Memory is quite gone, I can remember just
nothing, I would, I fain would, but I cannot.

Ans. Perhaps thy natural Family is decayed; for so far as it is organical or
sensitive it may decay, even as your Eyesight does; for as the natural Spirits
abate, so these decay; and you may know that, by your forgetting of other
things. As you forget Texts, so you forget faces; as you forget spiritual
Doctrines, so you do temporal business; yet you ought to grieve for this,
because this Decay is the fruit of Sin, not only of Original, but very likely
of thine Actual Sins, either of thy intemperance, or violent passions, or
excessive cares. And as ye ought to mourn for it, so for the same reason ye
ought to prop it up, to succor it and to improve it as well as you can; and
especially to practice what you do remember; for there is many that complain
they can remember little, while others complain that these very people practice
a great deal less. But for you that make this unfeigned complaint, you should
not be quite discouraged. Labor to remember at least the scope and drift of
all; and though much be lost, yet your labor is not quite lost. A sive or
riddle in a pond of water seems to be top full, but take it out of the pond,
its presently emptyed; true, but yet it is washed hereby; even so a poor
Christian, while he is Reading or Hearing feels himself full of heavenly
notions, but when he cease, finds his heart quite empty again; O! but the
heart is washed for all that, and made more holy. Its said of one Cassius
Severus, that when the Roman Senate doomed his Books to be burnt; yes, says he,
but you must next burn me too, for I have them written in my mind. Oh if the
Book of our memory be much effaced, yet if we can have the will of God written
in our heart, God will accept the soundness of our hearts and the sincerity of
our endeavors, though our memories be shattered.

VIII. And so I come to the Eight and last thing, which is some short
Application of all.

First, Magnify God for your Memories, especially you that have good Memories;
be not proud of them, but be very thankful. I have somewhere read of Simon
Tharvey a Cornish-man, that would so boast of his skill in Philosophy and
Divinity, that he could on the sudden answer any problem that was proposed unto
him; And the Historian says, that his parts and memory were so smitten, that he
could not repeat the Lords Prayer, nor remember his ABC. Alas! a little crack
spoils them. O give God the glory of this Faculty, and say, fearfully and
wonderfully am I made: And if your Memories have some strength and faithfulness
in them, praise him the more, for you have a great advantage beyond others, you
have a treasure which others want. Many a poor Christian would be content to
forget all his earthly concerns, so that he could but remember the things of
eternal life. Be sure then, that ye be truly thankful.

2. Let all Gods Ministers that preach, or that write, labor to consult
Peoples Memories, and to that end observe some proper Method in their Books and
Sermons. Adjuvatur memoria Intellectu, Ordine, Cur^. Erasm.
A confused or cryptical method confounds the memory, and a multitude of naked
Heads overpresseth it: but a clear connection and a proper method greatly
assists it. The Holy Ghost himself has in several places particularly stooped
down to us herein, in diverse of the Psalms, in one Chapter of the Proverbs, in
the whole Book of Lamentations, he has proceeded Alphabetically, for the
relief of the memory. That matter, manner, and method surely should be used by
us, which is most proper, not only to inform peoples understandings, but to
prevail with their wills, to awaken their consciences, and also which may best
stick with them, when they are parted from us; for the work of conviction,
conversion, and comfort are generally perfected by after-thoughts. And
therefore seeing Peoples Memories are so weak, let us do what we can to relieve
and help them.

3. Labor to improve your Memories, to have them cured and strengthened.
Content not your selves with such treacherous Memories; satisfy not your selves
with fruitless complaints of them, but proceed to a vigorous endeavor to amend
them. Consider,

1. This is Possible, and this is proved by experience: Many have come by the
help of God to remember, more and better than they did before; and why should
not you increase the number of such proficients? It is not fit for a Christian
to despond, in any such case, but to be up and doing. When a Ship leaks, it is
not presently cast away: for, says the Master, this Vessel may yet do me
Service; you have leaking Memories, I but being careen'd, they may be much more
serviceable than ever they were.

Obj. O but I shall never attain any Memory.

Ans. I tell you, despondency spoils all Endeavors: neither do you sit thus
down in other cases. If your Body or Brain be weak, you will try experiments,
you will go to one Physician after another, as long as you have a penny left; be
not then more careless of your noblest parts. The cure is possible, at least in
some good measure.

2. It is Reasonable that your Memories which have bin sinks of Sin, should
become Helps to Heaven. All our faculties are given us for this end, and is it
not highly reasonable that they should be so applied? It is apparent that our
Memories have bin grievously perverted, and therefore as we have yielded our
members Servants to uncleanness and to iniquity, unto iniquity; even so we
should yield our members Servants to righteousness, unto holiness, Romans 6:19.
Seeing God has given us a noble faculty should we neglect or abuse it? can
others remember the world, and their lusts, and shall not we remember the holy
things, that refer to a better world? nay can we remember a thousand
unprofitable hurtful and sinful matters, and not those things that do most
nearly and highly concern us? It is intolerable.

3. This is Necessary. It is an unquestionable Duty; That fundamental Law
propounded in the Old Testament, Deuteronomy. 6:5. and confirmed in the New, Matt.
22:37. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy
Soul, and with all thy mind, does oblige us to strain every faculty to the
utmost in Gods behalf. One end also of Christ's coming into the world, was to
repair our depraved faculties, and shall we suffer him to dye in vain? The Text
I am upon, shows how necessary it is, as a means of Faith and Salvation. We
find by experience that this faculty is miserably corrupted, and therefore it
is undoubtedly necessary, that it be renewed.

Obj. We can do but what we can, let it be never so necessary.

Ans. And I pray how far have your endeavors traveled in this business? have
you carefully used the forementioned means, and continued in the use of them?
no, no, your impotency is wilful; you cannot, because ye mind it not; or else
certainly, if inherent grace were weak, assistent grace would be ready at your
service.

4. A good Memory is very helpful and useful. It is not a vain thing, that is
thus pressed upon you. For,

1. It is a great means of Knowledge. For what signifies your Reading or
Hearing, if you remember nothing? It is not eating or drinking, but digesting
your food, that keeps you alive; and so it is in this case, Prove. 4:20, 21. My
son, (not only) attend unto my words, incline thine ear unto my sayings, (but)
keep them in the midst of thy heart. Then are they life unto those that find
them, and health to all their flesh.

2. It is a means of Faith, as is plain in my Text, unless ye have believed in
vain. For though Faith does rest purely on the Word of God, yet when the Word
and works of God are forgotten, Faith will stagger. Hence our Savior says
Matt. 16:9. O ye of little Faith, do not ye understand, neither Remember the
five Loaves of the five thousand etc. The Word of God is the Sword of the
Spirit, whereby Satan is foiled: but if this Sword be out of the way, by reason
of Forgetfulness, how shall we conflict with this Enemy?

3. It is a means of Comfort. If a poor Christian in distress could remember
Gods promises, they would inspire him with new life; but when they are
forgotten, his Spirits sink. Our way to Heaven lies over Hills and Vales: when
we are on the Hill, we think we shall never be in our dumps again; and so when
we are in the Valley, we fear we shall never have comfort again. But now, a
faithful Memory is a great help, Psalm. 77:10, 11. But I said, This is my
infirmity: but I will remember the years of the right Hand of the most High. I
will remember the works of the Lord; surely, I will remember thy wonders of
old. So also Psalm. 119:52. I remembered thy Judgments of old, O Lord: and have
comforted my self.

4. It is a means of Thankfulness. We are all wanting in this Duty of
Thankfulness, and one cause thereof is forgetfulness of the mercies of God.
Hence ungrateful men are said to have bad memories. What abundant matter of
thanksgiving would a sanctified Memory suggest to every Christian! Hence holy
David calls upon himself Psalm. 103:2. Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not
all his benefits. By which forgetfulness and such other means it comes to pass,
that Praise and Thanksgiving has so little, which should have so much room in
our daily devotions.

5. It is a means of Hope. For experience works Hope, and the Memory is the
Storehouse of experience; therein we lay up all the instances of Gods goodness
to us heretofore, Lament. 3:21. This I recall to mind, therefore have I hope.
Hence they who do not trust in God, are said in Scripture phrase, to forget
him. And one reason of men's impatience and dejectedness in trouble, is assigned
by the Apostle Heb. 12:5. And ye have forgotten the Exhortation which speaks
unto you as unto Children, My Son despise not thou the chastening of the Lord,
nor faint when thou art rebuked of him.

6. It is a means of Repentance. For how can we repent or mourn for what we
have quite forgotten? As therefore there is a culpable remembrance of Sin, when
we remember it in kindness; so there is a laudable remembrance of Sin, when we
remember it with displeasure, Ezekiel. 16:63. That thou may remember and be
confounded, and never open, thy mouth more. But alas! we write our Sins in the
Sand, and foolishly imagine that the eternal God forgets them just as soon as
we; though in such cases he has said and sworn, Amos 8:7. Surely, I will never
forget any of their works.

7. It is a means of Usefulness. No man should nor indeed can be singly
religious; when one spark of grace is truly kindled in the heart, it will
quickly endeavor to heat others also: so for counsel, we are born, we are new
born to be helpful unto others. Herein a good Memory is exceeding useful; out
of which, as out of a Storehouse a wise Christian may bring forth matters both
new and old. Such may say, Psalm. 44.1. Psalm. 48.8.
We have heard with our Ears, and our Fathers have told us, this and that
Observation. And likewise, as we have heard, so we have seen, what may be very
useful to many a Soul. So that you see a good Memory is useful many ways.

6. The want of Memory is a great defect and loss, when we cannot remember what
we read or hear, why time is lost. I will not say quite lost, but its not
improved. The Chapter's lost; I hope you do not read only to pass the time.
When Gods Word is remembered, then When thou go it shall lead thee, when thou
sleep it shall keep thee, and when thou awakest it shall talk with thee.
Prove. 6.22. But a broken memory has heard of Gods famous Acts of Providence,
but forgotten them; has read rare examples of Gods Mercy, Justice, Power, and
Goodness, but they are slipped and lost. In a word, so far as thy Memory fails,
so far will Meditation fail, Delectation fail, and Practice in a great measure
fail. And therefore set your selves in the use of the means prescribed, and all
other good means to heal and strengthen your memories; and give the more
earnest heed to the things which ye have heard, lest at any time ye let them
slip Heb. 2.1. And so far in the third use.

4. The fourth Exhortation is to young people, to store your Memories in the
time of Youth. Eccles. 12.1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy Youth,
Now your Memories are fresh and strong, hereafter they will be shattered with
cares and business. A new Ship, or any Vessel that is new, is free from leaks,
but time and travel will batter it, so will it be with you, care will batter
you, grief will batter you, and therefore now store your selves, now a dozen
Chapters, a good Catechism, a Collection of useful Texts and Doctrines will
take no room, nor make you go the heavier, nor sleep the worse: And therefore
it concerns Parents, both to have such things in their hearts, and to teach
them diligently to their Children, perhaps they may not understand the sense of
them at the present, but these will be ready in their minds till grace and
understanding come, and then they will help them exceedingly. As we lay some
sticks or fagots ready in the Chimney, which when fire comes, signifies
something. Yet a measure must be observed both with old and young, a Ship may
be laden, but must not be overcharged, lest all the Cargo be sunk and lost. A
just discretion will best determine the measure herein, according to the
capacities of the Subjects.

5. Let us all labor for more holiness, for that raises all the faculties,
and reduces them to their right frame and proper Objects. The more Grace we
have, the better we shall remember, and especially better things. Grace (says
excellent Dr. Harris) strengthens the memory always for practice, though it
serve not always for Discourse, some (says he) have such memories that they can
repeat vastly, but when they should advance to practice, they are nobody, when
others are more confused in their memories, but very clear in their practice. A
grain of Grace is worth an ounce of Parts. For thereby we love truths and
duties better, and it is easy to remember, that which we love; and therefore
let it be our daily Prayer, that the God of Peace would sanctify us wholly,
Spirit, Soul, Body, all. It is not for Christians to enquire just how little
Grace will serve our turn for Salvation, but rather how much may be attained
and improved to the glory of God.

6. Lastly, Reduce into practice that which you do remember. Christus Magister
vitae, non schola.
The end of all true knowledge is Practice. Remember his Commandments to do
them, If it be a Doctrinal Truth which you read or hear, consider what
influence it has upon the Heart. If it be a duty which is set before you,
immediately set about it. If a sin be exposed, presently root it out. If
Sincerity or Hypocrisy be decyphered try thy spiritual State thereby without
delay. For as a Treasure in the Chest is in danger of the Robber, but when its
laid out on a good Purchase, here its safe from starting; so while spiritual
Notions swim only in the memory, you may easily lose them, but they are safe
when they are once incorporated into your real Practice. But alas! there are
too many that are like those whiffling Chapmen, who come to the Shop, and lay
by a great many rich wares, but when all is done, they buy few or none; so
these cheapen and bid for the Pearl, but will not buy it; they will talk over
all the points of Religion, before they will seriously Practice any one of
them. Then you remember the Sabbath a right, when you so remember it before it
comes, that when it comes, you keep it Holy; Then you remember God truly, when
you fear and love and trust in him. Then you remember your Neighbor as you
ought, when you remember to do good and Communicate. Then you remember your
selves best, when you remember to have always a Conscience void of offense
toward God or men. In a word, then you remember your latter end rightly, when
you keep your oil ready in your Lamps and in your Vessels, that your Master may
find you so doing.

But I conclude, It is worth observing, that Holy David, among all the rest of
his blessed Psalms, has one which is the Thirty eight Psalm, which he Styles a
Psalm of David to bring to remembrance; His memory it seems had need of help as
well as ours. Now the Lord grant that this Sermon may by the blessing of God
upon it, be herein at least useful, namely to preserve better Sermons in your
mind; so shall I have my end, God the Glory and you the Comfort. Amen.

Quest. What are the Signs and Symptoms whereby we know we love the Children of
God? SERMON XV.
I. JOHN V.II. By this we know we love the Children of God, if we love God, and
keep his Commandments.
OF all the Marks that are useful in the Trial of our spiritual state in
reference to Eternity, there is none affords a more clear and comfortable
assurance of Gods special and saving Mercy, than Love to the Saints. This has
often resolved the Doubts, and quieted the Fears of afflicted enquiring Souls,
when other Graces have not been so apprehensible in their operations. But there
is no Mark which the deceitful heart does more securely rest upon, through the
mistake of natural humane Love for that which is spiritual and divive; it is
therefore most worthy our serious thoughts, the deceit being so easy and
infinitely dangerous, to show what is the unfeigned genuine Love of the
Brethren, to which Salvation is annexed, to confirm the humble sincere
Christian, and undeceive presuming hypocrites.

The great Design of St. John in this Epistle, is to excite and inflame in
Christians the Love of God, and of their Brethren, the two comprehensive
Duties, and Sum of the Law, our principal perfections in Heaven and Earth.
These he recommends by the most affectionate and obliging, the most warming,
melting Perswasives; the superlative Love of God to us, and our Communion with
the Saints in Nature and Grace.

In the former Verse the Apostle argues for the reality of the effect, as an
evidence of the Cause. Whoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, that is, the
Savior of the world, foretold to the Prophets, and expresses the truth of that
Faith in a suitable conversation, is born of God; and every one that loves him
that begat, loves him also that is begotten of him. Grace is not less powerful
in producing tender reciprocal affections between the offspring of the same
heavenly Father, than the subordinate endearments of Nature. The pretense is
vain of Love to God, without loving his regenerate Children. And in the Text he
argues from the knowledge of the Cause, to the discovering of the sincerity of
the Effect: By this we know that we love the Children of God, with a holy
affection, if we love God, and keep his Commandments.

There is but one difficulty to be removed, that the force of the Apostles
reasoning may appear; it is this; a Medium to prove a thing must be of clearer
evidence than what is concluded by it: Now though a demonstration from the
Cause be more noble and scientifical, yet that which is drawn from the Effect,
is more near to Sense, and more discernable. And this is verified in the
Instance before us; for the Love of God, who is absolutely spiritual in his
Being and Excellencies, does not with that sensible fervor affect and
passionately transport us, as Love to his Children, with whom we visibly
converse, and who are receptive of the most sensible testimonies of our
Affection. Accordingly the Apostle argues, He that loves not his Brother whom
he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen? As the Motives to love
our Brethren, from our conjunction in Nature, and familiar Conversation, are
more capable to allure our Affections, and more sensibly strike the Heart than
the invisible Deity, who is infinitely above us, by the same reason we may more
easily judge of the truth of our Love to them, than of our Love to God. To this
the Answer is clear; the Apostle does not speak of the Love of God, as a still,
silent, contemplative affection, confined to to the superior Faculty of the
Soul, but as a burning, shining affection (like Fire Lumine qui semper proditur
ipso suo.
) active and declarative of it self in those effects that necessarily flow from
it, that is voluntary obedience to his Commands, and thus it becomes manifest
to the renewed Conscience, and is a most convincing proof of the sincerity of
our Love to the Saints.

The Text being cleared, affords this Doctrine.

The sincerity of our Love to the Children of God, is certainly discovered by
our Love to God, and Obedience to his Commands.

For the Illustration and Proof of the Point, I will briefly show, 1. Who are
described by this Title, the Children of God? 2. What is included in our Love
to them. 3. What the Love of God is, and the obedience that flows from it. 4.
How from love to God, and willing obedience to his Commands, we may
convincingly know the sincerity of our love to his Children.


To explain the first, we must consider that this Title, the Children of God,
is given upon several accounts.

1. By Creation the Angels are called the Sons of God, and Men his offspring.

The reason of the Title is, 1. The manner of their production by his immediate
Power. Thus he is styled The Father of Spirits, in distinction from the Fathers
of the Flesh. For though the conception and forming of the Body be the work of
his secret Providence, yet it is by the hand of Nature, the Parents concurring
as the second Causes of it: but the production of the Soul is to be entirely
ascribed to his power without the intervention of any Creature.

2. In their spiritual immortal Nature, and the intellectual operations flowing
from it, there is an Image and resemblance of God; from whence this Title is
common to all reasonable Creatures, and peculiar to them; for though the Matter
may be ordered and fashioned by the hand of God into a figure of admirable
beauty, yet it is not capable of his likeness and image, so that neither the
Lights of Heaven, nor the Beasts and plants of the Earth are called his
Children.

II. By external Calling and Covenant some are denominated his Children; for by
this Evangelical Constitution God is pleased to receive Believers into a filial
relation. Indeed where there is not a cordial consent and subjection to the
Terms of the Covenant, visible Profession, and the receiving the external Seals
of it, will be of no advantage; but the public serious owning of the G^^pel
entitles a person to be of the Society of Christians; and filius and foederatus
are all one.

III. There is a Sonship that arises from supernatural regeneration; that is
the communicating a new nature to man, whereby there is a holy and blessed
change in the directive and commanding Faculties, the Understanding and Will,
and in the Affections, and consequently in the whole Life. This is wrought by
the efficacy of the Word and Spirit, and is called by our Savior Regeneration,
because it is not our original carnal Birth, but a second and celestial. It Is
with the new man in Grace, as with an Infant in Nature, that has the essential
parts that compose a man; a Soul endowed with all its faculties, a Body with
all its organs and parts, but not in the vigor of mature age. Thus renewed
Holiness in a Christian is complete and entire in its parts, but not in
perfection of degrees; there is a universal inclination to all that is holy,
just and good, and a universal aversion from sin, though the executive power be
not equal. And regenerate Christians are truly called the Children of God; for
as in natural generation there is communicated a Principle of Life and suitable
Operations, from whence the Title and Relation of a Father arises; so in
Regeneration there are derived such holy and heavenly qualities to the Soul as
constitute a Divine Nature in man, whereby he is partaker of the Life and
Likeness of God himself; from hence he is a Child of God, and has an interest
and propriety in his Favor, Power and Promises, and all the good that flows
from them, and a Title to the eternal inheritance.

Secondly, I will show what is included in our Love to the Children of God.

1 Pet. 1.22.
1. The Principle of this Love is Divine. The Soul is purified through the
Spirit to unfeigned Love of the Brethren. Naturally the Judgment is corrupted,
and the Will depraved, that carnal respects either of Profit or Pleasure are
the quick and sensible incitements of Love; and till the Soul be cured of the
sensual contagion, the inclination can never be directed, and the desires
fastened on the supernatural Image of God in his Saints. As Holiness in the
Creature is a Ray derived from the infinite beauty of God's Holiness, so the
love of Holiness is a Spark from the sacred Fire of his Love. 1 John 4.7.
St. John exhorts Christians, Let us love one another, for Love is of God.
Natural Love among men is by his general Providence, but a gracious Love to the
Saints, is by his special influence. The natural Affection must be baptized
with the Holy Ghost, as with Fire, to refine it to a divine purity.

2. The Qualifications of this Love are as follows:

First, It is sincere and cordial; it does not appear only in expressions from
the Tongue and Countenance, but springs from the integrity of the Heart. It Is
styled unfeigned L^^^ of the Brethren; it is a Love not in Word and Tongue only,
but in Deed and Truth. A counterfeit formal affection, set off with artificial
colors, is so far from being pleasing to God, the Searcher and Judge of
hearts, that it is infinitely provoking to him.

Secondly, It Is pure; the attractive Cause of it is the Image of God appearing
in them. Our Savior assures us, that Love shall be gloriously rewarded that
respects a Disciple upon that account as a Disciple, and a righteous man as a
righteous man. The holy Love commanded in the Gospel, is to Christians for
their Divine Relation, as the Children of God, as the Members of Christ, and
Temples of the Holy Ghost.

Thirdly, From hence it is universal, extended to all the Saints. The Church is
composed of Christians that are different in their Gifts and Graces, and in
their external Order, some excel in knowledge, and zeal, and love, in active
Graces; others in humility, meekness and patience; that sustain and adorn them
in sufferings; some are in a higher rank, others are in humble circumstances,
as in the visible world things are placed sutably to their Natures, the Stars
in the Heavens, Flowers in the Earth; and our special respects are due to those
whom the Favor of God has dignified above others, and in whom the brightness
and power of Grace shines more clearly; for according as there are more reasons
that make a person deserving Love, the degrees of Love should rise in
proportion: but a dear affection is due even to the lowest Saints; for all have
communion in the same holy Nature, and are equally instated in the same blessed
Alliance.

Fourthly, It must be fervent, not only in Truth, but in a degree of Eminency.
St. Peter joins the two Qualifications; See that ye love one another with a
pure heart fervently. Our Savior sets before us his own Pattern, as a Pillar
of fire to direct and inflame us. Joh. 15.12.
This is my Commandment, that ye love one another as I have loved you. As I
have loved you! Admirable Example! His Love was singular and superlative; a
Love that saves and astonishes us at once; for he willingly gave his precious
life for our Ransom. This we should endeavor to resemble, though our highest
expressions of love and compassion to the Saints, are but a weak and imperfect
imitation of his divine Perfection.

I shall add farther, this Love includes all kinds of Love.

1. The love of Esteem correspondent to the real worth and special goodness of
the Saints. It Is one Character of a Citizen of Heaven, that in his eyes a vile
person is contemned, Psalm. 15.
however set off by the Glory of the world, and the ornaments of the present
state, that as a false Mask conceal their foul deformity to carnal persons; but
he honors them that fear the Lord, though disfigured by calumnies, though
obscured and depressed by afflictions, and made like their blessed Head, in
whom there was no Form nor Comeliness in the judgment of Fools. In our valuation
Divine Grace should turn the Scales against all the Natural or Acquired
Perfections of Body or Mind; Beauty, Strength, Wit, Eloquence, humane Wisdom;
against all the external Advantages of this Life, Nobility, Riches, Power, and
whatever is admired by a carnal Eye. The Judgment and Love of God should
regulate ours. A Saint is more valued by God, than the highest Princes; nay,
than the Angels themselves, considered only with respect to their spiritual
Nature. He calls them his peculiar Treasure, his Jewels, the first Fruits of
the Creatures, sacred for his Use and Glory, in comparison of whom, the rest of
the world are but Dregs, a corrupt Mass: They are styled his Sons; being
partakers of that Life of which he is the Author and Pattern; and what are all
the Titles on Earth, compared with so Divine a Dignity?

2. The Love of Desire, of their present and future Happiness. The Perfection
of Love consists more in the Desire than in the Effects; and the continued
fervent Prayers that the Saints present to God for one another, are the
expressions of their Love.

3. The Love of Delight, in spiritual Communion with them. All the Attractives
of humane Conversation, Wit, Mirth, Sweetness of Behavior, and wise Discourse,
cannot make any Society so dear and pleasant to one that is a lover of
Holiness, as the Communion of Saints. David, whose Breast was very sensible of
the tender Affections of Love and Joy, tells us, That the Saints in the Earth,
the Excellent, Psa^. 16.^.
were the chief Object of his Delight. And ^^equent to this, there is a cordial
Sympathy with them in their Joys and Sorrows, being Members of the same Body,
and having an interest in all their good or evil. It Is observable, when the
Holy Spirit describes the sweetest humane Comforts that are the present reward
of the godly man, the enjoyment of his Estate in the dear Society of his Wife
and Children, there is a Promise annexed, Psalm. 128.
that sweetens all the rest, That he shall see the good of Jerusalem, and peace
upon Israel. Without this all temporal Comforts are mixed with bitter
displeasure to him. There is an eminent Instance of this in Nehemiah, Nehem. 2.
whom all the Pleasures of the Persian Court could not satisfy whilst
Jerusalem was desolately miserable.

4. The Love of Service and Beneficence, that declares it self in all outward
Offices and Acts for the good of the Saints: And these are various; some are of
a sublimer nature, and concern their Souls; as spiritual Counsel and
Instruction, compassionate Admonition and Consolation, the confirming them in
good, and the fortifying them against evil, the doing whatever may preserve and
advance the life and vigor of the inward man; others respect their Bodies and
temporal Condition; directing them in their Affairs, protecting them from
Injuries, supplying their wants, and universally assisting them for their
tolerable passage through the world. And all these Acts are to be cheerfully
performed; there is more joy in conferring than receiving a Benefit, because
Love is more exercised in the one than the other. In short, the highest effect
of Love that comprizes all the rest, is to die for the Brethren; and this we
ought to do when the Honor of God, and Welfare of the Church require it.
Hereby perceive we the Love of God, because he laid down his Life for us, and
we ought to lay down our lives for the Brethren. If Christians thus loved one
another, the Church on Earth would be a lively Image of the blessed Society
above.

Thirdly, The Love of God, and Obedience to his Commands, the Product of it are
to be considered.

1. The Love of God has its Rise from the consideration of his amiable
Excellencies, that render him infinitely worthy of the highest Affection; and
from the blessed Benefits of Creation, Preservation, Redemption, and
Glorification, that we expect from his pure Goodness and Mercy. This is the
most clear and essential Character of a Child of God, and most peculiarly
distinguishes him from unrenewed men, however accomplished by Civil Virtues.

Now the internal exercise of Love to God, in the valuation of his Favor, as
that which is better than Life, in earnest desires of Communion with him, in
ravishing Joy in the testimonies and assurance of his Love, in mourning for
what is displeasing to him, is in the secret of the Soul; but with this there
is inseparably joined a true and visible declaration of our Love in obedienc^
(...) him. 1 John 3.16.
This is the Love of God, the most real and undeceitful Expression of it, that
we keep his Commandments.

The Obedience that springs from Love, is,

1. Uniform and universal; for that two principal and necessary Effects of Love
are an ardent desire to please God, and an equal care not to displease him in
any thing. Now the Law of God is the signification of his sovereign and holy
will, and the doing of it is very pleasing to him, both upon the account of the
subjection of the Creature to his authority, and conformity to his purity; he
declares that Obedience is better than the most costly Sacrifice. There is an
absolute peremptory repugnance between love to him, and despising his Commands:
And from thence it follows, that Love inclines the Soul to obey all Gods
Precepts, not only those of easy observation, but the most difficult and
distastful to the carnal Appetites; for the Authority of God runs through all,
and his Holiness shines in all: Servile Fear is a partial Principle, and causes
an unequal respect to the divine Law; it restrains from sins of greater guilt,
from such disorderly and dissolute actions at which Conscience takes fire, but
others are indulged; it excites to good works of some kind, but neglects other
that are equally necessary. But Love regards the whole Law in all its
Injunctions and Prohibitions, not merely to please our selves, that we may not
feel the stings of an accusing Conscience, but to please the Lawgiver.

2. The Obedience of Love is accurate; and this is a natural Consequence of the
former. The divine Law is a Rule not only for our outward Conversation, but of
our Thoughts and Affections, of all the interior workings of the Soul, that are
open before God. Thus it requires religious Service, not only in the external
performance, but those reverent holy Affections, those pure Aims, wherein the
Life and Beauty, the Spirit and true Value of divine Worship consists. Thus it
commands the Duties of Equity, Charity and Sobriety, all Civil and Natural
Duties for divine Ends, to please and glorify God. Heb. 13.16.
It forbids all kinds and degrees of Sin; not only gross Acts, but the inward
Lustings that have a tendency to them. Now the Love of God is the Principle of
spiritual Perfection. It Is called the fulfilling of the Law, 1 Cor. 10.31.
not only as it is a comprehensive Grace, but in that it draws forth all the
active Powers of the Soul to obey it in an exact manner. This causes a tender
sense of our failings, and a severe circumspection over our ways, that nothing
be allowed that is displeasing to the divine Eyes. Since the most excellent
Saints are Gods chiefest Favorites, Love makes the holy Soul to strive to be
like him in all possible degrees of Purity. Thus St. Paul, in whom the Love of
Christ was the imperial commanding Affection, declares, Phil. 3.10, 11.
it is zealous endeavor to be conformable to the Death of Christ, in dying to
Sin, as Christ died for sin, and that he might attain to the Resurrection of
the dead, that perfection of Holiness that is in the immortal state.

1 John 5.3.
3. The Obedience of Love is chosen and pleasant. This is the Love of God, that
we keep his Commandments, and his Commandments are not grievous. Those that are
strangers to this heavenly Affection, imagine that a solicitous diligent
respect to all Gods Precepts, is a melancholy Task, but it is delightful to the
Saints; for Obedience is the continual exercise of Love to God, the Paradise of
holy Souls. The mortification of the carnal Appetites, and the restraint from
such Objects as powerfully insinuate and engage carnal Hearts, is with a freer
complacency to a Saint, than a sensual fruition of them. The sharpest
sufferings for Religion are allayed, nay sweetened to a Saint from the Love of
God, that is then most sincerely, strongly, and purely acted. The Apostle more
rejoiced in sharp Tribulations for Christ's sake, than in divine Revelations.

4. The Love of God produces persevering Obedience. Servile Compliance is
inconstant. A Slave hates the Duties he performs, and loves the Sins he dares
not commit; therefore as soon as he is released from his Chain and his Fear,
his Obedience ceases; but a Son is perfectly pleased with his Fathers Will, and
the Tenor of his Life is correspondent to it. He that is pressed by fear to
serve in an Army, will desert his Colors the first opportunity; but a
Volunteer, that for the love of Valor, and of his Country, lists himself, will
continue in the Service. The motion that is caused by outward poises, will
cease when the weights are down, but that which proceeds from an inward
principle of Life, is continual; and such is the Love of God planted in the
breast of a Christian.

Fourthly, We are to prove that from the Love of God, and willing Obedience to
his Commands, we may convincingly know the sincerity of our Love to his
Children.

There is an inseparable Union between these two Graces, and the one arises out
of the other. Godliness and brotherly kindness are joined by the Apostle. And
it will be evident that where this Affection of Love to the Saints is sincere
and gracious, there will be an entire and joyful respect to the Law of God, by
considering the Reasons and Motives of it.

1. The Divine Command requires this Love. These things I command you, says
our Savior, that ye love one another. This Precept so often repeated, and
powerfully re-inforc'd by him, made so deep an impression on the first
Christians, that they had one Heart, and one Soul, and their Estates were
common between them. And in the next succeeding Ages, this fraternal Love was
so conspicuous in the Professors of his Sacred Discipline, Tert. Apo^, c. 3^.
that their Enemies observed it as a rare and remarkable thing: See how the
Christians love one another! see how ready they are to die for one another! Now
the same gracious Principle that inclines us to do one Command, will make us
universally willing to observe all; for sincere Obedience primarily respects
the Authority of the Lawgiver, which binds the whole Law upon the Conscience.
James 2.
And as he that breaks the Law wilfully in one point, is guilty of all, because
the violation of a single Precept proceeds from the same Cause that induces men
to transgress all, that is contempt of the Divine Majesty; so he that sincerely
obeys one Command, does with consent of heart, and serious endeavors obey all,
And from hence it is clear, that without a religious and unreserved regard of
the divine Commands, it is impossible there should be in any person a gracious
affection to the Saints; that is the product of Obedience to God, and
consequently the observance of his Precepts, is the certain proof of our Love
to his Children.

2. Spiritual Love to the Saints arises from the sight of the Divine Image
appearing in their Conversation. Now if the Beauty of Holiness be the
attractive of our Love, it will be fastened on the Law of God in the most
intense degree. The most excellent Saints on Earth have some mixtures of
Corruption; their Holiness is like the Morning-light, that is checquered with
the shadows and obscurity of the Night; and it is our wisdom not to love their
infirmities, but to preserve an unstained affection to them. But the Law of God
is the fairest Transcript of his Nature, wherein his glorious Holiness is most
resplendent. Psa. 19.7, 8.
The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the Soul, the Commandment of the
Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes. This ravished the heart of David with an
inexpressible Affection. O how I love thy Law! Psalm. 119.
it is my Meditation all the day. And he repeats the declaration of his Love to
it with new fervor upon this ground; I love thy Law because it is pure. Now
Love to the Commands of God will transcribe them in our hearts and Lives. As
affectionate expressions to the Children of God, without the real supply of
their wants, are but the shadows of Love, so words of esteem and respect to the
Law of God without unfeigned and universal Obedience, are but an empty Pretense.

3. The Divine Relation of the Saints to God as their Father, is the Motive of
spiritual Love to them. And this is consequent to the former; for by partaking
of his Holiness, they partake of his life and likeness. And from hence they are
the dearest Objects of his Love; his eye and heart is always upon them. Now if
this Consideration excites Love to the Children of God, it will be as powerful
to incline us to keep his Commands; for the Law of God that is the Copy of his
Sacred Will, is most near to his Nature, and he is infinitely tender of it. Our
Savior tells us, that it is casier for Heaven and Earth to pass away, Luke
16.17.
than for one tittle of the Law to fail. If the entire World, and all the
Inhabitants of it were destroyed, there would be no loss to God, but if the Law
lose its Authority and Obligation, the Divine Holiness would suffer a Blemish.

The Use of the Doctrine is; to try our Love to the Children of God, to which
all pretend, by this infallible Rule, our Obedience to his Commands. This is
absolutely necessary, because the deceit is so easy and so dangerous: and it
will be most comfortable, if upon this Trial our Love be found to be spiritual
and divine. The deceit is easy, because Acts of Love may be expressed to the
Saints from other Principles than the Love of God: Some for vainglory are
bountiful, and when their Charity seems so visibly divine, that men admire it,
there is the Wo^m of vanity at the root, that corrupts and makes it odious to
God. The Pharisees are charged with this by our Savior; Mat. 6 2.
their Alms were not the effect of Charity, but Ostentation; and whilst they
endeavored to make their Vices virtuous, they made their Virtues vicious.
There is a natural Love among persons united by Consanguinity, that remains so
entire since the ruin of Mankind by the Fall, and is rather from the force of
Nature, than the virtue of the Will, and this in all kind Offices may be
expressed to the Saints. There is a sweetness of Temper in some, that inclines
them to wish well to all, and such tender Affections that are easily moved and
melted at the sight of others miseries; and such may be beneficent and
compassionate to the Saints in their afflictions, but the Spring of this Love
is good Nature, not divine Grace. There are humane Respects that incline others
to kindness to the Saints, as they are united by interest, Fellow-Citizens and
Neighbors, and as they receive advantage by Commerce with them, or as obliged
by their Benefits: But Civil Amity and Gratitude are not that holy Affection
that is an assurance of our spiritual state. There are other Motives of Love to
the Saints, that are not so low nor mercenary; in the thickest darkness of
Paganism, the Light of Reason discovered the amiable excellence of Virtue, as
becoming the humane Nature, and useful for the Tranquillity and Welfare of
Mankind; and the Moral Goodness that adorns the Saints, the Innocence, Purity,
Meekness, Justice, Clemency, Benignity that are visible in their Conversations,
may draw respects from others who are strangers to the Love of God, and
careless of his Commandments.

And as the Mistake of this Affection is easy, so it is infinitely dangerous;
for he that builds his hope of Heaven upon a sandy foundation, upon false
Grounds, will fall ruinously from his Hopes and Felicity at last. How fearful
will be the disappointment of one that has been a Favourer of the Saints, that
has defended their Cause, protected their Persons, relieved their Necessities,
and presumed for this, that his Condition is safe as to Eternity, though he
lives in the known neglect of other Duties, and the indulgent practice of some
Sin?

But if we find that our Love to the Children of God flows from our Love to
God, that sways the Soul to an entire compliance to his Commands, and makes us
observant of them in the course of our Lives: What a blessed Hope arises from
this Reflection? We need not have the Book of the Divine Decrees opened, and
the Secrets of Election unveiled; 1 John 3.14.
for we know that we are past from Death to Life, if we love the Brethren. This
is an infallible Effect and Sign of the Spiritual Life, and the Seed and
Evidence of Eternal Life.

Quest. What must we do to prevent and cure Spiritual Pride? SERMON XVI.
2. COR. XII.VII. And least I should be exalted above measure through the
abundance of the Revelations, there was given me a Thorn in the Flesh, the
Messenger of Satan to buffet me, least I should be exalted above measure.
THE case that calls for resolution and falls under our present consideration,
is, what we must do to prevent and cure spiritual pride. Pride is said to be
Spiritual in a double respect.

1. In respect of its Object, when that is something which is spiritual; as
gifts, graces, privileges etc. for it may be differenc't from fleshly pride,
which is conversant about more carnal objects, as strength, beauty, riches,
honors or the like.

2. In respect of its Subject, which is the heart or spirit of man, there is
its proper Seat. And so all pride (whatsoever be the object of it) may be said
to be spiritual.

To prevent and cure are terms that may be thus differenc't, the former
respects more especially the actings of pride, the latter the habit of it in
the heart.

Pride is an evil and a sore disease, some call it the tumor or timpany of the
Soul; it is dangerous to all, it is deadly to some. The scope of this discourse
is to prescribe proper remedies against it.

M^rc. 1:23. and 5:2. (...). Is a man acted or agitated by a Diabolical Spirit.
These words of the Apostle Paul are the fundation upon which I shall build. He
speaks a little before of a man in Christ that had a wonderful Vi^ion or
revelation from God. B^ a man in Christ he means either a man united to him, or
else a man that was extraordinarily acted and transported by him. Some expound
it by that passage in Revel. 1:10. where the Apostle John says, he was in the
Spirit on the Lords Day; That is, he was extraordinarily acted and transported
by the Spirit.

Farther by this man in Christ the Apostle means himself, because he is
speaking of his own privileges and enjoyments, he chooses to speak in the
person of another; A good man is always backward to speak any thing in his own
praise, he knows it savours of pride and folly; that it should come out of
another man's lips, and not his own; therefore he never does it but when it is
necessary for the hand of God and the vindication of his truth. And as he is
always backward to it, for he is ever modest and self-denying in it; therefore
the Apostle speaks of another Person when he means himself.

[ I knew a man in Christ above 14 years ago.] Some think the Apostle had this
rapture or revelation he here speaks of, at the time of his first conversion;
then he lay 3 days and 3 nights in a kind of ecstasy, and did neither eat nor
drink. Several at their first conversion to God have found such raptures and
ravishments, as they have had cause to remember all their life after, and such
as they have not experienced again during the whole course of their lives.
Others (for the good reasons to long here to insert) are of opinion that the
time of this revelation was after his conversion, yea several Years after it.

During the time of this extraordinary Vision or revelation he was caught up to
the third Heaven, for he calls it as some think, with respect to the Heavens
under it. The air in which we breath is the first, therefore the Fowls of the
air are called the Fowls of Heaven; the Starry Firmament is the second; and the
place of the Holy Angels and Glorified Spirits is the third. Others don't like
this distribution of the Heavens, and indeed we can speak of them but
conjecturally. This third Heaven which the Apostle was caught up to, he calls
Paradise, v. 4. for he does not speak of two raptures but of one and the same,
only he doubles it to show the certainty of it. Heaven is elsewhere in
Scripture called Paradise, in allusion to that excellent and diligent Garden
that Adam was put into before his Fall. Our Savior said to the repenting
thief, thou shall be with me in Paradise.

The way and manner of this rapture, he possesses himself to be ignorant off.
Hence he says it, that whether he was in the body, or out of the body he could
not tell. That is, whether he was caught up Soul and Body together, or in Soul
only. The Soul is not so tied to the body, but that for a season it may be
separated from it, and afterward return again to it.

While he was in this condition he heard unspeakable words, such as he neither
could nor might utter, it was not lawful for him; possibly he was forbidden.
God saw not all that meet to be communicated to a world of Sinners, which was
allured and indulged to this one eminent Saint.

This divine rapture or revelation was like to be an occasion of self
Exaltation to the Apostle, he was in danger of being exalted above measure by
means thereof. This he mentions twice, that it might be the better minded. It
is the nature of pride as it is of Fire to turn all things into fuel to feed
its self. The holiest Saint on Earth is not secure from spiritual pride, if one
should come down from the third Heaven, and bring this imperfect nature with
him, he were still in danger of this Sin.

To prevent this Sin in the Apostle, least he should be exalted in himself as
he had been exalted by God, there was given him a thorn in the Flesh, this
pricked the bladder of pride, and kept him from being trust up through the
abundance of revelations.

By whom was this given him? By God himself; it was by his wise ordination or
permission. The love of God to his People is wonderfully seen in his preventing
mercies, particularly in his preventing their falling into Sins; as here by
putting a thorn into Paul's Flesh he prevents the pride of his heart. This is
th^^ mercy for which David prays, and for which he also prayseth God. It Is as
great a mercy to prevent our committing of Sin as it is to pardon it when it is
committed.

But what was this thorn in the Flesh, which was given the Apostle to prevent
spiritual pride and self exaltation? Various are the conjectures of
Interpreters about it. The Greek word (...) is but this once used in all the
New Testament; it signifies a sharp stake upon which malefactors of old were
fastened, when executed. As also a pricking thorn that runs into a man's flesh or
foot as he goes through woods and thickets. Some think that this thorn in the
flesh was a fleshly lust, some evil concupiscence that the Apostle felt to be
active or stirring in him.

Others think that we are thereby to understand some sore temptation of Satan,
a blasphemous or Atheistical suggestion or injection, this is a pinching thorn
indeed, and has made many of the Souls of Gods People to bleed.

Others understand it a of a wound in his Spirit or a sting in his Conscience,
whereby he was pressed down, as it were to Hell, as before he was caught up to
Heaven.

Others understand it of the reproaches and persecution of his enemies; wicked
men are likened unto thorns (...) Scripture.

Others again understand it of some bodily distemper, an acute tormenting pain,
such as Stone, or Gout or the like. Of this opinion are some Ancient, and many
modern writers. Augustine freely confesses, se nescire quid sit, that he did
not know what it was.

The Apostle himself tells us, be it what it will, that it was a Messenger of
Satan, he sent it, though God gave it. A godly man at the same time and by the
same means, may be both afflicted of God and buffeted of Satan. God and Satan
both (though with a different design and to a different end) may have a hand in
the same affliction, God intending the good, and Satan the hurt of a Child of
God. What a gracious God do we serve, who overrules Satan in all his devices
against us, so that he cannot have his ends upon us.

Thus I have briefly paraphrased upon the words of my Text, and set before you
several useful no^es from them, as they lay in my way. The main observation
which I shall insist and dilate upon, is this.

Obs. That one great design of God in all his dispensations to his People, is
to prevent and cure the pride of their hearts. This (you see) was the thing God
designed in letting Satan loose to afflict and buffet the Apostle, and
therefore he gave him a thorn in his Flesh. This was his design in leading the
Children of Israel such a dance in the wilderness. They might well have gone
from Egypt to Canaan in less then 40 weeks yet there he made them to wander for
the space of 40 years, and why was it? the Spirit of God tells us Deuteronomy. 8:2.
that it was to humble them. There are other reasons also assigned, but this was
the first and greatest reason. Elihu informs us Job 33:17. of Gods various
dealings with the sons of men, and of his various ends therein, and amongst the
rest this is none of the least, to hide pride from man. Two ways may God be
said to hide pride from man. 1. By pardoning it, and so this very word is used
in another place, to note the gracious act of God in the pardoning the Sin of
man. Blessed is the man whose transgression is forgiven, whose Sin is covered,
or hide. 2. As God hides pride from man by pardoning it, so also by preventing
it; to hide pride is all one with hindering it, and in this sense it is here
taken. God is said to hide pride from man not by pardoning it when it is acted,
but by hindering and keeping man from the acting of it.

I might show you how God designed this in his creating man, at first he made
him of the dust of the earth, and this might keep him humble, even the sense of
his Original, God designed this in his way of redeeming man by his Son Jesus
Christ, we are thereby given to understand, that we could no more have redeemed
our selves, then we could have Created our selves, that we are as much beholden
to a Redeemer for Salvation and Eternal life, as to a Creator for our Natural
life. Yea God designs this in his way and method of saving man, which is by his
Grace and not by works of Righteousness which we do, we must condemn our selves
before ^e'l justify us, and renounce our own Righteousness, if ever we will be
made righteous, and why is this? but that pride should be excluded, and that no
Flesh might ever Glory or exalt it is self in his sight.

Yea, farther I might let you see how this is Gods design in his more inferior
providence and dispensations.

This is his design in his exalting his people, not that they might be made
proud, but more humble, that they might think and say with David, what are we
Lord, and what are our Fathers House, that thou should bring us hitherto.

This is his design in afflicting them, therefore he brings them low that they
might be more lowly minded, affliction is the Physic by which he brings down
that swelling which is in their Souls.

This is his design in deserting them, therefore he hides his face, that he may
hide pride from his people, he leaves them as he did Hezekiah, that they might
know what was in their hearts.

For this reason he leaves them to be reproacht and persecuted by men.

For this reason he leaves them to be tempted and buffeted by Satan.

For this reason he leaves them to be overcome or overtaken by Sin.

By their sins and falls they are made more watchful and more humble too. Peter
was too much opiniated of his own strength and love to Christ. Lord says he tho
all thy Disciples forsake thee, I will not forsake thee, but after his fall he
was Crest fallen, and more modestly conceited of himself. Our Savior said to
him, Simon son of Jonah love thou me more then these? he answered, Lord thou
know all things, thou know that I love thee, he speaks to the reality,
not to the degree of his love to Christ. He had done now comparing with, and
preferring himself before the rest of the Disciples.

The main reason of the point is this, because pride is a sin that is most
hateful unto God: he hates all sin, but more especially this sin. There are six
things that God hates, Prove. 6:16, 17.
yea there are seven that are an abomination to him, and the first and chiefest
of those is pride, he hates a proud look, but he hates more a proud heart,
Prove. 16 5. Every one that is proud is an abomination to the Lord, not
abominable only, but an abomination in the Abstract, James 4:6. 1 Pet. 5:5.
twice it is said in the new Testament, once in the Epistle of James, and the
second time in the first Epistle of Peter, that God resists the proud, (...),
he fights and sets himself in battle array against them. He opposes them,
because they oppose him, nay if it were in their power they would depose him
too; they would be God to themselves, this is the Devilish nature of Pride,
that when as other sins are against Gods Laws, this sin is against his
Sovereignty and his being; other sins are a turning from God, this is a turning
upon him; Hence it is that God is said to behold the proud a far off, as if he
could not endure the sight of them: Ps. 119:21. Prove. 16:5. Isa. 25:11,
23.8.2.12 13.
He hates the proud with his heart, he curses them with his mouth, he
punishes them with his hand, for proof of this peruse the Texts in the
Margent. I hasten to what I principally intend.

Is this so? Does God design in all his Dispensations to prevent and cure the
pride of the hearts? then, let us be exhorted to comply with God herein, let us
make it our care and endeavor so to do. This Exhortation concerns us all,
forasmuch as we are all infected with this plague, none can say they are free
of this contagion. There is no distemper more epidemical, it reaches the poor
as well as the rich, the godly as well as the wicked, though it has dominion
only in the latter, yet it dwells in the former. You see how it was with the
Apostle Paul; you read how it was with the Apostle Peter, with David, with
Hezekiah etc. The holiest Persons on Earth are more or less sick with this
disease, how therefore are we all concerned to endeavor the prevention and
cure thereof. And if any ask what they must do in order thereunto? the
remainder of the discourse shall be spent in the resolving and satisfying of
this enquiry.

1. Be thoroughly convinced of the greatness and sinfulness of this Sin, the Sin
and the condemnation of the Devil and his Angels.

There are two properties in Pride which greatly aggravate it, and make it out
of measure sinful and abominable.

1. The Antiquity of it. It was the first enemy that God ever had, this was the
Sin of the fallen Angels, and also of our first Parents; this was the original
of original Sin. Some have disputed whether pride or unbelief had the
precedence in man's fall. (A question, as one says, much like that whether
repentance or faith has the precedence in his rising) But all are of opinion
that man's pride if it was not antecedaneous, yet at least it was contemporary
with his unbelief; and that pride was the great cause of his Apostasy. He
proudly affected to be as God, to have known good and evil. He fell from what
he was by a proud desire of being what he was not.

2. The pregnancy of it. It is a big bellied Sin; most of the Sins that are in
the world are the offspring and issue of pride. Let me instance in several
other Sins that are the genuine spawn of this Sin.

It causes covetousness. Though covetousness is said to be the root of other
evils, yet this root it self springs from pride; what is covetousness but the
purveyor of pride, and a making provision for the lusts thereof? why are men
greedy of wordly wrath, but for the feeding and maintaining of the pride of
life? Habakkuk tells us, that he who is a proud man enlarges his desires as
Hell.

Again it causes ambition. Proud persons have aspiring thoughts and think
themselves the fittest persons to preside in Church or State. Haman said, whom
should the King honor but my self; a proud person takes it for an injury if
any be preferred before him, though never so deserving; and he bears a secret
grudge to any that had a hand in it, though they did it with the greatest
sincerity and impartiality. None are friends to proud persons, but those that
humor and honor them.

Again, Pride causes Boasting. Hence it is that in two Places of Scripture,
Proud Persons and Bo^sters are put together. A proud person is ever praising
and commending himself, and when he is ashamed to do it by open ostentation,
then he does it by secret insinuation and circumlocution.

Again, it causes Scorning; Disdain of others comes from men's over-valuing of
themselves. Compare two Scriptures; you read, Jam. 4.6. How God has said, that
he resists the proud, but he gives Grace to the humble. Now where has God
said this? You will find it Prove. 3.34. There it is said,, he scorneth the
Scorners, but he gives Grace to the humble. You see the same persons that are
called Scorners in the Old Testament, are called Proud in the New; so that
Scorning is the immediate fruit and effect of Pride.

Again, it causes Lying. Proud persons are great Liars: Most of the Lies and
Falsehoods that are told in the world, are to avoid disgrace and shame, or to
purchase applause and esteem.

Again, it causes Contention. The Scripture is express in this, Prove. 13.10.
Only by pride comes contention; ay, that is the greatest Makebate in the
world, Prove. 28.25. He that is of a proud heart stirs up strife; he is a
very firebrand in the place where he lives; he is like an unpolisht stone, that
will never lie even in any Building.

Again, Pride causes Unthankfulness. Hezekiah's Pride and Ingratitude are
coupled together in Scripture. Proud persons instead of prizing, they despise
the Mercies of God, and think diminutively of them; they look upon God's gifts
as due debts, and instead of being thankful for what they have, they are ready
to think they have not what they do deserve.

Again, it causes Selfishness. Pride makes men prefer themselves not only
before others, but before God himself. Proud persons Idolize themselves; and
make Self their principal End; they love themselves more than God, and they
live to themselves more than to God, they are not so zealous for his honor as
for their own, their Estates and Parts are more at the command of their Pride,
than at the command of God.

Again, it causes carnal Confidence. Proud persons are fearless persons; they
are so persuaded of their own strength, and the goodness of their hearts, that
they can walk in the midst of Snares, and venture upon temptation, and fear no
harm. The fool rages, says Solomon, and is confident. Pride makes men
insensible of their danger till it be too late.

Again, Pride causes Self-deceit. Proud persons think themselves something,
when they are nothing, and so deceive themselves. They take Gifts for Grace,
and the common for the saving works of the Spirit. Presumption goes with them
for Faith, and a little sorrow for Sin is Repentance. They do not distinguish
between the Form and Power of Godliness, betwixt a blockish Stupidity, and true
Peace of Conscience.

Thus I have told you many, but not one half of the evil Effects of Pride; let
me proceed a little farther in this Discovery.

Pride makes men censorious and uncharitable. Proud persons are very prone to
judge and censure others, especially if they differ from them in Opinion; a
little matter will make a proud person to count and call such Hypocrites or
Heretics; he no sooner espies a Mote in their eyes, but he thinks it a Beam;
he would have others to think the best of him, but he himself will think the
worst of others.

Again, it makes men Whisperers and Back-biters. Such are joined by the Apostle
Paul with proud persons. Those who are proud don't only censure others in their
hearts, but they reproach and defame them with their Tongues; they hope by
speaking evil of others, they shall be the better thought of themselves; they
endeavor to build their own Praise upon the Ruins of others Reputation.

Again, it makes men dislikers and haters of Reproof. Proud persons are ready
to find fault with others, but they do not like to hear of their own faults.
Solomon says of a Scorner (that is, a proud person, as ye heard before) that he
does not love one that reproves him; Prove. 15.12.
and in another place he says, that he hates him. Though the Reprover was his
Friend before, yet now he counts him as his Enemy. Herod imprisoned John for
telling him of his Sin, though before he reverenced him.

Again, Pride makes men heretical. One says of Pride, Haereticorum matter
Superbi^, Aug.
that it is the Mother of Heretics. Simon Magus, that great Haeresiarch, was a
very proud man; the Gnostics, the Manichees, the Eunomians were all noted for
Pride; the latter vainly and blasphemously boasted that they knew God as well
as he knew himself. Experience teaches, that if any Infection of Heresy comes
into a place, those that are proud do soonest catch it. Mark those (says one)
that are turned any where from the way of Truth, and see if they were not proud
and conceited persons.

Again, it makes men Separatists and Schismatical. There are such persons
amongst the professing People of God, though all are not such that go by that
Name. These are they (says Jude) that separate themselves. They went out from
us (says the Apostle John) because they were not of us. Proud conceited
Christians are not contented to come out and separate from the unbelieving
Idolatrous world, but they will separate also from the true Church of Christ,
and cast off all Communion with them who hold communion with him; they will say
to those that are holier than themselves, Stand off, for we are holier than
you. Oh, it is Pride that is the chief Cause of all Church-Rents and Divisions.
We may thank Pride for all the Factions and Fractions that are in the Churches
of Christ at this very day.

Again, Pride makes men Hypocrites. It prompts them to put on a Vizard and Mask
of Religion, and to be in appearance what they are not in reality. Proud
persons love the praise of men, more than the praise of God, and therefore they
are more careful to seem religious, than to be so indeed; they more study to
approve their ways to men, than they do their hearts to God.

Again, Pride makes men malicious and wrongful. Proud persons are forward to do
wrong, but backward to bear or endure it; they expect that others should
forgive and bear with them, but they will not forgive or bear with others; they
require an eye for an eye; and render evil for evil, nay sometimes evil for
good.

A proud person cares not whom he wrongs or betrays, so he may accomplish his
own ends, he makes no bones of Falsehood, Slander, Oppression or Injustice, if
he apprehend it necessary to his own honor or ambition.

Again, it makes men Murmurers and Complainers; (...), proud persons find fault
with their Lot, and are discontented with their condition; they think
themselves wiser than God himself, that in some things they could mend what he
does or has done. They suppose they could guide Gods hand, and teach him
knowledge; if they were of his Counsel, they could give him direction for the
better governing of the world in general, and for the better ordering of their
own conditions and concernments in particular.

Again, Pride makes men to slight the Authority and Command of God; Proud
persons don't only oppose their wisdom to Gods wisdom, but their wills also to
Gods will; they not only disobey, but despise the Commandment of God, and say
at least in their hearts (as that proud King) Who is the Lord, Jer. 2.21.
that we should obey his voice? or as those proud ones in Jeremiah, We are
Lords, and will come no more to thee: The Prophet calling the Israelites to
hear and give ear, Jer. 13.15, 17.
he immediately subjoyns, and be not proud; and by and by he adds, If ye will
not hear, my Soul shall weep in secret places for your pride.

Again, it makes persons to establish their own righteousness, and to set that
up in the room of Christ's righteousness. Proud persons will not submit
themselves to the righteousness of God; so it is expressed in the Epistle to the
Romans. God has provided a righteousness for sinners of the Children of men,
such as is every way sufficient to justify and save them, and that is the
righteousness of his Son. What he did and suffered, may by Faith be imputed and
made over to them, as if they themselves had done and suffered it; so that as
by the disobedience of Adam, they were made sinners, by the obedience of Christ
they might be made righteous; and as Christ was made sin for them, so they may
be made the righteousness of God in him. But such is the Pride of man's heart,
that he will not submit to this way of Justification and Salvation; he will not
be beholden to another for that which he thinks he has in himself; he will not
go abroad for that which he thinks he has at home. A proud Sinner sees no need
of a Savior, and thinks he can do well enough without him. Thus I have set
before you two Decads of the evil Effects of Pride; I might have given you as
many more: May all serve to show you the sinfulness of this Sin.

2. Be thoroughly persuaded that this Sin of Pride is in your selves, that Paul
was like to have been caught in this Snare, by means of his being caught up
into the third Heaven. A Christian if he has not a care, may be proud of his
very Humility; it is hard starving this sin, when as there is nothing almost
but it can live upon. But I remember I was too long in the first Direction,
therefore I must be the shorter in this and those that follow.

3. Be much in the Meditation of Death and Judgment. The serious a Vapor that
appears for a little while, and then vanishes away? Augustine doubted whether
to call it mortalis vita, vel vitalis mors, a dying life, or a living death.
One says of man's Life, that it is a little warm Breath turned in and out at the
Nostrils. The Prophet Isaiah tells us, that man's Breath is in his Nostrils and
therefore in nothing is he to be accounted of: And as for this reason man is
not to be accounted of by others, so neither by himself; it is but a little, a
very little while more, and you must be gone hence, and be seen no more; your
Breath goes out, and all your thoughts perish, and you your selves will rot
and perish; and shall rotting and perishing things be proud things? Shall man
be lifted up with what he has, who shortly himself must not be, I mean in this
world? Now you differ it may be, from other men, and are above them in riches
and greatness, in parts and privileges; but two Questions may clip your wings,
and keep you from soaring too high in your own conceits.

1. Who made you to differ? I suppose none of you will say (as one once did)
that you made your selves to differ: you will confess, I hope, that you have
nothing but what you have received, and so there is no room for pride or
glorying therein. If you excel in any gift or grace, you must say of it as he
of his Hatchet, alas, it is but borrowed.

1. How long will there be this difference? Death is at hand, it stands at the
door, and that will level you with those that are lowest. In the grave, whither
we are all hastening, there is no difference of skulls, there the rich and the
poor, the learned and the unlearned do all meet together; the dead bones of men
are not distinguished by the ornaments or abasures of this temporal Life.

As the meditation of Death will be a means to mortify Pride, so will also the
meditation of Judgment. The time will come when you must be accountable unto
God for all you have and do enjoy; all your mercies and enjoyments are but as
so many Talents with which you are entrusted, and for which you must give an
account. You are not owners, but stewards of them, and the time will come when
you must give an account of your Stewardship. So the Apostle Paul concludes,
Romans 14.12. Every man must give an account of himself to God. He must give an
account of himself in his natural capacity, as a man; in his civil capacity, as
a great or rich man; and in his spiritual capacity, as a good or religious man;
he must give an account of all his Receipts, of all his Expenses, what he has
received of God, and how he has laid it out for God. A serious Reflection upon
this one thing, will have a double Effect.

1. It will make you careful.

2. It will keep you humble; you will not easily over-reckon your selves for
any thing, when you consider the reckoning that you must make for all things.

Especially if this be added, that the more you do receive the greater will be
your Reckoning; that is a sure word of our Saviors, Luke 12.48. To whomsoever
much is given, of him much shall be required. When God sows much, he expects to
reap much; he requires not only an improvement of our Talents, but a suitable
and proportionable improvement of them, that they should be doubled, that two
Talents should be be made four, and five Talents ten.

4. Consider the many and great imperfections of your Graces and

1. Consider the imperfections of your Graces. How much water is mingled with
your wine, and dross with your silver, and honeycomb with your honey, how much
greater your ignorance is than your knowledge, your unbelief than your faith;
how the love of the world is as much, if not more than your love of God; if you
were perfect in Grace and Holiness, then you would have no Pride at all; how is
it then that you are so proud and conceited, when Grace is so imperfect? when
you are so short of what is attainable, and of what others have attained?
should that man be proud who has so little love to God and delight in him as
thou have? whose faith and patience, whose holiness and heavenly mindedness is
so little as thine is? Should that man admit of a proud thought, whose Grace
and Holiness is so small, that he is uncertain whether he has any at all in
sincerity? Surely the weakness and imperfection of your Graces should prevent
the Pride and haughtiness of your hearts.

2. Consider the imperfections of your Duties. If you did all that was
commanded, you were but unprofitable Servants; what are you then, when you fall
so short of your duty? you neither do what God commands you, nor as he commands
it to be done. How often are Duties neglected? and how often are they
negligently performed? how listless are you to them? how lifeless in them? how
quickly weary of them? Can they be proud who consider how coldly they pray, how
carelessly they hear, how distractedly they meditate, how grudgingly they give
Alms, and the like? Leave Pride to the Papists, who vainly think their works
are works of supererrogation; let us be humble who know that our works are
works of subtererrogation. God may say of the best of us, as he does of the
Angel of the Church of Sardis, Rev. 3.2.
that our works are not perfect or full before him; oh no! the Lord knows they
are full of gaps and imperfections.

5. Reflect seriously upon the sinfulness of your hearts and lives. Our sinned
as thou have sinned, and lived as thou have lived, and wasted so much time, and
abused so much Mercy, and omitted so many Duties, and neglected so great Means?
that has so grieved the Spirit of God, so violated the Laws of God, so
dishonored the Name of God? Should that man be proud who has such a heart as
thou have? so full of Atheism, Unbelief, Ignorance, Impenitency, Hypocrisy,
Envy, Malice, Discontent, Worldliness, Selfishness, etc. Nay, should not thy
very Pride it self be a matter of great Humiliation to thee? Surely it should
greatly humble thee to think that a sin so odious in it self, so mischievous in
its effects, should be still so predominant in thy Soul? It Is possible that a
Christian may turn his Pride against its self, and his very reflecting upon it,
may be a means of the subduing of it.

etc. The Apostle Paul says, that some knowledge puffs men up, but this pulls
them down. It Is true, by all our searching we cannot find out God unto
perfection, we can never come to a full understanding of all his Excellencies;
but so much may be known of God as may make us to admire him, and to abhor our
selves. What is man, the best of men, in comparison of him? Job sometimes
thought and spoke overvaluingly of himself, but when once he came to compare
himself with God, and to set God before him, then he is presently in the dust,
yea he abhors himself in dust and ashes. Job 42.6.
We never have such low thoughts of our selves, as when we have the clearest
discoveries of God. When the Prophet Isaiah had a glimpse of the Glory and
Holiness of God, he presently cries out, Isa. 6.5.
Woe is me, for I am undone, I am a man of unclean lips. He had a deep sense
upon him of his own vileness and wretchedness. The true reason why men's hearts
are so lofty and lifted up within them, is, because they have not right Notions
and Apprehensions of God, and do not consider that infinite distance that is
betwixt him and them. It might serve a little for the Cure of spiritual Pride,
to compare our selves with such men as are above us; as it is a good means to
keep down discontent, to consider that many others are below us, so it is a good
means to keep down pride, to consider that many others are above us. Our
Knowledge is but Ignorance, our Faith but Unbelief, our Fruitfulness but
Barrenness, if compared with theirs. But this will more subdue our Pride, if we
compare our selves with God, and consider how infinitely he is above us. We are
no more to him, than a drop to the Ocean, than the small dust of the Balance to
the whole Body of the earth; our Wisdom is Foolishness to God, our Strength is
Weakness, and our Holiness is Wickedness unto him.

They must be converted, and become as little Children; in two things
especially they must be as such; in Malice, and in Humility; instead of
contending to be greater than others, they must be servants of all, Mat. 20.27.
Romans 12.10. John 13.14. Mat. 11.29. Col. 3.12. Ephesians. 4.1, 2. Phil. 2.3.
in honor preferring one another. They must follow their Lords Example in
stooping to wash one another feet; and must learn of him to be meek and lowly
in heart. As the Elect of God they must put on bowels of Mercy, and humbleness
of mind. They must walk worthy of the Vocation wherewith they are called, with
all lowliness and long suffering. In lowliness of mind they must esteem others
better than themselves. These are all Scripture-Injunctions, and they plainly
show how all Christians ought to be qualified. Let me add that excellent
Passage, 1 Pet. 5.5. Be all of you subject one to another, and be ye clothed
with humility. The word (...), signifies to tie or fasten together. Humility is
the Ribond or string which ties together the Graces and Fruits of the Spirit;
if that fails, they are all scattered and weakened. Humility as well as Charity,
is the Bond of Perfectness. The Noun (...), from whence the Verb is derived,
does signify a Knot. 'Twas the Usage of old, and so it is still, for persons to
adorn their Heads and other Parts with Knots. The Apostle exhorts Christians to
adorn themselves rather with Humility; that is the great Ornament of a
Christian; therewith all Christ's Disciples must be clothed and adorned: This
renders them comely in the sight of men, yea and in the sight of God too. As the
Ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, so the Ornament of an humble and lowly
spirit is in his sight of great price. Indeed all along this was the great
Requisite in the People of God: The main thing that he required of them, was,
to do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with and before him; so the
Prophet informs us, Mic. 6.8. To do justly, and to love Mercy, that is the Sum
of all Duty to man; to walk humbly, that is the Sum of all Duty to God.

8. Set before your eyes the Examples of humble and lowly Persons.

1. Look upon the most eminent Saints that ever were upon the earth, and you
will find they were most eminent for humility. Jacob thinks himself less than
the least of Gods Mercies. David speaks of himself as a worm, and no man. Agur
says, that he was more brutish than any man. The Apostle Paul says of himself,
1 Timothy 5.15. Ephesians. 3.8.
that he is the chiefest of sinners, and less than the least of all Saints. How
does that great Saint and Apostle vilify and nullify himself? Bradford, that
holy man and Martyr, subscribes himself in one of his Epistles, a very paint^d
Hypocrite. The Apostle Peter said unto our Savior, Depart from me, Luke 5.8.
(...)
for I am a sinful man, O Lord! a man that is a great sinner. Thus the heaviest
ears of Corn do always hang downwards, and so do those Boughs of Trees that are
most laden with fruit.

2. Look upon the Angels of God, the elect Angels, they excel in strength, and
so they do in humility likewise; they readily condescend to minister unto the
Children of men, that are abundantly inferior to themselves, they take charge
of them, and bear them up, as it were in their arms. Are they not all
ministering Spirits, says the Apostle to the Hebrews? The Interrogation is an
Affirmation. The greatest Angels do not disdain to minister to the least
Saints. When they have appeared to men, they have utterly rejected the
reverence they would have shown them, and have openly declared themselves our
fellow servants, that we and they have but one common Lord.

3. Look upon the Lord Jesus Christ himself; he is the great instance of
humility; though he was in the form of God, and thought it not robbery to be
equal with God, yet he was made in the likeness of men, and took upon him the
form of a Servant, and made himself of no reputation; or as the word signifies,
he emptied himself of all his Glory; he sought his Fathers glory, and not his
own; yea, he humbled himself, so as to become obedient unto Death, even the
death of the Cross. The very Incarnation of Christ is condescension enough to
pole both men and Angels; what then was his Crucifixion? When you feel any
Self-exaltation, then remember and reflect upon Christ's Humiliation, and think
how unsuitable a humble Master and a proud Servant is, a humble Christ, and a
proud Christian. This alone, through the Spirit's assistance, is sufficient to
bring down the swelling of the Spirits.

shined into your hearts, and given you the knowledge of his Glory in the face
of his Son Jesus Christ? says Judas, not Iscariot, How is it Lord, that thou
do manifest thy self unto us, and not unto the World? Has he quickened and
saved you from Sin and Death? Say then, By Grace we are saved; not by works of
righteousness which we have done, but according to his Mercy he has saved us
by the washing of regeneration and renewing of the Holy Ghost. Is Grace and
Life preserved and increased which was at first infused into your Souls? give
God the Glory: Say, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but to thy Name be the
praise. Yea, let all Gods outward Dispensations have this operation upon you.
Let Mercies humble you; if God gives you worldly wealth and honor, and lifts
you up above others in Estate or Esteem, say as David, Who are we Lord? and as
Jacob, We are less than the least of thy Mercies. Let Afflictions humble you;
if God lays his hand upon you, then lay your mouths in the dust; if he smites
you upon your backs, do you smite upon your own Thighs. We are called upon in
Scripture to humble our selves under the hand of God. 2 Chro. 33.32.
You read of Manasseh, how when he was in affliction, he humbled himself
greatly before the God of his Fathers. May your Afflictions have the like
effect.

Give thy self to it. If Pride does not hinder Prayer, Prayer will subdue
Pride; and whilst thou art in this Duty, make this one of thy chief Petitions,
that God would cure thee of this evil disease. Some are ready to wonder, why
Prayer in all cases is one of our chief Directions and Prescriptions: they may
as well wonder why Bread in all Meals is one chief part of our Food. Why,
Prayer is the principal thing that calls in God to our Assistance, without
whose help we shall never be able to master the Pride of our hearts. This was
the course the Apostle took, when he was like to be exalted above measure; he
besought the Lord thrice, that is, often; a definite Number for an indefinite,
he did not only pray that God would take the Thorn out of his Flesh, but that
he would also cure the Pride that was in his heart; he knew if the Cause were
taken away, the Effect would cease.

Oh for this do you beseech the Lord again and again; pray, and that earnestly,
that God by his Spirit would help thee to mortify the Pride of thy Spirit; be
humbled as Hezekiah was, for the Pride of thy heart in times past, and pray as
Paul prayed, that God would prevent and cure the Pride of thy heart for time to
come: Desire God to use what Preservatives and Medecines he pleases, so that
the Cure be effected. Beg of God that he would help thee on with this Ornament,
and cloth thee with Humility; he has promised to give Grace to the humble; do
you pray that he would give you the Grace of Humility.

Quest. Wherein is a middle worldly condition most eligible? SERMON XVII.
PROVE. XXX.VIII, IX. Remove far from me Vanity and Lies, give me neither
Poverty nor Riches, feed me with food convenient for me.

Lest I be full and deny thee, and say, who is the Lord? or lest I be poor, and
steal, and take the Name of my God in vain.


MY Text presents you with a short, yet very pithy Prayer of Agur, concerning
whom we have no other account, than what the Holy Ghost gives in verse 1. The
Words of Agur, the Son of Jakeh, even the Prophecy the man spoke unto Ithiel
and Ucal. The Jewish Rabbis would make each of these Names to import some
great Mysteries, an account of which, I do not think to be of such importance,
as to trouble my self or you to search after, but will content my self with the
most vulgar Interpretation, viz. that this Agur was a person contemporary with
Solomon, one eminent for his Wisdom; and that the other two before mentioned
were his Disciples, to whom in the following Instructions he applies himself.

In the second and third Verse, you have his humble acknowledgment of the
meanness of his own natural abilities, and that whatever wisdom he had attained
to, it was not the product of his own industry, but donum desuper, a Gift from
above; Surely I am more brutish than any man, and have not the understanding of
a man, I neither learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge of the Holy.

In the following Verses you have a short, yet very significant confession of
his Faith, and that with respect to God, and Christ the Son of God, displaying
some of his most glorious perfections, by which he infinitely exalted above, as
well as distinguished from all his Creatures, v. 4. Who has ascended up to
heaven, or descended? who has gathered the Wind in his fists? etc. Next
follows an excellent Encomium of Gods Word, that Transcript of the divine
Will, which says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 3.15
is able to make us wise to salvation. v. 5. Every word of God is pure, he is a
Shield unto them that put their trust in him.

The Application of these Instructions you have, v. 6. Add thou not unto his
words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a Liar. Thus have I given you a
brief account of this excellent Sermon; I have not now leisure to acquaint you
either with the importance of the matter, or the Method here used, but shall
proceed to the Prayer that followed this Sermon.

In the Verse before my Text, you have first the Preface, v. 7. Two things have
I required of thee, deny me them not before I die.

In which you have first the Sum of his Requests, Two things. David goes to God
with his single Request; Psalm. 27.4.
One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after: Not but that
David and Agur too doubtless had many things to ask of God, upon whom they
depended for whatever they had in hand or in hope; but that one, or these two
Requests must either be supposed to lie uppermost upon their hearts at this
time; or else that they were such Petitions as were comprehensive of all things
substantially good and necessary. What these two Requests are, and how large
and extensive, might appear, if I had time to give you an account of them in
their due latitude.

2. You may observe the Object to whom he directs his Prayer, viz. to God; Two
things have I required of thee: who for our encouragement in our addresses to
him, has ascribed to himself that Title, to be a God hearing Prayer. Psalm.
65.2^


3. You have the manner of his Address, expressive both of his Faith and
Fervency, two necessary ingredients to an acceptable Prayer.

1. Two things have I required of thee. There is his Faith. To require, is more
than barely to request; it imports a looking and a longing for a thing with
expectation of receiving what is asked. This is the Language of Faith; and the
freedom that Christ has purchased for his People in their approaches to the
Throne of Grace. Ephesians. 3.12.
In whom we have boldness and access with confidence by the faith of him.

2. His Fervency; Deny me not; importing that holy courage, laying hold on God,
as not willing to let him go without a blessing.

4. You have his Constancy and Perseverance in this Duty; Deny me not before I
die; q. d. I intend not to give over calling upon thy Name whilst I have
breath; I Will give thee no rest; I Will never take thy seeming delays for deni^ls.

Here are many profitable Instructions that might hence be collected, did not
the present design of this Exercise hasten me to step forward to the words of
my Text: where you have these two more general Parts.

1. The Requests; the things pleaded for at the hands of God. 2. The Arguments
for the enforcing these Requests.
I. The things pleaded for. Their Number you heard in the foregoing words; Two
things. Here we are acquainted with their Nature.

1. Remove far from me Vanity and Lies. This Petition did primarily respect his
inward man, the Concerns of his Soul. Whenever we are sending Dispatces to
Heaven, spiritual and eternal things should always have the pre-eminence.
Peccata omnis complectitur sub nominibus Vanitatis and Mendacii. Jun.
The things he deprecates are Vanity and Lies. By which (as is conceived) we
are to understand those sinful Soul-Maladies under which he groaned, and unto
which by nature we are wholly addicted and enslaved. This then in short is
expressive of the breathings of his Soul after a freedom from the damning and
domineering Power of his in-dwelling Lusts, that his Sins might be pardoned,
that his Conscience might be purged, that all might be removed far from him
that kept him at a distance from, and interrupted him in his communion with God.

But 2. That Request in which I am at present concerned especially to give you
an account of, is the next; which does more immediately respect his outward
man, and the temporal enjoyments of this transitory Life: These are also the
gifts of God; and though they are the Blessings of the Footstool, Mercies of an
inferior rank, yet, as ^ur Savior tells us, such things, as during our abode
in this lower world, our heavenly Father knows that we have need of. Mat. 6.32.


The Request is this; Give me neither Poverty nor Riches, feed me with food
convenient for me. Which though made up of several Sentences, yet is it but one
single Request.

According to the Order observed in my Text, we must consider,

First, Somewhat that he deprecates and declines, viz. P^^^^^y and Riches.

Secondly, Something for which he supplica^^s, viz. Feed me with food
convenient for me.

1. The things he deprecates, are the two Extremes of a worldly condition;
Poverty on the left hand, Riches on the right.

1. Poverty, I suppo^e you all know, at least in the Notion, what that means,
viz, a N^^^tion or Privation of such things (...) God in the ordinary course of
(...) Providence has m^de nece^^^^y for ^he support of our outward man, or for
our comfortable subsistence in th^^ world, and in that station in which God
has set us. Such as are destitute of necessary supplies for the satisfying of
the cravings of Nature, these we reckon to be truly poor. Such as want Clothes
to co^^^ their nakedness, Bread to satisfy their hunger, that ar^ ^ed (...) an
(...) dependence under God, upon the Char^ty of ot^^^ for their ^aily, bread,
see how they are described, Job 2^ 7, 8 (...) ^^^se the nake^^ (...) lodge
without clothing, they have no cove^ing in the (...) and ^re wet ^ith the
showers of the mountains, and embrace the rock (...) ^ant of a she^^er. These
are ^oor indeed, that have not a Bed to (...), nor a H^^se to hide their heads
in: This is Poverty in the lo^^^ degree; and yet thus low did our blessed
Savior stoop; of whom it is said, he became poor, 2 Cor. 8.9.
that we through his poverty might be made rich. Mat. 8.2. The Foxes have
holes, the Birds of the Air have nests, but the Son of man has not whereon to
lay his head. Those Stars also of the first magnitude, of whom the world was
not worthy, were destitute, afflicted, tormented: Heb. 11.38.
Thus you see what this Poverty is; and had this good man made a full period
here, Give me not poverty, I question not but every one in this Assembly would
readily have subjoyned his hearty Amen.

2. The other Extreme is Riches; neither Poverty nor Riches. Now as Poverty
speaks Penury and Scarcity, so Riches speak Plenty and Superfluity, Psalm.
73.10.
when God causes Waters of a full Cup to be wrung out to us: It Is remarkable
what you find by way of encouragement to a cheerful communicating to the
necessities of the indigent, Luke 6.38. Give, and it shall be given to yo^ --
You shall be no losers by your Charity. Tha^'s somewhat agreeable with that of
Solomon, Eccl. 11.1.
Cast thy bread upon the waters, for thou shall find it after many days; but
that is not all; ^^^e's an insurance of great advantage, viz. good measure,
pressed down, and shaken together, and running over, shall men give into your
bosoms. Giving is one of the best ways for thriving.

But that which I quote this place for, is, to decypher out to you what is
meant by Riches, viz. a plentiful port^on of these worldly accommodations, not
only enough for ^^cessity, but for superfluity; though as I shall show you,
thi^ m^^t be considered with a distinction, that which may denominate one man
rich, may be but a mean or poor estate for another. He would be but a poor
Prince that should have no larger a Revenue t^^^ a ^ic^ ^e^ant.

Thus you see (...) th^^ good man declines; he would not have Poverty nor
Riches, if (...) to his choice; he would not lie so low as the poor, nor yet
sit so h^^^^ as the rich; he would not go naked, or be clad with Rags, nor yet
s^^^mptuous, as to go in Robes.

2. Next follows t^^ ^osit^ve Part of his Request; he would neither have
Poverty nor Ric^es. What then? Why says he, Feed me with food convenient for
me. which R^^^^st is not to be restrained, as if it were only a Petition for a
Supply for the Belly, but as including all temporal and worldly Necessaries, as
that Request in the Lords Prayer; Mat. 6.11.
Give us this day our daily bread. But it is not the quality or particular kind
of temporal Blessings that we are so much concerned to enquire after, as the
quan^ity, how much he begs of the things of this world. Now the consideration
of what has been said of the two Extremes, Poverty and Riches, both which he
declines, will be a sure guide to lead us into the tr^^ m^aning of his Request:
which must certainly be this; neither Poverty nor Riches: what then? Why, a
middle portion; such a condition allotted him by divine Providence, that might
fall between both those Extremes; Food convenient, so we translate it, a
competent or convenient allowance; so much of this world as might raise him
above contempt, and yet not so much, but that he might still be kept below
envy; Statute-bread, so much as the Law of Nature, Necessity and Convenience
allows for the enabling him to discharge his Duty in the place wherein God has
set him. Quicquid ad victum and vitam fovendam and tuendam est necessarium.

Secondly, We should next consider the Arguments upon which he grounds this
Choice: Lest I be full, and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord? or lest I be
poor, and steal, and take the Name of my God in vain.

These Reasons, though they differ in their nature and manner of expression,
yet they center in one and the same thing. Why not Poverty nor Riches? Why a
middle condition between both? The reason is because such a condition is in it
self most subservient to Gods Glory, and our own spiritual and eternal welfare.
It is possible a poor Estate may be best for some, and a plentiful Estate for
others. These may be the Conditions in which some may bring most honor to God,
and most promote the welfare of their better part; but this is accidentally:
otherwise in it self a middle Estate is the most suitable to the carrying on
these high and noble ends.

I should now give a more particular Account of the several Arguments here
specified: I will be brief.

First, Let us a little examine his Plea against Riches; which he declines upon
a double account.

1. Not Riches; Why? Lest I b^^^l and deny thee; q: d. being filled and every
way furnished with variety (...) Creature-enjoyments, swimming in a Sea of
Plenty, and swelled with a fond conceit of my own self-sufficiency and
independency upon any on earth, I should also be induced to disown my
dependency on the God of Heaven. This one would think is a strange Consequence,
Deum irritant confidenter ob summam felicitatem quam largitur iis. Merc. Hos.
13.6.
highly irrational, that a multitude of Benefits should be a means to make us
unmindful of, and disrespectful to our great Benefactor; but so it happens
through the depravity of our Nature, that the better and more bountiful God is
to us, the worse and more forgetful are we prove to be of God; according to
that of the Prophet, According to their pasture, so were they filled; they were
filled, and their heart was exalted, therefore have they forgotten me. Nothing
is more ordinary than to lose a sense of God in a crowd of Creature-enjoyments;
Deuteronomy. 6.11, 12. Deuteronomy. 8.10, 11, 12, 13. Quorsum orarem, aut sacra frequentarem?
Merc. Psalm. 10.14.
as appears by those Cautions of old. When thou shall have eaten and be full,
then beware lest thou forget the Lord, which brought thee forth out of the Land
of Egypt, from the house of bondage. Here is the first evil Consequence;
Atheism in Heart.

2. Next follows Irreligion and Profaneness in Life, and say, who is the Lord?
quid mihi cum illo? What have I to do with God? it is below great men, it suits
not with their Honors to be found upon their knees to God in Prayer, through
the pride of their countenance they will not seek after God.

2. His Argument against Poverty, or least I be poor, and steal and take the
name of my God in vain, here also is a double evil that attends poverty,

1. A Temptation to Thieft, necessity (according to the Proverb) has no Law,
but doubtless it holds not in this, better starve then steal, better undergo
the greatest Suffering, than commit the least sin. God has said, thou shall
not steal, Exo. 20.15.
the obligation of which precept extends it self to poor as well as rich; this
stealing does include all injurious defrauding of others, either more openly or
clandestinely.

2. The second Evil is, taking the Name of God in vain, which in the Letter is
a plain violation of the third Command, and is of large extent, here as is
conceived is mainly intended the sin of Perjury, or swearing falsely; to which
sin poverty exposes those that are necessitous, either for the purging of
themselves, when accused for their Theft, or as hired by others for the
condemning the innocent, -- Quid non mortalia pectora cogit,
Auri sacra fames? --
Having thus given you a short account of the word, viz. the requests, and the
several Arguments with which they are backed, you may readily conclude they
would afford many useful Instructions, but that which is most agreeable to the
scope of the whole, and best suits with my present purpose, and the design of
this Exercise, I shall give you in this single Proposition.

Observe. That a middle Estate or Condition in the World, Observe.
upon rational and religious grounds is most eligible for a man as such, with
respect to this Life; or for a Christian as such, designing the happiness of
another Life.

Before I come to a particular discussion and resolution of the Case
propounded, I shall premise a few particulars for the better opening this
Petition of Agur, and the main matter in hand.

1. Propos. That God has the absolute disposal of all men as to their Estates
and Conditions in the World, the rich and the poor meet together, Prove. 22.2.
the Lord is the Maker of them all, he is not only the Creator of their
persons; but the orderer and framer of their Conditions: Agur's Prayer was
bottomed upon this Faith, that Poverty was Gods gift as well as riches, this
Lesson Job had well learned, which was one great means by which he attained
that equanimity in his different State, and learned so well how to abound and
how to be in want, the Lord gave, Job 1.21.
the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord, though both poverty
and riches may be handed to us by various means; yet still all things come
under a divine disposure; Isa. 41.23.
Creatures do good or evil as Ministers of Gods will, and not as merely acted
by their own: riches as truly as grace and glory are the Gifts of God, Prove. 10
22.
without whose blessing all our endeavors after them will be to no purpose.
Poverty also is the Gift of God, by what visible ways soever it overtakes us,
God is the principal Agent, and his hand is to be acknowledged in taking from
us, as well as in giving to us, admit, that wicked men, the Sons of violence,
are let loose upon us to the spoiling our good, yet God is to be eyed. Isa.
42.24.
Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers? did not the Lord, he
against whom we have sinned; nay when men's Estates become a Sacrifice to their
own lusts, their pride and prodigality, their profuseness and debauchery; yet
even here, God is to be owned, who in a way of righteous judgment gives up men
to be devoured by their own corruptions.

2. Propos. God in his various Dispensations of the good and evil things of
this World, acts not only as an absolute Sovereign; but according to the rules
of his own most infinite wisdom; and as best suites, and may be most
subservient to his own purpose, what may most conduce to his own glory, and the
good and weal of his own people, 104. Ps. 24. O Lord how manifold are thy
works! in wisdom have thou made them all, which works of God are not to be
limited to those of Creation, but also of Providence; hence we are not to
understand Agurs Prayer; as if he did take upon himself, or by his example to
encourage us, to direct or dictate to God, how he should order out his
Condition for him in the World absolutely, that had been high presumption; no,
it must therefore be understood with submission to divine wisdom and good
pleasure.

3. Propos. No outward Condition in the World that men can be brought into,
has any influence upon God, so as to render us more or less acceptable to him,
are we never so poor and low, as poor as Job, as we proverbially speak, this
may lessen our respect amongst men, who in this respect are too prone to judge
of things according to outward appearance, Jam. 2.2, 3.
a Crime severely censured by the Apostle, if one come into their Assembly with
a Gold ring in goodly Apparel, and at the same time a poor man in vile raiment;
they had respect to him that wears the gay Clothing, etc.

Hospinian reports, That the Dogs that kept Vulcans Temple, the same which
others say of the Bohemian Curs, that they would fawn upon one in fine clothes,
but fly upon one in rags, but whatever influence these things may have upon
men, they have none upon God, Job. 36:19, will he esteem thy riches? no, not
Gold, nor all the forces of strength; it is not Titles of Honor, nor bags of
Gold, that will bribe him, who is the Judge of all the Earth; none of these will
avail in the day of wrath, and as riches will not help, Prove. 11.4.
so neither will our poverty hinder our acceptance with, or our finding favor
from God.

4. Propos. One and the same condition in the World is not alike desirable or
eligible to all men, under all Circumstances, nor to the same men at several
times; or as placed by God in several Stations, a poor and mean condition may
be best, and most desirable for some men under some Circumstances; some are
naturally so addicted to pride, to be puffed up by a confluence of Creature
enjoyments; or are so prone to mal^ce and revenge, to tread and trample upon
all over whom they can get advantage, that it is even best for them and others
too, when such cursed Cows have short borns. Eccles. 5.13.
Solomon tells us, there is a sore Evil, which I have seen under the Sun,
namely, riches kept for the owners thereof to their hurt, many men have an
Estate thrown in upon them, that they had better have been without, proving to
the hurt of themselves and others; it had been well for Hazael Benhadads
servant, if he had kept his station, and never ascended the throne of his
Master, as the Prophet intimated to him, 2 Kings 8.12, 13. Those venomous lusts
might have been so far stifled in the Embrio, as never to have come abroad to
have done so much mischief in the World, nor brought that ruin at last upon
himself, had they not been cherished by the warm Sun shine and ho^ gleams of
those prosperous advancements, to which he was exalted by his being King of
Syria.

On the other hand a rich, plentiful and prosperous Condition may be best for
some; those whose hearts are enlarged with spiritual endowments, and so well
poised and balanced by grace, that they thereby are not only able to manage a
prosperous gale with humility, and without the hazard of being overset with
self-conceit of themselves, but be very helpful and beneficial thereby unto
others, making friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, Luke 16.9.
and as Gods Stewards destributing the Talents with which they are betrusted,
according to the will of their Lord, to whom they are shortly to give up their
account, when Greatness and Goodness meet together in the same person, it
carries much of the resemblance of God, who is optimus maximus; but further,
one and the same condition is not always best for one and the same person; as
he may stand in a different station, or be under different circumstances: Hence
that of the Apostle, Jam. 1.9.
Let the Brother of low degree rejoice in that he is exalted, but the rich in
that he is made low.

Poverty and Riches come both from God, and I question not but some men who
have been rich, have had more cause to bless God, that of rich, they have been
made poor, than others have, who of poor, have become rich. Oh how many have
cried out periissem nisi periissem.

These things being premised, I Will come more directly to the Observation; which
with these forementioned Provisoes stand firm; That a middle worldly condition,
that which you have heard lies between those two Extremes, Poverty and Riches,
expressed here by Food convenient, is in it self, upon Rational and Religious
grounds most eligible to a man, as such, as respecting this life; or a
Christian, as such, with respect to the happiness of another life.

In the handling of this Point, I shall speak to two things briefly.

1. Somewhat a little more particularly, for the Explication of the Subject of
this Proposition, viz. What this middle worldly condition is: or wherein it
consists.

2. I shall then show you wherein or upon what ground this may be adjudged the
most eligible and desirable estate, both for a man, as such, or for a
Christian, as such; and so conclude the whole with a little Application.

First, For the determination of the Subject of this Proposition, where indeed
the greatest difficulty lies; this Food convenient, which as you have heard, is
of the same importance with Daily Bread, denoting a competency of outward good
things, this middle state between Poverty and riches, must be considered with a
threefold respect.

1. With respect to a man's personal and private capacity, as a single person.

2. With respect unto a man's relative capacity; as he may be concerned to take
care for others, as well as make provision for himself.

3. With respect unto a man's being placed in a higher or more public Station,
as Magistracy or Ministry,

Now that proportion of these outward things, which may be looked upon as a
competency for one, will not be so esteemed for all, under these various
Considerations.

1. Consider a man in his private and personal capacity, and so a lesser
quantity of the things of this Life may be looked upon as a competency; so much
as will afford him Food and Raiment. This was that which Jacob did desire of
God; upon the account of which, he did more strictly oblige himself to the Lord
in a way of gratitude.

Genesis 28.20, 21. Jacob vowed a vow, saying, if God will be with me, and keep me
in this way that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on, so
that I come again to my Fathers House in peace, then shall the Lord be my God.

This If is not to be understood as importing his diffidence, or any distrust
in Gods Providence; this could not be, when he had so lately received a
gracious promise of divine protection and provision, v. 15. Behold I am with
thee, and will keep thee in all places whither thou go, etc. Much less is it
to be looked upon as a condition, as if he would indent with God upon these
terms, or otherwise that he would quit his interest in God, and throw off his
Service; no such matter; but only a Note of Order or Inference, whereby from
the consideration of Gods Care to be taken of him, he should thence bind
himself more firmly to him in ways of Faith and Obedience. But that which I
make use of this place for, is to illustrate this competency that he had in his
eye as to worldly matters; Food and Raiment. He tells us not what kind of Food,
he speaks not a word of Delicacies, or Varieties, to please his Palate: So
Raiment, not gorgeous Apparel, no Silks nor Sattins, only Food and Raiment,
such as might be wholesome and convenient for the cravings of Nature, and that
might cover his nakedness, and secure him from the injuries of the weather; and
truly a little of this world will serve here. Grace and Nature will be
contented with a little. With this the Apostle consents; 1 Timothy 6.8. Cibus and
potus sunt divitiae Christianorum. Hierom.
Having food and raiment, let us be therewith content; (...), as Isidore
speaks; Food, not Sweetmeats; Raiment, though without ornament: And indeed
food and raiment is all upon the matter this world affords; other things are
but superfluous, tending more to delight than necessity; which without
spiritual wisdom, prove great hindrances, rather than helps to a happy
Eternity. Now wherein a competency lies here, is obvious to every capacity.

2. We will consider a man with respect to his relative Capacity. One whom the
Law of God and Nature has obliged to take care of and make provision for
himself and others too. Thus Parents, Masters, and Heads of Families, and these
of different sizes, call for a distinct consideration as to the stating of a
competency for them. The Apostle has put a black brand upon those who are
(...), Romans 1.31. Expertes charitatis vel nativae pictatis. Scult.
without natural affection. And elsewhere it is represented as monstrous, 1 Timothy 5.8. If any provides not for his own, and specially for those of his own
house, he has denied the Faith, and is worse than an Infidel. In this case a
larger quantity of worldly accommodations is requisite to constitute a
mediocrity, than there is for a single person; so much as is necessary for the
present comfortable subsistence of a man and his house, nay, so much as is
convenient for a future necessary provision for Children that may survive their
Parents, 2 Cor. 12.14.
whereby they may be preserved from a necessary dependence upon the Charity of
others.

3. Lastly, We must consider a man as placed by God in a public capacity,
whether of Magistracy or Ministry; and in this case also more is requisite to
constitute a middle State, than for those whom Providence has set in a lower
Orb. The Rule by which a mediocrity in such a capacity, must be determined, is
so much as may be necessary to discharge those Offices and great Trusts to
which they are called. Magistrates, especially chief Magistrates, such as have
the Care of Kingdoms and Commonwealths upon them, it is supposed a liberal
share is necessary for them; and that for the keeping up that external Grandeur
that belongs to their places, and to defray the Charges of that great work
incumbent upon them; which cannot be done but by many hands, which must be not
only employed but rewarded by them. And for Ministers, whom God has called to
that honorable Work of winning Souls, 1 Timothy 4.13, 15.
in order to which they are enjoined to give attendance to reading, to
exhortation, to doctrine, and to meditate upon these things, and give
themselves wholly to them, that their profiting may appear to all. So much is
supposed to be necessary for a competency for them, as may free them from
worldly distractions, Acts 6.2, 4.
and that they be not necessitated to serve Tables: Yet does not this either
justify Magistrates in the unreasonble Exactions or Oppressions of their
People, peeling and polling them, for the maintaining of their Pride and
Luxury; contrary both to divine Precept and Pattern. The Precept you have,
Deuteronomy. 17.16, 17. He shall not multiply Horses to himself, nor cause the People
to return to Egypt, to the end that he should multiply Horses, etc. Neither
shall he multiply Wives to himself, that his heart turn not away; neither shall
he greatly multiply to himself Silver and Gold: And for a Pattern, take good
Nehemiah, Nehem. 5.15. The former Governors that had been before me, were
chargeable unto the People, and had taken of them Bread and Wine, beside forty
Shekels of Silver, yea even their Servants bare rule over the People; but so
did not I, because of the fear of God.

Neither will this vindicate Ministers, 1 Timothy 3.3. (...). Not a lover of
Silver.
by what Titles soever they are dignified or distinguished, to be greedy of
filthy Lucre or Covetous, not grasping at worldly wealth, exalting themselves
with external Pomp and Grandeur, who are to be examples of Humility, Meekness,
and Lowliness to the Flocks over which God has made them Overseers; 1 Pet. 5.3.
thus to Lord it over Gods Heritage with high swelling Titles, and a Train of
Attendants, may suit well enough with the Ministers of Antichrist, 2 These. 2.4.
who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped; but is very unbecoming those who profess themselves to be the
servants of a meek and a lowly Jesus.

Having thus showed you in what respects we are to judge of a Mediocrity, or
middle worldly condition, I proceed to show you wherein this condition is the
most eligible and desirable, and this both upon Rational and Religious Grounds.
Only one thing remember, that when I am recommending a middle state in the
world, it must be supposed, that there is no worldly condition that can be
proposed as so desirable, but what has its adherent Vanities; as has
excellently been declared in this Morning-Exercise from another Subject. Who
knows what is good for man in this life, Eccl. 6.11, 12.
all the days of his vain life which he spends as a shadow?

To which let me add further, Neither is there any condition so formidable, but
what may by the Grace of God influencing the Heart, be improved for holy and
happy purposes; and yet so far as seems suitable to sound Reason, as also
Scripture-Revelation, a middle worldly estate is most eligible; and that,

1. For a man considered as such, with respect to his short passage through
this world; still this is to be understood with submission to divine pleasure.
Let us look upon man as a Creature placed by God to act a Part upon the Stage
of this world for a few years, and then to have his Exit; and thus think upon
him abstracted from all considerations of a future state. Could it be supposed
that those Expressions of Solomon, were to be construed in the Epicures or
Atheist's sense, That that which befalls the Sons of men, befalls Beasts, even
one thing befalls them; Eccl. 3.19, 20.
as the one dies, so dies the other; yea they have all one breath, etc. all
go into one place. This were good News to those wretches that spend their
precious Time in the contempt of God, and neglect of their Souls, if the words
were to be understood without a limitation: But the following Verse spoils all
their Mirth, V. 21. Who knows the spirit of a man that goes upward, and the
spirit of the beast that goes downward to the earth? A clear Testimony of the
immortality and surviving of the Soul in a future state. But suppose man as
making a short through-fare from the Womb to the Tomb, and so a middle
condition is most eligible; and that, 1. With respect to his Mind. 2. With
respect to his Body.


1. With respect to the Mind, a middle state is most eligible, as tending to a
greater sedateness and tranquillity; and freeing it from many distractions, and
manifold anxieties, that are the natural concomitants of both the forementioned
Extremes of Poverty and Riches.

1. As for Poverty, it is obvious to every eye. (especially if it be extreme.)
O what daily Tortures and wracking thoughts, what solicitous cares the mind of
man under such circumstances is exposed to! and that for the getting of such
Provision as is necessary to satisfy the cravings of Nature, whose cries and
clamors are loud and troublesome, impatient and querulous; not a day, nor
scarce an hour, but the mind is put upon the contriving an answer to those
repeated Queries, what shall I eat? and what shall I drink? and wherewith shall
I be clothed?

Nor, 2. Is the mind ever a whit the more at ease, by being brought into the
other Extreme of Riches, as through our folly we are apt to imagine. Oh: says
the poor man, could I but compass such an Estate; could I get such a Bank of
Money into my Coffers, then I should be satisfied: but alas, this is a grand
Mistake; for though Riches stop the mouth, and satisfy the cravings of Nature,
yet do they open the ^ouths, and enlarge the cravings of so many devouring
Lusts, that the rich man, where his heart is not renewed by Grace, is less at
quiet, and fuller of disturbance than the poor. Sometimes his Pride, sometimes
his Pleasure, sometimes his Covetousness, and sometimes a whole Kennel of Lusts
are let loose upon him, that eats out all that comfort and sweetness which
otherwise might result from his plentiful Enjoyments; whenas a middle condition
in the world, though it is far from giving any true rest to the mind of man,
(that being the peculiar property of God, and an interest in him to do) yet
does it free a man much from those disquiets before mentioned; for though a man
in this estate, may be supposed to have the same disturbing and devouring
Lusts, yet are they kept much under a restraint, not having that fuel to feed
them, which Riches afford, and which are of that nature, that the more they are
used, the more insatiable they are in their cravings.

2. A middle worldly Estate to a man, as such, is better than either of the
Extremes, with respect to the Body; and that as it is a condition that has a
greater tendency to its health, and preventing manifold Diseases and
Infirmities, to which it is liable whilst in this lower world. It Is true, all
Sicknesses and bodily Distempers, that are either afflictive or destructive to
man's Body, are at the dispose of God, in whose hands are all our times: He
kills, and he makes alive; he wounds, Deuteronomy. 32 39.
and he heals: He says to them as the Centurion to his Servants, go, and they
go; come, and they come; do this, and they do it: Mat. 8.9.
So that our Lives and Healths have no absolute dependence upon secondary
Causes; yet it must be acknowledged in the ordinary way of his Pro^idence, he
dispences the weal or woe of the Body by external means.

Now 1. As to Poverty; how many visible hazards do those that are poor run as
to their Health? and how many ways do bodily Infirmities beset them? Sometimes
through the want of these Creature-accommodations, that God in the ordinary way
of his Providence has made necessary for the upholding of the Fabric of
Nature, and repairing its dilapidations to which it is incident for want of
supplies. Little do you think, who sit down at your well spread Tables, how many
of your poor Brethren would be glad of your Fragments; whose Lamp of Life
dwindles away sometimes for want of Oil to feed it; besides excessive Heats and
Colds contracted by their Labors and Pains that they are at to fill their
bellies, and cover their nakedness; as also unwholsom Diet, and many times not
enough of that neither.

2. As to Riches, these are so far from preventing these bodily Infirmities,
that commonly they hasten and heighten them; proving temptations to those who
are destitute of Gods Grace, to sloth and idleness; upon the account of which
the Body, like a standing Pool, contracts filth and mud, so the Body gross
humors, to its great prejudice; especially hereby is occasioned Intemperance
and Excess in eating and drinking, which proves not only pernicious to the
Soul, but also destructive to the ^ealth of the Body: as Erasmus speaking of
the Epicures of his days, makes this Remark, Dum invitant ad coenam, efferunt
ad sepulchrum. How many fresh instances might be produced, wherein it might
appear that many have so long drank Healths to others, that they have drank
away their own; whilst a middle worldly condition tends to the preventing many
of those evils by which the Body as well as the Soul suffers. But I hasten to
the second Head of Arguments.

Secondly. A middle worldly condition is most eligible to a man as a Christian,
and as designing the happiness of the other world; as it is most subservient to
the living to God here, and living with God hereafter. This (my Brethren) if we
be in our right minds, is and ought to be the main scope and business of our
Lives. Hence that worldly condition that may rationally be judged most
conducing to that end, is doubtless the most eligible.

Now that a middle state (considering our present Circumstances, viz. those
internal depravities with which we are infected) is the most desirable, I shall
endeavor to evince.

This world and the time allotted for our abode here* is the time for our
acquainting our selves with God, Job 22.21.
that we may be at peace, and that all good may come unto us, all the good that
God has promised, and that Christ has purchased. Now that condition that may
afford most helps, and fewest hindrances to this great Business, is certainly
the most eligible condition. I have only this to premise by way of Caution,
that there is no condition in the world so well circumstantiated, that can be
so dispositive of us to our future happiness, but that without the Almighty and
outstretched Arm of Sovereign Grace, we shall still be left in a lost and
perishing condition; yet we do affirm there are some conditions in the world,
that though they are not in the least auxiliary to God, (who works in us to
will and to do, Phil. 2.13.
and that of his good pleasure) yet are they (if wisely managed) advantageous
unto us, for our improving those helps, by which God is pleased to communicate
his Grace to us. In this respect the Apostle prefers a single before a married
condition. He that is unmarried, cares for the things that belong to the Lord,
how he may please the Lord; 1 Cor. 7, 32, 33, 34.
but he that is married, cares for the things that are of the world, how be
may please his Wife, etc. By which the Apostle shows the advantage in some
respects, that the single person has beyond those who are married, in the
Service of God; so also a middle condition seems to have the advantage of both
the forementioned Extremes; and this will be more evident, if we consider that
there are three things prerequisite, and necessarily to be minded by us in
order to our future happiness.

1. A right and orderly entering into the way of salvation by the door of sound
Regeneration and Conversion.

2. A Progress in that way, by a holy and heavenly Conversation.

3. A Perseverance in that way of Faith and Holiness to the end, against all
internal or external opposition.

Now a middle worldly condition appears both from Rational and Scripture
accounts to be the most subservient unto all these.

1. Such as ever truly design to enter into Heaven when they die, must get into
the way that leads thither whilst they live. Mat: 7.13, 14.
Now every way has an entrance that leads to it. The entrance into this way is
by the Door of Regeneration: So our blessed Savior plainly tells us, John 3.3.
Verily, verily I say unto you, except a man he born again, he cannot see the
Kingdom of God. And what this new Birth imports, you may find, v. 5. Except a
man be born of Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
God. To which I might add many parallel places. Mat. 18.3.
Except ye be converted, and become as little Children, ye shall not enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven: No Conversion, no Salvation. Now that Condition in the
world from whence results the fewest Hindrances, and the most Helps for our
entrance in at this strait Gate, is doubtless the most eligible; and this a
middle state does.

Beloved, Conversion and Regeneration is a mighty work, whatever the world
think of it. The Mind must be enlightened, the Conscience must be awakened, the
Will must be inclined, the Affections must be spiritualized, and the Grace by
which all these Operations must be effected, as it comes from God, so is it
ordinarily conveyed to us through those outward Means which he has instituted
for that end; on which God requires our constant and conscientious Attendance,
such as Prayer, Reading and Hearing the Word read and preached. These are the
Posts of Wisdoms Gates, where we are bound to wait. Prove. 8.34.
These are the healing Waters at which we must lie, if ever we expect the Cure
of our Soul-maladies. In a word, these are the ordinary Means by which God
conveys his Spirit, that unites the Soul to Christ, Gal. 3.3.
and thence communicates the first formations of Spiritual Life.

Now a middle worldly Estate is the most subservient (considering our corrupt
state) both as to our attendance upon, and diligent improvement of these
external Helps, in order to Gods conveying his Grace to us.

1. Take a man under that Extreme of Poverty, one that is forced either to beg,
or earn his daily Bread before he eats it, and withal consider him as in his
natural state, dead in sins and trespasses, and without any serious sense of
the inestimable worth of his Soul, or weight of Eternity. Alas, how easily are
such, from the sense of their poverty drawn either to a total neglect of the
^eans of Grace, or to a careless superficial attendance upon it? Does not
experience tell us, that the pinching necessities of the Body easily induce
them to conclude, that they must have Bread for themselves and Families; What,
say they, we must live, we must not starve; but consider not in the mean time,
that there is a far greater Must for their Souls, that they must have their
sins pardoned, that God must be reconciled, that they must have Christ and his
Grace, and that their Natures must be changed, and their sins subdued, or else
verily they must to Hell, where they will not be allowed so much as a drop of
water to cool their Tongues; Luke 16.24.
and in order to this, that they must find time to pray, read and hear Gods
Word; and they must meditate, and take pains to acquaint themselves with the
matters of their Souls. But alas, the feeling of their bodily wants have got a
prepossession, and stand as a strong guard to keep out every such serious
thought from entering into their minds; and if at any time they thrust in upon
them, how quickly are they ejected? and the poor man is apt to think, if he
does not speak it out, that whatever may be the duty of his Betters, as he
calls them, yet he presumes he may be excused, and that he has a sufficient
Apology to live without minding such matters, having so many worldly Cares and
Concerns upon him. These and such like are too frequently the prevailing
Suggestions of those who are under that Extreme of Poverty.

Well, but then 2. Let us consider the other Extreme, and look to the Rich; and
here let me use the words of the Prophet, Jer. 5.4, 5. Therefore I said, surely
these are poor, they are foolish; for they know not the way of the Lord, nor
the judgment of their God. I will get me unto the great men, and will speak
unto them; for they have known the way of the Lord, and the judgment of their
God: But alas, see what Return is made upon this Inquest: Why, he tells you,
These have altogether broken the yoke, and burst the bond,

Poverty has many hindrances, but Riches through the horrible sensuality of
man's Heart, has more; as our Savior intimates. Verily I say unto you, Mat.
19.23, 24.
that a rich man shall hardly enter into the Kingdom of heaven. And again I say
unto you, it is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a Needle, than for
a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; not that Riches in themselves
are any impediment to true and serious Godliness: but only by reason of the
depravity of our Natures, that cleave so fast, and are so closely wedded to,
and lifted up with things here below; Vermis divitiarum est Superbia. Aug.
Pride being the Worm that naturally breeds in Riches. It Is a hard matter to
be high and humble. Great and rich men are easily drawn to a neglect and
contempt of the Means of Grace, and to imagine that it is beneath their
grandeur to have the worship of God in their Families; or at best, Difficile
est ut praesentibus bonis quis fruatur and futuris, ut de Jdeliciis ad delicias
transeat, Hier.
that it is more proper for their Chaplains to manage than themselves: these
are too great to be dealt plainly with about the Concerns of their Souls, and
are apt to think Nathan was a little too bold, when he said to King David, Thou
art the man, 2 Samuel 12.7. I must profess when my thoughts have been taken up
with such Objects, they have been so far from being envied by me, that of all
conditions of men in the world, I have looked upon them as the Objects of the
greatest pity: I mean such great and rich ones, whose wealth and honor is
employed as a shield to defend them against the faithful monitions of such as
are lovers of, and well wishers to immortal Souls. Hereby their lusts are
secured, and their Souls exposed to eminent danger: Besides, how open do they
lie to such Soul-destroying Opinions, viz. that there neither is, nor need any
other than an external baptismal Regeneration, and that we are all Christians
good enough by our natural, and no necessity of any new Birth, and that a
little outward Reformation will secure us, though we never mind
heart-renovation; and if men will not preach and prophecy such smooth things,
they shall not by their consent prophecy at all; like those of old, who say to
the Seers, see not, Isa. 30.10.
and to the Prophets, prophecy not; speak unto us smooth things, prophecy
deceits. In a word, when a sinner is converted, and brought home to God, the
Heart must be searched and ransacked, his false hopes, and sandy foundations,
upon which they are built, must be battered down; Pride and Self-confidence
must be brought low, and a man must become as a little Child. Now though our
hearts are all of us opposite to this work, Mat. 18.3.
and nothing short of omnipotent Grace can thus bring the heart to stoop, that
it may enter in at this strait Gate that leads to life; yet Greatness and
Riches in the world through the corruption of man's Nature, does much magnify
the opposition that is made against God on this account: but now a middle state
in the world is exempted from these additional hindrances, Neither has the
Flesh nor the Devil that advantage to obstruct this work of Regeneration, that
either of the other Extremes have.

2. Another Requisite to our eternal happiness, is a progress in this way of
Life, by maintaining an holy and heavenly conversation. God has said, let who
will or dare contradict it, Heb. 12.14. Follow peace with all men, and
holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord. This Holiness of heart and
Life consists in our fiducial dependence upon Gods Promises, and in a sincere
and hearty respect to all Gods Precepts, in the making the Word of God our
Rule, and the Glory of God, with the Salvation of our Souls, our main and
ultimate end; and this in the whole course of our Lives and Conversations. This
is that Trade of Godliness in which we must be exercising our selves whilst we
live, if we design to be really happy when we die. Now a middle worldly
Condition, considering our present Case, is the most advantageous, and has the
fewest hindrances for our driving on with success this Trade.

1. A man under the Extreme of Poverty, destitute of necessary Provisions for
the supply of this Life, and yet suppose him a godly man; Psalm. 37.25.
such a Supposition may be made, though David tells us, I have been young, and
now am old, yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his Seed begging
Bread. From whence some (though I judge upon a mistake) would conclude, that
extreme Poverty, so as to be reduced to Beggary, is a Condition that God never
exposes his Children to. But thus to say, would doubtless be a condemning of
the generation of the righteous (one thing which God abhors) some of whom in
all Ages have been brought to such great straights, that they have been
necessitated to beg or starve. And we read of some, that were (...), Heb. 11.37.
destitute, afflicted, tormented, of whom yet the world was not worthy. So that
I rather approve of that Sense of the foregoing Text, which confines it either
to David's Experience in his time, or rather to lay the Emphasis of the Matter
upon the Word forsaken. When Paul gives us a Catalogue of his Distresses, he
puts in this as an alleviation of his Troubles. 2 Cor. 4.9. Psalm. 37.24.
Persecuted, but not forsaken; which Sense also suits best with the Context;
Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down; for the Lord upholdeth him
with his hand.

Now supposing a Child of God under the Extreme of Poverty, though de jure this
ought not, yet de facto it does prove very prejudicial to this Trade of
Godliness; and this many times several ways; sometimes it does necessitate them
to absent themselves from those outward means, and those Soul quickening
Opportunities which others enjoy, whereby their hearts might be kept up warm
and lively for God. Are there not many at this day (whilst you can spare so
much time as to come hither in a morning to gather up this heavenly Manna that
falls at your doors) who are forced (poor hearts) to be hard at their Labors,
and that to get Necessaries for themselves and Families. Sometimes (though that
is sad I confess) are they overpowered by temptations to use indirect means for
the relieving their wants; which upon a review, make sad work in their
Consciences, and set them many degrees back in the way of holiness.

Sometimes they are so dispirited with the weight of their Burdens, that they
are almost totally incapable of doing any thing in their general or particular
Callings, not knowing how to pray, nor how to work, Oh the Temptations that
such poor Souls are under to Distrust, to Murmuring and Repining, to
Unthankfulness and Discontent; every of which are very prejudicial to the life
of Holiness.

2. Consider the other extreme, riches. Suppose a man to be great, and (in the
main) good and godly too; a rarity; but withal a singular blessing to the ages
and places in which they live; alas, how difficult is it for such to thrive in
Godliness, when they are under the bright rays of worldly prosperity! do we not
too often sind, that riches prove to a godly man, what the Ivy does to the Oak?
which indeed may seem to adorn it, and set it forth more speciously to the eye
of the beholder but sucks out that sap and nourishment, that should feed and
nourish the tree, and if not timely looked to, may endanger its life; few, if
any have been the better for their being rich; but too many have been the
worse. What Temptations are such daily encountering with, to carnal pleasure
and sensuality, to sloth and fleshly ease, to pride and ambition, all which so
far as they are indulged prove to the detriment of serious religion, how apt
are such to be flattered? nay even by good men to be cried up as none such in
their age, if they speak but now and then a few good words, and show a little
countenance to religion; when upon a strict view it may be, they have very
little (if any thing at all) of the power of godliness; which have given
occasion to that unhappy saying that a little Religion goes a great way with
great men, whenas in truth that which might pass for great Religion in persons
of an inferior condition, should be esteemed but little in those, whom God has
fixed in a higher orb, and so are under greater Obligations from God, and in a
greater capacity of bringing more honor unto God.

3. Another requisite to our eternal felicity is not only a progress, Finis
coronat opus. Mat. 10.22. Rev. 2.10. Heb. 10.38.
but a perseverance in the way of Faith and holiness to the end, and that
against all Temptations and Oppositions from within or from without, he that
endures to the end shall be saved, and be thou faithful to the death, and I
will give thee a Crown of Life; again, if any man draw back, my soul shall have
no pleasure in him.

From all which you may conclude the necessity of Perseverance to salvation:
Now though a security from final and total Apostasy is the undoubted privilege
of Gods Elect, and truly called ones, 1 Pet. 1.5:
such shall be kept by the power of God through Faith unto salvation; yet such
may, and many times do in an hour of Temptation (such an hour as this is in
which God has cast our lot) fall foully; to the great dishonor of God, and
discredit of their profession, to the hardening the wicked in their sin, and
wounding of their own souls, and to the interrupting their peace, and
comfortable Communion with God; many Christians may, and do fall to the
breaking of their bonds; and like Eutychus, who f^ll from the third Loft, and
was taken up for dead, though Paul told them, Acts 20.9, 10. 1 Samuel 4.18.
trouble not your selves, for his Life is in him; but they shall never fall as
Ely did: Of whom it is said he fell backward to the breaking of his neck, and
the loss of his Life; now a middle condition in the world affords fewer
Temptations to Apostasy than either of the extremes.

As 1. Poverty: Suppose a person truly godly in a poor and low condition in the
world, and thence by consequence, having a necessary dependence upon others for
his livelihood* if now Providence so orders it, that those persons on whom he
thus depends prove Enemies to God, and the power and life of Religion (O that
there were no reason for such suppositions) what Temptations are those poor
ones under to abate their zeal for God, and first to conceal their profession,
and possibly afterward to deny and disown those ways, which Conscience tells
them are the ways of God: and this in compliance with their Masters; fearing
else the loss of their favor and worldly advantages enjoyed from them. I must
(say such poor ones) if I do not alter my course expect no more relief, and
then my work will be gone, I shall have no more credit; and so I had even as
good shut up my shop, and shut up my mouth too; nay, I may fear not only a
suspension of what kindness, I have received, but of a friend, he will become
my Enemy, and then how easily may I and mine be crushed? Oh my friends! How
cogent such Arguments have been of late with many to do things contrary to
their Judgments, and to go against the plain Dictates of their own Consciences,
to decline their Professions; and so to make work for repentance; may easily be
imagined, but not readily sufficiently be lamented.

2. Let us consider the other extreme, Riches; and one would think at first
blush, that these should be a mighty Bulwork, and a strong preservative against
Apostasy; but constant experience teaches the contrary. Wealth and Honor have
been a mighty snare even to the people of God themselves in an hour of
Temptation; it is a great self (my beloved) that great men are called sometime
to deny for the sake of Christ and his Gospel; and oh how hard is this to be
done? how apt are such to study distinctions to evade their duty, and palliate
their sin? when the performance of the one, and forbearance of the other, may
hazard the loss of a great Estate; but now a middle Condition in the World does
not so violently drive men upon those rocks and quicksands, upon which both the
poor and the rich are liable so often to make shipwreck of faith and a good
Conscience, and thus have I given you a brief resolution of the case to be
discussed this day, and having spoken what my time would allow me in the
doctrinal part, it remains, that I should make a little Application.

USE.
The 1. Use shall be by way of caution; you have heard a middle worldly
Condition is most desirable, and this upon several rational considerations,
have a care that this be not applied by any of you so, as to be a rule as to
your spiritual state and condition in the World; you know there are two sorts
of riches, there are earthly riches, such as the Holy Ghost calls this Worlds
Goods. 1 John 3.17.


And there are heavenly riches, such as will be of use in the other World, Luke
12.21
a being rich toward God.

Now my Brethren, though a middle Estate as to the World, and as to worldly
Accommodations be most desirable; yet you are miserably mistaken, if you think
a middle Condition as to spiritual things to be so. I confess the Language of
many men's Lives, nay of the Lives of Professors speaks to this purpose. I know
few, if any, that live, as if they were afraid they should be too rich; but
alas, how many live, as if they were afraid, they should be too godly; afraid
of being righteous over much, of being too zealous for God. Oh Sirs, have a
care of this, lay your hands upon your hearts, inquire into the temper of your
Souls about this matter; may be some of you even in this Sense would not be so
miserably poor, but you would willingly have a little Grace, a little
Godliness, if it were only to give you some hopes, that you should not go to
Hell when you die, and hence are very inquisitive and industrious to find out
some marks and signs, and what may be the Discoveries of the least degree of
saving Grace, whilst in the mean time, they are not (as may be feared) so
industrious how to increase their Grace, and how to be adding to their
spiritual stock, according to that Counsel given us, 2 Pet. 1.5. giving all
diligence, add to your Faith, Virtue, and to Virtue Knowledge, etc. are you not
afraid you may have too much Grace, and be too holy? do you not sometimes
blame, and at least show a dislike against those who outstrip you? and think
they are more nice than wise, and too exact and curious in their conversation;
and that a more lax and indifferent Carriage would be better, and that
moderation and a middle way would be more commendable, oh! have a care of this
Lukewarmeness, a being neither cold, nor hot: Rev. 3.15, 16.
remember he that thinks he has Grace enough, it is much to be feared he has
none at all, be you copying out the Example of the Holy Apostle, Phil. 3.13,
14. if you say, what is this to my Subject in hand? I answer, it is no matter,
so it may prove an advantage to thy Soul.

But now then to make some more pertinent use of what you have heard, I shall
direct my application to three sorts of persons: or to persons with respect to
that threefold condition in the World, that my Text mentions, and that my
Discourse have pointed at all along, viz. the poor, the rich, and those of you
that are in a middle Estate between both; and this by way of counsel and advice
to you all.

1. One Word to the poor. 2. Two Words to the rich. 3. Three Words to you that
are in a middle Condition betwixt both.
1. One Word to the poor, and this shall be a counselling, comforting,
encouraging Word. I will not now enquire, how Poverty came upon you? whether it
be the Gift of God; I mean, whether it came more immediately from the hand of
divine Providence? or whether it be the effect and result of your own Lusts, of
your profuseness and prodigality, of your sloth and idleness, of your gluttony
and drunkenness; I Will not enquire this at present, but leave it to your selves
to consider; only take it for granted, that poor, very poor you are, and may be
upon this account despicable in the eyes of others; and miserable in your own.
Now (my friends) that which I have to say to you in short is this; be persuaded
that the greatest misery of your present condition is not (as possibly some of
you may be apt to imagine) that this your condition is pinching hard, and puffs
heavy upon your fleshly part, and that by reason of your Poverty, you are the
Objects of scorn and derision in the World; but indeed, the greatness of your
misery, and the sadness of your condition lies in this; that it lays you open
(without preventing Grace) to many strong Temptations, to dishonor and neglect
God and Christ, and your Souls; and so makes way for your being miserable in
both Worlds: may you but obtain wisdom from God, to hearken to his Calls, to
close with his Counsels, and accept of the gracious proffers of Christ and
Salvation by and through him; which proffers are made as freely to you as to
any in the World; and then admit, your poverty continued, nay increased upon
you; yet it will be but for a very little while; Luke 16.20, 21, 22.
and thou who with Lazarus art forced to lie at the rich man's Gate, and glad
when thou can get but the crumbs and fragments that comes from his Table,
shall be taken into Abraham's bosom; and sit down at the right hand of God,
Psalm. 36.8.
where are Rivers of pleasure for ever more, and thou shall hunger no more,
neither thirst any more, neither shall the Sun light on thee, nor any heat, but
the Lamb shall feed you, and lead you unto living fountains of waters, and God
shall wipe away all tears from your eyes, Rev. 7.16, 17. For the Lords sake
think of this; Things here below are but (...), 2 Cor. 4.18.
for a little season, whether they be good or evil; and therefore not worth the
minding, in comparison with those eternal things which are just before you.

2. Two Words to you that are rich; and the first shall be that which you find.
1 Timothy 6.17. Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not high
minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who gives us
richly all things to enjoy. You have little reason to set a higher estimate
upon your selves, because God by the bounty of his Providence has lifted you
up above your Brethren; either if you consider who it is that has made you to
differ, 1 Cor. 7.4.
and that you have nothing but what you have received, as the Apostle upon
another account expresses it; and received it not as an absolute Proprietor,
to do with what you have what you lift; but as God's Steward, to be laid out in
the Service of your Lord, who will shortly call you to a strict account, and
will say, Luke 16.2.
Give an Account of thy Stewardship, for thou may be no longer Steward; and
that the more you have, the greater is your debt, and the greater account you
have to make; but that is not all, your Riches and Honors which you are so apt
to admire and dote upon, if God give you not great wisdom in the management of
them, will be sad Riches, as they will be temptations to you to forget both God
and your selves; and under your Salvation more hazardous, as you have heard:
and if they should in this sense be for your hurt, you will shortly wish you
had rather have been amongst the number of those that beg their Bread at your
door, then thus as you do Coach it up and down, and lie upon your Beds of
Ivory, and drink Wine in Bowls, and Health and Carowse it with your huffing
Companions. Read James 5.1, 2, 3. Go to now ye rich men, weep and howl for your
Miseries that shall come upon you; your Riches are corrupted, and your Garments
are Moth-eaten, your Gold and Silver is cankered, and the Rust of them shall be
a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire; ye have heaped
treasure together for the last days. You that trust and pride your selves in
your uncertain Riches, and live in the neglect of God and your Souls, apply
this to your selves; for it belongs to you.

A Second Word to you that are rich, shall be that of Solomon, Prove. 3.9.
Honor the Lord with thy Substance, and with the first fruits of all thine
increase. Let it not offend your Worships, that I become a humble Monitor to
you on this account. It is true I have pointed at some of the inconveniences
and evils* that do attend, and are incident unto your high Condition; and upon
an impartial view, I question not but you will find many more; but yet I must
tell you that these are not inseparable concomitants. If God gives you his
Grace, and once brings you to submit to the conduct of his Spirit (without
which you are undone) your Riches may be so far from being hindrances, that
they may become excellent helps and advantages in your way heavenward. Oh! if
God gives you but hearts, how many opportunities may you enjoy for the good of
your Souls, that others cannot? Nay, how much good may you be instrumental to
do to the Souls and Bodies of others? What influence may your Examples of piety
have upon others in the places where you live? How may you even by your Riches
and Greatness be a terror unto evil doers, and a praise to them that do well?
Rich and great men if they be good and gracious, and lay out themselves for
God, and the good of others, are great Blessings of the Age; the Lord increase
them.

Lastly, I have three words to you that are in a middle worldly Condition; you
have heard that your Condition upon many accounts is the most eligible: then I
infer,

1. See what interpretation you are to make of those Providence that have put
a check to your endeavors and graspings at great things in the world, and that
you have greater reason to take this more kindly from the hand of God, than you
are aware of. My Beloved, I have known some, that through an overvaluing of
things here below, have been reaching after great matters, and God in the way
of his Providence has seemed to concur with their ambitious desires, placing
them under such Circumstances, giving them such a commodious Seat, such a
promising Trade, that they have had a prospect of huge Matters in the world,
and have reckoned themselves, and said, well, in a few years I question not but
I shall be a man, as they sometimes phrase it; but all on a sudden, some
Accident or other happens, that blasts all their hopes, and makes them take
down their wide Sails, that stood ready spread to receive a prosperous gale, and
they are fixed possibly in a middle state, neither very poor, nor ever likely to
be very rich: and Oh how hardly are such disappointments born! Much ado to
comport with patience with such Providence: Now do but consider what you have
heard, and you will find that God was kinder to you than you were to your
selves. Are you sure that if you had not been stopped in your pursuit, it might
not have been much, very much to your spiritual and eternal detriment.

2. Hence learn to be wiser for the time to come; moderate your affections to
the things of this world. Jer. 45.5.
Seek thou great things for thy self? seek them not. If God in the way of
thy Calling and honest industry, bless thee in thy Basket and thy store, bless
God for it; and as you but now heard, labor to honor God with what thou have,
but covet not inordinately these things. Heb. 13.5.
Be content with such things as you have; for he has said, I will never leave
thee, nor forsake thee.

3. Seeing Providence has placed you in that condition which is truly most
eligible, labor to answer it, and evidence it to be so, by your proficiency
and progress in Holiness and Godliness. I suppose thee at present to be in the
way of Life, if you be not, whatever your Condition is, whether in a poor, rich
or middle Estate^ let me say to thee, as the Angel said to Lot, Genesis 19.17.
Escape for thy life, look not behind thee, neither stay thou in all the Plain,
escape to the Mountain (the Rock Christ Jesus) lest thou be consumed. But if
thou art got into Christ, then let me say, As you have received Christ Jesus
the Lord, Col. 2.7.
so walk ye in him; rooted and built up in him, and stablished in the Faith,
etc. And remember thou in thy Condition have fewer Hindrances and Temptations,
and more Helps and advantages from the very worldly condition that God has set
thee in. Up and be doing, and the Lord be with thee.

Quest. How may we Graciously improve those Doctrines and Providence which
transcend our Understandings? SERMON XVIII.
ROMANS XI.XXXIII. Oh the Depths of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge
of God! How unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out!
IN this Chapter the Apostle discoursing about the great Point of Election and
Reprobation, comes to an Instance in Gods wonderful Providence toward Jew and
Gentile. The Jews, who were formerly Gods People, are now under Unbelief; and
the Gentile, a stranger to his Covenant, has now obtained Mercy. This Doctrine
and Providence of God both together, does fill the Apostle with Admiration, and
this Admiration breaks out into these words, Oh the Depths of the Riches both
of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his Judgments, and his
ways past finding out!

In this Text therefore we have exemplified our Subject in hand, thus; There
are Doctrines and Providence which transcend our Understandings.

Wherefore I shall first offer some Demonstrations, by proposing to you some of
those Doctrines, and some of those Providence; and then shall come to show How
they may be graciously Improved.

I will begin with the Doctrines.

1. That there are some Doctrines contained in the sacred Scripture, which
transcend the largest create Capacity, will with much conviction appear to any,
that will with any intention of mind fix their thoughts on those Doctrines
which I single out and insist on. It Is true there are some Doctrines so plainly
revealed in Scripture, that he that runs may read 'em, especially such as do
principally concern Salvation, but even these contain in them somewhat
extraordinary and surprising; there are some necessary Points so plainly
revealed in Holy Writ, that to be acquainted with and believe the Scriptures,
and yet not believe the Truth of these, is impossible; but then, there are also
other Points, which, as they are not very clearly revealed, so they are so
deep, and profound, that the framing distinct Conceptions of them, is beyond
our reach.

Though we may be satisfied that it is a Truth, yet we cannot comprehend how it
should be; there is somewhat that lies deep, out of our view, which after the
utmost study, cannot be found out. Not that Gospel Truths contrad^ct our
soundest reasonings, but do transcend them.

There is a great difference between these two, viz. a Contradicting, and a
Transcending our Reason. What contradicts our Reason, is not, it cannot be
received by us; but what transcends, may; yea, in many cases must be
entertained and embraced. That what contradicts our Reason, is not to be
received, nor can it be a part of true Religion, is manifest, in that whatever
is so, has nothing of Reason in it; it is unreasonable, and rather suited unto
the nature of Brutes, than unto that of Men, which is Rational. True Religion
is designed for the regulation of the Rational Powers in their Actings and
Exercises, and therefore must be somewhat agreeable unto Reason, and not what
is contrary unto it. What is contrary unto Reason, must be rejected, and by no
means embraced as a part thereof. In like manner all Contradictions must be
exploded as unreasonable. God lays no man under the Oligation of believing what
cannot possibly be true; and our soundest Reason assures us, that to believe
Contradictions, is to believe what cannot be true. But though what is contrary
to Reason, must not be received as an Article of our Creed, yet what transcends
it, may. What is above our Capacities, may be true, and from God, though what
is contrary unto our Reason, is not true, nor can be from God.

On this Distinction I do the rather insist, as well to obviate what is
suggested by Papists, and others, who receive for Articles of their Faith, what
is contrary unto right Reason, as to anticipate the Socinians Objections, who
will believe nothing that transcends our scanty and narrow Capacities.

That this may be the more plain and convincing, before I proceed to show what
are some of those Mysterious Doctrines which transcend our Intellects, I will
acquaint the Reader with some Notions received by many, which being contrary
unto our clearest and surest Reasonings, are not to be improved, but rejected.

I Will mention but some. 1. Transubstantiation. 2. Merit, quod Justitiam
commutativam. And 3. A Physical transition of Sins actually inherent in us,
from us unto Christ, and of Christ's Righteousness unto us. All which are to be
rejected as Notions contrary to our Reason.

I. Transubstantiation. A Doctrine asserted by the Papists to be contained in
Holy Writ, but really not so* By Transubstantiation is meant the turning of the
Elements in the Lords Supper into the very Substance of Christ's Body. Though
the Accidents which are proper unto Bread and Wine, distinguishing them from
every other Being, be there, yet the Substance of Bread and Wine, the only
Subject of the proper Accidents, is not there.

That is, 1. The Proper Accidents of Bread and Wine are Common unto these
Subjects, and a Humane Body; which is a Contradiction.

2. These Accidents, namely, the Color and Taste of Bread, etc. whose whole
Existence is Inexistence in a Subject, do exist even when they do not inexist,
namely, when they pass from the Bread unto Christ's Body.

Moreover the Body of Christ is asserted to be bodily under these Accidents,
even when there is not any one Accident proper unto an Humane Body.

These and many other Contradictions must be received as true, if you will with
the Papists put the Doctrine of Transubstantiation into your Creed. But as this
Conceit of theirs has not the least countenance of Scripture, so it is contrary
unto our Reason, as well as Common Sense, and to be rejected as unsound and
false, as well as absurd and unreasonable.

II. Merit quoad Justitiam commutativam. There are among the Papists a
considerable number, who assert that there may be a meriting somewhat of God
according to the Rules of Commutative Justice. That there may be a meriting
somewhat of God according to the Rule of Justice, we grant; for Jesus Christ
merited much of God, but this Merit was not according to the Rule of
Commutative Justice, but of Distributive Justice. Merit as to Commutative
Justice, does necessarily include in it the passing of somewhat over unto God,
unto which God had no Right antecedent unto this Transaction: But God is an
absolute Lord and Sovereign, who has a Right unto all things; Jesus Christ
himself as Man, is Gods Propriety, and all that Jesus Christ could give, must
be considered as Christ's, either as he is God, or as he is Man. Whatever
belongs to him as God, is God's; and as he is Man, whatever he has, it is God's:
for which Reason, Jesus Christ himself is not excepted, when it is said by the
Apostle, Romans 11.35. Who has first given unto him, and it shall be recompensed
unto him again? Who? As if it had been said, There is none, no not one, not
Jesus Christ himself could give first unto God, could give that unto God, unto
which God had not, antecedently to that Gift, a Right, that is, so to give unto
God, as to pass over a new Right unto God, for which God should be under the
Obligation of recompensing it. Commutative Righteousness is inconsistent with
the absolute Sovereignty and Dominion of God; whence it must be acknowledged,
that either God is not the absolute Sovereign and Lord of the Universe, which,
if not, he is not God; or there is no such thing as Commutative Righteousness
in God, and that Christ himself, much less Man, could not merit of God any
thing according to the Rule of Commutative Righteousness.

That Christ merited according to Distributive Justice, is asserted by all
sound Protestants, and by Vasquez and other Papists; yea, and that Adam in
Innocence, according to the tenor of that Law there given him, might by
rendering the required perfect Obedience, have merited the promised Reward, i.
e. the merit would have been of such efficacy, that God could not have remained
just, and not have given out the reward of Life, is also granted.

But a Merit as to Commutative Justice, contains in it an Implication, when
spoken of God; for in plain English it is to say, That the Absolute Sovereign is
not Absolute Sovereign: However this Notion is embraced by some Papists, who do
not only ^^^y, That Commutative Justice is in God, but that according to the
Rule of Commutative Justice man may merit of God: the which is the more absurd,
as it supposes that man can give that unto God, which is of a value
proportionable to Eternal Life, although Eternal Life, as it is to endure
infinitely, includes in it somewhat of an infinite Excellency; such is the
Nature of Commutative Justice as to stick to an Arithmetical proportion, in
adjusting the Value of things commuted, which cannot be by man in this case,
unless there were somewhat of Infinity in what he gives unto God. However,
notwithstanding the ridiculousness, as well as falseness of the Notion, there
are many among the Papists (if we may believe Arriaga) who assert it. It Is true
Vasquez explodes it, with an Essay to evince that the Papists generally reject
it; but Arriaga, a later Jesuit, freely rebukes Vasquez, affirming that
commutative righteousness is in God, and may be found to be between God and
man, and that this is generally received in the Church of Rome: for says he,
This is the Opinion of Suarez, Valentia, Granadus (who introduces Medina, and
Alvarez, to agree with him in this Point) Hurtado de Mendoza, Ragusa, Tannerus,
and Albertinus, and Molina also; who, though he expresses himself with Caution
in one place, yet elsewhere does freely enough own it; besides Capreolus and
the Thomists generally (says Arriaga) do agree with him in this; and that
therefore Vasquez is greatly to be blamed for affirming, that so many were of
the contrary Opinion, whereas this about Merit quoad Justitiam commutativam,
has many more Authorities than Vasquez could produce for his Sense of it. In
fine, Arriaga corrects Vasquez's Mistake, in saying that Hosius and Sotus were
against Commutative Righteousness, and then proceeds to an Attempt of
demonstrating the Truth of this Doctrine.

By this it is apparent, That if we may believe Arriago, the Papists generally
assert Merit according to Commutative Justice; in which Sense it is mostly
oppugned by the Protestant Writers, as a ridiculous Doctrine. The which, from
what has been already suggested, has been manifested. But seeing this Doctrine
contradicts our Reason, our Endeavors must not be how to improve it, we must
immediately reject it as false and unreasonable.

III. There are some who call themselves Protestants, and who seem to be
zealous Asserters of Imputed Righteousness, who being ignorant of the
Gospel-Notion, do assert, That those very Sins which actually inhered in the
Elect, did pass from them unto Christ, and that the Righteousness of Christ
which actually inhered in him, passes from him unto the Elect. But this is a
Notion as contrary unto our Reasons as that of Transubstantiation; it being as
impossible that Our Sins, or Christ's Righteousness, which are Accidents
Inhering in Subjects, should pass from Us to Christ, or from Christ to Us, as
the Accidents of Bread and Wine should pass from the Substance of Bread and
Wine, and inhere in Christ's Body. These Notions then I reject as False, and
Contrary unto Reason.

But there are other Doctrines revealed in Scripture, which transcend our
largest capacities. There are (I must acknowledge) many momentous and important
points, which though clearly enough revealed, and in themselves not very hard
to be understood, yet because either obscurely, or after a perplexed manner
handled, by some are listed among the (...) of which the Apostle Peter makes
some mention, which by the unlearned are abused to their own hurt, even when by
the more judicious they are clearly understood and ^eadily embraced. However
it is as certain, that there are other Doctrines, which bearing the Characters
of infinite Wisdom on 'em, are so grand and august, that they transcend the
most enlarged Understandings. Of the Truth of these Doctrines, we may be fully
assured; but yet cannot fully comprehend the whole of 'em: we may know enough
to raise our admiration; but cannot frame any adequate conceptions of them.

These Doctrines are many, and may be distinctly considered, either as they
have reference more immediately unto the Nature and Being of God, his Acts,
both immanent and transient, and consequently, the modes of Operation; or as
they have a special aspect on those profound and mysterious Transactions about
the carrying on fallen man's Salvation in a way adjusted to the Glory of all the
Divine Perfections.

I. The many Doctrines which more immediately respect the Nature of God, his
Acts and Modes of Operation.

1. More generally, they are all such as represent somewhat of him, who in all
Perfections is infinite, and infinitely above us; God is a Spirit, infinite,
infinite in his Essence, or immense, infinite in his existence, or external.
There is according to the Conceptions we must form of God (at least quoad nos)
a difference between Immensity and Externity. Immensity denotes the Essence of
God to be more large and comprehensive than can be measured, but the import of
Eternity is to be considered with regard to the Duration of the Divine Essence;
whence although we must assert the Essence, and Existence of God to be so much
the same, that necessary Existence is included in the very Essence of God, yet
we may look on the divine Existence to be a pressior conceptus to that of the
divine Essence; for essence includes somewhat more than mere existence namely
other perfections of the divine Nature, which when considered, as it fills
Heaven and Earth, and is infinitely beyond all, without all bounds or limits,
it is said, to be immense; but considered as enduring from everlasting to
everlasting it is Eternal. The like of the other Attributes.

Thus our finite capacities may form some partial and inadequate Conceptions of
these things, but comprehend them we cannot: If we look into any particular
Attribute of God, we are swallowed up as in a bottomless Ocean. For there is
not any one Divine Perfection that includes not in it Infinity, the which is so
far above us, that we cannot reach unto it: We cannot know him unto Perfection,
nor by searching find him out. He is higher than the Heavens, deeper than Hell,
longer than the Earth, and broader than the Sea, we cannot comprehend him; His
Nature; his Attributes, all his glorious Perfections being infinite, are
infinitely above us, and seeing the Revelations made of God do after a sort
represent somewhat of his glorious Nature, they are not fully comprehended by
us: They point unto somewhat that is beyond us. But to be more particular,

2. God, who is a Spirit Infinite, is absolutely and simply One, he is a pure
Act, but yet Three, One absolutely and simply, One God and yet Three, Three
Persons. None can be more concerned in asserting the Oneness or Unity of the
Godhead than the Christian; how vehement soever the Mahometane, Jew or Socinian
may be in asserting the Simplicity and Oweness of the Divine Nature, they
cannot be more so than We are, but yet a Trinity of Persons in the Godhead we
must also affirm, or our Religion is lost.

Whoever will but seriously acquaint himself with the Essentials of the
Christian Religion will find that the believing a Trinity is as necessary to
the being of our Religion, as the believing the existence of God is to any
Religion. The Spirit of God has not only here and there expressly asserted the
Doctrine of the Trinity, but every momentous Doctrine of our Religion, which is
appropriate unto it, as it is Christian, supposes it.

There are Three Fundamentals of our Faith, all which conjunctly considered,
suppose a Trinity of Persons in the Godhead, even God the Father, God the Son,
and God the Holy Ghost. There is the Fall of Man, his Redemption and
Sanctification. God at first made man upright, and gave him a Holy, Just and
Good Law, which was sanction'd with the Promise of a glorious Reward, and with
the severe Threat of Divine Wrath and Indignation, Do this and Live, but in the
Day thou eatest thou shall die. Man transgresses this Law, and is obnoxious
unto the Threatening, he must die: For God who is Infinite in all Perfections,
is a God of Truth, and must accomplish his Word. He is essentially just and
righteous, and must proportion the punishment to the nature of the Crime. An
Infinite God is offended, his Law is violated, and this by Man, by Adam the
Head of Human Nature, and therefore it is impossible that any escape Infinite
(which is on finite Worms Eternal) Wrath, unless the Justice of God be
satisfied by proportionable Sufferings in that nature that sinned. But if there
had been but One Person, as there is but One God, there could not be an
Infinite Person to undertake for us. That one Person who was offended would be
alone able to satisfy his own Justice, but he is angry, he demands
satisfaction from another; and should he enter into judgment with us, we should
not be able to stand.

He demands satisfaction, and is ready to consume us, unless an Infi-Person
interposes on our behalf; should he himself begin to capitulate with us singly,
he would be so far from offering himself to satisfy himself for us, that he
would immediately let out all his wrath.

Thus we see that the Doctrines about man's Fall and Redemption, do necessarily
infer that there is God the Father, who gave us a righteous Law, and who is
highly provoked by the violation of it, and as a righteous Judge proceeds to
condemn us, unless satisfaction be made unto his Justice; and that there being
God the Son, a Person distinct from the Father, who is also God, sent by the
Father, and who assumed Humane Nature, in which he suffered, and satisfied the
Justice of the Father, whereby fallen man is in a way of recovery; thus man's
Fall and his Recovery suppose two Persons. But whoever will more closely attend
unto this Point, will find that God being as Holy as he is Just and Righteous,
is as much concerned for the Vindication of the Honor of his Holiness, as that
of his Justice, whence our Sanctification becomes as necessary an Antecedent
unto our Salvation, as our Justification. Though Justification and
Sanctification are in their own natures formally and really distinct, yet are
ever in one and the same Subject: You may and must distinguish them from each
other, but cannot separate them. And the Reason is, because God is as Holy as
he is Righteous, and as much concerned for the Glory of his Holiness, as for
the Glory of his Justice. And therefore the Holy as well as the Righteous Will
of God must be satisfied: But such are the Corruptions of our Nature, so strong
and powerful, and we so weak and feeble, that unless some one Almighty be our
help, we shall remain under the power of Sin, unsanctified, and no way
advantaged by the Redemption of Christ's Death.

It Is true, Christ has died, but not to save us in, but from our sins. It was
never the Design of Christ that men should receive any special Blessings as the
fruit of his Death, while they continue under the power of Sin, Enemies unto
him. He has made a purchase of Heavens Glories, but will give it to none but
such as submit themselves unto him. He will that we humble our selves before
him, and be holy, or continue in the state of Condemnation, in which we are all
by Nature; but Holy we cannot be without the help of an Omnipotent Spirit,
which only is able to enlighten our Minds, and turn our Hearts from the power
of Satan unto God: All which supposes the Third Person of the Trinity, the Holy
Ghost.

By this it is very manifest, that such is the frame of the Christian Religion,
such the great Fundamentals thereof, that without the supposing the Truth of
the Doctrine of the Trinity of Persons in the Godhead, the Christian Religion
is gone, it is lost. And how to comprehend this M^stery is impossible. There is
no contradiction in this Doctrine, noth^ng in it contrary to our Reason; for
it is not said, that Three Gods are One, but Three Persons are One, One God. But
how to fathom the Mystery, we are at a loss, it is certainly beyond Us.

So much concerning the Nature and Persons of the Godhead.

3. Those Doctrines that have regard unto the ACTS of God, are also very
profound and mysterious.

1. There are the Immanent Acts of God, which do not terminate on any Objects
ad extra, off from God, such as Divine Knowledge, and the Decree, whether of
Election or Reprobation.

2. Transient Acts, such as terminate on an Object off from God, namely, the
Works of Creation and Providence.

In my discoursing about the Immanent Acts of God, I might be very distinct in
considering what is very much insisted on by the Schoolmen, with reference to
the Knowledge of God, and acquaint the Reader with the many Distinctions that
are used by that sort of men but if I do so, I shall exceed the Bounds allotted
me: I will therefore pass by the Doctrine of Praescience [which (whatever may
be said of it by some) has such difficulties in it, as admit not of our
Solution,] and make some search into these profound Doctrines about the Decrees
of Election and Reprobation.

That God has decreed the Salvation of some particular Persons, is evident
enough to any that will deliberately consult the Word of God, and that it is the
Unchangeable Determination of God, That such as die in their Sins, shall be
eternally damned, is as manifest. The Eternal Decree of Election is so clearly,
so fully, and distinctly revealed in Scripture, that few or none presume wholly
to deny it; and such is the known Nature of Election, that it is not easy to
believe the Doctrine of Election, but withal we must take in the other of
Reprobation; for Election is but of some, and if but some are taken, the other
are left; they are not chosen, they are refused, they are reprobated. But how
this Doctrine of Gods leaving, or reprobating any from all Eternity is
reconcilable to these other that concern the Glory of Divine Goodness and
Righteousness, is above us.

The Sublapsarians have done very much toward the clearing up of this, by
supposing all in their lapsed estate, under the guilt and pollution of Sin, and
God from all Eternity concerned for his own Glory, to Elect some, who by being
interested in the Blood of Christ, should through the sanctification of the
Spirit obtain Salvation with eternal Glory; but left others to themselves, who
continuing in Sin, are determined to die. Hereby the glorious Grace of God in
the eternal purpose of Calling, Justifying, Sanctifying some, and thereby
preparing them for Heaven, is excellently displayed, and the purposing from
Eternity to leave others to themselves in their Sins, for which, after much
long-suffering, they shall be eternally damned, is no way inconsistent with
that goodness that is so infinitely extended to the Vessels of Mercy, but does
most fully illustrate how just and righteous God is in condemning them for
their Sins and Transgressions. Besides, it is obvious enough that the Decrees
are but internal Purposes which have no influence on the thing decreed. Decreta
nil ponunt in Esse. Though there is a certainty of the Event, yet neither the
Sin, nor Destruction of the Reprobate is an Effect of the Decree.

What is here said toward the clearing up the Difficulties that attend this
Doctrine, is very well urged by the Synod of Dort, and it is no more than what
has great countenance from the Holy Scriptures* which suppose all in a lapsed
and fallen Estate, and therefore represents the Elect as Chosen in Christ,
Ephesians. 1.4. and Predestined unto the Adoption of Children by Jesus Christ,
Elect according to the Foreknowledge of God the Father through Sanctification
of the Spirit, etc. 1 Pet. 1.2. All which Expressions seem to suppose the Elect
in a fallen estate, standing in need both of a Redeemer and Sanctifier; even as
the Reprobates are said, Jude 4. to have been before of Old ordained unto
Condemnation; which Condemnation does presuppose a Judicial Procedure, and the
Sentence past against them for their Sin, which sufficiently suggests that they
were considered to have been in a sinful, a fallen state. Nevertheless it must
be acknowledged, That this does not remove the difficulty, it only supposes it
to be insuperable, and therefore to be passed over in silence.

The great Difficulty is, How the Absolute Decree of Reprobation is consistent
either with the Goodness or Righteousness of God, or those other Methods which
are taken for the salvation of all men? What of Goodness is there in
destinating men to eternal Misery? or what of Justice in purposing to punish
them for ever without any regard to their Sin, even before any evil done? or
how can the unalterable secret Decree for their damnation accord with the
sincerity of God in the many Offers which are made of future Glory? It Is true;
supposing the consideration of their fallen state as antecedent to the Decree,
it is goodness enough that any are chosen out of the sinful Mass, and it would
have been a righteous thing for God to have proceeded against all to a Sentence
of Condemnation: and seeing Christ has died, and thereby satisfied Justice, and
the Spirit strives, and that common Grace which is sufficient to enable men to
do more toward their Salvation than they do, is offered them, and that it is
their Sin which is the only proper cause of their denying due Subjection unto
Christ, these things seem to be cleared up; only the greatest difficulty
remains, to wit, How it is supposeable that such who came pure out of the hand
of God, can be considered as fallen, without some respect unto the anteceding
Decree of God. What! is their Fall, on the supposition of which depends all the
Discoveries of the glorious Perfections of God made unto us in the Scriptures,
a mere casual hit? One would as soon think, that this curious and beautiful
Fabric the World was owing only unto the casual concourse of Epicurean Atoms
for its being so, as that the Glory and Beauty, the Wisdom and Harmony that
shines forth most illustriously in the Christian Religion, should be only the
product of Casualty or Chance; but if the Fall or Sin of man must be considered
to be decreed by that God, the Purity and Holiness of whose Nature is infinite,
we are as much at a plunge; so that on the whole, we see in the Decree of
Reprobation somewhat Mysterious and Profound; there is in this Doctrine
somewhat that may raise our greatest admiration, but can never be by vain
Mortals comprehended; for what of goodness in destinating those who were in a
state of Holiness and Innocence, unto Sin and Guilt? or what of Righteousness
in the giving the Innocent a Law, and making them contrary to their innate holy
propensions, Transgressors of that Law? or how does the Sincerity of God appear
in the offers of Eternal Life to Adam on his Obedience, even when his
Disobedience was determined and inevitable? This shows that there is somewhat
above us in this Doctrine, and that although there is nothing in this Point
contradictory, nor contrary to our Reasons, yet there is in it somewhat that
transcends it.

4. The Doctrine about the Transient Acts of God, whereby the Execution of the
Decree is compassed, falls next under consideration. The Decree, which is but
an Immanent Act in God, does not put the thing decreed into Being, that is done
long after by some Transient Acts. The Decree is from Eternity, the Execution
only in Time. The Decree is but an internal purpose about what God will do in
time, which Decree in the time appointed being executed, the thing decreed is
then put into Being; the which cannot be done without the Physical Influence of
God.

This is true of every Decree, whether that of the Worlds Creation, its being
destroyed by the Flood, or by the last Conflagration. The Decree of all this
was eternal, but the Execution in time. The World is first created, then after
some hundred years the Deluge, and although some thousand years have past, yet
not burnt. The same of the Decree that some shall be glorified, which does
necessarily presuppose that they must be first in Being, before the Decree of
their Glorification can be accomplished. It Is naturally impossible that what is
not actually in being, should be actually the Subject of Glory or any thing
else. Moreover, if we will believe what the Spirit says, Romans 8.30. they must
be first effectually called, and then justified, and so through the
sanctification of the Spirit be prepared for the Glory. There is an Order to be
found in the Execution of the Decree, which is but according to the eternal
Counsels of the Divine Will.

An Illustration of this we have in Man, who may purpose to do many things in
time; his internal purpose to do the thing may be long before the time
appointed, and there is an Order to be observed in his purposes, he purposes
that one thing shall be first done, and after that another, as is best
discovered by what he does. The which being so, we cannot argue that such a man
purposing to give his Child an Estate when he arrives unto the Age of one and
twenty, that therefore 'twas actually given some years before: the like as to
the point of Election; God determined the Justification, Sanctification and
Glory of some; Gods purpose was from eternity, but he did then but purpose that
this should be in time, and that Sanctification should as necessarily precede
the Glory, as Justification be ordine Naturae before his Sanctification; and
therefore it is absurd to argue, God decreed their Justification from Eternity,
therefore they were justified from Eternity; God decreed that they should be
first called, and then justified, and therefore as Sanctification must be
before Glory, and Justification before Sanctification, even so Effectual
Vocation must be before their being justified; so that although Paul be an
elect Vessel, yet he is not actually justified before he is effectually called.

These things are plain Truths, but yet how to comprehend the ways of God in
bringing these things to pass, is beyond our Capacity; and that this is so, I
will evince.

Among the Learned there are great Contests about the Modes of Divine
Operation. All grant that the Decrees would have remained unexecuted, had not
God by some Transient Acts put the Decree in being; and that this must be
considered to be done by some Physical Efficiency of God, is acknowledged by
all. It Is true, the showing How this Physical Efficiency does contribute toward
the execution of the Decree, is difficult, especially as to the causing such
Acts as are clothed with vicious modifications, where what is Physical in that
Action is acknowledged to be from the Efficiency of God; but whether the Divine
Efficience be Mediate or Immediate, is controverted between the Durandists on
the one part, and all the rest of the Schoolmen generally on the other; but if
Immediate, whether antecedenter, concomitanter, or cons^quenter, is warmly
debated by the rigid Dominicans, Scotists, and Molinists, each of these three
Factions differing from each other, and casting in one another way insoluble
Difficulties.

It Is true, the moderate Dominican, such as Medina, Dominicus a Soto, and some
others do in my Opinion, give the best satisfaction in the stating these
Controversies; for they assert, That we must distinguish between what is
Natural, and what is Moral in a sinful Action, and that the subject Matter of
the Vitiosity of a sinful Action is somewhat Natural, that all the undue
Modifications of it are Moral, and included in the Formality, whence they
proceed to conclude, That what is merely natural in a sinful Action, is from
God; a Notion no one will deny; but what is Moral and Vicious in it, or that
Undueness that is the foundation of the sinful Relation (considering Sin with
reference to the Law, whereof it is a Transgression) is from Man.

This seems to be clear enough, only there still remains somewhat insoluble;
for whoever looks well into this Controversy, will find that in the sinfulness
of some Actions there is somewhat Positive; what else is the Conversion or
Termination of a Natural Act on an undue Object, or the undue Determination of
this Act on a due Object? It must be acknowledged, That Sin does not only
result when the Act is about an undue Object, but also when about a due Object,
if unduly conversant about it, e. g. In the Hatred of God, the Object of this
Act is undue; but as for inordinate Love to Father or Mother, the Object of
Love in this Case is not undue, but from the Intension of the Act does the
Sinfulness result; which Intension is somewhat Positive: but whether it must be
considered as somewhat Natural, or as somewhat merely Moral, or Mixed, partly
Natural and partly Moral, is beyond me; but if not merely Moral, it must be
from God, and so God must be either the Author of Sin, or the foundation of
this Relation must not be considered to be included in the Formality of Sin,
that is, the intension of the Act, though inordinate and undue, is not sinful.
By which it is manifest that if we consider the Controversy, there is somewhat
above us in the fairest stating it, much more so in the other Accounts that are
given; for as the rigid Dominicans do certainly make God the Cause of Sin,
(whether culpable or not culpable, is not the Question) even so do the Scotists
and Molinists; for they both include in the matter of Sin somewhat more than
what is merely Natural, even somewhat that is morally Vicious, and yet assert
that this Matter is the immediate effect of Gods Causality, only the one says,
That God does as it were take man by the hand, and lead him to Sin; the other,
That man determines the Efficiency of God; and the Scotist says, That the first
and second Cause do walk hand in hand to the Sin, but whether I lead another to
the Sin, and help him to commit it; or whether I am taken by the Sinner, and
determined to help him to produce what is sinful in the Act, or whether I walk
with him still, I am at least a Concauser of what is sinful in the Act; so that
neither the Scotist, nor the Molinist give me any satisfaction in this Matter.
The Result therefore of my thoughts is as follows, I am sure that no Natural
Being ever has been, is, or can be without the Efficiency of God the first
Cause, and yet I am as confident that no Moral Evil is in any sense the Effect
of the Physical Efficiency of God: The Moral Undueness that is considered as
that which is the Foundation of Sin, cannot be from God, but yet how
satisfactorily to reconcile these things, or how to comprehend the Modes of
Divine Operation, is above us, we cannot reach unto it, it transcends our
Understandings.

5. There are also several Doctrines, which have a special Aspect on those
Transactions that are about the carrying on Fallen Man's Salvation to the
Illustrating the Glory of the divine Perfections, which are very profound.

The Doctrines of the Fall of Man; the Transition of Original Sin from Adam to
his Posterity; the Methods taken for the Recovery of the Elect; the Covenant of
Reconciliation between the Father and the Son, from all Eternity; the
Incarnation of the Son of God; and the many surprising Doctrines with reference
thereunto, even about his several Offices as Mediator; and in special That of
his Being a Priest after the Order of Melchisedek; his Suretyship; how our Sins
were imputed to him; and his Righteousness made ours, beside those Doctrines
about the Nature of the Mystical Union that is between Christ and Believers;
and how this is the ground of Imputation; and many other momentous points might
be spoken unto, to evince, That though there is nothing of Contradiction in
these Doctrines, yet there is very much that transcends the most enlarged
Capacity. They are points that the Angels themselves are prying into, but
cannot fully comprehend. But these things I must wave and go on to acquaint you
with some of the many Providence, that do in like manner transcend our
Understandings.

II. Among the many amuzing Providence that are before Us, I will single out a
few.

1. That the greatest part of the World should lie in Wickedness, unacquainted
with the Methods of Salvation is an amuzing Providence. Look we into the
remotest parts of the World, we find nothing but a strange Ignorance of the
true God, or of the true Worship of God; Oh how great a part of the World is
overrun with Paganism, Mahometanism, and Judaism; Come we nearer home and take
a view of the Christian World; behold, how small is it in comparison of those
parts, where the abovementioned false Religions prevail, and of the many
thousands, who are called Christians; how many Invelop'd with the thick clouds
of Ignorance and Error? and how ^ew free from the Influence of Idolatry and
Superstition? A multitude of those who have been baptized into the name of
Christ, have not the opportunity of looking into the sacred Oracles, which
reveal the true way to Life everlasting, and of those who have the happy
Advantages of consulting the sacred Scriptures, how few can understand them?
The which is not without a Providence of God; But can we compare these
Providence with those discoveries, that are made of the Infinite Compassions
of Almighty God toward the Children of men, and comprehend a consistency
between them?

In the Scriptures it is said, That God would have all men be saved, and to that
end come to the Knowledge of the Truth, even when but a very small spot of the
Earth have any suitable means afforded 'em for the obtaining such knowledge. In
the Scriptures the Proclamation is general to all, Ho, every one; and the
Expostulation with Sinners is, Turn ye, Turn ye, why will ye dye? as I live,
says the Lord, I desire not the death of a Sinner, of a Sinner indefinitely;
q. d. of any Sinner, but rather, That he would Turn, and Live. Besides, did not
Christ die for this end; namely, to show the unexpressible greatness of Gods
Love to the world? God so loved, so, so loved the World; as if it had been
said, the Love of God to the World is so transcendent that no words could
sufficiently express it, nothing would fully represent it, but the Delivery of
the Son, the only begotten Son of God to the Death, the cruel, the shameful,
and the reproachful Death of the Cross, for the salvation of the World, on
their Believing, and this even when God left Millions of Angels to continue in
everlasting Chains of Darkness; notwithstanding all which, it is manifest, That
they cannot believe in him of whom they have not heard, and cannot hear unless
a Preacher be sent unto them, and that no such thing has been done, no Preacher
has been sent, or if in one Age, yet not in another. How can we reconcile these
Providence with the Discoveries that are given us of the infinite Compassions
of God to Mankind, when so few are made partakers of it? What of Grace is there
in leaving the greatest part of the World in a very little better condition
than the fallen Angels?

I know that there are many things offered toward the satisfaction of a
thoughtful Person; as, Who can tell but there are thousand of Worlds above us,
whose Inhabitants are in a better capacity to receive and improve the Instances
of Divine Love, and that this world is but a Spot in comparison of them, and if
this whole World should perish, it is but as the hanging up a few Malefactors,
to show that God is just as well as merciful; but how does this solve the
Difficulty which is not merely taken from the Notion we have of Gods me^ciful
Nature in it self considered, but from the Revelations made thereof unto the
Children of men in the Scripture; about which we cannot have any solid
satisfaction, but from things which are obvious before us, not from what is so
fully out of our view and knowledge, and concerning Creatures of another kind.

It Is true, there are some intimations in the Sacred Scriptures, which apart,
and by themselves considered, afford Relief; such as these, The Gentiles which
have not the written Law, doing the things contained in the Law, are a Law unto
themselves; by which Law they shall at the last be judged, but not by the
written Law, and who walking according to this Law, will find their Consciences
to excuse them, as the Transgressors thereof shall be under the Accusations of
Conscience, Romans 2.13, 14, 15. Besides, it is said in the foregoing Chapter,
that the great reason why Divine Vengeance was against them, was not so much
because they knew not God, or were unacquainted with the Methods of Salvation,
but because when the Gentiles who had [not Moses nor the Prophets for their
guide, but] only the Light of Nature, the things made for their help, glorified
not God as God, but were unthankful, and became vain in their Imaginations. And
to these Considerations, if we add what Peter in Acts 10.34, 35. has, it seems
as if many of the Gentiles, who were strangers to the Commonwealth of Israel,
were saved; for says the Apostle, I perceive that God is no respecter of
persons, but in every Nation he that fears him, and works Righteousness, is
accepted of him; every one that walks according to that Light he has
received, shall be saved. If this be minded without a fixing our thoughts on
other Scriptural Considerations, the difficulty would be removed; but when we
reflect on the many other Texts that assert Christ Jesus to be the only Door to
Glory, and that there is no other Name under Heaven, whereby we can be saved
but that of Jesus Christ; and the Reason of this Doctrine, namely, That all
have sinned, and have fallen short of the Glory of God; that such is the
essential Righteousness of God as engages him to demand Satisfaction, and that
unless his Justice be satisfied, no Salvation can be had, and that there is
none other able to satisfy the Justice of God, but Jesus Christ, God-Man, and
that all who are interested in his Merits, must submit unto him; I say, whoever
will consider the foregoing Passages with these, will find himself still at a
loss; so that on the whole, I am brought to this Result, that is, That
notwithstanding the Spirit of God does so very much insist on the largeness of
Divine Love to the World, the least part thereof are made partakers of it,
unless Salvation is to be had out of Christ, or unless a very implicit Faith be
sufficient to entitle the Heathen unto any of those special Blessings that are
the purchase of Christ's Blood; but when we come so far, if we do but intentely
mind these things, we shall find our selves in the dark; and though we have the
greatest reason to conclude, That these things are reconcilable, yet must we
acknowledge that they are above us, they are too high, we cannot attain unto
the height thereof.

2. That such whose Lot has been cast into more pleasant places, and who have
had the advantageous Helps of Sacred Scripture for their direction in the way
of Life, have yet been by Providence plunged into many an inextricable
Labyrinths of Difficulties, is surprising.

Concerning the Old Testament, who can without surprise converse with the
Disputes there are among the Learned about the Hebrew Copy we now have; or the
Septuagint, as whether the former or the latter is more Authentic, and must be
taken for the Canon? There are some momentous differences between them, and
therefore it is our Concern to enquire after that which is to be our Rule; if it
be the Septuagint, we are at a loss about its Rise; for it is well known that
the Greek is not that Language which the Holy Ghost used with Moses and the
Prophets: it is but a Translation, but where is the Original? Beside, whatever
is said by some of the Fathers concerning the miraculous Agreement of the 72
Israelites sent from Jerusalem to Ptolomy, as Translaters of the Law of the
Jews, it is manifest enough out of Aristaeus (of whom the Learned Usher has writ
so much) that they only Translated the Law of Moses, and no more: Neither is it
very difficult to show that the LXX we now have, is more Novel than that of the
New Testament.

But if the Hebrew must be taken for the Canon, yet as to the Books of Moses,
some are at a loss whether the Samaritan or the Hebrew be most Authentic? But
whether the one or the other, it is still queried whether we have the Autograph?
Yet we are still in a Labyrinth, not only about the various Readings, the Keri
and the Chetir, but about the Antiquity of the Points, whether they are Coaeval
with the Letters or not? The Points are so necessary toward the right
understanding the true Import of a Hebrew Word, that without them it is not
easy to find out the true sense of the Text; the least alteration of a Point
makes an unaccountable change in the signification of the Words.
Notwithstanding which, the Novelty of the Hebrew Points does now take with
many, whereby we are still at a loss where to find a firm Foundation, on which
our Faith may lean; for seeing the Sense of the Text so very much depends on
these Points, if these Points are of late and humane Rise, so is the present
Sense of the Scripture; and if so, how can our Faith which is grounded on the
Sense of Scriptures which leans only on this Humane Invention, be Divine and
Unshaken?

But might these Difficulties be removed, yet as to the greatest number of
professed Christians, there are others, which to them are as insuperable; for
they understand not the Original, and have for their Guidance and Conduct no
other help but what either some ignorant or profane Priest affords them. Such
is the Neglect the greatest part of Christendom is guilty of, that where there
is one learned and pious Minister to direct, there are two, who are either very
ignorant or scandalous; for which reason the greatest part of the People, who
are under the Ministers Conduct, are either to receive help from the Ignorant,
who cannot relieve them; or from the Scandalous, who cannot be confided in: How
can the People put any Trust in the Honesty and Truth of such who are strangers
to nothing more than to such Virtues?

There is very much may be said to solve these Phenomenon; but yet when all
that can be offered has been insisted on, we shall find somewhat in the
Providence that does transcend our Understandings.

3. I will mention only one Providence more that does greatly amuse and
astonish many that do truly fear the Lord, and that is this, viz. Although it
be frequently asserted in Scripture, That to the Godly, the Promise of the good
things of this Life, as well as of that to come, is given, yet we find the
godly to be without them, even when the wicked, who know not God, do abound;
Many are the Afflictions and Tribulations of the Righteous, Job 21.7, etc. They
are hated, reproached, and counted as sheep for the slaughter, but the wicked
they live, become old, and are mighty in Power, their Seed is established in
their sight with them, and their Offspring before their Eyes, their Houses are
safe from fear, neither is the Rod of God upon them, they are not in trouble as
other men; namely, as the Godly; neither are they plagued like them. Surely
there be some just men unto whom it happens according to the work of the
wicked; again, there be wicked men unto whom it happens according to the work
of the Righteous. All which does plainly show, that no man can find out the
work that is done under the Sun; though a wise man seek to know it, yet shall
he not be able to find it; though there may be some seeming Solutions given,
yet still somewhat will appear insoluble, and to transcend our Understandings.

Having thus shown particularly, That there are some Doctrines and Providence
which transcend our Understandings (i. e.) they are so deep and profound, so
high and much above Us, that we may all with the Apostle cry out, O the depths
of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his
Judgments, and his Ways past finding out! I say, having shown thus much, I will
now proceed to show, How we may Graciously improve these Doctrines and
Providence. In doing which, I will attempt to be as plain and practical as I
can.

The IMPROVEMENT.
That we may Graciously improve these Doctrines and Providence, we must
consider what may be offered toward the quieting our Minds, the establishing
our Faith, the silencing the foolish Arguings of our corrupt Hearts, and the
humbling our selves. May our Minds be quieted, and our Hearts established in
the Truth, may the vain Arguings of corrupt Hearts be silenced, and we brought
to an humble deportment in all our Conversation toward God, notwithstanding
all these difficulties, that are so transcending; the Improvement will be
great: I will therefore distinctly handle these Particulars, showing, That the
very Transcendency of these Doctrines and Providence call for these several
Improvements.

IMPROVEMENT I.
The First Improvement must be an Essay for the Quieting the Mind. The
Transcendency of these Doctrines and Providence, the insuperable Difficulties
in them do generally perplex the minds of men, we cannot comprehend the deep
things of God, and are therefore troubled, our Minds are greatly disquieted
within us. The first Improvement then that we must endeavor to make of these
Transcendencies, is, to get the Mind into a quiet, calm and sedate Frame. For
which end I will even from the Transcendency of these things, propose some
Considerations.

CONSIDERATION I.
The first Consideration for the quieting our Mind, is this; That even in these
Transcendent Doctrines and Providence, we may behold the footsteps of Gods
Transcendency and incomprehensible Greatness, whereby we are engaged to
conclude they are of God. The which is so admirably ordered, that we may see
that they are suited and adjusted unto the Make of Man for his Good.

When I consider the Transcendency of God, the Infinity of him in every
Perfection, I cannot but be abundantly satisfied to behold the footsteps and
impresses thereof in the things that are before me, especially when I also find
that all is so excellently well suited to man for his Good, that as God makes a
Display of his Glory, so he does discover the greatness of his Goodness, even
unto us. This great and mighty God making Man for Himself, for his own Honor
and Glory, cannot glorify Himself by Man, but in a way like Himself; that is,
in a way infinitely above us, in a way that transcends our narrow
Understandings; whence it is that all those Revelations or Doctrines that are
with reference to this great End, as are all the Mysterious Doctrines of our
Religion, and all those Providence that contribute to the bringing it to pass,
are so much above us.

It Is true, God did not only design his own Glory in these Transactions with
men, but also our Good, and therefore it is that those Doctrines and Providence
that are adjusted to these Ends, are in some respect suited to our Capacity;
how else could they be for our Good? If in all respects they should be
infinitely above us, we should not be able to apprehend any thing of them, and
then they could be of no Use unto us; and as they are suited to our Capacity,
even so they are such as bear on them the Signatures and Impresses of that
great God from and by whom they are, and for whose Glory designed. If we
believe that there are any Transactions between God and Man, we must entertain
this Opinion concerning these Doctrines and Providence that are designed for
the bringing them to pass. They must be so manifest and obvious unto us, as to
direct us concerning what is necessary to be done on our part toward the
obtaining the great Ends, and also such as bespeak them to be of God (i. e.)
there must be somewhat in them so high and profound, as to be beyond us.

Whoever will but intensely observe the things that are before us, whether in
the Natural or Moral World, will find somewhat plain, and within our compass,
and other things to us dark and obscure, transcending our understandings; the
which is to show, that all things that proceed from God, are designed both for
our good, and the illustrating the Glory of him from whom they proceed. They
are designed partly for our Good, and therefore partly within our compass; they
are also intended to show forth the Glory of God, and therefore in them there
is somewhat infinitely above us, transcending our Capacities; the which being
so, it is not very difficult to show what Improvement we may make of what
transcends us. Yea, we may hereby learn to make as gracious Improvement of what
is obscure, as of what is more plain and obvious: For hereby, to the great
satisfaction of our Souls, we see much of God in these Doctrines and
Providence. Their Transcendency is a Demonstration that they are of God.

It Is remarkable, that in the most Mysterious Doctrines and Providence there
is somewhat apprehensible by us, enough to oblige us to conclude that there is
no Implication in the Doctrines, nor any Inconsistency between one and another.
They are not contrary unto our Reasons, neither are the Providence such, but
that what difficulty soever about them lies before us, they are not unworthy of
God; only we cannot see how, without all scruple to satisfy our selves
concerning some things of ^^^fer moment with relation unto them. We cannot say
that the Doctrines and Providence are such as in their own nature are
incapable of a Solution; but this only we can say, we know not how to solve
them. There is somewhat in them that is above us, the which does but show that
they are from God. If the Doctrines and Providence had been in all respects
plain and obvious, how could it appear they had been of God; surely what,
things soever are in all respects easily within our compass, cannot be supposed
to be from one infinitely above us; wherefore then that the World may see that
the Author of Christian Doctrines and Providence is God, God has left some
Characters and Idea's of himself upon them, the which may be observed in every
thing that is of God. In those very things that are most known unto us, if well
looked into, we shall find somewhat extraordinary; the Reason of which we
cannot with any satisfaction fully discover, for there is still in them
somewhat beyond us.

We may know that this or the other thing is, and what it is, but how it is so,
or so, we know not. This is true of things In the Natural World, we know that
this is, and what it is, but cannot distinctly show how it is what it is, or
how it possibly should be what it is. We know we see, and what we mean when we
say we see; but yet if we will not believe that we do see until an Hypothesis
be laid down, on which, without any scruple all the many Phenomenon, or
difficult Appearances that arise from the consideration how we see, be solved,
we shall never believe we do see. It Is true, we know that we see by the Eye,
but how by the Eye, is the difficulty. The Eye and the Object are at a
distance, they must be so, if we will see by the Eye; but how, by what Medium
are they brought together? Is there an emission of somewhat from the Eye, or an
interception of any thing that may be supposed to pass from the Object to the
Organ? Whether the one or the other, is it Corporeal, or Incorporeal, Material,
or Immaterial? Not the latter, for what is Incorporeal, Immaterial, cannot
convey the Species to the Eye; nor what is Corporeal for many other Reasons.
Whoever will consult the Old, and (especially) the New Philophers, may see how
much is discoursed on this Subject, and how little to satisfaction. The like of
Hearing, of Motion, etc.

In Philosophy, for this very Reason, namely, Because God has left some Idea's
or Footsteps of himself on the things that are made, there are variety of
Hypotheses, but not one that can solve every Phenomenon or difficult
Appearance. That of Aristotle, is now exploded by most; the old Epicurean
Dogmata revived by Peter Gassend, and the almost forgotten Hypotheses of some
others, of which we have but some Scraps in Cicero, Laertius his Life of the
Heathen Philosophers and others, improved by Des Carts, are all insufficient
for the designed End. Des C^rtes can neither answer what is objected against
him by Gassendus, nor can Gassendus solve every Difficulty that Carts has cast
in his way.

This is so manifest, as that there is hardly a great Wit* but is in one thing
or other finding fault with what is urged by others, as insufficient; setting
up, as he apprehends, somewhat more plausible: and thus 'twill be ad infinitum,
unless the Learned of the World satisfy themselves with this, viz. That in all
the Works of God, how plain soever, there is somewhat of God to be seen in
them, that is infinitely above us, and not to be comprehended by us.

If this then be so in the Natural World, how much more may we suppose it to be
so in the Moral World, in which it pleases the Lord in a more especial manner
to make Discoveries of Himself? The Moral Systeme does after a more lively
manner contain the Portraicture of the Divine Perfections, and therefore in it
there must be somewhat that is more above us than in the Natural. We know
Gospel Doctrines and Providence that do transcend our capacity, we know what
the Doctrines are, and we know that there is reason enough to conclude that
these Doctrines and Providence are of God, and an Additional Argument to
confirm us in this Judgment, is, that they are above us. There are the Marks
and Signatures of Infinity and Incomprehensibility upon them. But shall the
very thing that is designed as an Argument to evince that they are of God, move
us to conclude that they are not of him? If there had not been somewhat
extraordinary, somewhat in these things above us, we might doubt concerning
their being of God; but now there is no place left for such doubtings. Besides,
we must consider that the Doctrines that fill our Minds with various thoughts,
being clearly revealed in Scripture, though not easily understood, are still to
be embraced; for it is their being about the deep things of God, that occasion
their being so far above us. They are about the eternal Counsels and Purposes
of the most High, the Acts and Operations of him, who is incomprehensible; the
Contrivances of fallen Man's Salvation in a way consistent with the Glory of
every Attribute, etc. All which are Matters so grand, that 'twould be
impossible for any finite Capacity to comprehend them, much more so for such
imperfect Worms as our selves. The Doctrines being about these deep Points,
must needs be above us, as the Subject Matter about which these Doctrines are,
be above us. The Transcendency then of these Doctrines should afford
Satisfaction unto us, as it bespeaks them to be of God. God utters things like
a God, when he reveals these profound and Mysterious Doctrines. The like may be
said of the Providence. God acts like himself, as well as speaks like himself:
Yea, and God acts like himself in all his Works of Providence, as well as in
the works of Creation; yea in the works of Gubernation, as well as in those of
Conservation. We cannot comprehend how our Beings are conserved, for it is done
by God; neither can we understand how the World is Governed; for it is God that
governs, ordering all things according to the exactest Rules for his own Glory;
whence if in the Administration of this Government, some Difficulties which
transcend our Understandings, do occur, it is an Argument that God governs the
World like God, in infinite Wisdom, and therefore in a way much above us; and
therefore our Minds may be quiet and at rest about these things.

CONSIDERATION II.
The Second Consideration for quieting our Minds, is, That the Transcendency of
these Doctrines and Providence, does very much contribute to the exciting and
stirring up those Graces, in the exercise of which God is glorified in the
Salvation of some.

Whoever will duly observe what may be known of God by the Discoveries that are
made of him, and what the Make of Man is, will find, That God, when at first he
created us, had a regard to his own Glory, and Man's Salvation in the Exercise
of Religion, whence it is God that formed man after his own Image, and gave him
a Law, that may be considered as the Transcript of his own Purity and Holiness,
and yet such, as was suited to those Powers and Faculties which were at first
given, us: Whence it is, that man was no sooner created, but a Holy Law was
given him, and the Promise of Life on his Obedience. The Law given, is no other
than the Will of the great God, who made us all; which Will must be made known
and revealed unto man, before it can have on him the force of a Law.

Now the Discoveries of God's Will are after a twofold manner; for there are
some other Discoveries than these, that are by the Light of Nature. What may be
understood by the Light of Nature from the things made, is done by the exercise
of our Reason, but what is revealed any other way, is not received the same way
with the former, our knowledge of these Revelations depends not solely on the
exercise of but principally on the exercise of Faith. It Is God, who after an
extraordinary manner, has revealed his Will, and therefore it is on the Truth of
his Testimony, we must lean for the knowledge thereof; that is, we must
Believe, we must exercise Faith; by the Exercise whereof, we come to the
knowledge of those things which we could not arrive unto merely by the Exercise
of our highest Reasonings; and really God delights to try and exercise our
Faith, so that now especially since the Fall, the Life and Heart of that
Religion that is necessary to Salvation, consists in the Exercise of Faith: To
be truly Religious, and to be a sound Believer, are expressions of one and the
same import. The Religion we are designed for, and must now exercise, if we
will be saved, is the Life of Faith, which is a Life much higher than that of
mere Reason; for by Faith we know what by mere Reason we could never know.

If we consider the most momentous Points of our Religion, we shall find, that
as they are adjusted to our own Capacities, even so they are of Matters
infinitely above us; they are of Matters that are not within our view; unto the
knowledge of which, we cannot come, but by some special Revelation: the
certainty of which Revelations depend on the Veracity and Truth of God's
Testimony; and it is our Faith alone by which we receive these Discoveries that
are thus given us of God, whence it is said, that the stronger our Faith is, the
more we glorify God by believing the Truth of his Testimony. And that we may
thus glorify God, it has pleased the Lord so to order the Revelations of his
Mind and Will, and so to dispose of things by his Providence, as to pose our
Reason, and leave us in the dark; at which time, if we lean on the Veracity and
Truth of Gods Testimony about the Doctrine, and on his Wisdom and Righteousness
about his Providence, we discover the strength and firmness of our Faith, to
the Glory of God.

These things being so, it is manifest, That the many profound Doctrines that
are in Scripture, and the many dark Providence that attend us, do very much
contribute to our living the more religiously (i. e.) to our walking the more
by Faith, to the saving the Soul.

This, I conceive, is one great End of the profoundness of the Doctrines of
Religion, and of the many difficulties in the Providence of God, namely, to
raise us up to a Life above Sense and Reason, even to the Life of Faith, which
is a high and a heavenly Life.

The more Difficulties that lie in the way of our Believing, the more strong is
the Faith that is exercised; and the stronger our Faith, the more God is
glorified by us, and the more is our Salvation furthered; the which being so,
we have great reason to be abundantly quickened in our Thoughts.

If we consider the Nature of Faith, we shall find that Mysterious Doctrines
and Providence are very necessary for the engaging us to apply our selves to
the Exercise of it.

1. FAITH is the Evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.1. The Evidence not only
of unseen future Glories, but the Evidence of somewhat else, not within the
view of our Sense or Reason. Faith does evidence unto the Believer the Reality
and Certainty of the Promises about Spiritual Blessings to be enjoyed in this
Life, and does clearly show unto him, that these Blessings promised are real,
and shall most assuredly be enjoyed; yea, though there are in the eye of our
Sense, and our Natural Reasonings, some Impossibilities between us and the
inheriting the Promises, yet even then Faith sees the Accomplishment not only
possible, but certain and sure.

By Faith we believe and receive those Truths which, though clearly enough
revealed, yet are so much above our Capacity, that we cannot otherwise embrace
them.

By Faith we believe that the Promise shall be, when we cannot see how it can
be. Thus was the Faith of Abraham exercised; He believed when his Sight and
Reason failed him. Abraham was an hundred years old, and as it were dead, Sarah
barren, and now according to all Rules past Childbearing, notwithstanding all
which, the Promise being made, that Sarah should bear a Son, Abraham believes;
he could see how this could be, by Faith, though he could not see how it could
be, by his Reason. According to his own Reasonings his Hopes were gone, but
being strong in Faith, he staggered not at the Promise, but had a hope above
Hope, being fully persuaded, that what God had promised, he was able also to
perform, Romans 4. The like also when God commanded Abraham to offer up his Son,
his own, his only Son Isaac, whom he loved and of whom the Promise was, for in
Isaac shall thy Seed be called, but nevertheless Abraham is commanded to kill
him for a Sacrifice, but here is the difficulty, if Isaac be slain while so
young as he then was, even before he had any child, how could the Promise be
fulfilled? Abraham must kill him, and yet believe, that he should live, that he
might be the Father of many Nations, but how could this be? Surely this
transcended his Understanding, but not his Faith; for he believed, That God was
able to raise him from the dead, therefore it is said by Faith, Abraham when he
was tempted offered up Isaac, accounting that God was able to raise him up from
the dead, Heb. 11.17, 18, 19. Time would fail to mention Jacob, Joseph, Moses,
David, and many others, who when surrounded with dark Dispensations, by
Believing gave Glory to God. Then Faith is in a special manner acted and
exercised, when the Believer is compassed about with a cloud of difficulties;
when in the Doctrines (that being plainly revealed) are to be believed, there
is somewhat above our Reason, and when in the Providence with which we meet,
there is somewhat very dark, they seeming to thwart the doctrinal Discoveries,
that are made of the Will of God unto us, then is the time to act Faith, that
is not Faith, which does carry us no higher than our own scanty Reasonings. To
believe no more than we can comprehend with our own Reason, is too low a thing
to deserve the name of Faith, Faith is a more noble and raised Grace by which a
man believes, when his Reason is at a Loss.

What is here said of Faith is a great Truth, and if duly weighed will afford
relief to such as are perplexed with the profoundness of some Doctrines, etc.
For by this it is manifest, That the Mysteriousness of the Doctrines, the
surprising manner in which they are revealed, the difficulties about the Hebrew
Points, and some Instances in Chronology, the various Readings and the like;
they all serve as a spur to our Faith, and a furtherance to our Salvation.

We have Arguments enough to convince us of the Truth of Scripture the
certainty of a divine Providence, and therefore we ought not to be unbelieving,
though we meet with some Difficulties that our Reason cannot overcome. This
should satisfy us, that how great soever the difficulties may be, how far
soever they transcend our Understandings, yet there is in 'em no Implication,
and if so, they are in themselves reconcilable, and although finite worms are
not acquainted with the true Methods of Conciliation, yet God, who is Infinite
in all perfections, is These difficulties should not in the least stumble our
Faith, but rather engage us to be the more strong in believing.

2. As by Faith we behold the Accomplishment of the Promises, which are not
comprehended by our Reason, and can thorough the Mysteriousness of Doctrines
and Providence see that they are of God, so by Faith we are enabled to put our
trust, and Confidence in God, even when under the darkest Dispensations. Faith
never appears so much in its luster as when the greatest difficulties lie
before it. Then it is that the Believer puts his trust in the Power, Wisdom,
Mercy and Faithfulness of God, when under the obscurest Dispensations. When
there are some difficult Appearances in the Sacred Scriptures that relate to
some Doctrines, and when some Providence seem to be contrary to the
discoveries that are made of God's Faithfulness, etc. then it is that our Faith
appears in its beauty; for thereby we show the just apprehensions we have of
God's Power, Wisdom, Mercy and Faithfulness. That God has promised to extend
his Compassions to Believers, that he will order all things to work together
for their good, is evident enough in Scripture; but yet notwithstanding this,
all things seem to be against them, they are afflicted, and under sore
temptations, they lose their temporal Estates, are deprived of their Liberty,
are sick, weak, and in great distress, several thwarting Providence attend
them, all things are seemingly against them: thus it was with good old Jacob,
he is bereaved of his Children, Joseph is not, S^meon is not, and Benjamin must
be taken away; All these things (says he) are against me, Genesis 42.36. But yet
this was the time for Jacob to exercise his Faith, as he did in the following
Chapter, ver. 14. q. d. The Lord Almighty be with you, with him I leave you; to
him I commit my Concerns; if I am bereaved, I am bereaved (i. e.) the will of
the Lord be done. Thus it was with Job; God had suffered the Tempter to break
in upon him; God himself seemed as if he was resolved he should die; and yet
then could Job say, Though he slay me, yet will I put my trust in him, Job
13.15. So with Habakkuk, chap. 13.17, 18, 19. Although the Fig Tree shall not
blossom, neither shall fruit be in the Vines, though the labor of the Olive
shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat, though the slocks shall be cut
off the Fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls, yet will I rejoice in
the Lord, the Lord God is my strength, he will make me to walk in mine high
places.

Many other Instances might be given, all which concur to evince, That then is
the time to put our trust in the Lord, when we are in the dark, and can see no
light, when there are in the Providence of God somewhat above us, that we
cannot reach unto, then it is that we are to look unto a Rock that is higher
than our selves; then are we called to put our trust in the Wisdom and Mercy
and Faithfulness of him who has promised to be with us, to uphold and support
us, as said David, At what time I am afraid I will trust in the Lord; for
though my Heart and my Flesh fail, yet God will be the strength of my heart,
and my portion for ever. On the other side, when at the sight of the prosperity
of the wicked, the Believers feet were almost gone, and his steps did well-nigh
slip, it is his Confidence in God that is then his stay. The Providence of God
in this Instance are remarkable; for though God had said, that the wicked shall
not prosper, nor live out half their days, yet behold they live, and their
houses are safe from fear, they prosper in the world, they increase in riches.
How is this consistent with the threatening? or how can the righteous see this,
and not be troubled? Surely when they enter into the Sanctuary, they see the
End of all, and are abundantly satisfied; their Faith is hereby tried, but yet
they can say, Good is God to Israel. They begin to reason with God, and will
say, Wherefore are all they happy that deal very treacherously? but still
conclude, that the Lord is righteous, Jer. 12.1. Though Clouds and Darkness are
round about him, yet Righteousness and Judgment are the Habitation of his
Throne: For notwithstanding all the dark Dispensations, the Godly do still put
their trust in the Lord, they stay themselves on his Wisdom, Power, Mercy, and
Faithfulness: the doing which, all should endeavor when under dark
Dispensations.

2. Hereby the Grace of Patience is to the Glory of God held up in a continued
exercise. Patience is not to be considered to consist merely in an enduring the
conflict of Temptations and Afflictions with a quiet, calm and sedate temper of
Spirit, but also in a quiet waiting for, and expectation of the accomplishment
of some great and glorious Promises, in looking and patiently waiting for the
End, when we shall see with much clearness what now lies in the dark, and out
of our view. But if we hope for what we see not, then do we with Patience wait
for it, says the Apostle, Romans 8.25.

Now there seems to be some inconsistency between Doctrine and Doctrine,
between some Doctrines and Providence, yea and between Providence and
Providence, but yet we must conclude, That it is not so, and that the time will
come when our Lord will not speak any more in Parables unto us, when the Vail
shall be done away, and when we shall find every thing to answer the Truth and
Holiness of God, no inconsistency in any of the Doctrines and Providence, but
the exactest Agreement, and most excellent Harmony, every one Doctrine and
Providence concurring to the illustration of each other; all which shall be
seen with great satisfaction when we shall depart hence and be with the Lord.
Now we know but in part, we see but through a Glass darkly, but then we shall
know as we are known, and see Face to face; the Vail shall be taken away; it is
true, even then somewhat will transcend our Understandings, for the Reasons
suggested in the first Consideration. We must not think that God can divest
himself of his Divinity, or make any thing that has not in one regard or other
some Impresses that discover its Author to be infinite; neither must we imagine
that man shall cease to be man, or cease to be a Finite weight, neither hope
that his capacity shall be enlarged to comprehend Infiniteness, but this we may
safely conclude, That we shall know more hereafter than now, and that the
present Darkness with which we are now surrounded, is no more than what is
suited to the state in which we now live. They that are born of God, are
encompassed with those Remainders of old Corruptions, which greatly indispose
us for the receiving greater Light.

There is an admirable Order to be observed in the Works and Providence of God.

First, that which is Natural, then that which is Spiritual: firrst, that which
is less perfect, then that which is more perfect: first, a dark Evening, then a
glorious Morning: first, Starlight, that is, Light shining in dark places,
then the Day Star from on high, the Sun of Righteousness arises to enlighten
our darkness: first, the Knowledge the World had of God and Christ was very
little, then some shadowy Representations were made of heavenly Truths, and now
the Image, but not yet the heavenly things themselves. Under the Law was the
Shadow of Heavenly things (i. e.) a draught of Heavenly things in
Watercolors, now the Image of Heavenly things, Heb. 10.1. that is, a more
lively Representation or Portraiture of them. Under the Law there was a Vail
over the Peoples Faces, they could see but the Shadow, but we all with open
face, 2 Cor. 3.10. (i. e.) with a face unvailed behold the Glory of the Lord,
but as in a Glass, in which we have but the Image; for Christ, though he
brought us a clearer discovery of things, yet considered our state, and
therefore spoke but of earthly things, John 3.12. That is, the discovery that
now we have is very dark to what it shall be in Heaven, when we are capable of
receiving Heavenly discoveries, and look into the Heavenly things themselves.
Now we see that the discoveries that are made unto us, are of God; for the
Signatures of infinite wisdom are found on them, but then the discovery will be
more full, more clear, distinct and satisfying. Now we know but just enough to
quicken us to look for further Knowledge about the Doctrines and Providence of
God; and the more we know, the more we desire to know; and such as have formed
any right Conceptions about them, cannot but conclude, there is somewhat
excellent in the knowledge of these things, and though the more we pry into
them now, the more unsatisfied we are, because we know no more; yet this is
some Relief, That we shall know more hereafter; whence it is, that a Judicious
and Understanding Christian is the more inclined to leave this dark State,
looking for that State of Vision in which we shall know and see more of God,
his Ways and Workings.

Really there is an extraordinary satisfaction that will attend us in that
state wherein we shall be filled with as much and as distinct a Knowledge as
our Understandings are capable of receiving; the which satisfaction is too
great an happiness for sinful Mortals here; it is a Felicity reserved for
hereafter.

The like may be said of the Providence of God, which may be considered as a
curious Work, a part of which only is within our view, and because we see not
the whole, we are at a loss concerning what we see; for we find most of the
several Parts that are before us, to be without any Order or Comeliness, the
which must necessarily be so, because it is but a Part of the work that we see,
and the Beauty which is the Result of that admirable Connection that is to be
between part and part in the putting all things together, cannot be seen till
the end of all, for which we must both hope and patiently wait.

It Is true, many Instances can be given wherein the several parts of
Providence, with respect to this or the other godly man, seem very strange and
surprising, and yet put together, render the highest satisfaction. Joseph was a
good man, and had a Right to the Promise, That all things should work together
for his good, but yet if you consider some Providence relating to him
distinctly, you will find all things against him; namely, that he should be
sold by his Brethren, that he should be carried into Egypt, and when in
Potiphars House, be falsely accused by his Mistress and cast into Prison, and
there continue for a long time; but yet put these Providence together, and you
will see what dependence the one had on the other, and how all are joined
together for Joseph's Advancement; for had not Joseph been sold by his
Brethren, how could he have been brought down to Egypt, and placed in the
capacity of a Servant with Potiphar? and if he had not been with Potiphar, how
could he by the false Accusation of his Mistress, be imprisoned? and if not
imprisoned, how could he have had the opportunity of interpreting the Chief
Butler's Dream, which was the occasion of his being called before Pharaoh, by
which means Joseph was so highly advanced, as to be made Ruler over all the
Land of Egypt?

Many other Instances might be given, but this is sufficient to show, that the
great reason, why many providence so far transcend our understandings, that we
cannot find out the Consistency, the admirable Order and Harmony that is in
them, is this, namely, we see not the End; if we could see the End, we should
have a fuller satisfaction, but till then we must patiently wait.

By this it is evident that the Correspondency of these Doctrines and
Providence is an excellent Expedient to excite those Graces that are necessary
to Salvation, and therefore our Minds may very well be quieted without it.

So much to the first Improvement, I Will proceed to a Second.

IMPROVEMENT II.
The Second Improvement is this; We may from the Transcendency of these
Doctrines and Providence, fetch an unanswerable Argument to confirm and
establish us in the Truth of the Christian Religion.

From what has been already urged for the quieting of our Minds about these
insoluble Difficulties, 'twas shown, that the Transcendency that is in these
Doctrines and Providence, was but the footsteps of God's Transcendency. Let us
then but take this for granted, and compare the Impresses or Footsteps that
there are of God's Transcendency in these Doctrines, with those on the things
that are made, and to be seen in the Providence of God, I say, compare the
Doctrines of the Gospel, the things made, and his Providence together, and we
shall find an excellent Harmony between them, even in this respect, that the
footsteps of God's Transcendency are to be seen in them all. Whence we have as
satisfying an Argument to convince us that the Doctrines of the Gospel are from
God, and consequently true, as that the world was created by him, and is now
under his Government; yea such as believe a Providence, and the Scripture to be
the Word of God, have as much to offer for their Faith as the mere Deist (who
only belive the Existence of a God) has for his; for the very same Characters,
Signatures, Impresses and Footsteps of Gods infinite Perfections that are on
the things made, are in these Doctrines and Providence, of which the
Transcendency that is in them, is an uncontrollable Evidence. Why do we believe
the World to be made of God, but because we see that the things made are so
admirably framed and ordered, that there is somewhat in them incomprehensible
by us? They are made by One whose Wisdom is infinite, and transcends our
largest Capacities. In like manner those who will look into the Scriptures, and
consult the Doctrines of the Gospel, will find that there are the Impresses of
infinite Wisdom in them, which could not be unless they had been of God, who is
infinitely wise; whence it is that by the Transcendency that is in the
Doctrines, we are engaged to conclude that they are true (i. e.) we are hereby
confirmed and established in the Truth of the Christian Religion, that is
discovered unto us in the Holy Scriptures.

IMPROVEMENT. III.
The Third Improvement is this; The Transcendency of these Doctrines and
Providence prove most excellent Expedients to silence and stop the mouths of
the Ungodly; for by the Transcendency of some Doctrines and Providence, God is
carrying on the great End of glorifying his Righteousness in the letting out
his Fury and Indignation on the Vessels of Wrath.

God who made all things for himself, will be Glorified either by or upon the
People he has made: God will be glorified by some to their Salvation, and upon
others in their Condemnation. And by the Transcendency that is in the Doctrines
and Providence, both are done: For the Transcendency of these Doctrines and
Providence, as has been already shown, exciting the Faith and Patience of
some, does farther their Salvation; and as they are Stumbling Blocks in the way
of others, they occasion the Ruin and Destruction of others.

These Transcendent Doctrines and Providence must be considered as
stumbling blocks that God puts in their way, not that there is any Evil in
God's putting them in the way, but the Evil is only from the indisposition of
the corrupt Heart of man.

For the clearer understanding which, we must consider that there is certainly
such a Decree as that of the Election of some particular Persons unto Glory;
which does necessarily infer the dereliction of others, the leaving them in a
state of Sin and Misery* Some being Elect according to the foreknowledge of
God the Father, shall through the sanctification of the Spirit unto Obedience,
and the sprinkling of the Blood of Jesus Christ, obtain Salvation with Eternal
Glory: But others there are, even ungodly men, who turn the Grace of our God
into lasciviousness, and who were of old ordained unto Condemnation.

The Salvation of some, the Damnation of others, is acknowledged by all to be
certain as to the Event, and that there is no event in time, but what was
foreknown of God from Eternity, is not denied by any that believe God to be
God; and that these Events cannot be without a Providence of God, is most
manifest. It Is true, God has a greater influence on the Elect, than on others;
for God does not only support their Powers and Faculties, and by a Physical
Efficience enable them to perform what is Natural in their Moral Actions, but
moreover God does by his mighty Power in infinite Wisdom sweetly determine the
Elect to the doing what is morally good, and savingly gracious, God does not so
much in such Actions as are sinful and vicious; the moral Vitiosity or
Obliquity that is in a sinful Action, is not of God, though what is natural in
a sinful Action, has its Origin and Rise from God, yet what is Moral and
Vicious, is not from God, God does not Physically and Invincibly determine any
man to what is sinful in any Action; the Sinfulness of an Action has no higher
Being than a Creature for its Author. However, though the Sins of the Damned
are without a Divine Physical Predetermination, yet not without a Divine
Providence. There is no Event without a Providence of God: As all Events are
according to the foreknowledge of God, so they are by his Providence. The
Destruction of Pharaoh in the Red Sea, according to the foreknowledge of God,
and the hardness of his Heart, that was the Cause of his ruin was by Gods
Providence. This Providence is somewhat more than a mere unconcerned
permission, and yet much less than a Physical Predetermination; it falls short
of this latter, because God has no Physical influence on the sinfulness of our
Actions, and it is more than the former; for the Wisdom and Power of God is
marvellously exercised in doing very much toward the bringing the Event to
pass, and that by laying stumbling blocks in the way of the Non-Elect; which
stumbling blocks in our way, may occasion our Sin and Ruin, but not cause it;
so that although the Lord does lay Stones of stumbling in our way, which
occasions our Sin, yet he cannot be said to be the Cause or Author of our Sin.
No one is the Cause or Author of another Sin, but he who does either
Physically or Morally contribute to the Commission of Sin; but though God lays
stones of stumbling before the Sinner, yet he does not in doing so, either
morally by persuasions draw, or physically by Impression drive him to the Sin.
The stumbling block is before him, and from it the Sinner takes occasion to sin
against the Lord. Though such is the infinite Knowledge and Wisdom of God, that
he foreknows that such a Block in the Sinners way, will occasion his Sin, and
notwithstanding puts it in his way, yet he is not therefore the Author of his
Sin, because God does not hereby either Physically or Morally move the Sinner
to the Sin; for the Sinner having a Natural power to withstand it, it is his
Wilfulness and Sin he does not.

That God does lay stones of stumbling before us, is evident enough to any who
will consult the Sacred Scriptures. In Ezekiel 3.20. it is said that God does
lay a stumbling block before the man who was externally Righteous, and he turns
from his Righteousness unto Sin, and dies in his Iniquity.

This will appear more convincingly in the Instances I will give concerning it.

The D^scoveries that are made of Gods gracious Designs toward us, are about
such matters as do amuse us; whoever will consider what is declared in the
Gospel concerning the way to eternal life, will find that Jesus Christ, though
he be God as well as Man, and as God is infinite in all Perfections, yet he
suffered a Vail to be on his Divinity, and took on him the form of a Servant,
his Birth was very mean, as appears by the Circumstances of it; his Education
under his Parents no way splendid; Is not this the Carpenters Son? his Converse
among poor Fishermen, and he at length became obedient to the death of the
Cross. He was a man of Sorrows, and very contemptible in the Eye of the world;
whence it is that he is unto the Jews, who expected a Messiah to come with
worldly Grandeur, a stumbling block, 1 Cor. 1.23.

In like manner are the many profound Doctrines of the Gospel, stones of
stumbling. Christ (i. e.) the Doctrines of Christ, not only such as relate to
the Meanness of his Person, but many others, are as stones of stumbling, and
rocks of offense to both the Houses of Israel, and for a Gin, and for a Snare,
and many among them shall stumble, and fall, and be broken, and be snared, and
be taken, Isa. 8.14, 15.

For this very reason, I humbly conclude, there are so many (...); things hard
to be understood in the Scriptures, so many difficulties about the Original,
the various Readings of Scripture, etc. Yea, for this Reason do many wicked men
increase in Riches, they have much Silver and Gold, but it is a stumbling block
unto them, even the stumbling block of their Iniquity, Ezekiel. 7.19. Their very
Tables are made a Snare, a Trap, a stumbling block, a Recompense unto the
wicked. Oh! how many do take occasion from the several Difficulties that lie
before them in the Word of God, and in his Providence, to reject all Religion,
to the eternal destruction of their own Souls; the which is done to the
Exaltation of the glorious Righteousness of God, that is seen in the
Condemnation of the Vessels of Wrath, who were endured with much
long-suffering; and all this by the signal Providence of God, which are
concerned in the Accomplishment of these high Ends, yet so, that the Purity and
Holiness of God appears as glorious as does his Justice and Righteousness; for
God, who lays these stumbling blocks before us, does not cause our Sin, for
that only follows our meeting them in our way, as the product of our own
Corruption.

It Is admirable to consider, that the very same thing, that is a Mean to excite
Grace in the One, should be an Occasion of Infidelity and other Sins in
Another. That such Contrarieties should in different ways proceed from one and
the same Providence; that one and the same thing should be a Means of the
Salvation of the one, and the Occasion of the Destruction of the other. There
is much of infinite Wisdom to be seen in this Contrivance; for hereby, in the
very same thing that proves an occasion of the Ruin of the non-Elect, there is
enough to stop their mouths, and silence them, and all such as do take occasion
therefrom to sin against God. For what ever the secret Counsels of God are
concerning this or the other particular Person, God does treat all in a way
suitable to those Capacities he has given us, he considers us all as Rational
Creatures, as Moral Agents, and has taken us all under his Government, and is
as sincere in the Promises of Life he makes unto all on their Compliances with
his terms, as he is just and true in the execution of the threatened Evils
against such as remain obstinate Transgressors; and as for the insuperable
Difficulties that lie before us, the Doctrines and Providence that transcend
our Understandings, they are as excellent Expedients to engage us to believe to
the saving of the Soul, as they are the occasions of that Unbelief that ends in
the damnation of those that perish.

Wherefore then seeing this is so, seeing so much good may be gathered from
these Doctrines and Providence, such as take occasion from them to sin, to
reject all Religion, and live Atheistically in the World, are without Excuse;
for it is manifest, that a better Use might have been made of thief things, and
that it is their own Sin, that they have made so ill an Use thereof, the which
will not in the least excuse, but aggravate their Misery, and justify God in
their Condemnation.

IMPROVEMENT IV.
Fourthly, We may hence learn to entertain more awful Apprehensions of the
Greatness and Majesty of God, and more low thoughts of our selves.

Such is the boldness of most men, that they fear not to pry into those things
that are above them, even into the Secrets of the most High. We are not
satisfied with what is revealed, but are too curiously searching into the
hidden things of God; although it is impossible that this Curiosity should be
attended with the desired success, and although it proved fatal to our first
Parents, who desiring to know more than was meet, fell from that happy state in
which they were at first placed, yet the temper of most studious Enquirers is
to be too curious and bold; and this they will be, though they turn the whole
World into confusion by their Contests.

It Is not unworthy our thoughts to consider what is the principal ground of the
many Quarrels and Wranglings that have been and are among the Learned; for then
we shall find that a too bold Enquiry into the things that are above us, and
unlawful to be pried into, is the ground of all. There is in us an ambition to
be like unto God, we would fain know as much as he who is Omniscient; our
Souls, though in their own Nature, are finite, yet in the desires they have of
knowing things, are in a manner infinite. The deep things of God cannot escape
our narrowest search; the Nature of his Being, the Modes and Media of his
Operations, and his eternal Counsels fall under our strictest Scrutiny and
boldest Debates.

It Is strange to consider with what Confidence vain Mortals will dispute about
these things, and no less surprising to observe the great Confusion and
Disorders that have followed such Disputes. How confidently do the Dominicans
and Molinists, the Scotists and Durandists, and other Schoolmen among the
Papists, the Remonstrants, and Anti-Remonstrants, the Supra and Sublapsarians
among Protestants, talk of God, his Decrees, and their Order, as well as about
Physical Predetermination, etc. Among all which there are different Opinions in
one respect or other, but yet by all one and the same unpardonable Confidence
discovered in adhering to their own Dogmata; for about these abstruse Points,
they are all as resolute in their determinations, as in Matters most plain and
obvious; the tendency of which has been nothing less than Strife, Contention,
and endless Quarrels, yea, strange Animosities and Confusions; whereas, if we
did but seriously consider that all these Matters are above us, that they
transcend the largest Capacities, and therefore are not to be pried into,
instead of spending our time and strength about them, we should be engaged to
entertain more awful Apprehensions of the greatness of God, and lower thoughts
of our selves.

What more manifest, than that there are some Doctrines and Providence which
transcend our Understandings; or than that we are but feeble and impotent
Beings, who cannot search them out? This is not only supposed in our Question,
but has been already evinced in this Discourse. And is it so? Is there such a
Transcendency in the Doctrines and Providence of God? Is there somewhat
secret, somewhat above us, and yet shall we by an unjustifiable Curiosity in
prying into these Secrets, presume on God? What! do thou not consider, that
God is infinitely above thee, that he dwells in that Light that no Eye can
approach unto; that his Throne is in the Heavens; and that there are Clouds and
Darkness round about him, and that his Glory is inaccessible? why then art thou
not afraid to come too near him; why dare thou to fix thine eye upon him?

The Transcendency of the Doctrines and Providence of God is his Glory; which
no Eye can see and live; and yet presumest thou to desire a sight thereof?
Behold! when a glimpse of the Glory of the Lord appeared but in the face of
Moses, the People could not bear it, and therefore a Vail was put on his face;
and art not thou as unable to behold the Glory it self, as the Israelites were
to fix their Eye on a glimpse of it? Consider the Shinings of Moses's face
represent unto us the Beauty, and Luster, and bright Glory that is in the
Doctrines of God; so great was the Light of Gospel-Doctrines then, that the
Children of Israel could not bear it, and therefore it pleased the Lord in
compassion to humane weaknesses to give them but the shadow of heavenly things;
the glorious Light of those Doctrines was under the Vail, 'twas hid under Types
and Ceremonies, so that they had but some darker representations, such as they
could bear; and now, though we are enabled to bear more, and accordingly have
clearer Discoveries of this glorious Light, yet not being able to bear the
Light it self, the heavenly things themselves, we have but the Image; though
the Vail is not such as hides from us so much of the Glory as the Jewish Types
did, yet the Vail that is over the Glory now, is such as keeps us from seeing
it, as it is. The Truth of which is confirmed unto us by the Transcendency we
now find in these Doctrines; there is a Cloud between somewhat in them and us,
and therefore we cannot find them fully out; the which being so, it should teach
us to consider our own State and condition, how weak and feeble we are, and
what reason we have to be humble and modest in all our Enquiries about these
things.

Could we but believe that the Transcendency that is in the Doctrines and
Providence of God, is what indeed it is, an unanswerable Argument to confirm
us in the Truth of this Point, namely, That there is an inaccessible Glory in
those Doctrines and Providence, even that Light which we are not able to bear,
or to behold and live; we should see cause to entertain more grand, august, and
awful Apprehensions of God, as well as lower thoughts of our selves, and then
instead of dssputing boldly about these Transcendencies, we should find reason
enough to acknowledge our own frailty and weakness, and in the sense thereof to
be humble and modest in all our Disquisitions. Alas! what is man that he should
come so near the Ark of God, or dare make too near approach unto the Mount that
burns, and is covered with a Cloud of Smoke and great Darkness?

Whoever will duly consider, How that man when in Innocence was mostly disposed
to close with the Temptation of being like unto God in Knowledge, and that the
Lord ever since the Fall, has taken special care to keep us very much in the
dark, may easily see, that the Use we are to make of the Transcendency of the
Doctrines and Providence of God, is to walk humbly before the Lord, and to be
afraid to enquire too curiously after his Secrets. When Adam was first Created,
his Knowledge was much more full, clear, and distinct than afterward it was;
and no question but that it afforded him suitable delight and satisfaction. He
saw so much Excellency in the Knowledge of God and his works, that a Temptation
to the doing any thing but what might increase his Knowledge, would with the
greatest disdain be contemned and rejected: This the subtle Tempter saw, and
therefore recommends the forbidden Fruit, as what was rather to be chosen as a
Means of enlarging his Knowledge, than as what was pleasing to the Taste; Ye
shall be as Gods, knowing Good and Evil. Adam finding so much pleasure in the
Knowledge he already had, is soon tempted to be inordinate in the desiring
more, yea, so inordinate, that as soon as he meets with the Temptation, no
Knowledge less than what was like unto Gods, could satisfy him, and so he
fell. So that the Sin of our first Parents was an ambition to be like unto God
in Knowledge, an inordinate desire of knowing what could not be known by any
but by him whose Understanding is infinite; and this Sin appears in all his
Offspring; we would fain be like unto God, and we are unwilling to be
satisfied with such Measures as the Lord appoints, and therefore are prying
into the deep things of God. Such are our low thoughts of God, and such are the
high thoughts we have of our selves, that we think it not impossible to know
God to perfection, and therefore are so curious and strict in our enquiry after
him.

But it has pleased the Lord to show himself to be God, and that we are but
men, by the wonders he has wrought on Earth. Hence proud man in aspiring after
more Knowledge than was meet, has lost what he formerly had; his Understanding
is darkened, his Heart is blinded, he cannot see, the Faculties of his Soul,
though they remain, yet not in their primitive strength and vigor, they are
greatly impaired and corrupted; yea, the enlightened Minds of the Regenerate
have on them such remainders of old Corruption, as unfits them for the
receiving all that may be known of God. And ever since the Fall, the Methods
God has taken in enlightening men, is such, as may convince us that we are but
men, finite worms, who cannot comprehend the infinite Glories of the Lord. For
it has pleased the Lord to give unto the Children of men some darker
representations of himself, and and in those Revelations that are most plain
and clear, there is enough to demonstrate, that there is somewhat in every
Doctrine and Providence that is above us; God keeps his distance, he will make
us know that he is the Lord, and that we are but men, even vain Worms; that
cannot comprehend him, and who therefore ought to submit our selves unto God,
and humble our selves before him, and not come too near him; for the nearer we
come, the more we are in the dark, the more at a loss, yea the more perplexed
and confused are our Apprehensions. This the Transcendency of the Doctrines and
Providence of God does evince; which is enough to show, how humble we ought to
be when we discourse of God, and how modest in our Enquiries into his Doctrines
and Providence. Content thy self therefore with what is clearly revealed, and
leave what is hid and above thee unto God. Be not thou so bold as to measure
the boundless Mysteries of God, by thy narrow confined Understanding; neither
do thou presume to reject what thou can not comprehend. What is of God is
above thee, for God is God, he is cloath^^ with Honor and Majesty, and with
that Light which is inaccessible. We ought therefore to be modest when we speak
of the unsearchable Doctrines and Providence of God; for in them we see enough
to admire, but can never comprehend; and when we have spent all our time to
find out God, and the Infinity of his Being, the Mystery of the Trinity, the
Mode of his Workings or Operations, the depth of his Contrivances about the
accomplishing fallen man's Salvation, and all the great Counsels of God, and the
Intricacy of his Providence, we must come to this Close with the Apostle, O!
the depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! how
unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out.

Quest. How ought we to do our duty toward others, tho they do not theirs
toward us? SERMON XIX.
ROMANS XII. 21. Be not overcome of evil: but overcome evil with good.
WHEN God first made the Heavens and the Earth, Genesis 31.1.
and all the Host of them, looking back upon his Work, as taking delight in it,
He saw every thing that he had made, and behold, it was very good. There was an
excellent order, and sweet harmony every where: all the Creatures above and
below, making then but one Host, Genesis 2.1.
did conspire to glorify their Creator, and be beneficial one to another. So
that if man had stood in his integrity, the Earth would have been a kind of
Heaven to him; but when he put forth his hand to take and eat of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil, which alone, of all the great Variety, was forbidden
him; an inundation of sin and misery broke in upon him, and all his Posterity:
For from that one sin of his, there sprung, in a little time, a far greater
number of sins, than persons out of his loins; one sin still begetting another,
and that another, till in a while, the earth was filled with violence. Genesis
6.11.
God not willing to leave things in this woeful state, designed a Renovation by
a Second Adam, a Reconciler, one that should be our peace both with God, and
one another, that there might be peace above, and peace below restored again.

There were two Songs sung to this purpose; the one at Christ's coming into the
World, the other as he was about to depart out of it; the former by a multitude
of the Heavenly Host, saying, Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace;
the latter, by the whole multitude of the Disciples, saying, Peace in heaven,
and glory in the highest, Luke 2.14. and 29.38.

The subordinate means of Reconciliation, is the Gospel, called the word of
reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.19. Ephesians. 6.15.
and the Gospel of peace. This is the great Engine in the hand of God, to bring
men powerfully, yet sweetly to God, and one another. There are no Arguments so
powerful to persuade to holiness toward God, and righteousness toward men, as
those drawn from Gospel Grace. The Grace of God, which brings salvation, will
teach a man those lessons, Tit. 2.11, 12.
which can never be truly learned otherwise, To live soberly, righteously and
godly.

Therefore our Apostle, like a wise Master Builder, in his Epistles, usually,
as may be seen particularly in those to the Ephesians and Colossians, lays a
good Foundation for Gospel-obedience, in the Grace thereof. He first sets forth
the great mystery of Redemption by Jesus Christ, and the Grace of God therein;
and then concludes with exhortation to all duties, both to God and Man, from
the consideration thereof.

He does the like here in this to the Romans: For having, in the foregoing part
of the Epistle, convinced both Jew and Gentile, and concluded all under sin,
and showed the only way to Justification, to be by the Grace of God, through
Jesus Christ, he comes in this, and the following Chapters, to engage them to
their duty both to God and Man. See how he does it, ver. 1. I beseech you
therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a
living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service.
Your bodies: that is, your selves, souls and bodies; the body being put by a
Synecdoche, for the whole man. He expresses both elsewhere, as due to God,
upon the account of redeeming-love, 1 Cor. 6.20. Ye are bought with a price:
therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, which are Gods. He
exhorts them to many excellent duties in this Chapter; upon all which, the word
therefore, ver. 1. has a powerful influence. Although the duty here exhorted to
in the last Verse, be so high, that it is not easy to reach unto it, viz. not
to be overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good; yet the consideration of
the mercies of God, mentioned above, will make this appear to be but a
reasonable service.

The point of Doctrine from this Text is,

Doct. That every Christian should not only take heed, that he be not overcome
of evil; but endeavor, what in him lies, to overcome evil with good.

It divides it self into Two Branches: 1. Every Christian should take heed,
that he be not overcome of evil. 2. Every Christian ought to endeavor, what in
him lies, to overcome evil with good.


We shall speak a little to each of these in order, and make the Application of
both together; which done, you will see, How we ought to do our duty toward
others, tho they do not theirs toward us. I begin with the first:

1. Bran. Every Christiaa should take heed, that he be not overcome of evil.

By evil, understand any unkind, or injurious dealing from others; which may be,

1. By detaining, or withdrawing from us the love, or the fruits thereos, which
by the will of God are due to us, either as men, or men standing in such, or
such a special Relation to them: Or,

2. By speaking, or doing that to us, or against us, which the Law of Love, or
the special Relation wherein we stand unto them, forbids.

To be overcome of evil, is to be drawn by the evil Temper, or Carriage of
another toward us, to be of the like Temper, and Carriage toward him: To be
so provoked by an injury done unto us, as to return the like again.

As when two contraries are put together, suppose Fire and Water, that which
brings the other to its Temper, is said to Master, and overcome it; so when
another's malice toward us, cools our love to him, and brings us to the like
evil disposition toward him, our love may be said to be overcome by his malice.

And great reason there is, that we should take heed, that we be not overcome
of evil.

1. If we consider what Relics of Corruption there are in good men. We live
not among Angels, but men compassed about with many Infirmities, which will be
apt to make them sometimes offensive to us.

When the Seer came to Asa with a Message from God, because it was that which
did not please him, he was wroth, and in a rage with him, 2 Chr. 16.10
and put him in Prison; a strange act of a good King! yet so he was; for the
Scripture testifies of him, 1 Kings 13.14. That, Nevertheless Asa's heart was
perfect with the Lord all his days. Aaron, the Saint of the Lord, Numb. 12.1.
as he is called, Psalm. 106.16. and Miriam, are found chiding with Moses, their
brother. Two of the most eminent Preachers of the Gospel of Peace, Paul and
Barnabas, are at variance; Acts 15.39.
and the contention is so sharp between them, that they depart asunder one from
the other. So true was that saying of theirs to the men of Lystra, who seeing a
Miracle wrought by them, were about to do Sacrifice, as if they had been Gods:
Sirs, why do ye these things? we also are men of like passions with you, Acts
14.15.

Sin is a troublesome thing, and will not suffer him in whom it is, to be at
rest, nor any that are near to it, or about it.

One would think, That if any men in the world were like to have been free from
disturbing-passions, the Disciples of Christ, and Moses, should be the men,
whose Masters taught and practiced Meekness to that degree as no man ever did
the like: yet we find, that such as were brought up under their wings, had
their infirmities, and disturbing passions, as well as others. Joshua, Moses
his Servant, hearing that Eldad and Medad prophesied in the Camp, is disturbed
himself, and endeavors to disturb Moses about the matter, and would have had
him disturb them, Numb. 11.28. My Lord Moses, forbid them: but he checks his
passion, and calms his spirit, by wishing there were more of them: I would all
the Lords people were prophets. The like you find in Christ's own Disciples,
even in John, who lay in his bosom; Mark 9.38.
he comes to Christ, saying, Master, we saw one casting out devils in thy name,
and we forbad him, because he follows not us. They would have had Christ,
it is like, join with them in the prohibition; but he forbids them to forbid
him, saying, He that is not against us, is on our part. So that you see, you
may find enough from good men, to exercise you so far, as to try the strength
of all your Graces.

2. Besides this, you will find in some a rooted enmity to that which is good.
There are two Spirits, by one of which all the men in the World are led, the
Spirit of the World, and the Spirit which is of God, 1 Cor. 2.12. These two
Spirits being contrary one to the other, do lead two contrary ways. They have
striven long, and will strive, as long as they breathe.

The contrariety of these two Spirits, first appeared in Cain and Abel, and
has continued down along thorough all Generations, unto this day, and will do
so hereafter. It is like the War between Rehoboam and Jeroboam, 1 Kings 14.30.
all their days. The hatred of the Philistines against Israel, is called by the
Prophet, Ezekiel. 25.15. the old hatred, not only because they were always full of
spite against them; but because it was of the same nature as that of old to the
people of God.

This old hatred is not like, by waxing old, to vanish away, as the old
Covenant is said to do, Heb. 8.13. It was under the old Administration, and
appeared against the holy Prophets then, Acts 7.52. Which of the prophets have
not your fathers persecuted? And it continued to show it self against Christ,
who gave his Disciples warning to expect the same, under the new
Administration. Mat. 10.25. Mat. 5.11.
If they have called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much more shall
they call them of the household? And he tells them, Men shall revile you, and
persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake.
How this was verified, the Scripture first, and Ecclesiastical History
afterward, does abundantly show. The Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 4.12, 13. they
were reviled, persecuted, defamed, and made as the filth of the world, and the
offscouring of all things. And in aftertimes one would wonder, had not John
said, Epist. 1. Chap. 3.13. Marvel not that the world hates you; that a people
so holy, so good, so peaceable, and inoffensive, as the Primitive Christians
were, should be so unworthily dealt with, both by tongue and hand, as they
were. Their Adversaries reported, That they fed upon Man's flesh, that they
practiced lewdness in their Assemblies, Such enemies have they (Christians) had
in all Ages; and in these our days the same is practiced, and will be to the
world's end. Perkins on the Creed.
and that they were the Authors of all the Tumults in those days, and what not?
all manner of evil, but falsely; yet by this means, great persecutions were
raised against them: And if Christians will be Christians still, they will find
the World to be the World still: so that unless they be the more careful, they
will be in danger to be overcome of evil. For if they find it hard sometimes,
not to be overcome of the lesser evil of good men, how will they not be
overcome by the greater of bad men! If the footmen weary them, how will they
contend with horses? Jer. 12.5.

3. There is something in every man, that makes him more easy to be overcome.
Malice, and other foolish and hurtful lusts, and roots of bitterness, that lie
deep in the heart of every man by nature. You see how early they will be
putting forth, even in Children themselves. Revenge is a Lesson, that every
child has at his fingers end. The more to blame are they, who being conversant
about them, do teach, and prompt them to use their hands to avenge themselves
on persons or things, before they be able to use their tongues to that, or any
other purpose.

And as they grow up, they live in them, Tit. 3.3. in malice and envy, hateful,
and hating one another. This is found so common a thing among Men, that
Joseph's Brethren thought it almost impossible, that he should not hate them
for the evil they had done to him. Therefore, when their Father was dead, they
say, Joseph will certainly requite us all the evil we did unto him, Genesis 50.15.
And so it is like he might, if God had not taught him another Lesson: But he
gives more grace, James 4.5, 6.

Yet seeing Grace is imperfect in the best of Men on Earth, it behooves them to
take heed, lest they be overcome of evil. Grace, so far as they have it, makes
them strong; but the remainders of Corruption makes them weak. I have heard,
that it has been said of an eminently holy man, That he had Grace enough for
two men; yet upon some occasions he was found not to have enough for himself.

4. He that takes not good heed, so as not to be overcome of evil, will be
altogether unable to overcome evil with good. How can he overcome evil in
another, that is overcome by it himself?

How will thou say to thy brother, Mat. 7.4.
Let me pull out the mote that is in thine eye, and behold a beam is in thine
own? But that we have a farther duty lying upon us, than not to be overcome of
evil, comes in the next place to be shown, in speaking to the second. Branch of
the Point; which is,

2. Bran. Every Christian ought to endeavor, what in him lies, to overcome
evil with good.

This Lesson was not much taught in old time. Our Savior tells us, the Scribes
and Pharisees were wont to teach the contrary, Mat. 5.43. It has been said,
Thou shall love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy. For which, and other such
Doctrines as they taught, he calls them, blind leaders of the blind, Mat. 15.14.

The like darkness had blinded the eyes of the old Philosophers, for the most
part. Some of them indeed, as Plato and Seneca, have excellent Precepts,
tending toward the Point in hand; but these may be thought to light their
Candle at their Neighbors Torch.

Vide Gatak destylo N. Instrum. cap. 44.
Plato was much conversant in, and well acquainted with the Writings of the
Church of the Jews; and Seneca lived in the days of Paul, and it is probable,
was acquainted with him, or with his Doctrine, and so might come to a more
refined Morality. But these remaining still in unbelief, as to the great
Doctrines of Faith in Jesus Christ, could not see themselves, nor show to
others the true ground of love, or the great motives to it. It was Jesus
Christ, who came to reconcile us when enemies, and died for the ungodly, and
did with his own mouth, preach his own, and his Fathers love therein, that
brought to light such Precepts as these, Love your enemies, and overcome evil
with good. Not that these were new Commandments, brought first into the world,
when God was manifest in the flesh: No, they were old Commandments. Thus we
read, Lev. 19.18. Thou shall not avenge, or bear any grudg against the children
of thy people, but thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. And John,
speaking of love, says, 1 John 2.7. I write no new commandment unto you, but an
old commandment which ye had from the beginning; tho in the next verse, he
calls it a new Commandment, it being renewed by Christ, who may be said to set
forth a new Edition of it, amplified and enlarged. A new commandment, John
13.34.
says he, I give unto you, that you love one another, as I have loved you;
which is such an as, as no tongue is able fully to express.

In speaking to the Point, we shall show, 1. That every Christian ought to
endeavor to overcome evil with good. 2. What good means should be used to that
purpose. 3. How they should be used, that they may be the more effectual to
that end.


1. That we are to endeavor to overcome evil with good, does appear by this.
We are called to be followers of God, Ephesians. 5.1. and to be of the mind of
Christ, and to follow his steps, Phil. 2.5. and 1 Pet. 2.21. As every godly man
is in some measure like unto God, and every true Christian, of Christ's mind
and way; so he is to endeavor still to be more like to both. Otherwise, to
profess Godliness and Christianity, is to take the Name of God and Christ in
vain. The Name which God proclaimed as his, Exodus 34.6. was, The Lord, the Lord
God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth.
These are Attributes which God delights to magnify: He glories in this, Jer.
9.24. I am the Lord, which exercise loving kindness. How often is it said of
him, Nehem. 9.17. Joel 2.13. Jonah 4.2. Genesis 6.5.
That he is slow to anger, and of great kindness? God did wonderfully exercise
these his Attributes toward the old World. When the wickedness of man was great
on the earth, and every imagination of the thoughts of his heart, was only evil
continually, how slow to anger was he then? He did not presently send the
Deluge, but his long-suffering is said to wait, while the Ark was a preparing,
1 Pet. 3.20. And this time of waiting was no less than One hundred and twenty
years, Genesis 6.3. His loving kindness appeared also, in that he sent Noah, who
preached righteousness, and called them all this while to repentance, 2 Pet.
2.5. The like long-suffering, and great kindness, he exercised toward the
people of the Jews, from Egypt, the House of Bondage, from whence he delivered
them, to Canaan, and in that good Land, which he so freely gave them too. They
were no sooner brought miraculously through the Red Sea, but they began to
provoke; and not long after you may hear God complaining of them, Numb. 14.11.
How long will this people provoke me? and ver. 22. he says, They have tempted
me now these ten times: Nor were they better after this; for he was then
grieved with them forty years long, Psalm. 95.10. After the same rate they
carried it, when they came into Canaan, as you may see by reading the
Historical Books of the Old Testament. You have a short sum of the Kindnesses
of God to them, and their great Miscarriages in the 9th Chap. of Nehem. Nehem.
9.26* 30, 31.
where you will find one yet, after another; and one nevertheless, after
another. God was good to them, nevertheless they sin and provoke: They sin and
provoke, nevertheless God is good to them. The greatness of their sin, and
God's great goodness to them, are both set forth in Isa. 65.2. I have spread
out my hands all the day to a rebellious people, a people that provoke me to
anger continually to my face. Their sin is here called Rebellion, which was not
only once or twice, but continually, and that to his very face. And the
goodness of God to them, is set out by the spreading out of his hands; which
showed great desire of their coming in, and a readiness to embrace them in so
doing; and this is said to be not once or twice, but all the day. That this
Scripture is to be understood of the Jews, we have the Apostles Warrant, Romans
10.21. To Israel he says, All the day long have I stretched out my hand to a
disobedient and gainsaying people. Thus matters stood between God and them,
all the days of old, Isa. 63.9. Neither was Gods goodness to them, nor their
sin against him less, when God was manifest in the flesh. Mat. 23.37.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and stonest them which
are sent unto thee: how often would I have gathered thy children together, even
as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would not! Their sin
was great, they killed and stoned Prophets: It was their Fathers work for many
Generations, and they take up the same Trade, and use it against Christ
himself; Thou that stonest the Prophets, in the Present Tense. They endeavored
to stone Christ himself more than once, John 10.13. Now see what good he would
have done them notwithstanding, and with what affection. O Jerusalem!
Jerusalem! He was inwardly moved when he uttered these words. You have the like
expression, 2 Samuel 18.33. The King (David) was much moved, and wept (when he
heard of Absalom's death), and said, O my son Absalom! my son! my son Absalom!
How often would I have gathered thee, even every hour of the day, as a hen
gathers her chickens under her wings! earnestly and affectionately clocking
them together, that they might be safe, and out of danger. Observe how he
carried toward them that would have slain him for curing an impotent man on the
Sabbath Day, John 5.16. He to abate their fury, speaks many words to them, and
at last tells them, ver. 34. These things I say unto you, that you may be
saved. Here is salvation endeavored, for destruction intended. They would have
killed him, but he would have given them life. And a little after, ver. 40. he
speaks, as one bewailing, that they would not come to him, that they might have
it: Ye will not come to me that ye might have life.

Now if there be such rich goodness in God, there should be, in all that
profess his name, an endeavor to be like him, that they may appear to be the
Children of so good a Father.

Christ charge his Disciples to use the best means within their reach, to
overcome the worst evils they meet with from others. Mat. 5.44.
Bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them
that despitefully use you, and persecute you. If such evils as these must be
overcome with good, much more should lesser evils, when they arise, as
sometimes they will, from Friends, or near Relations, be overcome by the like
means: Which brings us to the second thing mentioned viz.

2. What geod means should be used to this purpose: And they are Three.

1. To do good to them. 2. To wish them well, and pray for them. 3. To use good
words to them, and of them.
Two of these are expressly mentioned by Christ, in the place aforecited, (...),
Hebraica phrasis, pro been precamini vel beneficio afficite, alioquin (...)
idem valet quod (...), laudare, Beza. Genesis 1.3. Genesis 27.33. Heb. 11.20.
viz. to do good to them, and to pray for them; and they are all carried in
that word, (...), bless, if it be taken in its largest sense.

When God blesses men, he always does them good: His Benediction is a real
benefit, because his speaking is doing. God said, let there be light, and there
was light. He said to Abraham, Genesis 22.17. in blessing I will bless them; that
is, I will surely and certainly do it. So Isaac, speaking of Jacob, says, I
have blessed him; yea, and he shall be blessed: And so he was; but not so much
because Isaac had said it, as because God had said it before him. For the
Apostle tells us, That Isaac did bless him by Faith: Now Faith must have some
Word of God to be the ground of it. It was God spoke, and it was done; he
commanded, and it stood fast.

When men are said to bless, they do it one of these Three ways.

1. By being beneficial to others, in yiedling, or giving to them any good
thing that is in their power. Thus Jocob calls the Present he made to his
brother Esau, his Blessing, Genesis 33.10, 11. And Naaman, offering Elisha a
Present, says, I pray thee take a blessing of thy servant, 2 King 5.15. And the
Apostle, speaking to the Corinthians, to make up their bounty for the poor
Saints, calls it (...), their Blessing, 2 Cor. 9.5.

2. By wishing them well, and praying for them. So Jacob, speaking of Joseph's
sons, says, In thee shall Israel bless, saying, Genesis 48.20.
God make thee as Ephraim, and as Manasseh. And Deuteronomy. 24.14. where charge is
given to deliver the poor Man's Pledge, before the going down of the Sun; a
Reason is added, That he may sleep in his raiment, and bless thee: That is,
that he may find in his heart to pray to God for a Blessing upon thee.

3. By speaking well of others, and praising them. So the wicked is said to
bless the covetous, Psalm. 10.3. That is, to commend him for a wise Man, that
will look, as they say, to the Main Chance: and so it falls in with that in
Psalm. 49.18. Men will praise thee when thou do well to thy self.

1. First then, We ought to endeavor to overcome evil in others, Est illa
obliquae talionis forma, ubi ab iis qui nos laeserunt beneficentiam avertimus,
Calv.
by doing all offices of love and kindness to them, in the capacity wherein we
stand, according to our power. Are Friends unkind, or injurious to us? we
should not withdraw kindness from them, but be kind still. Do our Relations not
perform the duties of their place? we should be the more careful to perform all
the duties of ours to them. Have we to deal with enemies, that would do us all
the mischief that lies in their power? we should not do as they would do to us;
but on the contrary, be beneficial to them in any thing we may. If thine enemy
hunger, feed him; Romans 12.20. Juris periti, cui victus testamento legatus est,
ei intelligunt vestitum, habitationem, lectum, medicinus, and alia similia
legata esse, P. Martyr.
if he thirst, give him drink. These Expressions carry more in them than a
little bread and drink. When God is said, Mat. 5.45. to make his Sun to arise
on the evil and the good, and to send rain on the just, and the unjust; more is
meant than the mere shining of the Sun, and the descending of the rain upon
them: All earthly comforts which are produced by the Suns influence, and the
fructifying virtue of the rain, are comprehended in them. So when you ask of
God daily bread, in asking that, you ask all other necessaries for your life.
In like manner, when God says, Give bread and drink, he intends any thing else
that may do them good. Thus did Joseph deal to his brethren, who had been very
injurious to him; Genesis 50.21.
when by the Providence of God he came to such an estate, that he was able to
do them good, he not only gave them bread in their hunger, but nourished and
comforted them, and was a shelter to them in a strange Land, as long as he
lived.

As we should do them all the good we can, so we ought to prevent any evil that
might fall upon them. Saul had been very defective in his duty to David, both
as a Prince, and a Father. As a Prince, he ought not only to have protected,
but rewarded so deserving a Subject: As a Father, he ought to have cherished
such an obedient Son, who went whither soever Saul s^nt him, 1 Samuel 18.5. But
on the contrary, he not only encourages some of his Followers to kill him, but
endeavors to take away his life by his own hand, 1 Samuel 19.1, 10. Now how does
David carry it in this case? He endeavors to save himself as well as he could,
by withdrawing, and giving place to Readiness wrath: And when he, in pursuing
after him, 1 Samuel 24.6, 7. 1 Samuel 26.8, 9.
falls into his hands more than once, he does not only not destroy him himself,
but withholds those that would. The tenderness that was in him toward such an
enraged Enemy, appeared in this, that his heart smote him but for cutting off
the skirt of his Garment; tho this was done, only to show that he was in his
power, and that he could have done him a mischief if he would. What effect this
had upon Saul, may be seen in the Story. When David showed him the skirt of his
Garment, and spoke a few words to show his innocence, he, tho a King, and
mightily enraged against him, is melted into tears, 1 Samuel 24.16, 17. Saul
lifted up his voice and wept, saying, Thou have rewarded me good; whereas I
have rewarded thee evil.

There is nothing like to overcome the rough temper, and rugged carriage of
others, sooner than a kind and gentle behavior toward them. When Paul came
first to Thessalonica, he found them, or at least, many among them, Constat
apud Graecos translatitie (...) ad mores, and ad animum accommodari, Beza.
to be a rough and untractable people. The Bereans, Acts 17.11. are said to be
more noble, (...), of better breeding, and more ingenious than they, who upon
Paul's preaching there, took unto them certain lewd fellows of the baser sort,
and gatheted a Company, and set all the City in an uproar, ver. 5. Hence it is,
that he says, 1 These. 2.1, 2. That at his entrance in unto them, he spoke the
Gospel of God with much contention; that is, on their part: For, as for his own
part, he was otherwise disposed. It was the Rule he gave to Timothy, 2 Epist.
2.24. The servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all men, apt
to teach, patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves; if God
peradventure will give them repentance, to the acknowledging of the truth. This
was his own practice at this time: for ver. 7. he says, We were gentle among
you, as a nurse cherishes her children. As a Nurse bears with the frowardness
and peevishness of Children, and by all ways imaginable endeavors to quiet
them, and bring them to a good humor; so did the Apostle with them. And it is
probable, that those of them that did believe, partly by the Apostle's
Doctrine, and partly by his Example, were of the like disposition and carriage
toward them that believed not. And what the effect of this was, in that place
where the Gospel was so much opposed at first, we may gather from what he says
in his second Epistle to them, Chap. 3.1. Pray for us, that the word of the
Lord may have a free course, and be glorified, even as it is with you.

2. As we should do them all the good we can, and prevent the evil that might
hurt them; so we ought to pray, that God would do them the good, and prevent
the evil we cannot. Pray for them that despitefully use you, and persecute you:
And if for such, much more for such, who, tho they may be in some particular
instances prejudicial to us, have a love to, and kindness for us. David
complains, Psalm. 57.4. That his soul was among lions, and that he did lie among
them that were set on fire, even the sons of men, whose teeth were spears and
arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword. And of these, or such as these, he
says, Psalm. 35.15. They did tear me, and ceased not. What did David now? Did he
rend and tear as they did? No, ver. 13. As for me, when they were sick, my
cloahting was sackcloth: I humbled my soul with fasting, and my prayer returned
into mine own bosom. What could he have done more for his nearest Friend, or
dearest Brother? So he says, ver. 14. I behaved my self as tho he had been my
friend, or brother. Take an instance also of what was done for Friends, who in
a day of temptation did not the good they should. When Paul came to Rome, he
preached the Gospel among them for two whole years together, Acts 28.30, 31. And
no doubt but that he, that was sure that when he came, Romans 15.29.
he should come in the fullness of the blessing of the Gospel, was kindly
received by them. And we may well think, that he who before he came to them,
did so earnestly beseech them, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the
love of the spirit, Romans 15.30, 31.
to strive with him in prayers to God, that he might be delivered from them
that did not believe in Judea; did confidently expect, that they would use not
only that, but other good means, that he might be delivered from them that did
not believe at Rome. But it fell out otherwise; For when a day of trial came,
these Romans Faith did so far fail, that not a man of them stood by him, when
he was in that great danger to be devoured by the mouth of the Lion, 2 Timothy
4.16. At my first answer no man stood with me, but all men forsook me. This
must needs greatly affect and afflict him: yet in the next words he prays, that
this sin might not be imputed to them: I pray God it may not be laid to their
charge. You see this is the will of God, and this has been the Saints practice.

But if you find holy men (as sometimes you may David and Paul) uttering
themselves in another manner, against God's and their enemies, Psalm. 59.13. 2 Timothy 4 14
as if they desired evil to fall upon them; either the evil was Temporal, or
Eternal.

1. If the evil were Temporal, they cannot be thought to desire it absolutely,
sub ratione mali, as evil, but as it had a tendency to their good. Deliberata
imprecatio mali sub ratione mali contra homines, quae est formalis maledictio,
non potest non esse mala, Ames. Cas. lib. 4. Augustine de ser. D. in monte.
As David, Psalm. 9.20. Put them in fear, O Lord, that the nations may know
themselves to be but men. They desired evil no otherwise than good Men, that
are in Place of Authority over others, may and ought to use it; viz. not to
make others poena miseros, sed correctione beatos, miserable by putting them to
pain, but happy by amendment.

2. If you find them sometimes to have a farther reach, and to look beyond
time, to eternity; you must consider, they were extraordinary persons, and by
the spirit of Prophecy did foresee what God had irrevocably determined
concerning some men; and upon this supposition they might not only acquiesce in
the judgment of God against them, but were obliged to approve of it too. As all
the Saints shall at the last day approve of the Sentence of Christ against such
as they loved, and earnestly prayed for, when here on Earth, before they knew
what their final state would be. That these had such a foresight, is plain, by
what David spoke of Judas many years before he was born. He saw plainly what
Judas his cursed end would be, as you may see by reading the 109th Psalm; which
Peter tells us, the Holy Ghost spoke before concerning Judas, by the mouth of
David, Acts 1.16. So that these, being Persons and Cases extraordinary, are not
to be drawn into example by ordinary persons.

It is good for us to mind what Christ says of great sinners, Mat. 12.31, 32. I
say unto you, all manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men. When
Christ says, all manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men, and
excepts none but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost; no, not a word spoken
against the Son of Man himself; we may well think, a word spoken, or a deed
done against our selves, may be pardoned; and that it may be so, should pray
for it, and we may hope fot a good effect of it. Acts 7.60.
Stephen's prayer, when he was stoned, probably had an influence on Paul's
conversion. St. John tells us, 1 John 5.16. If any man see his brother sin a
sin, which is not unto death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life for them
that sin not unto death. So that unless a Man could be assured, that another
has sinned that sin which is unto death, he may, nay, he ought to pray for
him: He shall ask, etc.

In any case where there is but an if so be, or a who can tell, or a perhaps,
there is room left for prayer. In that mighty Tempest that arose in the Sea to
arrest Jonah, as he was going to Tarshish, which was like to have broken the
Ship; he is called on to arise, and call upon his God, Jonah 1.6. If so be that
God will think upon us, that we perish not. Their case was very doubtful, yet
they pray.

So when Jonah had delivered his Message to the Ninevites, Yet forty days and
Nineveh shall be overthrown; they cry mightily unto God, saying, Who can tell
if God will turn, and repent? Jonah 3.9. Simon Magus was in a very bad state,
In the gall of bitterness, and the bond of iniquity, and Peter perceived it; Si
fieri possit, ab ipsis inferis extrahendi nobis sunt homines, Calvinus in locum.
yet he bids him repent, and pray, If perhaps the thoughts of his heart might
be forgiven him; and can we think, that he who put him upon praying for
himself, would not pray for him too, especially considering Simon requested it
of him? Acts 8.21, 24.

3. The Third good means to be used to overcome evil in others, is to use good
words in speaking,

1. Of them, 2. To them.

1. To speak well of them, so far as with truth we may. Peter Martyr thinks
this is required, Romans 12.14. Bless them that persecute you; bless and curse
not: Where, by blessing, in the the former part of the verse, he understands,
speaking well of them in the latter, praying for them. But possibly the Apostle
might double the word, only for the greater Emphasis, it being a duty of great
necessity, and not easy to be performed. However, it must be acknowledged a
duty to speak well of them, for what is praiseworthy in them. Indeed we may
not call evil good, nor praise any for the evil they do; but must say in that
case, as the Apostle does to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11.22. Shall I praise you
in this? I praise you not. On the other hand, we must not call good evil. There
being none so bad, but have some good gifts, and commendable qualities in them;
we should acknowledge them in them, and praise them for them. The positive part
of the Ninth Commandment, requires this at our hands, to bear a true witness to
our Neighbor. Therefore, as Christ, when he blames this, and the other Church,
for the faults he found in them, acknowledges the good he found among them,
saying to one, This thou have; and to another, This thou have, Rev. 2.6. and
3.4. so should we do. And how this tends to overcome evil, the Wiseman will
tell us, Prove. 27.21. As the fining pot for silver, and the furnace for gold,
so is a man to his praise: or, as others, so is to a man his praise: That is,
it tries him, and refines him too.

2. As good words of them, tend to overcome evil in others, so good words to
them. Respectful language, and modest answers, are of great efficacy to allay
and abate corrupt affections in others. It was spiritual wisdom in Paul to
answer Festus saying, he was mad and besides himself, calmly and respectfully,
I am not mad, most noble Festus. Acts 26.25.
With what respect and reverence does David speak of, and to Saul, when he was
pursuing him for his life? Speaking of him, he calls him the Lords anointed, 1 Samuel 26.16. and speaking to him, he does, as it were, in one breath (for it is
within the compass of the Three following verses), call him, My Lord the King.
And what he spoke, as well as what he did at that time, did for the present
mollify his heart toward him, as appears by his saying to him again, Is this
thy voice, my son David? By long forbearing a Prince is persuaded, and a soft
tongue breaks the bone. Prove. 25.15.
A Flint is sooner broken on a Pillow than on a Rock. We find the men of
Ephraim very angry with Gideon, Judge. 8.1. because he called them not, when he
went out against the Midianites: for the Text says, they did chide with him
sharply. He, tho a mighty man of valor, gave them this modest answer, What
have I now done in comparison of you? Is not the gleaning of the graves of
Ephraim, better than the vintage of Abiezer? Intimating, that they had done
greater service in pursuing, than he had done in routing of them. Then, says
the Text, their anger was abated toward him, when he had said that. Prove. 15.1.
Grievous words might have stirred up anger, but his soft answer turned away
wrath.

3. The Third thing proposed, was, to show the manner, how all this good must
be done, that it may be the more effectual. It must be done,

1. Cordially: What you do, must be done as in the presence of him by whom
actions are weighed. Your prayers must not come out of feigned lips. 1 Samuel
2.3. Psalm. 17.1. 2 Cor. 2.17.
What you speak, must be as in the sight of God. It is easy to use a few
complemental words, in speaking to Men; or a few vain words in speaking to God
for them, as all are that come not from the heart. When you are about this
work, you should endeavor to draw deep, even from the bottom of your hearts.
Paul calls his prayer for the Jews, his greatest enemies, his hearts desire,
Romans 10.1.

2. Readily. Titus is charged to put Christians in mind of this, To be ready to
every good work, Tit. 3.1. Although these good works be contrary to corrupt
Nature, Grace will make a Man ready to them. The holiest Men have been always
the most forward in them. When God had set that Mark of his displeasure on
Miriam, for chiding with Moses, how ready was he to pray for her! Moses cried
unto the Lord, and said, Heal her now, O God, I beseech thee, Numb. 12.13. The
Jews, before the Captivity, were grown to a height of wickedness, 2 Chronicles.
36.16. They mocked the messengers of God, and despised his word, and misused
his prophets; and among the rest, Jeremiah in particular, who was sent to tell
them of the approaching Captivity: yet he was far from desiring that evil to
overtake them, tho they said, Jer. 17.15. Where is the word of the Lord? let it
come now. He appeals to God in the next verse, That he had not desired the
woeful day. He was so far from that, that he prayed hard for that hard-hearted
people. How his heart stood this way, you may see by Gods telling him again and
again, that he should not pray for them: Pray not thou for this people, Jer.
7.16. So again, chap. 11.14. and once more, chap. 14.11. till he tells him at
last, tho Moses and Samuel stood before him, yet his mind could not be toward
that people, chap. 15.1.

Such an admirable readiness was found in the Man of God, against whom Jeroboam
stretched out his hand, saying, lay hold on him, for his crying in the Name of
the Lord, against his idolatrous Altar at Bethel. God had dried up that hand
which he stretched forth against the Prophet, which brought him to entreat the
Man of God to pray for him; And the man of God besought the Lord, and the Kings
hand was restored again, and became as it was before, 1 Kings 13.6.

3. Constantly. It is not enough to use these means once or twice, for a fit,
or when you are in a better frame than ordinary; but it must be your constant
course. You find that when your bodies are full of evil Humors, the use of a
good Medicine once or twice does not remove your Distemper; therefore you steer
to a course of Physic. So must you do to remove or alter the tough Humors that
may be in others; you must use the Means constantly. There must not only be a
well-doing, but a patient continuance in it. Romans 2.7. Gal. 6.9.
If you find no good effect for a while, be not weary of well-doing: Say not, I
will recompense evil, but wait on the Lord, Prove. 20.22. Thus did David for a
long time, when Saul was his enemy; he waited on the Lord, and kept his way,
tho he was put to many a hard shift the while. And God put a sweet song into
his mouth at last, when he had delivered him out of the hands of all his
enemies, and the hand of Saul, Psalm. 18.20, 21. The Lord rewarded me according
to my righteousness, according to the cleanness of my hands has he recompensed
me; for I have kept the ways of the Lord.

Use 1. If these these things be so, have we not cause to take up a
lamentation, when we see Men professing themselves Christians, make so little
account of such duties as Christ has by Precept enjoined, and by Example led
them to? how unsuitable to Christian-Doctrine is the practice of such as
cannot, or will not forgive the least injury! This is far from endeavoring to
overcome evil with good. How can such say, Forgive us our trespasses, as we
forgive them that trespass against us? Some of old are said to leave out these
words, as we forgive, etc. fearing, it is like, that doom, Out of thine own
mouth will I judge thee, thou wicked servant. If any be more hardy in our days,
they may know one day, That God will not be mocked.

Nor is this all: Are there not some that account it necessary to avenge
themselves for a small offense, it may be only for a word, tho to the
hazarding, nay, the loss of their own and others blood? And to do thus, is by
many accounted to be of a brave spirit; and he that will not do so, is by some
not thought worthy of the name of a Gentleman; as if the name were allied to
Gentilisme, rather than Gentleness. Indeed a Learned Divine, speaking of this
matter, says, Gentility, according to the vulgar, Dr. Jackson of Justifying
Faith, chap. 13. parag. 8, 9.
and most plausible notion, retains the substance of Gentilism, with a light
tincture of Christianity. But the Learned and Pious Bishop Davenant, speaking
of the same, says, Haec opinio est plusquam Ethnica; This opinion is more than
Heathenish. For several Heathen Philosophers have given better counsel in the
case, than these Christian Gentlemen think fit to take; and if it be more than
Heathenish, think what it must be. There are others, Est illa diabolica opinio,
quae invasit mentes omnium fere qui se generosis somniant, nimirum, non posse
se salvosue honor and nominis sui existimatione far vel verbum
contumeliosum, sed teneri ad ultionem quaerendam etiam duello, Davenantius in
Col. 3.
and too many too, who although they dare not go about to wrest the sword of
Vengeance out of the hand of God, who says, Vengeance is mine; to commit so
great an evil as is the forementioned; yet they will be adventuring to shoot
their arrows, even bitter words, against such as do in the least offend them,
or stand in their way. And O that we could say, that such as make a greater
profession than others, and are in most things of good and exemplary
Conversations, were altogether free in this matter! But this evil is
Epidemical; and the best, I fear, are too much infected with it. The sad
consequences of this we partly see already, and may see more in time, if God in
Mercy prevent them not. So that it is for a lamentation, and like to be for a
lamentation.

Use 2. Look about you, and take heed that you be not overcome of evil.

1. Let not imaginary evils overcome you, as they will be like to do, as well
as those that are real, if they be so apprehended. There is no observing man,
but may see what mischief has come heretofore, and does come every day by
such. There always have been, and still are some, who beings weak or malicious,
do go about telling stories of this and that Man, or Party; and by leaving out,
or putting into their tale some circumstances, or by setting an Emphasis upon a
word innocently spoken, do raise in others the highest Passions, which hurry
them away to speak and do things very sinful and unjust. 1 Samuel 22.
If Doeg had fairly represented the matter of Abimelech to Saul, there would
have been found such Circumstances in the Cafe, as might probably have excused
him, in Readiness own judgment, and have kept him from that barbarous Act, of
slaying so many innocent souls.

If David, upon hearing what Ziba had told him of Mephibosheth, had staid a
while, and heard what he could have said for himself, he would not so soon have
forgot the passing love of Jonathan his Father, nor the Oath he made to him, 2
S^m. 1.26. 1 Samuel 20.15.
not to cut off kindness from his house for ever. But being then in such
Circumstances as made him credulous, upon a feigned story; without more ado, he
presently gave away all that belonged to poor Mephibosheth, to that false Man.
And how many that are, or would easily be made very good Friends, are
separated, or kept at a distance at this day, by such means as these; he is a
stranger to the World that does not see.

2. If the evil be real, yet be not overcome by it. It may be it is not so
great as it is apprehended: But if it be, it may be the Author of it did not
think it would prove so offensive, and hard to be born, as you find it to be;
and then it would be a greater evil in you to return that to another which you
find so hard to be born your self.

Christians should be more ready to receive one injury after another, than to
return one for another. This I take to be the meaning of Christ, When he says,
Mat. 5.39. Whosoever shall smite thee on the right cheek, turn to him the other
also Julian the Apostate, did blasphemously object against Christ, that he did
not observe his own Laws; because when he was smitten by one of the Offenders
with the palm of his hand, he did not turn the other cheek, but did expostulate
with him that did it, in these words, If I have spoken evil, bear witness of
the evil; but if well, why smitest thou me? John 18.23. But Christ is the best
Interpreter of his own Laws; and by his practice has told us what his meaning
was in this. He was so far from avenging himself by word or deed, that he was
ready and prepared to suffer farther at their hands; so as not only to be
smitten again, but to be crucified. And in this he is proposed to us, as an
Example, 1 Pet. 2.21, 22. Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example,
that we should follow his steps. Who did no sin, neither was guile found in his
mouth; Who when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, he
threatened not; but committed himself to him that judges righteously.

Object. Will not such as are injurious, grow more insolent, and go from bad to
worse, if they be not dealt withal in their own kind?

Ans. 1. If any have humanity or ingenuity in them, they will be ashamed by
your forbearing of them; if they be void of these, they will be more irritated
and provoked, by rendering evil for their evil; and consequently, you are like
to endure more from them.

2. If they should go from bad to worse, yet you may not avenge your selves:
This were to take upon you to be Judges in your own Case. God has set up the
Ordinance of Magistracy for this purpose, Romans 13.4. He is a revenger, to
execute wrath upon him that does evil. Therefore in greater injuries you are to
make application to him for a Compensation; as Paul appealed to Caesar, Acts
25.11.

3. Although a private person may not avenge himself, yet in case he be assaulted
by another that would take away his life; if no Magistrate be at hand, he may
stand upon his own defense by the Law of Nature, which Christ came not to
destroy: Provided, 2 Samuel 3.33, 34.
that he endeavor to avoid his Adversary, by flying, if he may. But if he
press so hard upon him, that he cannot, he may defend himself; wherein he
should be as willing to save the others life, as to preserve his own.

4. God himself, when other means sail, does often appear to vindicate the
wrongs of such as suffer with meekness and patience. He will not stand by as
one unconcerned, especially if his Name be interested in the matter. When
Rabshakeh came against Jerusalem, he made a railing Oration to the People,
threatening what be would do; but they answer him not a word: for the King had
said, Answer him not, Isa. 36.21. A while after Hezekiah himself receives a
Letter, stuffed with the like railing matter: he reads it, but turns from the
Messenger, and goes to the House of God; and spreading the Letter before the
Lord, leaves the matter with him, Isa. 37.14. Then the Angel of the Lord went
forth, and smote in the camp of the Assyrians, One hundred and fourscore and
five thousand, ver. 36.

God commanded Jeremiah to put a Yoke upon his neck, as a sign, That the Jews
should be brought under the Yoke of Nebuchadnezzar: Jer. 27.2, 12.
Hananiah, a false Prophet, comes and takes the Yoke off his neck, Jer. 28.10.
and breaks it before his face. What does the good Prophet do the while? Does
he strive with him about the Yoke, that he might not break it? Or does he use
any undecent words when be had done it? No: it is said, ver. 11. Jeremiah went
his way: but God sent him to Haraniah with this Message; That for his Rebellion
he should die that Year; which accordingly came to pass in the seventh Month,
ver. 17.

Christians that would keep a due Decorum in their words and actions when they
are injured, should look well to their hearts, and keep them with diligence;
for all sinful Miscarriages begin there. When the heart is disordered by
corrupt Affections, the tongue, and other Members, will hardly be kept many
good order. Corfelle livoris amarum, per linguae instrumentum spargere, nisi
amara non potest, Bernardus.
Therefore the Apostle willing the Colossians to put off the evil of the
tongue, Blasphemy, which is evil-speaking, bids them first put off the evils of
the heart, anger and malice, chap. 3.8. Whether the heart be inditing a good,
or a bad matter, the tongue will be as the pen of a ready-writer. If Choler be
suffered to boil to a height in the heart, the scum will be like to run over at
the mouth. If the heart be as the the troubled Sea, Isa. 57.20.
which cannot rest, it will be casting out the mire and dirt which before lay
at the bottom. Nullum vinditae genus tam in promptu habet, quam hoc
maledicendi, Davenantius. Prove. 25.28.
The evil of the heart is usually vented first at the mouth; but it will soon
appear in the other Members. When once the mouth is full of cursing and
bitterness, the feet will be swift to shed blood, till destruction and misery
be in men's ways, Rom 3.14, 15, 16. He that will not be overcome of evil, must
take care to rule his own spirit: He that has no rule over his own spirit, is
like to a city broken down, and without walls; easily overcome. Nothing can
conduce more to the calming of our spirits, when they begin to rise against
such as are offensive to us, Psalm. 103.10. Psalm. 130.3. 2 Samuel 16.6, 7, 10.
than to consider how obnoxious we have been, and still are to the great God.
David's patience toward Shimei was admirable, when he cast stones at him, and
cursed him still as he went. No doubt the consideration of the sins whereby he
had provoked God, made him the more calm toward that vile wretch.

Use 3. Rest not in this, That you are not overcome of evil; but endeavor, as
much as you can, to overcome evil with good. Do not your Relations perform the
duties of their place to you? be you the more circumspect and diligent to
perform the duty of yours to them. Are Neighbors unkind to you? let the law of
kindness be in your mouth, and acts of kindness in your hands to them. Vis ut
ameris? ^na.
Do any hate you? let your love work to overcome that hatred.

1. Keep your hearts in a constant awe of God commanding you. When they draw
back, as they will be apt to do, think of God standing by you, and saying, Have
not I commanded you? If others make no great matter of sinning against God, do
you say, as Nehemiah, But so will not I, because of the fear of God. Neh. 5.15.
This was it that kept Samuel to the duty of praying for a people that had
dealt very unworthily by him: As for me, says he, God forbid that I should sin
against the Lord, 1 Samuel 12.24.
in ceasing to pray for you.

2. Have much and often in your eye, the great example of all goodness, Christ,
whose name you bear. He met with a great deal of evil from an unthankful World:
yet he went about doing good still, Acts 10.38. How kind was he in word and
deed to his greatest enemies to the very last. When Judas came to betray him,
the worst word he gave him was, Friend, Mat. 26.50. Friend, wherefore art thou
come? And when Peter, in zeal for his Master's safety, had drawn, and cut off
the ear of one of the Officers that came to take him, he touched his ear, and
healed him, Luke 22.51. Consider him therefore who endured such contradiction
of sinners against himself, Heb. 12.3.
lest ye be wearied, and faint in your minds. If he whom you call Lord and
Master, did thus, should not you do so much rather?

To further you in this work, take these few Considerations.

1. By doing thus, you will show your selves to be genuine Christians, and
truly spiritual. Jam. 3.14, 15.
To render evil for evil, is devilish; good for good, something humane, but no
more than Publicans used to do: but to render good for evil, that is Christian.
What do ye more than others? Mat. 5.46. The fruit of the spirit is in all,
goodness, Ephesians. 5.9. If then there be found in you such fruits of the Spirit as
are mentioned, Gal. 5.22. Love, joy, peate, long-suffering, gentleness,
goodness, etc. it will be a token, that the good Spirit of Christ is in you.

2. It will tend very much to amplifying of the Kingdom of Christ, Haec illa
virtus est, qua primitiva ecclesia excelluit, accrevit ferendo, non resistendo,
ad hanc quia redditi sumus inhabiles res Christianismi in deterius ruunt in
dies, Aretius. 2 Cor. 13.11.
and the bettering of the World. One great reason why Christianity has made no
greater progress in the world in latter times is, because Christians have not
been so much conversant in this duty, as they were in the Primitive times. The
rendering evil for evil, makes the World a doleful place; an house, a Bedlam for
fury and disorder: A City, a Wilderness for rapine and confusion: A Kingdom, a
Land that eats up the Inhabitants thereof; as was said of that, Numb. 13.32.
But to render good for evil, tends to make the World a peaceable habitation,
where God and Men may delight to dwell. If this duty were more practiced, the
Wolf would sooner dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard lie down with the Kid,
as is prophesied, Isa. 11.6.

3. It Is a sign that God has more blessings in store, when he has given a Man
a heart to perform this duty. His labor shall not be in vain in the Lord.
Besides the eternal reward in Heaven, God does usually give a temporal reward
on earth. There is this encouragement given to afford bread to an hungry enemy,
That God will reward it, Prove. 25.21, 22. Saul was among the Prophets when he
presaged good to David for not suffering him to be hurt when his Spear was
taken from him, while he lay sleeping, 1 Samuel 26.25. Blessed be thou, my son
David; thou shall both do great things, and also shall still prevail. It has
been observed, That such children as have been, without cause, discouraged by
their parents, so as not to have a like share in their favor, nor a portion of
their substance with the rest, and yet have continued every way dutiful to
them, have been blessed by God above the rest. And such Servants as have had hard
and froward Masters, and yet have continued diligent and faithful in their
Service, have been wonderfully prospered when they have set up for themselves.

4. This is the most glorious way of overcoming others. It Is God's, and
Christ's way, Hosea 11.4. I drew them with cords of a man, with hands of love.
What glory would it be to a man, that it should be said of him, as Psalm. 9.6.
Thou have destroyed cities, if he himself be in the mean time destroyed by his
own lusts? To be slow to anger is better than the mighty; (...), Plato.
and he that rules his own spirit, than he that takes a city, Prove. 16.32.

5. Hereby you will keep a sweet serenity in your own spirits. There is not
only glory and honor, but peace to every one that works good, Romans 2.11. How
was David transported with joy, when Abigail had been a means of keeping him
from avenging himself with his own hand on Nabal and his house? His mouth was
full of blessings: He blesses the Lord God of Israel that sent her; he
blesses her advice, 1 Samuel 25.32, 33. Much more joy will flow in upon you, if
you go farther, and overcome evil with good. You will bless God heartily, who
has enabled you, against all temptations, and your own natural inclinations to
the contrary, to perform this excellent and most Christian duty, when you find
in your selves the joy that will attend it.

Quest. How may the well discharge of our present duty, give us assurance of
help from God for the well discharge of all future duties? SERMON XX.
1 Samuel 17.34, 35, 36, 37. Psalm. 27.14. Prove. 10.29. 2 Chronicles. 15.2.
OUR Reverend and Worthy Brother, who has the ordering of the Morning-Lectures
in this place, has both now, and heretofore, in great wisdom singled out many
choice select cases, relating to the mystery of practical godliness, and of
singular use to all those who desire to know, and feel more in themselves of
the power of inward experimental Christianity. Surely it is not for nothing that
God should send to this Auditority so many of his Messengers, one after
another, Morning by Morning, rising early, and sending. To whom much is given,
of them much will be required. See that you improve these extraordinary means
of grace.

The case that is fallen to my lot this Morning is this; viz.

How may the well discharge of our present duty, give us assurance of help from
God, for the well discharge of all future duties?

This Question has Two parts in it, and cannot be so well grounded upon a
single Text; therefore I shall name Three or Four: you may have your eye upon
all: viz.

1 Samuel 17.34, 35, 36, 37. And David said unto Saul, Thy servant kept his
fathers sheep, and there came a lion, and a bear, and took a lamb out of the
flock. And I went out after him, and smote him, and delivered it out of his
mouth: and when he arose against me, I caught him by his beard, and smote him,
and slew him. Thy servant slew both the lion, and the bear: and this
uncircumcised Philistine shall be as one of them, seeing he has defied the
armies of the living God. David said moreover, the Lord that delivered me out
of the paw of the lion, and out of the paw of the bear, he will deliver me out
of the hand of this Philistine. And Saul said unto David, Go, and the Lord be
with thee.

Psalm. 27.14. Wait on the Lord: be of good courage, and he shall strengthen
thine heart: wait, I say, on the Lord.

Prove. 10.29. The way of the Lord is strength to the upright: but destruction
shall be to the workers of iniquity.

2 Chronicles. 15.2. And he went out to meet Asa, and said unto him, Hear ye me,
Asa, and all Judah and Benjamin, The Lord is with you, while ye be with him:
and if ye seek him, he will be found of you: but if ye forsake him, he will
forsake you.

I do not name these several Scriptures, as so many Texts which I intend to
preach upon; but as so many Proofs of the truth of the Point, That it is a Case
very agreeable to the Scriptures, and to the Analogy of Faith; and so I shall
take it up, and for once preach common place wise upon it; which was a way of
preaching much in use in the last Century, and upwards, by many eminent
Divines, and not without great success. Now we tie our selves to single Texts:
Then they preached upon such and such Subjects, proving what they said by
Scripture: and in this good old way I shall walk for once: Pray follow me with
due attention.

This Case or Question may be resolved into two: 1. What our present duty is.
2. How the well discharge of that, may encourage us to hope in God for his help
and assistance in all future duties.


First, What is our present duty. Before I define this, it will be necessary to
speak something previous to it, which may help us much in this Enquiry, and
lead us, as it were, by the hand, into a right understanding of our present
duty.

The steps I shall go by are these, showing you,

1. What Duty is, in the general nature and notion of it. It Is an Act of
Obedience to the will of our Superiors. God being our Sovereign Supreme Lord,
Master and Lawgiver, our duty lies in subjecting our selves in all things to
his will. Duty is that which is due from Man to God: It Is Justitia erg^^ Deum,
Gic. de Not. de lib. 1. It Is Justice toward God: We don't do God right, we rob
him of his glory, if we don't do our duty* God knows indeed, how to recover his
right; and the wrong we do in sinning against him, will in the end redound to
our own souls, Prove. 8.36. Every sinner deals injuriously with God: he does not
give unto God the things that are Gods; he withholds the obedience that is due
unto God; he will not be subject to his Law; he does not do his duty.

2. Something is our present duty. God has filled up all our time with duty;
not one Moment left at our own disposal: We must give an account to him of
every thing we do in the body, from first to last; every day has its proper
works, the things of it self, Mat. 6.34.

3. Nothing that is sinful, and in it self unlawful, can be our duty at any
time; and therefore, to be sure, not our present duty. This needs no proof.

4. Every thing that is in it self-lawful, is not therefore our duty: All
things are lawful, but all things are not expedient, 1 Cor. 6.12. Whatsoever is
not forbidden under a penalty, is lawful; i. e. whatsoever is not contrary to
the rectitude of the Law, and in the doing of which, we incur no penalty from
the Law, that is lawful; but nothing properly is our duty, but what is
commanded: What we have a command to do, or not to do, the doing, or not doing
of that, is our duty, as the command runs in the Affirmative, or Negative. The
Law strictly injoyns some things, does tolerate and allow of some others of a
more indifferent nature, which in intimo gradu-juris, in the lowest degree of
legality, may be called lawful; and yet Circumstances may render our doing
these things unlawful, when God is not glorified, nor our Neighbor edified:
All things edify not, 1 Cor. 10.23.

5. Every thing that is commanded, and is in its time and place our duty, may
not be our present duty. Affirmative commands do bind semper, but not ad
semper, as Negatives do: Affirmatives bind always; i. e. we can never be
discharged from that obligation that lies upon us to worship God; but we are
not bound at all times to the outward acts of worship; for then me should do
nothing else: Neither indeed are we bound at all times to inward acts of
worship: for in our sleep we do not act our Grace: A disposition so to do from
an inward habit and principle, is all that God requires, when we are not in a
capacity to act either Grace or Reason. -- Besides, positive commands must give
place to a moral duty, because they will not justify our neglect of that.
Hence on the Sabbath Day we may and ought to lift our Neighbors Ox out of the
pit, Luke 14.5. and to perform any other act of necessary charity,
notwithstanding that positive command to worship God upon that day.

6. That which God now requires of you, and in doing of which you may most
glorify God, and edify your Neighbor, that is undoubtedly your present duty.

Quest. How shall we know this?

Ans. 1. Always look within your Calling for your present duty; for there it
lies. Don't go beyond your line. Do your own business, 1 These. 4.11. We have
different gifts, and different talents, according to the Grace that is given
unto us. Let every one attend to that which God has fitted him for, and called
him to, Romans 12.6, 7, 8. 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. The wisdom of the prudent is to
understand his way, Prove. 14.8. God has appointed to every one his way of
living in this World, from the Smith that blows the coals, Isa. 54.16. to the
King that sins upon the Throne. That cannot be our duty which we are not called
to. We are not absolute Lords, to do what we list: No, we are under command,
and must obey. I am one in authority, says the Centurion, I say unto my
servant, do this, and he does it, Luke 7.8. God has the Supreme Authority over
us: We ought not to move one step but by his direction.

Our Calling is twofold.

1. General. As we are Christians, so all Saints are of the same Calling, Romans
1.7. called to be saints. We are all equally obliged to the duties of our
Christian Calling, i. e. to serve and worship God, to believe in him, to love
and fear him, etc.

2. Particular: So we differ in our Callings: Some are called to the
Magistracy, some to the Ministry; some are Masters, some Servants; some called
to this, some to that Trade, or Occupation.

We are called to Christianity by the preaching of the Gospel of Christ.

We are called to some outward worldly Calling, by God's special appointment in
his Law. Six days shall thou labor and do all thy work, Exodus 20.9. Every man
has his work; a full business which he must not neglect: He must do all his
work. They walk disorderly who work not at all, 2 These. 3.11. living in
pleasures and wantonness, Jam. 5.5. having nothing to do. Let all idle
voluptuous Gallants consider this, who spend their days in mirth and jollity,
scorn the thought of business; they must needs be far from their present duty,
who are employed in nothing, or that which is worse than nothing.

We are called to this or that Employment by Providence. That we should be of
some Calling, is from the Word; that we are of this, or that Calling, is from
Providence. Providence follows the Word, and is a fulfilling of that, some way
or other.

Much of the duties of our Christian Calling, do follow us into our particular
Callings; as duties of worship must be performed in our Families every day, let
our particular Calling be what it will. So the same Graces must be exercised in
our particular Callings, which were required in our general Callings: The same
Graces do follow us into our particular Callings, and into all the works of our
hands.

They who do not keep up duties of worship in their Families, will be as remiss
in all duties of practical holiness in their lives. They who are not frequent
in prayer, are never eminent in holiness. And as no acts of worship, public or
private, do please God, that are not performed in Faith, and in the fear of
God; So no common acts of our lives are pleasing to God, if not done in Faith,
and seasoned with that inward exercise of Grace that belongs to all the common
actions of a Christian.

In showing you your present duty in your particular callings, I shall not
insist so much upon duties of worship; you know 'em, That Prayer, reading the
Scriptures, Meditation, and discourse of what you hear out of the Word, are all
duties; and you know when they should be performed, Morning and Evening, and as
often as your necessary occasions will permit: Whether you do them, I must leave
that to God, and your own Consciences -- But the present duty I would fix you
in, is that of Practical Holiness, which is your constant duty every moment of
the day. I would clear up this to you, and show you what it is, and where it
lies, that if it be the will of God, you may be always found in it.

I say then, That your present duty lies in a present exercise of Grace,
suitable to the present work and business in all its circumstances which you
are at any time employed in. If you buy or sell, it must be in the fear of God;
if you marry, it must be in the Lord. Whether you eat or drink, or whatsoever
you do, you must do it to Gods glory; which cannot be, if you do not act Grace
in every thing you do. The true Gospel-holiness of an action, lies in that
Grace that goes along with it. It Is Grace only that turns an action Heaven
ward, and Godward; you have no other way to sense your selves from the
temptations, snares and sins that border upon all the works of your calling,
but by keeping your selves in a due exercise of Grace, being in the fear of God
all the day long, that is the way to eschew evil, and to do good; it is the
beginning of wisdom. He acts like a Fool who acts without it. The fear of God
in Scripture, is put for all the Graces of the Spirit; and in that sense I now
press it upon you.

You see your present duty lies in your present work, in the daily business of
your particular callings. I suppose your callings are lawful, that there are no
Stage Players, Conjurers, Diviners, Astrologers here. Those who are of such
callings, their duty is to leave them, and to betake themselves to some honest
Employment consistent with Grace; and then Grace will help you out in it
wonderfully. I could name some other callings that I would hardly advise a
Christian to -- But whatever lawful Calling you are of, whatever Office you
bear, whatever Relation you stand in, as Husbands, Wives, Parents, Children,
Masters, Servants; whatever your Trade, Occupation, or Employment is, there are
particular Duties proper to your Callings, which cannot be performed but by a
suitable exercise of Grace, by which you show the respect you have to God, in
doing what you do, regulating and moderating your selves, and all your actions,
by that rule of the Word. You may do the works of your calling, and yet not do
the duties of your calling; if you seek only your selves, your own profit,
pleasure, etc. this is not to serve God, but your selves. You must do what you
do, in Faith, as to the Lord; and then every thing you do, will be an act of
worship, because it carries in it a religious respect to the will of God.
Herein lies the nature of all Practical Holiness, to do every thing after a
godly sort; whatever you are doing, be sure you be in the exercise of some
Grace. There can be no Godliness without Grace. Grace in exercise, consists in
the gracious actings of a holy soul, suitable to the matter or occasion that is
before us, for the exercise of such or such a Grace. Or thus -- Grace in
exercise, lies in the various emanations of spiritual life, showing it self in
suitable and seasonable actings, as the matter requires. The Spirit of God
dwelling in Believers, has a hand in every thing they do, as Saints, and does
shape himself in 'em, into that frame, into those holy passions and affections
that may best become a Saint in such circumstances; i. e. the Spirit does act
these things in and by our souls, makes use of our faculties, lets out himself
through our hearts, makes us to act so and so. The Spirit is said to cry Abba,
father, because it makes us to do so. For instance, If the matter between God
and a Soul, be sin, the Spirit works Faith in the Blood of Christ, for our
justification and pardon; works repentance and humiliation, brings us to
self-denial, in order to the mortification of sin in our hearts and lives. If
the matter be any lawful business that we are called to, in the place and
relation we stand in, the Spirit directs us how to do it in the best manner, so
as God may be most glorified. Grace in the heart guides the hand. The heart is
the seat of all affections. The Spirit knows that man will act so or so, as he
stands affected; and therefore the Spirit sets the affections right for God,
works in the heart a true love to God, a holy fear of God, a zeal for his
glory. These gracious dispositions toward God, follow a Saint into all his
Employments, inclining him to holiness in all his ways.

Object. Do you Ministers take upon you to tell us what we must do in our
Callings? We have served an Apprentiship, and know better than you what belongs
to our business.

Ans. -- Mistake me not; for the mystery of your Craft, whatever it is, I
meddle not with that: God has left you to your own reason and understanding,
and so do I: The directions I give you, relate only to the religious manner of
doing what you do; tho I must tell you, it is God that instructs you to
discretion in all worldly business, Isa. 28.26. Whatever your skill and insight
is in your calling, prayer may make you wiser: you may obtain a more excellent
spirit in your way, than you now have, if you seek it of God, Exodus 35.31, 32.
Tho you are left to the use of your reason, as men, yet Faith must go along
with it, as you are Christians. Therefore I shall show you how to put forth an
act of reason in Faith.

Some think they are never to make use of Faith, but when Reason fails them.
It Is true, in such cases Faith is of singular use; Abraham found it so; yet God
expects that in the ordinary course of our lives, in all common matters that
pass through our Hands, Reason and Faith should go together; for both have their
distinct parts in all our ordinary undertakings: And Faith is always Superior
to Reason: Reason is fubservient to that, as a handmaid, putting forth its
utmost strength in all humane endeavors, still leaving room for Faith, to deal
with God for a blessing, that all may issue well at last.

Object. How may we know when Reason and Faith go together?

Ans. 1. When at our entrance upon any business, we seek wisdom and
understanding from God, stirring up our Reason by our Faith, looking up to him
from whom comes every good and perfect gift, that he would instruct us unto
discretion.

2. When in answer to Faith and Prayer, thoughts ^o come in that clear up our
way to us, and do put us into a right method, pointing out such probable means,
inclining to such apposite counsels, as in a rational way tend to the
expediting that business we are about. In this case Reason owes its light to
Faith, and ascribes all its skill and discerning to God, who opens the eyes of
our Natural Understandings, and causes the Spirit of a Man to move aright, in
giving a true judgment of what is before us. Such a one can say, The race is
not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong. It Is not in him that wills, nor
in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy: Therefore let not the wise man
glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man in his strength; but only in this, That
he knows me.

3. When under the greatest assurances of our own Reason, we yet live in a
humble dependence upon God, for success, knowing that God can come between us
and our Reason, and disappoint us: He can dis-joynt our councils, and let in
his own will upon us, when we have laid things never so well together: God can
spy a flaw in the best humane contrivances, to overthrow all; he can smite us
between the joints and the harness, 1 Kings 22.34. and give us a mortal wound,
when we think we are shot-free. Thus does God sometimes frustrate all man's
preparations, turning his wisdom into foolishness, disappointing him in the
height of his expectation; he looks for good, and behold evil comes: he puts
forth an act of Reason in Faith, who trusts to God, and not to his own Reason.
It Is our duty to make use of it as men, tho as Christians we ought not to trust
in it.

2. Consider present Providence. Tho it is Precept, not Providence, that makes
Duty; yet Providence points to Duty, to the time and season of it. Much of our
duty lies in complying with the opportunity and occasion that Providence gives
for the doing of this or that good work: to every thing there is a season,
Eccles. 3.1. and every thing is beautiful in his time, ver. 11. The beauty of
holiness lies in timing our duties aright. The godly man brings forth his
fruit in his season, Psalm. 1.3. (...), Heb. 6.7. meet fruit; i. e. apposite
fruit, fruit well-placed. What is done out of its place and proper season, is
not so comely and beautiful. Do good as you have opportunity, Gal. 6.9, 10. If
we would reap in due season, we must sow in due season. There is a sit season
for both. We are never more obliged to our duty, than when we have the fittest
opportunity to perform it: and we must eye providence in this: It Is the
Prerogative of God to appoint times and seasons, not only for his own purposes,
but for our duty: He appoints the day, and the things of the day, what, and
when it shall be done. Should you order a Servant to do a business to day, and
he should not do it till the next day, would you not count such an one, a
disobedient Servant, because he observed not your time?

Those in the Gospel ( Mat. 20.1, 2, 3, 4.) came into the Vineyard at the same
hour they were called. They who were called at one hour, did not come in at
another hour. A call of God to repentance, loses much of its efficacy, if it be
not presently complied with; the heart is hardened under it. It Is true, God can
renew his call; but the first is quite lost, if it be not presently obeyed;
straightway they left their nets, and followed him, Mat. 4.20, 22. This was a
converting call. There are many calls to conversion that are not converting
calls: Man calls in God's Name; but till God speak inwardly to the heart, all
the Preachers in the world cannot prevail with a sinner to come to Christ.
Converting Grace is a special Providence toward the Elect. -- I am now
speaking of the call of common Providence to common Duties: I mean, such Duties
as God by his Word has annexed to such Providence, James 5.13. Is any
afflicted? let him pray? is any merry? let him sing psalms. Do the duty of thy
present condition: keep time with God, because he keeps time with thee: he
gives thee thy daily bread; then perform thy daily duty toward him.

3. Consult thy conscience: It Is a proper Judge of what thou have done, and what
thou should do at this instant. Joseph found it so, Genesis 39.8, 9, Conscience
in those who are enlightened, cannot easily step over a plain duty; 'twill
stumble at it, and demur about it, does cast a look toward it: tho by the
violence of lust, a man may be hurried another way; yet conscience looks
behind: there is a mis-giving heart, that tells him, Thus and thus you ought to
do. Hear thy conscience speak; it may show thee the right way, and turn thee
into it. He is a profligate wretch indeed, who has no reverence for his own
conscience: A wise man's heart discerns both time and judgment, Eccles. 8.5.
Consult thy conscience in what thou art going about; if that startle, stop
there, and consider well with thy self: don't mistake a carnal Objection for a
scruple of conscience -- Under the light of the Gospel, conscience is better
instructed than to doubt of plain duties: All cases of conscience lie in more
abstruse matters.

4. Consider what present temptation thou art under; in the light, a present
temptation, we may see what is our present duty. The Devil sets against that
might and main: He cares not what we do, if he can keep us from our present
duty: He will suffer us to put any thing in the room of that: you may read,
pray and meditate; the Devil will allow of any thing but what we should do. He
knows it is in vain to tempt some men to gross scandalous sins; therefore he
will reach a duty over the shoulder to them, to justle out the present duty
that lies before them. Take this for a Rule, viz. It Is always our duty to act
in opposition to any present temptation; If sinners entire thee, consent thou
not, Prove. 1.10. We do never more effectually resist any present evil, than by
setting about that good thing that is contrary to it. When the Devil sees his
temptations have this contrary effect, to awaken our zeal for God, and to stir
us up to a more vigorous prosecution of our duty; it is not his interest to go
on in that temptation which he sees is such a provocation to holiness, and
spurs us on the faster to our duty. The Devil knows not this beforehand: His
temptations are but trials and experiments that he makes, to see how we stand
affected, and how they will take.

5. Consult with the Word of God, especially those Scriptures that speak to the
state and condition thou art in in the world; whether Master, Servant, Parent,
Child, Rich or Poor; gather up those Texts, and be often reading them over to
thy Faith; Mingle them afresh every day with Faith; carry them about you in
your Memory, or in a Book fair written, that you may often have your eye upon
them; they will be a light to your feet, and a lanthorn to your paths: You can
never walk exactly in your place and sphere, if you do not walk by this rule,
often coming to the light, that you may see whether your works are wrought in
God. Some Christians do many things, many good things in the dark; or at least,
by a general Scripture Light. Some confused Notions they have, but no clear
distinct understanding of their duty. In conversion there are general
principles laid in, inclining us to all Christian duties, which for want of
searching the Scriptures, we take up by guess: but a distinct particular
knowledge of these duties, is an afterwork, distinct from our first conversion:
it is called Edification, or building up, which makes us expert skilful
Christians. The Scriptures are able to make the man of God perfect, thoroughly
furnished unto every good word and work, 2 Timothy 3.17. (...) ad omne opus bonum
perfect instructus, vel omnibus numeris absolutus. A man so skilled in all
things appertaining to his duty, so exact in it, that nothing is wanting, nor
nothing redundant; he does neither more nor less than God requires, he keeps
close to the Rule, puts in all the spiritual Ingredients that may give a duty
its right season and savor.

6. Devote thy self in sincerity to the fear of God, through the whole course
of thy life: Let it be the full purpose of thy heart to cleave unto God, and to
do whatever God shall convince thee to be thy duty. Labor to bring your hearts
into such a holy frame, before you make a judgment of your present duty.
Sincerity toward God does wonderfully enlighten us; it clears up the eye of
the soul, breaks through all prejudices, makes us judge impartially, according to
truth: Integrity and uprightness will preserve us, Psalm. 25.21. and direct our
way, Prove. 21.29. This I say; That man whose mind is thus set upon his duty,
will not find it so difficult a matter to discern what is his present duty;
ordinarily he will not; in some extraordinary cases there may be more
difficulty sometimes; but ordinarily it is otherwise. There is a secret guidance
of God in this case: The integrity of the upright shall guide them, Prove. 11.3.
There is a voice behind thee, a whisper from Heaven, saying, This is the way,
walk in it. David took this course: first he resolves upon universal obedience,
Psalm. 119.8, 30, 32. I have said, ver. 5, 7. (...); dixi; i. e. in animo
statuit apud se. So ver. 106, 112. and then begs of God to order his steps, and
tell him which foot he should put foremost; what he should do first, and what in
the next place, ver. 5, 35, 135. how he should order his conversation aright.
If the Devil finds you unfixed and unresolved, untrusty and wavering, he will
assault you with more violence: Resist him, and he flies from you; give back
never so little, and he will come upon you with double force. Till we are thus
sincerely fixed upon our duty, standing perfect and complete in all the will of
God, Col. 4.12. resolving to do our duty wherever it lies; Till then, we shall
be partial Judges of our duty, very apt to single out the easiest and shortest
duties, stepping over all the rest; we shall seek rather to please our selves
than God, in the duty we perform; and leaning to a carnal judgment, do what
seems right in our own eyes, and then to be sure we are wrong.

Object. Tho by these directions given, I may discern duty from downright sin;
yet I am at a loss, how to distinguish between duty and duty; between duty in
season, and duty out of season. When two duties come together, and present
themselves at once to my Conscience, I cannot deny but they are both duties;
but which to do first, I know not.

Ans. -- If this be the doubt, consider whether the Scripture has not decided
it; in some cases it has, and upon such grounds as may help us in other cases,
to know our present duty; as Mat. 5.24. First be reconciled to thy brother, and
then come and offer thy gift. So Mat. 7.5. First cast out the beam out of thine
own eye, and then shall thou see clearly, etc. When the duty postponed by you,
does hinder the right performance of that other duty which thou art going
about, and render it unacceptable to God, then the second duty, as you have
ranked them, must take place of the first, and be first done. Acts of worship
cannot be done in Faith toward God, where Charity toward our Neighbor is
wanting. He does not believe in God, who loves not his brother, 1 John 3.10,
23. And so in the other case mentioned, it is gross hypocrisy to reprove
another, when thou thy self art guilty in the same, or a higher kind: Thou
hypocrite, first cast out the beam, etc. Besides, he cannot understand how to
reprove another, who does not first reform himself: the casting out our own
sins, gives us light how to deal with others; then shall thou see clearly, etc.

Object. -- But what if after all this, it should so fall out, that two duties
should press upon my conscience for present performance, and I cannot, either
by Reason or Scripture, determine which to do first, but do hang in suspense,
am in a strait between two?

Ans. -- This is hardly to be supposed; but admit it to be thy case, according
to thy present judgment -- Then,

1. Sit down once more, and consider, weigh them both well, and hold the
balance with a steady hand: I am persuaded you may perceive some preponderancy
on one side, that may direct you what to do, from some over-bearing
circumstances that turn the scales. God is the God of Order, and not of
Confusion: He does never command two inconsistent duties at the same time: The
Covenant is ordered in all things, and so must our Conversations be too; else
we walk disorderly: Therefore consider well, what pleases God most, and for
once leave out the relation to the present time, which thou art so much puzzled
about, and consider the nature of the duties themselves, which of them is most
spiritual, which of them the Scripture lays most weight upon; for there is a
difference between duty and duty, all are not alike; as Psalm. 51.16, 17. a
broken and a contrite heart, is beyond all other Sacrifices. God did require
them too, but not without this; both together do best; but of the two, he had
rather have this alone, than the other alone without this. Outward Offerings
are never pleasing to God, when the heart goes not along with them. Be sure to
mind that most, which God is most pleased with.

2. If of two duties you cannot resolve which is most your duty at present,
then resolve upon both, and begin where you will; God will not be extreme in
that case; do one, and leave not the other undone, but be sure to find time for
that also. When one duty does quite take us off from the performance of another
necessary duty that stood in competition with it, it is greatly to be suspected
that there is a temptation then; but if you do both, one after another, you can
err only in point of time and order, and God will overlook that in a sincere
Christian, who acts according to his present light, and would do that which God
likes best, if he could understand his mind; but being not able to judge of
that, he resolves upon both successively.

3. Beg of God to resolve thee: O that my ways were directed to keep thy
statutes, Psalm. 119.5. Shall I go up to Hebron, or shall I not? 2 Samuel 2.1. God
will teach thee what to do, Psalm. 25.12. He shall direct thy paths, Prove. 3.5,
6.

APPLICATION,
In some moving Considerations, to quicken you to your present duty.

1. All the sins of your lives break in upon you, through the omission of your
present duty. Do but stop that gap, and keep it stopped, and then there will be
no room for sin. I speak not of those unavoidable infirmities that cleave to
the Saints under their most conscionable walking with God; but of wilful
neglects that lie heavy upon the conscience, when God awakens it.

2. Whatever you do in the room of a present duty, is not acceptable to God.
Not acceptable, did I say? that is too soft a word; it is an offense to him;
it is disobedience, and rebellion: tho it be a duty, yet because it is not that
duty that God now requires, you sin in doing it: Not that I would have
Christians live always distracting in fear, lest what they do, should not be
their present duty: My meaning is, when we neglect a known duty, which we are
convinced of: but if we use means to know our duty, and do act according to our
present light in what we do, we may have peace, and hope for acceptance.

3. If you don't now perform your present duty, you can never perform it,
unless you could recall time, and make that present again which is past: Time
passes away, and represents a Man to God as he was at that instant: what he is
the next, is another thing; but that hour, that day, week, or year, which thou
have spent in the neglect of thy duty, stands upon record against thee, is
irrecoverable: you must account for that; and without a pardon, you cannot
escape the judgment of God. Misspent time is the treasury of Gods wrath; and
what a fiery day of wrath will that make at last, when God shall put all
together, and sum up the sins of every day of thy life, and reckon with thee
for all at once, in the great day of his wrath; so much for such an idle hour,
and so much for such an idle hour; so much for such and such a day spent in an
Alehouse, Tavern, or Brothel-house; so much for such a year and such a year, it
may be for many years spent in open profaness, and all manner of debauchery. As
you fill up your time with sin, God fills it up with secret wrath, which will
be revealed one day. Time carries along with it all the things, good or evil,
that are done in that time, the neglect of a present duty. Leave that time void
of the duty that belongs to it, and there is no going back to fill it up: As
for instance, If your Present duty be Prayer, if you don't pray now, you can
never pray now: You may pray afterward, but that does not answer to the
present now: You may do the same duty for substance at another time, but it
does not bear the same date: That hour in which thou do omit any duty proper
to it, will witness against thee; when that part of thy life comes under
examination, have a care that time does not carry an evil report of you to God.
There is a voice in time, Day unto day utters speech, and night unto night
shows knowledge, Psalm. 19.2. Time past is present with God: he sees how it
slips through thy fingers, how it is stained by thy sins. Time is ill bestowed
upon thee; it may provoke God to shorten thy days, and to cut thee off in the
midst of thy years, Psalm. 55.23.

4. You can have no trial of your spirit, nor of the truth of your state: It Is
impossible you should ever prove your sincerity, but by a conscientious
discharge of your present duty. The power of godliness lies much in this, in
having a respect to God in all our common actions. There can be no Religion
without this; and in this there is peace, true hearts ease, Psalm. 119.45. (...)
in ipsa latitudine. When a man so walks, that his conscience meets with nothing
that offends it, that strikes against it, the way is broad enough, a plain path
of duty, which is very satisfactory to conscience: But when the business is
dark and doubtful, looks as much like sin as duty, a man cannot be at ease in
this case; the way is very narrow, there is a grating upon the conscience; and
after all the tricks, salves and distinctions that may be used to justify what
we do, we cannot have inward peace, whilst something always rubs against the
conscience as we go.

5. You cannot walk evenly with God, if you do not your present duty. One would
wonder to see what broken forms of godliness some men rest in: They pick and
choose here a duty, and there another: this they will do, and this they will not
do: Their Religion is but a voluntary Religion, what they please, pure
will worship. Col. 2.23. They will stint themselves, and stint God; so much he
shall have, and no more: They draw up to themselves a scheme of Religion, such
as they think will serve the turn, and on they go in this round of duties: Here
they are now, and here you shall find them Seven years hence. I am not against
a method of Practical godliness, provided it be comprehensive enough; but it is
very dangerous tying up our selves to these narrow set forms of practical
holiness, which some men place all their Religion in: a step farther they will
not go. Alas! the Providence of God may lead you to such duties which you
thought not of, in doing or suffering for him, John 21.18. Therefore you should
be in a readiness to comply with every call of God, standing complete in his
whole will. Present obedience gives understanding for the future; A good
understanding have all they that do his commandments, Psalm. 111.10. Let it be
the purpose of your heart to walk before God unto all well-pleasing, Col. 1.10.
and then your hearts will not reproach you while you live, Job 27.6.

Some men walk very unevenly: there are so many gaps in their obedience, they
move from duty to duty, per saltum, quite leaping over some, and lightly
touching upon others, as if they had no great mind to any: They act Grace so
abruptly, that it gives no continued sense; we know not where to find them:
There are so many vacant spaces, so many blanks of omission, so many blots and
blurs of commission; they drop a duty here, and another half a Mile off, that
you cannot say, A man of God went this way. This is not even walking; their way
is crooked, in and out; sometimes they wander on the right hand, and sometimes
on the left; they never touch upon the right path, unless it be in crossing the
way from one sin to another, which is rather to break through a duty, than to
perform it. Here is no beaten path of holiness, no continued tract of
godliness: They don't always exercise themselves to keep a good conscience.
They who are not frequent in duty, are never exact in duty; their hearts cool
so much between duty and duty, that there is no servour of spirit left; they
are key-cold; now and then they take up a Bible, read a little, dipping at a
venture, but are no way concerned in what they read; they heed it not: now and
then they hear a Sermon, now and then pray, but without any life and spirit.
They who pray but seldom, never pray well. Actus perficit habitum; Frequent
acts beget a habit, and frequent acts maintain it. We can never perfect
holiness, but by a constaut tenor in holiness, going on from day to day in the
practice of it. Some trees, tho they bring not forth much fruit; yet that as
is, is the bigger and fairer; but it is not so in a Christian: The less you are
in duty, the more lank and lean are your duties. As all Graces grow up together
in the heart, in an apt disposition to actual exercise, when occasion is given
to draw them forth: And as no grace in the heart grows up alone; so no duty
thrives in the life alone; one duty borrows strength from another, is bounded
within another: as stones in a wall do bare up one another; so a Christian is
built up of many living stones, many graces, many duties. There is the same
reason to do thy duty in one thing, as in another; the same authority commands
both: Unless you have respect unto all the Commandments, you truly respect none.

6. You must begin somewhere, at some present duty: Why not at this? It will be
as difficult, nay, more difficult to come to Christ to morrow, than it is to
day; Therefore to day hearken to his voice, and harden not your heart. Break
the Ice now, and by Faith venture upon thy present duty wherever it lies: Do
what you are now called to: You Will never know how easy the Yoke of Christ is,
till it is bound about your necks; nor how light his Burden is, till you have
taken it up. While you judge of holiness at a distance, as a thing without you,
and contrary to you, you will never like it. Come a little nearer to it: do but
take it in, actually engage in it, and you will find Religion carries Meat in its
mouth: it is of a reviving, nourishing, strengthening nature: it brings that
along with it, that enables the soul cheerfully to go through with it. Enter in
at the strait gate: You cannot judge of the way on this side the gate: Most men
stick at the strait gate. Beg of God to draw thee through, to lift thee over the
Threshold, and set thee in the narrow way; as narrow as it is, yet none who
enter in at the strait gate, by a true and through conversion, did ever perish
in the way: God will lead thee and sustain thee, and carry thee on to the end
of thy Race: Therefore be strong, and show thy self a man, and keep the charge
of the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, and to keep his statutes, and his
commandments, and his judgments, and his testimonies, as it is written in the
law of Moses, that thou may prosper in all that thou do, and whithersoever
thou turnest thy self, 1 Kings 2.3.

Secondly, How the well discharge of our present duty, may encourage us to hope
in God for his help and assistance in all future duties.

1. It Is promised, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. The cause of desertion is from our selves:
God shows mercy for his own sake, without any respect to any thing in us: But
all acts of judgment and wrath take their rise from something in our selves
that provokes God to such severities. Therefore let us keep close to our
present duty, and trust God, who has promised never to leave us, nor forsake
us, Heb. 13.5, 6. vide Isa. 40.31. vide Psalm. 84.11. and Isa. 41.10. There is a
special promise to the seed of Abraham, of help and strength. -- But they who
neglect their present duty, are greatly threatened, Prove. 1.24. and Psalm. 52.7.
vide.

2. Present Grace is a pledge of future Grace: To him that has, more shall be
given, Luke 19.17, 26. Where God begins a good work, he will finish it, Heb.
12.2. Phil. 2.6. So Psalm. 25.3, 10, 14. Mat. 10.19, 20. vide Judge. 13.23. The
Lord is faithful, who shall stablish you, and keep you from evil, 2 These. 3.3.

3. The experience of the Saints confirms this, Psalm. 18.26, 30, 31, 32. vide.
'Twas some such thing as this that David had, Psalm. 119.56.

4. The Saints made this an Argument in prayer, Psalm. 38.20, 21, 22. vide.
Psalm. 119.30, 31, -- 94, -- 121, -- 173. vide. Psalm. 25.21.

3. A conscientious discharge of our present duty, fits and disposes our minds
to the next duty. As there is a concatenation of sins, so of duties; as one sin
leads to another, so one duty leads to another: the breach of one Commandment,
is virtually the breach of all, James 2.10. 1 John 4.20. As there is a
revolting more and more, Isa. 1.5. a proceeding from evil to evil, Jer. 9.3.
waxing worse and worse, 2 Timothy 3.13. so a godly man goes from grace to grace,
from faith to faith, from strength to strength, Job 17.9. vide. Therefore in
all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths, Prove. 3.6. A man
cannot act his Faith upon God for future preservation, but in the discharge of
his present duty. Commit the keeping of thy soul to him in well-doing, 1 Pet.
4.19. and then you will find grace to help in time of need, Heb. 4.16.

6. By the well discharge of our present duty, we may attain assurance of
salvation, Col. 3.23, 24. vide. It Is Paul's motive to Timothy, when he stirs
him up to his present duty, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2, 5, 8. vide. q. d. I am Paul, the
aged, who have one foot in the grave, ver. 6. but you are a young man, Timothy;
you are putting on your Armor, but I am putting off mine: I have finished my
course, and kept the faith: I have discharged the duty of my place, and by that
means gained assurance of my salvation -- Henceforth is laid up for me, etc. He
dates his full assurance from that time, as the happy result of a well-spent
life, and exhorts Timothy to tred in his steps, to make full proof of his
Ministry. Fight on, Timothy, and fear nothing, that in the end of thy days thou
may have a comfortable sight of that Crown of righteousness which I am sure
of. Therefore let us all, by patient continuance in well-doing, wait for eternal
life, Romans 2.7.

These are the Scripture-grounds of hope for the time to come, that God will
help us, and stand by us, and strengthen us with might in our inward man,
giving us a sufficiency of grace answerable to all the occasions we may have
for it.

Object. May not Saints fail in future duties?

Ans. They may and do fail; and when it is so, their former neglects have no
small influence into their present miscarriage: But tho they may fall, yet God
upholds them with his hand, that they don't fall utterly, Psalm. 37.23, 24. God
gives them a heart that cannot totally depart from him, Jer. 32.40.

APPLICATION.
You see how the way of the Lord is strength to the upright. He that is a doer
of the word, is like a house built upon a Rock, which may be shaken, but will
never fall, Mat. 7.24, 25. In the fear of the Lord is strong confidence, Prove.
14.26. A Saint when he relies upon God for help to perform his present duty,
does not say, as Sampson did, Strengthen me only this once, Judges 16.28. but
promises to trust in God at all times hereafter, Psalm. 62.8. to come again and
again for help, as often as there is need. Every single act of Faith, implies a
universal trust reposed in God for all things at all times. He that does not
trust God for every thing, cannot trust in him for any thing, because there is
the same reason for one act of Faith as for another. You must bare upon God's
Infinite Power, Wisdom and Grace, in every act of Faith. God is always the same
in himself. If you can believe in him now, why not for ever? What should
discourage you hereafter, that may not be objected now? You have nothing now to
object; therefore conclude with David, That goodness and mercy shall follow
thee all the days of thy life, Psalm. 23.6. He that has delivered, will deliver.

Not that the doing a present duty, does merit assistance for the future; but
God for our encouragement in well-doing, has graciously promised it. This is a
great motive to quicken us to our present duty.

O that every one of you would go home from this Sermon, and set upon your
present duty. You that are Masters of Families, take up Joshuah's resolution,
and say every one of you in the presence of God this day, That I and my house
will serve the Lord. Fly all appearance of evil; declare against every thing
that looks like sin; let there be no lying, swearing, drunkenness, or any sort
of profaneness countenanced by you. Be zealous reprovers in your own gates, and
walk within your houses with a perfect heart; live in a continual fear of
offending God; beg of him upon your knees, to put you into such a daily
exercise of grace, as may be most suitable to your present circumstances. Grace
will help you at every turn: If you thrive in your calling, grace will teach
you to give God the praise, and to be thankful; if you sink and go backwards,
grace will teach you quietly to submit, how to bear with cheerfulness all
disappointments and losses you meet with; how to receive evil as well as good
from God. Truly a man without grace, is a burden to himself, and to every body
else; he knows not how to receive good or evil, is in danger to be undone by
one as well as the other: The prosperity of the wicked slays them, Prove. 1.32.
their Table becomes a snare to them; and that which should have been for their
welfare, a trap, Psalm. 69.22. They will run themselves a ground, one way or
other, and come to nothing at last: God will turn their way upside down, and
bring confusion upon them: But verily there is a reward for the righteous. --
What I am pressing you to, is your present duty; what is past, cannot be
recalled: Your present duty is to repent of past sins, and to walk with God in
your Callings for the time to come. Be upright in your way; admit nothing into
your particular Callings, that is inconsistent with the Principles of your
general Calling, as you are Christians: So carry your selves every one of you,
that all that deal with you, may know you are a real Christian. Were there a
greater savor of grace, and of the power of godliness in your Shops, did you
buy and sell in the fear of God, doing all things in Faith, as to the Lord, as
in his sight, conversing with others in the fear of God, what a comely sight
would this be! what a Sermon would this be! you would be living Epistles of
that, seen and read of all men; and such Sermon-Notes gathered out of the Lives
of Professors, may make deeper impressions than those that are gathered out of
the mouths of Preachers. Godliness exemplified in practice, shows it self more
clearly in the thing, than it is possible for us to do in words. Words convey
Notions of things to our ears; but a holy life holds forth the things
themselves to our eyes. Nothing is so like a man as himself. Godliness in
practice, is godliness it self, extant in the thing, in its own substance and
nature, it is visible grace, it is the very matter and subject of our Sermons,
standing forth in the Lives of Professors. I wish we had more of this Divinity
walking about our Streets, more of these living Epistles seen and read of all
men. These are the Books that will convince gainsayers, and provoke them to
real holiness. You hear good Sermons, and read good Books; but Doctrines
without Examples edify little. You don't see and read that in the men of this
Generation, that agrees with Gospel-principles. The truth is, Saints are not so
visible, so legible as they should be. We can hardly spell out any thing that
savours of true Christianity. 'Twould pose a discerning Christian, to pick out
Grace out of the Lives of some Professors: It Is couched under such sinful
mixtures, is in such a worldly dress, that it does not look like it self. Hence
it is, that many real Saints go for Hypocrites in this World, are suspected by
good men, and hated by bad men upon this account. Let your light shine out
more; away with the Bushel that keeps in the light; and take the Lanthorn of
Prudence, that only keeps out the wind. Christian prudence will direct us in
the right performance of our duty; but true Christian prudence never takes us
quite off from our present duty; that is Hellish policy, not Christian
prudence, that distinguishes a man quite out of his duty, and pretends to give
sufficient Reason for it too. But God will catch that man in his own
craftiness, and turn his wisdom into foolishness. There can be no Reason given
against a present duty; if it be duty, and thy duty now, Reason cannot
countermand it: You may go to Hell with all your Reasons, in a wilful neglect
of it. But if God incline your hearts every day to make conscience of your
present duty, you will be always found in a holy frame, and the blessing of God
will be upon you: you will flourish like the Palm Tree, and grow like a Cedar
in Lebanon, bringing forth fruit in old age: you will always be fat and
flourishing, to show the Lord is upright, Psalm. 92.12, 13, etc.

Quest. What distance ought we to keep, in following the strange Fashions of
Apparel which come up in the days wherein we live? SERMON XXI.
ZEPH. 1.8. And it shall come to pass in the day of the Lords sacrifice; that I
will punish the Princes, and the Kings children, and all such as are clothed
with strange apparel.
THAT this Prophecy was synchronal with the Reign of good Josiah, appears, v.
1. And a heinous aggravavation it was of Judah's sin, That they were unreformed
under a Reforming-Prince. Of him it was said, That there was no King before
him, that turned to the Lord with all his heart, and with all his soul, 2 King.
23, 25.
and with all his might, according to all the law of Moses; neither after him
arose there any like him. Of them it may be said, That there was no Generation
that turned from the Lord, that departed from the Law of their God, before
them; tho afterward there were that equalled, or exceeded their wickedness.

The Prophet therefore, without the solemnity of a Preface, immediately
proceeds to sentence, ver. 2. I will utterly consume all things out of the
land. And how could more of wrath be expressed in fewer words? Consumption, and
utter consumption, and utter consumption of all things, is certainly the
abstract and epitome of final and total disolation.

To silence all Objections that might be made against this righteous sentence
of God, the Lord commands, ver. 7. Hold thy peace at the presence of the Lord,
for the day of the Lord is at hand; he has prepared his sacrifice, he has
invited his guests. 1. Judah was to be the sacrifice. They that would not offer
a Sacrifice of Righteousness, shall be made a Sacrifice to Justice. 2. The
armed Babylonians were to be the Priests. 3. And the Rabble of their Enemies
were to be the hungry Guests, who would not spare, but glut themselves with the
spoil of Judah, to teach them (and us in them), That if God be not sanctified
in the hearts, Lev. 10.3.
he will be on the heads of a People professing his Name.

Now in this day of the Lords sacrifice, however the main of the storm and
Hericane would fall on the heads of the Idolaters, and those that swear by the
Lord and Malcham, ver. 5. upon all the Apostates, and such as shook off the
worship of God, ver. 6. yet some drops of the storm, a skirt of the shower of
vengeance would light on a sort of second-rate sinners, such as were clothed
with strange apparel. Or if the sinners were the same, yet this sin would be
Accumulative; and when the Ephah is brim-full, one single drop more will make
it run over.

In the words you may observe, 1. The Criminals. 2. The Crime. 3. The
Punishment.

(1). The Criminals: And they were either, 1. the Principals: The Princes, and
the Kings children; or as the Septuagint render it, (...); the Rulers, and
Kings household; i. e. the Magistrates, Nobles, and Judges of the Land, who as
they were lifted up above the level of the Commonalty, ought to have gone
before them in all examples of sobriety and gravity: whereas now their levity,
in what was decent and grave, and their affection of what was novel and vain,
had drawn the People into a participation of the same sin, and obnoxiousness to
the same punishment with themselves. 2. The Accessaries were all such (of what
order, rank, degree soever they were) that were clothed with strange apparel.

Whose sin was the greater, and whose punishment should be the heavier, was of
more difficult determination: For the Grandees would plead, that some Latitude
was to be indulged there, in respect of their Quality and Character; and the
inferior sort would argue, That they did but write after the Copy set them by
their betters. But leave we them to quarrel and debate the point among
themselves, both are included in the same condemnation; and it may safely be
referred to the Divine Justice, to admeasure out vengeance in proportion to
their respective aggravations.

(2). The Crime: To be clothed in strange apparel. (...). The Septuagint
render it, (...); which may denote, either 1. Exotic and foreign apparel, such
as they fetch far, and bought dear in the price, and must pay much dearer for
in the punishment, when Justice shall call them to a reckoning. The Jews are
noted for a People exceeding fond, even to dotage, of foreign Vanities, foreign
Wives, foreign Worship, and foreign gods too. We read, That Ahaz chanced, 2
King. 16.10.
to spy an Altar at Damascus that hugely pleased his humor (Gods Altar at
Jerusalem was a plain piece; but this, a rare Specimen of curious Art), and he
sends to Urijah, the Priest the fashion of the Altar, and the pattern thereof,
according to all its workmanship. For if a Prince has an itch to innovate in,
or make a change of his Religion, a Priest will easily be found that shall
justify it, That the Pattern of Damascus is far beyond the Pattern in the
Mount; and that a Model secundum usum Syriae, is more decent and august than
one secundum usum Salem. Or 2. It may denote such as they had newly invented
among themselves: For they had fruitful inventing heads, tho barren hearts,
which could conceive a Vanity, and bring forth a Lie, as soon as the most
sickly soul could long for it.

This strange Apparel (whether native or foreign) might be so for the matter,
or for the form. Lightminds, constant in nothing but inconstancy, would always
be varying, either the Stuff or the Shape, the Ground or the Trimming. And it
had been as easy to make a Coat for the Moon, as to have fitted the fickle
humor of that unstable Generation. And indeed, at last they had got their
(...), round tyres like the Moon, Isa. 3.16.
the liveliest Emblem of uncertain desultory Fancies that could have been
invented.

(3). The Punishment: which is indefinitely expressed, I will punish: but how,
or in what way, degree, or measure he will punish, he reserves to himself. As
there is not a greater threatening, than for God to promise an impenitent
people, That he will not punish them; so it looks very angrily, when God
threatens to punish, but conceals the manner of the execution: As if it must
needs be some strange punishment that God would invent on purpose for strange
Apparel; or some Curse not written in Gods Book, that must fall on the heads of
such a vertiguous and giddy people.

The Crime then you have heard, the Criminals you have seen, the Punishment
must be understood. In the mean time from this Text, a fair occasion is offered
to propose, and answer this Question.

What distance ought we to keep in following the strange fashions of Apparel
which come up in the days wherein we live?

That the present Generation is lamentably intoxicated with Novelties, and as
sadly degenerated from the gravity of some former Ages, can neither be denied,
nor concealed, nor defended, nor, I fear, reformed. And what is more
deplorable, some that wear the Livery of a stricter profession, are carried
away with the Vanity; Isa. 3.16.
and even the Daughters of Zion have caught the Epidemical infection. And this
has made this Question (tho in retentis) to be of great importance. To which
yet, before I can give a direct and distinct Answer, I must crave your
patience, that I may lay down these Preliminaries.

. 1. That it is exceeding difficult to fix and determine upon the minimum quod
sic, the lowest degree of Conformity to these new fashions, which is sinful;
and the maximum quod non, the highest degree of Conformity to them, which is
not sinful; and that because the decision of the Point depends on many nice
Circumstances, which must all be duly weighed; and if the Scales be not exact,
and true, the hand that holds them, steady; the eye that judges, clear; it will
be impossible to form a judgment in the case.

. 2. That therefore Satan has herein the greater advantage to overreach us, our
own hearts to betray and deceive us, Because it is easy to slide insensibly
from the lawful to the unlawful, when it is so hard to discern to a
hairs-breadth, where the one ends, and the other begins.

. 3. That Pride will be sure to perplex and entangle the controversy. For
seeing a haughty heart will never confine its licentiousness to the narrow Rule
of God, it must widen the Rule, and stretch it to its own Extravagancies. That
Lust which scorns to bow its crooked practices to the straight rule, will not
fail to bend the rule (if possible) to its own crooked practices: For it is very
uneasy to sit in the Stooks of a man's own Conscience.

. 4. That there may be some danger, as well as much difficulty in the
determination, since the Universality of the Corruption, like a deluge, has
overspread the face of the Earth, and Interest is taken into the Confederacy,
with whom to combat, is an unequal contention. Pride and profit, glory and
gain, have their distinct concernments in this controversy. And to decry the
silver shrines of Diana, by which so many Crafts-men get their livings, must
raise a heavy outcry against the Opponent: And when obtaining Custom shall
second and back these corruptions, he must have Robur and aes triplex circa
pectus, a very hardy spirit, that shall dare to cross the stream, or stem the
current of a prevailing luxuriancy. So that to have a finger in this ungrateful
debate, must engage him in Ishmael's fate, to have every man's hand lifted up
against him, seeing it is unavoidable, that his hand must be set almost against
every man.

. 5. That yet Charity will lend us one safe Rule, That we impose a severer law
upon our selves, and allow a larger indulgence to others. The Rule of our own
conversation, should be with the strictest; but that by which we censure
others, a little more with the largest. For thus has the Apostle, Romans 14.
taught us to proceed in things which in their own nature are indifferent.

. 6. Prudence will also afford us another excellent Rule; In dubious cases to
take the safer side: Not to venture too near the brink of a Precipice, when we
have room enough to walk secure at a greater distnce. For seeing the best that
can be said of, and pleaded for many of our Fashions, is, That in themselves
they are Adiaphorous, which yet in their common use are sinful; it becomes a
Christian to be cautious, and practice only that which is confessedly innocent
and inoffensive: For he that will always do what may lawfully be done, shall
sometimes do what is unlawful to be done.

. 7. An humble heart, crucified to the World, and making a conscience of its
baptismal Covenant, whereby it stands engaged to renounce the pomps and
vanities of a wicked World, with all fomentations of, and incitations to the
flesh, will be the best Casuist. Mortification would cut up the controversy by
the roots, cure the disease in the cause, and cleanse the stream in the
fountain. Nor can any determine for another, so well as he that is true to his
soul might for himself.

. 8. That yet there are some modes of Apparel, which so notoriously cross the
ends of all Apparel, so inconsistent with the Rule of Decency, so apparently
transgressing the bounds of Modesty, that no pretense of an honest intention,
no uprightness of heart can atone, or excuse the evil of wearing them. As if
(for instance) a Garment was made of Silk, wrought in such Figures as did
imitate the Pictures of Aratine, and represent Nakedness in all the most
obscene and filthy postures, the use of such Raiment would be a gross abuse;
nor could any internal chastity alleviate the guilt of the outward immodesty.

. 9. Tho some modes of Apparel can never be well used, there are none but may
be ill used: None so good, but they may become bad; tho some so bad, that they
never can be made good. And the reason of the difference, is, because Bonum
oritur ex integris, malum e quolibet defectu. All Circumstances must concur to
render a practice lawful, when the want of any one (which ought to be present)
is enough to render it sinful.

. 10. Tho sumptuary laws may justly be made, to retrench the excesses, yet none
can lawfully be enacted to compel men in the defects of Apparel. A Law may say,
Farther thou shall not go: but not, Thus far shall thou go. And the Reason is,
They that can reach the Standard assigned by the Law, may lawfully abate at the
command of Authority, when perhaps some cannot reach the lowest pitch, without
entrenching upon their Purses or Consciences.

Having premised these things, I reassume the Question.

What distance ought we to keep, in following the strange fashions of Apparel
that come up in the days wherein we live?

The Resolution of which Question will depend, I. On an impartial Inquiry,
Wherein the sinfulness of Apparel does lie? II. On some Directions, How to walk
at a due distance from these strange fashions, that we partake not of the sin
that may be in them?


[I.] Let us then in the first place inquire, Wherein the sinfulness of Apparel
does lie?

And that difficulty will be best assoiled by a further inquiry into these Four
Particulars.

1. For what ends God appoints, and Nature requires Apparel. 2. What is the
Rule of Decency to regulate Apparel? 3. From what inward Principles these
outward modes are taken up? 4. What effects these fashions have, or may have on
our selves or others?
(1). Let us then enquire, for what ends God appoints, and Nature requires
Apparel. In the state of Innocence, and Primitive Integrity, Nakedness was man's
richest clothing: No Ornament, no Raiment, was ever since so decent, as then
was no-Ornament, no-Raiment: For as there was then no irregular motion in the
soul, so neither was there any in the body, that might die the Cheeks with a
Blush, or cover the Face with shame: They were both naked, Genesis 2.25.
the Man and his Wife, and were not ashamed.

But when they had once violated the Covenant, and broken the Law of their
Creator, Shame, the Fruit and Daughter of sin, seized their souls, and that in
respect of God, and of each other; which latter, chiefly (as I conceive) to
hide, the best expedient their confused and distracted thoughts could pitch
upon, was, to stitch together a few fig leaves, to make themselves Aprons; till
God, commiserating their wretched plight, provided better covering, more
adequate to the necessity of Nature, more comporting with decency; i. e. coats
of skins, Gen 3.21.

Wherein the Divine Wisdom so admirably contrived it, That their Apparel, 1.
might serve as a standing Memorial of their demerits, that they might carry
about them the continual conviction of their sin, and the deserved punishment:
For what less could they infer, than that they deserved to die the death, when
the innocent Beasts must die, to preserve and accommodate their lives? 2. That
their Apparel might direct their weak Faith to the promised seed, in whom they
might expect a better covering, and from a greater shame, that of their
filthiness in the sight of God: In him (I say) whom those Beasts probably slain
in sacrifice, did typifie: For that any were slain merely on the account of
food before the Flood, is not probable, when yet the distinction between the
clean and unclean, on the account of sacrifice, is demonstrable, Genesis 2.7.

Now God appoints, and Nature (frail, faded Nature) requires Apparel.

. 1. To hide shame, to cover nakedness. That our first Parents, and their
Posterity, in their Exile from Paradise, might not become a perpetual covering
of the eyes, and shame to each other. Whence it will follow,

1. That whatever Apparel, or fashions of Apparel, do either cross, or not
comply with this great design of God, must be sinfully used.

2. That as any Apparel, or fashions of Apparel, do more or less cross, or not
comply with this end, they are proportionably more or less sinful.

But our Semi-Evites, aware of danger, from these conclusions, to their naked
breasts, will readily reply, That this will be of no great use to decide this
controversy, because it is not clear, 1. what parts of the body it is God has
appointed Apparel to cover: nor 2. which of them may be uncovered without
shame, seeing that some, as the hands, the face, the feet, may be naked,
without sin to our selves, or offense to others. To which I answer,

1. That the use of the parts, and their destinated ends, are to be well
considered in this case. The use of the Face, is chiefly to distinguish, 1. the
Sex, the Male from the Female; 2. the Individuals, one person from another: the
use of the hands, is, that they may be instruments for work, business, and all
manual operations.

2. That to cover, or muffle up those parts ordinarily, whose ends and use
requires to be uncovered, is to cross Gods end and design, and by consequence,
sinful.

3. That to uncover those parts promiscuously, and expose them ordinarily to
open view, for which there can be no such good ends and uses assigned, is
sinful: For the general Law of God must always take place, where the special
use of a particular part requires not the contrary.

4. And therefore all Apparel, or fashions of Apparel, which expose those parts
to view, of which exposing God and Nature have assigned no use, is sinful. It Is
true, I confess, our first Parents in that hasty provision which they made
against their shame, took care only for Aprons: but God, who had adequate
conceptions of their wants, and what was necessary to supply them; of the Rule
of Decency, and what would fully answer it, provided for them coats, that so
the whole body (except as before excepted) might be covered, and its shame
concealed.

. 2. Another end of Apparel was to defend the body, 1. from the ordinary
injuries of unseasonable seasons; 2. the common inconveniences of labor and
travel; 3. the emergent accidents that might befall them in their Pilgrimage.
For the Fall of Man had introduced excessive heats and colds: They were driven
out of Paradise, to wander and work in a Wilderness, now overgrown with briars,
thorns and thistles, the early Fruits of the late Curse; and Clothes were
assigned them in this exegency for a kind of defensive Armor. Hence we read, 1 Samuel 17.38. That Saul armed David with his own armor, and he armed him with a
coat of mail. In the Hebrew it is, Saul clothed David with his clothes, and he
clothed him with a coat of mail. And the word there used, (...), is of near
cognation with that in my Text, (...). Hence therefore,

1. Whatever modes of Apparel comply not with this gracious end of God, in
defending our bodies from those inconveniences, are sinfully worn and used.

2. That it is a horrid cruelty to our frail bodies, to expose them to those
injuries against which God has provided a remedy, to gratify pride, or to
humor any Vanity. And however our Gallants hope to keep themselves warm, and
to shelter their sin under the skreen of their own foolish Proverb, Pride feels
no cold; yet God has oftentimes made their sin to become their punishment,
whilst by an obstinate striving with the inconveniences of an ill-contrived
Mode, they have hazarded, if not lost, their Healths, if not their Lives, by a
ridiculous Complement to some new fashion. But how they will stand before the
righteous Judgment Seat of God, when he shall arraign, and try them as Guilty
of Self-Murder, in the great day of scrutiny, they may do well timely to advise
upon, and consider.

. 3. To these I may add, That when God made Man his first suit of Apparel, he
took measure of him by that Employment which he had cut out for him. Man's
assigned work was labor; not to eat the bread of idleness, but first to earn
it in the sweat of his face; which tho at first it was a Curse, is by Grace
converted into a Blessing. And accordingly God so adapted, and accommodated his
clothes to his body, that they might not hinder readiness, expedition,
industry, diligence, and perseverance in the works of his particular Calling.
Hence these things will be exceeding plain.

1. That God having appointed Man to labor, cannot be supposed to have made
any provision for, or given the least indulgence to idleness. Intervals for
rest, to redintegrate the decayed Spirits; cessation for a season from hard
labor, God allows, and Nature requires; but exemption from a particular
Calling, or any dispensation for sloth in that Calling, we find none.

2. That God having suited clothing in all its forms and shapes, so to the
body, that they prejudice him not in the works of his particular Calling
whatever fashions of Apparel do incommode him therein, and render him unfit, or
less fit to discharge the duties of it, are so far sinfully used.

3. That therefore they who by unmerciful lacing, girding, bracing, pinching
themselves in uneasy garments, can scarce breathe, less eat, and least of all
labor, do apparently offend against this end of God; and it is but just, that
they who will not, or create an impotency that they cannot work, should not
eat, nor long breathe in the earth, whereof they are unprofitable burdens.

Plato calls the Body, the Prison of the Soul, (...) quasi (...), and some have
made the clothes the Prison of the body, wherein they are so cloistered, so
immured in the Cage and Little-ease of a pinching fashion, that the body is
made an unprofitable servant to the soul, and both of them to God.

In the declining times of the Roman Commonwealth, this vanity began to obtain,
and is smartly noted by the Comaedian, as the folly of Mothers: -- Quas matres
student
Demissis humeris esse, vincto pectore, ut graciles litent, T^rent. eunuch.

Si quae est habitior paulo, pugilem esse ajunt, deducant cibum
Jametsibona est Natura, reddunt curatura Junceas!


But thus has Pride brought many to their Coffins, who after an uneasy life,
spun out in more pain with doing nothing, than they had found in labor, after
a few tedious days worn out in Asthma's, Catarrhs, Consumptions, and Ptisicks,
could never get freedom from the confinement of their clothes, till their souls
had procured a Jail-deliver from their bodies. However they cannot justly
complain of Providence, who gave them their option, and left them to their own
desires, Rather to be out of the world, than out of the fashion.

. 4. There is yet another end of Apparel, viz. The adorning of the body. And in
this all our wanton Fashionists take sanctuary. Out of which, that I may force
them, or (so far as is sober and moderate) indulge them, I shall first premise
a few Observations, and then lay down some Conclusions.

(1). Let these few things be premised.

1. That Ornamentals, strictly taken as distinct from useful garments, do not
come under the same appointment of God, with necessary clothing. For, 1. It is
ordinarily sinful to wear no Apparel; but not so, to wear no such Ornaments. 2.
The necessity of Nature requires the one, but no necessity or end of Nature
requires the other. Gods ends, and Natures occasions may be secured, and
answered to the full, without these additionals: Ornaments then are rather
matter of- indulgence, than precept; of permission, than injunction.

2. That plain simple Apparel, as it is a real, so it is a sufficient Ornament
to the body: For if Nakedness be our shame, Apparel that hides it, is so far
its beautifying and adorning. When therefore we say, God gave clothes for an
Ornament, we do not say, that he gave ornaments distinct from clothing.

3. That Ornaments are either Natural, or Artificial: Natural, such as Nature
has provided, as the hair, given by God and Nature to the woman, 1 Cor. 11.1^.
to be her glory, and for her covering: Artificial, such as are the product of
ingenuity, and witty invention. In which, as God has been not illiberal, so Man
has been very prodigal; Eccles. 7.29.
and not content with primitive simplicity, has found out many inventions.

4. It is evident, that God allowed the Jews the use of Artificial Ornaments,
as distinct from necessary Apparel: Exodus 32.2. Aaron said to the people,
Bring us of the golden earrings that are in the ears of your wives, your sons,
and your daughters. Ver. 25. And when Moses saw that the people were naked, for
Aaron had made them naked to their shame, amongst their enemies; That Moses
stood, etc. It seems then, that to be stripped of their earrings, was in some
sense to be made naked, to be exposed to shame in the sight of their enemies.

5. That yet there was some difference between the Indulgence granted to the
male, Pisgah sight.
and that to the female sex: And this Dr. Fuller observes from the order and
placing of the words Wives, Sons, Daughters; intimating, that those Sons were
in their minority (under Covert-parent, as he explains it); and so much seems
to be employed, Isa. 61.10. where we find indeed the Bridegrooms Ornaments, but
only the Brides Jewels: as if the Masculine Sex was restrained to a more Manly
and grave sort of Ornaments: when as the Female was allowed a greater degree of
finery and gallantry.

And when God permitted the Jewish Women to borrow of their Neighbors, and
Inmates, Jewels of Silver, and Jewels of Gold, the use was limited to their
Sons and Daughters, Exodus 3.22.
and grown men not considered: which is also evide^^ly inferred from Judge.
8.24. where the Army Conquered by Gideon are said to have worn golden
earrings, for they were Ishmaelites: clearly implying, That their Golden
Earrings were an Ornament peculiar to the Ishmaelites, and not common to the
Israelites.

6 That tho there might be something Typical or Symbolical in the Jewels wore
by the Jewish Women, (as I conceive there was) that yet the use of them was of
common right to the Females of other Nations, as indeed they were of ordinary
use long before the Jewish Polity was settled: Genesis 24.23. The man took an
ear-ring of gold, of half a shekel, (a quarter of an ounce) and two bracelets
for her hands (Rebecca's) of ten shekels (five ounces.)

(2) These things premised, I lay down these Conclusions.

Conclusion 1. Whatever pretends to ornament, which is inconsistent with
Modesty, Gravity, and Sobriety; and whatever is according to godliness, is no
Ornament, but a Defilement.

Modesty teaches us not to expose those parts to view which no necessity, no
good end or use will justify: Humility teaches us to avoid curiosity
in-decking a vile Body; which ere long must be a feast for Worms: Good
husbandry will teach us not to lay out on the Back, what should feed the
Bellies of a poor Family. And Holiness will teach us, not to keep such a stir
about the Outward, when the Inward Man is Naked. Charity will teach us, not to
expend superfluously on thy own Carkase, when so many of thy Fathers Children
want necessary Food and Raiment. And Godly wisdom will teach us, not to trifle
out those precious Minutes between the Comb, and the Glass, Tertul.
(inter pectinum and speculum) between Curling and Painting, which should be
laid out on, and for Eternity.

Let me recommend one place from the Apostle, 1 Pet. 3.2, 3, 4.
While they behold your chaste conversation coupled with fear; whose adorning
let it not be that outward adorning of plaiting the hair, and of wearing of
gold, or putting on of apparel: but let it be the hidden man of the heart, in
that which is not corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit,
which is in the sight of God of great price: Whence these things offer
themselves to your observation. 1. That plaiting the hair, wearing of gold, or
golden Ornaments, are not simply, and in themselves condemned; but only so
far, as they are either our Chiefest Ornament; or as we are too Curious, too
Costly, Excessive, or Expensive in them: for otherwise, the putting on of
Apparel, which is joined in the same thread and texture of the Discourse and
Sentence, would be condemned also. 2. That the rule for Regulating these
Ornamentals, is, That they be visibly consistent with a chaste conversation: I
say, visibly consistent: It must be such a chaste Conversation, as may be
beheld, whilst they behold your chaste conversation. That pure vestal fire of
Chastity that burns upon the Altar of a Holy Heart, must flame out, and shine
in chastity of words, actions, clothing, adorning; for whenever God commands
chastity, he commands whatever may feed and nourish it, manifest and declare
it; and forbids whatever may endanger it; wound, or weaken, blemish, or impair
it. 3. That Godly fear must be placed as a severe Sentinel, to keep strict
guard over the Heart, that nothing be admitted that may defile our own hearts;
nothing steal out that may polute another; we must keep watch over our own
Hearts, and other men's Eyes: Neither lay a snare for the Chastity of another,
nor a bait for our own. This chaste Conversation must be coupled with fear. 4.
Which Holy Fear, and Godly Jealousy will have work enough abour the matter of
Ornament; that we neither mistake in our Judgment, as if these outward
Adornings with Gold, with Plaited Hair, were of such grand concernment; nor
were in our practice in an immoderate care, and superfluous cost about them. 5.
To render that Rule which he has laid down, Practicable, he gives us a
pattern, ver. 5. After this manner in the old time, the holy women that trusted
in God adorned themselves. Where note, 1. That they must be holy women that are
the standard of our Imitation; not Painting Jezabel, nor Dancing Dinah, nor
Flaunting Bernice; but Holy Sarah, Godly Rebecca, Prudent Abigail. 2. They must
be such as were in the old time, when Pride was pin-feathered; not such as now,
since Lust grew fledged, and high-flown: such Examples as the old time
afforded, when plain cleanliness was accounted abundant Elegancy; such as the
Worlds Infancy produced; not such as an old decrepit Age, grown twice a Child,
recommends to us. 3. They must be such as could trust in God to deliver them
from evil, because they rushed not themselves into Temptation: for it is hardly
conceivable how any should trust in God to give them Victory, who tempt, and
challenge the Combat: or how they can expect that Divine Grace should secure
them from being overcome, when by their enticing Attire they provoke others to
Assail their Chastity. If then the Daughters of Zion will be the Heirs of
Abraham's Faith, they must approve themselves the followers of Sarahs modesty.

Conclusi^n 2. Nothing can justly pretend to be Lawful Ornament, which takes
away the Distinction which God has put between the two Sexes: That Law Deuteronomy.
22.5. is of Moral Equity, and Perpetual Obligation; The Woman shall not wear
that which pertains to the Man; nor the Man put on the W^mans Garments, for
they that do so are an Abomination to the Lord: [that which pertaineth] (...)
The Word signifies, any Vessel, Instrument, Utensil, Garment, or Ornament
Military or Civil; used for the discrimination of the Sex. (So Aynsworth) and
the Rabbis gloss it thus, In Pent.
The woman shall not poll her Locks, nor put on a Helmet, or a Tyara on her
head: neither may a Man put on a Colored Garment, or Golden Jewels, where men
use not to wear such Jewels: God therefore will have the distinction between
the Sexes inviolably observed, in the outward Apparel; which is a fence about
the Moral Law, to prevent those Murders, Adulteries, and promiscuous Lusts,
which under those disguises would more secretly and easily be perpetrated. And
yet observe:

1. That there may be a Case put, wherein in some Exigency it may be Lawful for
the Woman to wear the Apparel of the Man: and Asterius gives us one, Homil.
(...). I knew a Woman (says he) that polled her hair, and put on Man's
Apparel, and that a Flowered Garment too, that she might not be separated from
her dear Husband that was forced to fly, and hide his head.

2. What particular form of Apparel shall distinguish the one Sex from the
other, must be determined by the Custom of particular Countries; provided,
that those Customs do not thwart some general Law of God, the Rule of Decency,
the ends of Apparel, or the Directions of Scripture.

3. That yet there seems some distinctive Ornament to have been provided by
God, that the difference between the Sexes might not be left to the Arbitrary
Customs, and desultory Humors of Men: As in the hair of the head, and the
manner of wearing it; or at least in the Beard, which is ordinarily given to
the one Sex, and denied the other: And hence it seems probable, That for Women
to poll, for Men to nourish the Hair at the full length, is a Contravention to
the discriminating badge and cognizance which the God of Nature has bestowed
upon them.

4. That however, a prudent and cautilous Christian will be well advised, how
his Practice contravenes the plain Letter of a Law, when the distinctions used
to avoid the dint, and turn the edge of it, are not very clear and
satisfactory, but precarious, and such as are contrived to ward off the Force
of an Argument. 1 Cor. 11.14, 15.


As if an Instance should be given in that of the Apostle; Does not even Nature
it self teach you, that if a man have long hair, it is a shame to him, ver. 15.
But if a woman have long hair, it is her glory: (...), 1 Cor. 11.14, 15.
if a man wears his Hair at the full length; Now the Evasion used to escape the
danger of this Text, is, That by Nature is meant no more, than the Custom of
the Country; which being a second Nature, is able to warrantize whatever is
conformable to it, as also to render whatever is opposite, undecent, and
uncomely; and since the Custom of our Country is altered, the Sin is banished.
But let it be considered, 1. That the Phrase, (...), even Nature it self, seems
to restrain the word to its proper and primary signification. 2. That the
Apostle could not well argue against long hair, nourisht to its utmost extent,
from the Custom of the Greeks, since they of all Men are famous for wearing it
promise: which Homer notes as the common Epithete of the Grecians, (...), the
Grecians that nourisht their hair; nor will it appear that they from the Trojan
War, to the days of the Apostle, had changed their Custom, which they made much
of, as that which rendered them Formidable to their Enemies. 3. But supposing,
that Custom only had formerly taught the Men to wear their hair short, and
Women theirs at the utmost length; and that encroaching-practice, in process of
time should introduce the contrary Custom, for Women to Poll, and Men to
nourish their hair; yet how many Millions of sins must be committed, ere the
new Custom could prevail to jostle out the old, and legitimate the new
practice? so that they who plead this for themselves, do but acquit themselves
at the cost of other Men's condemnation. 4. As the case stands with us, the
Custom is not so general, either for the number, or quality of the persons (if
by quality we understand those of a Pious and Religious character) as to
justify the Modern deviation from a generally received practice: but this I
confess, if the commonness of the Custom be not extensive enough to take away
the sin, it is yet so prevailing, that it has taken away the sense of it in the
Consciences of very many Professors.

3. Conclusion. Nothing ought to be allowed for Ornament, which crosses the
great end of all Apparel, covering of Nakedness. The Israelitish Women are said
to have been made Naked to their shame, Exodus 32.25.
when only deprived of their Earrings, which were one part of their Apparel:
but amongst us, our English Ladies will not acknowledge it any nakedness, any
shame, to have their Breasts exposed: And they will pretend, 1. That the parts
which decency requires to be covered, and in whose nakedness shame does lie,
are only those which the Apostle calls (...), less hon^urable, and (...),
uncomely. To Which I Answer, 1 Cor. 12.23.
1. That no parts of the Body are in themselves dishonorable and uncomely. 2.
That yet the uncovering of any will be so, when no honorable use requires the
uncovering: thus the Prophet calls the uncovering of the locks, of the legs,
the thigh, the nakedness and shame of the Babylonians; Isa. 47.2, 3.
which tho it be meant of a necessitated nakedness, which may be a reproach,
but not a sin; yet when that is done voluntarily, which then was done
necessarily, it will become both the sin and the reproach. 3. It is pleaded,
That what they do is not out of Pride, to glory in the beauty of the skin; nor
out of Lust, to inveigle others to become enamoured at their beauty; but only
to avoid the reproach of a morose singularity, and a little perhaps to comply
with what has the vogue among the more Gentile and well-bred persons: To remove
this: 1. It is a branch of Holy singularity, rather to be sober alone, than mad
for company: What Christian would not rather choose to lag behind, than strain
himself to keep pace with a hairbrain'd Age in all its endless and irrational
usages? And, 2. Compliance with a vain humoursom generation, is so far from
being an excuse, that it is an aggravation of the vanity of the practice: But
these are only the causae justificae, the umbrages invented to palliate the
extravagancy: the causae sua sociae, lie much deeper, which because we cannot
in all make a Judgment of, we must leave them to the censures of their own
Consciences. I dare not say, it is to allure or invite Customers: tho what does
the open Shop and Sign at the Door signify, but that there is something Venal?
Nor shall I tax the practice of Ambition, to show the fineness, clearness, and
beauty of the skin; tho if it were so, I would ask, Who are concerned, I pray,
to know what hew, what color it is of, but either their lawful Husbands, or
unlawful Paramours? In the mean time this too plain is, That Arrogance and
Impudence have usurpt the place, and produced the effect of Primitive
simplicity; and Women are now almost naked, but not at all ashamed.

4. Conclusion. What ever pretends to be an Ornament which absucres that
Natural Ornament which God has bestowed, is not an Ornament, but a Defilement.

The Harmony and Symmetry of the parts each to other, made and posited
conveniently and proportionably to their proper ends, and respective uses,
Theoph.
is the real beauty of the outward man: (...), upon the front of this is
Engraved in Capital Letters, Deus fecit, God is not, we should not, be ashamed
of it, much less should we be a shame to it: The throne of this beauty is the
countenance, which, it is the will of God should ordinarily be uncovered, that
the Workman may be seen in his Wormanship. And yet this Frontispiece, this
Portal of the Fabric, which shows so much of Divine Art, God will have
covered, when the exposing it to view, shall expose the Soul to temptation: God
would have us turn away our own eyes from beholding Vanity; and has provided a
nimble covering, that with one twinkle we may prevent a Dart shot at us out of
the Devils Bow, by whatsoever Hand, or from whatsoever Quiver: and so would he
have us turn away the eyes of others too, when they may wound themselves, and
suck Poison from the Flower of Loveliness and Beauty. Now if God would have the
Face covered, whose great end requires the open view, when the uncovering would
do harm; how much more would he have the Breasts covered, whose uncovering may
do harm, but can do no good, having no Lawful end or use assigned for such
laying open? And if God would have the Face, the seat of Beauty, to be visible,
what shall we say of those who by Patching disfigure it, who by Painting
discolor it, that we may now seek God in his Workmanship, and his Workmanship
in the Face, and find neither?

How had these Wantons repined at their Creation, and perhaps blasphemed their
Creator, had he made them as they have marred themselves? They had no doubt got
a room in the Chronicles amongst the prodigious and monstrous Births, had they
been born with Moons, Stars, Crosses, Lozenges upon their Cheeks, especially
had they brought into the World with them a Coach and Horses. But here we shall
be attacqued with some Questions.

1. Quest. Is it not Lawful to conceal a gross deformity?

1. Ans. Yes, no doubt; but not a Natural deformity, with an Artificial vanity.
He that gave thee thy ordinary Clothing, expects thou will use them to hide
thy blemishes; but will nothing serve thy turn, but a fantastic vanity?

2. It is Lawful to hide a deformity, but not with a greater than that thou
would conceal: a black Patch (forsooth) is pretended to hide a blemish,
either natural, or it may be accidentally contracted: well, be it so: I demand
then, what if God had branded thy Cheek, or stigmatized thy Forehead with an
Escar of the same figure and color with that which thou have invented to hide
what thou now have? Would not such a mark have been accounted a greater blemish
than what thou now complainest of? Why then do thou, vain Woman, hide a
blemish with a deformity? All the quarrel I perceive thou have against the
Natural, is, that it was of Gods making: and all the fancy thou have for the
Artificial, is, because it was of thy own.

3. Much less is it Lawful to hide a Natural beauty, with an Artificial
deformity: for what is this but to be ashamed of what God has done exceeding
well, and then to glory in what thou have made a thousand times worse?

2. Quest. Is it not Lawful to conciliate beauty where it is not, or to
increase it where it already is?

1. Ans. An humble submission to the Divine good pleasure is the best Remedy
for imaginary or real defects: Has God made any of us vessels of courser earth?
Who shall say to the potter, Isa. 45.9.
why have thou made me thus? Let the potsheard strive with the potsheards of
the earth. The best covering for the defects of the Face, is to lay our hand
upon our mouth, and our mouth in the dust, and to be dumb with silence, because
the Lord has done it: wherefore then do thou contend with him, Psalm. 39.9.
Job 33.13.
who gives not account of any of his matters?

2. True Grace is the most excellent Receipt for beautifying your Face: wisdom
makes the face to shine. Eccl. 8.1.
There is something (tho hard to say what it is) in an unaffected gravity, an
unforced modesty, in an ingenious affable deportment, free, and natural,
without starch, and pedantry, that recommends and endears more to the
acceptance of the judicious, than all the curious mixtures of Artificial
fading colors.

3. Perhaps the evil of thy supposed defect and shortness, is more in fancy,
than in reality: thou art well enough, very well, if thou could think so:
when we consider our Moral blemishes, we deceive our selves, that we are good,
because not so bad as the worst; but when we reflect on our Natural defects, we
are apt to repine, because we are not as good as the best: and whilst we pore
only on what we want, we lose the contentment, and our God, the Glory of what
we have.

4. And it should be considered, that as some designing to make it burn the
clearer, snuff the Candle too long, and so near, till they quite extinguish it:
and as others are always Carining the vessel of the Body with Physic, washing
and tallowing with External applications, till they sink it: so are many
tampering continually to mend the Feature and Complexion, which God made very
well, because it pleased him to make them no other, till they utterly spoil
them.

5. But yet we must know, that there is a mid-siz'd Beauty, a moderate rate of
comeliness, which the Ancients called, formam statam, such a mediocrity as is
below envy, and above contempt: concerning which I observe,

1. That this moderate assize of beauty is the safest posture, and most secure
from doing or receiving mischief; from tempting, or being tempted, that we
could be placed in. It is so in all outward concernments. The Cedar of Lebanon
is exposed to storms: The Thistle of Lebanon liable to be trampled on, and
trodden down by the insolent foot of every wild Beast of the Forest. And when
we come to cast up our Accounts in a dying day, or to give up our Accounts in
the last day, we shall find, and acknowledge it to have been so.

2. It is Lawful by Natural means to recover what preternatural accidents have
taken away. If sickness has impaired thy complexion and beauty, health will
restore it; let the Physician do his part, and restore health, and health will
not be wanting to hers, and restore decayed comeliness better than the Painter.
That the Physician is Gods Ordinance, primarily to preserve life, and restore
health, I know; but whose the Painter is, when employed about the
redintegrating of faded beauty, you were best to inquire of Jezabel, for I
confess my ignorance.

3. It is not lawful to aspire after, nor endeavor to procure the highest
pitch of beauty that is attainable by Art, when Nature has denied it in things
of greater value and nobler use than perishing complexon. God has set due
bounds to our towering thoughts: I cannot conceive it lawful for me to desire
Paul's gifts, unless I had his employment; and we may possibly overshoot our
selves in begging for the highest measures of some Graces, unless what God
calls us to, shall need them.

4. Nor is it lawful to endeavor to restore by Art what the ordinary course of
time and age has deprived us of: It seems to me that we should acquiesce in the
devastations which time has made upon our Bodies, otherwise, than as a rate of
health suitable to that declining, may make us more lively, active, cheerful
and vigorous in Gods work.

The hoary head is a crown of glory. Prove. 16.31. Prove. 20.29.
And the beauty of old men is the gray head. And are we ashamed of our Glory?
Do we despise our Crown? Will nothing serve but juvenile hairs on an aged head;
must we needs try conclusions to fetch back the Spring in Autumn? the former is
indeed more pleasant, the latter more fruitful and profitable; who would
exchange the Harvest for the Seed-time? Yet such is our frowardness, youthful
Perukes must (if not make) yet counterfeit black hairs, where age has made them
gray; and thus not seeking true Glory in the way of Righteousness, we affect
and pursue a false, an imaginary honor, in a way of unrighteousness.

Let this suffice for the first inquiry: What are the ends for which God
appoints, and Nature needs Apparel?

(2). Come we to the second: What is the true rule of decency in Apparel?

That all indecent Apparel is a transgression of a general rule, Let all things
be done decently, (...), in a right Scheme, in a decent habit, is easily
granted: but to fix and settle the rule of decency, 1 Cor. 14.42.
will be a matter of greater difficulty: especially since much controversy has
been raised about it on another and greater occasion: what influence it may
have upon our main inquiry, will appear from this confessed truth, That the
suitableness or unsuitableness, and by consequence the lawfulness or
unlawfulness of all Apparel to the person that wears it, will depend very much
on its agreeing or disagreeing with this rule of decency.

There are six things which in conjunction, as I conceive, will complete this
rule. 1. The outward condition. 2. The Age. 3. The Sex of the wearer. 4. The
Climate. 5. The Law of the Land. 6. The Customs of the place where or under
which Providence has cast our habitation.

. 1. The condition of the wearer, in outward respects, is of great
consideration: for tho all men are made of the same Metal and Materials by
Creation, yet all are not cast in the same Mold by Providence; one wears a
public, and politic, another a private Character: God has placed one on the
Throne, whilst he has set millions to grind at the Mill: some are Rich, others
poor: some cut out for Masters, others shaped for Servants. And it seems to me,
that there should be some distinction in the outward habit, proportionable to
what Providence has made in the outward condition: But to render this
Observation serviceable to the main design, take these Propositions:

1. Proposition. It is lawful, and in some respects necessary, that Kings,
Princes, and Magistrates, especially in the Solemn exercise of their proper and
respective Offices, be distinguished by their Robes from private persons, and
from each other.

All civilized Nations have so unanimously concurred in this distinction, that
we may receive it as the dictate of Nature, the Vote of Universal reason; 1
King. 22.
Jehosaphat wore his Royal Robes, tho the wearing them once had like to have
cost him dearer, than the matter and making: Solomon's outward glory was the
admiration of the Queen of Sheba; and yet when he shone in all his external
Luster and Splendour, was not arrayed like the Lilly of the field, Matthew 6.
which gloried only in the bravery of Natures own spinning so short are the
finest Works of Art, Acts 12.21.
of the coursest manufactures, and meanest pieces of the God of Nature! And tho
Herod in his Royal Apparel was eaten by the Worms, who fell to, and spared not
what vengeance had set before them, before Death had said Grace; yet the sin
lay not in the richness of his Robes, but the rottenness of his Heart, who
affecting to be more than a Man, became less than a Worm; and because he was
ambitious of being a God, had not the civility usually given to Men.

2. Proposition. There is a Lawful difference of Apparel, arising from the
difference of Wealth, Titles, and Honors, tho distinguished by no public
Office, which our Savior seems to approve of: They that wear soft clothing
are in Kings houses: Matthew. 11.8.
Courtiers then may assume a Garb somewhat above that of meaner persons,
suitable to the glory of the Prince on whom they attend. And our Lord and
Savior, in his practice, justifies some diversity, who used both a more
liberal Diet, and agreeable Clothing than John the Baptish, whose raiment was
of camels hair, with a leathern girdle about his loins, Matthew 3.4.
and his meat was locusts and wild honey: one Garb was decent enough in the
rude Wilderness, which had been uncomely to him whose habitation was much in
the City.

Luke 16.19.
Should I quote that rich man, who was clothed in purple, and fared deliciously
every day; It would be answered, That he was a riotous Glutton, a Swine out of
Epicurus his stie; and he bespeaks our indignation, not our imitation; And yet
I might rejoin, that his sin lay in pampering his Carcass in the Dining Room,
when poor Lazarus could not get the scraps and crumbs that fell from his Table.
The truth is, it is a Parable which always speaks a truth, and is founded in a
truth, though the manner of teaching be artificial and feigned; nor do I doubt
but our Savior Modelled his Parable by, and Calculated it for the innocent and
allowed Customs of his own Country: Nor shall I make further use of that man,
that came into the assembly with his gold ring, Jam. 2.2.
and goodly apparel, than to observe, that the sin lay neither in the one nor
the other, but in the partial Idolizing a Grandee, merely on the account of his
External Habiliments, when the poor good man was thrust down to the footstool,
if not trampled under foot.

3. Proposition. No ability of the rich will warrant him in wearing any Apparel
inconsistent with the ends of Gods appointment: The purse is not the adequate
measure of the Lawfulness of Apparel: Conscience may be straightened, when the
purse is enlarged: I note this for the sake of those who always defend
themselves with a Proverb as wicked as it is dull, If my mind stand to it, and
my purse pay for it, what has any to do with it? I will tell them who has;
Nature, whom thou have enfeebled; those Souls that thou have tempted; thy own,
which thou have defiled; and God himself, whose ends in giving Apparel, thou
have neglected, and transgressed; each of these have cause of Action against
thee. A man then may be civilly able, who is not morally able to follow the
fashions; The purse may bear the charge, when Conscience cannot give thee a
discharge for thy vanity.

4. Proposition. No measure of Wealth can justify those Garbs which speak
pride, vainglory, in the wearer: I grant that Argument may indicate no pride
in one man* who out of his abundance can spare the charge of, which it would
speak in another, whose incompetent Estate cannot reach the expense, and yet
his ambitious mind affects the Gallantry: yet stll pride and vainglory are
abominable to God in the Rich, as in the Poor; in the King, as in the Beggar;
difference then of Apparel may be allowed, but pride and vainglory have no
toleration.

5. Proposition. It is sinful to aspire after those costly Garbs which are
above our Estates to maintain: A poor man may be as covetous as the rich, and
ordinarily are more, because covetousness lies not merely in the having, but in
the immoderate and inordinate desiring to have what he does not want. And a
mean man may be vainglorious and proud in his Rags, and sometimes of his Rags,
because this humor lies not so much in the wearing, as in the lusting to wear
glorious trappings, beyond what his Estate is able to support. And this I note
for the sakes of those aspiring persons, who when they cannot for their lives
reach the chargeable matter, yet show their good will to bravery, in imitating
the cheap vanity of the form and shape.

6. Proposition. Every man in the account of God, Clothes above his ability,
who withdraws from works of necessity, justice, and mercy, to maintain his
pride: No man is supposed able to do a thing, till he be able to do it, when
God and man have their own: The rich man's conveniences must be retrencht, by
the duties of Justice: his superfluities, by the acts of Mercy: and when these
are subtracted out of the total sum of thy income, the remainder is clearly
thy own, only in the Lord.

There is a certain order of things which we must strictly observe: If food and
raiment come in competition, the belly must carry it: food was before sin,
raiment brought in by it: If Justice and Mercy come in competition, Justice
must carry it: we must pay what we owe, and then give what we can spare: If the
necessities of another are competitors with mine, mine own must take place,
because I am bound to Love my Neighbor as, but not before my self; but if the
necessity of a Christian stands in competition with my own superfluities, his
exigence is to take place of my abundance; for no man is really able to be
fine, till he has paid all he owes to God and Man, to Creditors and Petitioners.

. 2. The age of the Person will allow some diversity of Apparel. One thing may
become little Children playing in the Marketplace with their fellows, which
would be ridiculous in the grave Senator when he sits in the Gate of his City:
when we are Children, we think, we understand, we speak as children: 1 Cor.
13.15.
when we become men, it is hoped we may put away childish things: but what was
the reproach of the Grecians, (...), may more justly be thrown in our dish; the
English, in the matter of Apparel, have always been Children: Is it not
nauseous to see a Lady of Eighty, smug and spruce up as if she was in the
flower of Eighteen? to trick, and trim, as if they were new come in, when they
are just going out of the World? to harness out, as if for a Wedding, when they
should be preparing for the Winding Sheet? When the Coffin is making, and the
Grave a digging, and the Worms ready for them, but they ready for neither. And
hence I infer,

1. Inference. That for aged persons by any habits or dresses to represent
themselves as young, and youthful, is sinful: Their Glass tells them they are
old, but they believe it not: Time has snow'd gray hairs on their heads, and
they acknowledge it not: Would they have others believe they are what they
would seem? Then they would have 'em believe a lie: A lie may be told by
visible as well as audible signs: Or are they ashamed of the hoary head? Then
are they ashamed of what God has made their glory? Or hope they to catch some
young Birds with that Chaff? Silly Birds are they that will be so caught: But
in the mean time, how abominable is the cheater?

2. Infer. All youthful Periwigs, and Paintings; which are sinful in youth, are
doubly sinful in the aged: Time has plowed deep furrows in the face, and they
will fill 'em up with Cerass and Vermilion. The Clock of time has given warning
for their last Hour, and they will set it back to Noon: The Sun is almost
setting in the West, and they will outvie Joshuah, not content it should stand
still there a while, but would force it back ten degrees, as on the Dyal of
Ahaz.

. 3. The Sex may be allowed a share in the decision of this point: for the
Female has a greater Latitude than the Male; it was so with Israel of old, when
the Bride was allowed her Jewels, but the Bridegroom must rest content with an
inferior sort of Ornaments. It would be a culpable effeminacy for the Man to
affect and imitate all the Lawful little Ornaments of Women.

Nevertheless this Indulgence is clogged with some humbling considerations.

1. Has God indulged them a fairer liberty? the very indulgence argues the
Sexes weakness: it speaks her the weaker vessel, because she needs it: small
reason have they to glory in a privilege, which is but a badge of their
infirmity! As if a Noble Man's servant should be exalted for his laced Livery,
and Silv^^ cognizance, which is but the mark of a more honorable servitude.

2. Has God indeed indulged that Sex with a greater latitude? How should it
humble them, that they have transgressed the bounds of Heavens Indulgence? God
has given them a longer Tedder, and must they needs break it? Will nothing
serve, nothing satisfy, unless they range abroad in the boundless waste of
their own capricious wills and fancies?

3. Know therefore, That the same Authority that has given the liberty, has
assigned due limits to it: which that they may be better understood, I shall
open that of St. Paul, 1 Timothy 2.9, 10.
I will that women adorn themselves with modest apparel, with shame-facedness,
and sobriety; not with broided hair, or gold or costly array; but (which
becomes women professing godliness) with good works: A divine glass, wherein
that Sex may contemplate both their glory and their shame.

(1.) Here they may hehold their real glory, which consists 1. in being adorned
in modest Apparel: (...); that no steam, no smoke, no vapor, flame of
immodesty without, discover a latent fire of lust burning within: (...): That
the very apparel should indicate the gravity of the soul; So Theodoret. Jude
23. In Loc.
hating the garments spotted with the flesh. A soul spotted with Lust, will
stain the the garment. So Theophylact speaking of ancient women; (...): In Tit.
2.3.
They ought (says he) to appear modest by their very habit and clothing: 2. In
being adorned with shame-facedness, (...): The face will bear a proporion to
the heart, and the habit to both: Rolling eyes, wandering looks, out-stretcht
necks, flearing smiles, and lenocinating glances, disparage the most modest
apparel. Isa. 3.16. The daughters of Zion (aequivocally so called) were haughty
in heart; and it soon appeared in the haughtiness of their necks. An humble
soul will adorn its Ornaments, when proud gestures and postures deform them. 3.
In being adorned with sobriety, (...). Moderation of affection toward outward
things, is a Christian's Holy-day-Suit; not to overprize them, or over-use
them: This Temper should shine through all our garments. 4. With good works,
(...). And there is no doubt, had less been laid out in good clothes, more had
been expended in good works: but rich clothing has beggared charity; and since
Women shone in Apparel, their light has shone less bright to the glorifying
their Father which is in Heaven. 5. Here is the Rule by which all is to be
regulated; as women professing godliness: Godliness must be your Caterer and
Cook for the belly; Godliness your Tailor and Sempster for the back; Godliness
must be consulted what to buy, how to make up what you have bought; and how,
and when, and where to wear what you have made up: But did Godliness advise to
paint, or patch the face? to curl, or crisp the hair? From what principle of
Godliness can these Vanities proceed? By what Rule of Godliness are they
ordered? or to what end of Godliness are they designed?

(2.) In this Gospel-glass they may view their own shame: and it lies in that
wherein they most of all glory, curiosity and costliness: 1. In curiosity,
doing much to no purpose; and nothing, with a world of pains; plaiting the
hair, (...), or (as St. Peter phrases it) (...), curling, crisping, twirling,
variegating into a thousand shapes, into Rings, into Mats, into Shades, Folds,
Towers, Locks. Tertullian inveighs bitterly against this sort of impertinency;
Quid crinibus vestris quiescere non licet; De Hab. Mulieb.
modo substrictis, modo relaxatis, modo suscitatis, modo elisis? What ailes you
(says he), that you cannot let your poor hair be quiet? but sometimes it must
be bound up, by and by dishevelled, and loose about your ears? one while
staring up in Towers, Ibid.
and presently polled and notched close? Aliae gestiunt cum cinnis coercere,
aliae ut volucres and vagi elabantur: Some of you are all for curling it up
into rings, De cultu Foeminar.
others for a loose mode. Nay (says he), Affigitis nescio quas enormitates
sutilium atque textilium capillamentorum: not content with that you stitch, or
I cannot well tell what monstrous extravagancies of false Locks, and artificial
Hair and Periwigs. O that I could give you a real prospect of a converted
Magdalene, Luke 7.38. She wiped our Saviors feet with the hair of her head; as
if she would take a holy revenge on that which had been the effect of her own
pride, and the cause of ensnaring others; as if she thought nothing too
precious for him that had rid her soul of Seven Devils; as if she had found
more honorable employment for her locks, than when they were woven into Nets
to catch poor silly souls; decked with Ribbands, to be a lure to gazing Youth.
2. Their shame lies in the excessive costliness of their Ornaments, in Gold and
Pearl. O the reproach, that a little refined Earth should be accounted the
glory of the rational creature! that we should esteem that our treasure, which
came out of Oyster-skells! that we should be at such vast charge to paint a
walking Sepulcher; to embroider a Tabernacle, whose cords e're long must be cut
asunder, whose stakes in a while must be plucked up, and whose Canase-covering
must shortly be fretted into Rags by the consuming Moth!

In a word: God has given the Woman some grains of allowance. She that takes
more, forfeits all the rest. Look to it, lest whilst you adorn with Gold, God
should call you Reprobate Silver; and when you load your selves with Jewels,
you be not found in Gods Balance much too light.

. 4. The Climate where we dwell may be of some consideration to fix the Rules
of Decency. God has provided us wholesome Cloth, and expects we should cut our
Coat according to it. When the Sovereign Lord appointed the Nations the bounds
of their habitations, he, as a careful and common Parent, provided suitably for
all the Inhabitants of the Earth: Some he ordered to dwell under the
Aequinoctial Line, others under the Polar Circles. To these he gave numerous
flocks of Sheep, that as they needed more, and warmer clothing, they might
have it of their own growth: To those he gave the Silkworm, that as they
required less and lighter Apparel, they might have answerable provision. But
Luxury has romaged every corner of the Earth to fetch home fuel to feed the
insatiable fire of lust, which the more it eats, the more it hungers. Alexander
Severus, and Aurelianus, those great Emperors, are reported never to have worn
a garment of entire Silk all their lives; which is now become the ordinary wear
of every Nurse of a Village. Emperors then were not clothed as Servants are
now. It was above 150. years after Christ, that some idle Monks brought into
Europe these Silk Spinsters. And truly it is no great credit to the wear, that
they who first brought in strange Religions, and new fashions of Worship,
should be the men who first introduced strange Attire, and new fashions of
Apparel. But so it is; Jonah 2.8.
whilst we pursue Exotic lying vanities, we forsake our own Domestic mercies.

. 5. The Laws of the land ought to carry a great stroke in the decision of what
is decent. It were to be wished, that evil Manners might at length beget good
Laws. But we are not sick enough with this Surfeit, to make us feel the need,
and submit to the prescription of State-Physicians. Such was once the
extravagancy of this Nation, in the prodigious breadth of their Shoes, that
they were restrained to Six Inches at the Toes. O monstrous Excess! where the
Excess it self was accounted Moderation! But because I find no sumptuary Laws
in force at present, let us look a little back into former Ages, and step a
while into foreign Countries.

The Lacedaemonian Ephori, were exceeding punctual, Aelian. var. hist. l. 14.
c. 1.
(...). That a daily inspection should be exactly made into the matters of
Apparel, that nothing herein might vary from what was decent, and of necessary
comeliness. Julius Caesar Lecticarum usum, item conchyliatae vestis, and
margaritarum, nisi certis personis and aetatibus ademit: Julius Caesar
prohibited the use of Sedans, Sueton in vita J. Caes.
and Licters, as also of Purple, or Scarlet, and Pearls, except to some certain
persons of such and such years. And Tacitus, the grave Historian, highly
commends the prudence and policy of that Law. Praeclare prudenterque Caesar,
ordines civium vest discriminavit; ut scilicet qui locis, ordinibus,
dignationibus antestant, cultu quoque ab aliis discriminarentur: Caesar (says
that Author) with admirable prudence, distinguishd the several ranks of the
Citizens by their Apparel; so that they who were advanced above others in
Offices, Degrees, and Honors, should also be differenced by their proper
habits.

. 6. That which compleats the Rule of Dcency, is common Honesty: By which I
understand the general received practice of such who in all other things are of
a laudable conversation. The Apostle seems to proceed by this Rule; Phil. 4.8.
Whatsoever things are comely, or honest, (...); whatsoever things are of good
report, (...), think of these things; where he refers the decision of what is
decent, to their outward Senses: 1. To their eyes: Whatever things are comely.
First see how well the fashion becomes the back of a sober grave Christian,
before you put it on your own. First, consider how a dress sits on the head of
a modest chaste Virgin, before you try the Experiment your selves. 2. He refers
the matter to their ears; Whatever things are of good report. We should be like
that famous Artist, who lay close behind his Picture, to hearken what every
man's judgment was of it: So should we listen what the generality of sober
Christians speak, and judge of the new Modes and Fashions. Their censure is
enough to create a suspicion of the appearance of evil; 1 These. 5.22. Romans
12.17. 1 Cor. 8.21.
from which the Apostle commands us to abstain. Again, Provide things honest in
the sight of all men; (...): such as carry a conviction of their comeliness
with them. Again, Providing for honest things, not only in the sight of God,
but in the sight of men. Let the inward garb of your souls, the frame of your
hearts, be such as may approve it self to God; the outward garb and deportment
of your bodies, such as may have a good report of good men.

Only here I must recommend to you these Cautions.

Caution 1. All customs that will authorize and warrant your imitation, must be
rationabiles consuetudines, reasonable Customs; such as clash not with, offend
not against, any Maxim of right Reason.

It Is a Maxim of Reason, That the particular modes of Apparel should answer
the general ends of all Apparel. No Custom will justify that Mode which
exposes shame and nakedness to public view. Another Maxim of Reason, That
what was appointed to preserve life, should not be perverted to destroy it. A
Maxim of Reason, That none should glory in that which sin and shame brought
into the World: And therefore no Apparel should make us proud, since all
Apparel was thus introduced. If an inveterate Custom shall plead time out of
mind, and bolster up it self with Antiquity, let it know, That nulla consuetudo
occurrit Rationi; no Custom, how ancient soever, can prescribe against the Law
of right Reason.

Caution 2. All fashions of Apparel that will justify themselves by Custom,
must be able to plead universality among them that in other things make a
Conscience of their ways and actions. The Custom of a few good men, or of many
wicked men, will be an unsafe Rule by which to judge of Decency. One speckled
Bird will not warrant us all to be Jayes and Magpyes. A single Cato would abhor
those Garments which Varro calls Vestes Vitreas, Glass-Cloaths, and which
Suidas terms, Tunicas interlucentes, laticed Garments; wherein, under the
pretense of covering, the Debauchees of Rome discovered their Nakedness. Nor
should a thousand precedents encourage one sober Christian to herd with those
in this, who in many other things give a demonstration, That they are under no
ties of Conscience.

Caution 3. Not only Customs which cross the ends of Nature, and the Rules of
Scripture, but such as are vain, and trifling, contribute nothing to the Rule
of Decency. Mat. 12.36.
Our blessed Savior has left us a smart word, That every idle word that a man
shall speak, he shall give an account thereof in the day of judgment, (...).
And if of every idle word, no doubt of every idle action and practice. If we
could then certainly tell what an idle word is, we might with the same labor
learn what an idle action is. If indeed an idle word in that Text, denote a
false, or blasphemous speech, I see not how we can make any use of it here: But
with the leave of that learned Paraphrast, who thus glosses it, I conceive an
idle word is somewhat below that, and does signify whatever speech is not
designed for some good end and use, either Natural or Moral; Discourse, that
has no tendency to any thing that is good, or useful: And if so, what may we
judge of vain Apparel, which complies not with any end of God, of Nature; which
neither hides, nor warms, nor adorns the body. But thus much of the Second
Inquiry.

(3.) I come to the Third; From what inward Principles these outward fashions
of Apparel are taken up?

As is the Heart, so is the Man; and as is the Man, such commonly will the
Garb, the Apparel, all his outward Behavior and Deportment be. An evil mind
will give an evil tincture to every thing he uses: Tit. 1.15.
Unto them that are defiled, is nothing pure. Only we must here remember (what
was before observed), That tho an evil Principle will make the action that
proceeds from it, sin; a good one will not serve to convert an indifferent
action into good, if there be not a concurrence of all other circumstances
which ought to be present. But hence we shall gain one general Rule: All
fashions of Apparel, however lawful in themselves, that spring from, or give
indications of an evil heart, are sinfully used. Suet.
Augustus Caesar was wont to say, That Rich and gay clothing was either the
sign of Pride, or the nurse of Luxury. Perhaps he might be mistaken: Nor can
any such necessary connection between Pride and costly Apparel be demonstrated,
as shall infallibly prove them sinful. Nevertheless when at any time they do so
spring from an evil Principle, they may without violating the Law of Charity,
be doomed as evil. It was an Argument of the sobriety of that great Emperor,
what the same Author reports of him, That he never wore any Apparel but such as
his Wife, his Sister, or Daughter made for him. Nor indeed do we read of any
such Trade as that of a Tailor, in all the Scripture; which argues the
simplicity and plainness of their habits, that they needed little art and
skill, little labor and pains to make them up.

There are Four main Principles, amongst some others, from whence these strange
uncouth fashions may, and (I fear ordinarily) do arise; levity of Mind,
Vainglory, Flattery, and Idleness.

. 1. Levity of Mind is certainly an evil frame (if that may be called a frame,
which never abides so long as to form an acquired habit). This various humor
has thus much of good in it, that if it chops on an evil and incommodious
fashion, it will never continue long in it. Aliquisque malo fuit usus in illo!
Perhaps there is no fashion so foolish, as the folly of men, that they will not
abide in any. If it was evil, why did you take it up? If good, why did you lay
it down? (...). I could wish they would, or could tell us where they will fix.
It Is strange to hear our Gallants cry up, and cry for that Mode to day, which
they will decry, and throw away to morrow; and yet more strange, to hear a
newborn Fashion extolled for the most commodious, convenient, useful, that
ever appeared; and yet when a newer Mode starts up before them, to decry it as
absurd, ridiculous, and inconvenient; and all the Epithetes which yesterday
were studied to adorn it, are transferred to the latter. Remember this (says
the Prophet), Isa. 46.8.
and show your selves men. Will you always be children, tossed up and down with
every wind of Novelty that blows from every quarter of the Compass? Nay, herein
worse than children, who in time will out-grow their toys and trifles; whereas
our (...), old boys, and old girls, of Fifty, Sixty, or more, grow more morose
in their inconstancy. And if we would have a Stuff that should suit these
various shapes, and also agree with their levity, it must be all of changeable
Taffata.

. 2. Whatever modes of Apparel do indicate, or proceed from a spirit of
vainglory, Tolet. instr. sac. lib. 8. c. 6.
are sinfully used. Vainglory is nothing but appetitus gloriae inordinatus; an
inordinate desire of glory. When a person not content with a Moderate Repute,
such as may vindicate him from Contempt, and render him serviceable in his
station, must be (...), aut Caesar, aut Nullus, either All, or Nothing. And the
Malignity of it lies, either, 1. In hunting after applause for some Excellency
that he would be thought to have in him, when he has it not: Or 2. In aspiring
after glory on the account of some little worth, far more than the thing
deserves: Or 3. In being ambitious of glory from that which really deserves
reproach and contempt. Hence we have these Rules:

Rule 1. It argues a vicious frame of heart, to affect the appearance of being
rich by costly Apparel, when one is really poor. It Is no very commendable
quality, to desire to be thought rich, tho a Man be what he would be thought.
We should rather give the Donor his glory of them, and glorify him with them,
than make them Matter of Ostentation. But to affect the Appearance without the
Thing, is somewhat that deserves a harder Name than I shall give it. What a
despicable thing was the poor Jaye in the Fable, when every Bird had reassumed
her own Feathers, and stripped the silly Creature naked of its Fools-Coat! What
folly, to be accounted rich, when thou art poor! and by that which makes thee
so! What Vanity, to desire the shadow, when thou have not the substance, and
when the shadow eats out the substance! which is the case of too many amongst
us, who hang their whole Inheritance on their backs, and even that is not yet
paid for, but must be set on the backside of the Mercer's Book.

Rule 2. It argues a proud spirit to affect admiration and applause from
clothing. They that have no solid Excellency, commonly court the notice of the
World by some exterior adventitious bravery. How do our Gallants expect
reverence, if not adoration, for their whistling Silks, and ruffling Periwigs;
and that all should rise, and bow to their state, port, and grandeur! Thy Silks
and Periwigs are but Excrements; and the latter, perhaps of one that died of
the Foul Disease, or at the Gallows. Tertullian nips this Humor severely: Ne
exuvias alieni, De Cult. F^^^^ min.
forsan immundi, forsan nocentis, and Gehennae destinati, sancto and Christiano
Capiti suppares. O! do not (says he) wear on thy sacred and Christian Head, the
hair of another, perhaps some foul diseased Fellow, perhaps one that was a
Malefactor, and is now in everlasting burnings.

Rule 3. It argues the most wretched forlorn spirit that can be imagined, to
hunt for applause from such fashions as are a shame to thy Profession, to thy
Person, Family, Age, Sex, and Species. If it be sinful to affect glory from
beauty, what is it then to affect it from a borrowed, a counterfeit beauty? If
from thy own curled, crisped hair, what then from false hair? If from so mean a
thing as thy own red and white, what then from painting, patching, and an
adulterate Complexion? Tertul. de cult. Foem.
In Deum delinquunt quae cutim medicaminibus unguunt, genas rubore maculant,
oculos fuligine collinunt, displicet illis nimirum plastica Dei. They
grievously offend God, that dawb their skin with ointments, and Slibber-sauces,
that be-smear their cheeks with Vermilion, that black their eyebrows with
Stibium: It seems they are ashamed (forsooth) of Gods handiwork. Quod nascitur
opus Dei est, Idem ibid.
ergo quod fingitur Diaboli negotium est. That which is natural, is Gods own
work; and therefore that which is counterfeit and artificial, is the invention
of the Devil.

. 3. That Apparel that proceeds from, or indicates a fawning adulatory spirit,
is worn with the sin of the wearer. This was Judah's sin, in her strange
Exotic Attire, servilely crouching, and accommodating her self to their potent
Neighbors Fashions, that they might insinuate, and screw themselves into their
favor and affections. Nothing passed for gentile, and gallant, but what was
A-la-mode, after the Mode of Babylon: which seems to be the collogueing humor
of Frenchified English; whose business it is to lie watching for the first Post
that may bring them the blessed News, in what Dress the Queen, and Court
appeared in the last Mask, Ball, or Play at the Louvre.

Some Mischiefs have always fatally attended this frenzy: one, That we seldom
imitate the Modes of Apparel of another Nation, but we learn their
Immoralities, and commonly their Idolatries. A Second is, That the Divine
Justice commonly plagues a People by that Nation they most dote on. A Third is,
That it is very seldom that any Nation is fond of the Vanities of another, but
they barter away Realities to purchase those Vanities. For when Lust is Clerk
of the Market, all shall go, rather than forego the dearly beloved Vanity.

. 4. Whatever Fashions, or Modes of Apparel, are the result of Idleness, are
justly condemned as sinful. There are a sort of male feriata ingenia; brains,
whose employment it is to do nothing, with a world of study; who do Magno
c^natu magnas agere Nugas: well noted by the Divine Poet: Herbert (...) Por.
Much curiousness is a perpetual wooing;
Nothing with labor; folly long a doing.


How many mis-employ their souls only to undo them? As if God had given them
Immortal Spirits, capable of serving him, and they should use them only in
contriving how to adorn, but indeed pollute the body.

(4.) Proceed we now to the last Inquiry: What are the consequences or effects
which these Modes and strange Fashions of Apparel have upon our selves or
others?

Every Christian is bound to consider his ways, whither they tend, and in what
they are like to issue; not only that his ends and aims be right, but that his
actions be such as may reach them. There is, 1. The end of the work: Finis
operis: And 2. The end of the workman: Finis operantis. The end of the work is
either, 1. such as follows necessarily, or naturally from it; Finis per se: Or
2. that which accidentally, or contingently follows thereupon; Finis per
accidens. Thus far then we may determine.

. 1. For sober persons to imitate the Fashions of the loose, so as to take away
all external distinction between the virtuous and debaucht, is culpable. 1 Pet.
3.2.
The Apostle would have chastity visible in the conversation, and particularly
in the Apparel; which is one thing that fills up our conversation. God would
not have the World huddled up in a Mist; that all outward difference between
the precious and the vile, should be taken away. De cult. Foemin.
Tertullian is very earnest with sober women, that in their visiting the sick,
going to the public worship, in all their civil visits and congresses, they
should apparel themselves so, ut fit inter Ancillas Dei, and Diaboli discrimen;
that there be a visible discrimination between the Servants of God, and the
Handmaids of the Devil. It Is pity there are any such proffigate wretches: but
seeing there are, and will be so, it is a thousand pities but they should be
known by their Attire. It was so of old: We read of a young man, Prove. 7.10.
met by a woman in the Attire of an Harlot; and she was no Hypocrite, her Heart
was as Whorish as her Habit. Judah took Tamar upon suspicion for one of the
same character, Genesis 38.14.
partly by her veil, but more by her sitting in an open place by the
high-way-side. But we may now take up a lamentation, As is the profane, so is
the professor; and as is the Harlot, so in this particular are many whom we
hope to be chaste. If a wise man would not willingly be seen abroad in a
Fools-coat, why should a modest Virgin walk the streets in the garb of the
debauched and prostitute? Or, if they will needs do it, let them not be angry
if others judge them as bad as those whom they are ambitious to imitate. I could
wish therefore, tho with small hopes to see it take effect, That as once there
was a Proclamation, That all Curtezans should be known by their striped Veil;
so we had the same, or some like Law revived, That there should be a visible
Mark of Discrimination between two such contrary Parties.

. 2. That Apparel which we find to gratify, or awaken corruption in our own
souls, tho it may be no sin in it self, nor in another, to whom it is no such
temptation, is a sin for us to wear. We are commanded to make no provision for
the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof. Romans 13.14
In vain do we complain that the fire burns and rages, if we pour Oil into the
flame to feed it. Take away the fuel, and the fire goes out of it self. If we
were true to our own souls, we might find how difficult, if not impossible it
is to wear gorgeous Apparel, and not be proud of it; to wear gaudy Apparel, and
not to feel some Vanity awaken within us: that God who forbids any sin, forbids
all fomentations of it, all incitements to it. If then any Apparel, or Mode of
Apparel, shall cherish, or excite Lust in the heart, whatever it is to others,
it is sin to him to whom it becomes such a provocation. What comfort is it to
see another drink a Potion without harm, when thou already feel thy self
poisoned by it?

. 3. Whatever becomes a bait to sin in another, ought to be worn with great
caution; and the ends of the wearer, and the wear it self, to be duly
considered. In order to which I lay down these Propositions:

Proposition 1. To design evil, tho the effect follow not, is sinful. The heart
is often criminal, when the hand is not, cannot be so. He that hunts for the
precious Life, is a Murderer, tho God break the neck of, and defeat the Murder.
A Man may conceive Mischief, which he cannot bring forth, because Providence
makes it abortive. And by this Rule all they are cast, who use, or abuse lawful
Apparel for unlawful ends, tho they happily miscarry in them.

Proposition 2. An evil that is the effect of its proper cause, is imputed to
him that gave, or laid the cause, tho he designed not actually the effect. We
are responsible to God for all the evil that naturally and necessarily flows
from our actions, whatever our designs are, or may be. And the Reason is,
because it is supposed that we do know, in as much as we ought to know, all the
natural and necessary Moral Products of our own actions. And this will condemn
some of our filthy Fashions, which of themselves produce these accursed
effects. And tho God can bring good out of evil, or restrain the evil, that it
follow not from that which otherwise would produce it; yet because we cannot,
it is evil in us not to prevent it.

Proposition 3. An evil which we ordinarily know has followed, and probably
will follow any action of ours, will be charged on us, if we yet shall
adventure upon it. For what if there be no natural and necessary connection
between that evil, and that action? yet if we see the event to be evil, we are
bound to prevent it, if it be in our power. He that knows the damning nature of
sin, and what it cost to atone and expiate it; the worth and price of souls,
and what it cost to redeem them, would not be an accidental instrument of the
Devil, to lead into the one, or destroy the other by any action of his which he
may well and conveniently refrain.

. 4. To be an accidental occasion of sin to another, in the remotest order of
contingency, tho it may not be sin in us, yet will be some part of our
affliction and trouble: As he that should kill a Man accidentally, besides and
against his intention, and it should be found Chance-Medley by the Verdict,
would be deeply concerned that he should send a Soul, it may be unprepared,
into Eternity.

[II.] Having now dispatched the First General Inquiry, viz. Wherein the
sinfulness of Apparel does lie? I proceed to the Second, What Directions God
has given us to walk at a due distance, that we partake not of the sin that may
be in them? To which, when I have subjoined a few Considerations to press you
to such a cautelous walking, I shall conclude this Discourse.

Direction I. Be not ambitious to appear the first in any Fashion. Affect not
to take the Mode by the fore-lock. Keep some paces behind those that are
zealous to March in the Front of a Novelty. When the danger is sinning, it is
valorous enough, tutus latere, post principia, to bring up the Rear. When
Custom has familiariz'd the strangeness, when time has mellow'd the harshness,
and common usage has taken off the fierce edg of Novelty, a good Christian may
safely venture a little nearer, provided he leap not over those bounds
prescribed by God, by Nature, and Decency. It is time enough to think of
following, when the way is well beaten before us. A modest Christian, in
Conscience, as well as Courtesy, will not think scorn to let others go before
him.

Direction II. Strive not to come up to the height of the Fashion. Study not
the Criticisms, the Niceties, the Punctilio's of it. You may be Modish enough
in all Conscience, without straining to reach the (...) of those superfineries,
which ill-imployed Wits have teemed and spawned amongst us. A general
Conformity, without forwardness, or frowardness, is one Branch of that great
Rule laid down by the Apostle, Phil. 4.5.
Let your moderation be known unto all men; the Lord is at hand. There is a
golden Mean (had we the skill to hit it) between the peevish singularity of
some, who morosely admire obsolete and antiquated Garbs, such as came in with
the Conqueror, or perhaps were worn by Evander's Mother; and the precise
exactness of others, who make it Religion to depart a hairs breadth from the
newest Fashions.

He that expresses the general usage of the Nation, without curiosity in the
finer strokes, and smoother touches of elegancy, is the Man whom I would take,
and propound to you for a Pattren.

Direction III. Follow no Fashions so fast, so far, as to run your Estates out
at the heels: Tuo te pede metire! Costly Apparel is like a prancing Steed: He
that will follow it too close, may have his brains knocked out for his folly; or
rather his empty skull shattered; for the brains are supposed to have gone long
before. Advise first with Conscience, what is lawful; then with your Purse,
what is practicable. Consult what you may do, and next what you can do. Some
things may be done by others, which you may not do; and there are some things
which you might lawfully do, if you could conveniently do them. All things
(indifferent) are lawful in themselves; but all things are not expedient to
some, under some Circumstances; and what is not expedient, so far as it is not
so, is unlawful.

If you will drink by another Man's Cup, you may be drunk when he is sober; and
if you will cloth at another Man's rate, you may be a beggar, when he feels
not the charge. But how many have run themselves out of their Estates, into
Debt; and from the height of Gallantry, sunk to the depth of Poverty; forced
either into a Gaol, or out of their Country, whilst they would strain to keep
pace with a Fashion that was too nimble and fleet for their Revenues?

Direction IV. Follow lawful Fashions abreast with your Equals: But be sure
you get right Notions who are your Equals. Some may be less than your Equals in
Birth, who are more than so in Estates. Pedigrees and Titles will not discharge
long Bills and Reckonings. And some may be your Equals in both, who are not so
in that wherein equality is most valuable.

Walk then hand in hand with them who are Heirs together with you of the Grace
of Life, who are partakers with you of the same precious faith; 1 Pet. 3.7. 2
Pet 1.1. Jude 3.
with those who have the same hopes with you of the common salvation. Why
should we zealously affect a Conformity to them in Apparel, from whom we must
separate in a little time for Eternity?

Heb. 11.9.
Abraham was a great Prince, and yet he dwelt in tents, with Isaac and Jacob,
the heirs with him of the same promise. And if a Tent would serve him, and
them, why make we such a-do for Palaces? Abraham had a promise that he should
be heir of the World; Romans 4.13.
and yet he confessed he was but a stranger, a pilgrim, a sojourner, even in
the Land of Promise; and was always in a traveling Garb and Habit, ready at an
hours, a minutes warning to dislodg, and follow whither God should call him.
Why then do we cloathe as if we were at home, Citizens of this World, when we
are but Tenants at will, and have here no certain dewlling place?

Direction V. Come not near those Fashions whose numerous implements, trinkets
and tackling require much time in dressing and undressing. No cost of Apparel
is so ill bestowed, as that of precious time in apparelling. And if common time
be so ill spent, what is the solemn sacred time, laid out in such curiosity?
How many Sabbaths, Sermons, Sacraments, Prayers, Praises, Psalms, Chapters,
Meditations, has this one Vanity devoured? Let me recommend the counsel of holy
Mr. Herbert to you: Church Porch.
-- O be Dress't!
Stay not for the other Pin! why, thou have lost
A Joy for it, worth worlds! Thus hell does jest
Away thy blessings, and extremely flout thee,
Thy clothes being fast, but thy soul loose about thee!


O the wanton folly of our Times, when (as one expresses it) its almost as
easy to enumerate all the Tackling of the Royal Sovereign, as the
Accoutrements of a capricious Lady! and perhaps it requires not much more time
to equip and rig out a Ship for the Indies, as a whimsical Madam, when she is
to sail in state with all her Flags, Streamers, Pennons, bound for a
Court-Voyage. With less labor did Adam give Names to all the Creatures in
Paradise, than an Attire-Herald shall give you the Nomenclature of all the
Trinkets that belong to a Ladies Closet. And yet all this is but to consume a
whole Morning to put on, which must waste the whole Evening to put off.

Direction VI. Suit your Apparel to the day of Gods Providence, and to the day
of his Ordinances. There is a day wherein God calls aloud for baldness: Isa.
22.12, 13.
and do we cross his design with ranting Periwigs? Does he bespeak Sackcloath,
and are we in our Silks and Sattins? How absurd is it to appear in the high
Rant, like Zimri, with his COSBI, when the Church of Christ is mourning before
the Lord? And yet more incongruous, when God calls, and they that fear his Name
answer his call; in a day of solemn fasting, and Prayer, afflicting their souls
before him, and accepting the punishment of their sins, for a Gallant to come
ruffling into the Assembly as if he designed only his diversion, and to trifle
out a tedious painful hour, till he may adjourn his little self, with all his
splendid Equipage, to the Devotion of the Playhouse. Thus did the builders of
Babel answer each other, when Vengeance had poured confusion on their Hearts
and Tongues, reaching the Hammer when his Fellow called for the Axe: and thus
do we answer our God, who calls for Weeping and Mourning, and we return Mirth
and Jollity, and gorgeous Apparel.

God by an express Law, granted this Privilege to the new married man, That for
a Twelve Month he should be exempted from the Wars: Deuteronomy. 24.5.
And yet tho this Indulgence held good when the Country was in danger of
Invasion, no exemption was to be pleaded when the Church was exposed to Gods
Indignation: Then call an assembly, sanctify the people, Joel 2.14.
let the bridegroom come forth of his chamber, and the bride out of her closet.
There was no discharge in this War.

But how well was it resented by Heaven, when at the denunciation of the Divine
displeasure against Israel, that he would not go up with them, Exodus 33.3, 4.
the people mourned, and no man put on his ornaments?

Direction VII. In all Apparel, keep a little above contempt, and somewhat more
below envy. He that will vere nigh either extreme, shall never avoid offense,
either for sordidness or superfluity. Let not your Garments smell either of
Antiquity or Novelty. Shun as much an affected Gravity, as a wanton levity.
There may be as much pride in adhering to the antic Garbs of our Ancestors, as
there is in courting the Modern Fooleries. A plain cleanliness is the true
Medium between sluttishness and gaudiness. Truth commonly lies in the middle
between the hot contenders; Virtue in the middle between the extreme Vices; and
Decency of Apparel in the middle between the height of the Fashion, and a more
running Counter and Opposition; only because our corrupt hearts are more prone
to the Excess than the Defect, I laid the Rule, to keep a little more below
Envy than above Contempt.

Direction VIII. Let the Ornament of the inward man be your Rule for the
adorning the outward. Take measure of your bodies by your souls: That is,
Consider well what Graces, Excellencies, and Virtues will adorn a soul, and let
something Analogical be made the Trimming for the body. The Apostle will have
Women adorn themselves in modest Apparel; 1 Timothy 2.9. Tit. 2.3.
and especially the graver sort, that they be in behavior as becomes
holiness, (...); which the Tigurine Version renders, in habitu qui Religionem
deceat; in such a habit as becomes Religion: and Beza, in habitu qui
sanctimoniam deceat; in such a habit as becomes holiness. Now it may be
enquired, what? is Apparel capable of modesty, or immodesty? of holiness, or
unholiness? But the meaning is, the Garment, the manner of dressing, or
wearing, must be such as indicates and discovers such qualities lodging in the
soul. And indeed if we could get the soul suitably adorned, it would cut out,
make up, put o^^ and wear suitable Ornaments. 1 Pet. 5.5.
The Apostle Peter commands us all to be clothed with humility: Humility is a
very proper wear for a sinner: and if the soul be thus clothed, you may trust
her to cloth the body. When the Inward Man is new-framed, and new-fashioned,
let it alone to frame and fashion the outward Attire. The Platonists say, That
Anima format sibi Domicilium; It Is the soul that forms its house to dwell in:
And she that is so rare an Architect as to build the house, will take care that
it be conveniently tiled.

Direction IX. Get the heart mortified, and that will mortify the habit. Let
Grace circumcise that, and that will circumcise the long hair, and sweeping
Train, with all the impertinent superfluities that wait on Vainglory. Heal the
heart of its inward pride, and that will retrench the excesses of the outward.
I do not wonder that we find it so difficult to convince idle women, that these
Gayeties and Extravagancies of curled hair, painting and patching, are sinful,
when we cannot convince them of the evil of impenitency and unbelief.

The most compendious way of reforming Persons, Families, Nations, and
Churches, is to begin at, and deal with the heart; as the shortest way to fell
the Tree, is by sound blows at the root. Could we lay the Axe to heart-pride,
the Branches would fall, the Leaves wither, the Fruit fade, with one and the
same labor. It Is an endless labor to demolish this Castle of Pride, by
beginning at the top: Undermine the Foundation, and all the glory of the
superstructure falls with it. As a pure living Spring will work it self clean
from all the accidental filth that is thrown into it from without; so the
cleansing of the heart will cleanse the rest. And when the Spirit of Christ
shall undertake this work, to convince the soul effectually of sin, of the sin
of Nature, and the Nature of sin, all these little appendices, and
appurtinances of Vanity, will fall, and drop of course. For this was our
blessed Savior's method, Mat. 23.26. Mat. 12.33.
Cleanse the inside of the cup, or platter, and the outside will be clean also.
And if we could (as supernatural Grace only can) make the Tree good, the Fruit
would be good by consequence.

Direction X. Whatever fashions of Apparel you have found a temptation to your
own souls, when worn by others, in prudence avoid them. You may reasonably
suspect, that what has been a snare to you, will be so to another: For tho all
are not guilty of the same actual sins, yet all have the same seeds of sins in
them. And what has awakened your Pride, and Lust, may awaken the same
Corruptions in your Neighbor.

Direction XI. Let all your indifferences be brought under the government and
guidance of Religion. Indifferent things in their general Natures, are neither
good nor evil; but when Religion has the main stroke in managing and ordering
them, it will make them good, and not evil. Advise with Gods Glory what you
shall eat, what you shall drink, and what you shall put on: That will teach us
to deny our selves in some particulars of our Christian Liberty: Whether you
eat or drink, or whatsoever you do else, 1 Cor. 10.31
do all to the glory of God. Than which, all the Masters of the Art of Eating,
all the Mistresses of the Science of Dressing, cannot give you a more approved
Directory.

Direction XII. Use all these indifferent things with an indifferent affection
to them, an indifferent concern for them, and about them. Treat'em, value 'em
as they deserve. Clothes commend us not to God, nor to Wise and Good Men: Why
are we then so solicitous about them, as if the Kingdom of God lay in them? The
Apostle in consideration that the Time is short, would have us use this World
as not abusing it, because the fashion thereof passes away. Yet a little while,
and there will be no use, 1 Cor. 7.31.
because no need of them. But God, and the World, are commonly of contrary
Judgments; and that which is highly esteemed among men, Luke 16.15.
is (oftentimes) an abomination to him. Lukewarmness is a Temper hot enough for
what is neither good nor evil. How great then is our sin, who are stone-cold in
those matters wherein God would have us fervent in Spirit; but where he would
have us cool and moderate, all of a flame?

Direction XIII. Lastly, Seek that honor chiefly which comes from God only.
The World is never so wise, or so good, that we should much value its good
word, or approbation; but oftentimes so bad and foolish, that its commendation
is our reproach. What evil have we done, that an evil World should speak well
of us? To be accounted honorable by him, and made beautiful by him, is true
Honor, real Beauty. In his Judgment stands our absolution, or condemnation; in
his Sentence, our life, or death; to him, and by him we stand or fall. What a
wretched honor is it, that we receive from it Apparel, which is no part of our
selves, and for which we are beholden to the trivial skill of a Tailor, or
Attire-woman? but the true Reason of the affectation of these Vanities, lies in
that of our Savior, How can ye believe that seek honor one of another, John
5.44.
and seek not the honor that comes from God only?

Considerations to press to such a cautelous walking, that we partake not in
the sinfulness of strange Apparel.
I. Let us seriously consider, How Apparel came into the World. Sin brought in
Shame, and Shame brought in Apparel, and Apparel has at last brought in more
Sin and Shame. The old Riddle has here found an Oedipus; Matter me genuit,
peperit mox filia matrem.

In the state of Primitive Integrity, Man was clothed with Original
Righteousness. He wore the glorious Image of him that created him in knowledge,
righteousness, and true holiness. But sin has now stripped him of his glory, and
exposed his shame to the view of God, his Judge. How great then is that Pride,
when we are proud of what should abase us? How vile that glory, that glories in
its shame? It was good advice of Chrysostom, Homil. 18. in Genes.
(...). Let the wearing of our Apparel, be a perpetual Memorial to us, of the
good things we have lost, and an Instruction what penalties mankind is liable
to by disobedience. For as Gregory Nazianzene reasons; (...): Orat. de Mort.
If (says he) we had continued the same we were at first created, we had had no
need of a coat of skins, the divine Image shining in our souls. And therefore
Chrysostom's Inference is very clear: Tom. 6. p. 241.
(...). Clothes were not given us to set forth our beauty, but to cover that
shame that proceeded from nakedness. But Tertullian excellently prosecutes this
argument: Si tanta in Terris moraretur fides, quanta in Coelis merces ejus
expectatur, nulla omnino vestrum (sorores)! ex quo Deum cognovisset, De hab.
Mulieb. in initio.
and de sua, id est foeminae condition didicisset, laetiorem habitum ne dicam
gloriosiorem appetisset, ut non magis in sordibus ageret, and squallorem potius
affectaret, ipsam circumferens Evam lugentem, and poenitentem, quo before quod
de Eva trabit, (ignominiam dico primi delicti, and invidiam perditionis
humanae), omni satisfactionis habitu expiaret. If there was as much Faith on
Earth, as there is reward for it in Heaven, there is none of you, since the time
she knew God, and understood her own condition, that would have affected a
joyful, much less a splendid Garb; but rather have lien in sackcloath and
ashes, carrying about her an Eve within that laments and repents, that so she
might compensate with the most mortified habit, that she derived from the first
Eve; I mean the scandal of the first sin, and the odium of having been the Ruin
of Mankind. Alas! what pleasure could we take in these Vanities, did we
consider them as the Effect of so sad a Cause? And what would the Gold of
Ophir, the Pearls of the Ocean, the Jewels of the Indies, signify to a soul
that was taken up with Reflections on its Exile from Paradise, and the loss of
God's Image?

II. It deserves to be laid to heart, how we came into the World, how we must
go out, and how we shall rise again. Holy Job confessed, that when he was
reduced to beggary, he was somewhat better than when he was born: Job 1.21.
Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither: i. e.
to the Earth, the common Mother of us all. And we may add, Naked shall I rise
again. I shall see my Redeemer at the last day with these eyes, but I hope not
in these clothes. And so the Apostle; We brought nothing into the world, 1 Timothy 6.7.
and it is certain we can carry nothing out: And why then all this a-do to
spruce up a rotten Carcass for the short time that we are to tarry here? We
brought nothing in, but filth and guilt; and if we carry out these, we had
better never have come in. Naked we came hither; and if we go naked hence, it
had been better to have staid behind. To what end then all this waste? and all
this superfluous cost is but waste. A little will serve Nature, less will serve
Grace; but nothing will satisfy Lust. A small matter would serve him for his
Passage and Pilgrimage, that has God for his portion: Any thing would suffice
for this short Parenthesis of time, were we but well harnassed out for
Eternity. Consider Christians! God has provided meat for the belly, and the
belly for meat; clothes for the body, and the body for clothes: But God will
destroy them all, as for those low ends and uses for which Nature, or Vanity,
does now employ them. Therefore (says the Apostle, ver. 8.) having food and
raiment, let us therewith be content. Simple Food, plain Apparel, will answer
all the demands of Nature: and what is more than this, is either evil, or comes
of evil, or leads to evil. If it be Food, Nature is satisfied, enquire no
further; acknowledge God in it, crave his blessing on it, bless him for it, and
glorify him with it. If it be Raiment, enquire no further, God sent it, he
indulged it; own his bounty, and bless the Donor. Neither the length of life,
nor the comfort of life, consists in the abundance of what thou enjoyest. And
how do you expect to rise again at the last day? It was an affectionate speech
of Tertullian; Atque utinam miserrimus ego, De cult. Faemin.
in illo die Christianae exultationis, vel inter calcanea vestra, caput elevem,
videre an cum cerussa, and purpurisso, and croco, and in illo ambitu capitis
resurgatis; an depictam Angeli in Nebula sublevent obviam Christo. I would to
God such a miserable sinner as I, might rise up in the day of the Christians
general triumphing, to see whether you will rise again with your white, red,
and yellow painted faces, with your Curls, Towers, and Periwigs; or whether the
ministering Angels will take up in their arms any painted Lady, to meet the Lord
Jesus Christ in the Clouds.

III. And let it have a just place in your consideration, to humble you, That
God once borrowed man's greatest bravery from the beasts: He made them coats of
skins. That he clothed them, spoke his Mercy; Genesis 3.21.
that he clothed them with skins, intimated their Vileness. Now have we since
that, mended the Matter, who borrow our choicest Materials for clothing, from
the Excrement of a Worm? If Man himself (in the notion of the Philosopher), and
his Life, be but (...), the dream of a shadow; and his clothing the Excrement
of a Worm; I wonder how he can be proud of it, or draw matter of pride from it.
A shadow is nothing; a dream of a shadow, is something less than nothing; and
yet such is Man. A Worm is vile, but the Excrement of a Worm, is the vilest
vileness: and such is all the glory of Man in his Ruff and Pageantry. Nay, Man
himself is no better, Job 25.6. Man that is a worm, and the son of man that is
a worm: (...). Here are two words rendered Man; the one signifies Sickness, and
Misery, the other Earth, and Dust. And here are two words rendered Worm; the one
comes from a Root that signifies to lift up the head; the other signifies
Purple and Scarlet; to teach us, That Man at his best state, when he lifts up
his head highest, is but a wretched worm. Some are longer, some are brighter
Worms than others: some perhaps may be Glowworms, but all are Worms, Earth
worms clothed by the Worms, and at last shall be a Feast for Worms. Art thou
proud of thy make? Remember thou art but a Worm: Art thou proud of thy outward
shape? Remember thou art a debtor still to the Worms, and be proud if thou
can; only know, that Man that is in honor, and understands not who made him,
why he made him, and that answers not the ends of his Creator in his Creation,
is like the beasts that perish. Psalm. 49.20.


IV. Let it have its due weight in your hearts, That you have another man, a
new man, an inner man, to cloth, to adorn, beautify, and maintain. Think not
with the Atheist of Malmsbury, that you have enough to do to maintain one man
well; for you have two. And shall all the care, all the cost, be bestowed on
the Case, the Cabinet, the Shell, when the Jewel is neglected? Think with your
selves, when you are harnassing out for some sumptuous Feast, when the Gold
Ring, and the gay clothing goes on, to conciliate Respect in the eyes of
others; Have I on my Wedding Garment? Am I ready for the Marriage of the Lamb?
Rev. 3.18.
Have I on the White Garment, that the shame of my nakedness appear not before
a pure and holy God? Look into the Gospel-Wardrobe; Christ has provided
complete Apparel to cloth you, as well as complete Armor to defend you: and
he commands you to put on both. Would you have a Chain for your neck, which
outshines the Gold of Peru; or a Tiara for your head, which shames that of the
Persian Kings? Prove. 1.8, 9.
Hearken to the instruction of your father; forget not the law of your mother;
and you have it. Would you have clothing of wrought Gold? Psalm. 45. 11, 12, 13.
and wear those Robes the King's Daughter glories in, when she is brought in to
the King of Glory, that he may take pleasure in her beauty? Would you wear that
Jewel which in the sight of God is of great price, beyond those celebrated ones
of Augustus, or Tiberius? Then get the Ornament of a meek and quiet spirit. 1
Pet. 3.4.
Would you have that which dazles the Diamond, and disparages the Orient Pearl?
Adorn your souls with modesty, 1 Timothy 2.9, 10.
shamefacedness, sobriety, and good works, as women professing godliness. Would
you have the whole Furniture of the Gospel? You have it provided by the
Apostle, Col. 3.8.
First put off all these, anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy, lying. Anger
ferments to wrath, wrath boils up to malice, malice swells up to blasphemy, and
all these break out into lying. And put on, as the Elect of God, holy, And for
an upper garment, Be clothed with Humility: And that your clothes may not sit
loose and indecently on you, 1 Pet. 5.5. Ephesians. 6.14. Romans 13.14. Hom. 106. de
Christo.
but close, and fast, Gird your selves with the girdle of truth. And would you
have all in one? Then put on the Lord Jesus Christ. This is the counsel of
Eloquent Chrysostom; (...). God looked down from Heaven, and saw the whole
World naked: not naked as to the body, but despoiled of V^^ue. He saw the sin
that they had committed, and he had mercy on them in the transgression they had
transgressed; and to these miserable naked ones he bestowed a garment, even
himself.

Here then is your real Ornament, your truly gorgeous Apparel; if you have but
faith to apply it, skill to use it, decently to put it on, and comely to wear
it. In a word: Would you have the faithful Mirror, that will impartially
discover all your spots, all your stains, and help you to judge, whether they be
the spots of his people, such as are consistent with the truth and power of
godliness; and which will not only reveal them, but wash them away? Deuteronomy. 32.4.
Then take the Glass of Gods Word, therein view, James 1.22, 23.
and dress your souls every day: but be sure you forget not what manner of
persons that Glass has represented you to your own consciences; but be doers of
the Word, not hearers only, deceiving your selves.

V. Nor let it be forgotten, who they were in all Ages, recorded for the most
curious and profuse in the mystery of Ornamentals. We find Jezabel painting her
face, and attiring her head, and immediately eaten by the Dogs; 2 Kings 9.30.
only out of civility, or loathing, they left some Fragments of her abominable
Carcass. Amongst the rest, I could wish her Scull were set in a Ring, to serve
as a Deaths-Head, to mind our painting Ladies of their Mortality. The Prophet
Ezekiel represents the spiritual Whoredoms of Judah, under the Terms of their
Corporeal Luxury: For whom she painted her eyes, Ezekiel. 23.40.
washed her self, and decked her self with Ornaments. That great Nothing,
Berenice, had got a stock of Impudence, that she durst face a Court of
Judicature, and came, (...), with abundance of Pomp, Acts 25.23.
and fantastical bravery. We must not forget that great Strumpet, Cleopatra,
who wore an Union, or Pearl, worth Fifty thousand pound; which in a prodigal
Frolic, and Bravado, she dissolved in Vinegar, and in a Glass of Wine drunk
off at one draught. And it might cool the fervor of our Ladies, to their
Braveries, Rev. 17.1.
when they read of a Woman arrayed in Purple and Scarlet, decked with Gold,
precious Stones, and Pearls, and presently hear that she was the Mother of
Harlots. And when Platina, their own Historian informs us, that Pope Paul the
2d. painted his face (a shame in a Woman, a greater in a Man, and yet greater
in him that would be styled the Head of the Catholic Church), I hope they will
not condemn the Protestants of incivility, if they now and then style his
Successors, The Whore of Babylon. St. Hierome tells us, That Maximilla, the
pretended Prophetess, but really the Whore of Montanus, painted her eyes with
Stibium. And History rings with the Effeminate Luxury of the Monster of Men,
Heliogabalus, who never wore one Suit twice, and studded his Shoes with Pearls
and Diamonds. Poppaea, the Infamous Wife of Execrable Nero, had the Bridles,
and all the Furniture of her Mules, of pure Gold; and with the same Metal, or
at least, Silver, were they shod. But let these be Patterns, not to provoke
your imitation, but stir up your indignation.

VI. And how heinous is that sin, to endeavor to procure the acceptance of
Men, by that which is an abomination to God? And must it not highly provoke His
Majesty, to see the Critics of artificial Beauty, put out Gods Work in a
Second Edition, auctiorem, non emendatiorem; as if it had been incomplete as it
came first out of Gods hands? Yet such is the operose study of our Fashionists;
what Nature made black, they will make white; what Age has made white, they
will have black. Time has made them bald, but by false hair they will restore
Youth: as if they would commit a Rape upon Nature, alter her course, make
Rivers run up to their Fountains. God gave thee short hair; but thou, perverse
Man, wilt cross him, and make it long; and what thou can not really do, yet
thou will pretend to do, and counterfeit at least contradiction and opposition
to his will; the worst sort of Hypocrisy certainly in the World, when Men
would seem more wicked than they are; nay, than they can be; and because
neither Nature gave, or God allows this extravagant length of Main, Contra
Helvid.
they will supply Nature by Art, to the affront of God! St. Hierome smartly
rubs these painted Butterflies: Haec ad speculum pingitur, and in contumeliam
Creatoris conatur pulchrior esse quam nata est: Here is a Lady (says he) that
paints her face by the advice of her Glass; and to the reproach of her Creator,
would appear fairer in the eyes of men, than ever Nature made her. How
displeasing is it to God, to be displeased with what he has done, Tert.
that they may please the worst of Men? Displicet illis nimirum plastica Dei:
They are angry with, or ashamed of Gods handywork, who, in Cyprian's Cypr.
Language, may disown these wretches for any of his handiwork. Haec non sunt
membra quae Deus fecit, sed quae Diabolus infecit: These are not the limbs, the
members which God made, but such as the Devil has marred and metamorphosed.

I know both Painting and Periwigs have their Palliations and Excuses.

1. They that ruffle in their waving Perukes, and look like the Locusts that
came out of the smoke of the bottomless pit, Rev. 9.8.
whose faces were as the faces of women, and had their hair as the hair of
women; do plead that they wear them upon good advice, for their healths sake,
to divert Catarrhs, to prevent Consumptions.

Ans. 1. And is it indeed so, that the Nation is become almost one great
Hospital? Are the generality of Men among us just dropping into Consumptions?
Then what other Lust, what Debauchery has introduced a sinful Necessity, and
then taught them to plead it? But is it not evident, that the corruption is
much larger than the pretended occasion? 2. But if cutting off the hair be in
some degree useful for that end, are Periwigs therefore so? Can no other thing
substitute the place of hair, but such a Vanity? 3. But if this Vanity be any
ways useful, what does the curling contribute to it? and what does the change
of the color conduce to that effect? Is it no color but one contrary to the
natural, that will do the deed? Or if it must be so, what does the immoderate
length signify to that end? How much more ingenuous had it been, to have
confessed the sin, and yet persist in it, than to palliate it with such
slender, thin excuses?

2. They that are for painting the face, do plead, They, good Women, do it only
to please their Husbands, that they may keep a room in their affections, now
grown old, and not so taken as in their youthful and florid days. And they
think they have a clear Text that will justify their pious intentions: She
that is married, cares for the things of the world, 1 Cor. 7.34. Loc. com. p.
383.
and how she may please her husband. To which I answer with P. Martyr, Curent
ut velint placere maritis, modo id faciant citra fictionem and mendacium, and
de seipsis cogitent, an vellent decipi and falli, ut pro viro pulchro and
formoso, ducerent foedum, and deformem: Let Them do so with all my heart; let 'em
strive to please their Husbands: but be sure they do not cheat and abuse him,
whilst they please him. For let them make it theit own case; Would they be so
choused, as to marry a deformed, ill-looked fellow, whom they took for a
handsome and beautiful person? An understanding man (as Chrysostom) would see
his Wives face as God made it: And (says he) when Women have once taught their
Husbands to be in love with painted faces, they will rather send them to
professed Whores, than tie them closer to themselves; because common Harlots
are a thousand times more expert in these Adulterations than honest Women. And
if it be a sin to sophisticate and adulterate Wares, and Merchandise, how much
more to paint the Face? And Austin in express, Epist. ad Possid.
Fucari pigmentis quo mulier vel candidior, vel rubicundior appareat,
Adulterina fallacia est, qua etiam ipsos maritos, non dubito nolle decipi: For
a Woman to paint her face, that she may appear either more fair, or more ruddy,
is an adulterating fallacy; and I am confident Husbands would not willingly
have such a trick put upon them. To conclude: If the Husband be a wicked Man,
he will suspect his Wives honesty the more, and be tempted par pari refer: If
a good man, he will need none of these Artifices to secure his affections, but
out of Conscience will acquiesce in his own choice, and the Law and Will of God.

VII. And weigh it seriously, what a long train of sins waits upon this stately
Lady, Vainglory. Pride never walks the streets alone, nor without a vast
Retinue of Lusts to adorn her Pageantry. He that will be profuse in one
instance, must be covetous in another. Riotous spending is accompanied with
penurious sparing. A great fire must have great store of fuel to feed it; and
an open Table requires abundance of Provision to maintain it. Pride must be
maintained by Oppression, Fraud, Couzenage. If the Tradesman's Wife lashes it
out in the streets, the Husband must fetch it in one way or other in the Shop.
They that spend unmercifully, must gain unconscionably. The Mill will not
grind, unless some Lust brings Grist unto it. A Gentleman anticipates his Rents
in the Country: he comes up to Town to vamp his Lady and fine Daughters with
the newest Fashion. He ransacks the Court and City for the Fashion, searches
the Shops for Materials to furnish out the pomp: He returns home, and then his
poor Tenants go to rack; the sweat is squeezed out of their Brows, the blood
screwed out of their Veins, the Marrow out of their Bones, that they may pay
the unconscionable Reckonings and monstrous Bills that his own prodigality has
drawn upon him.

Nor is it one single sin that fills the Train of Pride. God is robbed of his
Worship, the Poor of their Charity, the Creditor of his just Debts, Posterity
of those Portions which Parents are bound to lay up for their Children. Pride
drinks the Tears of Widows and Orphans, revels with the hard labors of the
Indigent, feeds on the flesh of Thousands. Elegantly Tertullian; De hab. Mulieb.
Brevissimis loculis patrimonium grande profertur: Uno lino decies sestertium
inseritur; saltus and insulas tenera Cervix fert; Graciles aurium Cures
Calendarium expendunt: A vast Estate is enclosed in one small Locket; A
Necklace of almost 8000. l. hangs on one single string: A slender Neck carries
Lordships and Manors; and the thin tip of the Ear wears a Jewel or Pendent
that would defray the charges of Housekeeping for a Twelve month. This is the
evil of what the Apostle calls (...), costly Apparel.

VIII. And how many precious souls has this one Vanity destroyed, or
endangered? not with meat, but which is more sinful, because less necessary,
with superfluous Apparel. How often has thy own clothing been thy own
temptation? as the proud Horse is made more proud with his Bells and Trappings.
Is it not enough we have a Devil to tempt us, but we must be so to our selves?
How often has Apparel drawn out the seeds of Corruption, which else had lien
under the clod, and never sprouted? How often has it blown up the sparks of
Concupiscence, which else had lien buried under the ashes? Is not Satan
malicious enough, subtle enough, but we must do his work for him, or render it
more feisible? And how do you endanger the souls of others? Wicked men are
hardened in their pride by your Example: they triumph in you as their Converts
and Proselytes: they glory, that the Professor is now become as one of them.
Others are tempted to think all Religion a cheat, when it cannot prevail with
those that pretend to it, to deny one Vanity, when it professes to deny all.
Who can expect a Man should deny his profit and gain, that cannot deny an
expensive and chargeable foolery? Or how will that Man deny himself in the
bulk, when he cannot refuse the blandishment of so small a branch of it? And
how many poor innocent souls, perhaps a little inclinable to entertain better
thoughts of Religion, have been seduced to unchaste thoughts, designs and
actions? Nay, how many may be in Hell, whom thy bewitching, whorish Attire has
first drawn into sin, and then sent down to Hell? Say not (if thou art a
Christian thou will not say it), I will use my liberty, and wear what I judge
convenient: if others will take offense, and stumble, it is their sin, not mine,
the offense is taken, not given: If they took an occasion, I gave them no
cause; and therefore let them be damned at their own peril. But did thou
know, or seriously consider what thou know, the price of a souls Redemption,
thou would not hazard its Damnation. 1 Pet. 1.18.
Silver and Gold, and corruptible things, may damn a soul, but could not ransom
and recover a soul. What a cut would it be to thy heart, could thou lay
thine ear to the Gates of Hell, and hear the Roarings, Cursings, and
Blasphemies of that miserable Crew, how they blaspheme Divine Justice, curse
themselves, and amongst others, thy self, that wast an occasion to send them
thither, with thy tempting Braveries? Hear Tertullian: Quid igitur in te
excitas malum illud, De cult. Foem. in initio.
etc. Why then do thou provoke Lust in thy own heart? Quid autem alteri
periculo sumus, etc. Why do we endanger the souls of others? Qui praesumit,
minus veretur, minus praecavet, plus periclitatur: timor fundamentum salutis
est, presumptio impedimentum timoris: He that presumes, fears little, uses
little precaution, and runs into great danger. Fear is the original of
security, but presumption the enemy to fear.

I easily grant, that there is a great difference between a Cause, and an
Occasion of evil: A Cause is much more than an occasion; yet is not the latter
so small and light a matter, but that many of God's weighty Laws were grounded
on this, that the Occasion of sin in themselves and others, might be avoided.

The Civil Law determines, That if Archers shooting at rovers, should kill a
man passing on the Road, they shall make satisfaction: That they who dig
Pitfalls to catch wild Beasts, if accidentally a man falls into them, they
shall be punished: and that he shall be severely punished, that being set to
watch a Furnace, falls asleep, whence a scarefire arises. But the New
Testament is very full. We are not to lay a stumbling block, nor an occasion of
offense, nor to use our liberty in that wherein our weak brother is offended.

IX. Lastly, Let us lay it to heart, That Pride is the forerunner of
destruction, whether Personal, Domestical, or National, Prove. 16.18. Pride
goes before destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall: a Truth so
obvious to the observation of Heathens, that Seneca could say, Quem dies videt
veniens superbum,
Hunc dies vidit fugiens jacentem.


There is the pride of the rich, who boast themselves in the multitude of their
Riches: there is the pride of the ambitious, who swell with Titles and
Dignities: and there is the childish pride of Women, and effeminate Men, who
glory in Apparel. And tho this last may seem below the notice of the Divine
Nemesis; yet these light and small things, draw down great and heavy Judgments.
What more trifling and ludicrous than those Fopperies mentioned Isa. 3.18. The
tinkling Ornaments: as if they would imitate Morrice-dancers, or Hobby-horses:
their round Tires, like the Moon, an Emblem of their lunacy and levity: The
Nose-Jewels, very uncomely sure in such Epicurean Swine. And tho many of them
seem to be innocent, as Bonnets, Earrings, and Mantles; yet God threatens, v.
24. That instead of sweet smells, there shall be a stink; instead of a girdle,
a rent; instead of well-set hair, baldness; and burning instead of beauty. All
which threatenings were punctually accomplished in the Babylonish Captivity,
whither God sent them to spare the cost and trouble of fetching home their new
Fashions, their strange Apparel.

Archbishop Usher, and Mr. Bolton, Two great Lights of our Church, have long
since forewan'd us, That God would punish England by that Nation which we were
so ambitious to imitate in their Fashions of Apparel. And how much is the
ground of fear increased since their days? The Plague is never more easily
conveyed, than in clothes. And it is to be feared, that with their strange Apish
Fashions, we have imported their vicious Manners, if not their Idolatries.

The Degeneracy of the Romans in this Point, prognosticated their declining
greatness. And there is no more easy observation, than that when a People cease
to be great in generous and noble Achievements, they begin to affect this Trim
way of glory by Apparel.

But I must conclude. The Use and Application must be your own. This Sermon
will never be complete, till you have preached it over to your Souls by
Meditation, and to the World by a thorough Reformation. And if you slight this
advice and counsel, yet rememer the Text however, That God in the day of his
sacrifice, will punish all such as are clothed with strange Apparel.

Quest. How may Childbearing Women be most encouraged, and supported against,
in, and under the hazard of their Travail. SERMON XXII.
1 Timothy II. 15. Notwithstanding she shall be saved in childbearing, if they
continue in faith, and charity, and holiness, with sobriety.
THAT I may with all Christian tenderness, give a satisfactory Answer to that
Practical Case, of Concernment to be resolved, for the sake of fruitful pious
Wives, whose manifold sorrows call for the best aids, viz. How may
Childbearing Women be most encouraged, and supported against, in, and under
the hazard of their Travail? I shall by Gods assistance, according as I am
able, with some respect to the time allottel for this Exercise, open, and apply
this notable Text I have read to you.

To find out the true importance of which words, it will be requisite to cast
an eye upon the foregoing part of the Chapter; wherein the Apostle exhorts
all Christians to pray for persons of all Ranks, Ver. 1, 2, 8.
and particularly Christian Women, to practice answerable to their profession
of godliness, Ver. 9, 10.
instructing them about their deportment in Church Assemblies, and at home;
both in reference to their habits, that they be modest, without excess in their
Apparel and Dress; and to their Actions, which they are (1.) enjoined, viz. to
hear with silence and subjection: (2.) forbidden, viz. to teach, because that
were to usurp authority over the man Ver. 12.
, which the woman's posteriority in the creation Ver. 13.
, and priority in the transgression Ver. 14.
, does not allow of, but on the contrary brings Her, by whom her Husband was
deceived, into subjection and Childbearing sorrow with the Fruit of her Womb.
For tho Adam was first formed, Eve first sinned, and so infested all with
Original sin. However (as one notes Testard de Not. and Gratia. These. 20.
) the Opposition is not to be considered of the Thing, but in respect of the
Order, that the sense might be, Adam was not first seduced, but the Woman,
agreeing with the scope foregoing. Yet that the Female Sex at home, may not
despond under the sense of that suffering which Eves forwardness to sin had
more especially brought upon them; the Apostle here in these heartning words,
prepares a most sweet and strengthening spiritual Cordial, for the chearing up
of all good Women, and the clearing of their eyes from fumes in fainting fits.
And therein it eminently concerns Childbearing ones, to copy out the most
approved Receipt in the comfortable Expressions of the Gentile Doctor, That tho
they breed and bear children with much trouble, which may argue God's
displeasure in his Sentence, and is indeed a consequent of the first sin, which
they are very sensible of in the Antecedents, Concomitants, and Consequents of
their sore Labor, that may (as it sometimes has done in Rachael, and Phineas
his Wife, etc.) bring their bodies, or their Babes, if not both to the Grave;
yet the Pains shall be sanctified, and be no obstacle to their welfare; their
souls shall be safely delivered.

The [ Notwithstanding] in the front of the Text, does, my thinks, Rhetorically
usher in a comfortable Answer to a tacit Objection which might arise in the
minds of those Women who were without sufficient Reason but too much addicted
to a single life, or over-fearful of a married state, partly from the sorrow
upon Conception, and in Childbearing, and partly from that kind of subjection
in conversation, which (with more reluctance) the apostasy of the Woman, and
thereupon the Sentence denounced against her, did introduce. For the Wisdom
from above, according to the Tenor of the new Covenant, thus sweetly and
graciously resolves the doubt, That if a Woman's subjection in conversation be
sanctified, her sorrow upon conception shall be sweetened; if her life be holy,
tho her throws and pangs be grievous, yet she shall have surpassing joy that a
child is born; and if she dies in childbearing, her soul will be eternally
happy. So that in the doleful state, and hard condition of childbearing pain,
whereinto the Apostasy of Eve has brought her (whose Sex the Levitical Law
Levit. 12, 5, 8,
supposes to be under greater weakness and uncleanness); which makes even
Christian married Wives more suspicious and fearful upon their conception; here
is a ground of good hope, All shall go well with them, who may hence take
encouragement as to their Temporal sase deliverance (even as to any other
Temporal good thing) in the due exercise of Christian Graces. Yea, and here is
matter of great support, and strong consolation Danaeus in loc. Jun. and Tremel.
, which may alleviate those pinching sorrows, considering that their eternally
safe deliverance cannot be hindered, but rather promoted thereby.

It Is plain then we have in these excellent words (implied and expressed) these
two things: as,

I. A Woman's weakness by the Fall implied to be, a more uneasy subjection, and
childbearing. So,

II. Her support and strength, as to the ground of it, by Grace expressed, both
in respect to the end, by removing the impediment: she shall be preserved, and
saved notwithstanding; and way or means, by continuance in Grace, or keeping
her Ornament, to evidence her Title; and that shines with the four Jewels of
Faith, Charity, Holiness, and Sobriety.

I. That the Woman's weakness by the Fall, is here implied to be, a more uneasy
subjection, and painful childbearing, may be apparent from the precedent
verses. For it should seem before the Fall, when there was an admirable Harmony
in the whole frame of Nature, Woman should have bred and brought forth with
easiness, and her subjection to the authority of her Husband should have been
more liberal, without any remittency, or discomfort. Whereas now since that
saddest accident, by reason of the imperfection which arises from sin, the
woman is, as it were, untuned, and inclined to account this inflicted
subjection to her Husband, grievous to her, who had given the worst counsel,
and does find the many illnesses which occur in breeding, very troublesome; as
also the pangs of the approaching birth, very terrible; yea, and sometimes from
the fearful apprehensions she has of the Curse, next to intolerable Miserima
miseria quod maximo periculo and tantum non moribunda enititur foetum, Luth. in
Genesis 3.16.
. Yet,

II. The Apostle expressly mentions the Woman's support and strength by grace, in
that condition, both with reference to the end, preservation and salvation [
she shall be saved in child-bearing]; and the way or means to attain it, if
they continue in Faith, and Charity, and Holiness, with Sobriety. Here,

1. As to the end: Lest any Christian Woman should conceit that those Notes of
the Divine Sentence, legible in the pains which fruitful Wives underwent in
breeding and bearing of Children, made the state of Marriage less acceptable to
God; the Apostle, who elsewhere Heb. 13.4.
determines it to be honorable in all, and the bed undefiled, does here labor
to prevent such a misconceit, by showing, that childbearing was so far from
being any Obstacle to the safety and salvation of good Women, that instead of
sustaining loss, they should reap great benefit, if they did demean themselves
Christian-like, with patience in bearing those sorrows, and prudence in
discharging the duties of their Relation, and abiding in their conversation,
only as it becomes the Gospel Phil. 1.27
. The words are, (...); Notwithstanding she shall be saved by childbearing.
Wherein for explication, somewhat is to be said of the Term salvation, the
Particle in, and the Compound word childbearing.

1. Somewhat is to be said of salvation [she shall be saved], which is
variously expounded of Temporal and Eternal salvation. And if I take it in the
latitude most comprehensively, as including both in due Circumstances, yet the
former in Subordination to the latter, I hope I shall be less obnoxious to an
overhasty censure.

(1.) There is salvation Temporal: We find the Original word signifying shall
be saved, so taken in Scripture, as connoting temporal preservation, keeping
alive in safety, and deliverance from sickness, trouble and danger, (...),
as the woman of the bloody issue, and Lazarus Luke 8.43, 50. John 11.12.
, the Disciples, and Peter in a storm Mat. 8.25. and 14.30, 31.
, and the Passengers in the Ship with Paul, were saved Acts 27.31.
.

(2.) There is salvation Eternal, which is the most famous signification of the
word in the New Testament, being most frequently so used in the Future Passive
(as here), connoting deliverance from sin and misery, and an estating in
everlasting felicity Mat. 10.22. and 24.13. Mar. 13.13. and 16.16. John 10.9.
Acts 2.21. Romans 9.27. and 10.13. 1 Cor. 3.15.
. So the believing Woman shall obtain the same salvation and Heavenly Glory,
that her believing Husband shall. Yet that I may more clearly determine the
import of the woman's being saved here in the Text, will be necessary to find
out the meaning of,

2. The Particle, or Preposition, (...), which we do well translate [in], since
upon searching into Authority, I meet with it, by some or other rendered Four
ways; viz. by, for, from, and (the most, as we do) in.

Tom. 2. de Matrim.
1. There be who would construe it [by], as I find amongst some of the Papists
(tho Bellarmine thinks fit to render it as we do), and that as noting the Cause
and Merit of saving married Women Signif. hic causam and meritum, Scil. laborum
quos patitur mulier in partu. A Lapide.
, while they strain to have Matrimony accounted a Sacrament conferring Grace
Catech. Romans p. 368.
: As if the meaning were, She shall be eternally saved by childbearing,
reckoning this good work as Causal of salvation. But how can childbearing,
which is a natural thing. either effect or deserve eternal salvation? Then
every Strumpet by childbearing, tho she remained impenitent and unmortified
all her days, would put in her claim; which were most absurd to conceit. And as
some of the Papists would carry it to advance the Merit of good works, if the
bearing, yea, and religious bringing up of children, were the cause and means
by which Women should be saved, what would become of those pious Virgins, yea,
Wives and Widows, who have either proved barren, or through some other defect
have brought forth no children? It would follow, according to this supposition,
That they would be excluded salvation; which yet could not be consistent with
what their great School-man Aquin. sum Theol. 2da, 2ae. Q. 152.4.
asserts in celebrating the praises of Virginity, which he extols above
Matrimony; tho elsewhere he concludes Matrimony to be meritorious; and in his
Comment on the Text, says, Virginitas est excellentior Matrimonio, Suppl. Q.
41. A. 4. Actus matrimonialis semper ^^ritorius.
The Woman shall be saved, although she go by generation: i. e. if she marry, and
be not a Virgin. Whereupon he adds, This [by] implying a Repugnancy, imports
the augmentation of Salvation, q. d. by the generation of Children; for the
Word of God she shall rather, or be more saved. But be sure however it be
difficult to reconcile the Popish Authors with themselves: all that come to
Heaven are truly of Gods mere grace meritoriously saved by Christ, In whom
there is no distinction of Sex or condition: but all believers, male or female,
are one in him Gal. 3.28. Col. 3.11.
, through whom there is no difference of married or unmarried as to
justification and Salvation. Some in deed learned Protestants D. N. Knatchbull,
followed by Dr. Hammond.
do interpret [ by] with relation to Childbearing; as if the Apostle did mean
by the bearing, or generation of a son, the child born; i. e. the seed of the
woman, namely, Jesus Luke 1.35. Genesis 3.15.
, who should bruise the Serpents head, by whom alone Adam and Eve, and their
posterity should be saved, if they continue in Faith, etc. And so (to pass by
what some of the Ancients Origin in Mat. and Romans August. de Tim. l 12. c. 7,
etc
have written allegorically, and less solidly upon the word) Theophylact
reports some to have understood it of the Virgin Mary, whom he would not have
it restrained to, but rejects that Exposition. However some Papists Tirinus,
etc.
would have it understood of her, whom they worship Clarus Bonarscius, al.
Scribanius.
as sinless, contrary to Scripture and right Reason. For then the comfort from
this Scripture would have been appropriated to the Virgin Mary, and to no other
woman. But the Apostle speaks in this verse of that which is future, and not
past, as he had constantly done in the forgoing verses; which will evince also,
that the above said Protestants do not fully reach the sense of Paul here, when
they interpret it of the woman's bearing the seed that had been promised, and
which was the mean foretold and fulfilled for bruising the Serpents head, and
so for rescuing the woman from that eternal punishment which was justly
deserved by her sin. However rhey imagine they have a color for their Opinion,
from the Context: viz. Ver. 12. The woman, i. e. Eve, being deceived, was first
guilty of eating the Forbidden Fruit, but was rescued from the punishment by
the promised seed, i. e. by the Messiah born of her, to redeem that Nature he
assumed: yet not absolutely, but on condition of Faith, etc. and continuing in
all these: So the advantage should not only accrue to Eve her self, but to all
her posterity. It must be granted as an undoubted truth, that Christ is the
seed of the Woman meant in the first promise; the Son (tho not immediately) of
Eve, the Mother of all men Genesis 3.16.20.
: he is the Savior, by whom alone salvation to eternal glory is attainable.
Yet to restrain this childbearing in my Text, only to the bearing of Christ,
as it is more Novel, so it seems too narrow to reach the Apostles meaning;
since, as one Zanch. Tom. 3. l. 4. p. 727.
notes, this state is best accommodated to every faithful Woman (as well as
Eve, and the blessed Virgin), continuing constant in the exercise of Faith and
Love of Christ, to promote her own salvation; as anon we shall see the Plural
in the next clause does import; and that we may clearly understand the Apostle
does here speak of conjugal conversation, he does expressly name childbearing;
not signifying the child born, but the act of bearing children, as it is used
elsewhere in this very Epistle 1 Timothy 5.14.
, and also in profane Authors Hippocrat. in Epist. ad Demag. Xenophon.
.

(2.) There be who render this Particle [for], as noting the final cause (...)
propter Episcopius. Scharpius, Finis servatae mulieris.
, Wherefore she shall be saved; unto this end, namely, that she may procreate,
and bear children, and consequently if she continue in the holy Exercises
following in my Text, she shall be eternally saved. But this conceit, so far as
I apprehend, wants a sufficient ground for the use of this Particle elsewhere
in the New Testament, in such a contexture with a Genitive case. And the
Apostle cannot here be easily understood of the end wherefore the woman is
saved, since he makes salvation it self the end, and speaks here of the Graces
with which Christian Women are qualified, and their Exercises to which they are
engaged, as incumbent on them to the attaining of that great end, which is with
a non obstante, or notwithstanding, opposed to the sad consequent of that
deception which the woman was first guilty of, and so brought her self and
posterity to be obnoxious to. As for Hensius In locum.
his conjecture, that childbearing here notes marriage, which (he says) for
the scarcity of the Greek, he would have so called from the principal end of
it, childbearing, it is a mere fancy, without probable ground, being the
Apostle uses the same compound word in this Epistle verbally, as diverse from
marriage, tho no doubt bearing, and bringing up of children, is a very proper
and signal Office of a married woman.

(3.) Some would have it rendered [from], as noting the term from, which, out
of, or through which, the escape or deliverance is made: as it is said of those
in the Ark, they were saved from the Deluge, out of, or through the waters 1
Pet. 3.20. (...).
; we in our Translation read, by the waters; and elsewhere 1 Cor 3.15. (...).
, He shall be saved so as by fire; i. e. as those from, or out of the fire,
connoting the difficulty of escaping, and not being consumed: q. d. She shall
pass safe from, or out of childbearing, and be delivered as a firebrand out
of the burning Amos 4.11.
. Yet as a learned man Dr. Hammond.
thinks this does not fully reach the Apostles meaning here, because that which
follows in the Text does not seem to be a condition of freedom from the sharp
and hazardous pain of Childbirth, wherein the visible accidents are common to
believing and Pagan women; and because since God's sentence of the woman's
bringing forth in sorrow Genesis 3.16.
, there has been no promise, upon any condition, that the pain should be
abated. But experience has taught us, That choice holy women, who have been
the Lords most dear Servants, have tasted of the denounced sorrow, as deep as
any others; and some of them, as Rachel, and Phineas his Wife, expired with
their pangs. Another Learned Critic, mighty in the Scriptures Gataker Cinnus,
c. 15. p. 330.
, thinks, that to say, The woman shall be saved, although she be compelled to
bring forth, and bring up children with sorrow: which thing seems to be an
argument of the divine wrath, is an unusual construction, and more forced:
Resolution. But if by being saved from, or out of that hazardous condition of
childbearing, tho it otherwise carry the signatures of Gods displeasure upon
it, import only, that it shall be no impediment to pious women's either temporal
or eternal salvation, however difficult that office of breeding and bearing may
seem to be (as the faithful Ministers not stopped in their hard Province, by
honor or dishonor 2 Cor. 6.8.
); but she shall be delivered with Gods favor for the best. Then it agrees
upon the matter with,

(4.) Our translating of it [in], (...).
consonant to the most Orthodox Expositors, as not signifying the cause, or
means here, but only the bare order, or way to the end, or wherein the issue is
attainable. So it is frequently used in the New Testament; as of going in that
way Mat. 2.12. and 7.13.
: Believers continuing faithful in many afflictions antecedent to their entering
into the Kingdom of God Acts 14.22.
, in the letter, and circumcision, and in uncircumcision Romans 2.27, 29. and
4.11.
, in the body of Christ and 7.4.
, in a Parable Luke 8.4.
, building the Temple in Three days Mat. 26.61. Romans 14.14, etc.
, etc. I might also produce many Testimonies from Ethnic Authors, to the
frequent use of this Particle in them (as well as Scripture), to signify in
Plat. in Caes. (...). Sic (...), Plat. (...). Xenoph. (...), etc.
. It Is plain here in my Text, the Apostle does not discourse of the cause of
woman's salvation, but suggests that bearing, and (taking the word more largely
1 Timothy 5.14. (...).
) bringing up of children, is the ordinary way wherein pious Wives, apt to be
suspicions and fearful, should meet with saving-help from God, who would lead
them on therein to salvatian, which of his Free Grace through Christ he had
designed them to, and prepared for them, who sensible of the signal Marks of
the Divine sentence, in their childbed sorrows, are appalled under the
dreadful apprehensions of the first woman's guilt, and the sad consequent
thereof to all of the same Sex, ready to swound away in despair. For as Abraham
was of Gods good pleasure, father of the faithful in uncircumcision Romans 4.11.
(...).
, which could be no cause of begetting faith, or any obstruction to
justification. So any, yea, every godly Wife whatever, tho not permitted to
teach in the Church (as a little before my Text 1 Timothy 1.12.
), yet in her honest Function, Employmet, and good work of childbearing
travail, allotted to her by the righteous Governor of the World Mar. 13.34.
, should in due circumstances be either temporally saved; i. e. comfortably
delivered from those pains, so that she should no more remember the anguish,
for joy that a man (or one of Mankind) was born into the world John 16.21.
, if God in his all-wise disposal of persons and things, sees this to be best
for her: or else eternally saved by God in Christ ( who commands light to
shine out of darkness 2 Cor. 4 6. Non (...), sed (...).
), being found in her Journey Heavenward, wherein she goes on with submission
to Gods disposal, in her proper Vocation, Office and Duty, for the propagation
of Mankind. It Is strange then, that any should take this causally, as if here
the Apostle were opening the cause by which women should be saved; when rather
the cause should have been explained, why he chiefly mentioned this condition
or state Beza.
, not by which, but in which the woman might be saved. For he had touched on
the special punishment wherein the Woman was amercd for deceiving the Man; and
now he would subjoyn a Cordial to the imposed penalty, or give support under
it, lest tremulous Wives should faint in their childbearing pangs, which
however they might have the signature of Divine wrath upon them, did not
exclude them from happiness; but as other Christians, in a way of Trial, do
pass into glory, so religious Wives should not fall from the hope of salvation;
because through Christ, in their Feminine state, and Function of childbearing,
tho they be not free from all spot of sin, they have a blessed Cordial in their
sanctified sufferings, and shall by a comfortable separation of Mother and
Babe, be safely delivered of their burden, in their appointed time, if that be
best for them; and at the end of their peregrination in this life, shall be
eternally saved, supposing they have sustained those troubles in Faith,
Charity, Holiness and Modesty. Having thus, as well as I could (making my
passage clear through some difficulties), weighed the import of the Particle
(...), in these Four Respects, 'twill be convenient to say a little for the
explaining of the compound word it relates to, viz. (...).

3. Childbearing, or bringing forth Children, as expressing the most proper
act of a good woman's parturition, rather than the child brought forth. Yet some
do not only take it more strictly, as noting the very act of a woman's being in
Labor, or Travail, wherein are sharp throws and pains, antecedent,
concomitant, and subsequent; but also more largely from the Apostles use of the
word afterward in this Epistle (as has been hinted Danaeus in loc. 1 Timothy 5.14.
); as comprehending also the nursing and educating of Children in the nurture
and admonition of the Lord Ephesians. 6.4.
; which is also very painful; as Augustin's Mother Monica experienced, when
solicitous for his conversion, till Christ was formed in him. These burdens
will then be born in a Christian acceptable manner, if the woman be out of the
rich grace, and bountiful gift of God, so qualified, that she is endowed with
saving grace: which is,

2. The support and strength expressed, as the way and means by keeping her
Ornament, to evidence her Title, or observing the Duties required, abiding in
the Exercise of Christian and Conjugal Graces, wherein they continue to be
employed. Here, to speak distinctly, we are to look upon the Persons, and their
Exercises.

Gagneius Estius.
(1.) The Persons: Some (following the vulgar) would have the word rendered
singularly [if she continue, or remain], as conceiting there is nothing
Antecedent to agree with a Plural Verb: But it is certain that the Original
word is in the Plural Number, by the full consent of all Copies (as Beza
notes): so that there can indeed be no ground for that conceit. The generality
therefore render it Plurally, according to truth, as we do [ If they continue,
abide, (...)
remain, persist, or persevere], noting the necessity of being constant in holy
duties. But then of those who render the word thus:

[1.] Some, as the Ancients, etc. Syriac, Aethiopic. Hierom, etc. Estius, etc.
refer it to the children brought forth, expounding it of their abiding in the
exercise of the following Graces. But this does no way please the most
judicious modern Expositors, any more than some of the Ancients, as not so
consonant to the Context, wherein we have nothing of children. And therefore a
Learned Protestant Chami^r.
does justly wonder it could come into the mind of any who understand Greek.
Be-like they took it to respect the generation of children, if they, by the
Mothers care, did continue in the faith, etc. But these did not well consider,
that the compound werd, (...), childbearing, is of the Singular Number.
Waltheri Harmonia.
When therefore this Verb Plural has Two Nouns going before it, i. e. the
Woman, and childbearing, we should look to which of the Two [continue] may be
best accommodated. If to the word childbearing, what more uncouth? Then the
Paraphrase would thus trip, The Women shall be saved in childbearing, if
childbearing continue in the faith, etc. Who then that duly weighs the thing,
would refer the Verb continue, unto the Person, namely, the Woman, and not to
childbearing, which is her allotted work or Function? Besides, if it should be
expounded of her childrens perseverance in Grace, it would follow, That a godly
Mother, who had faithfully done her duty toward her children, would endanger
her own salvation, should her children prove untoward and impenitent. Whereas
this were contrary to Scripture, which does engage both Parents, Fathers as
well as (if not more than) Mothers, in the pious Education of their children;
and does clear godly Parents, having done their own duty, from being chargeable
with the guilt of their children, when they perish through their own personal
default Ezekiel 18.3. Calvin.
. So that tho too often the wickedness of children may be imputed to the
Parents neglect; yet certainly the righteous God will accept of the faithful
Mothers discharging of her own duty, tho her children do wickedly miscarry.
Wherefore it is most rational, yea, necessary, to refer it (as most do),

[2.] To the woman, and not to her children; to pious Mothers, and not their
Offspring. Nor is there sufficient warrant, considering it is in contexture
with the Woman's proper Office of childbearing, to take in both Parents (as
Chrysostom thinks (...), l. 3. Adv. vitup. vit. Monastic. Enallagen Numeri.
). And however the Verb [ continue] be of the Plural Number, that is easily
understood by an Hebraism frequent in the New Testament, or a Figure very usual
in sacred and civil Authors, both Greek and Latin, suddenly to pass from one
Number to another, when there is an agreement in the Structure, with somewhat
understood. So here from the Singular to the Plural; as before, in this very
Chapter, from the Plural to the Singular, speaking of Women, ver. 9, 10. to
speak of Woman, 1 Timothy 5.4. See 1 Cor. 4.2. Gal 6.1, etc.
ver. 11. and again in this Epistle l, from a Widow in the Singular, to speak
of Widows in the Plural. Let them learn to show piety at home. Where in like
Construction, a Noun Collative singular is joined to a Verb Plural; Woman
noting the Sex, may be conjoined with either Number: Glassii Gramat. Sacra.
it being a Grammar-Rule, That a Verb of the Plural Number is joined to a Noun
of the singular, be sure, when the Noun is Collective, or Indefinite; and the
reason of the Construction is of it self plain, because the Singular Number
does indeed comprehend in it the plurality of the Collective Noun. And the
reason of the Apostles sudden transition here, might be, because he had briefly
discoursed of the Office of all Christian Women, ver. 9. But Collectively under
the Noun Woman, he says emphatically of Christian Wives, if they continue
constant, noting the whole body of Christian Wives, who passing through the
pangs of childbearing, as the allotment of God, do,

(2.) Exercise the Graces proper to such who mind their eternal welfare, by
persevering in their Christian walk, suitable to their high Calling, and holy
Profession; being qualified and adorned with Faith, Charity, Holiness, and
Sobriety, those rare Jewels, which in the sight of God are of great price. And
the last of these, which some render Modesty, or Chastity, as a Species of
Temperance, the Apostle makes necessary to married Women, as well as to Virgins
Beza, Chamier.
. Tho not (as the Papists do ridiculously imagine), that Matrimony is a
Sacrament, and does confer Grace: or that (with the Papists) we are to restrain
the Graces in my Text only to the four Matrimonial Virtues, opposite to the
four Evils too often incident to a married state Bellarm. To. 2. de Matrim.
Sacram.
, viz. Fidelity, in opposition to Adultery; Charity, to Enmity (chiding and
brawling); Sanctity, to Dishonesty (or Lasciviousness, and Rebellion of the
Members); Sobriety, to Intemperance and Incontinence. But I know no warrant we
have to speak thus narrowly, when it is most rational to conclude, that the
Apostle does respect Faith in Christ for Justification and Salvation; and not
only the Faith of Matrimony; Charity, or Love to Christ, and his: and not only
Conjugal Love; Holiness, which becomes all Christians; i. e. sanctification of
the whole Inward and Outward Man: and not only the peculiar sanctity of the
Marriage Bed; Sobriety, noting that Moderation all who are Christ's should be
endowed with Gal. 5.24.
; and not only the continency of a Wife. So that I shall take these Graces in
their Exercises, comprehensively, as relating to a Christian Conversation in
the general, and a Marriage-state in special.

Thus having been took up much longer than I wished, in obviating the
difficulties which some cast in the way to the clearer explanation of the Terms
in my Text; I shall be straightened in speaking to the Deductions from it, as to
the present solution of the case propounded, by reason I want that dexterity
some others might have used. I beseech you bear with me a while, to touch upon
Two or Three Doctrinal Observations, which my thinks do clearly result from the
words thus explained, with respect to what went before in the chapter; viz.

Obs. I. Not teaching in the public Assemblies, but a patient breeding,
bearing, and bringing up of children (when God opens the Womb), is the
commendable Office of a good Woman in a marriage state. It Is clear from the
Apostles discourse in the foregoing verses, that he might take off such Women,
who from the pride of their Gifts, were apt to take a liberty in public
Church-meetings (which does in no wise appertain to them): he enjoins them
silence; and enforces it from this reason of the Woman's subjection, and
certain sorrow inflicted for her forwardness in the transgression. And that
such a temporal penalty might not obstruct their eternal felicity, he shows it
does not become the weaker Vessel 1 Pet. 3.7
, to be so puffed up, as to be talking publicly about Church Matters in the
Assemblies, where they ought to behave themselves modestly, and not indecently
1 Cor. 14.35.
; but rather by a patient demeanor, suitable to their condition L. Viv. de
Christiana Foem. p. 21.
, to glorify God in the Parturition and Education of an holy seed to serve
him. If so be the Lord has called them into that eligible and honorable
estate of Marriage, qualified them with an ability to conceive, and blessed
them with a power of bringing forth; and if he is pleased to exercise them with
the many troubles of breeding, but yet gives them a miscarrying Womb, for ends
best known to himself Hos. 9.14.
, they are more eminently called to patience, quietness, and meekness of
spirit, which in the sight of God is of great price 1 Pet. 3.4.
, not desponding of Gods mercy in that doleful condition.

Some Improvement of this First Point may be made in a short Application for
the Reproof, Applicat.


1. Of such malapert Women, who mind not their own business, the duties
properly appertaining to their Sex; but contrary thereunto (as the Apostle
speaks in this Epistle 1 Timothy 5.13, 14.
), will be Busy-bodies, speaking the things they ought not; as the Pepuzens of
old (...), Pandect. Can. Tom. 2. p. 50.
, thrusting themselves into Church Assemblies, and invading the Ministerial
Function. Yea, those, who tho they do not (as some have done) contradict the
pure Doctrine of the Gospel, in the faces of Christian Congregations; yet at
least in their Conferences do imagine, that all their Teachings, and conceited
Opinions, should pass for uncontrollable Dictates and Doctrines. If Women
professing godliness, did really labor more after those things which the
Apostle here looks upon as most commendable for their Sex, Christians in our
Age had not had so many sad Experiments of the inconveniences which have risen
from the liberty of speech in Church Matters, which some who would be reputed
godly Women, and of great seize, have usurped to themselves. And if
preaching in a fixed Church, do not belong unto Women, then be sure baptizing
does not. Both are to be performed only by Men called, and solemnly set apart
for the Ministerial Office See Mr. N.C. on Tit. 1.5.
. Hence those Women, who from an unwarrantable Indulgence of such as made
Baptism absolutely necessary to the salvation of all, did usurp a liberty and
power to baptize weakly children, did evidently contradict the Apostolical
Canon; as may be gathered from what in the Hampton-Court-Conference Fuller Chapter
Hist. lib. 10. ad an. 1603/4.
, against the Arguings of some of the then Bishops, for the permission of
Midwives, in case of necessity, to baptize Infants; King James did assert, from
our Saviors Commission Mat. 28.20.
, Go preach, and baptize, etc. That it was essential to the lawful Ministration
of that Ordinance, that it should be performed by a Minister duly called.
Again, it is for the Reproof of,

2. Such soft and delicate Women, who like the pleasure, but are impatient of
the pain which ordinarily attends those in a married state. To say nothing of
those bad Women, who from a lustful cruelty, or cruel lustfulness, as Augustine
speaks De Nupt. and conj. l. 1. c. 15.
, do wish that their issue should perish rather than live; and therefore do use
ill Arts, either to prevent Conception, or procure Abortion; which must needs
be very displeasing to God, who in his Law Exodus 21.15.
, has breeding-bearing Women much upon his heart, to provide for their safety.
There be some, who from pre-apprehensions of their own pains, forbear to render
their Husbands their due 1 Cor. 7.3, 4.
, not well weighing the ill consequents of such forbearance. Others are ready
to conceit, it is a discouragement to them to take pains, when very well able,
about the nursing and education of their children. It Is true, they are not of
such Nun-like dispositions, as some others, idolizing a single life for their
ease, regarding not to be serviceable to God in their Generation, according to
their capacities, when called. For our Apostle in this Epistle 1 Timothy 5.14.
, wills young Women to marry, bear children (not as too many in our Age, to
bear children when not married), guide the house, give none occasion to the
adversaries to speak reproachfully. Yet they are so greatly addicted to sensual
pleasures in the married state, that they like not to take pains in going
through their appointed time with their child-breeding, and childbearing; but
do so over-eagerly pursue their Appetites, Frolicks, and Fancies, that they too
often forget the condition into which God has brought them, and so deprive
themselves, and their Husbands, of those blessings, which if they did behave
themselves soberly, and Christian-like, they might well hope for at Gods hands,
supposing them to continue duly careful (as they should be) to forbear excess
in Diet, and violent Recreations, and to suppress vehement Passions, using that
moderation in all things which their condition notably calls for. Which leads
me to the*

Obs. II. That the sorrows of childbed should not dishearten Chris^ian Women
from entering into a marriage-state.

We plainly see here, lest the pains of childbed should deter good Women from
enjoying the comfort of the Marriage Bed, Paul does in my Text introduce the
great benefit of Women's Temporal and Eternal safety, that they might not
despond under the Temporal chastisement of childbearing sorrows, if they were
true Believers, and lived in subjection to God and their Husbands (wherein
their Husbands act agreeably to Gods Word): so that through Gods gracious
vouchsafement, they should receive no final damage by their Grandmother Eves
being first seduced: but upon their unfeigned returning to God, and resigning
entirely to him, they should find in his favor life Psalm. 30.5.
. The penalty of their sorrows being converted into a blessing by the
sanctifying Spirit, they shall receive comfort in their sharp and tedious
throws: and the thousand pains they sustain in breeding, bearing, and
religiously bringing up their children, shall work together by Gods infinite
wisdom, and benign influences, for their Temporal safety, so far as God sees
that good for them Romans 8.28.
; and in the issue, for their Eternal salvation.

Hence I infer, to make a short Application of this Doctrine,

1. That good Women, Applicat.
when they are called to it (for all are not called to it at all, and some not
at all times, upon several accounts), they are so far from hindering, that they
may forward their own salvation by entering into a marriage state. And tho they
may think subjection to their own Husbands 1 Pet. 3.5.
, only in the Lord, as is fit Col. 3.18.
(for the Gospel requires no other subjection, but in the Lord Christ), to be
some obstruction to their comfort and happiness; yet they are much deceived in
such apprehensions. For this Doctrine, resulting clearly from my Text, shows,
that this kind Admonent^ hoc genus obsequi and sibi esse salutare and D^^*
acceptum, Calv. in Textum.
of willing submission and obedience to their own Husbands Tit. 2.5. Heb. 6.9.
, is a better thing than they deem of (accompanying salvation), and acceptable
to God; being Marriage is honorable in all 13.4.
; an Ordinance instituted by him, who brings so many good Wives to Heaven, to
enjoy most contenting sweets there, from their afflicting sorrows in Childbed
here. Further I infer,

2. That hypocritical pretenses of Sanctity, and unwarrantable vows of
perpetual Virginity, should not bring a disparagement upon the honorable state
of marriage, from the pains and perils which childbearing Women pass through.
The Disciples of Christ were over hasty in saying Mat. 19.10.
, It Is not good to marry. But these of Antichrist, who embrace the Doctrines of
Demons, and forbid marrying 1 Timothy 4.1, 2.
to their Priests, whether they have the gift of Continency, yea, or no; and to
such Virgins, which for their gain, they decoy into an irrevocable Vow (as they
call it), is detestable. Yet this is the common practice of the Papists, how
odious soever it be, and in the consequents pernicious Bernhardin^^ in Rosario^*
; as well as the pract^ses of those before reproved, who either to cherish
covetousness, or cover their wantonness, seek to prevent Conceptions, or
procure Abortions, are enemies to the propagation of Mankind; and when the
subtilties of School-distinctions Estius in Senten.
are laid aside, will be found culpable of Homicide. God deliver us from that
mystery of iniquity, which they who go a wondering after the Beast Rev. 13.3.
, in contempt of Marriage, labor to bring in, following a wicked Pope Syric.
Distinct. 82.
, tho they incur the Anathema of a Council Council. Gangr. c. 10.
; and tho, as we may see some of our first Reformers detecting the Acts of the
English Votaries Bale Mist. of Iniquit. p. 17, 18. Engl. Votar. p. 18.
, cast it out with abomination; in that they said, the Whorish Papal Synagogue
was a great blemish to godly marriage: which has already in our days been
ridiculed by some Atheistical Debauchees, whose monstrous Immoralities make
them contemptible. Whereas Marriage derives its honorable Pedigree from the
first pair, when innocent in Paradise here below, and is no way obstructive to
an happy entrance into the Paradise of God above. Hence I am at last come to the

Obs. III.
IIId, and Principal Observation from the words, which will directly answer the
Enquiry before us: viz.

By perseverance in Christian and Conjugal Graces and Duties, childbearing
Wives may be best supported against, in, and under the hazard of their Travail.

This does clearly result from the Text, as I have explained it, and needs not
much proof.

By patient continuance in well-doing, those who seek for glory, and honor,
and immortality, have eternal life, says the Apostle elsewhere Romans 2.7.
: and a prudent Wife abiding in faith, charity, holiness and sobriety, may have
such support from the strengthning-word of Promise here, and elsewhere, that
travailing in birth, and pained to be delivered Rev. 12.1
(as the borrowed speech expresses the Churches sorrow), she may have good
hope of being preserved, and seeing a comfortable separation 'twixt her and the
burden of her belly, when her loins are filled with pain, and pangs have taken
hold on her Isa. 21.3.
; Isa. 43.6.
The Lord will say (as I may allude to that in the Prophet) to the loins, give
up, and to the womb, keep not ^a k; so that all shall be sanctified to her; and
in a proportion she may rejoice in hope, as Elizabeth from her own experience
heartned her Cousin Mary Luke 1.45.
; bl^ssed is she that believes; for there shall be a performance of those
things which were told her from the Lord; if not in kind, yet in Equivalency,
or that which is better. For tho, as the most beloved Wife Rachel, in her hard
labor, she should dye Genesis 35.17, 18.
; or tho the sad estate of the Church should multiply her groans, as Phineas
his Wife's were, for the the taking of the Ark 1 Samuel 4.20, 21.
; yet she may have good evidence from the clear shining of her Jewels and
Chains (which Christ, her Husband, has put upon her, as his Spouse Cant. 1.10.
); I mean the exercise of her Graces, that she shall be eternally saved; her
soul shall pass into that rest which remains to the people of God Heb. 4.9.
, where there shall be neither sorrow, nor crying, nor any more pain; for the
former things shall be passed away Rev. 21.4.
; and that may be written on her Tombstone, which a Learned Doctor wrote on
that of pious Mrs. Wilkinson Dr. Reynolds in her Life. She and her Child were
buried together.
, who with her child went to Heaven from her Childbed; viz.

Here lies Mother and Babe, both without sins.
Next Birth will make her and her Infant Twins.
Those necessary and eminent Graces, to perseverance or continuance wherein,
the promise of salvation is made by the Apostle unto childbearing Women, on
which they live for support against, and in their Travail, are, as you have
heard, these Four; viz. Faith, Charity, Holiness, Sobriety.

1. Faith, which we may distinctly conceive of, (...).
as comprehending both that which is Divine and Moral, or Christian and
Conjugal.

(1). A Divine Faith, which is precious and saving 2 Pet. 1.1. with Heb. 10.39.
; a Grace of the Holy Spirit, whereby the enlightn'd heart being united to
Christ, does receive him, and resigns up it self to him as Mediator; and so is
espoused to that one Husband 2 Cor. 11.2.
, depending entirely upon him. By this Faith, receiving the Son of God, who is
also the Son of Man, born of a Woman, is the good Wife to live in subjection to
Christ, her spiritual Head; and then, tho her pains be never so many, her
throws never so quick and sharp, she may be confident that all shall go well
with her, either in being safely* delivered of the Fruit of her Womb, as the
Lord's reward, out of his free love Psalm. 127.3.
; or having her Soul, and that of her Seed, eternally saved, being taken into
covenant with the Almighty God Genesis 17.1, 7.
: so that in the issue, she will at last with all humble adoration, yield that
it could not have been possibly better with her, than to have been in that
condition of subjection and sorrow, in breeding, bearing, and bringing up of
children. 'Twas this Faith, for the substance of it, which the pious childing
Women, mentioned in the story of our Saviors Genealogy, did exercise; a
continuance wherein, is required of every just Christian Woman, that she may
live by it in the pains which threaten death. For by this Principle she may be
the best supported, and derive Virtue from her Savior, for the sweetning of
the bitterest cup, and strength for the staying her up, when the anguish of
bringing forth her first child is upon her Jer. 4.31.
; as Sarah, the notable pattern of pious Women, in this case did, concerning
whom it is recorded Heb. 11.11.
, By faith Sarah her self received strength to conceive seed, and was delivered
of a child when she was past age, because she judged him faithful who had
promised. A staying, and living by Faith upon Gods Providence and Promise, will
revive the drooping spirits of otherwise weak and fearful Women, in their good
work of childbearing, for the multiplying of the Church with those whom God
will save. So that tho impending danger to Mother and Child, may make even good
women to quail, when their pangs, as so many touches of Gods d^^pleasure
against sin, are upon them; yet by Faith they can fetch relief out of the
faithfulness of the Promiser, as Sarah did; and out of this good word he has
recorded in my Text; or that more general by the Prophet David Psalm. 55.22.
with 1 Pet. 5.7.
, He will sustain, or take care of those that cast their care and burden upon
him, with the like. Hereupon the upright woman, tho frail, can resign up her
self to God, being fully persuaded with the Father of the Faithful Romans 4.11.
, That what he has promised, he is also able to perform in his own time and
way, which is ever the best. And one Mr. Oliver, chap. 13. p. 139.
, now with God, speaking largely to this matter, in his Present to Teeming
Women, has very well observed, 'Twas his will, that in their Travail there
should ever be, while the World stands, that most eminent instance of his
power. Indeed, that (I may say) which made the great Heathen Physician, Galen.
after a deep search into the Causes of a woman's bringing forth a child, to cry
out, Oh miracle of Nature! Hence in her low estate, the pious Wife who lives by
Faith above Nature, when she spreads her hands, and utters her doleful groans
before the Almighty, concludes, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him
good Jer. 4.31. 1 Samuel 3.18. 2 Samuel 15.26 Luke 22.42.
. If it seems good unto him then to call for her life, and the life of her
Babe, she can say, Lord, here am I, and the child which thou have given me (as
the Prophet speaks upon another account Isa. 8 18.
). She trusts to that good and great promise Genesis 3.15.
, That the seed of the woman shall break the serpents head: and therefore
comforts her self, that the Serpents sting is took away by him that is born of
a woman. And tho the Birth of her Child may cost her much more sorrow than it
does her Husband; yet as Manaoh's Wife, she may have a secret intimatiom Judges
13.3, 9, 23.
from the Angel of the Covenant, of, and in her safe deliverance, one way or
other, which her Husband knows not of, and which will abundantly compensate all
her sorrows. If she has been in such a condition before, she can say Romans 5.4.
Psalm. 63.7.
, Tribulation works patience, and patience experience, and experience hope:
and so by Faith conclude, Because thou have been mine help, therefore will I
trust in the shadow of thy wings. This saving Faith I might farther show, does
presuppose and imply Repentance, and express it self in Meditation and Prayer.

1. It does presuppose and imply Repentance, which from a true sense of sin,
and an apprehension of the mercy of God in Christ, does cause a loathing of our
selves for our iniquities Ezekiel. 20.43. and 36.31.
, which is a very proper exercise for a childbearing woman, who is eminently
concerned antecedently to bring forth fruit meet for repentance Mat. 3.8.
, that God may receive her, and the Fruit of her Womb graciously, upon her
hearty turning from sin, and returning to, and trusting in him. Childbearing
Women should fruitfully remember the Sentence, acknowledge rightly Gods
displeasure against sin; and humble themselves very particularly before him,
who does in mercifulness infinitely surpass all the Kings of Israel; that he
may show special favor to them. For as a woman newly delivered of her Child,
is not out of peril, whilst that Physicians call the Secundine, and the
Placenta, or part thereof, remains; so neither if there should be remaining any
known sin unrepented of, could she upon good grounds expect to be saved from
her groanings. One of the Ancients Nazianz.
does set forth Repentance, by comparing the Soul to a pair of writing Tables,
out of which must be washed whatsoever is written with sin; and instead thereof
must be entered the characters of Grace. And as this spiritual washing is very
necessary for all Jo. 3.3, 5. Tit. 3.5.
; so be sure it is specially necessary for those women who are apt to be
overcurious in the washing of their Linnens for their lying in, that the
purity of the outward be not preferred to that of the inward Man.

2. This saving Faith does usually express it self in those women who are
really espoused unto Christ, and in whom he dwells by Meditation and Prayer,
which are also very requisite for the support of childbearing ones, at the
approaches of their appointed sorrows.

(1.) Faith does express it self in Meditation; and so by bringing the Soul to
contemplate upon God, does (as Wax is softened and prepared for the (Seal make
the heart soft for any sacred characters or Signatures to be imprinted upon it.
Hereby an Handmaid of the Lord, when she awakes, is still with him Psalm.
139.18.
in heartning Soliloquies. The good woman seriously thinking on the Sentence of
the Almighty, That sorrow should be multiplied in her conception, and bringing
forth children Genesis 3.16.
, reflects upon her self, and considers well, how her portion of afflictions in
a Federal state, is allotted to her by divine disposal; and thereupon tastes
some sweets in their bitterness, and resolves to submit thereunto, as her duty:
and finding her self to have been barren and unfruitful in the knowledge of the
Lord Jesus Christ 2 Pet. 1.8.
, to bring forth fruit unto holiness, which ends in eternal life Romans 6.22.
. Instances of such fruitful Meditation, may be seen in Mr. Oliver's Present
forecited, chap. 5. Further, Faith does exercise it self,

(2.) In Prayer to God, that being the Mouth of Faith in God through Christ; in
whose prevailing Name Christians are concerned to lift up their hearts unto him
for relief in all their straits. Those good Wives who own the Religion of the
Bible, should not with the Heathen in their pains, make their Prayers to
Lucina; or with the Papists, to the Virgin Mary, or their S. Margaret; but unto
him alone in whom they believe Romans 10.14.
, and who alone hears prayers Psalm. 65.2.
. Chrysostom did greatly complain in his time, that the tender mind of a
Virgin on her Marriage-day, should be diverted from minding the things of
Christ, with immoderate sports, and devices of Mirth; and from eying of God,
who alone could effectually give joy to a married couple L. Viv. de Christian.
Foem. l. 2. p. 148, 149.
. And therefore she should then rather implore his aid, as she has need to do
all along in a married state; but much more peculiarly and fervently, when
having conceived, and grown big, the hour of her childbed pangs is
approaching, that her heart is sore pained within her, and the terrors of death
are fallen upon her Psalm. 55.4.
, should her precious Faith fervently utter her most necessary and affectionate
requests unto him, who has freely given by his Apostle, the good word of
support in my Text, with those of the like import elsewhere; and is able to
save to the uttermost, deliver effectually, and keep in perfect peace all that
fly to him, and stay themselves upon him in that good work he has appointed
them unto. Thus of the principal Grace, a Divine or Christian Faith. There is
also,

[2.] A Moral, or Conjugal Faith, which is more distinctly called fidelity, or
faithfulness; a Grace much strengthened from the former; and in a Wife does more
peculiarly respect her Husband; as we may particularly gather from our Apostle
in this Epistle 1 Timothy 5.12.
(compared with that which he speaks more generally of it elsewhere Tit. 2.10.
, for the adorning of the doctrine of God our Savior in all things). The Wife
has plighted her Troth to her Husband, according to the flesh, unto whom the
Lord has in the Marriage-Covenant joined her, and she is obliged to be
constantly faithful in all conjugal duties to him, with whom she has trusted
her self, and that by Virtue of the Covenant of her God. Neither is it enough
to be really faithful, but also to seem so, or be seen as much as may be, so to
be Tertull.
. Not that any Christian woman should be like some of those in the Great Moguls
Country Purchase Pilgrim. l. 1. p. 225.
, who to gain the repute of modest, loving, and faithful Wives, will have their
own Corpse burnt together with their deceased Husbands: but she should show her
real fidelity, as in an honest and prudent concealment of her Husbands secrets,
so in avoiding all just suspicion, by any familiar converse with others, of
being false to his Bed; and religiously keeping till death, the Matrimonial
Obligation, not deserting her dear yoke fellow when reduced to straits. For so
it is storied of the King of Pontus his Wife, that she disguised her self to
follow her banished Husband, saying, There she reckoned was her Kingdom, her
Riches, and Country, wheresoever she could find her Husband L. Viv. de Christ.
Foem. l. 2. p. 157, 158.
. The Wife of a certain Count of Castile, when the King had detained her
Husband in Prison, went to visit him, whom she persuaded to put on her clothes,
and leave her there in his stead: Of which Fact the King hearing, did much
wonder at the fidelity of the Countess, and sent her to her Husband, wishing he
had such Wives for himself and Sons. I might produce more Instances, but I
hasten. If Christian Servants should perform the Offices of their Relation, as
unto the Lord, with all good fidelity Tit. 2.10. Col. 3.22.
; much more should the Christian Wife, who has solemnly entered into the
Covenant of the Lord with her Husband, in all faithfulness fill up her Relation
toward him, with whom she is become one flesh. Yet in too many, what a
defection is there from this Faith? Wat a violation of this good fidelity in
our degenerate and decrepit Age? which unless God give timely repentance of,
may not only hazard the Temporal, but will also the Eternal salvation of many
adulterous child-bearers, who (yet less impudent than some others) wipe their
mouth, it may be, and (unless their sharp throws face them to confess their
falsity) would be thought to be most genuine Daughters of the Church, when
indeed they hasten its ruin in a spurious brood.

The next Grace required here in my Text, is,

2. Charity, or Love. This in a good Wife, I take as I did Faith, (...)
for that which is Christian and Conjugal, respecting Christ, and her Husband.
Be sure every Christian Wife should,

1. Love the Lord Jesus Christ, considered both personally and mystically. She
should sincerely love Christ in himself, and in his members. Her Faith toward
him should work by Love Gal. 5.6.
.

[1.] It behooves her to give the Primacy of her affection unto Christ himself.
She is obliged above all, most entirely and heartily to love the Lord Jesus
Christ, her spiritual Husband. For they come under the Apostolical Benediction,
who love our Lord Jesus in sincerity, or with incorruption Ephesians. 6.24.
. Our Lord Jesus loves such, and is much affected with their doleful condition,
as with that of his friend Lazarus John 11.3, 11, 35.
. This indeed is a good evidence of a genuine Faith, and shows it self to be of
a right stamp, when there is an holy care to keep all Christ's Commandments John
14.15.
. Hence Charity is compared by one, to an ever-turning spq, always providing,
and laboring for him in whom she rests. Let this be the chief care of the
Christian Wife, and she may upon good grounds conclude Christ is hers, and she
is his Cant. 2.15.
; and say in all trouble, as the good woman, when bloody Bonner threatened her
in the Popish persecution, to take away her Husband and Son; Christ is mine
Husband, and better to me than Ten Sons: you cannot strip me of him. Now if the
good Wife has Christ present with her in her Travail (as they who love him
with a prevailing love, certainly have in all their affliction), she has All,
having him who will command deliverance for her, and a blessing upon her Psalm.
44.4. Lev. 25.21.
; who being indeed Christ's Friend, as she is to love him in himself, so also
in the next place,

[2.] She is concerned to love him in his members. Her Christian Charity is to
be manifested unto those that are Christ's, for Christ's sake; and as the Apostle
writes in this Epistle 1 Timothy 1.5.
, is such, namely, which answers the end of the Commandment, out of a pure
heart, a good conscience, and faith unfeigned. We certainly prove our love to
Christ, by keeping his Commandment, in loving those that are his, sincerely and
constantly John 13.34.
. Love to the Brethren goes along with our love to God 1 John 5.1, 2.
: and the continuance of it, may well dispose to Angelical comforts Heb. 13.1,
2.
. However it may be very advantageous to a childbearing woman, to endear
Christian brethren, who are much in doing of Gods will, and prevalent with God,
to assist her more affectionately with their Prayers, having seen her real
Charity to promote Gods service, and advance piety. It will no doubt argue her
abiding in the light 1 John 2.10.
, and sure passage from death to life and 3.14.
, and Gods dwelling, or constant presence with her, which will be abundant
support to her in the greatest pains, when she brings forth with the most
difficulty, as the Physician Hippocrates (...), Aph. 55.
finds some to do. Then as she should love Christ in himself, and in his
members; so

2. Next to Christ, the good Wife is above all other, dearly and constantly to
love her own Husband, and that with a pure heart fervently 1 Cor. 7.2. Tit.
2.4. 1 Pet. 1.22.
. Yea, and she should never entertain low thoughts of him in that Relation,
whom she could once think worthy of embracing for her Husband; and whom by the
Covenant of God, in all Offices of Love, she is obliged to please 1 Cor. 7.34.
: without this bond of Perfectness, all will be loose, uneasy, and unpleasing;
yea, the Laws and Command of God, who by his wise Providence ordered the Match,
will become tedious and irksome Lud. Viv. p. 104.
. But where this conjugal love is consequent upon the foregoing Christian love,
there all will become easy. This is the very life of perfect. Friendship; and
where it resides in power, no diligence will be wanting to facilitate all other
conjugal duties Fabr. Bar. de re Vxoria, l. 2. c. 1.
. For never-failing Charity, especially in this Relation, will enable the good
Wife to bear all things, to believe all things, to hope all things, to endure
all things 1 Cor. 13* 7, 8.
. This holy flame therefore (as the Vestal fire Alex. Alex. l. 5. c. 12.
) should be ever-cherish'd, that it go not out. Indeed Love being as the Soul
of Society, and of it self Immortal, it would argue it were not sincere at
first, if it should cease. Dr. Goad recommending the mothers Legacy to her
child unborn, written by pious Mrs. Joceline, when big with child, preparing
for her approaching childbed, says, What eyes cannot behold her true and
unspotted love to her dearest Husband? In her affectionate Letter to him,
prefixed to that little Book, she declares, with thankfulness to God, her fears
of childbed painfulness were cured with the remembrance, that all things should
work together for the best to those that love God (which cannot be right in a
Wife without this true love to her own Husband), and a certain assurance that
God would give her patience according to her pain. And she bare all patiently.
So did Mrs. Wilkinson, a most loving Wife Dr. Harris in her Life.
, whose patience was remarkable in the midst of very sore pains, which
frequented her in the breeding and bearing of children. Yet then her speech
was, I fear not pains; I fear my self, lest through impatiency I should let
fall any unbefitting word. It Is a blessed frame (said that grave Divine, who
recorded it), when pain seems light, and sin heavy. So on the other hand, for
want of this prevalent conjugal love, in conjunction with Christian love, a
Daughter of King Ethelred having found the difficulty of her first birth, she
did afterward perpetually abstain from her Husband's Bed (against the
Apostle's Rule 1 Cor. 7.3.
), protesting from a Principle of unaccountable self-love, That it was not fit
a Daughter of a crowned Head, should commit her self any more to such perils.
'Twas far otherwise with a young Woman in Euboea, who being married to a Man
she loved dearly, became Mother and Grandmother to an Hundred Children. The
Story of Mrs. Honywood, in our Age, is not less famous. I might produce many
other Instances, but it is more than time I come to the next mentioned Grace;
viz.

3. Holiness; which I take as the former, (...)
for that which is Christian and Conjugal, more general and special.

1. There is Holiness which is considered more generally, being an universal
Grace agreeing to a Christian as such, wrought by the Spirit in the new
creature, from the peace made by Christ; whereby the soul being changed into
his likeness, there is an abiding in a state of gracious acceptance with God,
and a striving in some measure to be holy as he is holy, in every particle of
our conversation, both toward God and Man, publicly and privately in some
degrees. As all Christians are to mind their salvation in the holiness of the
Spirit, and to follow after it by Christ 2 These. 2.13. 1 Pet. 1.2. Heb. 12.14.
and 13.12.
: So Christian Wives in a childbearing state, that they may comfortably bring
forth the Fruit of their Wombs, are highly concerned for that good work, to
have their fruit unto holiness Romans 6.22.
. Then be sure all shall go well with them, both here and hereafter.
Blessedness belongs to the pure in heart, and the undefiled in the course of
their lives Mat. 5.8. Psalm. 119.1.
. What knows the holy Wife, whether (if she should be married to a bad Man, by
Parents disposal) she may save her Husband 1 Cor 7.16.
? We read of several Christian Wives, whose Husbands have been brought to real
godliness, by their zealous Endeavors; as Clemens by Domitia, etc. L. Vivis de
Chr. Foem. l. 2. p. 253. vide and p. 271.211.
For the holy conversation of a Wife, has sometimes a great force upon the
mind of the Husband, who is thereby disposed to entertain good: and if a work
of Grace be wrought upon him, then he will be more fervent in prayer for his
childbearing Wife; who, as she ought through the whole course of her life, to
be daily dying to sin, and living to righteousness; so in her approaching
sorrows, she is more especially concerned,

[1.] To conform to the preceptive, or commanding will of God, in all the
actions of her life, that she may present her body a living sacrifice, holy,
acceptable unto God; which is her reasonable service: and so by universal
obedience, prove what is that good and acceptable will of God Romans 12.1, 2.
, in the prevailing desires of her soul to please God, who has called her into
a conjugal Relation, and enabled her therein to conceive; and so in her proper
Office, to serve her own generation by the will of God Acts 13.36.
, waiting upon him with cheerfulness in filling up her Relation, to give her in
due time an holy seed for his glory, and the enlargement of his Church; as holy
Mrs. Joceline, above mentioned, earnestly desired of God, that she might be a
mother to one of his children Mothers Legacy, p. 1.
. Then,

[2.] To submit to the effecting and disposing will of God, who works all
things according to the counsel of his own will Ephesians. 1.11.
, in preparing for death; not to neglect, but make ready for so great salvation
as is purchased by Christ, and offered in the rich and precious promises Heb.
2.3.
. If all should hearken to the charge our Savior gives to his own Disciples
Mat. 24.44.
, Therefore be ye also ready; then it eminently concerns a big-belli'd woman,
to be in a readiness for her departure, that she may not be surpised, since the
pangs are perilous that she is to pass through; and the more, if she be but of
a weak, and not of an hail constitution. Mrs. Joceline.
The last mentioned pious Gentlewoman, when she felt her self quick with child
(as then travailing with Death it self), she secretly took order for the buying
a new Winding Sheet; thus preparing and consecrating her self to him who rested
in a new Sepulcher, wherein was man never yet laid; and privately in her
Closet, looking Death in the Face, wrote her excellent Legacy to her unborn
child.

None ever repented of making ready to die. And every Christian is ready, who
can entirely submit to Gods disposal in Life or Death. Yea, and then a good
woman is likest to have her will in a safe temporal deliverance, when she is
most sincerely willing that God should have his in dealing with her as seems
best to himself. When the Yoke of Christ is easy, and his Burden is light,
then is the good Wife in the fairest way to be most easily delivered of the
burden of her belly, so that she shall have the truest joys afterward. Thus of
Holiness considered more generally, and how the childbearing Wife is concerned
to exercise it.

2. Holiness may be considered more specially, as it is conjugal; and more
peculiarly appropriated to the marriage-state. This being a more particular
exercise of Christian holiness in the Matrimonial band; wherein as every one,
both Husband and Wife, in that Relation, are concerned; so the childing-woman
is obliged to be singularly careful to possess her Vessel in sanctification, or
sanctimony, and honor 1 These. 4.4.
, in a special kind of conjugal cleaness and chastness, which is opposite to
all turpitude, and lust of Concupiscence in the very appearance of it; that
there may be, as much as possible, no show or tincture of uncleanness in the
Marriage Bed; but that there may be an holy seed, and she may keep her self
pure from any taint of Lasciviousness. 'Twill cheer up in the hour of her
Travail, if she can sincerely say in the sight of God, as it is said in the
Apochryphal story Tobit 3.14, 15.
, Sara, the Daughter of Raguel, did; Thou know Lord, I am pure from all sin
with man, and that I never polluted my name, nor the name of my father. This is
the true Eagle-stone to be constantly worn for the prevention of miscarrying,
that there may not indeed be laboring in vain, or bringing forth for trouble;
but her seed may be the blessing of the Lord, and her offspring with her Isa.
65 23. with 21.
; who may solace her self in her Integrity, and unspotted Reputation, having
her chaste conversation coupled with fear 1 Pet. 3.2.
; that all shall issue well with her, and the Fruit of her Womb. But this is so
much of the same Nature with the last Grace mentioned here in my Text, that the
Apostle annexeth that to Holiness, with,

4. Sobriety. So we render it; others Temperance, others Modesty, (...).
as in our old Translation; others Chastity. And taking it largely, the word
seems to speak that gracious habit which may best become a prudent, grave,
temperate, moderate, or modest Mother of a Family Beza.
; for that seems to reach the Apostles sense, comparing it with what he has in
the 9th Verse of this Chapter, and elsewhere Tit. 2.4, 5. Acts 26.25.
. I might consider this like the former Graces, more generally and specially.

1. More generally, as Christian, every one that names the name of Christ,
being under an obligation thereby to depart from iniquity 2 Timothy 2.19.
, is engaged to labor after a sound mind 2 Timothy 1.7.
, to be modest, sober, and temperate in all things Tit. 1.8. and 2.2, 4, 6. 1
Cor. 9.25.
, learning to use this world as if we used it not; minding that which is
comely, and attending upon the Lord without distraction 1 Cor. 1.31, 35.
. Yea, we should let our moderation be known unto all men, as those that are
Christ's, who have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts Phil. 4.5.
Gal. 5.24.
. Certainly then a Christian Wife, and that in a childbearing condition, is
concerned to seek, that she may be endew'd with Sobriety, which purges the
Mind from Distempers, and puts the affections into an orderly frame,
acceptable to God; and so does morally give the best ensurance to the promises
of temporal and eternal safety. But more particularly,

2. The special conjugal Grace of Temperance and Modesty, is to be exercised by
the childbearing woman in sobriety, chastity, and gracefulness, both with
reference to her affections and senses. I have warrant from the Apostle, as
well as the Philosophers Wallaei E^hic. ^. Arist. l. 4.
, to take the word so largely, as to comprehend both Modesty and Temperance.
Whereupon I conclude,

[1.] With modesty she is to govern her passions and affections; so that there
may be only an humble appetition of due respect, and an abstinence from those
unbecoming. An holy care, as to avoid pride on one hand, so ignominy and
contempt on the other, as well as to give check to boldness and indecency in
her gesture, speech and behavior, as to lightness and wantonness in any of
these. So that she may by a graceful deportment, as much as she can, in minding
things venerable, just, pure, lovely, and of good report Phil. 4.8.
: not with the outward adornings of plaiting the hair, and of wearing gold, or
of putting on of apparel 1 Pet. 3.3.
, show her self to be a virtuous Wife, who is not carried away with an
affectation of glorying splendour, and artificial handsomeness; but with the
ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which in the sight of God is of great
price and 4.
. Then her heart will not upbraid or reproach her Job 27.6.
with the glittering of her Pendants, when her pangs in travail have taken her
Micah 4.9, 10.
; as a penitent Gentlewoman on a dangerous sickbed, once with much sorrow told
me, That her foregoing priding her self in hers did, and greatly wound her
spirit: But her modesty, humility, and discretion, will be Evidences of her
unfeigned Faith. For as an excellent big-bellied woman Mrs. Eliz. Joceline.
once wrote to her Husband, with reference to her Daughter; she would not have
her bold, modesty and humility being the groundwork of all virtue. Again she
is to govern her self,

[2.] With Temperance; she should moderate her senses; especially take ca^e to
govern well those of Taste and Touch. For Temperance indeed is such a Virtue, as
does keep a mean in desiring and avoiding such bodily pleasures as are
perceived by those senses, about the proper use of creature enjoyments; so that
in eating and drinking, as well as other actions, a Christian may be kept in
the best temper for the glorifying of God 1 Cor. 10 31.
. And in looking upon Temperance as a fruit of the Spirit Gal. 5.23.
. Here may come under consideration, more strictly and particularly, the good
Wifes Sobriety and Chastity in her conjugal Relation.

(1.) Sobriety; which more strictly respects the moderation of the Appetite,
and sense of tasting, for the desiring of that which is convenient, and the
avoiding of Riot. Whilst exercised about meat and drink, for the shunning of
Intemperance in either, the breeding and big-bellied Woman is highly concerned
to take special care for her own, and the child's safety. Plato determined L.
7. de leg, (...), etc.
, That big-bellied Women, above all, should so govern themselves during that
space, that they may be neither carried away to many and furious pleasures, nor
oppressed with grief; but live a mild, quiet, and pacate Life. Many have
miscarried by an inordinote giving way to their Appetites, and feeding
immoderately upon various Dainties. So that such should not despise the divine
direction given unto Manoah's Wife by the Angel Judges 13.4, 11, 12, 13, 14.
. For tho that was given in an extraordinary case; yet as to the equity of the
thing in some proportion, it certainly suggests moderation in that which is
ordinary. It Is true, in case of a lingering appetite, there is a considerable
allowance to be made unto pregnant women; yea, after conception, before the
growing big, lest they should miscarry (as too many modest ones have done) by a
not discovering of it in due season. But out of that case, childing-Wives, who
have put on the Lord Jesus Christ Romans 13.14.
, they are to eat and drink for health, and not for pampering of the flesh,
which is done by excess in the quantity, rather than in the quality of the
Food. It Is odious in men to be given to immoderate drinking; but in women, and
those professing godliness, it is abominable. Excess in Meats and Drinks, puts
Violence upon Nature by Intemperance, and may cause the Death of the Mother, or
Child, or both at once, to the desperate woundnig of the Conscience, when God
makes inquisition for blood Psalm. 9.12. and 51.14. Acts 16.28.
; yea, and may too often precipitate into Immodesty. Whereas the Christian Wife
should indeed be adorned with,

(2.) Chastity (which for the matter was partly hinted before in conjugal
fidelity and sanctimony). This strictly respects the other sense
aforementioned, and requires a keeping of the heart and body from uncleanness
Prove. 4.23. Mat. 5.28. 1 These. 4.4.
. It may be granted, Men, yea, Husbands, are generally more prone to
Incontinency. And were I discoursing to them, I might remember them (as well as
their Wives) of that famous saying of the Roman Orator In voluptatis Regno
nullum omnino esse posse hominibus cum virtute comercium, Cicero de Senect.
, That in the predominancy, or Kingdom of sensual pleasure, men can have no
commerce with virtue: and therefore are concerned to be watchful and moderate,
especially considering what the great Philosopher has said, That of all the
desires of the body, men are apt to be faulty this way (...), Arist. Rhet. c.
14.
. Yet since the Command of God reaches those of each Sex, both are under a
religious band in the marriage-state; and (as one says Charron of Wisd. l. 3.
c. 12.
) the pleasure therein must be mingled with some severity; it must be a wise,
and conscionable delight Heb. 13.4. 1 Cor. 7.5. and 2.2.
. It much concerns the Christian Wife, to give check to any suggestion, much
more to any parley which is in a tendency to violate her matrimonial contract;
or to bring her into any carriage unbecoming that honorable state she is
brought into; or the undue use of the undefiled bed Heb. 13.4. 1 Cor. 7.5. and
2.2.
. So that however some of the Papists in magnifying a single Life, would
appropriate chastity unto Virgins (whom they themselves do debauch in their
Nunneries); Yet we find from Scripture, and the Ancient Fathers, that there is
chastity and continency in a marriage-state, as opposed to that in a single
life See Chameir. Tom. 3. l. 16. cap. 14.
. In the Exercise of this, with the precedent Graces, the good Wife having well
learned the lesson of self-denial, can bear her burden in humble confidence of
aids from above, in the hour of her childbed sorrow* and a safe deliverance in
the best way. For being thus qualified, she has from the precious promise in
my Text, a sure ground of a comfortable exemption from the curse in
childbearing, and of the removal of that Original Guilt, which otherwise
greatens the sorrows of women in such a case.

Reasonableness of all this I have been discoursing.

1. From the fidelity of God, who has passed his word for the preservation, in
due Circumstances, of all those thus qualified, as you have heard. Which indeed
was Sarahs support, with reference to her childbearing, because she judged him
faithful who had promised Heb. 11.11.
. He who is most faithful, and cannot lie, has said, They who are not weary of
welldoing, shall reap, if they faint not.

2. From the evidence of their own sincerity. The continuance in these
Christian and Conjugal Exercises of Faith, Charity, Holiness, with Sobriety,
shows, notwithstanding their Frailties (which are no other spots than those may
be on Gods own children Deuteronomy. 32.5.
), that they are in a safe state; which must needs be great support, supposing
the worst that can befall them by their pains. And as by abiding in Christ,
they are spiritually fruitful Jo. 15.4.
; so they may well hope, that in bringing forth their natural fruit, they shall
be evermore kept under Gods benign influence and blessing. The promise in my
Text is ensur'd upon Gods fidelity to all those good women who are interessed
in it. But all those, who have evidence of their sincerity, may be well
satisfied as to their interest therein; and the continuance in the exercises of
the Graces of Faith, Charity, Holiness, and Sobriety, does clearly demonstrate
they are persons qualified with sincerity, who in and through Christ, in whom
the promise is yea, and amen, shall certainly inherit it 2 Cor. 1.20. Heb. 6.12.
.

I may not enlarge, having staid overlong already; yet would crave a little
further leave to make some use of what has been said.

Applicat.
The Application of this last and chief Observation, viz. That perseverance in
Christian and Conjugal Graces and Duties, is the best support to childbearing
women against, in, and under their Travail; may briefly serve to teach care,
and administer comfort.

1. This teaches an holy care, and that to Men as well as to Women. We shall
find they of either Sex, may hence learn instruction.

1. It may teach a lesson to Men, whether they be in a single, or a married
state.

(1.) They who are not yet married, but are waiting to meet with good Wives of
Gods giving; they are concerned to be careful, as nigh as they can, to choose
such as are so qualified, as to be interessed in the promise here of
preservation and salvation in their childbearing. Plato Cratyl. p. 284. (...),
etc.
derives the Greek word for a Woman, from that which signifies fruitful, and a
beinger forth. And he that seeks such an one to marry with, only in the Lord
1 Cor. 7.39.
, that things may go well with her in her childbearing condition, should
consult well, how she is endowed and stored with the Graces I have been
discoursing of, both for the good of her self, and the seed she may have by
him. It Is certainly of great importance to make choice of such a Yoke Fellow,
as may be assuredly entitled to this good and comfortable word that we have
here before us, for the support of childbearing Wives, in whose* sorrows and
joys, good-natured and conscientious Husbands, cannot but have their shares.

(2.) They who have Wives already, should take special care upon this account,
to discharge the duties of good Husbands toward their childbearing Wives,
with all good fidelity; viz. [1.] To dwell with them according to knowledge,
giving honor unto them as the weaker vessels, and as being heirs together of
the grace of Life, that their prayers be not hindered 1 Pet. 3.7.
: yea, and to labor daily with them, both by their Christian Advice, and Holy
Conversation, to engage their fruitful Wives more and more to the constant
exercise of these Graces and Duties, that their sorrows may be sanctified to
them, and they may see the salvation of God in their breeding and bearing of
children. And if the great and holy God, should in his wise Government, think
it best to take them hence from a childbed, they may learn to submit to his
disposing will, and rest the better satisfied, as having good evidence of their
Souls eternal welfare. [2.] To endeavor as much as may be, to discharge the
parts of good Christian, and tender Husbands, toward their dearest
Yoke-fellows in such a travailing condition; laying much to heart those
antecedent, concomitant, and consequent pains a state of pregnancy involves
them in; which these Husbands themselves, in such a kind, cannot have
experience of. That as it becomes them for the sake of their good and godly
Wives, they may, as is sometimes said of some Sympathizing ones, in a sort,
breed with them, and for them, by putting on, as the elect of God, bowels of
mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering, etc. Col. 3.12.
and fulfill all the Duties of the Relation they are in, readily and timely
providing for them, not only necessaries, but conveniences, as they can, for
their longing appetites, and for the heartning of their dear and suffering
Wives, apt to be cast down under apprehensions of their approaching sorrows,
and call in aid of faithful praying Ministers, and pious Friends, to make
requests known unto God for them. And if God hears prayers, [3.] To be heartily
thankful to God upon his giving safe deliverance to their gracious Wives, from
the pains and perils of childbearing. When the kind Husband has been really
apprehensive of the sicknesses, pains, throws and groans of his dear Wife, in
her breeding and bearing a child to him, by aids from above; nothing can be
more necessarily incumbent on him, than to adore, and be thankful to God, who
has made a comfortable separation betwixt her, and the Fruit of her Womb, and
that as a return to prayer, and harkening unto her groanings. If he who was a
Samaritan, found himself healed of his Leprosy, upon crying unto Christ for
mercy (tho the other nine likely Jews remained unthankful for the same
benefit), came and fell down on his face at Jesus his feet, giving him thanks,
and returning to glorify God with a loud voice Luke 17.15, 16, 17, 18.
, as expressive of his heartiest sense of the Divine Favor in the mercy
received: then certainly the Christian Husband having seen his loving Wife in
the exercise of the Graces I have been discoursing of, to pass through the
peril of childbearing, and admirably preserved therein by Gods power and
goodness, is greatly obliged to return his hearty thanks to God, who has made
good his word wherein he caused them to hope, in granting so signal a mercy.
This giving thanks is acceptable unto God, and a Duty indispensably incumbent
on us Nullum officium magis quam referenda gratia necessarium. Seneca.
, who are charged Ephesians. 5.4, 20.
, to give thanks always for all things unto God, and the Father, in the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ. Much more for a singular Favor earnestly sought for,
and granted through difficulty and peril. Thus briefly I have touched upon the
care of married men, with reference to their childbearing Wives, in the
forementioned Particulars. Again this Doctrine teaches,

2. A Lesson of care to Women. Consider them, as the Men, either in a single,
or a married state.

(1.) If yet in a single, or unmarried state, and by the fair Providence of
God, called to the change of their condition, They are concerned to take care
they may be furnished with the abovementioned qualifications; to covet
earnestly, not only the best Gifts, but to be found in the more excellent way 1
Cor. 12.31.
. This sacred ambition, or holy covetousness, is lawful to Virgins, and may
commend them to good Husbands; i. e. to covet earnestly those excellent Graces
of Faith, Holiness, Charity, and Sobriety, that if they are brought into the
honorable state of marriage, and in due time God do bless them with blooming
hopes of the Fruits of their bodies, and the unknown pains of a woman in
travail come upon them Genesis 38.27. Psalm. 48.6. 1 Samuel 4.19. Micah 4.10.
, they may live by says upon Gods power and promise, and expect salvation in
an happy separation 'twixt them and the Babes God has enabled them to
conceive, in the appointed season. Yea, and then tho their pains should come as
sharply upon any of them as they did upon Rachel, and Phineas his Wife, causing
a separation betwixt their own souls and bodies; their souls may go in a very
sure way, out of a great cross here, to receive a Crown of Glory hereafter.
Believe it, Virgins! These Graces are the necessary qualifications to fortify
your tremulous souls (apt to be full of fear (...), Eurip. in Medea.
) against all Occurrences; if you have the real Ornaments of Christ's Spouse,
you need not torment your selves with carking thoughts; your mystical Husband
will take care of you, to make what you greatly fear, the matter of your joy.

(2.) If you are already married, and that in the Lord, who has opened your
Wombs, and given you power to conceive; it behooves you, as righteous Handmaids
of the Lord, [1.] To continue in the constant exercise of these Graces.
Certainly you who are blessed in being instruments for the propagation of
Mankind, when you find you have conceived, and grow pregnant, are highly
concerned to put on, and use these Ornaments. A great work you are usually
busy about, in preparing your child-bed-linnen; And I shall not discourage,
but rather encourage you to make necessary provision for your tender selves and
babes. I easily yield, according to the instinct of Nature, as other Females
(and with the help of their Mates), you ought to be somewhat indulged to make
ready, and feather your Nests, wherein to lay your selves and your young Luke
9.58.
. But the Modesty and Moderation you have heard of, will not allow you above
your rank to be costly in superfluous fine Feathers, when Christ's poor
Ministers and Members, up and down, do expect your Charity. Oh! I beseech you,
good Christian women, let your chief care be (lest you should die in your
sorrows) to be arrayed in that truly spiritual fine linen, clean and white,
which is the righteousness of the Saints, wherewith the Lamb's wife makes her
self ready Rev. 19.8.
. This, this is the principal thing; the Grace of Faith, Charity, Holiness and
Sobriety, speak true Christian prudence. And if you therefore take care to put
on these, you will be the most surely guided in a subordinate care about other
circumstances. And if God has given any of you real proof already of
performing his promise in my Text, by vouchsafing temporal salvation to you, it
behooves you to take care, [2.] To record the Experiments he has given you of
making good his word to you in particular. Has God vanquished your fears,
wiped away your tears, and heard your prayers? Engrave the Memorials of his
goodness and faithfulness upon the tables of your hearts. You have the great
Example of our dear Lord and Master, Jesus Christ, who when he had been greatly
troubled for Lazarus, whom he loved, groaned in spirit, and wept, making his
requests known to his Father on his behalf; which was graciously answered; he
with great devotion of heart, lift up his eyes, and said John 11.41. with ver.
3, 35, 38.
, Father, I thank thee that thou have heard me. Let every ingenuous and
grateful Mother, whom God has safely delivered from her childbearing pains
and peril, imprint a grateful remembrance of so signal a mercy with indeleble
characters in her mind. Lord, thou have regarded the low estate of thine
maiden; when I was in an agony, and wellnigh spent with repeated pains, thou
did stand by me and my babe; yea, thou did admirably help us, making way
for it to pass the bars into this world safely, keeping us both alive; yea, and
it may be, when our friends verily thought with sadness, that my child could
not have seen the light, and I should shortly have shut mine eyes upon it,
being ready to despair of bringing it forth; then did thou find a way for us
both to escape 1 Cor. 10.13.
. When the above-noted Gentlewoman Mrs. Joceline, Oct. 12. 1622.
, was made a Mother of a Daughter, whom shortly after being baptized, and
brought to her, she blessed, and then gave God thanks that her self had lived
to see it a Chrsstian; Having dedicated it to the Lord in his Ordinance, she
accounted it an additional mercy to her bringing her forth, and so would have
it communicated to others support. As Paul, when he was made sensible of great
mercy in his deliverance, by superadded Favors, he thanked God, and took
courage Acts 28.15.
; so should every joyful Mother thank God, and be of good courage for the time
to come: and good, because by how much the more common, the better it is: She
should communicate her rare Experiment to encourage others, who are apt to look
upon themselves as a most miserable Offspring (...), Eurip. in Med.
, when their pangs come upon them, that they may be helped. For well said the
Greek Tragaedian (...), Il. in Helen.
, It becomes one woman to be at hand to help another in her labor. Thus we
briefly see this Doctrine teaches care to men and women, both in a single and
a married-state. It does also,

2. Administer comfort, as to the good Wives themselves, so likewise to the
Husbands of such good Wives.

1. To good Wives themselves, who are qualified, as you have heard; but yet in
an hour of temptation are apt to walk very heavily from pre-apprehensions of
grievous pains; yea, and it may be from great fear of Death in their appointed
sorrows that are coming upon them, grown weary with their heavy burdens.
Whereas a constant abiding in the forementioned Graces and Duties, is a sure
ground of good hope that you shall pass well through your childbed sorrows;
which be sure shall be no obstacle at all to your eternal welfare. And if you
be eternally saved, 'twill be better for you than to be only temporally
delivered. Yes: But you will say, You shall have a rough passage. And if, as
Sabina, a Christian Martyr, when she travailed, being in Prison, you shall cry
out, as she was heard to do in her childbearing throws: whereupon some asked
her, how she would endure the torments her persecutors had prepared for her, if
she shrunk at those? To whom she said, I now bear the punishment of my sin; but
then I shall suffer for my Savior. It may be answered: Notwithstanding, be of
good cheer; The Apostle certainly brings in my Text, as an Antidote against
discouragement, and to cheer up suspicious and fearful women. They are
heart-reviving words to every drooping woman, and should lead her, with Sarah,
to judge him faithful who has promised Heb. 11.11.
: whereupon she may, notwithstanding her state of subjection and sorrows, be
humbly confident in this great work of serving her Generation according to the
will of God, in childbearing, of preservation and salvation; and God will lay
no more upon her, than he will enable her to bear; and find a way for her
escape, either by a comfortable sanctified deliverance here, or a blessed
translation to Heaven, to reap in joy what was sown in tears; and those but
temporary, when the joys are eternal. Further, it does administer comfort,

2. To the Husbands of such good Wives; i. e. such as continue in the Graces
and Duties before, and in their pregnancy, or growing big, hoping in Gods word,
that Root and Branch shall do well, being under the blessings of the
New Covenant. When they cannot but sympathize with their Wives in their
sorrows, they may cheer up in humble confidence, that the sting being took out
of the punishment, their Wives joys shall be increased by the pains they
undergo; and that God will deliver them, and hear their prayers, and they shall
glorify him John 16.21. Psalm. 50.15.
. And if after prayers and tears, their dearest consorts should decease, and
depart from them, out of their childbearing pains: Tho this be a most cutting,
and heavy cross in it self; yet comfort may be gathered from it in the issue.
For indeed that is the comfort of comforts, which affords Life in Death: that is
the Honey which is taken out of the dead carcass. That, supposing the worst
which can befall us in temporals, gives better security in those things which
are eternal. The Fruition of God in Glory, is the highest end; and when we and
ours attain that, after the serving of our Generation here, according to the
will of God, and thereby glorifying his most sacred Majesty, there is matter of
geatest consolation, and truest joy to holy souls. In expectation of which, let
pious Husbands, and gracious Childing Wives, in their mutual Offices wait upon
God with submission for a sanctified support, when they stand in most need of
divine aids. Then such Handmaids of the Lord may humbly hope they shall
receive help in and under their childbearing travail, and in due time, even a
temporal deliverance (supposing that to be best for them) from those pains and
perils, taking comfort from that gracious word of the Lord by the Prophet (tho
spoken upon another account) Isa. 41.10.
, with which I shall conclude; Fear thou not, for I am with thee: be not
dismayed, for I am thy God: I will strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee; yea,
I will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness.

SERMON XXV. Quest. How may we best know the worth of the SOUL?
MATTHEW 16.26. For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole World,
and lose his own Soul. Or what shall a man give in Exchange for his Soul?
IN the Twenty first verse of this Chapter, our Savior foretells his
sufferings, together with many considerable Circumstances; as the Place where,
at Jerusalem: The Persons from whom, the Elders and chief Priests, and Scribes:
The Degree unto which he must suffer; not only that he must suffer many things,
but that he was to suffer unto death, and be killed: by which enumeration of so
many particulars, he spoke more plainly, and preached to them the unwelcome
Doctrine of the Cross.

A Doctrine so strange unto them, as they had shown themselves of a quite
contrary Opinion, expecting a worldly Kingdom, and hoping for considerable
advancement in it.

Peter, in the name of the rest, therefore cavils at it, and enveighs against
it; and was probably suffered to be tempted himself, and to become a Tempter to
our Savior, that he might not be exalted above measure for what our Savior
had said, ver. 17, 18. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my
Church.

But our Blessed Savior, who had overcome the Devils temptations, when they
came immediately from himself, Matthew. 4. could not be overcome by them, now
they are suggested to him by another; but shows that he continued his
Resolution of suffering the utmost for us, by his severe check given unto Peter
under a smart compellation, Satan.

This is that very same Apostle, who but a few verses before, had his Name
changed from Simon to Peter, and presently after here from Peter to Satan, to
show how much he and all other differ, when mightily assisted by Gods Grace and
Spirit, from themselves, when left to themselves; and become as other, if not
worse than other men.

And how easily do we slide into sin at unawares, and how carefully need we to
watch over our very zeal for Christ, and Goodness, when our very best
Affections are subject to so gross mistakes, and may deserve such severe
reproofs?

Upon this occasion it was that our Savior in stead of retracting his former
resolves, declares that he was not to be alone in them, but they should all
come to be of his mind; and be conformed to his Will. Nay, that if they would
be his Disciples in deed ver. 24. If any man will come after me, i. e. be in
deed my Disciple; (alluding to the manner and custom of the Eastern Countries,
when the Master, or Rabbi was wont to go with his Scholars attending after him)
he must not only forego his Ease, and resign his Will, but leave his life (in
these things denying of himself, as if his present pleasure, or advantage were
to be considered no longer of) when they stood in opposition to Gods Glory, or
our Souls good.

And this is not only, or barely asserted, but convincingly proved; least the
Disciples shall cry again, this is a hard saying, (as if ever they had cause to
say so, they had on this occasion:) Our Blessed Savior is willing to abide the
Trial upon this Issue, and to have it judged and determined by themselves.
Appealing in the words of the Text to their rational and wise faculties, For
what is a man profited if he should gain the whole world, and lose his own
Soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his Soul?

In which words, as to the form of them.

1. Our Judgment, and Consciences are called upon, (being we do so often
vilify our Souls, and prefer the little things of this world, now one thing,
then another; before them) to show cause for our so doing, and to bring forth
our strong Reasons.

Of all sorts and ways of arguing, this came most home, and is closest: when we
are allowed to be as it were both Judge and Party; and yet must condemn our
selves.

This manner of Speech is only used when the case is very plain and obvious:
And we care not who hear it, or determine it.

Thus God calls upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah to judge
betwixt him and his Vineyard. Isa. 5.3. His Vineyard were themselves in a
Figure, and God is willing the case should be referred to their own
determination; if they would give themselves time and leisure to think of it:
So Amos 2.11. Is it not even thus O ye Children of Israel says the Lord? as if
God had said, I call your own Consciences to witness, and let them but speak,
they will testify both my Mercies to you, and your sins against me; or as
elsewhere, Ezekiel. 18.25. Are not my ways equal, and your ways unequal?

And oh that men would consider how self-condemned they must needs be for all
their sins against God, and all their neglects of Salvation, and disregards of
their Souls; their sins usually go thus beforehand unto Judgment, and men
cannot but condemn themselves, who can think but that a humble, useful,
temperate, pious Life is far better than a proud, useless, luxurious and
profane Conversation? Would we but show our selves men in the concerns of our
Souls, as we do in those of our Bodies or Estates, acting with that caution,
and concern in the one, as we do in the other; what a vast change should we
soon discover? for all Gods Commandments are for our good, and his ways are
pleasantness, would we but seriously view and consider them.

Howsoever this is that which will make the Worm to gnaw, and the fire to burn
the ungodly in the other World; in that they have sinned against those notices
of good and evil which they had, or might have had; and in that they have put
no difference between their vile bodies, and their precious Souls; whereas our
Savior here appeals to them concerning the worth of their Souls, and the
worthlesness of all things comparatively besides.

2. From the form or manner of expression here used by way of a positive
interrogation, or Expostulation: What is a man profited? or what shall a man
give? We observe that the Negation is intended to be more vehement. It being
usual not only in Scripture, but in common speech; by a positive question
vehemently to deny, as by a negative question vehemently to affirm any thing,
as by these Scriptures before quoted, Amos 2.11, 18. Ezekiel. 25. amongst many
other places may appear: so that the sense of these words amounts to this.

1. It is most evident, and undeniable that if any man could gain the whole
World (not that such a thing was ever done, or is indeed possible, but) upon
that supposition, he would be a vast loser by it, if he lost his Soul for it.
Because

2. There is nothing of worth or value sufficient to exchange for a Soul with
all.

Now this Text is as it were a balance, or pair of Scales, in which the
Commodities therein spoken of, are weighed.

1. In the one Scale is laid the whole world; 1 Jo. 2.16.
here you may take in the lust of the Flesh, the lust of the Eye, and the Pride
of Life, or whatsoever serves for Pleasure, Gain, or Honor, (the worldly man's
Trinity.) Abate nothing, make good weight, more than was ever weighed out to
any one; but supposed or granted only for Arguments sake: Yet here is a Mean:
Mean writ against it, it is weighed, and found too light. It is touched, and
found under value.

2. In the other Scale only a single Soul, is put (yours, or mine;) and that
does so far praeponderate, and outweigh, or outvie the whole World, as that
there is no comparison betwixt them, nothing is of value to be given, or taken
in Exchange for any of them. As to the former of these, the World, and the
Glory of it: Our present purpose is to take no further notice of it.

Sic transit gloria mundi. The Moon is not worth the looking after whilst the
Sun appears, nor all these fading changeable things, when the Soul comes under
consideration. Gal. 6.14.
It is now expected that the World should be crucified to us, and we to the
World; and then only we shall be able to hear, i. e. to understand what our
Savior here says concerning our Souls, which being my intended Subject: I
shall take occasion from his words to speak to these following Particulars.

1. What is meant by the Soul here spoken of? 2. What this Soul here spoken of,
is? 3. In what (more particularly) the worth of this Soul does appear?
As to the first of these, viz.

1. What is meant by the Soul.
What is meant by a Soul, in the Text? To mention no other acceptions of the
word than such as may be accommodated to this place, and our present purpose.

(1.) Soul (or (...) the word here used) is put for Life; by a Metonymy of the
Efficient for the Effect, because our Life depends upon the Soul; thus Matthew.
6.25. take no thought for your Lives; when the same word is used, which is here
translated Soul; which well considered, will give a great light into the
meaning of this place.

For these words are looked upon as a proverbial Speech taken out of Job 2.4.
All that a man has will he give for his Life. As if our Savior had from
thence inferred, if a man being in an apparent danger of a corporal Death,
would give any thing, or do any thing to prolong or redeem his Life; how much
more should a man do or part with to prevent an Eternal Death, or to procure an
Everlasting Life?

(2.) The word Soul is put for the Whole Man (Synecdoche Partis) frequently in
Scripture; thus Genesis 46.26. The number of Persons that came with Jacob into
Egypt are reckoned by so many Souls, as also Act. 2.41. They that were
Converted by St. Peter's Sermon are counted three thousand Souls.

This if considered, furthers our present purpose, and must needs add to our
esteem of our Souls; for the Soul is the Man. Our Souls are our selves; and
what by this Evangelist our Savior calls losing of the Soul: in Luke 9.25.
That Evangelist relating the same thing, calls losing of our selves. The Body
is but the House or Cabinet, the Soul is the Jewel in it; the Body is but the
clothing (...), that the Soul for a while is clothed with, and must put off.

(3.) This word Soul is taken most properly and strictly for the Form,
constituent, and better part of Man; that Breath that is breathed into him from
God, Genesis 2.7.
when Man becomes a Living Soul. And in this acception we shall take this word
here in our following Discourse, and are come to enquire what it is.

2. What this Soul is.
But we shall not be thoroughly able to satisfy our inquiry; for being all our
knowledge arises from our Senses, and there is nothing in our Understanding,
which was not first in one of them. Our Souls not incurring into our Senses,
Our understanding is at a loss to frame any adaequate conceptions of them.

There are three things reckoned amongst the (...) such things as cannot be
known, and by consequence be defined, and they are 1. God, 2. Angels, 3. Humane
Souls: and this does very much set forth the Excellency of our Souls; that they
are only to be known as God himself, or the Angels are to be known; that is,

1. By way of Eminency: When we affirm that Being is in a more excellent manner
in them, than in any visible thing.

2. By way of Negation: When we deny those Imperfections to be in them which
are in matter, as Corruptibility.

3. By their Effects: Which are manifest even to our Senses; so that it is as
certain that we have such Souls, as it is not so demonstratively certain what
they are. Yet we may so far define a Humane Soul, as to express the Conception
which we have of it. I shall only set down St. Austins definition of such a
Soul. libr. de immortalitate animae.
Est substantia quaedam rationis particepss, regendo Corpori accommodata. It is
a rational substance, fitted for the government of the Body.

But because as it is said of God, it may be said of the Soul; None has seen a
Soul at any time: and therefore as there are many that say there is no God. So
there are as many which say there is no Soul (both having the same Friends and
Enemies, the very same affirmers or denyers) I shall be more particular in
several conclusions concerning this subject, our Souls.

1. We assert that the Soul is a distinct substance from the Body, 1. The Soul
is a distinct substance from the Body.
which will appear if we consider that such things as are proper to distinct
substances (as to dwell in the body whilst a man lives, to leave the body when
he dies,) are attributed to the Soul; and this is not the saying or opinion of
some one, or a few persons, who though eminent, might be singular and opine
according to their fancies or prejudices; but it has been at all times, and in
all Nations (as an universal tradition) held undeniably by all considering, and
thinking men, and they speak accordingly.

2. That the Soul is a substance and distinct from the Body, appears in that it
does substare, i. e. is the Subject of Accidents, such as are Virtue, and Vice,
Arts and Sciences; which cannot inhere in bare matter. It is not from the Body
that a Man is Learned or Ignorant, but from his Mind.

3. The Soul is thus distinct from the Body, in that it was made after the
Body. Thus Moses speaks of the Creating of the Soul distinctly after the
forming of the Body: Genesis 2.7. And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the
Earth, that is, his Body, which was dust, and shall return to dust; and then he
adds, he breathed into his Nostrils the breath of Life. His Body or Nostrils
were made before the Soul was breathed into him; and his Soul was breathed into
him by a distinct Act of Divine Power from that which made his Body.

4. The Soul of Man is a different substance from his Body, because it does
exist separately from the Body. Though I will not say with the Platonists, that
the Souls of Man had a being before their Bodies: Yet it is certain they
continue their being after that they have left their Bodies; this the wiser
Heathen were not wholly ignorant of, whose Testimonies (as all things of that
Nature upon this occasion I forbear to meddle with) are full, and plain in this
Case. It suffices us Christians that our Lord and Master supposes this as most
certain in the Parable of the rich Glutton, ( Luke 16.19, 20.) in which there
are no less than three instances to prove the Souls existence after the Death
of the Body. Abraham, Dives, and Lazarus, and though this is indeed a Parable,
and Symbolical Scripture is not Argumentative. Yet so far must be granted true,
as may make a foundation for the scope and intent for which it was spoken.

But what is beyond any cavil or exception. Our Savior tells the Thief upon
the Cross, Luke 23.43. Verily to day thou shall be with me in Paradise. It is
certain his Body was not with our Saviors; that it might appear our Savior
(not any other) did arise, God so provided, that he was laid in a new Tomb, in
which none ever was laid before; Neither could our Savior mean that he should
be with his Godhead in Paradise that day; for at that very instant in which he
spoke, in that place, and in all places Christ as God is present. Had this man
gone to Hell, the words in this sense had been true, but not comfortable to
this dying Confessor. They can only therefore relate to his Souls going to the
place of the Blessed, when it should that day leave its Body.

2. The Soul is a Spiritual substance.
2. We may advance a little further toward the knowledge of our Souls, in
asserting that they are Spiritual, or Spirits, freed from that composition, and
those druggs that are in matter, which clogs, and debase it; and it is no small
perfection of the Soul that it is freed from them: My meaning is, The Soul of
man is not the Temperament, libr. de immortalitate animae.
or Crasis of the Body. St. Austin thinks that every one may easily be
convinced of this in himself, Quis been se inspiciens, etc. Who, says he,
considering himself, does not find that he understands any thing he ponders on
the better, the more he can withdraw his thoughts from sensible Objects. Quod
si temperatio corporis esset animus, non utique id possit accidere. If the Soul
were the Temper of the Body, it would not fall out thus, for bodily or sensible
things would help them, rather than hinder the Understanding.

But I shall be engaged to a further proof of it which these following
Arguments may evince. Were it only that the Soul is so often called a Spirit
(by God himself in his word.) It were a very considerable Argument to prove
that it is a Spirit. (...) Plato in Crat.
When Adam gave all the Creatures Names, who doubts but that those Names were
suitable to their Natures? And could that Nomenclature be retrived, it might
tell us more of Beasts and Fowls than is yet, or it may be now ever will be
known.

But when God speaks so often of a Soul under the notion of a Spirit; and in
many places where a Metaphorical sense will not serve the turn, we cannot but
know that the Soul is what God calls it, as well as the Creatures were what
Adam called them.

To name but a few Texts: The wise man speaking of the Soul, Gal. 12.7. Calls
it the spirit, and says it returns to God that gave it, in contradistinction to
the Body, which he calls there dust: and if Solomon knew the several Creatures,
from the Cedar to the Hysope, surely he was not so ignorant of the nature of
his Soul, as to speak so impertinently if it be not a Spirit.

Nay it is one of Gods Titles, Zech. 12.1. ult. That he forms the spirit of
man within him: Which proves its distinction from the Body, and its spiritual
Nature too: and if man's Soul were only as the Soul of a Beast, the forming of
it would not deserve to be reckoned up with those stupendous Acts of stretching
out the Heavens, and laying the foundations of the Earth; as we see it is in
the forecited place.

Add to this that when our Blessed Savior dyed, the Evangelist says he gave up
the Ghost. Matthew. 27.50. that is, his Spirit or Soul: And St. Stephen dyed with
these last words, Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Acts 7.59.

2. That the Soul is a spiritual substance, is evident, in that it is not
produced out of matter; as the Body of Adam was, and all our Bodies are; as is
observed in the Relation we have of man's Creation* Genesis 2.7. and in Solomon's
Observation upon it, Eccles. 12.7. speaking of Death, (after his most admired
description of Old Age) then says he shall the dust, i. e. the body, return to
the Earth as it was; there is the Original of that assigned, and the spirit
shall return to God that gave it. The Spirit or Soul is as certainly made by
God out of no praeexisting matter, as the Body is made out of matter, Genesis 2.23.
and if we grant the one, why should we doubt of the other? To be sure, when
Eve was brought unto Adam, he says she is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my
flesh, but he does not say she is a Soul of my Soul.

Whether the Soul be made by God, mediante Generatione, or by an immediate
Creation, (though I am persuaded of the latter, yet) I shall not peremptorily
determine, Nec tum scitbam, nec adhuc scio August. libr. 1. Retr.
finding St. Austin in a plainer case concerning the Soul, modestly professing
his Ignorance.

3. My third Argument to prove the Soul is a Spirit, is, because in it man
bears the Image of God. God is a Spirit, John 4.24. and nothing corporeal, as
such, can be said to be in his Image or Likeness: Neither is any bodily thing
as bodily, capable of Wisdom, Holiness, Righteousness, by which man resembles
his Maker.

Now though these Scripture-proofs are sufficient to any that believe
undoubtedly the verity of Scripture, (and such I speak to) yet to name one or
two of another Nature; Therefore,

4. Fourthly, The Actions or Operations of the Soul are such, as cannot proceed
from any bodily Being; as intellection, and volition; To abstract and reflect
upon its self, and its motions. In one thought to meditate on Hell, in the next
on Heaven. No Corporeal Agent can in less than the twinkling of an Eye, or turn
of a hand move, or act on things so vastly distant. The Opinion of the motion
of the Orbs of the Planets and of the Firmament is antiquated, and almost
laughed at because no Bodies can be conceived to move so swiftly: and this
motion of the Soul incredibly exceeds theirs.

5. And lastly, The Soul is a Spirit, in that it is in the Body, and one Body
cannot be in another, non datur penetratio corporum. The Soul takes up no place
as bodies do, it is tota in toto or at least negatively. It is not by parts in
the Body, as material things are; part here, and part there; whereas the Soul
is so in any part, that it is not the less in the other: Thus these being
premised

3. In what the Souls Excellency does appear.
I come now to that which is mainly intended, viz. to show whence we may know
the excellency of the Soul; For as to some other particulars which may tend to
the further explaining the Text. As

1. How a Soul may be said to be lost. And

2. What this Phrase, giving an exchange for the Soul; imports, I shall take
occasion to speak to them as they will fall with what we are yet to speak unto,
For I would not make the Porch or Entry too large or wide.

Though I may suppose that in what I have said enough may be discovered to
prove what I am upon, and that I have laid down such Principles as the worth of
the Soul may easily be inferred from them. Yet it will not be amiss to be
minded of the force of them, with the addition of such things as will
abundantly serve our present purpose.

1. In its Original.
The first thing that speaks the Souls Prerogative, is its Original. It is
accounted no small privilege to be nobly born, to be descended from Princes,
or Persons Eminent in any kind, yet man in his best Estate is altogether
vanity. Ps. 39.5. Man is a worm, Job. 25.6. and the Son of man (be he who he
will) is but a Worm, his Generation is univocal, and like begets its like. But
the Soul is the Offspring of God. Acts 17.29. In that sense the Heathen Poet,
and St. Paul from him is to be understood, there is no pretense for the Body to
be the Offspring of God, who is a Spirit. If it be warily understood, we may
admit of what is ordinarily said of the Soul, that it is divinae aurae
particula, I am sure it is this part only in man that may be said to partake of
the Divine Nature. (2 Pet. 1.4.)

It Is remarkable that the Soul at its Creation was not made according to any
pattern, or sampler taken from amongst the herd of the visible Creatures, but
it is a kind of an Idea of God, as true, and as full a one; as in matter can be
borne, and though man be lower than the Angels by reason of his Body which is
as a clog upon the Soul, or a flaw which this precious Jewel appears with. Yet
in some respect the Humane Nature may vy with the Angelical Nature, and man is
the Crown and Topstone of the Creation; being added last of all by the all-wise
Architect to his building of the World.

In the End it is designed for.
2. The Excellency of our Souls appears from the End they are designed for. It
cannot but speak the dignity of the Soul, that it alone, of all the Creatures
is chosen and set apart by God for such great purposes. As 1. To glorify him.
2. To enjoy him.


Men though otherwise of the lowest rank are ennobled when their Prince
appoints them to Honorable Employments. Now

1. The Soul of Man is made for to bring glory to God; Not as the body of Man,
only as an Instrument, which moves as the Soul would have it, as the Ax in the
hand of the Workman, nor as the other visible Creatures who glorified God only
as they afford us matter for Gods glory; but all the Glory that God expects, or
can reap from all and every one of the Corporal Beings is entrusted with Man.
Man is the Creatures High Priest, and by him they offer up all their Sacrifices
of Praise and Thanks. When in Psalm. 148. the Sun and Moon, nay, Storms and
Tempests are called upon to praise God, Man is cited to meditate on, and to
glorify God for his Wisdom and Power which appear in them. And indeed were it
not for the Soul of man, God should have made all the rest of the Creatures for
naught; Man is only concerned in them, and benefited by them; and his Soul only
able to bless God for them.

All Gods works of Creation, nay, and of Providence too, are matter of praise,
so done, as they ought to be had in remembrance. (Ps. 111.4.) When we
contemplate or meditate upon them, they afford our Souls great cause to be
enlarged in our praising of several of the Attributes of God: All things are
Deo plena. All things have a voice as well as day and night. The Heavens and
the Firmament, Ps. 19.1, 2. They speak God to be Almighty, and abundant in
goodness; they tell us, as often as we view or consider them, that God who made
and preserves them is worthy of all our Fear, and Love, Service and Obedience.
It is only the Soul of man that is able to read, hear, or understand these
things; and therefore man for his Souls sake (as the Priests had) have many
privileges allotted to him by God. ( Ps. 8.6.) who has put the other
Creatures (generally) under his feet.

It is sadly true that men rob God of his Honor they are entrusted with.

Ah whose Soul is a faithful Steward of Gods manifold gifts? What Sacrilege do
not men commit daily? And may we lay it to heart? For God will call Heaven and
Earth else to witness against us. Every Creature, and Providence can testify
they contained matter enough to excite our praises, and to persuade our
Obedience.

2. Again the Soul of man is made capable to enjoy God, to see God, that is, to
know him, and love him, in whose presence there is fullness of joy. ( Ps.
16.11.) The Sun and Planets, with the rest of the spangles of Heaven know not
their Maker, nor what they are, nor to what end they serve; they, (how bright
soever) are not receptive of that light that shines into the hearts; and upon
the Souls of the Children of Men; if compared with which, their brightest beam
is thick darkness, were it only for our viaticum (the repast we have on the
road toward Heaven.)

The Soul indeed sees here as through a glass darkly, 1 Cor. 13.12. and knows
but in part, yet this very taste is better than the full meal that any other
Creature can make: Yet it must be confessed that anima male habitat, the Soul
is uneasy in this World, not only with grieves and cares, but because it is out
of its place, as a bone out of joint. It was made to be with God, and cannot be
satisfied when it is from God. But what an excellent Creature must that be,
whom the King of Heaven, and God of Glory should thus delight to honor: which
God should* (may I speak such a word) choose for his Companion: I am sure we
are said to have fellowship with him. 1 John 1.3. Whatsoever the Soul was
before, by choosing and admitting it into his presence, God makes it glorious.

Hence it is that inferior Creatures are satisfied with food suitable to them;
they have saved their End, and have gone to the utmost of their line, according
to the Law of their Creation, to their Creators praise; But the Soul of man is
upon the Rack, and has a thousand torments till it answers his end,
Irrequietum est cor meum donec venit ad te; until it brings actively some Glory
unto God, and comes in some measure to the enjoyment of God.

That Life, or Soul, which inferior Creatures have, keeps indeed their bodies
from putrefying; but man has not animam pro Sale: His Soul only as salt to
keep his Body from stinking; but to act and govern it that it may be an
Instrument in the service, and to the praise of God, and by reason of this, his
Tongue, and every Member may be made his Glory, when it is employed to the Glory
of God. It is certainly a debasement of the Soul to busy it about Eating and
Drinking, Dressing, or Undressing (further than what is necessary to our
preservation and our passage through this world as Pilgrims and Strangers.) as
we think Children to employ their Souls ill whilst they make Pyes of dirt; or
run after gay pubbles made up of froth or stime: Only here is the difference,
young ones are scarce capable of knowing or doing better, the wings of their
Souls seem not fledged, but afterward God justly expects that we should fly
higher, and we are able to soar above the third Heavens; and in our Thoughts,
Meditations and Affections to go to God; to taste and see how good that he is,
Ps. 34.8.

^. The Endeavors that are used for to gain Souls.
The Pretiousness of the Soul appears in the great Endeavors that are used to
get it; This is the standard that we value all things by: What is given for
them? What is done to obtain them? Insomuch that many think there is a great
indifferency in Metals, and Stone, etc. and that opinion sets the rate on them;
by this, Gold and Silver are esteemed before Lead, or Iron, etc. Now though the
Soul has an essential innate worth, as appears by what has been said: Yet
this, if I may call it extrinsecal consideration does further prove it. For,

It Is mainly desired by God on the one hand, and by Satan on the other; and
though the Devil be a fallen Angel, yet he has the greatest knowledge of the
Nature and worth of things; and is from thence called (...). But,

1. God endeavors to win Souls; 1. Gods Endeavors.
this he condescends to woo and entreat for. My son give me thy heart. Prove.
23.26. But to be more, particular (though we are not able to apprehend all the
means God uses for our Souls: Yet so many will easily come into our view, that
if we were not the most ungrateful and insensible Creatures in the World; we
could not deny our Souls to God, he so loves and values them; he has done, and
does daily so much for them. Above all

1. God's parting with his Son, and Christ with his Heart-Blood and Life for
them. Behold how he loved him, could they say when our Savior shed but a few
tears for Lazarus, but much more when he shed all the blood in his Body for our
Souls: We may well say, behold how he loved them. When man by sin had
incurred the displeasure, and deserved the Curse and Wrath of God; and that
the blood of Bulls and Cattle, or a thousand Bulls were too mean to atone for
the least Transgression: God requiring a greater price for the Redemption of a
lost Soul. Our Blessed Savior cries, Lo I come to do thy Will. (Heb. 10.7.)
that is, to give satisfaction, and to bring in Everlasting Righteousness, that
these precious Souls may not perish.

Christ never interposed to save the Bodies, so many Thousands or Millions of
such as perished in the deluge of the old World, or to keep the bodies from
destruction of those wretches that perished by fire in Sodom and Gomorrah, but
when Souls were in danger, and rather than they should perish; he comes, nay,
he delights to do God's Will in suffering for them. And what did he suffer,
what did he not suffer? Here we must draw a vail as that Painter did, who could
not express grief enough to the life.

Go with Christ a little, (cannot ye watch an hour with him) to contemplate
this; go into the Garden, to the Judgment seat, to Golgotha; behold him on the
Cross, hear his strong sighs and groans; they will break thy heart if any thing
will; and broken it must be; and why did God suffer his beloved Son in whom he
was well pleased to be thus tormented? Why? God would rather afflict him for a
time, than lose our Souls for ever: And why did Christ, who might have chosen
otherwise, so freely give his cheeks to the smiters? Why? Only he had set his
love upon our Souls, which he would not suffer to perish.

Indeed the Text supposes that there is no (...) or exchange for a Soul; it is a
Phrase borrowed from former times, when men did not pay in coin for what they
bought, but did exchange Commodity for Commodity, (as yet in some of our
Islands etc.) and it does imply, that there is nothing, no, not the World, that
bears a parity of value with the Soul. Now though this be most certainly true,
that our Soul out-vyes in worth the whole World: (1 Pet. 1.18, 19.) Yet the
Blood of Christ, which is the Blood of God (by reason of the Hypostatical Union
of his Humane Nature with the Divine) is a sufficient ransom for all the Souls
that shall believe in him; nay it is sufficient, were it but applied, for the
whole World.

But how highly does God prize a Soul, seeing that when they were to be
purchased, he asked, and would receive no less a rate for it, from his own Son,
than his Lifeblood, and yet men barter it away (as Judas and the Priests did
our Savior for thirty pence) at what rate, how low soever the Devil and the
World will give for it.

2. I might add unto God's giving of his Son for our Souls; his giving of his
spirit to the Soul; and this too that it might not perish, but have Everlasting
Life, that he who dwelt in the highest Heavens, and whom the Heaven of Heavens
is not able to contain, should dwell in the Soul, or Heart of man after a more
excellent manner, than in the most glorious Temple that ever was made; and
therefore it must as far exceed it. It is true, our Bodies are said to be
Temples of the Holy Ghost, (1 Cor. 3.16. 1 Cor. 6 19.) but they are only
Temples of the Holy Ghost as they are the Bodies that are animated by such
Souls, otherwise they had been no more dignifyed than any other clay or earth.

That God should come, and knock, and stay, and wait for entrance into our
Souls until (to speak with Scripture after the manner of men,) his head is wet
with the dew of the morning, and be grieved at any repulse, unkindness, or
denial he meets with. Nay that God, where he is entertained, should never leave
or depart from a Soul: Nay, with his good will would not absent himself for one
moment from it; It must needs declare his great love unto it, and esteem of it:
Nay, by thus loving of it, he makes it worthy, and valuable, whatsoever it
might otherwise have been.

3. God's valuing of our Souls appears in the care and pains which he takes for
our Souls daily.

1. In that he has instituted means whereby he might come to obtain our Souls,
nay, to strengthen, and comfort them, and have communion with them. These are
his Ordinances, the Word, Sacraments, and Prayer. He is brought in by the
Prophet as one rising up early, and sending his Messengers, and Ministers:
(Jer. 7.13, 25.) He neglects no time, with the very first he is as it were,
seizing upon us, and crying to us, return, why will ye dye?

2. Nay secondly, He bears with us, and exercises a great deal of patience
toward us; if so be he might at length gain our Souls; and says, when shall it
once be? Every sin we commit presses God, as a Cart is pressed with sheaves.
All the Patience and meekness in all the best of Creatures if joined together,
could not endure such an indignity as every sin offers to God, but they would
ease themselves of such a burden, which yet God endures multitudes of, only
that his Long-suffering might be Salvation to our Souls. (2 Pet. 3.15.)

3. Yet further, His bearing with the whole World of wicked men;
notwithstanding their Blasphemies, and open defyances of him, is only out of
Love to some few Souls who serve, and fear him: Hence the Psalmist says
concerning the World, ( Psalm. 75.3.) I bear up the Pillars of it. A gracious
Soul is the true Atlas that keeps the World from falling. God, out of respect
unto such, withholds that destroying fire that shall (when their number is made
up) consume it.

4. And lastly, All the Providence of God, in which he works hitherto, are
intended by him for the good of our Souls, and done by God out of respect unto
them.

1. By his Mercies God would allure our Souls to love and serve him; ( Hosea
11.4. Plaintus.
) these are the Cords of a man (quo magis extendas eo astrugunt arctius) by
these God would oblige and tie our Souls the closer unto him. Mercies are
vocal, they all have a Language or Speech (which we ought to learn to
understand) whereby they recommend God unto our Souls, and as they came from
God; so for this purpose they came from him, that our Souls might by their
means go to God, who indeed sent them on that very errand to bring our Souls
unto him.

2. Nay the very Judgments of God in the World prove his value for our Souls,
who rather than miss of them, does this his strange work. (Isa. 28.21.) God
does not afflict willingly, but rather than to be deprived of men's Souls, he
will do that which he is so loath to come unto. Thus he does not only afflict
the wicked, who obstinately remain so, to caution and instruct the Souls of his
people, (as Princes Children are lessoned when their Proxyes are whipped) but he
corrects his dearest Children and Servants, though it goes to his heart, and he
himself is afflicted in all their afflictions, (Isa. 63.9.) Yet rather than
their Souls should perish with the world, he is ready to do, nay to suffer any
thing.

But when all is said, these are but a few shreds of what might be laid before
you. God's Love to, and prizing of our Souls need not so much to be proved, I
would hope that it is felt.

2. But on the other side as God does endeavor, 2. Endeavors used by Satan
for our Souls.
so does Satan to gain the Soul; fas est and ab hosts doceri. We may learn
this from our greatest Enemy, that our Souls are worth all our care and pains
in keeping; being our Adversary the Devil thinks no pains too great to get
them; 1 Pet. 5.8. He goes up and down, seeking whom he may devour. He
compasses the Earth as we may read in the book of Job. (Job. 1.7. Job 2.2.) He
had considered Job, and so considers all others, what temptation is likest to
prevail; what their tempers, and distempers are: what traps will take some, and
what snares others. He knows our beloved sins, and dresses them up, so as we
might be loath to part with them. He did not desire to go into the herd of
Swine, that he might destroy them; but that by that means he might tempt their
owners, as indeed it took effect (the Gadarens preferring their Swine before
their Souls or their Savior.) When our Savior came to cast him out of any
one, the Devil was tormented: Why art thou come to torment us they cry; it was
not because they were forced to leave their Bodies, but because by that means
he should have no such opportunity to mischief their Souls: ( Matthew. 8.29. Luke
8.28.) Oh this is a torment to Satan to be deprived of our Souls.

There is not a Sermon we hear, but this Evil One is ready to take away the
seed as soon as ever it is sown; ( Matthew. 13.19.) there is not a Prayer we
make, but these fowls of air attend to light upon the Sacrifice, and hardly can
they be driven away. ( Genesis 15.11.) Wheresoever we are, whatsoever we do, the
Devil attends and waits for advantage against us, that he might but gain our
Souls.

And oh that men were but so industrious to preserve their Souls as Satan is to
ruin them. The Philistines are upon thee, and do thou sleep? The Thieves
are up that intend to rob thee, and do not thou arise? Satan does not do all
this for nothing, or for that which is worth but little: This Eagle does not
catch at Flies, he hunts for the precious Soul.

4. The duration of our Souls.
4. There is one Argument more to prove the Excellency of our Souls, and that
is, if you consider their duration or lasting. It is as a dead color upon all
the beauties and glories in the World that they are fading; there is a worm at
the root of the Gourd which men delight in, and set with greatest content
under: Insomuch as it is not yet resolved whether our comfort is greater whilst
we have these outward things, or our grief when we part from them; to be sure
the one must needs bear proportion unto the other; and the more any thing is
loved, the loather we are to leave it.

Now that the Soul transcends in this respect the World and all that is in it.
(It being to remain when they shall be no more,) may appear from the nature of
the Soul, which admits not those contrary qualities, which acting upon one
another, destroy their subject in which they are. There are many Treatises to
prove the Immortality of the Soul; which I will not so much as mention, only
one Argument Bernard uses, Libro de Anima.
because I find it not elsewhere, I shall set down here. Immortalis anima est,
quoniam cum ipsa sibi vita sit, sicut non est quo cadat a se, sic non est quo
cadat a vita. The Soul of man being life unto its self, as it cannot part with
its self, so it cannot part with its life; the body therefore dies, because it
has its life not in its self, but from the Soul; which it may be severed from;
but the Soul lives not by virtue of its union with the Body, but the Body lives
by virtue of its union with the Soul. I am the less intent upon my proving of
this, because all thinking men do grant it. Nay, it is an Antecedent verity to
the Christian Religion, unless our Souls be immortal, our faith is vain: and
all those absurdities will follow which the Apostle reckons up, 1 Cor. 15. as
the consequents of denying the Resurrection of the Body.

Nay unless the Soul be immortal, all Religion is but imposture, and we are
designed upon and abused when we are called upon, and persuaded to the
worshipping and serving of God; so that it is indeed as necessary forus to
believe our Souls to be immortal, as it is necessary for us to believe that
there is a God; and either a good man's hope, or a wicked man's fears are
sufficient Evidences of both. That there is another life, or a future state
after this life: a good man would not but believe, and a wicked cannot but
believe: They are only inconsidering debauched men, whose Lusts and Sins have
made it greatly their Interest, that they might dye like Beasts, as well as
they have lived like them: Who did ever seem to question it? I say, seem to
question it, for their surda vulnera, the wounds that Conscience makes in them,
would not pierce so deep, nor look so sadly, if they had such a lenitive as the
thoughts that they might not be felt in the other world.

But oath Eternity, Eternity? What a shrill and dismal noise do it make in a
wicked man's ear (or heart rather) when heard or thought on, and on the
contrary what melody is it to a gracious man, to hear that his Soul is
immortal, and his Crown incorruptible.

But the Text supposes the Soul may be lost, and what is that else, but that it
dies?

The Soul indeed may be lost, and dye in a figurative sense: Sicut anima vita
est corporis, sic Deus vita est animae. Bern. Libr^^ de Anima.
Take a Soul from the Body, the Body stirrs, breathes, lives no more. So if
Gods Grace and Spirit be not in the Soul, it moves not, but is dead in
trespasses and sins. Sin does that to the Soul, which Diseases, and Mortal
Wounds do to the Body. In the day that thou eatest thereof, i. e. whenever
thou sinnest, thou shall dye. (Genesis 2.17.)

I should here have concluded my Arguments for the preciousness of the Soul;
but I will add one or two more, (ad hominem) which may affect men most
according to what they are usually taken with, and persuaded by. And therefore

5. In the fifth place. The Soul is the cause of that life 5. The Cause of our
Life.
which we so prize, and it preserves that body which we so value; and certainly
then, if ye may be Judges your selves, it is most considerable: What is the
Body of the most beloved Person without the Soul? a stench, and an abomination.
Oh bury her out of my sight says Abraham of his beloved Sarah. (Genesis 23.4.)

What do men take pains and care about? What are they at cost and charge upon?
rising early, and going to bed late, but only for such things as may serve and
please the Body? Which very Body must be beholden to the Soul for to keep it
from becoming worms meat, and rottenness: We might value our Bodies and their
concerns as much as we do, or as we list to do, would it but cause us so much
the more to esteem our Souls as they deserve for keeping our Bodies in a
capacity for our care and kindness.

6. Our Bodies follow their Condition.
6. It is in the last place very considerable as to us, to enhance our opinion
of the Soul, that our Bodies follow the condition of our Souls. As our Souls
are, so shall our Bodies be, when raised up to all Eternity: and therefore St.
Stephen when he was a dying, commends only his Soul to our Savior, ( Acts
7.59.) and our Savior himself in his last breath commends his Spirit or Soul
to his Father; ( Luke 23.46.) neither making any mention of their Bodies: as
knowing that their Bodies by consequence would be happy, that they would be
cared for by God, and raised up in Gods time, to be blessed with their Souls to
all Eternity.

If our Souls be found unbelieving and impenitent, without Gods Image and
favor, all the rich attire, and sumptuous fare will not keep our Bodies, no
more than they did Dives his Body from being tormented in those flames that
shall burn, and none can quench them; on the other side, if our Souls be
sanctified and accepted, notwithstanding any present poverty, disease, or
misery, they shall hereafter sit with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom
of Heaven. Shall I carry this a little further, it may be more home and close
unto you.

The welfare of the Body even in this life depends upon the Soul. As the case
of thy Soul is, so are all those very things that befall thy Body, even in this
world. We judge amiss, and call good evil, and evil good; take all things
together, and stay till the conclusion, and you will then see that all the
prosperity that befell a man, his riches, health, friends, reputation etc. were
all evil, if his Soul be evil; (that is, unpardoned, unregenerated,) oh very
evil. ( Isa. 3.10, 11.) Psalm. 7.11. God is angry with the wicked every day. In
his healthful prosperous days he has the wrath of God; the least drop whereof
will imbitter all his sweets; and this is mixed in the Cup, and is as death in
the Pot: But one that has his Soul pardoned and purged from sin by the Blood
and Spirit of the Son of God. All his very torments and Miseries, if any such
befall him, are, what God in wisdom has chosen for him, ( Romans 8.2, 8.) and in
faithfulness has laid upon him; they are the very best providence that God
could find out for him; thus to the pure, all things are pure, etc. Titus 1.15.

And now I hope that the pretiousness of the Soul being manifest, although I
have all a long enforced my Argumenes as practically as I could; I may yet have
room for the remaining Application which I am now come unto.

APPLICATION.
Informa^^^^
1. If the Soul be so precious, we have heard enough to make us abhor sin for
ever. Sin must needs be the most mischievous thing to us. It being that only
which can ruin our Souls, whereby only we can lose our Souls: Other Evils can
but bereave us of our Estates, or at most of our Lives, but they have no more
mischief which they can do; but sin does deservedly cast Body and Soul into
Everlasting Fire, ( Isa. 59.2.) they are only our iniquities which separate
betwixt God and us; not tribulation, and anguish, etc. no loss or cross, these
can and do work for good, but sin is such a bitter root, that it can bring
forth nothing but bitter fruits. Sin is the Souls sickness, nay, its death;
causing a divorce betwixt it and God, the fountain of its life. Hence it is
said to war against the Soul, (1 Pet. 2.11.) and to pierce the Soul through, (1 Timothy 6.10.) I appeal to any whether they would not detest and oppose those that
should do such things to their Bodies: O fools, and slow of heart to believe.
(Luke 24.25.) If ye will not believe God who has said there is no peace,
nothing truly good, (no Salvation to be sure) to the wicked; believe at least
your selves, who cannot but find, that as sin grows stronger, your Souls grow
weaker, and that by it you forsake your own Mercies, and get Boiles and Ulcers,
nay the Plague in your Souls.

2. This does recommend and endear our Blessed Savior to us, who is the
Savior of our Souls, and the Shepherd of our Souls; and therefore only it is
that they do not want, he washed them in his blood, (1 Pet. 2.25.) and quickens
them by his Spirit, and keeps them by his power, and crowns them with his
glory; to them which believe these things, he is precious, (1 Pet. 2.7.) If ye
value your Souls above the World, ye will value our Savior above all the world
too; for had it not been for his love and care, your Souls had been the
miserablest things in it.

3. This commends Holiness in all its parts to us: Holiness is nothing else but
the right Temper, and Healthful Constitution of the Soul; it is the beauty of
the Soul, without which it is most deformed and loathsome in God's sight.

To be Heavenly and Holy, is to be as God is, and to have the Spirit of Glory
rest upon you; (Heb. 12.14.) nay, without Holiness, none shall see God; For
though there was no defect in the price that Christ paid; he did and suffered
till all was fulfilled; yet if we be wanting in our applying of it, we may
perish; and it will be our sore condemnation that light is come into the World,
and we love darkness: (Colos. 1.27.) it is Christ within us that is our hope of
Glory.

I must not take occasion to commend those comprehensive Graces, Faith and
Repentance unto you; but in a word, as ye love your Souls, value and esteem
them; they are to you as tabula post naufragium, a plank to get safely to shore
withal: If you do not make timo^s use of it, your Souls will be drowned, and
perish Everlastingly.

Godliness is the Souls food, ye cannot live a day without it, or your Souls
will be weak and faint; nay, expire and dye. It is indeed the Souls Life; as
Jacobs Life was bound up in Benjamins life, so is the Souls Life bound up in
Godliness; where Godliness decays, there the Soul goes down with sorrow to the
Grave, nay, to Hell: Where Godliness thrives, the Soul exults and cries out,
Lord now let thou thy Servant depart in peace: ( Luke 2.29.) nay, in this
world, What a Feast does Godliness make for the Soul; whilst it may be the Body
has only a dish of Herbs.

2. Reprehension.
I may then in the next place blame and bewail the folly and madness of most
men; who live as if they had no Souls, or as if their Souls were fit only to be
placed with the Dogs of the fold: Like a woman I have heard of, who when her
house was on fire, was very busy in saving of her stuff, carrying out with all
her might as much as she could; at last she bethought her self of her Child
which was left in a Cradle; but when she returned to look after that, she found
that the fire had destroyed it, and there she was first aware of her
praeposterous care for her Goods before her Child, running up and down as one
distracted, crying my Child, my Child, as David for his son Absalom. So ^las,
when it is too late, all that neglect their Souls in this life, will how I out
in the midst of their scorching flames. (2 Samuel 18.33.) Oh my Soul, my Soul, I
would I had dyed for thee my dear and precious Soul.

We would have nothing bad by our good Will; we would not have bad Relatives,
Children, or other, no, not so much as a bad piece of Coin; and how comes it to
pass that men can be so content with bad Souls? Thy Soul is thy self, and if
thy Soul be bad, thou art bad thy self, and how have thou deserved so ill of
thy self, that thou should neglect thy self, and care not what become of thy
Soul, which is thy self?

Xerxes when he beheld his numerous Army, wept; Oh (said he) what a many here
are that in a very short space, must yield to Death, and be devoured by Worms.
It is a far sadder consideration that such multitudes of men's Souls are lost,
and perish Eternally; and let the abounding of sin speak whether this be a
causeless fear: When the Apostles heard that one of them, though but one, was
the Son of Perdition, and should lose his Soul: Every one of them was jealous
over his Condition, and cried out, Is it I, Is it I? (Matthew. 26.22.) I cannot
tell who particularly it is; yet I cannot but know there are many sins that
speak men ripe for judgment; and many other sins, which though they be not so
notorious and visible; are yet certainly as truly destructive and damnable. A
leak in any part of the Ship may sink it: And now oh that my words might reach
your hearts. I speak in the behalf of your precious Souls. These words are not
about trifles, which you may consider or neglect as you please, but as Moses
said in the like case, These words are your Life, and no less than Life or
Death Eternal depends upon your receiving of them.

When your Bodies are distempered, what sending is there for a Physician? How
are the symptoms of the Disease considered? Or if an Estate be doubtful, what
counsel do we not take? What cost and charge are we not at to ensure it? Yet we
let our Souls run all imaginable, yea, and unimaginable hazards without the
least care, to be sure without suitable care to their worth or danger: and how
can we any longer go for Christians, or the Disciples of him, who taught us
here the pretiousness of our Souls, and himself valued them accordingly?
Whatsoever we may flatter our selves with, only such as are of the same mind
with him, shall have Salvation by him.

It is high time then to be Exhorted, 3. Exhortation.
and prevailed with to suitable affections, and dispositions shall I say, or
rather to suitable Lives and Conversations unto what ye have heard; The truths
that have been spoken unto, are not so much speculative, as practical; they
meet with little or no controversy in the Theory, but in the practice of them.
The Devil knows that, let men believe what they will concerning their Souls, he
is sure enough to obtain them, and that with great advantage to a more sore
condemnation, if they do not practice according to what they are convinced of.

Show then that thou do value and esteem thy Soul, according to the worth
and dignity. Children or Fools, or Barbarous Africans, prefer Beads and Toys
before Gold and real Pearls, but it were folly and madness if we should do so,
and yet I am afraid we do worse every day.

Whatsoever is the price the tempter offers, or persuades to sin with, remember
that it is for thy Soul, if thou consentest and yieldest the bargain is struck,
thou do what in thee lies to give thy Soul, for the pleasure or advantage of
the sin. Judas had an ill bargain, that lost his Soul and his Savior for
thirty pence; though many sell their Savior, and their Souls too, cheaper
every day, a goodly price, be it what it will. God gave his Son for thy Soul,
and entrusted thee with it, and thou ungrateful, and vile wretch, do barter
it away for trifles. You know Nathan 's Parable of the Ew-Lamb, (2 Samuel 12.) so
tenderly beloved by the right owner of it, and yet it was slain to entertain a
stranger. That Parable respects more than David. Thou art the Man. Thy Soul is
the beloved Lamb, and the Devil is the Stranger (whom to be sure thou art no
way concerned to entertain) when thou sinnest, thou slayest this Ewe-Lamb to
entertain and gratify this stranger. Oh that the Parallel might be carried a
little further, and that some or other upon the reading of this would cry out
with David, I have sinned.

And if thou would indeed value thy Soul, be persuaded from what thou have
heard, that all those things which concern thy Soul, are far more excellent,
than those which concern thy Body, as for instance; That,

1. Thy Souls riches are the best riches, called by our Savior true riches,
Considerations to facilitate this duty.
( Luke 16.11.) Ah that any should be contentedly without them!

2. The Souls pleasures are the choicest pleasures: True Joy is not a
superficial thing that affects the countenance, and produces smiles or
laughter; many poor wretches in Bedlam are thus merrily mad; but res severa est
verum gaudium. The Heart is the seat of all our Affections, and so of our Joy;
and nothing can rejoice that, but the favor of God to the Soul.

3. The Souls honor is the truest honor, if honor be in honorante, what
honor is it to have the applause or homage of sorry, sinful men? But it is God
that delights to honor the Soul, and will put off his own glory upon it.

I shall say nothing to vilify the Body which is the other part we consist of,
and we overprize and value: it is enough to say with Bernard, quantumcunque
excolatur caro est. Trim thy Body, pamper it, bestow all thy care and pains
upon it, it is but flesh still, twill be worms meat, and by all thy carking and
caring for it, thou art but preparing to feast those contemptible Creatures
more delicately, or if that will be some while first, yet I may ask you as
Plato did one of his Scholars, (who minded his Table and cheer) what he did
mean to make his Prison so strong? Alas the Body is but the Prison of the Soul;
the Soul is at liberty only when it gets out of it: Let these things frequently
come into your minds: To which add,

1. If the miseries and wants which concern the Body be so great, as indeed we
esteem them, and sometimes feel them to be; what then are the necessities and
calamities of the Soul? (The Soul being so excellent) nay, the meanest humane
Soul being more worth than all the Bodies in the world. Is there any pain which
torments thy Body; how intolerable will the pain be that will torment thy Soul;
the biting of a Scorpion, and the raging of fire are but faint resemblances of
it. If bodily hunger be so sharp, (what did it not cause the poor Women in the
siege of Samaria to do, or to part with 2 Kings 6.26.) how intense is the
hunger and thirst in the Soul, whilst yet we are under the dispensations of
mercy; but if once God's offended Patience turns to Anger, who can endure to be
scorched with the flames of it.

2. If the Pleasures and advantages men have for the Bodies be so desirable, Oh
what are those Pleasures and advantages we have or may have for our Souls: For
God has provided for all his Creatures suitably to their Natures. The Herbs
and Plants have Earth and dung; Beasts have grass to nourish them with. The
Body of man is plentifully provided out of the storehouse and wardrobe of the
Creatures with food, and raiment; but there is nothing amongst them all found
good enough for the Soul: The Soul can only be satisfied with the good things
of Gods house, even of his holy Temple. Psalm. 65.4. Or as David says elsewhere,
Ps. 17.15. I shall be satisfied with thy likeness.

^articulars which we must practice this duty.
But that I may not be only in generals, persuading you to a practical valuation
for your Souls; let the esteem you have for your Souls appear in these
particulars.

1. Value thy self upon the account of thy Soul: How do men stand upon their
tip-toes, if they may by any means overtop others. This will almost make thy
Pride commendable, if thou gloriest only that thy Soul is so near akin, so much
alike to God; thou art not so far removed as tertius a Jove. Oh Reverence thy
self more, and think thy self too good for the most fashionable or creditable
sin. Should such a^ one as thou sin? (Neh. 6.11.) Should any whose Souls are
Spiritual in their Original, be sensual in their Conversation? Far be it from
you; But,

2. Use your Souls well, if they be so excellent, do not set them upon trifles.
A meaner Soul than ours would serve to do those Offices we put our Souls upon,
viz. to eat, and drink, and sleep. A Kings Son sent to a Philosopher his
Governor to know whether he might not take such pastimes as other Young men
did, he only returned for Answer that he should remember that he was a King's
Son. Oh remember who it is you call the Father of your Spirits, and pick not
straws (you may easily know what I mean) with those very Souls which are given
thee for higher and better purposes.

Remember that known Maxim, Corruption optimi est pessima. A degenerate, filthy
or sinful Soul is worse than any Body can be. A degenerate Soul is so much
worse than a blind, or lame body, or ulcerous; as the Soul otherwise is in its
self better than the Body.

We cannot use our Souls well, unless we give them their due superiority over
our Passions and Affections; and indeed over all the things relating to the
Body; God did make these Souls for to rule in man, and he set up our
Understanding in the Throne, and commanded our other faculties to obey it, as
his Viceroy, and Deputy. When men prefer there Humors or Lusts, they make
their vile Bodies to Lord it over these precious Souls, and employ their Souls
as purveyors, nay, as drudges for the Body. The Servant rides on Horseback, and
the Prince goes on foot; nay there is a greater disparity where the Soul is
made to truckle to the Body.

3. Thirdly, And above all, have a care that ye do not lose these Souls that
are so valuable. I have shown you how that they may be lost; let me now leave
some considerations to be enlarged upon by you.

1. The danger your Souls are in, is very great. The Philistines are upon thee;
thou do not only run a hazard, and it may be, or may not be, but unless thou
do mightily, and in time (even to day, whilst it is called to day) bestirr
thy self, thy Soul is certainly, and may be inevitably lost. As David said to
Jonathan in another case concerning himself, As the Lord lives, there is but a
step between thee and Death: 1 Samuel 20.3. So there is but a step between thy
Soul and Death: Nay, your Souls are dead in trespasses and sins, (Luke 19.10.)
they are lost, but God has sent his Son to seek, and to save.

2. The loss of your Souls is very great. It is much to lose an Estate, or Wife
or Child, but if thou losest thy Soul, thou do not lose only much, but thou
losest all. For the whole World cannot now profit thee, and though the clatter
and noise that worldly things make about our Ears will not suffer us to hear or
mind this, yet dare but to be alone, converse with thy self, ask thy Heart and
Conscience, and it will tell thee as much; especially when thou art in
affliction, or on a sick bed, etc.

3. The loss of thy Soul is never to be repaired. Men may meet with losses,
which yet they may otherwise recover, or may have something else that may
countervail them, but not only nothing can countervail this loss, (no more than
dross and dung can Jewels of the greatest price:) but if thou do once lose
thy Soul, nothing can retrieve, or regain it; in this case non licet bis
peccare. If thou once losest thy Soul in this life, there is no means hereafter
whereby thou may recover it, but as the tree falls, so it lies. Thou that
read this, upon this moment (for ought either you or I know) depends thy
Eternity: nunquid aut alter Christus an idem iterum crucifigi habet pro anima,
as Bernard asks the question, Bernard Epist. 54.
is there says he another Christ? Or do you think that he will be crucified
again for thy Soul?

4. Shall I add, that this Soul is thine own, and thou have not, nor never
shall have another, and therefore it stands thee upon to keep it safe. The Text
calls our Souls ours, his own Soul, what shall a man be profited, if he should
gain the whole world, and lose his own Soul. Christ does not call the World, or
any thing in it ours, but he calls our Souls ours; and certainly they are ours
so as nothing else is, for we must forego all other things, and be parted from
them; and have been, and may be without them; but without our Souls we never
were, nor cannot be.

And it is thy only Soul, thou have to make thy darling, and to be fond and
careful of. Most of other things we have double of, as two Eyes, two Hands, and
Feet, etc. but God has given thee but one Soul. Omnia Deus dedit duplicia
animam vero unam. If thou losest one of the members of thy Body, the other in a
great measure serves in its stead, but thy soul must needs be more carefully
looked to, than thy right eye, or thy right hand, for nothing to be sure can
stand in stead of it, if it be once lost. Oh remember this is the one thing
necessary.

5. You must answer for the loss of your Souls, God has entrusted them with
you. A great trust, a great charge, we must account for this Talent when our
Lord comes. David's Brethren asked him with whom he had left their Sheep: God
will ask every one of you, with whom ye did leave your Souls? Are not your
Children, nay, are not your Goods, (many a man's Swine) more cared for, and
looked after than your Souls?

(...) and (...). Beza.
There are two words in the Text that are observed to be forensical, and relate
to a Court of Judicatory, which the gaining and losing in the Text refers to.
The loss of his Soul will be as a Mulct or Penalty inflicted by the Just, and
righteous Judge upon every one that has been careless of his Soul. He that
does not earnestly endeavor to keep his Soul whilst he lives, the evil Angels
when he dies shall require it of him, as you know the Soul of the Covetous
wretch was adjudged to them. How unconcernedly do we read or hear of such
things? But mutato nomine de te, etc. Yet but a little while, and it may be thy
case: It may be, the divertisements of the World will not let thee have the
while to attend to what you hear: but what are all the pleasures and enjoyments
you can have, might they be continued to thee, as long as ever they were unto
any, but as the singing of a little longer Psalm before thy Execution; Oh that
my words therefore might be acceptable unto you. I have shown you the
excellency of Souls, as when the Disciples showed to our Savior the costly
stones, and curious Fabric of the Temple. ( Matthew. 24.1, 2.) Our Blessed Lord
told them, the time was a coming, in which not one stone should be left upon
another, but all should be thrown down. The Application (be not to all that
hate us) but to all that implacably hate God.

Oh awake, arise, bestir your selves, watch and ward, and above all, call in
the assistance of the Keeper of Israel, that not only with all thy keeping; but
with all his keeping thy Soul may be kept by his Power through faith unto
Salvation. 1 Pet. 1.5.

SERMON XXVI. The Leading of the HOLY SPIRIT opened: With some Practical
Enquiries resolved about it.
ROMANS 8.14. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of
God.
OUR Apostle, in the close of the preceding Verse, had made use of a very
powerful Motive to excite these Romans, (and in them all others,) unto
Mortification; [if ye, through the Spirit, do mortify the deeds of the Body,
ye shall live.] In this Verse, he backs that Motive with an Argument to
Probatio est ejus quod proxime praecessit. Calv. Probat quod dixit, vivetis.
Esth.
evince its Truth and Certainty. Such as are the Sons of God, shall live: such
who are led by the Spirit, (viz. to mortify the deeds of the Body,) are the
Sons of God: therefore such shall live.

Others consider these Words, not so much as a Proof of the foregoing Motive,
but rather as (...), etc. Chrysostom. etc. (...). Theophyl.
another distinct Motive in themselves to promote Mortification. Such who are
led by the Spirit thereunto, they are taken into the high and glorious Relation
of being the Sons of God, (or the Children of God, as it is v. 16.) Now, what an
inducement is this to Christians to live under, and comply with the Spirits
Leading; as it directs and excites unto the mortifying of the deeds of the
Body, Both of these Connexions are good, but I prefer the first.

If we take them apart, and as they lie in themselves, so they contain these
three things in them:

1. A Glorious Privilege; the being [the Sons of God.]

2. A Description of the Persons to whom this Privilege belongs; they are
such, who are [led by the Spirit of God.]

3. The Adaequateness or Commensurateness, between the Persons described and
the Privilege asserted; [As many as are led,] just so many, and no more; all
such, and none but such, are the Sons of God: It Is Inclusive or Extensive to
all of them, Exclusive and Limiting to all others.

The words are an entire Proposition; As many as are led by the Spirit of God,
they are the Sons of God.

The Subject hereof, [they that are led by the Spirit,] I am to speak unto; as
to the Praedicate, (they are the Sons of God,) that I shall not insist upon,
(further than as it is reducible under the Subject.)

As many as are led by the Spirit of God,] (...). Some render it by Aguntur, as
many as are acted by the Spirit; Some, by (...). i. e. impellunt^r ad sanctas
Actiones. Piscat.
Impelluntur, as many as are impelled, vigorously urged and moved by the
Spirit: The most, by Ducuntur; as many as are led by the Spirit. We have the
same Phrase, (with another Privilege annexed,) Gal. 5.18. If ye be led [(...)]
by the Spirit, ye are not under the Law.

It Is evident, the Expression is allusive and Metaphorical. And it alludes
either to Guides, (such as lead the Blind, or those that are in the Dark, or
Travelers that know not their way:) Or to Mothers and Nurses; who take their
Children by the hand, such as cannot go, and therefore they lead, uphold, and
help them. Answerably to both of these, Believers are led by the spirit of God:
with respect partly to their Spiritual Blindness and Darkness, and partly to
their spiritual Weakness and Infirmity. The Holy Ghost, is both their Guide and
Director, (to keep them from wandering;) and also their Vpholder and
Strengthner, (to keep them from falling.)

The Point to be discoursed of, is this; That

Gods spirit is a leading spirit to, ^os.
and in, all Gods Children. The Acts and Operations of this Spirit are various
and multiform. Several of which, are instanc't in in this Chapter: the Law of
the spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the Law of sin and
death; (v. 2.) If ye through the spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye
shall live; (v. 13.) The spirit it self bears witness with our spirit, that
we are the Children of God; (v. 16.) Likewise the spirit also helps our
infirmities; (v. 26, 27.) But I must confine my self to that One in the Text,
the (...), Leading, Conduct, Manuduction, which this Blessed Spirit vouchsafes
to the people of God.

He is the Saints Leader, their (...), Dux viae, the Guide of their Life. Look
as by Christ, they have (...), Leading, Access, Admission to God the Father in
Prayer; ( Ephesians. 2.18. and 3.12.) So by the Spirit, they have (...), Leading and
Guidance in their whole course of Life.

In the discussing of this weighty Point, I will 1. Open the nature of the Act;
the Leading of the Spirit. 2. Propound and answer some practical Enquiries
about it.


For the better opening of it, I must 1. Lay down some things more Generally
concerning it. 2. Then come to the closer and stricter Explication of it.


Under the First, I shall commend the following Particulars to you.
Distinctions premised about the Spirits Leading.


1. The Leading of the Spirit, is either General and Common, or Peculiar and
Special. If we consider him as God, (in his joint participation of the Deity
with the Father and the Son, and in his joint Operations with them according to
their Divine Essence;) so, there is a Leading by him which does extend to all
Creatures whatsoever. For all of them, by his Divine Power and Influxe, in
their several Beings, Actions, Motions and Tendencies, are disposed, ordered,
governed, and overrul'd to the Glory of the Creator, and the good of the
Universe. Take them in all their Faculties, and in all their Operations, they
are all excited, directed, actuated, by this Spirit. And so, (in a general
Sense,) they all come under his Guidance and Regency.

This also, may be said to extend to all men; to the Unregenerate, as well as
to the Regenerate. How? why as they all do act and move Acts 17.28.
in and by him; as He, in a Common and Providential way, does order and
regulate all their several Actions and Motions; (For this he does in all, as he
is the first cause and the supreme Sovereign.) So that as there is his common
Illumination, common Conviction, common Restraints, common Gifts, (which even
the Graceless partake of;) so there is too a common Leading by Him which they
also have.

Now most certainly, this is not that Leading which the Text speaks of; for
this cannot be the Foundation or Evidence of the Privilege mentioned. A common
Act will never entitle to a special Relation. Ductus spiritus quo Filij Dei
aguntur, non est Generalis Dei Actus, quo omnia moventur; sed est specialis
Gratia, qua Filii Dei Sanctificantur, in via salutis diriguntur ad Deum.
Pareus. Observare convenit esse multiplicem Spiritus Actionem. Est enim
Vniversalis, qua omnes Creaturae sustinentur ac moventur; sunt and peculiares
in Hominibus, and illae quidem variae; sed hic sanctificationem intelligit, qua
non nisi Electos suos Dominus dignatur, dum eos sibi in Filios segregat. Calv.
in loc.
How many are thus led by the Spirit who yet are far from being the Sons of
God! That Leading therefore must be here intended, which is special and
peculiar to Gods people, such as will amount to the making of the Proposition
here Reciprocal and Convertible; thus, All the Sons of God are led by the
Spirit and All that are led by the Spirit, are the Sons of God.

2. The special Leading of the Spirit, is Extraordinary or Ordinary. The
former, was confined to some Persons, and to some Times, and was not to extend
to all Saints, nor to continue in all Ages: Thus the Holy Prophets, the
Apostles were led by the Spirit; as they were immediately inspired, guided, and
moved by Him, in the discharge of their Extraordinary Work and Office. These in
the penning of the Holy Scriptures, (and in all that they revealed of and from
God,) were acted and (...) or (...).
moved by the Holy Ghost. 2 Pet. 1.21. (and hereupon they were infallible in
what they revealed.) But this was extraordinary; and so Limited and Temporary.
The latter Leading of the Spirit therefore must be that which is here spoken
of; that, which appertains to all Gods Children, and at all times. Did the
Apostle, when he says, [As many as are led by the Spirit, are the Sons of God,]
mean, that as many as have Extraordinary Visions, Revelations, Inspirations,
Impulses, from the Spirit of God, are thus related to God, and none Other?
surely no! Should we carry it thus high, we should exclude all but the
forementioned Prophets and Apostles, from being Gods Children; (which would be
both sad, and also false.) Wherefore it is unquestionable, that the Ordinary,
Abiding, and Permanent Leading of the Spirit, and that which reaches to all
Believers; is here intended.

3. This Act of the Spirit may be considered, either as it is exerted at the
first Conversion, or after. For as we distinguish the Grace of God, into
Prevenient and Subsequent; so we may also distinguish of the Leading of the
Spirit. He leads at, and in order to, the first Conversion; as he then does
irradiate the Mind, incline the Will, spiritualize the Affections; (and so,
lead or guide the whole Soul to God, and Christ.) Then he leads after
Conversion; as this is done by him all along in the whole course of a
Christians Life; (for it is a continued Act.) The Guidance of the Sp rit to
bring a man into the state of Grace, that is done but once; but the Guidance of
the Spirit, in the state of Grace, that is done Daily and Renewedly. The first,
imports the infusing of a Living, Vital Principle into the Soul; the latter,
supposes this Principle, and makes use of it, in the Conduct of a Child of God
in the way of Holiness. Both are here to be taken in; (yet I conceive,) the
last may be most proper. And Observe, these two Leadings of the Spirit have a
different respect to our Sonship with God; For the former Constitutes it, the
latter only Discovers and Evidences it: The Spirit, as leading me to God at the
first Conversion, makes me a Child of God; the Spirit, as leading me after
Conversion, causes it to appear that I am a Child of God.

4. There is the Having of the Spirit, and there is the Leading of the Spirit.
We have both in this Chapter; the One, v. 9. [if any man have not the Spirit of
Christ, he is none of his;] the other, in the Text. Now, although these two be
conjunct and inseparable, (whoever have the Spirit, they are led by the
Spirit); yet they are distinct things. To have the Spirit, is to be made a
Possessor of Him in his Indwelling in us: To be led by the Spirit, is our
partaking of his Directive Influence after we are made Possessors of him. The
First, supposes the receiving of the Agent or Principle; the second, imports
the Operation from that Agent or Principle.

The Greek Expositors do much insist upon this; (...) Chrysostom. (Whom Oecumenius
and Theophylact follow.) Ideo non dicit, Qui spiritum Dei acceperunt, sed qui
spiritu Dei aguntur; i. e. qui illius actui obtemperant. Musc.
(but with that Explication of it which I do not drive at.) Observe (say They,)
it is not said [as many as have received the Spirit] are the Sons of God; but
[as many as are led by the Spirit.] For, (as they gloss upon it,) many receive
the Spirit at Baptism, who yet afterward, not being led by the Spirit to and
in an Holy Life, their Sonship to God ceases, (But this stating of the Having
of the Spirit, I meddle not with.) I consider the Reception of the Spirit, not
only in an external, Baptismal way; but in that which is inward, real, and
saving. And even this, I make to be distinct from his Leading: For although
these are never disjoined, and separated, but do always coexist and accompany
each the other, (all Circumstances concurring:) yet, in themselves they differ,
both as to Order and Precedence, and also as to Nature and Essence. The Having
of a Soul, and then the having of the subsequent Acts of that Soul, are
different things; so it is in that which I am upon.

These things, (that are more general,) being premised, I come to a more
strict, and particular Explication of this Leading of the Spirit. What is it to
be led by Him?

It notes, something on the Spirits part, and something on the Creatures part.
Both must be taken in, in the opening and stating of it.

1. Something on the Spirits part. So it imports 1. His special Guidance. 2.
His powerful Inclination. 3. His Cooperation and Corroboration. 4. His Regency
and Gubernation.


1. His special Guidance. To be led by the Spirit, The special Acts included in
the Spirits Leading.
it is to live under the blessed Guidance and Conduct of the Spirit. (This is
the Notion which does most obviously comport with Leading.) How is the Blind
man led? why, as he has one to direct and guide him to and in the way wherein
he is to go: So here,

Of this act, (as done by God and his Spirit.) the Scripture often speaks. And
the Lord shall guide thee continually; Is. 58.11. I am the Lord thy God which
teaches thee to profit, which leads thee by the way that thou should go.
Isa. 48.17. Thou shall guide me by thy Council, and afterward receive me to
Glory; Psalm. 73.24. Teach me to do thy Will, for thou art my God; thy spirit is
good, lead me into the land of uprightness: Psalm. 143.10. Lead me in thy truth,
and teach me, for thou art the God of my Salvation; Psalm. 25.5. I will direct
their work in truth, and I will make an everlasting Covenant with them; Is.
61.8. The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord. Psalm. 37.23. Thine ears
shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk ye in it, when ye
turn to the right hand, and when ye turn to the left, Isa. 30.21. Here Is the
Leading of the Spirit. What the Cloud was to the Israelites in the directing of
them in their Motions; what the Guide is to the Traveller who knows not his
way; that the Spirit of God is to Believers, their Guide and Director in this
their Journeying and Wilderness state.

II. His powerful Inclination. He leads, not only by a naked Guidance or
Directive Light beamed into the Understanding; (whereby Believers are brought
to know God's Will and what they are to do: Col. 1.9 -- that ye might be filled
with the knowledge of his Will, Quid est duci spirieu Dei? Est a spiritu
sancto, soris Verbo, intus Illuminatione, doceri de Dei voluntate; nec non
efficaciter flecti ac Regi, ad volendum and faciendum ea quae Deo placent. Par.
in all Wisdom, and spiritual Understanding: Ephesians. 3.10. Proving what is
acceptable to the Lord:) But he leads also, by the Efficacious Inclining of the
Heart, the bowing and bending of the Will, the overpowring of the Affections,
to close with, and follow his Guidance in the doing of what is good, and in the
shunning of what is evil. Divines bring the whole of the Spirits Leading under
two words, Monendo, and Movendo; he first counsels and directs as to what is to
be done, and then he excites and effectually enclines to the doing thereof.
Psalm. 119.33. teach me O Lord, the way of thy statutes; (here is the Informing
and Directing Act of the Spirit:) v. 35, 36. make me to go in the path of thy
Commandments, -- Incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not unto
Covetousness; (here is the Efficacious and Powerful Act of the Spirit.) They who
feel and experience This in themselves, they are the Persons that are led by
the Spirit. (I shall have occasion to speak more of it in what will follow.)

III. His Cooperation, and Corroboration. When one leads another both the
person leading, and the person led have their proper Action and Motion, and
both unite and concur therein. And so it is in the Saints being led by the
Spirit, (as to what is Holy and Good.) He Acts, and They Act too; something
there is done on His part, something on Theirs too; and there is a mutual,
conjunct efficiency (or Agency) in Both. He acts, then they act; acti agunt;
And the Act is Theirs, and His too; theirs, Subjectively and Formally, His, in
respect of Excitation to it and Assistance in it: They do the thing, but it is
by his Influxe, Is. 26.12. thou have wrought all our works in us: Philip. 2.12,
13. Work out your Salvation, for it is God that works in you both to will and
to do of his good pleasure. In short, we move, we act, and the Spirit concurrs,
and cooperates with us therein; and so, we are led by him. Dicet mihi aliquis,
ergo agimur non agimus. Respondeo, imo and agis and ageris; and tunc been agis,
si a bono ageris. Spiritus enim Dei qui te agit* agentibus adjutor est. Ipse
nomen adjutoris praescribit tibi quia and tu ipse aliquid agis. Sermon. 13. de
Verbis Ap.
Austine, when he is proving the Necessity of the latter, from my Text, does
also prove the Reality and Verity of the Former.

The other Act of the Spirit, ( Corroboration, or Strengthening,) falls in with
this, (in part.) So, his Leading resembles the Mothers or Nurses leading the
Child: it being weak, not able to go alone, they take it by the hand, hold it
up, join their strength with its weakness; and so they enable it to go. In like
manner, the strong and mighty Spirit of God, does (as it were) take weak
Christians by the hand, and communicate his strength to them; by which, they
are enabled to do what is required of them. As it follows in this Chapter,
(with respect to Prayer:) [likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities;]
(...), lifts with us, and against us at the other end of the Burden: And so it
is in all the Duties of Holiness; the Spirit lifts with, helps the infirmities
of Believers, and strengthens them thereunto. I can do all things through
Christ strengthening of me; Philip. 4.13. That he would grant you according to
the riches of his Glory, to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the
inner man; Ephesians. 3.16. I may allude to that of Elisha, 2 Kings 13.16. He said to
the King of Israel, put thine hand upon the bow; and he put his hand upon it,
and Elisha put his hands upon the Kings hands: So we put our hands upon the
bow, attempt to believe, pray, mortify sin, (and the like;) and then, the Holy
Spirit puts His hand upon Ours to confirm and strengthen us in all these. Was
it not for this, we could do nothing; Joh. 15.5. was it not for this Leading we
could not move one step in the path of Holiness.

IV. A Fourth thing included in this Leading of the Spirit, is his Regency and
Gubernation. Where he Governs, there he Leads. So vice versa; and his Leading
is ever attended with Rule and Authority, It Is like a Generals Leading an Army,
who Authoritatively disposes and orders all its motions; like Moses his leading
the People of Israel, who had the Rule and Government over them. As to Christ,
they are put together: Behold I have given him for a Witness to the People, a
Leader and Commander to the People; Isa. 55.4. Such a Leading is this of the
Spirit in Gracious Souls; He has the Regiment of them. He Commands and Orders
them in their Course as he pleases; they are subject to his Will, steered by
him in their Motions, (as the (...). Chrysostom. (...). Oecum. (...). Theophyl.
Ship is by the Pilot, or the Chariot by him that drives it.)

These are the Things, on the Spirits part, which do constitute his leading.

2. (To fill this up) there is something on the Creatures part. And that is,
their yielding up of themselves to the Guidance and Conduct of the Spirit.
Their free, willing, Bishop Halls Remains. p. 147. Hollingsworth of the Spirit,
p. 65.
spontaneous following of him in what he moves and dictates to them. Without
this, it is not Leading; for that imports Motion after something that goes
before. And that Motion too must be Voluntary, or else it is being Haled, and
Dragged, not Led. This is the Disposition and Carriage of the Sons of God
toward the Spirit: He excites them to be Holy, Heavenly-minded, to resist and
mortify Corruption, to Pray, Hear Gods word, perform other Religious Duties;
yea, to take up their Cross: in all they readily comply with him. As David (in
that particular Case,) When thou said seek ye my face, my heart said, thy
face, Lord will I seek: Psalm. 27.8. He will teach us his ways, and we will walk
in his paths: Isa. 2.3. Draw me, we will run after thee; Cant. 1.4. Here Is the
Spirits Leading and the Believers following of him. It Is set forth, v. 1. by
walking after the Spirit: it supposes a Principle of Life; dead things may be
drawn but they cannot properly be said to be led: where the Spiritual Life is,
such do willingly conform to what the Spirit directs them unto. (But this I
shall say no more of in this Explanatory part; it being a thing that requires
our Practice rather than any large Explication of it!)

Thus I have opened the Nature of the Spirits Leading. But it being a point of
great Importance, and the due stating of it being highly Necessary, (upon
sundry Accounts;) I will further speak to these Four things about it.

Four things opened about the Spirits Leading.
1. The Matter or Terminus, what the Spirit leads unto. 2. The Rule, by which he
leads. 3. The Way and Manner, wherein he leads. 4. The Extent and Measure of
it.
The matter of it.
1. The Matter, what the Spirit leads unto. This is of great Extent; but all may
be reduced to these two things, Truth and Holiness. Truth is seated in the
Understanding, and speaks the Spirits Leading of that Faculty: Holiness reaches
to the Heart within, and Conversation without; and speaks the Spirits Leading
of Both (in their utmost Comprehensiveness.) These, he leads and guides unto;
but not in the least to their Opposites, Error and Sin. Every Agent is for that
which comports and suits with his own Nature, and against that which is
contrary thereunto: Therefore, the Spirit being a Spirit of Truth and of
Holiness, this determines him to lead to these; and to these only. So his
Conduct is stated in Holy Writ; John 16.13. When he the Spirit of Truth is
come, he will guide you into all Truth. Ephesians. 5.9. The fruit of the Spirit, is
in all goodness and righteousness, and Truth. Psalm. 23.3. He leads me in the
paths of righteousness for his Names sake. This Holiness includes in it Holy
Affections, the Exercise of the several Graces, and these the Spirit guides
unto: 2 These. 3.5. The Lord direct your hearts into the love of God, and into
the patient waiting for Christ. The avoiding and mortifying of sin; and this,
the Spirit guides unto; If ye through the Spirit mortify the deeds of the
body, ye shall live; immediately it follows, As many as are led by the Spirit:
showing, that the Mortification of sin is one special thing which the Spirit
leads to. Gal. 5.16. walk in the Spirit, (after his Guidance,) and ye shall not
fulfill the Lust of the flesh; why? because, he always makes this the matter of
his Guidance to keep men off from the Lust of the Flesh, from all sinful ways
and Courses. He Is a Good and Holy Spirit in himself, and therefore all his
Motions tend to what is Good and Holy. As Satan, he being the Evil Spirit,
suitably to his Nature does excite and urge to what is Evil; (Acts 5.3. John
13.2.) So e contra, the Spirit of God, He being the Good Spirit, does excite
and urge to what is Good; and to nothing else. How do they blaspheme this Holy
Spirit, who do wicked things, and yet presume to say, the Spirit leads them
thereunto! This must be laid down as a Principle (of undoubted verity,) that
the sole and whole tendency of the Spirits Leading is to Purity, Obedience,
Universal Holiness; and in no case to sin and wickedness.

II. The Rule by which he leads. The Rule of it.
And that (in short) is the Written Word. God guides by the Spirit, the Spirit
guides by the Word. He is our Guide, and the Word is our Rule. The Spirit
himself, as to his own Actings, has no External Rule) to act by; (His Internal
Holiness and Perfection being his sole Rule. But as to Us, in our Actings, we
have an External Rule, by which all that we do is to be squared: and therefore
by, and according to this Rule, the Spirit guides us. And our Conformity
thereunto, is both the Measure, and also the Design and End of the Spirit in
his Guidance of us.

The Word it self, carries in it a leading and directive Property: Prove. 6.22,
23. When thou go, it shall lead thee -- For the Commandment is a Lamp, and
the Law is light: Psalm. 119.105. Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light
unto my path: 133. Order my steps in thy Word: Mic. 6.8. He has shown thee O
man, what is good -- The written Revelation of God's Will is the Christians
great Rule; the Compass by which in all things he must steer his Course, the
Star that must direct him in all his Motions: It Is to the Law, Isa. 8.20.
and to the Testimonys, that we must have our continual Recourse for the
regulating of us in all matters of Faith and Practice. Now this Leading of the
word, and that of the Spirit, are never to be severed: As that is in
subordination to This, so This is ever in Conjunction with That.

This Word we must in all things keep close unto, or else we run our selves
upon most dangerous Rocks. The Enthusiast is for a Light within, for immediate
Revelations, Inspirations, Impulses from the Spirit; (and I know not what:) But
are these Praeter-Scriptural? much more are they Anti-Scriptural? Oh then they
are nothing but men's own Fancies and Delusions, and not at all the leadings of
the Spirit of God. When any, upon the pretense of these, go off from the
written Word, what wild Opinions and Practices do they run themselves upon! (Of
which we have had too many instances both at Home and Abroad.) The Spirit and
the Word are our full and complete guide: The Spirit, gives Light and Life to
the Word; and the Word gives Evidence that the Guidance is from the Spirit.

But it may be asked, Does the Spirit guide only in this mediate way? Is there
not an immediate Leading by him? (at least) pro hic and nunc?

No, unless you state it thus; That, although he may not always, Express, and
in an Explicit manner, guide by the Word; yet, his Guiding always is according
to the Word and Consentaneous to it. The Word, evermore is in the matter,
though sometimes it may not be in the manner of the Spirits Guidance. He may,
without making use of the Word, by an immediate Divine Light and Excitation,
lead me to this or that duty; but he never leads me to any thing but what the
Word first makes to be Duty. Take it in that other Act of the Spirit (which
follows here, v. 16.) The Spirit it self bears witness with our Spirit, that
we are the Children of God. This witnessing of Adoption is usually Mediate, and
by the Word; yet it is not always so, sometimes it is Immediate and without the
Word. That is, the Spirit assures of this, not only in a syllogistical way, by
such and such Scripture-signs, Marks, Qualifications, Dispositions, which
evidence Sonship to God: (as He that is led by the Spirit, is the Son of God;
Thou art one who art led by the Spirit; therefore thou art the Son of God:) But
he sometimes may, and does, directly and immediately say to a person, Thou art
a Child of God: But now, though here he thus witnesses, Abstractly and
praecisively, without making use of the marks and signs of the Word concerning
this Relation; yet, he never so witnesses, but according to the Word, (i. e.)
where those marks and signs are. In like manner it is as to his leading; this,
is not always managed by an express Revival upon the Heart of this, or that
passage in the Word; yet, for the matter of it, it is ever done in a way,
consonant and agreeable to the Word.

And so long as we keep to this, I think there will be no great danger of
Enthusiasm, or Fanaticisme, (rightly so called.)

The manner of it.
III. The manner of the Spirits Leading. Concerning which, (not to run out into
all the various Explications that occur about it,) I Will confine my self to
these two things: The Spirit leads, 1. With Power and Efficacy. 2. With
Sweetness, and Gentleness. Fortiter and Suaviter.


1. With Power and Efficacy. The Spirit leads so, as that the Person led shall
certainly follow him. For in this Act, he does not only illuminate the
Understanding, or barely dictate to the Mind and Conscience what way is to be
taken; but he does also, Inwardly, by a Secret Power upon the Heart, incline
and bend the Will, to close with what he directs unto. He leads with a strong
Hand; so, as that the Soul shall not be able to resist him; (I mean, ad
Victoriam.) I speak, not of his Guidance which is common and general, but of
that which is peculiar and saving; of that which is put forth either in those
that are regenerate already, or in those whom God designs to make such: This
leading of the Spirit, in such Persons, is ever carried on with Power and
Efficacy. I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes, and ye shall keep my Judgments and do them: Ezekiel. 36.27. (here is not
only an Informing Light, but an Overpowering Influence; [I'le cause you] to
walk in my Statutes.) Turn thou me, and I shall be turned. It Is leading in the
Text, (to show the Mildness of the Spirits Operation; elsewhere it is Drawing,
(to show, the Power of the Spirits Operation:) it is Drawing as to the depraved
Will, it is Leading as to the Sanctified Will. The Evil Spirit leads to sin;
How? Why he moves, persuades, solicites to sin; and further than that he cannot
go: But the Holy Spirit, in his leading to Grace and Holiness, pursues this
with a Determining and Overcoming Power; so as that the Effect (which he aims
at) shall certainly be produced. This we must grant, or else we must hold a
parity of Operation betwixt the two Spirits, that the Holy Spirit has but the
same causal Influx upon what is good, which the wicked Spirit has upon what is
evil; (then which nothing can be more absurd!)

2. Yet it is Power acted and exerted with all sweetness, mildness, and
gentleness. Here Is leading, but no Force, Conduct, but no Compulsion, no
Coaction; vehemens Inclinatio, non Coactio; (Ghorran:) The Will is determined,
but so as that not the least violence is done to it, to the infringing of its
Liberty. Ne arbitreris istam asperam molestamque violentiam; dulcis est, suavis
est, ipsa suavitas te trahit. Aug.
How spontaneously does the Person led follow him that leads him! so it is here.
This, (and all the other workings of the Spirit,) are admirably suited to the
Nature of Reasonable and Free Agents. Efficacious Grace does not at all destroy
Natural Liberty. Where the Spirit does not find sinners willing, by his sweet
Methods he makes them willing. Psalm. 110.3. Thy people shall be willing in the
day of thy power; (a day of power, yet willing.) Even the Spirits Drawing, is
managed with all consistency to the freedom of the will; (...), (Chrysostom.) he
draws, but it is one that he makes willing to follow. Hos. 2.14. Behold I will
allure her --; (ay, there is the Spirits leading!) This being the constant and
avowed Doctrine of the Protestants, and Ductus spiritus, non est impulsus
violentus, quo rapimur inviti ut stipites; sed est efficax persuasio, qua ex
nolentibus efficimur volentes. Par. (with many others.)
(particularly) their Explication of the Spirits leading in the Text; how
injurious and invidious are the Popish Writers, in their traducing and
calumniating of them, as if they asserted the Spirit in This, or any Other Act,
to work with Compulsion, or in a way destructive to man's Essential Liberty:
It Is a vile scandal! And yet how do Esthius, Salmeron, Contzen, (upon the
Words,) charge our Divines with it! We perfectly concur with Blessed St.
Enchirid. Cap. 64. de verbis Apostol. Sermon. 13. c. 11, 12.
Austin, (in that excellent passage of his cited by the Rhemists:) As many as
are led by the Spirit, he means not, (says he,) that the Children of God are
violently compelled against their Wills, but that they be sweetly drawn, moved,
or induced to do good. (But no more of this!)

IV. The Extent of this Leading of the Spirit. The Extent of it.
A threefold account may be given of that.

1. In regard of the Subject or person led. So it extends, to the Whole Man;
First to the Interior Acts of the Soul in its several Faculties,
(Understanding, Will, and Affections;) And then to the Exterior Acts of the
Body; yea, to the whole Conversation: (For all these are comprehended within,
and fall under, the Spirits Leading.) For as his Sanctifying Operation extends
to all of these; (the God of Peace sanctify you wholly, and I pray God your
whole Spirit, Soul and Body, be preserved blameless unto the coming of Christ;
1 These. 5.23.) So does his Guiding Operation also; (these two being
Commensurate and Coextensive.) This might be made out in Particulars, was I not
afraid of too much prolixity.

2. In regard of the Object or Matter that the Spirit leads unto. So it extends
to the whole Duty of a Christian; to all that he is to Know, Believe, and Do.
Look as the Word (in its External Leading,) guides us in all things that
concern Faith and Practice; (it being a complete and perfect Rule, 2 Timothy 3.16,
17.) so it is with the Spirit in his Internal Leading too. Joh. 14.26.
For Knowledge and Faith, the Promise is; But the Comforter, which is the Holy
Ghost, whom the Father will send in my Name, he shall teach you all things, and
bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you. John.
16.13.
And again, Howbeit when he the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you into
all Truth: (see 1 John 2.20. -- 27.) And so it is as to Holiness also; this
Spirit directs those (who have him,) to, and in the Practice of Holiness in its
full and utmost Extent and Latitude. Tit. 2.12.
As the Grace of God (the Gospel Without) teaches us, that denying ungodliness,
and worldly Lusts; we should live soberly, righteously, godly in this present
world; (which is the sum of all Duty toward God, toward Men, and toward
our selves:) So the Spirit Within, teaches, guides, inclines to all these. His
Gracious Conduct is not confined to, does not terminate in this or that
particular Duty of Religion, no, but it extends to every Duty, to the whole
Obedience of a Christian.

3. In regard of the Degree and Measure of it. Concerning which it is clear,
that this Leading of the Spirit (in the Directing, Inclining, Governing Notions
of it,) is not as to Degree equal in all God's Children. All have the Thing in
the Necessary and Substantial part of it; yet, so as that there is a Gradual
Difference in their having of it; (Some having more, and some less.) He being a
Free and Arbitrary Agent, does proportion this Act of his Grace to different
Persons as he pleases. And he making Some more ductil to his Leadings than
Others, accordingly he vouchsafes more of Them to Those, than he does to
Others. But in None does it reach so high, as to render them perfect here. For
although we should grant, (which I do not,) that the Spirit should advance his
Guidance, (considered in it self, and as it comes from Him,) to such a Degree
and Pitch, as to lay the Foundation of Perfection in Saints here below; yet
considering, what the Capacity of the Subjects of this Act is here, (they being
Flesh as well as Spirit;) it is not imaginable that de Facto and in Eventu, they
should ever here be perfect upon it. Wherefore it must be bounded and limited,
though not from what the Spirit could do, yet from what he is pleased to do in
Believers in their present imperfect state. He shall guide you into [all
Truth;] what, so as to make Saints Omniscient or Infallible? He guides unto all
Holiness, what, so as to render them sinless and impeccable here on Earth? we
must by no means carry it thus high! It therefore must be qualified thus; He
shall guide you into all Truth, (i. e.) into the Knowledge of all Necessary and
Fundamental Truths: And he shall guide you into all Holiness, i. e. so far as
your present state admits of, and so far as is necessary for your future Glory.
Beyond this Measure we must not extend or heighten the Spirits Leading. For the
truth is, if we take it in this bounded Notion, we secure the Thing; but if we
go higher, we totally undermine and nullify it, (as all Experience proves.)

And (by the way) Observe, that this Guidance of the Spirit in the General, and
that Guidance of His in Particular, (in the Duty of Prayer,) do much stand upon
the same level. Insomuch, that as the Former, (the Spirits immediate Guiding of
Believers in the Matter and Manner of their Actions,) does not thereupon render
Them or Their Actions perfectly Holy and free from all mixtures of sin: So
neither does the Latter, (the Spirits immediate Guidance and Assistance in the
Matter and Manner of Prayer,) render the Prayers of such infallible, or of
equal Authority with the Scriptures; (as some Object.) Because as to Both, this
Agency of the Spirit is to be limited, partly from the Consideration of the
present State of the subject in whom it is exerted; and partly, from the
Spirits Aim and End therein. It Is true, (to obviate a bad Inference that may be
drawn from hence,) the Apostles themselves considered as but Men, and as men in
the State of Imperfection, so they were fallible as we are. But as they had in
matters of Faith and Doctrine for a special End, that Extraordinary Guidance
and Direction from the Spirit, which no common Believers now have; so They,
(and They only) became Infallible. Wherefore, although Saints now are partakers
of a special Assistance and Guidance from the Spirit in Prayer, and in their
General Course of Life, quoad veritatem rei; yet this does not make them
infallible in the One, or impeccable in the Other; it being vouchsafed to them
but in such a Degree, as is consistent with their present state, and
subservient to the End of the Spirit in his present Operations in them; Which
is but to guide them to necessary Truth and Holiness, to help them in their
Infirmities, (and the like;) but not to advance them to Apostolical Endowments;
Of which now, the Evangelical Doctrine being published and sealed, there is no
Necessity.

And thus I have gone over the Doctrinal Explication of the Leading of the
Spirit. I come now to resolve some Practical Enquiries about it; (which will be
in stead of the Application.)

The First is this; How may We, as to Our selves or Others know, 1. Enquiry.
whether We, or They be led by the Spirit of God?

It highly concerns us to be very inquisitive about this. Both because our
Sonship to God must be evidenced by it; (for the Text is express, As many (and
no more then) as are led by the Spirit, are the Sons of God:) and also because
there are great Mistakes in Men about this. The Most lay claim to it, when yet
(God knows) but very few partake of it in truth and reality. How many please
themselves with the thoughts of their being led by the Spirit, when it is most
obvious they are not:

Every man in the World is acted by Some Spirit or Other. Omnes Homines aguntur
aliquo Spiritu. Orig.
Now there being different and contrary Spirits, (some Evil, and some Good,)
the Question is, What that is which we are led and acted by? There Is the Spirit
of the World, 1 Cor. 2.12.
(by which the Men of the World are led:) There Is the Corrupt and Sinful
Spirit, (Do you think that the Scripture says in vain, Jam. 4.5.
The Spirit that dwells in us, lusts to envy?) by this all in the
Unregenerate state are led: There Is the Spirit of Whoredom; Hos. 4.12. the
Spirit of perverseness, Is. 19.14. the Spirit of seduction; 2 Timothy 4.1. (under
the Conduct of which, too many are.) These are the Evil Spirits within Us,
which influence Men in their Actings. And then there is the Grand Evil Spirit
without, the Devil; the Spirit that works in the Children of Disobedience,
Ephesians. 2.2. And Oh what an Heart-piercing, Soul-afflicting thing is it to
consider, how the Generality of Men are led by this wicked Spirit! All these
Spirits are Evil.

In Opposition to which, there are Other Spirits that are Good. And they are
either the Renewed Spirit in Gods people; (the Heart as sanctified, as having a
Vital, Supernatural Principle infused into it, which leads and inclines to
Holiness:) Or the Renewing Spirit, Gods own Spirit; (of whom the Text speaks.)

These Spirits are contrary to the Former, both in Themselves, and also in
their Leadings. For as They are all for what is Evil, so These are all for what
is Good. And the Contrariety is such betwixt them, as that they are (...),
incompatible in the same Subject; (in their full, entire Power and Strength.)
So as that a person can be led but by One of them; Both cannot lead together;
(I mean, as to a Man's General Course, and as to their Absolute Power and
Dominion in Him.)

The Text speaking of the Leading of Gods Spirit, the Enquiry must be confined
to that: And so its laid down, How may we know whether we be led by the Spirit
of God?

For the Resolution of which, I must refer you to what I have been upon. Having
said so much in the Opening of the Thing it self, by the comparing of your
selves with that, you will be able to determine your own Case; whether it
belong to you or not? It would be superfluous for me to enlarge again upon
those Heads in the Application, which I have already been so large upon in the
Explication. Only therefore, (to give some brief Direction,) I would desire you
to look back.

1. To the Essential and Constitutive Acts included in the Holy Spirits
Leading: (viz. Guidance, Inclination of the Heart to Good, Corroboration,
Gubernation.) Art thou One that art guided by this Spirit to and in the great
Duties of Christianity? One, who art strongly inclined to what is good? One,
that feel an inward Divine strengthening for Doing and Suffering? One, that
art ruled and governed by this Spirit? Surely, thou art led by Him! But if it
be otherwise, thou art led not by This, but by some Other Spirit.

2. To the Matter or Terminus of the Spirits Leading; Truth and Holiness. Do
thy Opinions carry Truth in them? thy Practices, Holiness? Oh then thou art led
by the Spirit. But what shall we say to those, who are led away ((...)) with
the error of the wicked; (2 Pet. 3.17.) or led away (...)) with diverse lusts, 2 Timothy 3.6. why it is a concluded Case, these are not led by the Spirit. The
Course discovers the Guide. The Fruits of the Spirit ever accompany the Leading
of the Spirit. Principiata respondent suis Principiis: If the Action be Holy,
Spiritual, and Good, such as suits with the Holy Spirit; it then proceeds from
Him; but if it be sinful and wicked, Satan and thy own evil Heart are thy
Leaders in it, and to it. Whoever does not righteousness, is not of God, 1 John
3.10.
(nor led by his Spirit.) What live in Drunkenness, Uncleanness, Sensuality,
Injustice, Malice, Hatred? And yet, pretend to the Conduct of the good Spirit?
What a Delusion is this to thy self, what a Reproach and Injury to the Blessed
Spirit!

3. To the Rule, by which the Spirit leads; the written Word of God. He
Indicted this Word, and he Guides by it. The Spirit, and the Word go hand in
hand together. Is your Faith regulated by this? Your Conversations steered by
this? hereby you may know, that the Spirit leads you. But if any Believe, Live,
Speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no light in them; Is.
8.20. He that knows God, hears us; he that is not of God, hears not us;
hereby know we the Spirit of truth, and the Spirit of Error: 1 John 4.6. Oh let
all take heed of fathering any thing upon the Holy Spirit, which does not
comport with, nor is founded upon the Holy Scriptures. The Enthusiast is very
bold with the Spirit, but his Arrogance and Folly shall be made manifest (at
one time or another.)

4. To the manner of the Spirits Leading; He leads with Power and Efficacy.
Well, what do you find of this? what have you more than a bare directive Light?
is there a Power working in you, Ephesians. 3.20.
effectually to incline and draw you to what is Good? To beat down and subdue
the innate Renitency and Reluctance of the Will? Oh here is the Leading of the
Spirit! To find out which two things must be searched into:

1. Whether it be the Spirit of God that leads us?

2. Whether he leads us in a peculiar and saving, or only in a common and
general way? Now the first must be found out by the foregoing Heads: the last,
by that Head which I am now upon. If the Spirit work in me as a Spirit of
Power, as well as of Light and Direction; I may conclude I am led by Him.

I beseech you, lay these Trials and your Hearts close together, and the
Decision then will be easy and safe. And pray consider, as the Spirits Leading
must evidence your Divine Sonship, so the Things set before you must evidence
the reality of that Divine Leading.

A Second Enquiry is,

What Inducements are there to excite and move men to endeavor, to attain and
live under this Leading of Gods Spirit? 2. Enquiry.


Answ. Many and Great! Oh, how strong are the Motives that are proper for the
urging of this!

1. As First, The Excellency of the Thing. The Person leading, he is excellent;
(the great Spirit of God:) The Act, (Divine and Supernatural Leading,) that is
excellent; The Object, (which this tends unto and terminates in,) that is
excellent; (as the Loving of God, Delighting in God, Conformity to God:) all
carry a transcendent Glory and Excellency in them. Oh did but sinners know what
this (...), this Conduct and Guidance of the Spirit is? what a blessed thing
it is to possess and feel it? how earnest would they be in their Desires and
Pursuits after it! I Am sure, The Saints that have it, would not be without it,
(no not one Day,) for Millions of Worlds.

2. The Necessity of it. The Leading of the Spirit? Oh how highly necessary is
it! who can be without it! What becomes of the poor blind Man that has none to
guide him? Of the weak Child, that has none to uphold it? Alas the poor sinner,
in both respects, does more need the Spirits Leading inwardly, than either of
These need external Leading. Such is our Spiritual Blindness, our Aptness to
wander, our Ignorance of our Way, our lyableness to fall into Pracipices, (and
the like;) as that without a Divine Hand to guide us, we are lost. And such too
is our Spiritual Debility and Weakness, as that if the Spirit of God do not
hold us up in our Going, ( taking us by our arms, Hos. 11.3.) we fall
immediately. How absolutely necessary therefore is the Spirits Leading, both
for Direction, and also for Sustentation! It Is true, God has planted in Man a
Natural Faculty, to guide and direct him in his Actings; the (...),
Understanding, Reason, Conscience, to be his Director and Monitor as to what he
is to do: And this, in things of a mere Natural and Moral Consideration, may be
of great use to him; Prove. 20.27. the Spirit of man is the Candle of the Lord:
Ah, but as to things of a Spiritual Consideration, (the matters of Evangelical
Faith and Practice) he must have an higher Guide and Leader, even the Holy
Ghost, or else, in these things he will be at an utter loss. Jer. 10.23. O Lord, I
know that the way of man is not in himself; it is not in man that walks to
direct his steps: Prove. 16.9. a man's heart devises his way, but the Lord
directs his steps. The Natural Light separate from what is Supernatural, is a
very incompetent and insufficient Guide; (which evinces the Necessity of the
Spirits Guidance.)

3. As the Natural Guide is defective and insufficient, so there are other
Guids which are destructive and damnable; (such as Satan, Depraved Nature,
Indwelling Sin, the Flesh, the World.) Oh what dangerous Guides are these! If
they be our Leaders whither will they lead us? why first to sin and wickedness
here, and then to Hell hereafter. It Is with them as with Solomon's Whore; Prove.
7.27.
Her house is the way to Hell, going down to the chambers of Death. Can the
Course be good when the Guide is bad? and can the End be good, when the Course
is bad? (neither can be expected!) The Conversation, Naturally comports with
the Leader; and the End judicially comports with the Conversation. So that if
these lead you, this will inevitably follow upon it, you will be very wicked in
this Life, and very miserable in the Life to come.

And besides this, pray consider what a base thing it is for such a Creature as
Man, to be under the Conduct and Government of such base things as These! Oh
what a Debasement is it, to him who is of such a Divine Extract and Original,
to be at the beck and ordering of such vile Things as Satan, Sin. (and the
rest!) Yet this is the misery of the Fallen State; upon Adams Fall, Man has
sadly lost his way, and has put himself under woeful Guides; And one great thing
done in his Restoration to his Primitive State, is to reduce him to God as his
First and Best Guide and Leader.

To drive this a little further, (in a word) know that where it is not the
Leading of the Good Spirit, it is the Leading of the Evil Spirit. For One of
these it must be; not a Man in the World but he is led by One of them. Now do
you not dread the thoughts of being led by Satan? Oh it will be so, unless you
be led by this Holy Spirit of God. What the Devil thy Leader? Oh dreadful! What
comes after a Devil- leading, but a Devil- tormenting!

4. Weigh the Way and Manner of the Spirits leading. You see, how the Conduct
of the Opposite Leaders is stated; well how does this Leader manage his
Conduct? with great exactness and Wisdom; he so leads, as never to mislead; so
as always to direct with the deepest Judgment; (For, as in all his Other Acts,
so in This, he is the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the Spirit of
Counsel, the Spirit of Knowledge -- Isa. 11.2. I will instruct thee (says God,)
and teach thee in the way which thou shall go; I will guide thee [with mine
eye;] (i. e. with great care and accuracy:) Psalm. 32.8. Thus the Spirit leads.
And He does this, with infinite Truth and Faithfulness also; As the wise man,
(personating his Father,) says, I have taught thee in the way of wisdom, I have
led thee in right paths; Prove. 4.11. And as Abraham's Servant, (in the
Particular Case before him,) Blessed be the Lord God of my Master Abraham,
which has led me in the right way -- Genesis 24.48. And as the Psalmist, (with
respect to Gods Conduct of Israel in the Wilderness,) He led them forth by the
right way; (Psalm. 107.7.) Such a Leading is this of the Spirit as to Believers
in their whole course; he always leads them in the right way. And then, he
leads safely; (in reference both to the Way, and to the End.) He led them on
safely, Psalm. 78.53. (I do but allude to it:) Here Is no such Leader as Those
the Prophet speaks of; Is. 9.16. The Leaders of this people cause them to err,
they that are led of them are destroyed. Oh who then would not be desirous to
be led by him? The skilfullest, faithfullest, safest Guide the Traveller
pitches upon: O Christian, wilt not thou do the same for thy precious and
immortal Soul?

5. The Advantages, Benefits, Blessings, that attend and result from this
Leading of the Spirit, are great, and glorious. As (to instance in a Few,)
inward Peace and Comfort: wherever the Spirit is a Leading Spirit, there he is
(or will be) a Comforting Spirit. A Readiness to all Dutys of Holiness; so as
to do them spontaneously, and with Delight: Gal. 5.18. If ye be led by the
Spirit, ye are not under the Law; (i. e. so as in your Obedience to act from a
servile Spirit, and from the mere External Compulsions of the Law; but having
the gracious Conduct of the Spirit, this will make you do all Freely, with the
greatest Promptitude and Alacrity.) Sonship to God: (so it here comes in,) as
many as are led by the Spirit, are the Sons of God. As it leads to Conversion,
it makes us the Sons of God; as it leads after Conversion, it evidences us to
be the Sons of God; (as has been already said.) If the Spirit be thy Leader,
God is thy Father: (And what a Privilege is this! John 1.12. 1 John 3.1.) And
then, (as the Consummation of all,) comes the Glory and Blessedness of Heaven,
as the certain portion of such who are led by the Spirit. Death and Hell are
not more sure upon the leading of Sin and Satan, than Life and Heaven are sure
upon the leading of this Spirit. God ever saves in Heaven such whom he leads on
Earth. Gal. 6.26.
As many as walk according to this Rule, mercy and Peace be upon them -- Thou
shall guide me with thy Counsel, Psalm. 73.24.
and afterward receive me to Glory.

All being put together, and seriously weighed, have I not said enough and
enough to excite you all, to attain and close with this Blessed Leading of the
Spirit of God? (Much more might have been added by way of Motive; but if what
has been said, will not prevail, I despair of ever prevailing with you.)

A Third Enquiry follows,

3. Enquiry.
How may this Leading of the Spirit be attained? What is to be done by us, that
we may be thus led by Him?

Answ. In order to this, take the following Directions.

1. There must be the having of the Spirit, before there can be the Leading of
the Spirit, This Order is founded in the Nature of the Thing; We cannot expect
to participate of the Spirits Operations, (such as are saving,) before we
participate of the Spirit Himself. Therefore, pray attend upon the Gospel, (by
which He is conveyed to Sinners;) and then, when you have once received him, he
will not be Non est spiritus sanctus otiosus movet Mentes et ducit. Mel.
Idle, and Ineffective, but an Operative and Leading Spirit in you.

2. The Antecedent, First leading of the Spirit must be had; before there can
be the having of his Subsequent and Secondary Leading. That is to say, He must
First lead you to God by Conversion; first bring you into a state of Grace; and
then way is made for his subsequent Leading and Direction. When he has been a
quickening Spirit, (in the infusing of a vital Principle into the Soul,) then
succeeds this Act which I am upon. And not till then; for who will attempt to
lead a thing that is dead? This Method of the Spirit therefore must be
regarded, and complied with. It Is first Sanctification, then Manuduction, (in
the several Things contained therein.)

3. Be willing to follow the Leading, the Motions of the Spirit. He gives again
and again his secret Guidance to you; (showing what you are to do, what not:)
if this be followed and complied with, he will continue it; if not, he will withdraw,
and leave you to follow the Conduct of your own Inclinations; (a sore
Judgment!) Psalm. 81.11, 12. My people would not hearken to my voice, and Israel
would none of me: So I gave them up unto their own Hearts Lust, and they walked
in their own Counsel: (Oh dreadful Word!) The same will the Spirit do, upon our
rejecting or resisting of his Leading. He may long strive, but he will not
always strive; (Genesis 6.3.) If the person led shall once begin to struggle with
him that leads him, and shall refuse to follow his Guidance; what is then to be
done, but to leave him to himself? Continued, rooted, allowed Resistance to to
the Spirit, makes him so to cast off a person as to lead him no more. His
Initial Workings in this are to be closed with, or he goes no further. That one
Act in the Leading of the Spirit, ( viz. his Powerful Inclining of the Heart to
comply with what he leads unto;) secures all the Rest. If thou art an Opposer
of the Spirit, he will not be thy Guide: Yield to Him, and close with Him, and
he will not withhold this Grace from thee.

4. Let your dependence be upon God and his Spirit, for Guidance and Direction.
Would you have Him to lead you? Oh let your Trust and Relyance be upon him; and
see that you renounce all confidences in yourselves. He that thinks he has
Wisdom or Grace enough in himself, to order his Conversation aright; shall
never find the Spirit to be a Guide to him. The meek will he guide in Judgment,
the meek will he teach his way; Psalm. 25.9. When a man is brought to this
meek, humble Frame, then he is in the way of the Spirits Leading. Prove. 3.5, 6.
Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not to thy own understanding.
In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths. Christian
Prudence, Caution, and Circumspection, is our Duty; but do we lay the stress of
our Confidence upon that? The steps of our strength shall be straightened, and our
own Counsel shall cast us down; (as he speaks, Job 18.7.) Man's goings are of
the Lord, how can a man then understand his own way? Prove. 20.24. So long as
thou think, thou can go by thy self, the Spirit will not take thee by the
hand to lead thee.

5. Pray much for this Grace of the Spirit. It being a free and Arbitrary Act
on his part, he will be sought to for it; and give it forth in that way which
best suits with his Sovereignty. Psalm. 25.5. Psalm. 5.8. Psalm. 31.3. Psalm.
139.24. Psalm. 143.10.
How much was David in Prayer to God for this! Lead me in thy Truth, and teach
me: -- Lead me O Lord in thy Righteousness, -- Make thy way strait before my
face: -- For thy names sake, lead me, and guide me: -- Lead me in the way
Everlasting: -- Teach me to do thy will, for thou art my God; thy Spirit is
good, lead me into the land of uprightness. Oh what a desirable Mercy is this
Leading Mercy! And Sirs, will you not pray and pray servently for it? Yea, will
you not every day make this your request? Blessed God and Spirit, let me be led
by thee this day. First he works as a Spirit of Prayer (in the Drawing forth of
the Souls Desires after this Mercy,) and then as a Guiding and Leading Spirit.
And the Former is a good Plea for the latter; Psalm. 143.8. Cause me to know the
way wherein I should walk, for I lift up my Soul unto thee. Oh that we might
all follow these Directions, and then we should have not the Thing only, but a
large Measure thereof!

It may in the Fourth place be qu^ery'd,

What Duties are incumbent upon those who are led by the Spirit?

4. Enquiry.
Answ. Such as these.

1. They should more and more follow the Leadings of the Spirit. I hope I speak
to some of you who have These, and live daily under them; if so, what is your
Duty? Why, in an Higher Degree, to obey, and fall in with them. The Following
of them, (as that is Simply and Absolutely considered,) is to be supposed and
granted from your being led by the Spirit; (for the Former is necessarily
included in the Latter:) And therefore, it is not This, as considered in it
self, that I am so much to press upon you, as the Manner, Degree, and Measure
of it. And, in this respect, the Best stand in need of Counsel and Quickening;
for who do so follow the Spirits Leading as they ought? We have an excellent
Guide, one that leads us with infinite Wisdom and Faithfulness; that directs us
to nothing but what is Good, and Good for us: Ah, but here is our sin and
misery, we do not carry our selves as we ought, in such an Obeying and
Following of his Conduct as that requires.

As to this therefore I would excite you to follow the Spirits Leading thus.

(1.) More Exactly; So as to act just as he would have you act, to move just as
he would have you move; to keep pace with him step by step in all his Holy
Motions. What Israel did to the Cloud, [At the Commandment of the Lord they
journyed, and at the Commandment of the Lord they pitched; as long as the Cloud
abode upon the Tabernacle, they rested in the Tents: -- And when the Cloud was
taken up in the Morning, then they journyed; whether it was by day or night
that the Cloud was taken up, they journyed: Numb. 9.18.] that we should do to
the Holy Spirit in the exact Ordering of all our Motions by and according to
his Guidance. This, should be the Aim and Endeavor of every one of us, though
through weakness and infirmity, we cannot Actually and Universally come up to
it.

(2.) Follow the Spirit more fully: God gives this high Character of Caleb,
that he followed him fully; Numb. 14.24 Art thou one that art led by the
Spirit: Oh follow him fully! Whatever Truth he would have you believe, let it
be believed; Whatever Duty he would have you practice; let it be practiced;
whatsoever Sin he would have you mortify, let it be mortifyed. As the Scribe
said to Christ (Master, Matthew. 8.19.
I will follow thee whithersoever thou go;) so do you say to the Spirit, I
will follow thee whithersoever thou leadest me; Excite me to Good, I Will do it;
restrain me from Evil, I Will shun it. Blessed are they who thus follow this
Leader!

(3.) Do this more Uniformly and Constantly: in being more eaven, Fixed and
Steady, in holy walking.

4. More Readily, and Freely: Oh there should be no Demurring, Disputing,
Consulting with Flesh and Blood, hanging back in the Case; but a Willing,
Ready, Cheerful Compliance with whatever the Spirit leads us unto! How well
does this comport, as with the Nature and Essence, so with the Matter and
Manner of his Leading!

(5.) Follow him, so as to make further Progress in the way wherein he guides
you; so as continually to be getting nearer and nearer to the End of your
Journey.

6. And Lastly, Follow him with stronger Resolution and Purpose of Heart:
whatever Difficulties, Discouragements, Dangers, you meet with, yet resolve
that nothing shall make you leave your Guide, or the Holy Course that he has led
you to. (And thus I would persuade you to rise higher and higher in your
Following of the Spirit.)

2. Let it be your great and constant care and endeavor to get the Spirits
Leading continued to you. You have it, pray keep it. Can it be well with a
Christian when This is suspended or withdrawn from him? How does he Wanderand
Bewilder himself when the Spirit does not Guide Him! How backward is he to good,
when the Spirit does not bend and incline him thereunto! How unable to go when
the Spirit does not uphold him! What vile Lusts and Passions rule him, when the
Spirit does not put forth his holy and gracious Government over him! Oh it is of
infinite concern to all that belong to God to preserve and secure to themselves
the Spirits Leading! Take a good Man without this, and he is like a Ship without
a Pilot, a Blind Man without a Guide, a poor Chlid that has none to sustain it,
the rude Multitude that have none to keep them in any Order. What a sad
difference is there in the same Person, as to what he is when the Spirit leads
him, and as to what he is when the Spirit leaves him! Oh therefore let us
always keep him with us! I may allude to that passage of Moses to Hobab, Numb.
10.31. And he said, leave us not I pray thee; forasmuch as thou know how we
are to encamp in the Wilderness and thou may be to us in stead of Eyes. So
let none of us let the Spirit depart, or occasion his Leaving of Us, for in the
Wilderness he will be as Eyes to us, to direct and show us our way. How dismal
would the state of the Israelites in the Wilderness have been, if there they
had not had the Cloud to guide them! So it is in the thing before us.

But does the Spirit at any time do this to Gods People? suspend and withdraw
his Guidance from Persons who once lived under it?

Answ. Leadings are not followed. This is a thing that grieves him; and when he
is Grieved, he Departs, withholds, and recalls his Former Gracious Influences;
(though not Totally and Finally, yet for a time, and in such a Degree:) As a
Guide, that is to conduct the Traveller; if this Traveller shall refuse to
follow him, or shall give unkind usage to him; what does the Guide then do? why
he recedes and leaves him to shift for himself: it is thus in the Case in hand:
If we comply with the Spirit in his Motions, and use him tenderly, he will hold
on in his Leading of us; but if otherwise, he will concern himself no more about
us. Oh take heed how you carry your selves toward him! Not only upon
Ingenuity; Jer. 2.17.
(its base to be unkind to our Guide; [ Have thou not procured this to thy self,
in that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, when he led thee by the way?] But
also upon the account of self-Love: for as we behave our selves to him, so he
will behave himself to us; Ita nos tractat, ut a nobis tractatur.

3. Labor after the having of the Leading of the Spirit, in an higher Degree
and Measure, than what as yet you have attained unto. It Is not enough merely to
keep it, but there must be a Getting more of it. As there should be a Rise in
our following, so we should press after a Rise in the Spirits Leading of us:
And that in a threefold respect; that he lead us

1. More Extensively, as to the Object.

2. With greater Light and Clearness, Power and Efficacy, as to the Manner:

3. With more Eavenness and Constancy, as to the Duration and Continuance of
it. He guides you to Truth, but does he guide you to all Truth? He guides you
unto Truth, but does he guide you into Truth? and is this his Constant and
Continued working in you? Oh this high Measure of it we should aspire at and
pant after! taking up with nothing short of it. (And so as to Holiness and
Practical Godliness, the same is to be endeavored after.) There is indeed much
Mercy in the lowest Degree of this Act; and they that have the lest should be
thankful: but yet a fuller Proportion may, and ought to be desired by every
Child of God. And surely, they who experience what this Leading of the Spirit
is, never think they have Enough of it.

4. So live, as that it may appear to others, that you are led by this Spirit.
Christians, your Actions and Conversations should be such, as may suit with the
Spirit that leads you; Such, as may evidence to the world, that you are not in
pretense only, but in truth and reality, under a Divine and Supernatural
Conduct. Do we lay claim to this? Oh then what Good do we do more, what Evil
less, than Others do! What, live in sin, do Evil things? (be Proud, Worldly,
Covetous, Passionate, Unclean, Malicious, Fraudulent?) and yet pretend you are
led by the Holy Spirit? Lord, what an Indignity and Affront do you put upon
Him! what a Cheat and Fallacy upon your own Souls! Pray never talk of This
unless your Lives be Holy and Good: For ye who are real Saints, oh that you
would often think of this, and look upon it as one of the highest Engagements to
Circumspect Walking! You that are Guided, by such a Word without, and such a
Spirit within, What manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy Conversation
and Godliness!

5. Be very thankful for this glorious Mercy. Led by the Spirit? admirable
Love! What Thankfulness is due to Father, Son and Spirit for it! (for all
These have an hand, though the last be more Immediately concerned in it.) When
you know not your way, this Spirit shows it to you; when you are weak and
feeble, not able to go, this Spirit strengthens you; ( I taught Ephraim also to
go, taking them by their arms -- Hos. 11.3.) When Others are left to the
Conduct of their Own Light, Understanding, Inclinations, (which lead them to
Sin and Death;) you are under the Conduct of this Gracious Spirit, (which leads
you to Grace and Glory:) what cause have you to admire this Distinguishing
Grace! How great is the Fathers Love in this! who, as Fathers here, when they
send their Sons into Foreign Countries, and they themselves cannot be with
them; they send a Tutor or Governor with them in all their Travels to instruct
and govern, and take care of them; Just so does your Heavenly Father do for
you, in, and by his Spirit in this state of your Pilgrimage and absence from
him. How great is the Love of the Son in this! for he has Purchased, and now
does Actually send this Spirit to be your Teacher, Monitor, and Guide. And how
great is the Love of the Spirit too in this! All his Operations carry infinite
Goodness and Condescension in them; but none more than this, his tender and
patient Guiding of us. Should not all the Persons therefore be heartily,
sincerely, and with the greatest enlargedness of Heart, blessed and adored for
it? Especially considering how they design and aim at the exalting of
Themselves by this very Act. As in the Miraculous Leading of the People of
Israel out of Egypt, through the Red Sea, (and so on;) set forth Isa. 43. V.
12. that led them by the right hand of Moses, with his glorious arm, dividing
the Water before them. -- V. 13, 14. that led them through the deep, as an
Horse in the Wilderness, that they should not stumble: As a Beast goes down
into the Valley, the Spirit of the Lord caused him to rest, so did thou lead
thy people; (for what end?) to make thy self a Glorious Name. Surely so in that
Spiritual and Gracious Leading that I am treating of, the great God, (whether
Essentially or Personally considered) designs much Glory and Adoration to
Himself. And let him have it, (for he well deserves it,) from all that have any
Experience of this Grace.

A Fifth Enquiry,

May such, who are led by the Spirit, fetch comfort from it? 5. Enquiry.
Is this a solid Bottom for any to build Holy Joy upon?

Undoubtedly it is! You who have it, may rejoice, and that greatly: For,

1. It Is a clear Evidence, a deciding Argument of your being the Sons of God.
And what a Soul-rejoycing Privilege is that! Sons of God? this assures of dear
Affection, tender Care, strong Protection, constant Provision, free Access to
God, ready Audience of Prayer, a gracious Presence in every Condition, a
favorable Acceptance of all Duties, a good Inheritance and Portion; and what
not? All These Blessings are yours, if ye be the Sons of God; and so you are,
if led by the Spirit. Oh then what a Ground of Comfort is this!

2. As it is a certain Evidence of Sonship here, so it is a certain Pledge of
Heaven and Salvation hereafter. And that, both upon the account of the Relation
which it instates in; ( For if Sons, then Heirs; Heirs of God, and Coheirs with
Christ; Romans 8.17.) And also upon the account of the Leading it self. For
wherever that is, as it is in Order to Salvation, so this Salvation by it shall
certainly be obtained. Never did any perish that lived under the Spirits
Guidance and Conduct. God ever saves where the Spirit leads. All that he guids,
come safe to the End of their Journey, to their Eternal Rest.

3. Besides the Things which are wrapped up in this Leading, besides the Matter
and Manner of it, (all of which carry in them Ground of the highest Joy;)
consider but two things Further about it.

1. That it is Abiding, Permanent, Continuing. The Spirit does not lead and
then leave, (as some Guids do with poor Travelers, deserting them in the midst
of their Dangers;) no, but he holds on, repeats and lengthens out this Act to
the very last. True, this depends upon Conditions on our part, (as ye have
heard:) but yet these do not make the thing Uncertain and liable to
Intercision; because it is part of the Spirits Leading, to direct, incline, and
overpower to the performance of those Conditions. So it is secured, as to the
Continuance of it to all the Elect of God. Every upright Christian may
triumphantly say with David, This God is our God for ever, and ever, he will be
our guide even unto death; (Psalm. 48.14.) The Cloud never left Israel, till it
brought them to the land of Promise; so it is here.

2. That it is managed and carried on all along, with Mixtures of all other
Grace: i. e. with the bestowing of inward Peace and Comfort, and of all supplys
necessary to the believing Soul. It Is not a bare, naked Leading, but such as is
attended with the Conveyance of all Other Mercies. (According to that
encouraging Text, Isai. 49.10. -- He that has Mercy on them, shall lead them,
even by the Springs of water shall he guide them) Is not here, Heb. 6.18.
(...), strong Consolation for all who are led by Gods Spirit?

In the Sixth and last place, it might be inquired,

6. Enquiry.
Since this Leading of the Holy Spirit is a Special and Discriminating Act; what
Inferences may be drawn from it, as being such?

I might instance in several, (if I had not already exceeded the Bounds of a
Sermon.) Therefore take but this One; That it is not a thing much to be wondered
at, that Saints and Sinners do so much differ, and that Saints and Saints do so
little differ.

The Difference 'twixt the two Former, is great; Light and Darkness, Heaven and
Hell, do not more differ than they. That which the One Loves, the Other hates;
in their visible Practices, there is little but Sin in the ^^e, there is Holiness
(though imperfect) in the other: The One Curses, Swears, takes Gods Name in
Vain, lives a brutish Life, minds not God; the Other fears God, avoids Evil,
desires to order Words, Thoughts, Actions by the Rule of the Word, Prays,
Sanctifies the Sabbath, does Good: is not here a vast Difference? There is
indeed! but can it be expected it should be otherwise; they being led by
Different and Contrary Spirits? Oh upon this no wonder that their Actings and
Courses are so different! Men will, and must Be, and Do according to the Spirit
which Guides and Governs them: Therefore the Unregenerate and Wicked being
under the Guidance and Power of the Evil Spirit, they will do what suits with
that Spirit: e contra, the Renewed and Sanctified being under the Guidance and
Power of the Holy Spirit, they will do what suits with that Spirit. And upon
this Foundation there must be an Everlasting Difference and Contrariety betwixt
them.

But then for Saints and Saints, they do not thus differ. As to lesser Matters,
there may be too much of Differences even amongst Them; but as to the
Fundamentals of Faith and Practice, so there is an admirable Harmony, Unity,
and Consent amongst them. Some live in one Age, some in another; some in one
Place, some in another: yet there is a blessed Oneness and Agreement amongst
them all. They believe the same Truths, perform the same Duties, attend upon
the same Worship, walk in the same path of Holiness, have and act the same
Graces, groan under the same burdens, drive on the same Designs: as Face
answers to Face so do they to one another. And whence is this? why from this,
they are all led by one and the same Spirit. Hence it is that they do so
concur in all the Necessary and Vital parts of Religion. We having the same
Spirit of Faith -- 2 Cor. 4.13. There is one Body, and one Spirit, (which
actuates and animates all that Body;) Ephesians. 4.4. It Is One and the self same
Spirit which works in all; (as the Apostle speaks in reference to Gifts, 1
Cor. 12.11.) As many as are led by the Spirit of God --; here are Many that are
led, but it is but One Spirit that leads them all. This is that which causes
such an Unanimity and Harmony in Gods people, both in Matters of Faith and
Practice. Oh that the World might see more of the Thing! and then, the Reason
thereof would be obvious!

SERMON XXVII. Quest. What advantage may we expect from CHRIST'S PRAYER for
Union with HIMSELF, and the Blessings relating to it?
JOHN 17.20, 21. Neither Pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall
believe on me through their word:

V. 21. That they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee; that
they also may be one in us: that the World may believe that thou have sent me.


IN this Chapter we have the admirable Prayer of Christ offered up to the
Father, a little before his last and greatest Sufferings. In this Prayer we may
observe the design and the contents of it. The design of it is to encourage his
Disciples, ver. 1. These words spoke Jesus, etc. He had spoke much in the
former Chapters for their comfort and encouragement, and in pursuit of the same
design he lifts up his eyes to Heaven and pours forth this Heavenly Prayer in
their hearing. The contents, that which he prays for, is Union with him and the
Father, and the blessings relating thereto, of which more particularly
afterward. The words considered jointly with the design and contents of the
Prayer, offer us this Observation:

Observe.
The People of Christ have great encouragement from his Prayer in reference to
Union with God, and the Blessings relating to it.

In the prosecution hereof, 1. I shall give some account of the severals he
prayed for, And 2. Show what encouragement we have to expect what he prays for.


For the first, he prays for Union with Himself and the Father, for Faith the
bond of this Union, for Holiness the effect of it; for Perseverance, that it
may continue, and not be dissolved and interrupted, lastly for Glory, the
Consummation of this Union.

1. For Faith, that those may have Faith who did not, or do not yet believe,
ver. 22. That the World may believe that thou have sent me. He prays, that
those who were chosen to Glory as the end, and so to Faith as the means, may be
brought to believe on Christ, as sent of the Father to be the Mediator, and so
accept of him as their Prophet, Priest and King.

2. He prays for Holiness, the growth and increase of it, ver. 17. Sanctify
them through thy truth, thy word is truth. The word of Truth through the Spirit
working with it, and making impressions by it on the Heart, is the instrument
and mean, both to begin Holiness in regeneration, 1 Pet. 1.23. James 1.18. and
to promote it where it is begun, 1 Pet. 2.2. He prays that the Lord would make
his word effectual to cleanse and sanctify them more and more. He would have
those who are given to him to be sanctified, truly separated from Sin, the
World, and carnal Self, truly consecrated and appropriated to himself, truly
offered up and employed for him, as those who are wholly his, and cannot
without Sacrilege be converted to other ends and uses than those that are his.

3. He prays for perseverance, that those who are given him, may hold out and
continue to the end, in Faith, and Holiness, and Union with Him and the Father;
that they may not fall away to unbelief, or profaneness, nor be ever separated
from him with whom they are once united, ver. 11. Holy Father, keep through
thine own name, those whom thou have given me, etc. keep them in all dangers,
in all assaults, in all trials; secure them from Sin, from Satan, from the
World, that they may be neither frighted, nor enticed from me. Through thine
own name, the name of God is that by which he is known, as we are known by our
names, all those glorious perfections, whereby he has made known himself unto
us, his Power, Wisdom, Goodness, Faithfulness, Sovereignty, Allsufficiency,
etc. He would have all the infinite Excellencies and Perfections of God, all by
which he is called and known, engaged for the security of his People, that none
of them may fall away, and be lost. Keep them by thy Power, by thy Wisdom,
Goodness, Sovereignty, Allsufficiency, etc. Or if we take these words for an
argument wherewith he urges this Petition, it is of no less force, Keep them
for thine own names sake, for the honor of thine own name, so he engages the
honor of God for the security of his people that none of them may fall away;
and that is the greatest, the strongest engagement in the World, and gives the
best security that possibly can be. The Lord will do more for his own Names
sake, than for all the works of his Hands, than for all that is in Heaven and
Earth besides. His Honor is his Interest, so that the Interest of God is
thereby engaged to secure the Eternal concerns of his People. Those men in the
World that we are not secure of, and can have no confidence in otherwise; yet
if their Interest do engage them for us, we think our selves so far sure of
them. Interest amongst men is the strongest obligement, if they understand it,
and have but so much respect to themselves as to be true to it. Christ by his
Prayer engages the Interest of his Father, his Name, his Honor, for the
security of his People, that they may not fall away, and be lost; and if we
acknowledge him to be God, we cannot in the least suspect, either that he knows
not what his Interest is, or that he will not be true to it. When it is for his
Names sake, or his Honor to secure his people, it shall certainly be done, and
this is that which Christ urges in this Petition.

4. He prays for Glory, ver. 22, 24. And the glory which thou gave me, I have
given them. It is the Glory of Christ that he is the Son of God, his only Son
by Eternal Generation, and Heir of all things, Heb. 1.2, 3. Joh. 1.14. Now such
a Glory will Christ have for his people, something like it, though in a way
below it; he will have them to be Sons and Heirs of God, Coheirs with himself.
A wonderful Glory indeed, and such a degree of it as could never have entered
into the Heart of man to expect or believe, if the Lord himself had not given
assurance of it, Romans 8.17. And if Children, then Heirs, Heirs of God, and
joynt-Heirs with Christ, All that are given him, he will have to be adorned
with his own title, and be accounted and called Sons of God, and all that are
Sons, he will have to be Heirs, and joint-Heirs with himself, not of some
meaner part of his Fathers possession, but even of his Kingdom, Jam. 2.5. Has
not God chosen the poor of this world rich in Faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom,
etc. being Heirs, they have hopes to inherit, Tit. 3.7. They have a Title upon
this account, and so hope; but Christ not satisfied with this prays also that
they may have possession, ver. 24. Father I will that they also whom thou have
given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory, which thou have
given me; that they may behold it, so as to partake of it, this sight will be
the highest, the happyest enjoyment, it will be an enhappying, a glorifying
sight, a sight that will make them who behold it happy, perfectly so, eternally
so. The sight of Christ's Glory will make them glorious, 1 John 3.1, 2. Beloved,
now we are the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be, but we
know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as
he is. We are Sons, that is a great Glory indeed, but there is a Glory to come
which is far greater, so great, that no expression can fully represent it to
us, or make it appear to be so much, so great, as indeed it is, but this is the
sum of it, we shall be like him in Glory, for we shall see how glorious he is.
The sight of our Glorious Redeemer, will make us glorious like him. When we are
in the sight of that Glory wherewith he now shines at the right hand of the
Throne of the Majesty on high, (to which the greatest brightness of the Sun is
less than a spark) we shall be adorned with his beams, and so made glorious. A
hint hereof we have in what is recorded of Moses, who when he was admitted to a
nearer converse with God, it is said his face shined, Exodus 34.29, 35. His face
was horned, (as the word imports) it appeared in such a form as the rays of
the Sun appear to us, his face sent forth beams like the Sun, there was such a
radiant Luster, such a Glory in his face, as the weak eyes of mortals could not
bear, could not look on. When we are where Christ is, and see him in the
brightness of his Glory (which is that he prays for) the sight of it will
transform our Souls from Glory to Glory, as the Apostles expression is in
reference to that of Moses, 2 Cor. 3.18. a Glory will be derived upon our Souls
from his Glory, and upon our bodies too; that Glorious Vision will be a
transforming sight, and change vile Bodies, so that they shall be fashioned
like unto his own glorious Body. Phil. 3.21.

5. He prays for Union, That they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and
I in thee, that they also may be one in us. This Union is a Mystery, a great
depth, such as I was loath to venture on, if it could have been avoided; what
my shallowness can say of it briefly, I shall comprize in some few particulars.

1. It is an Union of Believers with God, with the Father and the Son, not an
Union of Believers among themselves, at least not this only. For the Union
expressed in those first words (that they may be one) is declared or
illustrated in these following, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, and so
is the same Union with that in the last words, which is taken to be an Union
with the Father and the Son (that they may be one in or with us:) or else the
words here used to illustrate one thing, would not illustrate that, but
another. That they may be one, how? as thou Father art one in me, and I in
thee, so they may be one in us. Besides the same words in effect are used, ver.
22. that they may be one, even as we are one, and the same explained
immediately, ver. 23. I in them, ver. 26. I in them, by which without question
Christ both here and elsewhere expresses the Union of Believers with himself;
though I will not deny that the Union among Believers themselves may be
included, being a consequent of the other, and that which Unites them with
Christ, unites them among themselves.

2. This Union has some resemblance of that between the Father and the Son,
that they may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, (...), as,
denotes not any thing of equality, but only something of likeness. That we may
know what of resemblance there is, we must inquire, (but very modestly, as
becomes those who are so much in the dark,) how the Father is said to be in the
Son, and he in the Father. For this purpose Christ may be considered, either as
God, or as Man. As God he is in the Father, and the Father in him, or which is
the same, he is one with the Father, because they are of one and the same
Nature and Essence, the same Infinite Excellencies, and Essential Perfections
that are in the Father, are also in the Son; upon this account the Son is said
to be in the Father, and the Father in him, Joh. 14.10, 11. Believe thou not
that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? Believe me, that I am in the
Father, and the Father in me, so that he that has seen the Son, has seen the
Father, ver. 9. and he that has known the Son, has known the Father, ver. 7.
because they are one and the same in Nature and Essence, the very same as to
all divine perfections. And thus the Father and Son with the Spirit are said to
be one, 1 John 5.7. For there are three that bear record in Heaven, the Father,
the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one; one in Essence, and all
the perfections which are Essential to God, though distinct in personality and
manner of subsistence. There is an Essential Union between the Father and the
Son, as he is God; no such Union must be imagined between them and Believers,
the distance is no less than infinite, and if there can be any resemblance, it
must be very remote.

If we consider Christ as Man, he may be said to be one with the Father, and is
so, because the same Spirit, which is called the Spirit of God, and the Spirit
of the Father, dwells in the Humane Nature of Christ, Matthew. 12.18. Joh. 3.34.
And this may help us better to apprehend, how we may be said to be one in or
with the Father and the Son. Therefore,

3. The most intelligible way of expressing this Union which I meet with, is
this, believers are said to be one with the Father, because that Spirit which
proceeds from him, and is called his Spirit, is in them. They are said to be
one with the Son, not only because that Spirit which proceeds from the Son, and
is called the Spirit of Christ, resides in Believers; but because the same
individual Spirit, which dwells in the Humane Nature of Christ, dwells also in
them, 1 Cor. 6.17. He that is joined unto the Lord, is one Spirit, he that is
one with the Lord, has one Spirit with him, he is quickened and acted by the
Spirit of the Lord dwelling in him. They are not one essentially as the Father
and the Son are one, being of one and the same Essence; nor one personally, as
the Divine and Humane Nature of Christ, being united in one person; nor one
morally only; as he whose Heart cleaves to another by love, is one with him,
but one spiritually, or one Spirit, because one and the same Spirit is in both.
So elsewhere our Union with God and Christ is said to be by the Spirit in us,
Ephesians. 2.22. In whom you also are builded together for an habitation of God,
through the Spirit, We are in Christ, and God is in us as his habitation, as
those in whom he dwells, how? through his Spirit. By his Spirit dwelling in us,
as it is expressed, Romans 8.9, 10, 11. But ye are not in the Flesh, but in the
Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you, now if any man have not
the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, and if Christ be in you -- and if the
Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, etc. Ye are
Spiritual, if the Spirit of God dwell in you, but if any man have not the
Spirit of Christ, he is none of his; none of his Members, not united to him,
but if Christ be in you, (as is before signified,) by the Spirit of God
dwelling in you, etc. So that this Union by the Apostles account, consists in
the Spirits dwelling in us, and it will be farther cleared by showing how the
Spirit dwells in us.

4. The Holy Spirit, by virtue of whose inhabitation Believers are said to be
united unto the Father and the Son dwells in them as a Principle of Spiritual
Life and Motion, quickens them to a new Life, and all the acts of it. There are
some who will not have the person of the Holy Ghost to be in the Saints, but I
know not how this can be denied, without denying either the immensity or
personality of the Divine Spirit. For if he be a person, and if he be every
where, his person will be present, and reside in them. It is true upon this
account merely, nothing singular is ascribed to them, for his person is not
with them only, but every where. The peculiarity of this privilege lies here,
that he is in them as a principle of spiritual Life and motion (and thus he is
not in any other Creature on Earth) he quickens and acts them as a vital
Principle, like as an Humane Soul united unto the Body, gives it Life and
Motion suitable to its Nature; so does the Spirit of God, taking possession of
the Soul of a Believer, enliven and act it with the Life and Motions of a
Divine and Spiritual Nature. Not that the Spirit is united to the Soul, as the
Soul is with the Body; for these united make one person, whereas the
personality of the Spirit is incommunicable; but that, the Holy Spirit performs
such Offices in a believing Soul, as have some resemblance, and are some way
correspondent to what the Soul does in and for the Body, and which the
Scripture expresses in like terms, and this we find frequently, the Spirit is
said to quicken and act those in whom he dwells, they have new life and motion
by his inhabitation, Romans 8.11. But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus
from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also
quicken your mortal Bodies by his Spirit that dwells in you. The Apostle
having signified in the former verses, that our Union with God and Christ is by
the Spirits dwelling in us, he expresses what may be expected from this
inhabitation, Christ's Spirit dwelling in us will quicken our mortal bodies,
will be a principle of Life in them, quickening them to a new Life, a Life of
Holiness. The same Spirit, as he quickens, so he acts those in whom he dwells,
who are therefore said to be led by him, ver. 14. For as many as are led by the
spirit of God they are the sons of God, they are excited, directed, enabled to
act like the Children of God by his Spirit dwelling in them: so Ezekiel. 36.27.
And I will put my spirit within you and cause you to walk in my statutes, and
ye shall keep my judgments, and do them; the Spirit which I will put within
you, shall make you active in my ways. So much for the first Proposal.

II. What encouragement have we from Christ's Prayer, that this Union, II.
Observe.
and the Blessings relating thereto shall be vouchsafed?

Answ. Our encouragement in general is the full assurance given us that his
Prayer is prevalent for what he desired; the particular grounds of this
assurance, are more particular encouragements. There are several things
requisite to a Prayer, which when they concur, the Word of God assures us that
it will prevail.

(1.) When the things desired are according to the Will of God, 1 John 5.14.

(2.) When the Person praying has a special Interest in God, and duly improves
it. There are some whom the Scripture declares God will not hear, Joh. 9.31.
Psalm. 66.18. Prove. 28.9.

(3.) When the persons prayed for are such as the Lord has some particular
favor, or respect for. There are some for whom the Lord will not hear the best
of his Servants interceding on their behalf, Jer. 7.16. -- 11.14. -- 14.11. Now
in the Prayer of Christ there is a concurrence, and that in a transcendent
manner, of all those things that render a Prayer undoubtedly prevalent.

1. The things that he prayed for were consonant to the Will of God in every
instance. He knew what was the Fathers Will in its full extent, and discerned
it with the greatest clearness and certainty; for as he is God, he is one with
the Father, of one and the same Essence and Will, and as he is man, he had in
him all the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, a fullness of the Spirit of
Revelation, so that he did perfectly apprehend what was the good, and perfect,
and acceptable Will of God. He did not only know this in particular instances,
by general rules of Scripture, as we do; but had the conduct of an Infallible
Spirit, and that always; not sometimes only, and in some things, as holy men
of God, the Prophets and Apostles had it; but in every Act and Word. And as he
perfectly and infallibly understood what was agreeable to the Will of God in
all points, so he gave himself up entirely to the most exact observance of it,
without varying, without the least shadow of mistake or deviation: This was the
end why he came into the World, Joh. 6.38. This was his constant practice, Joh.
5.30. in his Sufferings, and Actings, and in his Prayers; this was his delight,
Joh. 4.34. Now since he presented nothing in his Petitions, but what was his
Fathers own Will, desired nothing but it was his Fathers Will to grant, we may
be as certain that his Prayer was granted, as we are sure that the Lord will
comply with his own Will.

For the Second, It will be apparent by showing who it was that prayed, and how
he prayed, of which take an account in some particulars.

1. This was the Prayer of the Man Christ Jesus, who was Holy, Harmless, and
separate from Sinners; he was a Lamb without spot or blemish, and so was this
Offering, the pure Eye of God could see no blemish in him or it. His requests
were not prejudiced by any antecedent guilt, nor tainted with any impure
mixture, either apparent or secret, nor chargeable with the least defect in
Fervor, Faith, Affectionateness, etc. It was a sinless Prayer in all respects,
and so, such a Prayer as was never offered to God on Earth, since the
Foundation of the World, and Sins entering into it. It was not liable to the
least exception, no not at the Tribunal of strict Justice, and so could not but
be acceptable and prevalent.

Nay, it was not only clear from every the least speck of sin, but was the
product of admirable Holiness, such as is not to be found in the Holiest Soul
or Spirit, Saint, or Angel. He had it in larger measures, in an higher degree,
and in a more excellent way. Some tell us that if all the Holiness that is in
all the Angels and Saints were united in one subject, it would fall short of
that which is in Christ's Humane Nature. However it is taken for granted, that
the capacity of his Soul was wonderfully enlarged, by its personal Union with
the Godhead, far beyond the capacity of any other finite-Being; and all this
capacity was wholly filled with Holiness, it pleased the Father that in him
should all fullness dwell, and God gave not the Spirit by measure unto him. Joh.
3.34. Saints and Angels receive it as Vessels of small measure, but in Christ
it is unmeasurable. Now all this Holiness was exerted in this Prayer, and
diffused through it. Grace in him was not acted sometimes intensely, sometimes
more remisly, (for remisness seems to import some culpable effect) but was put
forth on proper occasions, and particularly in this Prayer, in its full power
and vigor. Upon this account this Prayer was the Holiest Offering that ever
was presented to the most Holy God, either on Earth, or in Heaven, and
therefore could not but be most acceptable to him, and accordingly prevalent
and succesful.

2. It is the Prayer of him who is God, of him who is God and Man in one
person. As the Blood of Christ is said to be the blood of God, Act. 20. by the
same reason, the Prayer of Christ may be said to be the Prayer of God. And
though it be properly the Act of Christ's Humane Nature, yet this Nature being
personally united with the Godhead, it is upon that ground duly ascribed to the
Divine Nature and Person of Christ; which being infinite an answerable value
and excellency is derived upon this Prayer. So that though it be but finite in
it self, as it is the proper Act of a finite Being, yet it is of infinite
excellency and value relatively, and so far of infinite efficacy. Let us
suppose, that all the Angels and Saints in Heaven and Earth, should agree to
prostrate themselves before God, and join together in one Prayer for us, and
that influenced with all the Holiness, enforced with all the fervor and
importunity, that those Heavenly Spirits and Holy Souls are capable of; we
would conclude such a Prayer would be undoubtedly prevalent: and yet we may
believe upon unquestionable grounds, that this one Prayer of our Blessed
Redeemer is incomparably, yea, infinitely more prevalent and effectual. In
short, this Prayer is nothing else, but the Will and desires of him who is God,
offered in manner of a Supplication, and there can be no question, but that
Will and those Desires shall be fulfilled to the utmost.

3. This Prayer was founded on merit, He prayed for nothing but what he was
worthy to obtain, sought nothing on our behalf, but what he did purchase for
us, and deserve of his Father, He might present this Supplication for his own
righteousness (as the best of his people could not, durst not do, Dan. 9.19.)
he might expect to obtain what he asked from the hand of Justice; not as we,
only from mere bounty and free mercy. Christ's obedience unto Death it was
meritorious, and did deserve for his people all that he prayed for. All the
ingredients of strict and proper merit concur in the Obedience and Sufferings
of Christ, as I might show particularly, but that I hasten, they were of equal
worth with the recompense which he prays for in the behalf of his people; he
thereby fully satisfied the demands both of Law and Justice, and though it was
the Life and Pardon and Happiness of a World of condemned Persons that he prays
for, yet his Obedience and Blood is of more worth than all these; for they are
of infinite value, being the Obedience and Blood of him who was God. So that
Christ's Obedience, Active and Passive is meritorious, not only ratione pacti,
by reason of the agreement betwixt the Father and Him, he having performed all
the Conditions required in order to our Redemption; but ratione pretii, by
virtue of the intrinsic value of what he paid and performed. Now, to use the
Apostles expression, Romans 4. to him that thus works the reward is reckoned,
not of Grace, but of Debt: It is Grace to us, but it is Debt to Christ, and so
the plea on our behalf being for a just Debt, it cannot but be most effectual
with the righteous God.

4. It is the Prayer of him for whose sake all other Prayers were heard. We
have direction, if we would have our Prayers not fail of success, to present
them in the Name of Christ, i. e. to beg what we desire for his sake; and he
gives assurance that what we so pray for (in his name or for his sake) shall be
granted, Joh. 16.23. and 15.16. and 14.13, 14. Now if the Prayers of his people
will prevail for his sake, there can be no question but his own Prayer will be
prevalent; all our Prayers are accepted through him, upon his account, nor can
they be acceptable otherwise, 1 Pet. 2.5. There is that corruption in our
Natures, which depraves and vitiates our Spiritual Sacrifices, our Prayers
particularly; there is more or less of a sinful tincture in them; they cannot
be well-pleasing to that Holy of God, who is of purer Eyes than to behold
Iniquity, till they be purged, and the guilt expiated; nothing is sufficient
for expiation but the great Propitiatory Sacrifice, by virtue whereof this
guilt is expiated, and we are said to be Sanctified in a Sacrificial Sense,
that is, purged from guilt, Heb. 10.10. Thus himself purged our sins, Heb. 1.3.
and thereby, that which was occasion of Offense to God being removed, our
Prayers became acceptable through Jesus Christ, in this sense he says, ver.
19. and for their sakes I sanctify my self, that they also may be sanctified:
I sanctify, that is, I offer my self an expiatory Sacrifice, that they may be
truly sanctified, that is, freed from guilt, and so rendered well-pleasing and
acceptable. Now the Prayers of others being acceptable through the Mediation of
Christ, the Prayers of the great Mediator himself will undoubtedly be most
acceptable, most prevalent.

3. As to the Persons prayed for, they are such as on whom the Father is no
less willing to bestow what is here desired than Christ was to seek them on
their behalf. This appears by several Expressions in this Chapter.

First, They belonged to the Father in a special manner, Thine they were, ver.
6. and thine they are, ver. 9. They were his in design and purpose, before the
Foundation of the World, chosen Vessels, set apart for him, as his own
peculiarly. 2 Timothy 2.19. And his Actually, by Effectual Calling, they resigning
up themselves unto him, and he taking possession of them as his own, ver. 8.
and Romans 9.24, 25. Now to whom is the Lord willing to grant these favors, if
not to those who are so much his own?

Secondly, Those whom he prays for, are given to him, as is many times
expressed, ver. 2, 6, 9, 11, 12, 24. and given to him that he might redeem and
save them, or as it is expressed, ver. 2. that he should give eternal Life unto
them: this comprizes all that he prays for on their behalf, and that is the end
why they are given him; now the Father is as willing to promote his own end and
design as the Son; and so no less willing to grant what is desired in order
thereto, than the great Intercessour was to pray for them.

Thirdly, Those for whom he prays are such as the Father loves, with a
transcendent, a wonderful love, ver. 23. and have loved them as thou have loved
me: not with the same love which the Father has for the Son, nor with a love
equal to it, but a love so great as comes nearest to it of all others. A
greater love than any Creatures, Men or Angels have for them, or for one
another; a far greater love than he has for any other Creatures in this World.
A demonstrative instance hereof we have, in that he gave his Son for them,
which was the greatest expression of love that ever the World saw or heard of,
and greater than could ever have been believed, if truth it self had not
declared it; that he should send his Son to reside on Earth, not gloriously,
like himself, but to take the form of a Servant, and live as a man of sorrows
and sufferings, and die as a Sacrifice under the Sin and Curse of those for
whom he was offered, oh what manner of love was this! Now as the Apostle
argues, Romans 8.32. He that spared (...) his own Son, but delivered him up for
us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? how can he
not be freely willing to give us any thing at his Sons request, when he loved
us so, as to give the Son himself for us?

Use. Since it is thus, What greater encouragement can we have for our Faith
and Prayers, than this Prayer of Christ? What can be a firmer ground of hope,
or more effectually raise our expectations, of what is here prayed for? that
is, of all wherein our happiness is concerned, for the Prayer does comprize all
that is requisite to make us happy here, and for ever.

I. What support is there that Faith does need, or can have, which it may not
here meet with? Is it the infinite Mercies and Compassions of God? Why, this
Prayer not only engages the Mercy and compassions, but the Justice and
Righteousness of God; it is a Righteous thing with God to grant the requests of
Christ. Is it the Covenant of Grace, or the great and precious promises? Why,
he that here prays is the Mediator of the Covenant, in whom all the promises
are Yea, and Amen. Is it the Humiliation of the Son of God? Why, this is a
signal instance of his Humiliation, where he who has Heaven and Earth, and all
Creatures at his Command, offers himself in the form of a Servant, and presents
these particulars in the posture, with the voice, and in the Words of a
Supplicant. Is it the Obedience and Righteousness of Christ? Why, this was in
him a meritorious Act of Obedience; he prayed as one made under the Law, and
this was one way whereby he fulfilled the Righteousness of it. Is it the Death
and Sufferings of Christ? Why, this is the ground upon which his Prayer
proceeds, ver. 19. For their sakes I sanctify my self that they also might be
sanctified; those for whom I offer these requests, are no other than those for
whom I offer my self a Sacrifice. Is it the intercession of Christ at the right
hand of the Father? Why, his Prayer on Earth, and Intercession, differ but
circumstantially; and the Circumstances which make the difference, make no less
for the support of Faith: he prayed for the same Persons, and for the same
things too, for which he intercedes, and it is the same Person that both prayed
and intercedes, he is in both the Son of God, and the Son of Man too. The
difference is that in his Intercession, his Sacrifice is presented as already
offered, in his Prayer it was presented as ready to be offered; but it was no
less effectual before it was actually offered, than after. Besides he prayed in
the state of Humiliation, he intercedes in the height of his Glorious
Advancement, but his Exaltation in Heaven is the effect of his Prayer on Earth,
ver. 5. Now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self, with the glory
which I had with thee before the World was: in short, his Prayer was his
Intercession begun, and his Intercession is the continuing of his Prayer; for
it has the Essence of a Prayer, being the presenting of his Will and Desires
to the Father on the behalf of his People. Lastly is the Word of him who is
Truth it self a support of Faith? Why, this we have also in reference to
Christ's Prayer, John 11.41, 42. Jesus lift up his eyes, and said, Father, I
thank thee, that thou have heard me, and I know that thou hear me always.
You see what supports Faith has from this Prayer, even all that is requisite
to raise it to a full assurance, if not all that is possible.

II. What qualifications would you desire in one that pleads for you, to make
you confident that his plea will be successful and prevalent? You may find a
concurrence of all these, and that far more transcendently than in any, in whom
you would have the most confidence; For,

First, He has Power, no less than all: all power is given him in Heaven and
Earth, Matthew. 22.18. He has power to prevail with the Father; and power to
order all Creatures in Heaven and Earth into a subserviency to what he desires.
He is willing, and earnestly desires the happiness of his People, and all that
tends to it; and these desires flow from the wonderful Love of an Infinite God,
and the greatest compassions of a perfect man, united in one person; and so
from an affection altogether unparalled, such as cannot be found in Heaven or
Earth, save only in the Lord our Redeemer and Advocate. Farther, he has
Authority, he was called to be an High Priest, Heb. 3. and obliged by that
Office to pray for his people, Heb. 5.1, 7. and being faithful in the discharge
of it, could not but be successful therein: his Honor is engaged, and depends
both upon the Execution of his Office, and the success of it. The Father called
him to be an High Priest, and so to pray for his People; he would not have
called him to it, but with a design to comply with him in it, and to be
prevailed with by it. Besides he has right, and pleads for nothing but what he
has right to obtain; pleads for nothing with the Righteous God on our behalf,
but what he has purchased with that which is of infinite value. Also he has
Interest, the greatest imaginable, as much Interest as is possible; he makes
not this address to a Stranger, or a Friend, or a common Relative, but to his
Father, one who loves him as himself, Joh. 5.20. He has as much Interest in
him, as in himself, and can prevail as much with him, as with himself, and can
no more be denied by him in what he desires, than he can deny himself, for they
are both one, Joh. 10.30. I and my Father are one: they have not only one
Interest and Design, but one Essence and Will: What Christ wills, the Father
wills; Christ directs us to say to the Father when we pray, thy Will be done,
and the Father says to Christ praying for us, thy will be done; for it is no
other than his own Will; and Heaven and Earth shall pass away, rather than one
jot or tittle of it shall not be fulfilled. Lastly, He had a personal, a
particular respect, for every of his Servants in his Prayer. It is as
comfortable, and will be as effectual, and gives as much assurance of success,
as if now in Heaven he did pray for every of us by name. The High Priest under
the Law carried the Names of the Twelve Tribes upon his Breast when he vent
into the Holiest, to intercede for the people; he was herein a Type of Christ
the great High Priest, and his People were so in his Mind and Heart while he
made these requests, that his Prayer reached every individual, no less
effectually, than if he had petitioned for each of them by Name. These severals
duly considered are enough (if any thing in the World be so) to advance Faith
unto the height of Confidence, that those for whom Christ prayed, shall obtain
all the rich and glorious things which he desired.

Finally, Here is the greatest encouragement for our Prayers that can be
desired, for hereby it is manifest, that whatever we can beg of God, which is
needful for our Happiness here, or hereafter, it has been already prayed for
on our behalf by Christ Himself, who was not, who could not be denied. When we
pray for our Relatives or others, who are given to Christ, but do not yet
believe, that they may have Faith. When we pray for Union with the Father and
the Son, for the comfort, improvement, and continuance of this Union. When we
pray for pardon of sin, and the purging of guilt by the grand Sacrifice of
Expiation; when we pray for Holiness, the increase and exercise of it; when we
pray to be kept from the evil of the World, (which is all in the World we need
to fear) from the evil of Suffering, or whatever may be destructive to our
Souls; in a word, when we pray for Eternal Glory: it is evident by the
premises, that all these, and what else is necessary for these purposes, were
on the behalf of those that do, or shall believe, the requests of the great
Mediator, who was God and Man in one Person, and could no more be repulsed than
God can deny Himself, in a Prayer that was not liable to the least exception
from Justice or Holiness it self, that was in all points exactly agreeable unto
the Will of God, and infinitely acceptable to the Divine Majesty; therefore
praying for any, or all these things expressed or included in this Divine
Prayer, as we are required, we may be as fully persuaded that they will not be
denied us, as we may be confident that the requests of our great Advocate,
Jesus Christ the Righteous will be granted.

SERMON XXVIII. Quest. How we should Eye ETERNITY, that it may have its due
Influence upon us in all we do?
2 COR. 4.18. While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things
which are not seen: for the things which are seen are Temporal, but the things
which are not seen are Eternal.
ETernal! What a sound does this word Eternal make in my Ears? What workings
does it cause within my Heart? What casting about of Thoughts, what word is
next to be added to it? Is it, Eternal World? Where? For this is Temporal: Oh!
that Eternal World is now by us unseen, and as to us is yet to come. But yet my
trembling Heart is still solicitous to what other word, this word Eternal might
be prefixed as to my self, or those that hear me this day, when they and I (who
through the long sufferance of God are yet in this present and temporal) shall
be in that Eternal World. Shall it be Eternal damnation in that Eternal World?
How? after so many knockings of Christ? Strivings of the Spirit? Tenders of
Mercy? Wooings of Grace? Calls of Ministers? Warnings of Conscience,
Admonitions of Friends? Waitings of Patience? All which put us into a fair
probability of escaping Eternal damnation. O dreadful words! can more terror be
contained, can more misery be comprehended in any two words, than in Eternal
damnation? But we in time are Praying, Hearing, Repenting, Believing,
Conflicting with Devils, Mortifying Sin, Weaning our Hearts from this World,
that when we shall go out of time, we might find Life or Salvation added to
Eternal. Eternal Salvation! these be words as comfortable, as the other were
terrible, as sweet as they were bitter. What then? This word Eternal, is the
horror of Devils, the amazement of damned Souls, which causes desperation in
all that Hellish Crew, for it wounds like a Dart, continually sticking in
them, that they most certainly know that they are damned to all Eternity.
Eternal! it is the Joy of Angels, the Delight of Saints, that while they are
made happy in the beatifical Vision, are filled with perfect Love and Joy, they
sit and sing, all this will be Eternal. Eternal! this word it is a loud alarm
to all that be in time, a serious caution to make this our grand concern, that
when we must go out of time, our Eternal Souls might not be doomed down to
Eternal Damnation, but might obtain Salvation that shall be Eternal, of which
we have hope and expectation, while we look not at the things which are seen,
but at the things which are not seen; for the things which are seen are
temporal, but the things which are not seen, are Eternal.

The Consideration of these words may be twofold,

1. Relative, As they are a reason of stedfastness in shaking troubles, as a
Cordial against fainting under the Cross. ver. 16. For which cause we faint
not, but though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by
day. v. 17. for our light affliction which is but for a moment, works for us
a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. 18. While we look, etc. Not
only the experience of present spiritual good in the inward, by the pressing
afflictions on the outward man, in weakening of sin, in purging away our dross,
in weaning us from the World, in humbling us for our miscarriages, in reducing
us from wandering, in emptying us of self-conceit, in trying our Faith, in
exercising our Patiance, in confirming our Hope, in awakening of Conscience, in
bringing us to examine our Ways, in renewing our Repentance, in proving our
Love, in quickening us to Prayer; but also the clear and certain prospect of
Glory after Affliction, of a Weight of Glory after light Affliction, of Eternal
Glory after short Affliction, of a Weight of Glory, far more exceeding all our
present Sorrows, Burdens, Calamities, than Tongue can express, or Pen describe,
or the Mind of Man conceive, being more than Eye has seen, or Ear has heard,
or have entered into the Heart of Man, must needs be an alleviation of our
Sorrows, a lightning of our Burdens, comfort in our Grief, joy in our Groans,
strength in our Weakness; though we are troubled on every side, yet not
distressed: though perplexed, yet not in despair, though under Afflictions both
felt and seen, yet we faint not while we keep our Eye fixed upon the Glorious
things in the other World that are unseen, and Eternal too.

2. Absolute, As they set before us the mark and scope we should have in our
Eye, all the while we are in time, viz. unseen Eternal things; you stand in
time, but you should look into Eternity: you stand tottering upon the very
brink of time, and when by Death thrust out of time, you must into Eternity:
and if in any case the old Proverb should prevail, it should not fail in this,
to look before you leap. The Analysis of the Text breaks it into these parts.

1. The Objects that are before us.

1. Things seen. 2. Things not seen.
2. The Act exerted on these Objects. Looking expressed 1. Negatively. 2.
Affirmatively. Not at things which are seen. The Men of the World stand gazing
at these, till their Eyes are dazzled with them, and their Souls damned for
them. But at the things which are not seen. Men in this World minding another
World stand looking at these, who have an Eye to see those things that are not
seen: There is a Mystery in Godliness.



3. The Persons exerting this Act upon these Objects, We that have the Spirit
of God: Who have our Eyes opened, who consider we are hasting, posting out of
time into Eternity: These things are set before the Men of the World, who have
Eyes, but they do not see.

4. The Property of these Objects. 1. Things seen are Temporal. 2. Things not
seen are Eternal.


5. The Reason moving Believers to keep a steadfast Eye upon Things unseen, and
to look off from things seen is the Eternal duration of the one, and the short
continuance of the other: While we look, -- for, or because the things that are
seen are Temporal -- not seen, Eternal. The good things in this World that are
seen, as Riches, Pleasures, Honors, are things of time, and only for time;
therefore we are not much concerned whether we win or lose them: and the bad
things in this Life, which are seen, as Poverty, Imprisonment Persecution --
are at longest but for a short space, and therefore we are not much concerned
whether we endure them, or be freed from them: But that which adds Weight to
the things in the other World now not seen by the Men of this World, and draws
our Eyes toward them, and keeps them fixed thereon, is the Eternity of them.

6. The Influence that this looking upon things not seen has upon the
Beholders of them in keeping them from fainting under any Afflictions while we
look, etc.

Three words require a little Explication.

Looking. Temporal. Eternal.
I. While we look (...): The Verb is used six times in the New Testament, and
is variously translated.

1. To take heed, Luke 11.35. Take heed therefore that the Light in thee be not
darkness: have a care, see to it; in this sense it is as if the Apostle had
said, We take not so much heed, nor are we so full of care about these visible
transitory things, as we are of the Eternal Joys of Heaven, and the unseen
Happiness of the Saints above.

2. To Consider, Gal. 6.1. Considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted: q.
d. We seriously consider and weigh in our Minds the Vanity, Insufficiency, and
short Continuance of all visible things both good and bad, whether Profit or
Poverty, Honor or Disgrace; and the ^ulness, excellency and everlasting Nature
of things unseen, and therefore prefer these before them.

3. To mark, observe, and take notice of. Romans 16.17. Mark them that cause
divisions among you. Phil. 3.17. Be followers of me, and mark them that walk
so, as ye have us for an example. It is the Observation that Believers make
that all seen things are Temporal, unseen Eternal, which worldly men take no
notice of, to influence them in what they do.

4. To look. Phil. 2.4. Look not every one on your own things: To look with a
diligent Eye, as the Archer to the mark whereat he shoots, to make a thing our
scope and aim; and so the Substantive is used. Phil. 3.14. I press toward the
mark. In this respect the sense is, the thing that we do aim at in all we do,
is to get a Title to, and hereafter the possession of Eternal things, to secure
our Everlasting happy state: to have treasures not for a while, but for ever:
to have Honor, and Glory, and Joy, not in hasty time, but in abiding Eternity:
Believers are lowly in Heart, but they look high: the Men of this World are of
an haughty Spirit, but they aim at low things.

II. Temporal. (...). Used four times in the New Testament; twice concerning
temporary Believers: Matthew. 13.21. but dureth for awhile. Mar. 4, 17. dureth
but for a time: Once concerning the pleasure of sin. Heb. 11.25. -- then to
enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; and in the Text comprehensively of all
visible things: take then a summary account of all, that wicked, worldly men
have, and all is but for a while. What the richest among them have, their
grandeur dureth but for a time, and then is past and gone, and has no more
existence. What the merriest among them have, Pleasures, Mirth, carnal Delights
and Joy, and this is but for a season; their merry bouts will be quickly over,
and then succeeds weeping and wailing for ever. What the best among them have,
even their Faith is but for a time, and their Hope but for a short time; at
longest it is Death shall close their Eyes, and then ly down in Everlasting
despair; that all their comings in, whether profits from the World, or
pleasures from their Sin, or supposed happiness from their supposed Graces have
their goings out; that upon all they have, you may write, all is temporal: They
had Riches, but they are gone. Honors and Pleasure, but they are gone. Many
good things in time, but at the end of time, all have an end, and then when
their endless misery comes, this will be their doleful tune, all our good is
past and gone.

III. Eternal. (...); always existing: all duration, (even time it self taken
metaphysically) is nothing else but the permanency of Essence. Time External in
sensu Physico, is but ens rationis, or nothing. Therefore according to the
manner of Beings, must be the manner of their Abidings. All Beings may be
ranked into three sorts, whence arise three sorts of Duration.

1. Some things have both beginning and end, as Beasts, and other corruptible
Creatures, and their duration is time, which has both beginning and end.

2. Some things have a beginning, and no end; as Angels, and the Souls of Men,
and the state of both in the other World; and the duration by which these are
measured in Philosophy to distinguish it from Time and Eternity strictly taken
is called Aeviternity; which imports only an Initial defectibility of the
things in themselves, though by the absolute power of God there might be a
period put unto their being once begun, but there is no principle of corruption
in their own Nature, which should cause a cessation of their existing Essence:
nor is it in the verge of any created Power or second Cause to take that Being
from them, which was given to them by the first; and these things because they
have no end, are Eternal.

3. One only Being has neither beginning nor end, nor can have; and that is
God; and his duration is Eternity, properly and most strictly taken, which is a
duration inferring simple interminability of Essence all at once existing
without succession. Eternity in the most proper acceptance does exclude not
only actual beginning and end, but all possibility of both, and denotes
indefectibility of Essence a part ante, and a part post, existing all at once
in one continued immovable instant, without consideration of any thing in it
past or to come, though it always was and will be; plainly to every capacity
might this be thus adapted: if you look backwards, you cannot think of any one
moment, wherein God was not: if you look forwards, you cannot think of any one
moment when God shall not be; for if there had been one moment when God was
not, no thing could ever have been: neither God nor Creature, unless that which
is nothing could make it self something, which is impossible; because Working
supposes Being, and a contradiction, because it infers the Being of a thing
before it was; for in order of time or Nature, the Cause must be before the
Effect: Neither can you conceive any one moment beyond which God should cease
to be; because you cannot imagine any thing in God, or distinct from him, that
should be the cause of his ceasing to be.

The Object then of Believers looking is the unseen. Eternal God, as their
Happiness objectively considered, which is so Eternal as to be without
beginning and end; and the enjoyment of this unseen Eternal God in the
invisible Heavens, which fruition being their happiness formally considered,
has a beginning, but no ending.

Should I follow the signification of the Greek word, as looking at a mark we
aim at, or an end which we desire to obtain, I should limit my Discourse only
to unseen Eternal good things, but if it be taken in a more extended sense, to
take heed, to mark, and diligently consider, I might bring in the unseen evils
in the World to come: and indeed to keep our Eye fixed upon invisible things,
both good and bad, that make Men Eternally miserable, or Everlastingly Blessed:
Would have a powerful influence upon every step we take in our daily travels to
the unseen Eternal World.

To look at unseen Eternal Evil things, that we might not fall into them:

To look at unseen Eternal Good things, that we might not fall short of them:
Which is the design of the question propounded from this Text, viz.

How we should Eye ETERNITY, that it may have its due influence upon us in all
we do?

Which question will be more distinctly answered by resolving these following
questions contained in it.

Q. 1. Whether there be an Eternity, into which all men must enter, when they
go out of Time. That we might not only suppose what too many deny, and more
doubt of, and some are tempted to call into question, but have it proved that
no man might rationally deny the Eternity of that state in the unseen World;
for upon this lies the strength of the reason in the Text, why Believers look
at things unseen, because they are Eternal: and the object must be proved,
before we can rationally urge the exerting of the act upon that object.

Q. 2. How we should Eye Eternity? or look at Eternal things? For if they be
unseen, how shall we see them? And if they be to us in this World invisible,
how shall we look at them?

Q. 3. What influence will such a sight of, and looking at Eternity have upon
our Minds, Consciences, Wills, and Affections in all we do?

Q. 1. Whether there be an Eternity of Happiness that we should look at to
obtain, and of Misery, to escape?

Does any question this? Look at Men's Conversations, see their neglect of God
and Christ, their frequent, yea, constant refusals of remedying Grace; their
leading a sensual flesh-pleasing Life, their seldom thoughts of Death and
Judgment, their carelessness to make preparation for another World, their
minding only things Temporal, and then the question may be, who do indeed
believe that there is such an Eternal state? Yet the real existence and
certainty of Eternal things may be evidently manifested by Scripture, and by
Arguments.

1. If you give assent to the Divine Authority of the Scripture, you cannot
deny the certainty of another World, nor the Eternal state of Souls therein,
though this be now unseen to you. Luke 20.34. Jesus said, the Children of this
World marry -- 35. but they that shall be accounted worthy of that World, and
the Resurrection from the Dead, neither marry; nor are given in marriage. 36.
Neither can they dye any more, for they are equal to the Angels -- Is not here
plain mention of This and That World? and the different state in both? In this,
Men marry and die; in that, they neither marry nor die; yea Christ himself
affirms, that in That World they cannot die; and whatsoever words the Scripture
borrows from the best things of this World to help our conceptions of the
Glorious state of Holy ones in the other World, some word denoting the Eternal
duration of it, is annexed to them all. Is it called a Kingdom? It is an
Everlasting Kingdom, 2 Pet. 1.11. a Crown? It is a Crown incorruptible, 1 Cor.
9.25. that fades not away. 1 Pet. 5.4. is it called Glory? is it Eternal
Glory. 1 Pet. 5.10. 2 Cor. 4.17. an Inheritance? it is incorruptible: 1 Pet.
1.4. Eternal: Heb. 9.15. an House? it is Eternal in the Heavens: 2 Cor. 5.1.
Salvation? it is Eternal Salvation: Heb. 5.9. Life? it is Eternal Life. Matthew.
25.46.

No less certain is the Eternity of the state of the Damned, by the Scriptures
adding some note of Everlasting duration to those dreadful things by which
their misery is set forth; is it by a Furnace of fire, Matthew. 13.42. by a Lake
of fire? Rev. 21.8. it is fire Eternal, and Unquenchable: Matt. 3.12. Matt.
25.41. by a Prison? 1 Pet. 3.19. from thence is no coming forth: Matthew. 5.25,
26. by darkness, and blackness of darkness? it is for ever: Jude ver. 13. by
burning? it is Everlasting burning: Isa. 33.14. by torment? Luke 16.23. the
smoke of their torment ascends for ever and ever: Rev. 14.11. and 20.10. by
Damnation? it is Eternal Damnation: Mar. 3.29. by Destruction? it is
Everlasting Destruction: 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. by Punishment? it is Everlasting
Punishment: Matthew. 25.46. by the gnawings of the Worm? it is such that never
dies: Mar. 9.44.46, 48. by wrath that is to come? Matt. 3.7. 1 Thessalonians. 1.10.
When it comes, it will abide: Joh. 3.36. Is any thing more fully and plainly
asserted in the Scripture, than that the things in the other World, (now
unseen) are Eternal things? those that enjoy the one in Heaven, and those that
now feel the other in Hell, do not, cannot doubt of this: and a little while
will put all those that are now in time, quite out of all doubting of the
certainty of the Eternity of the state in the unseen world.

2. The Eternity of the unseen things in Heaven and Hell, the Everlasting
Happy, or Everlasting Miserable state after this Life may be evidenced briefly,
yet clearly by these following Arguments.

I. God did from Eternity chose some to be fitted in time to partake of
happiness to all Eternity. Ephesians. 1.4. According as he has chosen us in him
before the Foundation of the World, that we should be holy -- and being made
holy, shall be happy in obtaining that Salvation to which he chose us, 2 Thessalonians.
2.13 -- God has from the Beginning chosen you to Salvation -- 1 Thessalonians. 5.9.
For God has not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain Salvation -- which
Salvation does include absence of all evil, and presence of all good; and this
Salvation being Eternal, Heb. 5.9. infers the absence of all evil for ever, and
the presence of all good for ever, and whosoever is delivered from all
privative Evils, and possessed of all positive Everlasting good, and that for
ever, can not be denied to be happy for ever.

II. Christ has redeemed some to be infallibly brought to Eternal Glory. What
reason can be given of the Incarnation and Death of the Son of God, if there be
no Eternal misery for men to be delivered from, nor any Eternal happiness to be
possessed of? For,

(1.) Did Christ dye to deliver his Followers from Poverty and Prisons? from
Sorrow and Sufferings, from Trouble and Tribulation? What! and yet his Holy,
Humble, and Sincere people lie under these more than other Men that are wicked
and ungodly; why was Paul then in stripes and imprisonments, in hunger and
thirst, in cold and nakedness, in perils and jeopardy of his Life continually:
and such as Pilate, Faelix, and Festus in great worldly prosperity? Or can it
be imagined, that Men persisting in Sin should be more partakers of the fruits
of Christ's Death, than those that forsake their sin, repent and turn, and
follow him?

(2.) Did Christ suffer and dye to purchase only Temporal good things, as
Riches, Honors, for his Disciples? Were these worth his precious Blood?
Whatever Christ dyed for, it cost him his most Sacred Blood: Was it then, for
Temporal enjoyments only, which Turks and Pagans may and do possess more than
Thousands of his true and faithful Followers? Did Christ intend the benefits of
his Death for these in more especial manner, then for such as remain finally
impenitent, and yet shall such reap the fruit of all his Sufferings, and those
that believe on him, go without them? Sober reason does abhor it, and all the
Scripture is against it. Would Christ have humbled himself to such a
contemptible Birth, miserable Life, lamentable, painful, shameful Death only
for transitory, temporal, fading Mercies? If we consider the variety of his
sufferings from God, Men and Devils, the dignity of the Sufferer, I profess I
cannot imagine any reason of all Christ's undertakings and performances, if
there be not an Eternal state of Misery in suffering of evil things, by his
Death that Believers might be delivered from, and of Glory in enjoying of good
things, to be brought unto.

III. The Spirit of God does sanctify some that they might be made meet to be
partakers of the Eternal Inheritance of the Saints in light: As all are not
Godly, so all are not Ungodly: Though most be as they were born, yet many there
be that are born again: there is a wonderful difference betwixt men and men:
the Spirit of God infusing a principle of spiritual Life, and making some all
over new, working in them Faith in Christ, Holy Fear and Love, Patience and
Hope, longing Desires, renewing in them the Holy Image of God, is as the
earnest and first fruits assuring of them in due time of a plentiful harvest of
Everlasting Happiness. Faith is in order to Eternal Life and Salvation. Joh.
3.16. Love has the promise of it: 1 Cor. 2.9. 2 Timothy 4.8. Jam. 1.12. Obedience
ends in it: Heb. 5.9. Hope waits for it. Romans 8.25. and because their hope
shall never make them ashamed, Romans 5.5. therefore there must be such an
Eternal-Blessed state they hope for.

IV. The Souls of all men are immortal: though they had a beginning, yet shall
never cease to be, therefore must while they be, be in some state, and because
they be Eternal, must be in some Eternal state. This Eternal state must be
either in the Souls enjoyment of God, or in separation from him; for the wit of
Man cannot find out a third: for the Soul continuing to be, must be with God,
or not with God; shall enjoy him, or not enjoy him; for to say he shall, and
shall not; or to say he shall not, and yet shall, is a contradiction; and to
say he neither shall, nor shall not, is as bad: if therefore the Soul be
Eternal, and while it shall be, shall perfectly enjoy God, it shall be
Eternally happy. If it shall for ever be, and that without God, it shall be
Eternally miserable, because God is the chiefest good, the ultimate end, and
perfection of man: The great work in this then is to prove that the Soul is
Eternal, and shall for ever be: For which I offer these things.

1. There is nothing within, nor without the Soul, that can be the cause of its
ceasing to be: (here except God, who though he can take away the being of
Souls, and Angels too, yet he has abundantly assured us that he will not.)
Nothing within it, because it is a Spiritual Being, and has no Internal
Principle by contrary qualities, causing a cessation of its Being; and because
it is simple and indivisible, it is immortal, and incorruptible, for that which
is not compounded of parts, cannot be dissolved into parts, and where there is
no dissolution of a Being, there is no corruption or end of it; there is no
Creature without it; that can cause the Soul to cease. Matthew. 10.28. Not able
to kill the Soul. Luc. 12.4. Fear not them that kill the Body, and after that
have no more that they can do: if they would kill the Soul, they cannot, when
they have killed the Body, they have done their worst, their most, their all.

2. The Soul of man has not dependence upon the Body, as to its Being and
Existence. It has certain actings and operations which do not depend upon the
Body, and if the operations of the Soul be independent from the Body, such must
the principle be from whence such operations do arise: and if it can act
without dependence on the Body, then it can exist, and be without the Body, In
the Body without dependence on the Body; it has the knowledge of immaterial
Beings, as God and Adgels, which were never seen by the eye of the Body, nor
can, because there must be some proportion between the object and the faculty;
and the Soul does know it self, wherein it has no need of the fantasy, for
when it is intimately present to it self, it wants not the ministry of the
fantasy to its own intellection. Besides it can conceive of universals,
abstracted from its singulars, in which it does not depend upon the fantasy,
for phantasmata sunt singularium, non universalium; therefore since it can act
in the body without dependence on the Body, it can exist without the Body, and
not dye when the Body does; which yet is more plain and certain from the
Scripture; which tells us that the Soul of Lazarus, after death, was carried
by Angels into Abraham's bosom, Luc. 16.22. but they did not carry it dead or
alive, but alive, and not dead. Stephen when dying expected the continuance of
his Soul in being, and its entrance into Blis. Act. 7.59. saying, Lord Jesus
receive my Spirit. The Thief upon the Cross had a promise from Christ, that
that day he should be with him in Paradise: in his Body he is not yet,
therefore in his Soul without the Body; therefore the Soul does exist without
the Body. Paul believed the Immortality of his Soul, and its existence after
the death of his Body. Phil. 1.23. I am in a strait, having a desire to depart,
and to be with Christ, which is far better. If his Soul had not existed, he had
not been a moment sooner with Christ, nay, his Soul in the Body had some
communion with Christ, if it dyed with the Body, it had none, and that was not
far better, but worse.

3. The original of the Soul by immediate Creation is usually brought as an
argument of the Immortality and Continuance of it to Eternity; to assert the
Creation of the Soul has this difficulty attending on it, how to clear the
propagating of Original Sin: to affirm the Soul is extraduce propagated by
generation, has this knot to be untied, how it does consist with the
Immortality of the Soul; when that which is generable is corruptible; but I for
present shall take their arguing which prove it shall exist for ever, because
it is created immediately by God according to the worn axiom whatsoever is
ingenerable, is also incorruptible: The Soul cannot be from the Matter or
Bodies of the Parents, because that which is Spiritual and Immaterial cannot be
produced out of that which is a Corporeal and Material Substance, for then the
effect would be more noble than its cause, and the cause would give and impart
something to the effect which it self has not, but that which any thing has
not, it cannot give to another; as in a Spiritual, so in a Natural sense, that
which is born of the flesh, is flesh; but the Soul is a Spirit.

Nor are the Souls of the Children from the Souls of the Parents, either by
Multiplication, or Division; not by Division; that part of the Souls of the
Parents should be communicated, and pass from the Parents to the Children,
because it is a Spirit, and therefore indivisible into parts because it has
none, being without matter, therefore without quantity, therefore without
divisible parts.

Not by Multiplication, for this must be by participation of something from the
Parents Souls, or not: if not, then it infers Creation, for that which is
brought out of nothing into being is created; if by participation of something
of the substance of the Parents Soul, this infers Division, which before was
showed cannot be.

4. That the Soul shall never dye, but abide to all Eternity. I argue, either
God, neither can, nor will maintain the Soul in Eternal duration, or he would
but cannot, or he could but will not, or he both can and will. If he cannot,
then God is not Omnipotent, for the Soul being a Spirit, it no more implies a
contradiction that the Soul should live for ever, then that Angels and Devils
should live for ever. If he can, and any say he will not, I desire a reason of
this assertion: how shall any man know Gods Will, by but what he has revealed;
and God has not revealed that he will not maintain the Souls of men in Eternal
Being, but the contrary. It follows then that God both can and will, and
therefore they must live to all Eternity.

V. The certainty of an Eternal State in the other unseen world is evident from
the innate appetite universally in all men after Eternal happiness. There is no
man but would be happy, and there is no man that would have his happiness
cease: a man might as soon cease to be a man, as cast away all desires of
Happiness, or Will to be for ever miserable, though most mistake what their
happiness is. This innate Appetite cannot be filled with all the good things in
this World; for though the rational appetite be subjectively finite, yet it is
objectively infinite. God therefore and Nature which do nothing in vain, has
put unsatisfied, restless desires after happiness into the hearts of men, which
cannot be any thing among things seen, and Temporal, there must be something
that must be the object of this Appetite, and able to quiet and fill it in the
other world, though most by folly, blindness, and sloathfulness miss of it.

VI. The absurdities which follow the denial of an Eternal state of men (though
now unseen) demonstrate the certainty of it:

1. For then the lives of men, even of the best, must needs be uncomfortable,
and the life of reason would (as such) be subject to more fears and terrors
than the life of sense, which is against all sense and reason; for Beasts must
dye* but do not foresee that they must dye; but the rational foresight of Death
would imbitter all his sweetest delights of Life; if there were no reason to
hope for another after this; and the more the Life of Man as Man is more noble
than the Life of Beasts, the more the foresight of the certain loss thereof
without another after this, would affright, afflict, torment: Now it is not
rational to think, that God who made Man the chiefest, and the choicest of all
his visible works, should endue him with such powers and faculties, as
Understanding and Will to make his Life (as man) more burdensome, by being
filled with fretting fears, wracking griefs, and tormenting terrors, more than
any Beasts are liable to, or capable of. Nay, and add, that the more any Man
did improve, exercise, and use his reason in the frequent Meditations of Death,
the more bitter his Life would be, to consider that all the present good he
does enjoy, must certainly and shortly be lost by Death, and he not capable of
any good after Death in the stead and room thereof.

2. Then the Condition of many wicked, yea, the worst of men would be better
than the condition of the godly that are the best; if the wicked have their
good things here, and no evil hereafter; and the people of God their evil
things here, and no good hereafter; 1 Cor. 15.19. If in this life only we had
hope, we were of all men most miserable.

3. Then the chiefest and greatest encouragements to undergo Sufferings and
Losses for Gods sake were taken away. Why did Moses refuse the Honors of
Pharaoh's Court: and chose to suffer Afflictions with the People of God; but
because he had his Eye to the recompense of reward. Heb. 11.25, 26. Why did
Paul endure such Conflicts, but for the hope of Life and Immortality which the
Gospel had brought to light: 2 Timothy 1.10, 12. and well might he ask what it
would advantage him that he fought with Beasts at Ephesus, if the Dead rise not
to Eternal happiness. 1 Cor. 15.32. Might not then the Suffering Saints repent
when they come to dye, that they had been so imprudent and unwise, to endure so
much, and lose so much, and say they have been losers by obeying God, and by
their holy walking, for there is no happiness after Death to be hoped for:
wherefore I do repent that I did not take my pleasures while I might; but did
you ever here a serious godly man, when dying, utter such words? But on the
contrary on their dying beds do grieve and groan, mourn and lament, that they
have been no more holy and obedient; and in suffering times, if they had Gold
as Dust, they would count it all as Dross; and if they had a thousand lives,
they would lose them all to keep in the favor of God, and to gain the Crown of
Everlasting Life.

4. Then would the Floodgates of sin and profaneness be plucked up, to let in
an Inundation of all manner of gross abominations; for if men will not be
afrighted from their sin with all the threatenings of the sorest pains of Hell,
nor allured to leave them with all the promises of the sweetest pleasures of
Heaven; if they were sure there were no torments of Hell to be adjudged to, nor
Glory in Heaven to be rewarded by, they would run with greater greediness to
the commission of the worst of sins that the Devil should tempt them, or their
wicked hearts incline them to.

Quest. 2. How should we Eye Eternity? or look at unseen Eternal things?

They are said to be unseen, as they are not the objects of our external sense;
for in this sense they are not to be seen: but we must look at Eternal things
that are unseen, with an Eye that also is unseen; and the several things
denoted by the Eyes in Scripture, will give some light to see, with what Eyes
we must look at unseen Eternal things; viz. with an Eye of Knowledge, Faith,
Love. Desire. Hope.


Our looking at Eternal things comprehends these acts of the Soul.

1. It includes a sure and certain Knowledge of them: as things not understood
are said to be hid from our Eyes; so what we know, we are said to see. Eccles.
2.3. I sought in my heart-till I might see what was that good for the Sons of
men. -- taking away of Knowledge is called the putting out of the Eyes, Numb.
16.14. and the inlightening the Mind, the opening of the Eyes, Acts 26.18. and
Looking is put for certain Knowing, Job 13.27. 1 Pet. 1.12. and expressed by
Seeing; Act. 7.34. so that the Looking at, and Eying of Eternal things with the
Eyes of the Understanding, includes.

1. The bending of the mind to study them; as when a man would look at any
Object, he bends his Head, and turns his Eyes that way.

2. The binding of the mind to them, as a man, when he looks earnestly at any
thing, fixes his Eye upon it.

3. The Exercise of the mind thus bent and bound to Eternal things, that it is
often thinking on the unseen Eternal God, Christ, Heaven, and the Life to come.

2. This Looking is by an Eye of Faith. Looking is believing, Numb. 21.8. Make
thee a fiery serpent, and set it upon a pole: and it shall come to pass, that
every one that is bitten, when he looks upon it, shall live. The Object and
the Act are both expounded by Christ, John 3.14. As Moses lifted up the Serpent
in the Wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up. 15. That whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have Eternal Life.

3. This Looking is with an Eye of Love. Though in Philosophy the Affections as
well as the Will are blind Powers; yet in Divinity the Eyes are put for the
Affections. Prove. 23.5. Will thou set thine Eyes upon that which is not? and
the Eye of the Lord denotes his Love. Psalm. 33.18. and Believers that love the
coming of the unseen Savior. 1 Timothy 4.8. are said to look for it. Phil. 3.20.
ubi amor, ibi oculus. We love to look at what we love.

4. This Looking is with an Eye of Desire, which is expressed by the Eye. Numb.
15.39. That ye seek not after your own Heart, and your own Eyes. 1 King. 20.6.
(...) every thing desirable in thine eyes. Job 31.16. If I have withheld the
poor from their desire, or have caused the eyes of the Widow to fail. The Eye
is an Index of the desires of the Heart.

5. This Looking is with an Eye of Hope. The Eye is put for Hope, Job 11.20.
Lam. 4.17. 2 Chro. 20.12. Psalm. 145.15. and 25.15. and things not seen are
looked for by Hope. Romans 8.24, 25. and things hoped for are the Objects of our
Looking. Tit. 2.13. Looking for the blessed Hope -- In short, the sum is, as if
it had been said, While we have a certain knowledge of unseen Eternal things, a
firm belief of them, fervent love unto them, ardent desires after them, lively
hope, and patient expectation of them, we faint not in all our tribulations.

Having opened the Eyes with which we are to look at Eternal things, I proceed
to the manner of our Looking: There is a Looking unto them. Psalm. 34.5. Mic.
7.7. There is a Looking into them, by studying the Nature of them, to know more
of the reality, necessity, and dignity of them, 1 Pet. 1.12. Which things the
Angels desire to look into. If Angels do, Men should. There is a looking for
them, either as we look for things that we have lost, look till we find, as the
Man for his lost Sheep, or the Woman for her lost Silver. Luc. 15.4.8. or to
look for a thing that is yet to come: Tit. 2.13. Isa. 8.17. and there is a
looking at them, which is not an idle gazing at the unseen Eternal World, but a
practical lively, affecting look in this manner following.

1. We should look at Eternal things with such an Eye of Faith, that should
presentiate them unto us, though they are yet to come. Hence Faith is said to
be the substance, or subsistence of things not seen, and the evidence of things
hoped for. Heb. 11.1. Faith so looks at things that are far off, that they have
a kind of mental, intellectual existence; though absent as if they were
present: being promised as sure, as if they were already possessed: Faith
convinces and assures the heart of a Believer most strongly of the truth of a
thing, while it looks to the Revelation and Testimony of God, than any argument
brought forth from Natural reason could do; and does give as firm assent to the
certainty and reality of Eternal things (though unseen) as to any thing he
beholds with his eyes, or perceives by the apprehension of any Sense;
because our Eyes may be deceived, but God neither can deceive, nor be deceived.

Look then, e. g. at the coming of Christ with such an Eye of Faith, as if with
your bodily Eyes you saw him descending from Heaven, in flaming fire, with
glorious attendance; as if you heard the Trumpet sounding, and the Cry made,
arise ye Dead, and come to Judgment: at which command, as if you saw the Dead
quickened, and peeping out of their Graves, to see why they are raised: as if
you saw the wicked come forth, fearfully amazed, with vile and filthy Bodies,
like Toads from their holes, with pale and ghastly countenances, with trembling
hearts, and their knees for horror knocking one against another, tearing their
hair, smiting on their breasts, and crying out, what is the matter! What meant
that loud Alarm, that thundering Call that awaked us out of the deep sleep of
Death? Oh! the Lord is come, the slighted Christ is come: Come! how does he
come? How? clothed with vengeance, with fury in his face, and his wrath like
fire burns before him: because of his Indignation, the Heavens melt over our
heads, and the Earth burns under our feet, and all is in flames round about us.
Oh terrible day! such as this we never saw. Oh the storms! the storms! Oh such
burning, scorching storms we never saw, nor felt before! We have been sleeping
all the night of Death, and the morning is come, the day does dawn: Dawn! Oh it
is broad day all about, we were wont to wake, and go to work, and go to sin, to
swear, and lie, to drink and take our pleasure, but now we wake, and must to
Hell, to Pain, and Punishment. Now we must go from God to Devils, from the only
Savior, to Eternal Torments. Oh what day is this! What day! it seems to be
rather night than day, for it is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress,
a day of wastness and desolation, a day of darkness and gloominess, a day of
clouds and thick darkness; a day of the trumpet and alarm against us all
Impenitent Sinners, and to us all it would prove the great Damnation day. When
our Souls and Bodies by Death were separated, it was a sorrowful parting, but
this is a sorer meeting: the Body with doleful groans does strangely greet its
reunited Soul. Oh thou cursed Soul! must I be tied to thee again with a faster
knot than ever? Death did heretofore part thee and me, but all the pains of
Hell hereafter cannot do it: thou wast Commander over me, and should have
managed thy Government better: thou should have used this Tongue to call upon
thy Maker: thou should have used these Ears to have hearkened to the calls of
Christ, to the wooings of Grace, to the entreaties of Mercy: these feet to have
carried thee to the means of Grace: these hands to have been Instruments of
good, they were all at thy command, what thou biddest them do, they did, and
whither thou command them to go, they went: Oh that I might have lain rotten
in my Grave, for then I had been at rest! for though in the Grave I had no
pleasure, yet there I felt no pain: but since I have been again united to this
before-damned Soul, I feel intolerable punishment, and I now perceive it is
past doubt that it will be Eternal; the Soul will give no better salutations to
the Body. Oh cursed flesh! what, alive again! Must I be linked to such a
loathsome lump, worse than any Carrion? thou did rebel against the commands
of reason, and thy Appetite was pleased, and thy Lusts were obeyed, and all the
time of Life on Earth was spent, and fooled away, in feeding, clothing, and
adorning thee; and as I was led away, and enticed by thee to live with thee a
sensual, flesh-pleasing life, so formerly sowing to the flesh, now of the flesh
we reap that Damnation that shall be Eternal. For the Judge is come, his Throne
is set, and all the World is summoned to appear, the separation is made, the
Books are opened, all on the right hand are acquitted, and called to the
possession of an Everlasting Kingdom, while we are doomed down to Eternal
Torments. Lo! they are going with their Blessed Glorious Lord unto Eternal
Glory: and we with cursed Devils, like cursed Wretches to Everlasting shame,
and pain, and banishment from God and Christ, and Saints and Angels for ever.

Look thus believingly on these unseen things, as if you saw all these, and a
thousand times more terrible and more joyful, transacted now before your eyes.

2. Look directly at unseen Eternal things. Many do look indirectly at things
Eternal, but directly at things Temporal; pretending things not seen, intending
things that are seen; in praying, preaching, and professing seem to have an eye
to God, and Christ, and Heaven, but they look asquint to their worldly profits,
credit and applause: Should pray that they might see God, but it is that they
might be seen of Men: Mat. 6.5. Mat. 23.14. But this is to look awry, contrary
to Solomon's advise. Prove. 4.25. Let thine Eyes look right on, and let thine
Eyelids look straight before thee.

3. Let unseen Eternal things be the first that you look at. Do not first look
at Riches, Honors, Pleasures, and please your selves with purposes after that,
to look after God and Christ, and the happiness of Heaven, when sickness
comes, and Death approaches, and when near the end of time, begin to make
preparation for Eternity. Men spend their days in getting a visible state,
while the unseen Eternal God, and Glorious Savior, and Heavens Happiness is
neglected by them; but it would make a considering man to tremble to think what
a sight these Sinners shall have after Death has closed their eyes, when the
separated Soul shall see an angry God, a condemning Judge, the Gates of Heaven
shut against it, and its self in Everlasting misery.

Unseen Eternal things are first in order of duration, for the invisible God
was, when nothing was besides himself; and first in order of dignity, and
should have the priority of our thoughts, care, and diligent endeavors. Matthew.
6.33. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these
things shall be added unto you. When we first take care about Eternity, the
things of time shall be given to us over and above: but the Eternal happiness
of Heaven shall never be given over and above to those that primarily look at,
and seek the things of time, for amongst men, the overplus does not exceed in
worth the things contracted for.

But this damnable preferring things Temporal, and cursed post-poning things
Eternal, is the setting of God in the room of the Creature, and the Creature in
the Throne of God, as if they would set the Heavens where the Earth does stand,
and the Earth where the Heavens are, and so subvert the order of things which
God has appointed to be observed in the Nature of things.

4. Look heedfully at Eternity. All the things that are only for time, are
toys and trifles: the things for an Eternal World are the grand concerns we
should narrowly look to in time; the gathering of Riches in time to the getting
of Grace, and an interest in Christ for the escaping of Damnation, and
obtaining of Happiness to Eternity is busy Idleness, careful Negligence, and
laborious Sloth. If God that inhabiteth Eternity looks narrowly to all our
actions done in time, Job 13.27. how narrowly should we look to our own, when
every one is a step to Everlasting Happiness, or Eternal Misery? We should look
narrowly that we do not walk in the broad way that leads unto the one, but in
the narrow that will bring us to the other. Matthew. 7.13, 14.

5. Look Earnestly with a longing look at unseen Eternal things. Let your
Hearts be filled with greatest intense desires after them, as one that looks
and thinks it long, till the desire be accomplished: as the Mother of Sisera
looked out at a Window, and cried through the Lattice, Why is his Chariot so
long in coming? Why tarry the Wheels of his Chariot? Jud. 5.28. Why does time
make no more haste to be gone, and flee away, that when it is gone and past, I
might enter into Eternal joys, that never shall be past and gone? Why does the
Sun, that by its alternate presence and absence, is the measure of my nights
and days, make no swifter speed in its diurnal Motion? If it be as a
Bridegroom coming out of his Chamber, and rejoices as a strong man to run a
race, why does it seem to my longing Soul, (as in the days of Joshua) to stand
still? If the Sun in the Firmament be so slow, let the Sun of Righteousness
make more haste, and come, and lighten my passage to the other Eternal World,
that I might see him as he is, and be more like unto him, then at this distance
I can be? Return, Return, O Shulamite, return, return, that I might look upon
thee: Make haste my Beloved, and be thou like unto a roe, or to a young heart
upon the Mountains of spices, that my looking for, and after thee might be
turned into looking upon thee. Did thou say a little while, and ye shall see
me, and again, a little while, and ye shall not see me? Why dearest Lord! shall
I count that a little while, in which I do not see thee? have thou left it upon
record, yet a little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not
tarry? Sweetest Savior! to my thirsty, panting Soul, it seems a great while,
while thou do tarry, and not come: time seems long till I do see thee, but
when I shall see thee in looking on thy lovely, glorious Self, Eternity shall
not seem long. I will mind thee of thy promise, surely I come quickly, and make
it matter of my prayer, and in confidence of the performance of thy promise,
and audience of my Prayer will say, Amen, even so, so quickly come Lord Jesus:
for according to my earnest expectation, and my hope, I groan, and am
traveling in pain, until I see thee who to me art now unseen, that then I
might live by sight, and no longer walk by Faith.

6. Look though with Earnest, yet with Patient expectation, at unseen Eternal
things. He that walks now by Faith, that he shall hereafter live by sight,
will not make undue, untimely haste; though what he sees by Faith in unseen
Eternal Joys and Glory, does fill his Soul with longing desires after them,
yet hope does help with Patience to wait for them. Romans 8.25. For the
beatifical Vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end of Temporal Life
it will be given, though it tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come, it
will not tarry; though it tarry beyond some Months or Years that you desire to
be there, yet it shall not tarry one moment beyond the time, that God has
appointed to take you to it, therefore in the mean time live by Faith, and see
in things unseen, what can be seen by Faith, till things unseen, shall clearly,
and with open face be seen by you.

7. Look with a fixed, steadfast Eye at unseen Eternal things, if you give a
glance, or cast of the Eye toward things seen and temporal; the Eye and Heart
too is ready to fix upon them: if you would fix your Eye upon Eternity, upon
God and Christ, and the Joys above, Satan, Sin, the Flesh and World will be
diverting of it, that now in time, comparatively, you can but glance upon
Eternity: If you look that way, many Objects will interpose themselves, to
hinder your sight, and to turn your Eyes from things Eternal, to things
Temporal, from God to the Creature, from things above, to things below: But yet
if we were full of the Holy Ghost, as Stephen was, we might look up steadfastly
into Heaven as Stephen did, and though not with the same Eye, yet to the same
effect and purpose, see the Glory of God, and Jesus, standing on his right
hand. Act. 7.55. Though the thoughts are immanent, yet in this respect they are
too transient, that they do no longer dwell upon Eternity: But if the Devil and
the World find your thoughts tied to this subject, and go about to loosen them,
say, why do ye this? for not my Lord, but I have need of them: Or if you are at
any season seasonably got up into the Mount, viewing Eternity, and they send
Messengers to you to come down, reply (for they think to do you mischief) I am
doing a great work, so that I cannot come down: Why should the work cease,
whilst I leave it, and come down to you? And though they send more than four
times after this sort, yet answer them still after the same manner.

8. Look unweariedly at unseen Eternal things. The Eye might be fixed for a
while upon an Object, and after a while be weary in looking at it; can you look
unweariedly at the vanities of this World, and will you be so soon tired in
beholding the Glorious things in the other World? Do you look on things
Temporal, where seeing is not satisfying, and yet are never satisfied with
looking? And will you not look on things Eternal, where seeing would be such a
filling of your heart with satisfactory content, that looking would not be
tedious to your eye? There is so much in God, in Christ, in all Eternal things
in Heaven; so much Beauty, Glory, Fullness, that methinks we might stand looking
at them night and day, without any irksomness at all. But alas, when the Spirit
is willing, the Flesh is weak; and whilst the Soul must look out of Flesh to
see those Glorious things, and so clogged with Corruption, that is like dust
within its Eyes, that makes it weep, because it can look no longer: but yet in
time we should endeavor to be more like to them that are already in that
Eternity, where they look at God and Christ unweariedly: and though their
looking is not measured by Days, or Months, or Years, but by immensurable
Eternity, yet they shall never be weary of looking at them to all Eternity.

9. Look with a joyful pleasant Eye at unseen Eternal things. Look till you
feel your Heart to leap for joy; look till you find your Spirit is revived
within you; look till the sight of your Eye affect your Heart. Is Christ
unseen? yet not unknown: Do not you now see him with bodily Eyes, yet you do
with an Eye of Faith and Love, and therefore may rejoice with Joy unspeakable,
and full of Glory. 1 Pet. 1.8. When you look up unto the Heavens, and see and
say, yonder is the place of my Everlasting abode, there I must dwell with God,
there I must be with Christ, and joyfully join with Angels and Saints in
praising of my Lord and Savior; the foresight of this will make you joyful for
the present, and pleasant in your looking at it.

10. Look fiducially at unseen Eternal things, with an Holy, Humble Confidence
by Jesus Christ upon the performance of the conditions of the Gospel, they
shall be all your own; that by turning from all your Sin, by Repentance and
Faith in Christ, you trust, you shall be possessed of them; that when you see
there are Mansions now unseen, there are Eternal Joys, an Immovable Kingdom,
an Incorruptible Crown, the Eternal God to be enjoyed, and for all this you
have a promise, and you know this promise is made to you, by the performance of
the Conditions annexed to the promise, you trust in time to come unto it, or
rather when you go out of time into Eternity, you shall be blessed in the
Immediate, Full, Eternal Enjoyment of all the Happiness that God has prepared
in Heaven, to give you welcome, joyful entertainment in that unseen Eternal
World; that you so eye that World while you live in this, that when by Death
you are going out of this World, into that, you might have this well-grounded
confidence to say, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course,
henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which the Lord,
the righteous judge shall give me at that day -- 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.

If you get such a sight as this, as now has been set forth before you, upon
such Eternal Objects as before were propounded to you, you will be able from
your own experience to answer the third question contained in the general case;
but yet I will proceed unto that branch.

Q. 3. What influence will such an Eying of Eternity have upon us in all we do?

In all we do? Will its Influence be so Universal? Will the efficacy of such a
sight be so extensive to reach forth its virtue in all we do? yes, in all we
do. Whether we Eat, or Drink, or go to Sleep, whether we Trade, or Work, or
Buy, or Sell. Whether we Pray, or Hear, or search our Hearts, or Meditate, or
Receive, or Study, or Preach, or Sin, or Suffer, or Die, it will have a mighty
influence upon us in any thing wherein we are active, or passive, culpable, or
praiseworthy; in any condition, be it Poverty, or Riches, Health, or Sickness;
in any Relation, be it of Husband and Wife; of Parents and Children, of Masters
and Servants: In any Office and Employment, Sacred or Civil; out of such an
heap (because I am limited) I will take an handful, and because I have not room
to speak of all, I will not cast them into method, according to their nature,
connection, and dependence one upon another, but take them as they come in some
few particulars only.

1. Such an Eyeing of Eternity in all we do would make us careful to avoid Sin
in any thing we do, or however we might fail in all we do yet that we suffer it
not to Reign, or have Dominion over us. Look at Eternity with a believing Eye,
and you will look at sin with an angry Eye: you will cast a deadly look at Sin,
when you have a lively look at Eternity of Joy or Misery.

1. Sin would deprive me of Eternal Life, therefore I will be its Death; it
would keep me from Eternal Rest: therefore I will never rest, till I have
conquered and subdued it; nothing in the World would bring upon my Eternal
Soul, the Eternal loss of the Eternal God, his Glorious Son, and Holy Spirit,
of the Company of his Holy Angels and Saints, of Eternal Treasures, of a
Blessed Kingdom, and Incorruptible Crown^ but cursed Sin: Poverty, Sickness,
Men, Death, Devils cannot; nothing but Sin: therefore I will be its bane, that
shall not Reign in me, that would not suffer me to live in Everlasting
Happiness.

2. Sin would plunge me into unseen Eternal Torments, into Endless Flames, and
Everlasting Burnings: If you could speak with a Soul departed but a Month ago,
and ask him, what do you now think of the delights of Sin, of sporting on the
Sabbath day, of your pleasant Cups, and Delightful Games; of pleasing of the
Flesh, and gratifying of its Lusts? What a sad reply would he return, and what
a doleful answer would he make you? Sin! Oh, that was it that was my ruin;
that was it, which has brought me (miserable wretch) to Everlasting Torment;
that was it, which shut me out of Heaven, that sunk me down to Hell. O ye
foolish Sons of Men, that are yet in time, be not mad, as I was mad; and do not
do as I did: let not the seen pleasures and profits of the World, which I have
found, were but for a time, deceive you, and bewitch you: the Devil showed me
the seen delights of Sin, but concealed from me the Extremity and Eternity of
the pain that it has brought me to; the pleasure is past, and the pain
continues, and I am lost for ever; and all this Sin has brought me to. Let
your eyeing of Eternity whilst you are standing in time, be instead of ones
speaking to you in time, that has been in Eternity, for the Eternal God does
tell you, as much as any Damned Soul can tell you, and would you believe one
from Hell, and not the Son of God that came from Heaven? Oh look and view
Eternity in the Glass of the Scripture, and firmly believe it, and it will make
slaughtering work amongst your Sins, and destroy that which would damn you.

2. Such Eyeing of Eternity would be a mighty help to quiet your hearts under
the dispensations of Providence here to Men on Earth. When you look at the seen
Afflictions, Distresses, Disgraces, Stripes, Imprisonments, Persecutions, and
Poverty of the People and Children of God, and the Riches, Ease, Honors,
Pleasures, and the seen flourishing prosperity of the worst of Men, that by the
Swearing, Drinking, Whoring, hating of Godliness, being patterns of wickedness,
proclaim themselves the Children of the Devil, and you are offended, and your
Mind disquieted, except in this you have a better heart than Job, cap. 21.6, to
16. or David, a Man after Gods own heart; Psalm. 73.2, to 16. or Jeremiah, cap.
12.1, 2. or Habakkuk, cap. 1.13, 14.

Now amongst the many helps to allay this Temptation, the eyeing of the last,
yea, Everlasting things is not the least. Look upon these two sorts of Men,
(which comprehend all in the World) as going to Eternity, and lodged there, and
then you will rather pity them, because of their future Misery, then envy them
for their present Prosperity. What if they have their Hearts desire for a
moment, and must be tormented for ever. What if they have Pleasures, and carnal
Delights for a season, they must be under the heavy wrath of God for ever. You
might stand and see all their mirth at an end, but their sorrow never will have
end; all their joy is but for a moment, as the crackling of Thorns under a pot,
but their misery will be endless misery. Let them laugh a while, they shall
weep for ever: let them rejoice for a season, their mirth shall be turned into
heaviness; their Temporal rejoicing into Everlasting howling; and the Eternity
of Joy will be more than a recompense to the afflicted Saints, whatsoever their
Sufferings for Christ, and Conscience be in this World.

A supposed case might be an help in this Temptation. Suppose then that you
were poor, and full of pain for so long time, or rather for so short, that you
should fall asleep, and after you awake, should be poor no more, nor afflicted
any more, but have a Life of manly delights afterward. Suppose again, another
man were compassed about with all manner of accommodations; costly Dishes to
please his Palate, beautiful Objects to delight his Eyes, all manner of Music
grateful to his Ears; many Servants to attend him; all standing bare before
him, and bowing the knee in Honor to him; and all this, and much more, he were
to enjoy as long as he could abstain from sleeping; but as soon as he does fall
asleep, he should be taken off his Bed, and cast into a Furnace of boiling
Lead, or scalding Pitch. I demand which of these two Men's Condition you would
choose; I know it would be the condition of the former, and not the latter;
this, and infinitely beyond this is the case in hand; you are afflicted till
you fall asleep, and then you shall be afflicted no more, but live a life of
Joy for ever! the Wicked prosper till they fall asleep, and they cannot long
keep open their Eyes, but Death will come and close them, then the justice of
God will arrest them, and then Devils will seize upon them, and they shall be
cast into a Lake of burning Brimstone, where they shall have no rest, night,
nor day; but the smoke of their Torment shall ascend for ever and ever.
Exercise your thoughts in this manner, and have an Eye unto Eternity, and you
will more easily and successfully overcome such Temptations to murmuring and
discontent, from the different dispensations of the Providence of God here, in
time to good and bad.

3. Such eyeing of Eternity would have great influence for the well improvement
of our time. Time is to be valued in order to Eternity, because we go out of
time into Eternity, (and that which should make every Man in time most
concerned) out of time into Eternity of Misery or Glory. Oh! what a precious
thing is Time! it is beyond the worth of Gold or Silver, because we might do
more in time in reference to Eternity, than we can do by all our Gold and
Silver: Jewels are but Toys in comparison of precious Time. Many are saving of
their Money, but are prodigal of Time; and have more of Time then they know
what to do with, when others find so much to do, that they know not what to do
for time to do it in. Oh Fools, and blind, what were an Hundred years to make
preparation for Eternity? Oh sluggish careless Sots! Do you ask, how shall we
pass away the time? Might ye not with more reason ask, how shall we prevent
hasty time from passing away with such winged motion? Or if that cannot be
prevented, How shall we improve our time that is so fast a posting from us?
Blind World! Do any Men in thee enquire, How shall we spend our time? It is
easily answered, in Praying, Repenting, begging for Grace, the pardon of Sin,
the favor of God, and peace with Him, and fitness for Eternal Life. Had the
Damned in Hell the time that once they had, and you now have, do you think they
would ask what they should do to pass away the time? Their cry rather is, Oh
hasty time, whither art thou fled? Why did thou move so fast while we sat
still? Or why in time did we so swiftly run in ways of Sin, as if we could not
have sinned enough before time was past and gone? When we had a God to serve,
and Souls to save, and an Everlasting State to make preparation for, we like
Fools did say, How shall we spend our time? But now our time is spent, and
past, and gone; and now the question is, which never can be answered, How shall
we spend Eternity? which never can be spent, no not in enduring Ten Thousand
Thousand Millions of Years in pain and punishment; for when they are past, it
is as fresh, and as far from ending, as it was the first moment it began; then
Eye Eternity, and you cannot but improve your time.

4. Such Eyeing of Eternity would make us careful how we die, because Death is
our passing out of time into Eternity. Death is dreadful to the ungodly,
because it opens the door into Everlasting Misery; gainful to all endued with
saving Grace, because it lets them in to Everlasting Happiness. Did you that
are yet Christless, Impenitent, and Unbelieving, see whither you are going, and
where you must within a little time take up your Everlasting Lodgings; what
fear and trembling would seize upon all your joints, and when by sickness you
perceive Death to be approaching, you would cry out, Oh Death, forbear,
forbear, stay thine hand, and do not strike, for if thou cut me down in this
condition, I drop into Eternal Misery: there is nothing but this single thread
of my frail Life between me and endless woe, and if this be cut or snapt
asunder, I sink in to irrecoverable Misery, without all hope of ever coming
forth: Could you but see a Soul the next hour after its separation from the
Body, what a taking it is in, what woe, what despair it is filled with, would
you then live without Christ, go to bed without Christ, and rise and trade, and
still remain without an Interest in Christ? What mean ye sirs, to make no
provision for Death that is so near, so very near, when you are as near to
going into an Everlasting World, as you are to going out of this Transitory
World? and your Souls be dragged sooner by Devils into Hell, than your Bodies
can be carried by Men unto your Graves. Awake, arise, repent, and turn unto the
Lord, for if you sleep on in sin, till you sleep by Death, you will be awaked
by the flames of Hell; and then though you be under the power of Eternal Death,
you will sleep no more, and rest no more for ever.

And Death is as gainful and desirable to a Gracious Man, as it is terrible to
the Ungodly, for it lets him into unseen Eternal Glory, to the sight of Christ
unseen to us on Earth: How willing would you be to go a Thousand Miles to see
Christ, and converse with him, if he were on Earth, it is better to see this
precious Christ in Eternal Glory: it is worth the while to die, to have a view
of your Lord-Redeemer in the highest Heavens. Oh the wonderful transporting
Joys the Soul is filled with, when it first comes into the unseen, but happy
World! when it has the first Glorious view of its dearest Lord. Do you think
it would desire to return to live in flesh upon Earth again? Do you know what
you do, when you are so loath to die? Do you understand your selves when you are
so backward to be taken out of time? It is to be loath, to go into Everlasting
Happiness, to go and take possession of unseen Eternal Glory.

5. Such an Eyeing of Eternity would make us more patient, constant, joyful in
all our sufferings for Christ's sake. When we poar upon our seen troubles, and
do not look at rest after trouble, when we see and feel what is inflicted upon
us, but do not look what is laid up in Heaven for us; when we see the rage of
men, and do not look at the love of God, our Hearts and Flesh do fail; but if
we set unseen Eternal things over against things seen and Temporal, it will be
strength unto us. Against the power of Men which is Temporal, set the Power of
God, which is Eternal; and then you will see their power to be weakness:
Against the Policy of Men which is Temporal, set the Wisdom of God, which is
Eternal, and then you will see all their Policy to be Foolishness. Against the
Hatred of Men, which in its effects to you is Temporal, set the Love of God,
which is both in its self, and in its effects to you Eternal; and you will see
their hatred to be no better than raging, unreasonable madness. Keep your Eye
upon the unseen Torments in the other World, and you will rather endure
Sufferings in this, than venture upon Sin, and expose your selves to them: Keep
your Eye upon the unseen Eternal Crown of Glory, and it will carry you through
Fire and Flames, Prisons and Reproaches for the sake of Christ. Heb. 11.26.
Esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt;
for he had respect unto the recompense of the reward, 27. by Faith he forsook
Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the King: for he endured, as seeing him who is
invisible.

6. This Eyeing of Eternity will be a powerful preservative against the
temptations of Men or Devils; a Sovereign Antidote against the Poison of
Temptation. I see the Invisible God looks at me, shall I then yield to the
suggestions of the Devil, or the solicitations of men to sin? I see there is
an Everlasting state of Joy or Torment that I must be shortly in, as sure as I
am in this place, and Satan's design is to bring me to that state of Torment;
and if I follow him, I shall be excluded from yonder glorious place; from God,
and Christ, and Saints above: therefore by the Grace of God I will not yield to
this Temptation; but strive I will, and Watch and Pray I will against the
assaults of this deceitful Adversary: for why should I be so foolish to lose
Eternal Glory for momentary Pleasures? and run my Immortal Soul into Eternal
pain for short delights? I do plainly see what will be the end, if I do yield
Damnation without end, banishment from God without end: I do clearly see that
Stealing and Murder is not a more ready road to a place of Execution upon
Earth, than yielding to a tempting Devil is to Everlasting Misery.

7. Such Eyeing of Eternity would wean our hearts from the things of time. A
sight and view of Heavens Glory would darken the Glory of the World, as looking
at the shining Sun over your Head, does obscure in your Eyes the things under
your Feet; after a believing view of the invisible God, and the Glory of the
place above, this World would appear as a very Dunghill in your Eyes: Phil. 3.7,
8. as where we love, there we look; so the more we look, the more we shall
love; and the more we love the Eternal things that are above, the less we shall
love the Temporal things that are below.

8. Such Eyeing of Eternity would make us more like to God and Jesus Christ: it
will be a transforming and assimilating look. 2 Cor. 3.18. But we all with open
face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same
Image, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. Therefore when
we shall see Christ who is now out of sight, we shall be perfectly like unto
him. 1 John 3.2. But we know when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we
shall see him as he is.

9. Such an Eyeing of Eternity would fill our Souls with Holy admirations of
the Goodness, Grace, and Love of God to us: When Paul had a sight of such
unseen things, he was in an Holy Ecstasy and Divine Rapture. 2 Cor. 12.2, 3, 4.
When we consider the Eternal Happiness of Heaven, we shall stand as Men amazed,
that God should prepare such things for such men, and bear such Love, and show
such Mercy to such as we that are so vile and full of sin, and say, Lord what
am I that might for ever have howled in the lowest Hell, that I should hope to
praise thee in the highest Heavens! Lord, what am I that might have been in
Everlasting Darkness, that there should be prepared for me Everlasting Light
and Joy! Why me, Lord, why have thou designed me, and wrought upon my heart,
and made me in any measure meet to be partaker of such Eternal Glory. Oh! the
depth of the Riches, both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! How unsearchable
are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! Romans 11.33. How precious are
thy thoughts to me, how great is the sum of them. Psalm. 139.17. Oh how great is
thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee, which thou have
wrought for them that trust in thee. Psalm. 31.19.

10. Such an Eyeing of Eternity would have this influence sure upon us, to set
our selves under a painful, skilful, serious Ministry: It does much concern
you, for you are going to an endless Life, and Preaching is the appointed means
to fit you for an endless happy Life; then do you choose the most lively,
searching, powerful Preaching, it is for the life of your Souls; for the
Everlasting life of your Everlasting Souls. If you were sick, and in danger of
Death, when your Life lies upon it, you would have the advice of an able
Physician, that is serious and afraid that he no way become guilty of your
Death? Would you like that Physician that seems to be unconcerned, and cares
not whether you live or die, if he might but have his fee? Or that should
merrily jest with you when you are sick at Heart, and near to Death, if you be
not cured? Would you take Pleasure in his witty sayings, and be jested into
your Grave? Or if you go unto a Lawyer about your whole Estate, though it were
in Leases that will expire, would you choose one, that you think did not care,
whether you win or lose your cause? Would you be pleased with some witty
sayings, impertinent to the pleading of your cause? Would you not say, Sir, I
am in danger of losing all I am worth, my Estate lies at stake, deal plainly
with me, and be serious in your undertaking for me, and tell me in words that I
can understand the plain Law by which my case must be tried. And will you be
more careful about the Temporal Life of a Body that must die? and about a
Temporal Estate which you must leave when you die? and not about your Soul that
must ever live, and never dye? No! not so much as to set your selves under
faithful Preachers, that shall in words that you can understand, plainly tell
you the Laws of Christ by which you must be tried for your Life, and according
to them be Eternally damned or saved?

11. Such an Eyeing of Eternity would make you serious and lively in all your
spiritual duties in all your approaches unto God: If you have no Grace, the
serious thoughts of the unseen Eternal World, would stir you up to beg and cry,
and call for it; if you have to desire more, and to exercise what you have; to
confess your sins with such contrite broken penitent hearts, as though you saw
the fire burning, which by your sins you have deserved to be cast into: To beg
for Christ, and Sanctifying Grace, and pardoning Mercy with that lively
Importunity, as if you saw the Lake of boiling Brimstone, into which you must
be cast, if you be not sanctified and pardoned; to hear the Word of God that
sets this Eternal World before you, with that diligent attention, as Men
harkening for their Lives; to commemorate the Death of Christ with such life
while you are at the Lords Supper, while you do as it were see the Torments you
are delivered from, and the Eternal Happiness by Faith in a crucified Christ
you have a Title to, it will cause a fire and flame of Love in your Hearts to
that Lord that dyed for you, ardent desires after him, complacential delight in
him, thankfulness, hope of Heaven, hatred to sin, resolution to live to, or dye
for him that dyed for you: If your Hearts are dead and dull, and out of frame,
go and look into the unseen Eternal World; take a believing view of Everlasting
Joys and Torments on the other side of time, and you shall feel warmth and
heat, and lively actings to be produced in you.

Particularly this Eyeing of Eternity would make Ministers sensible of the
weightiness of their work; that it calls for all possible diligence and care,
our utmost serious study and endeavors, our fervent Cries and Prayers to God
for ability for the better management of our work, and for success therein; for
as much as our employment is more Immediately about Eternal matters: to save
(under Christ) Eternal Souls from Eternal Torments, and to bring them to
Eternal Joys: When we are to Preach to people that must live for ever in
Heaven, or Hell, with God, or Devils; and our very Preaching is the means
appointed by God to fit men for an Everlasting state; when we stand and view
some Hundreds of Persons before us, and think, all these are going to Eternity;
now we see them, and they see us, but after a little while they shall see us no
more in our Pulpits, nor we them in their Pews; nor in any other place in this
World, but we and they must go down unto the Grave, and into an Everlasting
World: when we think it may be some of these are hearing their last Sermon,
making their last public Prayers, keeping their last Sabbath, and before we
come to Preach again, might be gone into another World; if we had but a firm
belief of Eternity our selves, and a real lively sense of the mortality of
their Bodies and our own, and the Immortality of the Souls of both, of the
Eternity of the Joy or Torment we must all be quickly in, how pathetically
should we plead with them, plentifully weep over them, fervently pray for them,
that our words, or rather the word of the Eternal God might have Effectual
Operation on their Hearts? This Eyeing of Eternity should

1. Influence us to be painful and diligent in our studies to prepare a message
of such weight as we come about, when we are to Preach to men about Everlasting
matters, to set before them the Eternal Torments of Hell, and the Eternal Joys
of Heaven: Especially when we consider how hard a thing it is to persuade Men
to leave their sins, which do endanger their Immortal Souls; when if we do not
prevail with them to hearken to our message, and obey it speedily, and
sincerely they are lost Eternally; when it is so hard to prevail with men to
accept of Christ the only and Eternal Savior on the conditions of the Gospel.
You might easily see that Idleness either in young Students that are designed
for this work, or in Ministers actually engaged in it, is an intolerable sin;
and worse in them than in any men under Heaven; Idleness in a Shopkeeper is a
sin, but much more in a Minister; in a Trader, much more in a Preacher; bear
with me, if I tell you an Idle Cobbler that is to mend men's Shoes is not to be
approved, but an Idle Preacher that is to mend men's Hearts, and save their
Souls shall be condemned by God and Men: for he lives in daily disobedience of
that charge of God. 1 Timothy 4.13 -- Give attendance to reading, to exhortation,
to doctrine. 15. Meditate upon these things, give thy self wholly to them. 16
-- continue in them-

2. It would provoke us to be faithful in delivering the whole counsel of God,
and not to daub with untempered mortar; not to flatter them in their sin, or to
be afraid to tell them of their evils, least we should displease them, or
offend them: Is it time to sooth men up in their Ignorance, in their neglect of
duty, when we see them at the very door of Eternity; on the very borders of an
Everlasting World, and this the fruit, that they shall dye in their sins, and
their Blood be required at our hands? Ezekiel. 33.1. to 10. but so to Preach and
discharge the Ministerial Function, that when dying, might be able to say as
Act. 20.25. And now behold, I know that ye all, among whom I have gone
preaching the Kingdom of God, shall see my face no more. 26. Wherefore I take
you to record this day, that I am pure from the blood of all men. 27. For I
have not shunned to declare to you all the counsel of God.

3. To be plain in our speech, that every capacity, of the weakest in the
Congregation that has an Eternal Soul that must be damned, or saved for ever,
might understand in things necessary to Salvation, what we mean, and aim, and
drive at; it has made me tremble to hear some soar aloft, that knowing men
might know their parts, while the meaner sort are kept from the knowledge of
Christ: and put their matter in such a dress of words, in such a style so
composed, that the most stand looking the Preacher in the face, and hear a
sound, but know not what he says: and while he does pretend to feed them,
indeed does starve them; and to teach them, keeps them in ignorance. Would a
Man of any Bowels of compassion go from a Prince to a condemned man, and tell
him in such Language that he should not understand, the conditions upon which
the Prince would pardon him, and the poor man lose his Life, because the proud
and haughty Messenger must show his knack in delivering his message in fine
English, which the condemned Man could not understand; but this is course
dealing with a Man in such circumstances that call for pity and compassion:
Paul had more Parts, and Learning, but more self-denial than any of these, when
he said 1 Cor. 2.1. And I Brethren; when I came to you, came not with
excellency of speech, or of wisdom, declaring to you the testimony of God. 4.
And my speech, and my preaching was not with enticing Words of man's Wisdom, but
in demonstration of the Spirit, and of power. 2 Cor. 3.12. Seeing then we have
such hope, we use great plainness of speech. 13. and not as Moses, which put a
vail over his face, that the Children of Israel could not steadfastly look to
the end of that which is abolished. Some put a vail upon their words that
people of mean Education, that yet have Souls that must be damned, or saved:
cannot look into those truths that shall never be abolished: but what is this
but a cursed preferring their own parts and praise, before the Salvation of
Eternal Souls: and the preaching themselves, and not Christ: which will not be
their praise, but shame, at the Eternal Judgment, when some shall plead they
stand there condemned, because the Learned Preacher would not stoop to speak to
them of Eternal matters in Language that they might have understood.

4. This Eyeing of Eternity would stir us up to improve our Interest in God and
Men for a continual succession of Men in the Ministerial Function: In God, by
Prayer, that the Lord of the Harvest would send forth Laborers into his
Harvest: In men, whether such as have Children of pregnant parts, studious and
bookish, serious in Religion, and inclined to this Employment, that they would
give them to God, and give them Education in order to it, which would be the
Honor of Parents to have such proceed from their loins that shall be
Ambassadors to call the blind ungodly World to mind Eternity, to escape
Everlasting Damnation, and obtain Eternal Life; or whether they be such as have
no Children so qualifyed, or disposed, yet have riches to be helpful to such as
have such Children, but not an Estate to bring them up; for there is a
necessity of a standing continued Ministry: Men in all Ages are hasting to
Eternity; those that were our Ancestors in former Ages are already there, and
have taken up their Lodgings where they must for ever dwell; and we are
following after them; and what a mercy is it, that we have the Gospel preached
unto us, wherein we have directions how to escape Everlasting Torments, and
obtain Eternal Joys in the other Eternal World to which we are a going; and
those that shall live after us, when they have been upon the stage of this
World awhile, shall follow us and our Fathers into Eternity, and give place to
those that follow after them; thus this World does often change its
Inhabitants: What is the Life of Man, but a coming into time, and a going out
into Eternity: Oh how needful is it then, that while they make their short stay
on Earth, they should have preaching Ministers to warn them of Eternal Misery,
and teach them the way to Eternal Glory: Those that are now engaged in the
work, will shortly be all silenced by Death and Dust: and how desirable is it
that your Children and posterity should see and hear others preaching in their
room! and the Honourableness of the Office might allure young men to incline
unto it: is it not an Honor to be an Ambassador of the great Eternal God, to
propound Articles of Everlasting peace between him and Everlasting Souls? What
is buying and selling, Temporal, Transitory things in comparison of a calling,
wherein it is men's work and business to save Souls from Eternal Misery, and to
bring them to the Eternal Enjoyment of the glorious God. Thus in some few
particulars we have showed the Influence that the Eyeing of Eternity will have
upon us in what we do. Do you so Eye Eternity, and the rest here for want of
room omitted, you shall by experience find out, which will be better than
knowing of them in the notion only, because they are told you.

The Conclusion of this Discourse shall be some particular uses, omitting many
that it would afford.

1. Is there an Eternal State: Such unseen Eternal Joys and Torments? Who then
can sufficiently lament the blindness, madness and folly of this distracted
World, and the unreasonableness of those that have Rational and Eternal Souls
to see them busily employed in the matters of time, which are only for time, in
present Honors, Pleasures and Profits, while they do neglect Everlasting
things? Everlasting Life and Death is before them, Everlasting Joy or Torment
is hard at hand, and yet poor sinners take no care how to avoid the one, or
obtain the other. Is it not matter of lamentation to see so many Thousands
bereaved of the sober serious use of their Understandings? That while they use
their reason to get the Riches of this World, they will not act as rational men
to get the joys of Heaven? and to avoid Temporal Calamities, yet not to escape
Eternal misery? Or if they be fallen into present Afflictions, they contrive
how they may get out of them: if they be sick, reason tells them they must use
the means, if they would be well: if they be in pain, Nature puts them on to
seek after a Remedy; and yet these same Men neglect all duty, and cast away all
care concerning Everlasting matters: they are for seen pleasures and profits
which are passing from them in the enjoyment of them, but the unseen Eternal
Glory in Heaven they pray not for, they think not of: Are they unjustly
charged? Let Conscience speak, what thoughts they lie down withal upon their
pillow; if they wake or sleep, fly from them in the silent night, what a noise
does the cares of the World make in their Souls? With what thoughts do they
rise in the Morning? of God, or of the World? Of the things of time, or of
Eternity? Their thoughts are in their Shops before they have been in Heaven;
and many desires after visible Temporal gain; before they have had one desire
after the Invisible, Eternal God, and Treasures that are above. What do they do
all the day long? What is it that has their Endeavors all their labor and
travel? Their most painful Industry, and unwearied diligence? Alas! their
Consciences will tell themselves, and their practices tell others, when there
is Trading, but no praying, Buying and Selling, but no Religious Duties
performed: the shop-book is often opened, but the sacred book of God is not
looked into all the week long.

O Lord! Forgive the hardness of my Heart, that I can see such insufferable
folly among reasonable Creatures, and can lament this folly no more: Good Lord
forgive the want of compassion in me, that can stand and see this distraction
in the World, as if the most of Men had lost their wits, and were quite besides
themselves, and yet my Bowels yearn no more toward immortal Souls that are
going to unseen miseries in the Eternal World; to see distracted men busy in
doing things that tend to no account is not such an amazing sight, as to see
men that have reason for the World, to use it not for God, and Christ, and
their own Eternal good: to see them love and embrace a present Dunghill World,
and cast away all serious, affecting, and effectual thoughts of the Life to
come: to see them rage against the God of Heaven, and cry out against Holiness,
as foolish preciseness, and serious Godliness, as Madness, and Melancholy.

Alas! These Men are Brutes in the shape of Men; for like the very Beasts they
live by sense, and are led away by a sensitive appetite: The Brute takes
pleasure in his present Provender, and feels the smart of the present Spur, or
Goad, and so do sensual Sinners find sweetness in their present pleasures, and
profits, and do complain of present pain and sickness; but of pains to come,
and joys to come that are Eternal, they have no care, nor serious thoughts.
Better such had been Toads and Serpents, than rational Creatures; for as they
mind no future things in the other World, so they are not Subjects capable of
Eternal Punishment, or Everlasting Happiness; they are not so provident as the
Ant, that in Summer lays up for Winter, and while the warm Sun does shine,
provides for a cold and stormy day: but Men that have Immortal Souls are only
for this present World, but do not provide for a stormy day that is a coming,
nor for an Eternal state to which they are hasting.

Let us call the whole Creation of God to lament and bewail the folly of Man
that was made the best of all Gods visible works; but now by such wickedness is
bad beyond them all, being made by God for an Everlasting state, and yet minds
nothing less than that for which he was principally made.

O Sun! Why is it not thy burden to give light to men to do those works, and
walk in those ways that bring them to Eternal Darkness? O Earth! Why do thou
not groan to bear such burdensome Fools that dig into thy Bowels for Gold and
Silver, while they do neglect Everlasting Treasures in the Eternal World? O ye
Sheep and Oxen! Fish and Fowl! Why do ye not cry out against them that take
away your present Life to maintain them in being, but only mind present things,
but forget the Eternal God that gave them Dominion over you, to live upon you
while they had time to mind Eternal things, but do not? O ye Angels of God, and
Blessed Saints in Heaven, were ye capable of grief and sorrow, would not ye
bitterly lament the sin and folly of poor mortals upon Earth? Could ye look
down from that Blessed place where ye do dwell, and behold the Joy and Glory
which is to us unseen, and see how it is basely slighted by the Sons of Men, if
ye were not above sorrow and mourning, would not ye take this up for a bitter
lamentation? O ye Saints on Earth! whose Eyes are open to see what the blind
deluded World does not see, do ye bitterly take on, let your Heads be Fountains
of Water, and your Eyes send forth Rivers of Tears for the great neglect of
Eternal Joys and Happiness of Heaven. Can you see Men going out of time into
Eternity in their Sin, and in their Blood, in their Guilt, and Unconverted
state, and your Hearts not moved? your Bowels not yearn? Have ye spent all your
tears in bewailing your own sin, that your Eyes are dry when ye behold such
monstrous madness, and unparallel folly of so many, with whom daily ye
converse? Ye sanctified Parents, have ye no pity for your ungodly Children? nor
sanctified Children for ungodly Parents? O my Father, my Father, by whom I had
my Being, is going to Eternal Darkness! Alas for my Mother, my dear Mother,
that carried me in her womb, that dandled me upon her knees, that suckled me at
her breasts, that did delight to break her sleep to quiet me when I was
froward, to look to me when I was sick, that bound my head when it was pained,
that wiped mine eyes when I did weep, and my face when I did sweat; because of
my Disease, this my Mother is forgetful of her own Immortal Soul; was more
troubled for me when she thought I was near my Grave, than for her self, though
near to Hell: when I was young, she took care for me, for things Temporal, but
for her self neither young nor old, for things Eternal. Ere long she will be
dead, and I am afraid, and damned too: Ere long she must go out of time, and
for any thing I can perceive, being Ignorant, and fearless of God, and
unmindful of Eternity, her Soul will go into Eternity of Torments. O how loath
am I to have such thoughts of one so near, so dear unto me? Oh it is the
cutting of my Heart, it is bitterness to my Soul. I had rather dye, than she be
damned; and yet it is my fears, she is hasting to Eternity of Woe; for to my
observing Eye she is taken wholly up with the cares, and pride, and vanity of
this Life, and apparently regardless of that Eternal World.

Why do not also ye that are Parents, that have a belief of an Everlasting
State, take on, and bewail the doleful state of your ungodly Children, that in
their sinful courses are posting to Eternal pains. What my Son! the Son of my
Loins! the Son of my Womb! Did I bear him with so much sorrow, and shall he be
a castaway? Did I travail with him with so much pain, and brought and nursed
him up with so much labor, and must he be for ever fuel for the Flames of
Hell? Have I brought forth a Child to be a prey to Devils, and a Companion with
them to all Eternity? Oh my Son, my Son, what shall I do for thee my Son, my
Son. Thus whatever Relation, Neighbor, Friend, or Acquaintance you have, or
others that you see go on in sin, let it be your grief, trouble, lamentation*
when there is an Eternity of Joys, and they will lose it, an Eternity of
Torments, and they be cast into it.

Use II. Do something every day in preparing for an Eternal state. If any thing
of weight lies upon your hands, this is it. If I could prevail with you in any
thing; Oh that it might be in this! if in any thing I am to preach, I had need
to have gone unto my knees, to beg that my message might be regarded, this is
it: If in any thing I should be serious in Preaching, and you in Hearing, still
this it: The longer your abode shall be, the greater preparation you should
make; When we exhort you to prepare for other Duties, it is but in order unto
this, that you might be prepared for the Eternal World: When we exhort you to
Repent, Believe, be Holy, or prepare for Death, in all, we have an Eye unto
Eternity: But if my words be slighted and rejected by you, will you do so by
the word of the Eternal God himself, that has given you this in charge? If I
show you express commands from God, that will shortly take you into Heaven, or
judge you down to Hell; that will quickly call you out of time into Eternity,
will you promise you will do it then? then read, and do what you shall read.
Matthew. 6.18, 19, 20, 33. Luc. 13.24. John 6.27. 1 Timothy 6.12. 2 Pet. 1.10, 11.
To these Scriptures I will add these following Arguments to persuade you.

1. God has set you in this World for this very work to make ready for
Eternity. Consider I beseech you, and demand an answer of your selves, Why has
God brought you out of Nothing, and given you a Being more noble than all his
visible works, in making your Souls Immortal, induing you with Reason and
Understanding? Do you think it was that you should look after, Riches, and not
Grace? things Temporal, not Eternal? to buy and sell, and eat and drink, and
sleep? Do you in your Conscience think that God has appointed you no higher
things to mind, no more lasting things to get? Reason will convince you, and
Conscience will prove it to your face, and the Immortality of your own Souls
considered, does undeniably argue that God has made you for more noble Ends,
higher Employments, and greater Concerns. Why then do you not mind the end of
your Creation, and do the work that God has set you in time to do, and look
after that Eternal state that God has made you for? I have read of a devout
Pilgrim traveling to Jerusalem, and in his way passed through many Cities,
where he saw many stately Buildings, rare Monuments, and delightful things, but
he was wont to say, but this is not Jerusalem; this is not the end of my coming
hither: I am sure that you are Pilgrims, but whether devout or no, let
Conscience speak: and you should be traveling to the Heavenly Jerusalem, and
if not, you are to Eternal Torments, why then do you stand gazing at the
Temporal things you see in your Journey, and your Hearts and Eyes so taken with
them? Sirs, this is not the Heavenly Jerusalem, this is not the end of your
coming hither, be sure the minding, loving, looking after things of time in the
neglect of God, and Christ, and Heaven, is not preparing for Eternity, except
it be for an Eternity of Woe, and Misery, and what need you be at so much pains
and labor to get thither?

2. God does give you your time in this World to prepare for Eternity. You have
time to repent, to get an Interest in Christ, to mortify sin, to pray for
Grace, to make your peace with God, to get the pardon of your sins, and all
this that you might be fitted for Eternity. Why then do not you do in time that
which God has given you time for; Can you imagine that God does lengthen out
so long the day of his Patience, only that you might labor for Temporal
Riches? Or that you should live a life of Carnal Pleasure, or gratify the
Flesh? Can it enter into your heads that God supporteth you in Being, and keeps
you yet out of the Grave and Hell, that you might scrape together things
Temporal, and neglect the things that are Eternal. Does he make his Sun to rise
upon you every Morning, to give you light to drudge for things that are but for
a moment, and let alone the things that are for ever? And if God has given you
time in order to Eternity, why do you spend your time in getting things that
are but for a time, and not for Eternity? Oh the years that you have had! the
Months, the Weeks that God has given you to be improved for Eternity, and you
spend it, some in things absolutely sinful in serving of the Devil, and your
Lusts; some in things in themselves lawful, but unlawfully, but none in the
things absolutely necessary that you may be happy in Eternity: some in taking
of your carnal Pleasures, some in Trading, some in Every thing but the One
thing needful, that none is left for an Everlasting state; but when you shall
be in Eternity, you will repent, though then too late, that in this World, you
so spent your time.

3. As you go out of time, so you must in the same state go into Eternity. If
you dye in your sin, you must in your sin go down to Hell. This is a Life of
Trial, here in time you are Probationers for Eternity, and as you are found at
the end of time, so your state shall be determined to Eternity of Happiness, or
Misery without end.

4. You stand upon the brink of Time, you are near the Borders of Eternity, so
near, that you that are in Time to day, might be in Eternity to morrow, or
sooner; for you never yet saw that hour, that you could say, you are sure of
the next: when you have drawn one breath, you are not sure to draw another.
Time is short, 1 Cor. 7.29. set forth sometimes by years, if Seventy, how much
is already past? Psalm. 90.10. Sometimes by Months, Job 14.5. by days, Psalm.
90.12. by one day, Job 14.6. by a span, and nothing, Psalm. 39.5. by a vapor;
Jam. 4.14, 15. But what if you were to live a Thousand years in pleasure upon
Earth, and after that pass into Eternity of pain and torment; would you not
when there, cry out of your own folly that you should purchase a Thousand years
of pleasure at so dear a rate, as to endure for them Everlasting Burnings? One
would think you should not get it out of your heads that you are almost in
Eternity. One would think you should think on this when you lie down, and when
you do rise up, or dream of this in your sleep, that you are as near to Heaven
or Hell, to an Eternity of Joy, or Misery, as to your Grave.

5. When time is past and gone, and you are entered into Eternity, it will be
too late to prepare for it. Preparation for Eternity must be done in time, not
in Eternity. Now, or Never, if once Death stop your Mouth, and close your Eyes,
dying in your sin, you must bid farewell to God and Christ for ever. When time
is gone, your hope and all is gone. When time is gone, it will never come
again: Yesterday you shall never see more; and the time that is going while I
speak and you hear; when gone will never come, that which is to come, will be
present, but not that which is past. If you lose your Health, you might recover
it again; if your Estate, you might get it again; but if you lose your time, it
is gone for ever.

6. If you go out of time unfitted for Eternity, better you had never been in
time. Better for you, if you had been always nothing: Or if a Being, to have
been a Dog, a Toad, or Serpent; for these do live in time, but after time they
do not live in Eternal Misery, as they are not capable of Eternal Happiness;
and when you lie in extremity, and eternity of pains in Hell, this will be your
judgment, that it had been better never to have been, then to be for ever
miserable.

7. Multitudes have, and more shall come short of Eternal Happiness, and go do
down to Everlasting Misery, and yet does it not concern us to be preparing for
Eternity? What means this sottishness of mind, that when multitudes are going
daily out of time into Eternity, from seen pleasures, to unseen pains, that we
are thus secure and careless, as if we should live so long in time, as never to
live in Eternity? Or that our Being should end with time? Have not we deserved
Eternal punishment as well as they that in Eternity are now enduring of it? and
do you know you have deserved it, and take no care to prevent it; not so much
as ask of God by serious Prayers and Tears, that you might not be cast into
Everlasting burnings? Do you think you can make as light of the wrath of God,
when you shall feel it in Eternity, as you do when you hear of it in time? Can
you be merry in the flames of Hell? Can you jest, and sport, and play, when you
shall be filled with the Indignation of a provoked God, or when the Arrows of
the Almighty shall stiick so fast, as never to be plucked from you? Why then do
you in time cry out and roar, and bitterly complain under the smarting pain
that the Gout, or Stone. or Cholick puts you to? why do you say if this were to
continue for one year, without intermission or mitigation, you had rather dye
than live? Do not many walk in the broad way that leads to Eternal Damnation?
Matthew. 7.13, 14. Are not the Holy, Humble, Penitent ones saved with much
difficulty? 1 Pet. 4.18. Are not many Professors gone to Hell? Matthew. 8.12. and
Preachers too? Matthew. 7.22, 23. and yet is it not time for you in good earnest
to mind your Eternal state, lest there being an Everlasting Kingdom, you should
never enter into it, and Everlasting Torments, and you should feel them to all
Eternity?

8. God does give you all the helps and means you have, that you should make
ready for Eternity. Have not you had Sermons and Sabbaths? Have not Gods
Ministers preached to you, and warned you from God of the wrath to come, and
charged you in the Name of God, to repent, believe, and turn, and told you, you
must turn from sin, or burn in Hell? And will you go from hearing on Earth, to
howlings in Hell? from the Light of the Gospel to utter Darkness? with the
sound of the voice of Mercy in your Ears? After a thousand calls to mind your
Souls, to accept of Christ, and remedying Grace? Do you mean to have the
hottest place in that Infernal Lake? the heaviest load of Wrath in that Eternal
Furnace? Read, and tremble when you read. Matthew. 11.20, to 25.

9. This will be approved Wisdom ere long by all the Sons of Men: Those that
now do mock at Praying, and make a mock of Sinning, and deride serious
Godliness, shall quickly be of another mind; shall confess and know that they
were the wisest Men, that in time prepared for Eternity, and they were the
Fools that spent their time in Sin and Vanity. Some do say as much when they
lie a dying, and wish, oh that I had been convinced of this before my time had
been so near an end! before my glass had been so nigh out! Oh my Folly! Oh my
Vanity! that had Eternity to make preparation for, and yet of all the time I
had, I never spent one hour in hearty Prayer unto God to save me from
Everlasting Torments. Woe is me! my strength is almost gone, my time is almost
gone, and I in danger of Eternal Torments, that never shall be past and gone!
or if they be blind or hardened on their Deathbeds, yet a moment after Death
they shall be convinced indeed, that it was worse than madness to neglect
Eternity. When stepped into the other World, shall be amazed and confounded,
saying, where am I now? what a place is this? what a state is this? I heard of
such a place before, but it is worse than any Man's Tongue in time could tell.
What is time gone! this is not time. Here is no Sun to measure it by its
motion; here is no succession of Night and Day. Here is no turning of an
Hourglass, no striking or telling of Clocks; No Morning, Noon, and Evening:
this is not time. I see nothing like the things I saw in time. But a little
while ago, I was among my Friends on Earth: Did I say a little while ago? Alas,
I am but lately come, and this little while seems to me a Thousand years: No
while in this place is little, and it will never be less, because it does not
go. Oh happy they that are in Eternity, but in another place than I am in! they
were wise indeed that have prevented their coming hither, and are got into a
place that is as light as this is dark: as joyful, as this is sorrowful: as
full of ease, as this is of pain: and yet this must last as long as that, and
that makes this as bitter and dreadful, as that is pleasant and delightful.
Wise were they that did foresee while they were in time, but I like a blind
Fool did not see before I felt what I must endure for ever. I did not see, but
Death did draw the Curtain, open the Door, and let me in to an Everlasting
State; but woe is me! it is of Misery and Damnation. You are for being of the
mind of the most, and doing that which the Generality do approve; take in but
these words, first, or last, and then do so: even that which all first or last
shall confess to be truest wisdom; and the neglect of it, folly and madness.
God, Angels, good Men do all approve of this as sober Wisdom; and the Devils
cannot deny it, and all Damned Souls in Hell, and all the Wicked upon Earth as
fast as they go down to them, and feel what now they do not believe and fear,
shall not deny it, to be Wisdom in them that escaped that, and got to a better
place in the Eternal World.

10. In Eternity there will be no mixture. In the other World there is all pure
Love, or all pure Wrath; all Sweet, or all Bitter; without all Pain, or without
all Ease; without all Misery, or without all Happiness: not partly at Ease, and
partly in Pain, partly Happy, and partly Miserable, but all the one, or the
other. This Life is a middle place betwixt Heaven and Hell, and here we partake
of some good, and some Evil: No Judgment on this side Hell upon the worst of
Men, but there is some Mercy mixed with it, for it is Mercy they are yet on
this side Hell; and no Condition on this side Heaven, but there is some Evil
mixed with it, for till we get to Heaven, we shall have sin in us. In Heaven
all are good, in Hell all are bad; on Earth some good, but more bad. In Hell
Misery, without mixture of Mercy, or of Hope; they have no Mercy, and that is
bad; and they can hope for none, and that is worse; while they be in time, they
are pityed; God does pity them, and Christ does pity them, and good Men does
pity them, their Friends and Relations do pity them, pray for them, and weep
over them: but when time is past, all pity will be past, and they in Misery
without pity to all Eternity. Rev. 14.10. The same shall drink of the Wine of
the Wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into the cup of his
indignation: and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence
of the Holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb. 11. and the smoke of their
torment ascends up for ever and ever, and they have no rest, day nor night --
No! then for the Lords sake, for your Souls sake, as upon my knees I beseech
you, if you have any dread of God, any fear of Hell, any desire of Heaven, any
care whither you must go, take no rest night nor day in time, till you have
secured your Everlasting happy state, that you might have Everlasting rest,
night and Day in Eternity; or that you might pass into that Eternity where it
is always day and no night; and not into that, where it shall be always night
and never day. Sirs! what say ye? What are ye resolved upon? to sin still, or
to repent that ye have already sinned, and by the Grace of God to sin so no
more? To work in time, for things of time, or in time to prepare for Eternity?
Will ye obey my message, or will ye not? Speak in time, or I will not say, hold
your peace for ever, but repent in time, or ye shall cry and roar for ever. The
time of this Sermon is out, and the time of your Life will be quickly out, and
I am afraid I shall leave some of you as unfit for Eternity as I found you: and
my heart does tremble, least Death should find you, as I shall leave you, and
the Justice of God, and the Devils of Hell should find you as Death shall leave
you, and then vengeance shall never leave you, and the Burning Flames,
Tormenting Devils, and the Gnawing Worm shall never leave you. Will ye then
work it upon your Hearts that ye came into Time, unfit to go into Eternity:
that in time ye have made your selves more unfit: that the only remedy is the
Lord Jesus Christ, that in the fullness of time did dye, that Sinners might not
be damned for ever; that this Crucified Christ will not save you from Eternal
Misery, nor take you to Eternal Glory, except ye do perform the Conditions of
the Gospel, without which, his Death puts no Man into an actual state of
Happiness; ye must Repent and be Converted, ye must take him for your Savior,
and your Lord; ye must be Holy sincerely, Hate Sin universally, love Christ
superlatively, or else the Savior will not save you; Mercy it self will not
save you from Everlasting Misery: Ye must persevere in all this to the end of
your time, and then ye shall be Happy in Eternity, to Eternity. Otherwise ye
shall not give audience Sirs, otherwise ye shall not be Happy. Happy! no ye
shall be Miserable. If the loss of God and Christ, and Heaven will make you
Miserable for ever, ye shall be Miserable for ever: If the pains of Hell, the
company of Devils, the stingings of Conscience, the terrors of Darkness, total,
final, despair of having any end of your damned condition will make you
miserable, ye shall be miserable. If all that God can lay upon you, if all that
Devils can torment you with, if all that Conscience can for ever accuse you
for; if all that is in Hell can make you miserable, except you repent in time,
and believe on Christ in time, and be sanctified in time, ye shall be miserable
for ever. O my God! be thou my Witness of this Doctrine. All ye that fear God,
that hear me this day, bear me witness that I have published this in the Ears
of all that hear me. Thou Conscience, that art in that Man, that is yet going
on in Sin, and posting with speed to Eternal Misery, bear me witness now, and
at the day of Judgment, that I told him what must be done upon him, in him, and
by him, if he would escape Eternal Torments. If he will not hearken nor obey
while he is in time; Conscience, I bespeak thy witness against him, and that
thou bring thy Accusation against him, and upbraid him to the Confusion of his
face, among all the Devils in Hell, and all that shall be damned with him, that
he was told he could not keep his sins, and be kept out of that place when he
dyed; he could not reject Christ, and finally refuse him, and be saved for
ever. Sinner! carest thou not? will thou still on? Good God! must we end thus?
Must I come down without hopes of his Repenting; and he dye with foolish hopes
of being saved, and after Death be cast into that Eternity where the Worm dies
not, and the Fire is not quenched? But in those Endless Flames shall cry out
and roar, oh cursed Caitif! what did I mean all the while I was in time, to
neglect preparation for Eternity? Oh miserable Wretch! this is a doleful,
dreadful state, and still the more, because it is Eternal. Woe is me! that I
cannot dye, nor cease to be! Oh that God would cut me off! Oh that Devils could
tear me into a Thousand, Thousand pieces; or that I could use such violence to
my self, that I might be no longer what I am, nor where I am! But alas! I wish
in vain, and all these desires are in vain; for though the union of my Soul and
Body in my Mothers Womb was liable to a dissolution; yet since this Body did
arise out of the Bosom of the Earth, and is reunited to its Soul, admits of no
separation for ever; and which still is worse, this Soul and Body now separated
from God and Christ, and all that be above in that Blessed Eternity, must
Never, Never be admitted near unto them. Oh cursed be the day that ever I was
born! Cursed be that folly and madness that brought me to this cursed place!
for here I lie under extremity of pain, which if it were for an year or two, or
many Millions, and then end, would be in this respect exceeding heavy, because
it were to last so long, but that then should be no longer, would make it in
the mean while to be the lighter: but when Eternity is added to Extremity,
nothing can be added to make me extremely, because in this extremity I am
eternally miserable. Oh Eternity! Eternity! in my condition what is more
dreadful than Eternity? This Fire burns to all Eternity; the heavy strokes of
revenging Justice will be laid on me to all Eternity; I am banished from God
and Happiness to all Eternity. Oh Eternity! Eternity! nothing cuts me to the
heart, like the corroding thoughts of this Eternity. I am an Object of the
Wrath of God, of the contempt of Angels, of the derision of Saints, of the
mockings of Devils, and cursed Fiends to all Eternity: I burn, but cannot be
consumed; I toss and roll, and cannot rest to all Eternity. Oh Eternity!
Eternity! thou art enough to break my heart, and make it dye, but that it
cannot break, nor dye to all Eternity. And if this shall be the doleful
Language, the direful Lamentations of Souls that went Christless out of time
into Eternity, do ye while ye are in time Eye Eternity in all you do, and get a
Title to Eternal Happiness, or else when ye are in Eternity, ye shall remember
that in time ye were forewarned, which warning because ye did not take, shall
be a vexation to your Hearts to all Eternity.

SERMON XXIX. A Discourse of the right way of obtaining, and maintaining
COMMUNION with GOD.
1 JOHN 1.7. But if we Walk in the light as he is in the light, we have
Fellowship one with another.
THE Subject I am to treat upon is Communion with God, how to attain it, and
how to maintain it, in as constant a course as we may be capable of in this
World: And for that end I have chosen this Text. My usual course is to provide
matter for a Text, but in this Lecture I provide a Text for the matter I am to
treat upon; The Subject is high and copious, much spoken of, but I fear not so
well understood, and less experienced; though the Subject mainly relates to
Christian Experience. Before I come to the Subject, I shall speak something of
the Text upon which it is grounded.

The Author of this Epistle is St. John, John the Apostle, John the Divine as
he was anciently called; and he writes this Epistle, (some think) to the
Believing Jews only, others think rather to the whole Catholic Church; and the
matter of the Epistle is partly to distinguish the true and the false
Christian, and for that end lays down many signal Characters to distinguish,
and partly to vindicate the Doctrine of the Gospel concerning Jesus Christ the
true Messiah, his Person, his Natures, and Salvation by him alone, from the
many errors that were crept in by false Teachers and Seducers in his time; as
Cerinthus, Ebion, etc. as he intimates in the 1 John 2.26. These things I speak
concerning them that seduce you. He also vindicates the Holiness of the
Christian Profession from the impure practices of the Nicolaitans; and the
Gnostics who began early to abuse the true liberty of the Gospel, and to turn
the Grace of God into wantonness. And lastly he does earnestly press them to
the Christian Love of one another, because of the Persecutions he saw were
coming upon the Church from the Roman Empire, and the divisions that would
arise amongst themselves from many false Brethren.

And hereupon to strengthen their Faith and Profession the more, he shows forth
the Gospel in the beginning of this Epistle.

1. In the Antiquity of it, That which was from the beginning, etc.

2. In the Certainty of it: as in the third verse, That which we have seen and
heard, and our hands have handled of the word of Life, declare we unto you.

3. In the main Scope and End of it; These things have we written unto you,
that ye may have Fellowship with us: with us the true Apostles of Christ, and
not go out from us; as he complains of some that did in this Epistle: They went
out from us, because they were not of us: And then tells them what their
Fellowship was, Truly our Fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son,
Jesus Christ. So that he proposes Fellowship with God, and with Jesus Christ,
as the great scope and end of the Gospel; and he mentions Christ as well as
God, because all our Fellowship with God is by Jesus Christ. So that the
Apostle does invite and persuade the believing Jews to Fellowship with himself
and other Apostles in the Doctrine and Ordinances of the Gospel dispensed by
them; or more generally the whole Catholic Church of God, consisting both of
believing Jew and Gentile; but all this was in order to their having Fellowship
with God, and Jesus Christ.

4. He shows the way how to have this Fellowship with God; which he sets
down both Negatively, and Affirmatively.

1. Negatively in the sixth verse, If we say that we have Fellowship with him,
and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth.

2. Affirmatively in the words of the Text? But if we walk in the light as he
is in the light, we have fellowship one with another.

And this the Apostle proves by an Argument taken from the Nature of God in the
fifth verse, God is light, and in him is no darkness at all; and therefore they
that would have Fellowship with him who is Light, must walk in the Light; for
what Communion has light with darkness. But by Light is not meant any visible,
material Light, either Natural or Artificial, but a Light that is Divine,
Spiritual, and Intellectual; For though God expresses himself to us by things
Natural, when he is called Light, or Life, etc. yet he is Ens transcendens, a
transcendent Being; and it is a true rule, nothing can be predicated univocally
of God and the Creature; And he does not say only of God that he is in the
Light, as verse the seventh, Or that he dwells in the Light, as the Apostle
Paul elsewhere expresses it, But He is Light. Light Essentially, Originally,
Eternally; Light it self, and in him he says there is no darkness at all; He
is a pure, simple, immixt, and perfect Light: As we say of that which is
perfect, it is plenum sui, full of it self, without any mixture of the contrary.

Quest. Why is God called Light without Darkness? And what is this Light?

I Answer,

1. Wisdom is Light, and Folly is Darkness.

2. Knowledge is Light, and Ignorance is Darkness.

3. Truth is Light, and Error is Darkness.

4. Holiness is Light, and Sin and Wickedness are Darkness; So that when he
says that God is Light, he means that God is Wisdom, without mixture of Folly,
Knowledge without Ignorance or Nescience, Truth without any Error, or any false
Conceptions in his Eternal Mind; and Holiness without the least mixture of Sin;
so that the way to have Fellowship with God, is to walk in the Light, that is
to say, to walk in Wisdom, and not as Fools; to walk according to Knowledge,
and not in Ignorance, to walk in the Truth, and not in Error, to walk in the
way of Holiness, and not of Sin and Wickedness. Now Light in men, it is either
Natural or Supernatural.

1. Natural, which is either the Light of the Body, which is the Eye, Matthew.
6.26. Or

2. The Light of the Soul, which is the Light of Reason, and Natural
Conscience; this we are to walk in according to the utmost Sphere and extent
thereof: But Supernatural Light, that shines from Supernatural Revelation in
the Scriptures, and the inlightning Spirit of God in the Souls of Men, is the
Light here meant in the Text, and which Christians should walk in. Now this is
the way to have Fellowship and Communion with God, as the Text says, If we
walk in the Light as he is in the Light, we have Fellowship one with another.

Now by one with another (...). Some say the Apostle means the Saints to whom
he writes, we and ye shall have Fellowship together, we Apostles, and ye
Believers. And the Vulgar Latin carries it that way, and renders it ad
invicem; But we must rather understand that the Apostle here speaks of the
Fellowship that God has with his People, and they with him. And so Beza
understands it, mutuam habemus cum eo communionem. An Ancient Greek Manuscript
has in the Text (...), with him, that is, God and we shall have Fellowship
with one another. And the rather we are to understand it in this sense; for the
Apostle he is not speaking here of the Communion which the Saints have with one
another, but of our Communion and Fellowship with God, as in the sixth verse,
If we say we have Fellowship with him and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not
the truth: And then he adds, but if we walk in the Light as he is in the Light,
we have Fellowship one with another.

I shall now proceed to speak to the Subject it self, and herein shall
discourse of these four Generals.

I. What this Communion with God is.

II. Give some Distinctions about it.

III. Show how it is to be Attained and Maintained.

IV. Deduce some Consequences that follow from my whole Discourse concerning
it; And then conclude with some practical Application.

Communion with God is, The Word in the Greek (...) is from (...), which
signifies common; and so it imports something that is common and mutual betwixt
God and us, as Communion among men imports something mutual on each side, so
that our Communion with God, it is either Active or Passive: Active, in what
passes from us to God, and Passive in what is Communicated from him to us.

1. Active on our part, which consists in the Divine Operations of our Souls
toward God, when the faculties of the Soul are tending toward him, and
terminated upon him; when the Mind is exercised in the contemplation of him,
the Will in choosing and embracing him, when the Affections are fixed upon him,
and Center in him, when by our Desires we pursue after him, by our Love we
cleave to him, and by Delight we acquiesce and solace our selves in him.

2. Passive on Gods part, and so our Communion with God consists in our
participation of him, and in his communicating himself to us; and this
Communication of God to us in our Communion with him, is specially in these
three things, Light, Life, and Love.

(1.) In Light, I mean the Light of Spiritual Knowledge and Understanding,
whereby we are enabled to discern Spiritual things Spiritually; This is called
Gods shining into our Hearts by the Apostle, 2. Cor. 4.6. and seeing Light in
Gods Light by the Psalmist. Psalm. 36.

(2.) In Life, whereby we are made partakers of the Life of God, though in a
lower degree, and are no longer alienated from the Life of God, as the Apostle
declared the Gentiles to be: Ephesians. 4. And by this Life of God we must
understand, that which the Scripture calls Sanctification, For Holiness is the
Life of God in Man: For when God Sanctifies a Man, he quickens the Soul that
was dead in Sin, and makes it partake of the Divine Life, or the Life of God;
and which elsewhere is called a partaking of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. and
a renewing Man into the Image of God, Col. 3.10.

(3.) In Love; God communicates his Love also in the sense and taste of it to
the Soul, which the Apostle calls The shedding abroad the Love of God in the
Heart. Romans 5. So that in this Communion with God, we have not only the Theory
of his Love in our minds, but some taste and experience of it in our Hearts:
And under this is comprehended all that Peace, Joy and Consolation that springs
out of this to the Soul, and arising from the Communication of the sense of his
Love to us. The Apostle James expresses this Communion with God in both the
parts of it; James 4.8. when he says, Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh
to you. And Christ expresses them both also in these words, John 14.23. If a
man love me, he will keep my words, and my Father will love him, and we will
come unto him and make our abode with him. He expresses the active part of
Communion with God by our loving him, and keeping his Commandments; and the
passive part, by his own, and his Fathers coming to us to make their abode with
us; The Apostle John expresses them by our dwelling in God, and Gods dwelling
in us, 1 John 5.16. We dwell in God either by Faith in him, whereby we make him
the Object of our Trust, Confidence and dependence; or especially by our Love
to him, as he there expresses it, He that dwells in Love, dwells in God;
And then Gods dwelling in us is Communion with God in the other part of it,
consisting in a Communication of himself to us.

But this Communion with God we must think soberly of it: It is not a
transformation of the Soul of Man, into the Divine Essence and Being, as if Man
was made God, swallowed up into him, and lost his own Existence and Being in
God; Neither is it a mixture of Gods Being, with the Being of the Creature, as
Water and Wine are mingled together, so that the Nature of them both is lost in
that mixture. For it is not thus with Angels in Heaven, or the Glorified
Spirits there, for they still retain their own distinct Nature and Being,
though, they are in the Highest Communion with God. Neither is it thus between
the Humane and the Divine Nature of Christ, as if these two were mingled
together, and did lose their proper and distinct Natures, in each other, though
the Humane and Divine Nature of Christ have a most near Union and Communion
with each other.

But this Communion it is a Sacred and Mutual Intercourse that is between God
and his People, whereby they go forth and act in the Divine exercise of their
faculties toward him, and he comes forth in the Communication of himself in
Light, Life, and Love to them.

II. I next proceed to speak of some Distinctions about Communion

(1.) Communion with God may be considered either with respect to this World,
or the World to come; the one is Imperfect, the other is perfect, one is
Mediate, the other Immediate; the one is Inconstant, and often interrupted; the
other is constant, fixed, and uniform, without any Interruption for ever.

(2.) This Communion with God has higher and lower degrees both in the Nether
and Upper World; Both among the Saints here below, and the Saints and Angels
above: As there are Orders of Angels in Heaven, and some nearer to the Throne
of God than others; and receive higher Communications of God to them, so it is
with the Saints made perfect in that Heavenly State.

(3.) This Communion with God is either Internal, or External; By Internal I
mean that sacred Intercourse between God and the Soul, which is managed only in
the inward Man; And by External, I mean this Communion with God managed in some
External Ordinance of his Worship in the Communion of Saints.

attained, and then maintained. I answer in General, It is attained only in
that way which God himself has appointed thereunto. The Heathen did aim at
having Fellowship with their Gods, and therefore they built them Temples to
dwell in, Erected Oracles for them to speak to them by, and they built Altars
to sacrifice to them, and appointed Priests to be their Mediators, or (...),
Ministers of Friendship between them and their Gods, they used several Charms
to bring their Gods to them, and keep them with them; they made use of various
Modes, and Rites of Worship which they thought best pleased their Gods, and
whereby they might invite their favor to them, and presence with them; Yea,
they worshipped several Creatures, though not as Gods, but yet that in
worshipping them, they might have some Communion with those Gods that they
thought did preside over those Creatures they Worshipped: as Vulcan over the
Fire, Neptune over the Sea, Ceres over the Fruits of the Earth, etc. But
notwithstanding these vain apprehensions of the Heathen by such means to have
Fellowship with their Gods, yet the Apostle says, they sacrificed to Devils,
and not to God, and had Fellowship with Devils, 1 Cor. 10.20. I would not says
he that ye should have Fellowship with Devils. But the ways of this Communion
(as I said) must be those which God himself has appointed; the principal
whereof are Jesus Christ himself, and the Holy Spirit.

(1.) By Jesus Christ, who was figured upon this account by Jacobs Ladder that
stood betwixt Heaven and Earth, as the Person wherein Heaven and Earth are
united; God and Man have Communion with each other, who was also figured by the
Temple, whither the people came up to meet, and have communion with God, and
God with them; And particularly by the Mercy Seat, where God promised to meet
his people, and commune with them; and therefore the Apostle adds here in the
Text, Our Fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ: for on
our part, all our access to God is by him. Ephesians. 2.18. Through him we both have
an access unto the Father.

(2.) All Gods approaches to us are also through him: All that Light, Life, and
Love; which God communicates to his people, is through him alone. And we have
this Communion through Christ with God.

First, By virtue of his Incarnation; He assumed our Nature into Union and
Communion with God, and so made way for our Persons:

Secondly, By virtue of his Life he lived here in the World; considered either
in the Holy Example he has left us to walk by, or the Doctrine that he here
preached; by both which he did guide and lead Men in the right way to
Fellowship with his Father.

Thirdly, By virtue of his Death, and making reconciliation for us by his
Blood; for if there had not been a Reconciliation, and an agreement made
between God and us, we could never have had Communion with him; How can two
walk together if they be not agreed.

1. This Communion with God it is some lower entrance into the Holiest of all
in this World, and this is said to be by the Blood of Jesus; as the Apostle
speaks, Heb. 10.19.

Fourthly, By virtue of his Resurrection, whereby Believers come to be raised
up to newness of Life, Romans 6.4. And it is only in this New Life, that we have
all our Communion with God; the Old Man in us is not capable of it, nor the
Powers of Nature, till they be renewed, raised, and quickened through the power
of Christ's Resurrection.

Fifthly, By virtue also of his Ascension into Heaven; from whence descends
upon Believers a Divine Influence and Power through Faith, whereby they are
carried up above this World, and ascend up to Heaven, and into Communion with
God; as the Apostle argues; Col. 3.1. If ye then be risen with Christ, seek
those things which are above, where Christ sits at the Right hand of God.

Sixthly, By virtue of his Intercession; For this is one great thing that he
Intercedes for with his Father in Heaven, that his People might have Union and
Communion with them; as appears by what Christ prays for John 17.21. in the
behalf of his Disciples, that they all may be one, as thou Father art in me,
and I in thee, that they may be one in us, and so have Communion with us; so
that all these things I have spoken concerning Christ, ye see tend to this
great end, to bring up the Saints of God into this Communion with him.

2. This Communion with God is also by the Spirit of God: as the Apostle 2 Cor.
13.13, 14. speaks of the Communion of the Holy Ghost; The Grace of the Lord
Jesus Christ, the Love of God, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost: The Grace
of Christ, and the Love of God are communicated by the Holy Ghost: So that all
our Fellowship with the Father and the Son, are by the Spirit. Now the Spirit
does effect this Communion with God

(1.) By Sanctifying our Hearts, and assimilating our Natures to the Nature of
God; for there can be no Communion where there is no likeness of Nature. What
Communion has Light with Darkness, or Fire with Water? because there is no
similitude in their Natures; As the Elements that have symbolical qualities,
and some likeness in their Nature do easily pass one into the other by a
Natural transmutation. In this Communion with God, there must be some
suitableness and likeness between God and the Soul, and that enmity and
contrariety which is in our Natures to him, must be removed by the sanctifying
operation of the Holy Spirit in us.

(2.) By elevating, and raising the Soul above its Natural power and reach. The
Apostle distinguishes between the Soul and Spirit in Man; the Spirit is the
superior part of the Soul, and it is in the Spirit that we have our Communion
with God, who is a Spirit: As the Union and Communion between the Soul and the
Body in Nature, is by the Superior and most refined part of the Body, which
are the Vital, Natural, and Animal Spirits; so our Union and Communion with God
is by the Spirit the supreme part of the Soul, and that elevated and raised by
the Spirit of God above its own Natural capacity or power.

These are the principal ways for Communion with God, but then there are
subordinate ways which are the Ordinances and Institutions of God for that
end: For God has in all ages been training up his people to this, to have
Communion with himself; and therefore he did appoint Ordinances for that end
under the Law; there were Sacrifices and Altars. and Solemn Feasts appointed of
God, especially the Sabbath Day, and a Sanctuary erected, etc. and all for this
end, that his People might therein draw nigh to him, and have Communion with
him. And so in the New Testament God has his Ordinances also appointed for
this end; as Prayer, Hearing the Word, Singing of Psalms, Baptism, and
especially the Lords Supper, which is therefore called the Communion, as that
Ordinance wherein we have a more special Communion with Christ, and with God in
him.

Quest. But what is to be done more particularly on our part to obtain it, and
maintain it also.

Answ. 1. In general, we are to desire it, and pant after it as the most
beneficial and necessary thing in the World; Many have it not, because they
desire it not: They satisfy themselves in their converse with things below,
and the Communion they have with things sensible and natural, and desire not
this Communion with God.

Answ. 2. You are to make it your scope and end in all the Ordinances you
approach to, to have therein Communion with God. Many come to them out of
custom, some out of curiosity, and others in hypocrisy; and so find not that
Communion with God which else they might obtain if they did make it their great
scope and end. David testifies his great longing that he had after the
Sanctuary of God; but it was for this end that he might there meet with God,
and have Communion with him; as he expresses it in the Psalm. 27.4. One thing
have I desired of the Lord, to dwell in the House of the Lord, that I may see
the Beauty of the Lord, and enquire in his Temple: And again, Psalm. 63. O God
my God, early will I seek thee, my Soul thirsts for thee, that I may see thy
Power and thy Glory as I have seen thee in thy Sanctuary, which is in effect
that he might there have Communion with God. But to speak to this more
particularly.

1. If we would have Communion with God, we must keep up the exercise of Faith
in Christ, for it is (as I said) by him that we have all our Communion with
God; therefore Christ had his Name Immanuel given to him, which signifies God
with us. Let Faith look upon God as in Christ, and so we may behold him
reconciled, we may behold him coming down to us in our own Nature, we may
behold him upon a Throne of Grace, and as entered into a Covenant of Grace,
whereby we may with a greater freedom and boldness have access unto him, which
is the active part of this Communion with God; and through Faith in Christ, God
also communicates himself by his Spirit to his People in Light, Life, and Love,
which is this Communion in the passive part of it. The Apostle 1 John 4.15.
says to this purpose, Whosoever confesses that Jesus is the Son of God, God
dwells in him, and he in God. This Confession is an act of Faith, and if it
be not only from the Mouth, but from the Heart, it leads the Soul into this
Communion with God, expressed in our part, by our dwelling in God, and on Gods
part by his dwelling in us.

2. Keep up a daily exercise of Repentance, that so no new Sin, nor the Guilt
of it in the Conscience may hinder and interrupt our Communion with God. For
who can say his Heart is clean? He is pure from sin, and therefore there is
need of daily Repentance, that sin may not interrupt our Communion with God,
which it will do, if we abide impenitently under it. The Apostle speaks in this
Chapter of Fellow-ship with God, and here in the Text, and afterward adds, If
any man say he has no sin, he deceives himself: So that this Communion with
God may consist with the Being of sin, but not with impenitence under it; and
therefore adds, If we confess our sin, he is faithful and just to forgive it;
and we know that Confession of Sin is one great part of Repentance; and when
Sin is thus confessed and forgiven, it need not hinder our Fellowship with God.
The Apostle also mentions in my Text, Fellowship with God, and the cleansing
of us from sin by the Blood of Christ; both these are put together, so that to
maintain this Fellowship with God, we must be cleansed from sin, which is done
meritoriously by the Blood of Christ, but on our part upon the Conditions of
Faith and Repentance.

3. Keep up a constant course of Prayer, and praising God. (1.) Prayer. Prayer
is a special Ordinance for Communion with God, and therefore so much commanded
in Scripture. Pray without ceasing, says the Apostle in one place, Pray all
manner of Prayer in the Spirit, as he speaks in another place. For if it be not
a Prayer in the Spirit, accompanied with Faith and fervor of Soul we may pray,
and yet have no Communion with God. Prayer is compared to incense, but it does
not ascend to Heaven but in the Fire of Holy Affection kindled by the Spirit.
And Christ therefore propounded several Parables to put men upon Fervency,
Faith and Perseverance in Prayer, which are so well known, that I need not
mention them. If the Soul draws nigh to God in any Duty, it will be this; And
so Gods drawing nigh to the Soul is experienced to be much in this Duty of
Prayer. Christ himself had his Transfiguration from Heaven, and the Glory of
God shining forth upon him while he was praying, as you read, Luke 9.29. And
the experience of the Saints can much witness to this, what visits of Light and
Love they have had, and transfiguring views of Heavenly Glory in this Duty of
Prayer. And then (2.) Keep up a constant course of Praising God. Praise, it is
the great Ordinance of Heaven for Communion with God in a State of Perfection;
and as we are able to reach it in our present State, it will raise the Soul
into Communion with God. The Soul is in its highest Operations when it is
praising God, and the higher the Acts of the Soul are, the nearer it does
approach to him who is the most High God.

4. Keep your selves pure; Though by Purity, I mean not an absolute Purity, but
watchfulness against all Sins and Temptations; Resisting every Sin, Living in
no sin, and a continued endeavor to mortify all Sin in our selves: The Purer
the Soul is, the fitter it is for Communion with God. The promise of seeing God
is by our Savior made to the pure in Heart; Matthew. 5.8. and with the pure, God
will show himself pure, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 18.26. And the Apostle James
speaking concerning this Communion with God, James 4.8. which he expresses by
our drawing nigh to God, and his drawing nigh to us adds this Exhortation,
Cleanse your hands ye Sinners, and purify your Hearts ye double minded. And
the Apostle Paul speaks to the Corinthians of the same thing, 2 Cor. 6.16, 17.
and thereupon advises them to keep themselves pure. What Communion has Light
with Darkness, Righteousness with Unrighteousness, etc. and therefore be you
separate, and touch no unclean things says the Lord, and I will dwell and walk
in the midst of you. Under the Law God appointed Porters to keep their Watch at
the Doors of the Temple, that nothing might enter in to defile that Temple,
which was his dwelling place. The Soul is to be Gods Temple for him to dwell
in, and therefore we should watch against whatsoever may enter in to defile our
Souls, whereby we may be fitter dwellings for him, and for Communion with him.
And the Priests under the Law were commanded to purify themselves before they
drew nigh to God in his Temple; Yea, and the People also before they came to
the Passover, and those folemn Feasts wherein they did draw nigh to God, they
were to purify and cleanse themselves. And the very Heathen before they entered
their Solemn Sacrifices would have their Crier to proclaim to the People (...),
Holy things are for Holy Persons. And they would write this Inscription over
the Doors of their Temple, Nemo immundus huc ingreditor. Let no unclean Person
enter in here. And all their Lustrations and washings they used to the Living,
and their purging Fires which they dreamed of for Souls after Death, and which
are still kept up in the Holy Water, and Purgatory of the Romish Church do
confirm the truth of this Notion, as that which is ingrafted in the minds of
all Men, that purity is required as necessary in all our approaches to God, and
Communion with him.

5. Let God be much in your Thoughts, and in the view of your Mind; not only
when you approach some solemn Ordinance, but in the whole course of your
actions: when you go forth, and come in; when ye lie down, and rise up. Let the
Creatures you converse with, the several dispensations of Divine Providence
toward you, present God to your Thoughts, and the view of your Minds. For how
can Men that have seldom any Thoughts of God, maintain any Communion with him.
Our Communion with God is not as it is with Creatures, in a sensible way, but
it is by the inward Thoughts and Exercise of the Mind; which therefore we ought
to be frequent in.

We should with David, Psalm. 16.8. Set the Lord always before our face; and
not as he that he speaks of, Psalm. 10.4. of whom its said, God is not in all
his thoughts. This is rather to live without God in the World, than to live in
Communion with him. And these Thoughts of God should not be slight, and
transient, but fixed and serious, especially at some times, which we should
more peculiarly denote to solemn Meditation. Meditation brings the Object
nearer to the Soul, and the Soul near to it, though locally distant; unites the
Soul to it, mixeth it self with it, whereby it does possess it, or is possessed
of it.

6. Practice Self-denial, for he that abides in himself, and lives in and to
himself, lives at a distance from God. God and Self are as two Opposite Terms,
we must forsake the one, if we would approach to the other. When Man first fell
from God, he fell in with himself, and therefore must forsake himself if he
would return to God, and have Communion with him.

There is a twofold Self-denial. One is Internal; when we can deny our selves
in all high Thoughts of our selves, Confidence in our selves, all self ends,
self- applause, self-sufficiency, and do even annihilate our selves; this is
highly requisite to our Communion with God. Self is that Dagon that must fall
before Gods Ark; that Idol that must be cast out of the Temple of Man's Soul,
that God may enter in, and dwell there.

Then there is a Self-denial that is external, which God sometimes calls his
people to in Order to Communion with himself. As to forsake Father, Mother,
House, Land, Liberty, etc. and all this in order to the receiving the hundred
fold in this Life, as our Savior has promised, which they shall receive in
this Communion with God. An eminent instance of this we have in Galeacius
Caracciolus, who left his Country, Kindred, Estate, Honor, that he possessed at
home, to enjoy Communion with God in the purer Ordinances of the Reformed
Church at Geneva; and being tempted by Gold and Silver to return, answered, His
Money perish with him that thinks all the Gold and Silver in the World worth
one days Communion with Jesus Christ. He found all that he had left an hundred
fold in this Communion he had with God and Jesus Christ.

6. Walk in Love. This I add, because our Apostle does so much insist upon it
in this Epistle. Love is an Affection requisite to all Communion; To Communion
with Saints among themselves, and to Communion with God. For God is Love, and
he that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in him. 1 John 4.16. And
this mutual indwelling is this Communion I am treating of.

The Philosopher says of Love, it does transferr amantem in amatum; it carries
the Soul from home to live and dwell in the person or thing beloved. It is
vinculum Vnionis, the band of Union; and all Communion is founded in Union. And
therefore where there is no Love, how can there be Communion; and where Men do
not walk in Love, how can they walk in Communion with God. If Christians walk
in Strife, Envy, Debates, Emulation, Contention, they will not hereby be only
hindered in their Communion with one another, but with God also.

7. And Lastly. Let the People of God walk in Fellowship with one another: Let
them be all united to some particular visible Church, where they may enjoy all
those Ordinances of Divine Worship which God has instituted for Communion with
himself: Besides the Catholic Church whereof Christ is the Supreme Head and
Pastor, there are particular Churches under the praesidency and care of
particular Pastors, to some of which all professed Christians ought to belong
in order to their Communion with God, and one another. But upon this third
General I shall speak somewhat further in the Application.

IV. I shall now come to the Fourth and last General I proposed to

1. It follows hence that Communion with God is a very comprehensive

2. It is also a constant Duty, which we are to maintain in a constant

Acquaint thy self with God, said Elihu to Job, chap. 22. v. 21. The Heb. is,
Accustom thy self with God, which imports some frequent course of
approaching to God, and converse with him. And when it is said of Noah, and
Enoch, that they walked with God: It implies a constant course of Religion, and
Communion with God. And when the Apostle says, Phil. 3.20. our Conversation is
in Heaven, it implies more than the performance now and then some Religious
Worship, but some constant converse with God, and the things of Heaven, as
Citizens of the same civil Body or Society have among themselves in their civil
Commerce and Conversation with one another; as the Greek word there used does
import. (...).


3. No Creatures are capable of Communion with God, but Angels Poet expresses
it, Jovis omnia plena, all things are full of God, and his Infinite Being is in
all Finite Beings; yet no Creatures have Communion with him, but Angels and
Men: Other Creatures have a Natural instinct or sagacity to preserve and
propagate their respective Natures, or Beings, but have no sense of their
Creator, no impression of a Deity upon their Nature, nor no rational faculties
whereby they might be capable of Communion with God.

The Angels have Communion with God in Heaven, they always, behold the face of
God, as our Savior speaks; So the Spirits of just men departed are with
Christ; and in nearer Communion with God; than when they dwelt in their
Tabernacles of Flesh. And the Saints upon Earth also are not without it, though
in a lower degree; whereby the Church Militant has Communion with the Church
Triumphant in this Communion that both have with God, Heb. 12. whieh shows the
excellency of rational Creatures above all others, that they alone are capable
of this high Employment, and Privilege.



And herein consists the chief misery of fallen Angels, and fallen Man; that
they both fell from their Communion with God. The Angels so fell, as never to
be restored to it again: And man so fell also, as not to be able of himself to
return to it. But God has provided a way for man by Christ to be brought back
again to him, which if he neglects or refuses, he will then be cast into the
same hopeless Condition with the Devil and his Angels.

Israelites brought Gold, Silver, Purple, Scarlet, and precious Stones for the
use and service of the Sanctuary, they devoted them to the highest service they
were capable of. So when the faculties of the Soul are made a Sanctuary to God,
and employed in Communion with him, they receive their highest improvement.

Lastly, Communion with God is the Life of Religion: It is but a dead thing
without it. All Religion has respect to a Deity, either to confer Honor upon
it, or to have Communion with it, especially the true Religion; without the
former it finds no acceptance with God, without the latter it is unprofitable
to our selves, yea, we may grow worse under all our profession. What the Body
is without the Soul, and what the matter without the form, that is Religion,
where men find no Influence from Heaven upon their Hearts, and have no
Communion with God. I next proceed to the Application.

I. Take notice with an holy admiration of the condescending goodness

To assume our Nature into Union and Communion with God was great condescent;
and so it is to receive any of our persons. Will God indeed dwell on Earth said
Solomon, when he had built God an House for him to dwell in amongst his people.
For God to approach in ways of such kindness to Men, as to communicate himself
to them as I said before, and to admit men to make such near approaches to
himself, both these manifest his great goodness.

II. Take notice wherein Christianity excels Philosophy, properly Philosophy
speaks nothing of the Mediator, the Man, Christ Jesus, by whom alone we can
draw nigh to God. Philosophy improves the Principles of mere Nature, but cannot
confer a new Nature; does not infuse such Principles as the Gospel does, to
lead men into Communion with God. Philosophy, whether Natural, or Moral, has
an excellency in it, in its proper Sphaere, but yet falls far short of
Christianity, the Principles of the Gospel, and the Mysteries of Faith, wherein
Men are led to the true knowledge of God, and fellowship with him.

III. This may be matter of Lamentation in this profane and Apostate

Though some may pretend to it that have it not, yet God forbid we should deny
it. The Apostle in the Text asserteth it, and the experience of real Christians
in all Ages bears witness to it. And if it be not a fancy, but a real thing, I
am sure it is the most solemn and important thing in the whole World.

Q. But why are there so few that attain it.

A. 1. Some are under an evil heart of unbelief, whereby they depart from the
living God. Heb. 3.12. And what stands opposite to Communion with him more than
departing from him?

2. Others walk in Hypocrisy, and have only External Communion with the
Church, and Ordinances of it, but for want of true Grace, and sincerity in
their hearts have no real Communion with God.

3. Others walk in Pride, and God resists the proud, knows him afar off,
and all Communion with God is intercepted hereby.

4. Others are in such friendship with the World, which as the Apostle says,
is Enmity against God; and where there is Enmity, there can be no Communion.

5. Others are under the disturbance of headstrong Passions, and Communion
with God, requires a quiet, serene, and sedate frame of Spirit.

6. Others concern themselves only about Disputes and Controversies in
Religion, and mind not that wherein the Life and Power of it consists, which
is Communion with God.

7. Others satisfy themselves with notions and speculations, with fine
Language, strains of Rhetoric, well compiled forms of devotion, and look no
farther.

8. Others give way to wandering thoughts, and serve God with a distracted mind,
whereby their Hearts are carried from God, even while they are serving of him.

9. Others make Religion mere matter of Discourse, please themselves to talk of
it, and that is all.

10. And Lastly, Others are fallen into down right Atheism, question Gods very
Being, and indeed are of no Religion at all, and can have no Communion with the
Deity which they doubt of, or deny.

Now is not this to be lamented, for Men to have no Communion with that God who
gave them their Being; that God, in whose favor is their Life, that God, in
whom is treasured up the true felicity of Man. God is a Fountain of Living
water, a Spring of endless Pleasure, an Ocean of all Perfection and Holiness,
but what is this to him that has no Communion with him; and has not a drop of
all this falling upon himself.

But in stead of this Communion with God, have not these Men Fellowship with
unrighteousness, and the unfruitful works of darkness, which the Apostle
forbids, Ephesians. 5.11. Fellowship with the Adulterer, or Adulteress in
Uncleanness, with the Swearer in Profane Oaths; with the Unjust in
Unrighteousness, with the deceiver in his frauds, the Liar in false Speaking,
the Drunkard i^ riotous and intemperate Drinking, which Men call good
Fellowship, etc. And I could wish that the Fellowship that men call clubbing at
Taverns, and Coffee-houses at unseasonable hours, whereby the duties of their
Families are neglected, were forborne at this day. Certainly, a more circumspect
walking is required of us, especially such as pretend to Religion in a day
wherein God is visiting the Nation, and rebuking his own people for their
Iniquities.

And many in stead of Fellowship with God, have Fellowship with the Devil. I
mean not so much, Witches, Sorcerers, or such as Confederate expressly with him,
but such as do his Lusts, and carry on his work in the World. What is the
Devils great work? Is it not to propagate Wickedness, to persecute the Church,
to obstruct the Gospel, to foment Divisions, to corrupt the Truth with Error,
and to sow Tares among the Wheat. And how many are there that have Fellowship
with the Devil in such works as those: But they little think of the Fellowship
they are in danger to have with him in his Torments, who at present have this
Fellowship with him in these works of Wickedness.

IV. I shall next proceed to exhort men to seek after this Communion

And I shall first speak to such as are mere strangers to it; have lived many
years in the World, and in a Land where the Gospel has been long preached, and
yet know nothing of it.

1. Let me persuade them that there is really such a thing, and that all that
is spoken of it, is not mere canting, and vain pretense.

2. Let me persuade them seriously to seek it, and to make it the great work of
their lives, and their great scope and end in all Religion to attain unto it.

3. As the Gospel invites sinners to Christ, let them make haste to him, that
in him they may have their peace made with God, and receive that Grace whereby
they may be capable of Communion with him.

4. Let them no longer walk in darkness: For if we say we have Fellowship with
him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth, as the Apostle speaks
in this Chapter. And here remember what I spoke in the opening of the Text.
Wisdom is Light, and Folly is Darkness, Knowledge is Light, and Ignorance is
Darkness, Truth is Light, and Error is Darkness, Holiness is Light, and Sin and
Wickedness are Darkness. Let Men then first walk wisely, and not as Fools.
Wisdom lies in choosing to a Man's self a good end, and in fitting means suitable
to that end, let Men do this: Wisdom lies in preferring things according to
their true worth and value, let Men do so. Wisdom lies in embracing of Seasons,
and redeeming of Time; let Men practice this; Wisdom lies in looking to things
in their End and Issue, and not only how they appear at the present, let Men do
this also. And secondly I said, Knowledge is Light, Ignorance is Darkness;
Would you then have Communion with God, you must not abide in Ignorance: but
read the Scriptures, Enquire into the Mysteries of the Gospel, and know the way
of coming to God, and Communion with him by Christ Jesus, and to an Everlasting
Communion with him in Heaven.

And Thirdly, Truth is Light, and Error is Darkness; Take heed therefore of
false Doctrines, especially such as may tend to the obstructing this Communion
with God. Take heed of Socinian Doctrines in denying, Christ's satisfaction, the
Trinity, and the Godhead of Christ, etc.

Take heed of Popish Doctrines, which tell you of other merits, besides the
merits of Christ, other satisfaction, other Mediation, and other Headship of
the Church besides Jesus Christ, etc. Take heed of the Leaven of Quakerism,
which sets up the Light of Nature for Christ, and cast off the use of those
Ordinances which Christ has appointed for our Communion with God.

Take heed of the old Pelagian Doctrines that set up the Power of Nature, and
are since revived under other Names, to the denial or neglect of that help of
the Spirit which is necessary to our Communion with God.

And lastly, I said, Holiness is Light, and Sin and Wickedness are Darkness; He
therefore that would have Communion with God, must break off from his Sin,
betake himself to a course of Godliness, and Holy walking with God. In the
Apostles time rose up a Sect of carnal Professors, who would talk high of
Fellowship with God, and yet walk after the Flesh, and indulge their Lusts:
Whom he is thought especially to referr to in this Chapter, that they thus
walking in Darkness, cannot have Fellowship with that God who is Light.

The next branch of the Exhortation I direct to such as are in the practice and
experience of this Communion with God.

First, Maintain it in what Constancy you can. The fewer interruptions are
admitted therein, so much the better. Take heed of violent passions, take heed
of distracting Cares, take heed of Diversions from Duties and Ordinances you
ought to attend unto. Take heed of the snares of bad Company, of the influence
of bad Examples, of the carnal Counsels of your own Heart, of any Complyances
against your Consciences, of any doubts and disputes in your Mind about the
Fundamental Principles of all Religion, especially that Christian Religion that
you make profession of. And watch over the Levity and instability of your own
minds, which of it self alone may hinder our constancy in this duty. Yea, and
the very lawful Affairs of our calling, especially if much encumbered, may
interrupt us herein.

Secondly, Advance it to an higher degree; That your Communion with God may
grow up into a greater intimacy, such as the Church, the Spowse of Christ is
represented to have in the Book of Canticles. He that can attain it, let him
attain it. In Jacob's Ladder which stood betwixt Heaven and Earth, there were
many rounds. In an high Mountain there are several degrees of ascent. At Mount
Sinai, the people stood at the bottom, some of the Priests, and the Seventy
Elders of Israel went up a little way, but Moses was at the top. Let us ascend
this Mount as high as we can, only know it is not Mount Sinai, but Mount Sion
we must ascend to have Communion with God.

And be not discouraged if you meet with some difficulties in your ascent
through the Natural bent of your Hearts toward things below, The sweetness and
advantage you will reap herein, will abundantly recompense all the labor and
endeavors after it.

And may not some eminent degree of Communion with God be expected of such as
do not only live in the times of the New Testament, but have had a long
standing in the Church of God; that your growth herein may in some measure be
proportioned to your time and advantages for it.

And that which should quicken you the more, is the present Complexion of the
times both at home and abroad. We know not what days are coming, Men's Hearts
are failing them for fear of what Evils are coming upon the Earth; as our
Savior foretold, Matthew. 24. now nothing will so fortify the Soul against an
evil day, and an hour of Temptation as this Communion with God. This will
sweeten a Prison, sweeten Poverty, sweeten Banishment, sweeten the very sorrows
of Death.

This sweetened the Martyrs sufferings of old: that Fellowship they had with God
in those sufferings, wherein they had fellowship also with Christ in his Death.

Now let these things put you on to this great work: And be not discouraged
because of the infinite distance betwixt God and us. He is come down to us in
our own Nature in Christ, that we may have access to him, and his terror not
make us afraid. And hear what he speaks himself to our encouragement, Isa. 57.
Thus says the high and lofty one that inhabiteth Eternity, I dwell in the high
and holy place with him also that is of a contrite Spirit, etc. The most high
God thus humbles himself to men.

But God is invisible,

Its true, We cannot have a sensible Communion with Him, We look not to the
things which are seen, but to the things which are not seen? And does not the
Apostle Peter say, Whom having not seen, you love: 1 Pet. 1.8. And is not Faith
the Evidence of things not seen? Heb. 11.1. And though in himself he is
invisible, yet he made himself visible in Christ, who is the Image of the
Invisible God. Col. 1.15.

Creed: And that which the Apostle in this Chapter exhorts to; These things
have we written to you, that ye may have Fellowship with us: with us as
Apostles, and with us as Believers. So that the fellowship of Saints
comprehends their fellowship with the Father, and their fellowship with the
Son, and their fellowship with the Apostles, and from thence fellowship with
one another.

All Saints and Churches that hold fellowship with these three, ought to have
fellowship among themselves. To bring in new Doctrines, or new Rules of Worship
not delivered by the Apostles, is to forsake Communion with the Apostles. The
terms of Communion laid by the Apostles for the Churches of Christ ought to be
kept inviolable in all Churches to the end of the World, and be the Foundation
of their Communion among themselves. And for my part I can hold Communion with
any Church where these are maintained; though there may be some Circumstantial
differences either in Opinion or Practice; especially if they are not imposed,
as necessary. For this has made such woeful Divisions in the Church, the making
things unnecessary, and doubtful the necessary terms of Church Communion. Was
the Church of Rome it self the truly Ancient, Catholic, and Apostolic Church,
as she styles her self, I could have Communion with it. They that leave the
Apostles, shake the Foundation of the Churches stability, and forsake the
center of its Unity. The Lord help us all to understand the way of Peace and
Union in this miserably divided Age.

Turkish Paradise, it is Communion with God, that is, the very Heaven of
Heaven, as the loss of it is the very Hell of Hell: And this makes Heaven not
desirable to the Carnal Man, who has no desire after, or delight in Communion
with God; but it does commend it the more to the Spiritual Man, that he shall
then enjoy that in its highest perfection, which he has been pursuing, and had
the fore-tasts of in this World.

Quest. What is the best way to prepare to meet God in the way of his Judgments
or Mercies? SERMON XXVIII.
1 John XII. 28. Beginning of the Verse. Father Glorify thy Name.
IN this Chapter we find the Lord Jesus under two very different Exercises: in
the one attended with much Solemnity, in the other under great Perplexity: much
Courted, much cast Down; highly Honored, and exceedingly Troubled; and he
bears both, with wonderful Equanimity. He is Feasted at Bethany v. 1, 2.
Anointed with Oil of Spiknard very costly, v. 3. Rides Tryumphantly into
Jerusalem, v. 12, 13. etc. His Disciples bless, and entertain him upon the way
with Hosannas, v. 13. Matthew. 21.8, 9. Strangers desire to see him and give him
their Acknowledgments, v. 20. And the Multitude throng after him, v. 12. And
strew his way with Palm Branches, v. 13. But immediately the Scene is changed.
As our blessed Lord was not much affected with these things; so contrary to all
Expectation he enters upon a discourse of another Nature. v. 23.
The hour is come that the Son of Man should be Glorified. Why; Had he not been
Glorifying throughout this Chapter? yea! But not comparably to what he here
intends, q. d. my Feast, my Triumph, my applause; bear no Proportion to the
glory I am hasting to. These are but Dull, low Glories to what is at Hand, The
hour is come (i. e.) is near, That the Son of Man shall be, and Glorified upon
the Cross, by Expiating the Sins of his Elect; Glorified thereupon in Heaven at
the right hand of the Father.

Christ had his Eye upon an higher Glory which would redound to him upon the
Performing and Finishing our Redemption. And a true Christian frame, overlook's
present Comforts and Honors from Men; and fixes mainly upon the Honor to be
received from God in the way of Obedience, here, and hereafter.

Nor will our Lord Jesus pass over this Meditation till he have improved it.

1. Inferring thence the Fruitfulness of his Death. Verrily, Verrily, I say
unto you, v. 24.
Except a Corn of Wheat fall into the Ground, and Dye* it abides alone, but if
it Dye, it brings forth much Fruit. Alluding to the Propagation of his Church
by his Death.

2. The Proportionable advantage of the Death of his Saints, for his Sake, v.
25.26.
and Testimony: and the disadvantage of forbearing and refusing to suffer for
his Name.

But passing thence to the consideration of his Dreadful Agony, and Passion
ensuing. v. 27. beginning.
His Thoughts are at a Stand, his Soul is Troubled; yea the Extremity of his
grief stopped his Mouth: so Amazing, so Astonishing was the Foresight of his
Sufferings.

At last Prayer breaks out. Father, Save me from this Hour: and is presently
Corrected. But for this cause came I to this Hour. q. d. I would escape, but
must not resist thy Will. I Would save my self, yet not without a Salvo to thy
purpose and council. I am in a Strait, between Nature and Faith, between Fear
and Subjection, between Death and Duty.

First, Mere Trouble is no Sin. Christ's Soul was Troubled (...) as Water when
it is Mudded, Jo. 5.4, 7. Not that their was any mixture of Sin in his Trouble:
it was such as might consist with his pure unspotted Nature. If grief be not
groundless, if not extravagant, no Sainted with unbelief, or effected of
disobedience: it is but Natures Weakness, Grace induces no Stoical Stupidity.
It Is no property of the Gospel; to make Men Senseless.

Secondly, Fear of Death, and sense of the Wrath of God, are of all things most
Perplexing. Now is my Soul Troubled. Now I am to conflict with the Father's
Anger, Men's Malice, and Death's Pains and Terrors: and now, not my Flesh only,
but my Soul is Troubled.

Thirdly, Extreme distress of Spirit is of an amazing Nature. Christ had not
the Freedom of Prayer. What shall I say? and then what he did say, was
corrected, Matt. 26.39, 42.

Fourthly, No Extremity can Ordinarily, or should really put an Holy Soul, by
the Plea of, or hope in his Relation to God, Christ calls God Father. My God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me? Matt. 27.46.

Fifthly, Prayer must be suited to the Occasion, Save me from the Hour, etc. A
great Argument against most forms, is, that an Holy Soul cannot relish them,
nor can I see how God accepts them, because they are impertinent, or not full
to the case.

Sixthly, In our Extremitys, we may be importunate, must not be Peremptory,
with God in Prayer. Our Savior here Prayed not more Heartily, then
submissively, Matt. 26.39.

Our Text is the Result of the Lords Wrestling, both with his own Soul, and
with his Father.

Here is first Christ's Prayer. Father, Gl^rify thy Name. And the Fathers Answer
in the next words: but I meddle not with that now.

In the Text we have Two things, 1. The Compellation, Father. 2. The Petition,
Glorify etc. 1. The Compellation Father. Prayer ought to be Ushered in with
some Suitable Title of God, which is expressive of his Supremacy, our Reverence
of him, and Relation to him. All these are Couched in the Single word Father.
Read, Matt. 6.10. Malach. 1.6. Romans 8.15.

1. This Title expresses God's Authority, and Chirst's Allegiance both owned
by him in this little Word.

2. Relation. The Lords Petitioners must ask so as to assure themselves of
Acceptance: which the Recognition of our Interest in God, Read Isa. 63, 16.
as our Father in Christ, is very proper to Effect. Hence the Rule of Prayer,
enters with Our Father. And it is most Suitable to the Spirit of the Gospel,
that believers call God Father in Prayer, having the Spirit of the Son poured
out upon them to this End, Gal. 4.6.

2. The Petition Father, Glorify thy Name, q. d. Be thou rather Glorified, then
I Spared. If I dye, thy Glory will make amends for my Torment and Death, where
note,

1. His Submission to the will of the Father. He puts himself into his Fathers
hands, and Subjects himself to his pleasure.

2. His design, the Fathers glory, Glorify thy Name. He does not say simply,
let my Agony and Death come: but Glorify, etc. q. d. This being the means of
thy Glory, which thou have fixed upon, here I am, do to me as seems good in
thy Sight. Hence observe,

First, The best way to quiet and compose our Spirits in time of distress, is
the Prayer of Faith. Wrestle with God and you Conquer your own Tumultuatings.
1. Sam. 1.10, 11, 18.

Secondly, That Soul will be heard, who forgets or neglects himself in
Comparison, and Prays for the Accomplishment of the Will, and Glory of God.
So does Christ here, and God heard him, See. Heb. 5.7.

Thirdly, Our Exemption from suffering may sometimes be inconsistent with the
Glory of God. Save me from this hour (says Christ) but for this cause came I
unto this hour; Father Glorify thy Name. The Ground of the Point lies in his
Correction of his first Petition.

Fourthly, The best and most Effectual means to prepare our selves to meet God
either in the way of Mercy or Judgment, is to resign our selves to the
Sovereign Will of God, to be disposed of for his Glory.

1. I shall prove the Doctrine.

2. Open the Nature of this resigned Frame of Spirit.

3. Give some Arguments, manifesting that it is our Duty, especially in a Day
of Distress.

4. Apply the whole.

Before I enter upon the first: I lay down this Supposition, That believer who
is prepared for Affliction, is prepared for Salvation; that the same
qualification fits for both these dispensations. I know some are Vessels of
Wrath fitted only for Destruction, To. 9.22. If the Apostle did there Treat of
a Moral preparation, which I know he does not, then we must Distinguish between
Destruction and Affliction; and of the fitness of the Vessels of Wrath for
that, and Saints for this. But to decide this matter. Our Doctrine and
Question, speaks of an Holy, Gracious Preparation for Sufferings, to bear them
quietly and benificially, not of a judicial Aptitude for Ruin, much less an
Eternal act of Preterition, which is the Apostles meaning there. This premised,
I suppose, none will deny him who is holily qualified for Suffering: to be in a
blessed readiness for comfortable Dispensations and Providence.

Now that the above mentioned Resignation to the will of God for his Glory,
Prepares a Soul, both for Mercy or Judgment, Suffering, or Deliverance,
appears as follows.

1. In that we find Holy Men of Old, in this Spirit ready for either
Dispensation, Tribulation or Comfort, Adversity or Prosperity.

Job shall be our First Instance, his Resignation is notably expressed, Chap.
1.21. Naked came I out of my Mothers Woumb, and Naked shall I return Thither;
The Lord gives and the Lord takes, Blessed be the Name of the Lord. The good
Man upon the first gust of the Storm that beats Terribly upon him, falls down
at the Feet of God, acknowledging his Soveraignity, and Adoring his Name. Well,
in this Frame he met with greater Trials afterward, and how did he bear them,
See, James 5.11. Ye have heard of the Patience of Job, and have seen the end of
the Lord that the Lord is very Pitiful and of tender Mercyes. In this Spirit he
bear Affliction Patiently, and received Mercy Plentifully. God had two Designs
on Job, to Try, and Bless him; and Job's humble Spirit equally quallified him
for both. Take David for a Second Example. By Absaloms Rebellion he was brought
to a great Strait, that must fly, to prevent the Surprise of his Person. Now
take notice of his Frame, 2 Samuel 15.25, 26. And the King said unto Zadack carry
back the Ark of God into the City: If I shall find favor in the Eyes of the
Lord, he will bring me again, and show me both it and his Habitation. But if he
say thus, I have no delight in thee, behold here I am, let him do to me as
seems good unto him. David was not without hopes of being Restored to his
Throne, and yet he had fears of the Contrary: but whether God would dispose of
him that way, or this; he Submits to his Pleasure, Resigns himself to his Will*
and this prepared him for Suffering, and qualified him for Deliverance, Isa.
41.2. It Is said that God called Abraham to his Foot. (i. e.) to an entire
Subjection to his Will: He disputed nothing that God revealed, and refused
nothing which he commanded, what was this for? why! to fit him for great
Trials and Mercies, Genesis 12.1, 2, 3, 4. Cap. 22.1, 2, 3, -- 10 -- 16, 17, 18.
this was Paul's Frame, Acts 20.22, 23, 24.

2. That Frame is most fit to meet the Lord in the way of Judgment or Mercy
which Christ chose to suffer in, and so to enter into Glory. In the Text this
was his case, he was shortly to meet with two Contrary Dispensations. He was to
bear our Sin, and to Conflict with the Wrath of God for it; to Suffer the
Violence of Hell, and the World, and to Dye an accursed Death, but with all
immediately, he is to be Glorified at the Right Hand of the Father. Both these
he had in his Eye in this Chap. v. 23, 24. He expected a double Glory upon his
Death: here, by the Propagation of the Gospel, in Heaven, by the Exaltation of
his humane Nature, Chap. 17.15. and both these he looked for, Heb. 12.2. Well,
how will he prepare himself for Suffering and Glory? even by lying at his
Fathers Foot in the Text. And now he can grapple with all his Enemies, and now
he can wait for his reward, Matt. 26.39, 42, 44. 'Twas in this Spirit that he
went to meet his betrayer, v. 45, 46. This all the Evangelists mention for our
Example. Certainly Christ knew what was the best preparation, for Judgment or
Mercy, and Chose it for himself, and was therein our Pattern.

3. That's the best way to meet God in the way of his Judgments or Mercies which
himself prescribes, but a Resigned humbled Spirit to his Will and Pleasure is
commanded by himself to qualify us for such Dispensations, 1 Pet. 5.6. Humble
your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, and he shall Exalt you in
due time. q. d. bear my Afflicting hand, and you shall feel my Supporting
Exalting hand.

4. That Is the best Preparation for Mercy or Judgment which God aims at in
Afflicting, and Rewards in Delivering his People: and this is a Resigned
Frame, an Obedient, Submiss, Subdued Will to the Will of God. If he afflict his
Children, it is because they are Froward, if he Cherrish them it is for the
Compliance with his Pleasure, Ephram was Smitten for his Stubborness, and
Comforted for his Obedience, Jer. 31.18, 19, 20. God has no Contention with
us, but our Crosness: because our Wills Thwart his, and our ways contradicts
his; First we resist his Commanding Will by Disobedience, and then his
chastizing Will by Impatience, and he in his Wisdom and Love is resolved to
bring us to his Foot, Well! If we Comply before hand when we see the Storm
approaching, God's end is Attained, and he either lay's down his Rod, or
Mitigateth the Chastizement, yea he will e're long Embrace and Comfort broken
and humble Ephraim. Indeed this Frame superseed's Affliction: for Judgment upon
Saints are not to Destroy, but Subdue them to their Fathers Will. And if we
meet our angry Father, in this Spirit; he may Correct a little, but he will
certainly Comfort much.

5. Lastly, a resigned Soul meets God in the way of Judgments or Mercies to
great advantage. They are so far from doing him harm, that they do good,
therefore it must needs be a blessed Preparation for either. Physic never
works so well as when the Body is antecedently prepared: nor is any Person so
certainly profited by Judgments or Mercies, as he that is ready to entertain
them. I know God can do an unprepared Soul good by any Providence, but I am
sure none can come amiss to such as be prepared. What then will prepare us to
receive Chastizments Profitably? The Apostle tells us, Be Subject to the Father
of Spirits, and Live, Heb. 12.9. Comply with his Will, resign your selves to
his Pleasure, and what ever he does; will be a quickening in proving Providence.

Qu. What is the Nature of this Resignation to the Will of God for his Glory?
Or wherein does it consist?

Ans. I shall reply to this Quere, by laying down something employed in it, and
then speak to the Proper Nature thereof. It implies many things, I shall
Instance only in a few for Brevity's sake

1. It supposes a Lively exercise of Faith. For as no Unbeliever ever did
resign himself freely to the Will of God: so no believer, if Faith be not in
Exercise, can do it. Yea, it must be an active Faith will enable us to put our
selves into the Hands of God (especially in a Day of Affliction) to deal with
us according to his Pleasure. I say, that Soul must have a good Acquaintance
with, and a blessed Confidence in him whom he trusts with his Life and All.
Paul therefore tells us, in case of Suffering, he knew whom he had Trusted, 2 Timothy 1.12. Therefore our Savior here, when he Refers himself to God,
expresses his Faith in that very Resignation. Father Glorify, etc. He believed
God to be his Father, and that his Father loved him, and now he is Satisfied
that his Father dispose of him, Psalm. 31.14, 15. But I trusted in thee Lord, I
said thou art my God. What then? my times are in thy Hands, q. d. it is not only
thy Perogative to dispose of me and my Days, but I refer them Voluntarily to
thee. He put them into the hands of his God, and trusted them with him.

There be many Perticulers that the Faith of a resigned Soul is Exercised in.
As, That God is his God. Faith must have Interest in him whom it Trusts.
Isaac will Suffer his Father to Bind and Sacrifice him, Why? Abraham was his
Father, and God who had given the command for it was his God, Genesis 22. And it
believes that all the will of God is Good. Good in it self and good for the
resigned Soul. A believer may know that there may be Pain and Affliction in
Suffering according to the Fathers Pleasure: but it is withal assured, it is his
good pleasure, Heb. 12.10. And such a Soul believes, that it is God and Father,
is kind, loving and tender, that he will not oppress, that he will not
overwhelm. He believes that God Glorifies not himself to the damage of his
People; but that his Glory and their Benifit are inseparably Linkt together.
Yea, it is in Christ, the Redeemer of the Soul, puts it self into the
Fathers Hands, and it expects Power and Strength from its God to bear the
Sufferings and carry through them. When Moses forsook Egypt and his Interest
there, and chose to Suffer Affliction with the People of God. He did this in
Faith, Eying him who is Invisible, Heb. 12.24, etc. And David in the like case
was well Satisfied in the good will of God to him. 2 Samuel 15, 25, 26. Chap. 25.
5.

2. Consequently, it is an high act of Love. He that loves his Heavenly Father
will be disposed of by him, but it must be above becoming the glorious
Objection, which it is fi^t, Matt. 22.37. A Love that prefers his Will and
Glory before all things else. A Love in Comparison of which all other Love is
hatred, Luke 14.26. A Constraining love, 2 Cor. 5.13, 14. Abraham loved Isaac
well: why then did he offer him up at the Command of God? O 'twas because he
loved God better. This is the Love of God, that we keep his Commandments, and
nine of his Commandments are grievous, 1 Jo. 5.3. What, no Command grievous?
Not Self-denial? not bearing the Cross! No! Those Commands are not grievous,
because the Soul loves God better then it self. We have a great word, Rev.
12.11. They loved not their Lives unto Death, why, because their love of
Christ, was stronger then Self-love, Rev. 14.4. We Read of some that followed
the Lamb where ever he went. Into Tribulation of all sorts they followed the
Lamb, Why? Love constrained them, Christ therefore resigned himself into the
Fathers hands, for he loved his Father. Love will lay the Soul at Gods Feet,
Love will follow and Obey the Fathers call in all things. Love will keep
steadfastly in the way of the Will of our beloved. It argues little Love to
Christ, when we seek to evade Suffering for his Name, by finding out Carnal
Shifts. He that loves the Father and Son is (as to the main) resolved into
their Will.

3. To come nearer to my Intendment. This resignation of our Wills to the
Pleasure of God for his Glory, respect's Sufferings and Dutys Principally. For
there is no difficulty Ordinarily to comply with the good Will of God in
Distributing Mercy and Favor. But to have our Wills Resolved into his, in case
of difficult Duty, and hard Sufferings, which Cross our corrupt Nature, and
press upon our Pampered Flesh; is a great Work, far above the Sphere, of an
unregenerate Person, and a special Effect of the Spirit of God, in and upon the
Hearts of Saints, But because our Subject leads to consider the matter, in case
of Afflictions only: I shall confine my Discourse thereto, Only adding this by
the way, that where a Soul disputes no Sufferings, it Submits to all Dutys. If
it be resigned to the Will of the Lord in the one, it is Subjected to him in the
other also.

4. Therefore the Resignation I spoke of, consists in several things.

1. In referring our selves to the Will of God in a Day of Trial, in the very
things we fear. Our Lord Jesus dreaded nothing like this Hour that was coming
upon him. It troubled and amazed his very Soul, v. 27. gladly would he be saved
from it, had it been consistent with his Fathers Purpose and Honor: yet all
this notwithstanding he boweth his Soul, and prays his Father to Glorify his
Name, so Matt. 26.39, etc. His Soul trembled at the thoughts of the bitterness
of that Cup; we find him not Relucting at any foregoing Suffering, but this
amazed him as Mark expresses it, yet see his resolve, nevertheless not my
Will, but thine be done.

Two things in times of Trouble we usually start at, yet a resigned Soul will
refer it self therein to the Will of God.

1. The matter of the Trial. Very often we think we could be content to bear any
burden, but what Providence lays upon us: carrying it as if God had picked out
the very worst of Pains, and Aff ictions for us. We'd bear Sickness if it
pleased God, but cannot away with Death, we'd lay down our Lives at Gods Feet,
but know not to be confined in a nasty Goal. Let God send any thing but
Poverty, or Banishment, or Slavery, etc. The meaning of it is, we would Suffer
according to our own Will, not Gods. For to corrupt Nature any Trouble is more
Eligible, then what Providence fixes upon. Rachel could Die more quietly (as
she imagined) then endure the Affliction of Barrenness, Genesis 30.1. Though, poor
Woman, she found that first as hard a Task as the second, Chap. 35. 18.

Was this Christ's meaning when he prayed the Father to Glorify his Name? does
he prescribe the Suffering or close with his Fathers Pleasure? did Christ say
any Cup Father, but this, any Death, but this accursed Crucifixtion. Nay, but
if this Cup may not pass away, thy Will be done. O how far are we from this
Frame, when we Complain, our Lot is worse then any Man's. We think God has
chosen the Smartest Rod in all the Bundle for us. But where is our Resignation
all this while?

2. The manner of the Trial, this is usually disputed. Saul in his dispare will
Dye, but Scorns to be Slain by the uncircumcised, 1 Samuel 31.4. Abimeleck too,
will Dye when he cannot help it, but not by the hand of a Woman, Judge. 9.54.
And we flatter our selves, as if we were willing to Glorify God by our Death;
only we would choose the way of Dying. The meaning is, God shall be Glorified a^
we please, He shall have the Honors but we will prescribe the manner. Indeed he
owes us much thanks for our kindness. Is this to Glorify God? No! He is not
Glorified but in the way of his Will.

2. This Frame carries in it a Resolution of our Suffering, not only into the
Will of God, but his Glory also. O says our blessed Lord, I Will Suffer thy
Wrath, and Men's Malice and Rage, and say thine be the Glory. I Will endure the
Shame, and thou shall have the Honor. Father Glorify thy Name. Christ stood
not upon his own Credit, but the Fathers Glory, 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether therefore
ye Eat or Drink, or whatever ye do, do all to the Glory of God. Ye, whether ye
Live or Dye, Suffer or Prosper, do all, Suffer all, for the Glory of God. A
resigned Soul counts it worth his while to bear any Affliction, so God be
Glorified. Our holy Lord here Ballanc't the Glory of God against his
Sufferings; what a blessed Spirit was that of the Baptist? Jo. 3.30. I must
decrease, but he must increase, he began to loose his followers when Christ
entered upon his Ministry: but instead of grudging at it, or envying him; he is
abundantly Satisfied; that his loss was his Lords gain. A resigned Soul will
be base in its own Eyes; and be content to be vile in Men's Sight also, so God
be Glorified. I know nothing more contrary to the Spirit of the Gospel, then
Affectation of Reputation to our selves: nor any thing more Christian, then
Zeal for, and desire of, the Glory of God, and our Lord Jesus, Jo. 5.44. How
can ye believe who receive Honor one of another? Christ aimed at his Fathers
Glory. First, Jo. 17.4. I have Glorified the upon Earth Here, both in doing and
Suffering we must design Gods Glory, our turn comes not to have Glory till we
be in Heaven. Nay! We must not only Aim at Gods Glory in our Suffering, but be
willing that he manage our Sufferings to that end. He always has most Glory
when he Orders the whole affair. Christ does not say, Father I Will Glorify thy
Name, but refers himself unto the Father, do thou O Father Glorify thy Name.
Our Sufferings bring God no Glory, unless he order them, Heb. 10.7. Lo I come
to do thy Will, there was nothing of the Will of Christ in the case, further
then its Submission to the Fathers Will, so must we lay our selves at the Feet
of God, and desire him to work out his own Glory in and by us.

2. We must also be willing that he make what Glory, for himself, he pleases
of us and by us. Some think from Rev. 11.7. The Witnesses would have finished
their Testimony too soon, and laid aside the Sackcloth and Ashes before the
time. What know we, when God has got Glory enough by our Sufferings? Nay let us
be content to bear as long and as much as he thinks fit, to be sure we cannot
Glorify him too much. Let him Carve for himself; when his Name has had Glory
enough by us, himself will ease us. Did Christ hang back after his Agony in the
Garden? No! but thence he went to meet his apprehenders, thence to the Chief
Priest, thence to Herod, and thence to Pilate again, then to the place of
Execution, then to the Cross, then to the Grave. He Suffered as long and as
much as it was his Fathers Pleasure. His Prayer in the Text, fixes no measure
nor Time, but leaves the Stint to the Will of God. Holy Job, bare his several
Afflictions Patiently, not one but all till God had done. Paul professes that
he was not only ready to be Bound, but Dye, for the Name of Jesus, Acts 21.13.
And none of these things move me says he, Chap. 20. 14. If when God has
Glorified himself by my Bonds, he thinks fit to get him Honor by my Death; I
Submit. This should check our impatience and weariness in a Suffering Day, how
can we say, Father Glorify thy Name, when we would Stint him in the degree, and
time of our Sufferings?

3. This Frame, Submits the Season when we shall Suffer, to the Fathers wise
Determination. This was the dismallest hour that ever Christ saw: the Hour and
Power of Darkness: Luke 22.53.
when Hell and the World seemed to have all possible Advantages against the
Lord. And does he say Father save me from this Hour? yea! but he corrects
himself, and with respect to that Hour puts up his request to the Father in the
Text, Father Glorify, etc.

He is so far from contending about the Season, that he came designedly to
Jerusalem at that time to Suffer, Jo. 12.9, 10.

But we are apt to Reluct in this case. O Lord deliver us from this and that
Hour, and Glorify thy self any time else. Some think Hezekiah was loath to Dye,
Isa. 38.23. Because he was in the midst of his Reformation, and the work
unfinisht. He might possibly think it more son Gods Glory to live then, than
Dye. Let me out live this Sickness, escape this Persecution, avoid this
Judgment? and Father Glorify thy self ever after, is our Language. But where is
Resignation to the Will of God all this while? One would think, the Patriarks
died very unseasonable, Heb. 11.4. When they expected the fulfilling of
Promises, but however they died Contentedly. Many of us would gladly be spared,
to see the Resurrection of the Witnesses, the fall of Antichrist, the return of
the Jews, and the Descension of the New Jerusalem, and then they think they
could say with Simeon, Luke 2.29, 30. Lord now let thy Servant depart in Peace,
etc.

These desires are good, if attended with Submission to the Will of God,
otherwise Rebellious.

4. Though Nature shrink, our Souls be perpext, our Thoughts disturbed for
fear of the hour Approaching, yet our Wills must be Resigned, our Reasoning
silenc't, our Passions Resisted, and all Submitted to the Will of God. The Lord
Jesus was now strangely Perplexed, fear and amazment stopped his Mouth for a
while? yet as soon as he can Recollect himself, this is the Language both of
Heart and Lips. Father Glorify thy Name. It may be we have Plausible Arguments
against Drinking the Cup, as our Weakness, Psalm. 39.9. Levit. 10.3.
our Fear, and possibly, that to escape would be more for Gods Glory, that it is
an hard case, that we are not Ready, etc. Well? but if we would have God
Glorify himself, Reason must be silent, and only Faith speak, as Christ does in
the Text, and Matt. 26.39, etc.

5. This Resignation is not only a Thought, but a Deliberate desire. It Is
Christ's request to God? Nay! he begs more Heartily that the Father Glorify
himself, then that he should be saved from that Hour. Christians may now and
then use such an Expression, by way of Ejaculation; as a short Prayer, the
result of some close Spiritual reasoning in our Souls, but can we settle our
desire this way? can we say in time of Plague, Persecution, or other Distress,
Father Glorify, etc. The Lord Jesus knowing how much it conduced to the Fathers
Glory, does not only desire to Suffer; but desires it earnestly and
passionately, Luke 12.50. I have a Baptism to be Baptized with, and how am I
straightened, till it be accomplished. His Heart was bent, Bent to Glorify his
Father, he was therefore Angry with Peter for diswading, Matt. 16.22, 23. He
spaks; with an Holy Passionateness and Indignation, Jo. 18.11. The Cup that my
Father puts into my Hands, shall I not Drink it? And this is recorded for
our Imitation, Acts 21.13. What mean you to Weep, and break my Heart, I am
ready, etc. was Paul's Spirit. The Name and Glory of the Lord Jesus, are
concerned in my Sufferings, and I will Suffer his Will. We should endeavor not
only to be Content, but desirous of Suffering, when it is for the Glory of God.

6. Lastly. This is Christ's last and Final Resolve, he was at first Reluctant,
but now he fixes, and Changed not till Death. Ah! many of us may say now and
then, Father Glorify thy Name, but our Spirit alters, Our goodness is as a
Morning Cloud, early dew, that soon Vanishes, Hos. 13.3. O but a resigned Soul
makes it his abiding Resolve.

3. The next General is to Alledg some grounds on which this Resignation is
Built, and reasons for it.

1. We cannot prescribe how God should be Glorified, therefore it is fit we be
Resigned. How have Men befooled themselves and dishonored God in the case of
Worship? They Will invent and prescribe Forms and Modes, when they have no ground
to believe he will accept them. Nothing pleases God but his own Will. Even in the
case in hand we must not dispose of our Selves, and Suffer how, and when, and
where, and by whom we please; for this would rather dishonor then Credit the
cause of God; because it wholly depend's upon his Pleasure. He has laid the
Whole Platform and contrivance thereof in his own Councels and purpose: and
therein all the several Spirits of the Mystery answer, and add Beauty to each
other. Now any thing of our Will, would deform the rest, and take off from that
Divine Symmatry and Concord which render all, becoming the Wisdom, Holiness,
Power, and Sovereign Grace of God. And why do we not as well teach him? how he
should Govern the World, as how he should dispose of us! would it be for Gods
Honor, if we should direct when it should Rain, and when Shine, when there
should be a Storm, and when a Calm? He that understands not the whole Council
of God, cannot direct any Fragment thereof, who has known the Mind of the Lord
and who has been his Councellor? Romans 11.34. Nay is it not most dishonorable,
that his Creatures should advise him? that dust and ashes should correct his
Will, Isa. 45.9, 10. The way of Gods Glory, is the way of his Pleasure, Rev.
4.11. Into which, unless we resolve our selves, we obstruct his Honor.

2. Because Gods Glory is most Valuable; Christ stood not upon his Life, in
Comparison of his Fathers Glory, what then is our Life, or Ease or Credit, to
be laid in the bottom with it? Better the World Perish, then God not be
Glorified? It was made for his Pleasure, Rev. 4.11. for that end is it
continued, and if it be dissolved, that will be the design, see how
magnificently the Prophet speaks of God, Isa. 40.15, 16, 17. And shall nothing,
shall we stand between him and his Glory? Methinks we should Tremble at our
unwillingness to Suffer according to his Will, considering how it Eclipses his
Glory? Joshua was more Solicitous for Gods Name, than his own Life, or all the
Camp of Israel, Jos. 7.9.

3. Because Christ has showed us the way in this most difficult case. Learn of
me (says he) for I am Meek and Lowly, Matt. 11.29. Wherein did he express his
Meekness, see Isa. 5.3, 7. He neither refused nor murmured, complained, nor
resisted. He behaved himself most Submisly and Obediently. Now learn of him:
lay down Passion, and tumult in a Suffering day, and lie at the feet of your
Father, what did the Lord Submit, and may the servant Rebel? Nay, the Disciple
is not above his Master, nor the Servant as his Lord, etc. Matt. 10.24. It Is
enough to be like him. Eliah was content to Dye if God pleased, why? I am not
better then my Father, 1 Kings 19.4. Did the example of the Patriarcks move
him? Behold a greater then the Patriarks is here.

4. Because God has had his Will and Glorified his Name hitherto: so he says
immediately after our Text.

And must Providence be put out of its Course for us! did not God Glorify
himself upon, and by all our Predecessors in all Ages? The greatest, the
holiest of them, gave way to the Course of his Will, they were sick,
imprisoned, poor, strangers, Persecuted and Slain, when, by whom, and as he
pleased; and what are we, a foolish Generation, arisen in this last and worst
Age; that we should reluct, or murmur, or tumultuate, or be angry or impatient?
Jo. 5.17. My Father works hitherto, etc. He had not been impeded in his
Providential will to that day; nor is he yet. And is it sit he should alter his
course for us, now at last? This is the Fathers own Argument.

5. Because do what we can, he will Glorify his Name, so himself says in the
words following, I will Glorify it again. Friends, it is fit we consider this
matter, when God call's to Suffering, this is the Language of non-submission:
We will not be persecuted, we will not be Imprisoned, etc. but what says God,
I will, etc. Yea, he will do it in spite of us.

He did not ask our Leave to make us, nor will he, to dispose of us.
Non-resignation imply's a double Contradiction.

1. To God, I will do all My Will, my Council shall stand in his resolve. Isa.
46.10. No says an unresigned Soul, I will not, I cannot bear it, it must not
be, at least for this once. Vain man! what would become of the World, yea of
the Church; if Gods Will were not fixed, Zach. 6.1. The providence of God are
represented by Chariots: some Red, importing War, some Black, expressing
Famine, some Grizled and Bay, signifiing Vanity of dispensations, others White,
denoting Peace and Comfort. Well, all this proceeds from two Mountains of
Brass, denoting the irreversible Councels of God. Go to then vain Man, if thou
will not bear War, or Famine, etc. stop the Chariots, stay their Career if thou
can; or lead them out of their way, but know thou must first remove the
Mountains of Brass, and change Gods Eternal unalterable Counsels. Pray is it
not better to Submit willingly, then struggle in vain? Take heed least the more
thou strivest, thou be the more entangled, Isa. 51.20. Never was any thing got
by Resistance, of the Will of God, save Blows.

2. To our selves, and this is as absurd, as the other is Vain and Atheistical.
Have we Prayed all our Days that the Will of God be done? If we have not, we
are Strangers to Prayer, Matt. 6.10. If we have then by refusing to Submit to
the Will of God in Suffering times, we contradict our selves. Now what an
absurdity is it to desire God to do his Will, and refuse to submit when he
brings his good Pleasure upon us? Is this fair dealing, does it become
reasonable Creatures, or Christians, may we say, and unsay, desire, and deny,
the same things?

Obj. But we did not think of Suffering, when we put up that Petition?

Ans. And do we Pray we know not, or regard not what? is this to pray in Faith?
Is it an Affront to God to vent a Prayer to him, without considering the sense
or meaning of it?

Obj. We were of that Mind then, but fear of Suffering has altered our
Judgments.

Ans. And must God change his Will, as often as we vary ours?

This were to make him more changeable than our selves, for whereas we only
alter our minds as we think fit, we would have God change as we please, and so
make our Wills, the rule of His.

Besides what we pray Diliberately we ought to resolve for ever, or else our
Praying is Lightness. To which let me add; that when Christ gave that directory
of Prayer, he left it as a standing Rule never to be varyed.

6. Because God is our Father, therefore we must acquiess in his Pleasure. This
is our Lords Argument Couch't in the Text. Father Glorify thy Name, q. d. I
Submit to my Fathers Will, Job. 17.11. The Cup that my Father gives me, shall
I not Drink it? Is it becoming our Relation to withstand our Fathers Will and
Glory? Would you take i^ well, if your Children should Rebel, and refuse your
Correction? And how do you think your Heavenly Father will take your Resistance
against his? Poor Worms that we are, there is no Proportion between their
Disobedience to us, and ours to God. When Saul, though a King, Rebelled against
the Command of God, it is compared to the Sin of Witchcraft, 1 Samuel ^5.23. See
how strickt the Law was in this case upon Rebellious Children, Deuteronomy. 21.18, 19,
20, 21. What then shall our Father do to us, when we refuse his Correction? To
enforce this Argument, consider, we must Submit to our Fathers Will. For,

1. He gave us our Being, Lives, and all we have, and shall he not dispose
them? may he not do what he will with his own, Matt. 20, 15. can we, or any
thing we enjoy, be better improved then for our Fathers Glory. Of him, and from
him, and to him, are all things; to him be Glory, etc. Romans 11.36.

2. Our Father is our Superior, it is fit therefore we be resigned to his Will,
Exodus 20, 12. Honor thy Father and thy Mother. How much more our Heavenly
Father, Heb. 12, 9. See David's Spirit in the case, Psalm. 131.12. q. d. I Will keep
within my own Sphere, I Will not stretch beyond my line, in prescribing to God,
but Submit to his Will, as a weaned Child, taken from its dear Breasts;
intimating, he would Wea^ himself from what ever God disposed from him. How
patiently did Isaac permit himself to be bound and Sacrificed by Abraham, Genesis
22.9. And yet he was of Age and Strength Sufficient to have strugled for his
Life, being Twenty five Years old. But that holy young man abhorred the
thoughts of striving with his Father. And shall not we resign our selves to our
God and Father in Jesus Christ.

3. Our Father is Wiser then we, therefore we should rest in his Pleasure,
shall we who are but of Yesterday and know nothing, contradict the wise
disposal of the Ancient of days, the only wise God? my Father (says Isaac,)
her^^ the Wood and the Fire, but where is the Lamb? O says Abraham, God shall
Provide himself a Burnt-offering, Genesis 22.7, 8. He declares not his design, but
Isaac is so confident of his Fathers Wisdom, that he replied no more. It
becomes the Children of God to esteem their Fathers Will most Sacred. Nay, but
O Man who art thou that reply against God, Romans 9.20. What though we see not
how our Sufferings can Conduce to our Fathers Glory? Remember, his thoughts are
not as our thoughts, etc. Isa. 55.

4. We may well resign our selves to the Will of our Father, for to be sure as
such he will be tender of us Heb. 12.5, 6. etc. we indeed may Judge our Afflictions
dreadful, and insupportable, but our Father knows what we can bear, and how
he will carry us through Comfortably. He Will not break the bruised Reed, nor, etc.
Matt. This is the reason why he Mannageth the Corrections of his Children, that
they may not be oppressed, Read, Isa. 49.14, 15, 16.

Obj. This is an hard saying who can hear it. Ans. 1. It Is hard to untamed,
wanton, Proud Nature, to make the Will of God our Rule, and deny our own Wills,
but then how hard will Suffering be without it? An unresign'd Soul in a day of
Affliction, is like a wild Bull in a Net full of the Fury of the Lord, and the
troubled Sea that cannot rest, but casts forth Mire and Dirt.

2. But it is easy to a gracious Soul, as such. Grace in the Heart is the
Image of God, and this Image mainly consists in the Conformity of the Will, to
Gods Will. The Scripture call's it, writing his Law in the Heart and putting
it in the inward parts, Jer. 31.33. Well? and what is the proper natural
Effect, or result hereof, Psalm. 40.7, 8. It makes the Soul not only Obedient in
Suffering, but to Submit with Delight. Now none of Gods Commands, nothing of
his Will, Scriptural, or providential, is grievous, 1 Jo. 5.3.

1. Hence I infer that God is not Glorified but in his own way, for our Wills
must be resigned to, and resolved into his. If he will that we Suffer, it is
vain to dream of Honoring him otherwise, suppose we resove to save our selves,
and make him amends by double and treble Duty, we decieve our selves. Obedience
is better then Sacrifice, and to hearken then the fat of Lambs, 1 Samuel 15.22.
All the Manifestative Glory of God, depends on his Will, Rev. 4.11. We may
extol his Power, Grace, Justice, Holiness, etc. and not give him Glory, if in
the interim we resist his Will, it is vain to think of Honoring God, and doing
our own Will, give him all but his Will, and we give him nothing. For,

1. His great design is his Will, Rev. 4.11. He both contriveth, and Executes
according to it, Ephesians. 1.11. All his word is but his Will, Collos. 1.9. Truth
is the Analagy of persons, things, word and thoughts unto the Will of God. And
this is his great Contraversy with men in the World, they would have their Will,
and he will have His And indeed Sin is only (and that is enough and too much) a
Contradiction of his Will, 1 Jo. 3.4. And the accomplishment of his Will is
his Glory.

2. In relucting against his Will, we contend against all his Name and being.
It Is a denial of his Sovereignty and perogative, for what is that but his
Pleasure. We thwart his decrees, for they are the Purpose of his Will. We
contradict his Power thereby, as if he were notable to do his Pleasure, many
are our oppositions, we thereby Disbeleive his Holiness, as if his Will were
not good, and his Wisdom, as if he had not ordered his matters accurrately,
yea, we deny his Justice by resisting his Will; as if he required more then
his due. Indeed his Will is the hinge upon which all his Attributes move,
disappoint it, and you supplant them all, so absolutely does his Glory depend
upon his Will.

2. I infer, that Gods Glorifiing his Name by our Sufferings is not
inconsistent with his Parternal Relation. Father Glorify thy Name. If he be our
Father, then he Loves, then he Cares for us, when he Afflicts us. For
nothing can deprive us of the Comfort of this Relation, which is consistent
with that Relation. Christ in his Agony calls him Father, Mat. 26.39. When he
was betrayed and apprehended, Jo. 18.11. When he was upon the Cross his
expression implies as much, Mat. 27.46. And he says no more, when he was
Risen, Jo. 20.17.

Obj. There is not the same Reason, why God should continue our Father in
Suffering, as that he should be Christ in his Passion. Because he is his
Eternal Son, we only adopted Sons.

Ans. This Objection proves only that Christ has the first Right to his
Paternity, and we only secundarily in him, but not that he is less constantly
our Father then his, Jer. 31.3. Though we be but adopted Sons, our Adoption is
Endless not Temporary. And therefore our Father will be our Father in
Affliction, and we shall be his Children. For,

1. His Fatherly Love is the Reason of his Chastizements. He would not Scourge
and Correct his Childeren, but because they are his Childeren. He Chastizeth
them as a Father, he Condemns others, as a Judge. Heb. 12.7, 8.

2. We are Heirs of his precious promises even in Affliction, 1 Cor. 10.13. It
seems then his Faithfulness to his word of promise is engaged, when we are
Tempted.

3. Suffering Saints have the Image of their Father when they Suffer, Christ's
Sufferings were consistent with the Clouding of his Divine Nature, then it did
not appear in its Glory; but not with the separation of it from his Humane.
Saints may be Black by Affliction, but withal they are Lovely by grace, Cant.
1.5.

4. They then stand in most need of his Fatherly Care and Love, and therefore
shall not be deprived thereof, Psalm. 89.30, 31, 32, 33. Isa. 40.12. and 43.23.

5. Our Sonship depends on Christ's Sonship: if therefore God were his Father
in his Sufferings, he will be our Father in ours. For we are chosen, and
predestined in Christ to the Adoption of Sons, Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 5. This is the
Reason why Sin it self cannot Un-son us, because we are Adopted in Christ, not
for our own Sake, but his, Romans 8.38, 39. While we cease not to be Christ's
Members, we cease not to be the Fathers Children.

Obj. But if God be our Father why does he Suffer his Children to be so abused
in the World? Can it consist with the Love of our Father to see his Children
Imprisoned and Slain, etc. before his Face, and he not help and save them?

An. It is enough that the Scripture has Reconciled these things, Romans 8.35,
36, 37, etc. Psalm. 89.30, 31, etc. We may as well say, how could the Father
Love Jesus Christ, yet Bruise him in that dreadful manner, Isa. 53.7, 8, 9, 10.
But I add,

1. That be the Saints never so dear to their Father, yet his own Name and
Glory is more Dear. Their Sufferings being for his Glory, he will therefore permit
them. Is it fit that he Suffer in his Name, rather then we in our Flesh? Or
must he loose his Glory, to preserve our Estates, Ease, Liberty, or Lives. Nay
faith the Lord Jesus, Father Glorify thy Name, do any thing with me, rather
than neglect thy Glory: and see the Fathers answer in the following words.

2. Be his Love to his Saints never so great, his hatred of Sin, and his just
Indignation against it are as great. Now here lies the case, she must either
Chastize as for our Sins, or be unjust. He must either dispense so far with his
Love, as to correct us, or dispense with his Righteousness and Holiness. And
judge now which is most like a Father, to correct a Sinning Child, or Pamper
him in Sins? Psalm. 89.30, etc.

3. Hence I infer, that our Peace, Ease, joy, Estates, Liberty, and Life, are
Subordinated, and must be Submitted to the Will and Glory of God. Be sure
Christ, put these things in their proper place, and behold his Life and all are
resolved into the Fathers Will and Glory. Nor did he undervalue himself or
them, in laying them at his Fathers Feet. Certainly he was most tender of that,
which was most Valuable. All the Baptist's Credit was to Vanish at Christ's
appearing upon the Stage. Well did he Bustle in his own behalf? Nay he bare
witness that he that came after him, was to be preferred before him, Jo. 1.15.
and being demanded who he was; he confessed and denied not, but confessed I am
not the Christ, v. 20. What need all this? but that John was render of the
order wherein God had placed him. So v. 27. O that it were thus with us? that
we would lay down our Selves, our Lives, etc. At the Feet of God, and
subordinated them to his Glory? That we were willing that he be Glorified
though we Suffer.

4 Be we never so great and high, yet our Father must do his Pleasure with us,
and get Glory by us. Though Christ were a Son, yet he Learned Obedience, Heb.
5.8. Yea he was Equal with the Father in Nature, Phil. 2.6. Yet having
Covenanted to be the Fathers Servant in the Mediatory Dispensation, he made
himself of no Reputation, etc. v. 7, 8. O let this mind be in us, which was
also in Christ, v. 5. How was God pleased with Abraham's Resignation of his Son,
his only Son, the Son of his Love of his Age, his Darling Child. Genesis 22.12,
15, 16, 17, 18. Well? as great as any of us think our selves, we are not so
great as Christ, not so Considerable as Abraham, let us be Content God should
Glorify himself by making us little and laying us low in the World. What an
abasement was it to Christ to be sold for 30 Pieces of Silver? See what himself
says of it, Zach. 11.12, 13. a goodly Price, that I was Prized at of them, yet
he could bear in Submission to his Father. O that high, proud, lofty, Stately
Professors, who stand upon their greatness, who affect grandeur would consider
this! Certainly the hight of Christians is a great part of the Controversy God
has with us in this Day. Pray lets bow our Spirits, and lour our Topsails
willingly, for God is bringing us down, and (for any thing I know) he cannot
otherwise have his Will and Glory.

5 See hence whither we must drive our perplexitys in Suffering, if we would
Conquer them even to this Holy Resignation of our selves into the Sovereign
Will of God.

Our Lord Jesus came to no Composure till he arrived at this Frame. Compare
with the Text, the foregoing verse. As long as you reluct against Providence,
expect nothing but Tumult: He resists the proud, etc. James 4.6, 7. who so
proud, as the unresigned Soul? Well, if we submit not, God will fight against
us, and judge what composure we can then have. When Jonah opposed the Lords
Will, had he any rest? chap. 1.2, 3, 4. Job. 9.4. 'till we resign, he will visit
our Souls with darkness, our Bodies with pain, and our Matter with frustration
and disappointment. A Man that will Swim against Tide, and Stream, and Wind,
may waste and spend his strength; but the longer he strives, the more
unfeasable his Attempt is. So while you strive against the Lords pleasure,
expect universal disturbance; For when the debate is who shall yield, whether
God shall abate his Will or we submit ours: we may easily conceive, how bitter,
unquiet, and vexatious, the greatest will be on our part. Well, but come, and
resign to the Will of God, and all will be calm, Isa. 30.15. There are three
things herein exceeding composing.

1. Our spirits and thoughts are now come to a conclusion, before there was a
contest between Grace and Nature; that would, this would not, submit: this
created unquietness, but now Grace has got the day, the Soul is calm. When
there are two Armies in the Field Fighting, all is in a cumbustion: but when
one is conquered, Peace ensues. That which created Christ's trouble, was the
struggle between his Natural and Divine Will. Now that being concluded by
resignation, he is at rest.

2. Now there is no difficulty in our way, for we follow providence.

3. Having resigned, the burden of our suffering is rolled upon God. A resigned
Soul casts it self into his Arms, as well as submits to his Will; and now God
is engaged, if not to save us from the hour, yet to help us in and through it.

6. Lastly, Let me advise the people of God, to take this course. If we must
suffer Imprisonment, loss of Goods, or Liberty, or Life, let Providence find us
in this frame. Well then, let us be earnest with God, and contend with our own
spirits till we come to this temper, till we can in some blessed measure say
with the Lord Jesus Christ, Father glorify thy Name. Friends, it may be this
Doctrine, and Exhortation, will find very slight entertainment with some: but I
will promise them they cannot meet God in the way of his judgments in any other
frame. If the Lord Jesus would not venture upon his Agony till he had attained
it, how shall we be able to meet our sufferings without it?

Quest. It Is true this was the frame of Christ: but is it possible for us to
attain it.

Ans. Yea, it is feasible. It was not peculiar to Christ: but it is common to his
Member, with him. I have given several instances: nor does God oblige us unto
impossibilities. There are two things I have to say in the case.

1. God gives this resignation sometimes unexpectedly. If he surprise an holy
Soul with affliction, he will sometimes surprise it with submission and
resignation. Nay, every Believer in suffering for the Name and Cause of God,
has the promise of the Spirit, to compose and carry him through, Mark 13.11.
Observe, this promise takes place in persecution, what then? Take no thought
what ye shall speak. We must not confine this promise to the Spirits management
of our Tongues only; nay, it extends much more to our Hearts and Thoughts. If
the Spirit dictate our words, how much more will it influence our Souls? And I
add, the Lord does not say it shall be given before hand, but in that Day.

2. This Spirit of resignation is ordinarily the Blessing of Exercise, Psalm.
131.1, 2. As in all other Cases Grace is given in and upon our endeavor, Hos.
6.3. Psalm. 119.2. so in this Case. And therefore,

1. Do what you can to clear up your interest in God. This once cleared,
submission is in a manner easy. Why did Isaac resign himself to his Father?
Genesis 22. because he knew he was his Father. My Father (says Jophtha's
Daughter) if thou have opened thy mouth to the Lord, do to me according to that
which has proceeded out of thy mouth, Jud. 11.36. A dutiful Child will not,
dare not, cannot profane it is Relation by contending with its Father. Upon
this Principle our Lord Christ built his resignation in the Text. It Is
impossible to submit willingly to the pleasure of an Enemy. Enmity excludes
submission, Romans 8.7. let there be a sense of reconciliation, and resignation
will follow.

2. We must be exercised in the mortification of pride and passion. For pride
will swell, and passion tumultuate; they who are used to have their wills,
shall find it hard, if not impossible, to let God have his without reluctance.
No, self-will, will tumultuate against God himself according to custom. You
know how it was with peevish Jonah. I do well to be angry, with proud Joram;
this evil is of the Lord, why should I wait upon him any longer? And how with
Pharaoh, Exodus 5.2. they were persons used to have their wills. When the Devil
desired God to afflict Job, chap. 1. 11. and 2. 5 he presumed, that Job having
had much prosperity, could not bear a great cross without flying in God's Face.
Consequently,

3. If we have been inured to sufferings, the Task is easier yet, Lam. 3.27,
28. Paul was accustomed to afflictions, and see what he says, Acts 21.13.
Phil. 4.11, 12.

4. Keep the sense of your own great sinfulness upon your hearts. This will
stop your mouths when you would complain of the holy hand of God upon you, Lam.
3.39. wherefore does a living man complain, I will bear the indignation of the
Lord (says the Church elsewhere) because I sinned against him.

5. Christ prayed himself into this frame, Jo. 12.27, 28. The more impatient
and discontent we be, the more need of Prayer. Christ did not tarry till the
hurry were over, but cried to his Father while it continued. And observe, How
he Prayed, and what? He Prayed brokenly, and uttered the Sense and very Case of
his Soul. No matter how abrubt the Prayer be, so it be the Representation of
our Hearts. Thus did David, Psalm. 61.2. Where does he Pray? in Banishment.
When? when his Spirit is overwhelmed. How does he Pray? he Cried. Thus Hannah
Prayed her self, composed. Remember Resignation is the work of the Spirit of
God; and therefore you must plead for it before you have it.

6. Subdue your Carnal Reasonings by the Reasonings of Faith. So did Holy
David, when the Flesh had Reasoned him into Impatience, he went into the
Sanctuary; and was composed, Psalm. 73.16, 17. And to help in this Combat
between Faith and Sense: take these following Considerations,

1. That all things are good from Gods Will. I am sure all Providence be. They
are good because he Wills them. Psalm. 119.68. Thou art good, and thou do
good. Himself is good, and Will; therefore are his ways good also. No matter
what Sense and Reason say: God cannot do amiss. And therefore Jeremy lays down
this as a Principle, before he dare Argue about Gods Judgments, Chap. 12.1. And
so David, Psalm. 73.1. So Hezekiah, 2 Kings 20.19.

2. That what becomes God to do, or order, becomes us to suffer. If God bring
the Affliction we may bear it. If it be for his Glory, it cannot be for our
Disadvantage. God will not do what is Evil; and we may very well submit to what
is good, Job 1.21.

3. It Is our Folly and Bruitishness when there is any Impatience of Gods Will.
Jonah was Mad with Passion, when he told God he did well to be Angry, at the
Dying of the Guord, Jonah 4.9. Psalm. 73.21, 22.

4. That God has managed as unlikely Providence for the good of his People,
as these that he is bringing upon us; and having such experience of his Wisdom
and Faithfulness, it is reason we submit; especially having the Promise too,
Romans 8 28.

5. That when there is a contrariety of Will between Two Parties, the Best, the
Wisest, the Holiest, should carry it. If either God must not have his Will, or
we want ours. It Is all the reason in the World we should submit, and embrace
the Cross patiently. Methinks there should be no Debate about this matter.

6. That God will be Glorified, Levit. 10.3. This silenced Aaron, and what are
we? This was Answer enough to Christ himself in the Text; and are we too good,
or too proud to acquiesce in it.

7. That God is Glorified upon others on harder Terms then any proposed to us.
Our Cup is nothing so bitter as the Lord Jesus's was, nor like that of the
Primitive Christians and Martyrs, then and since. They were scourged with
Scorpions, we, in comparison, but with small Rods.

8. Lastly, That submission breaks the Blow: God will not contend with a
resigned Soul. Satis est prostrasse. But his Day falls heavily upon the
Unquiet, Proud and Obstinate. With the froward he will behave himself
frowardly. Read Isa. 2.11, 12.

As Encouragements to Resignation: Consider,

1. This frame is a greater Blessing then Deliverance, Christ chose it rather,
then that the Cup should pass away. And the Father rather granted it. Certainly
what the Father and Son preferred, is best.

2. This once attained, Sufferings are Free-will-offerings. Now Affliction is
not an Absolute Necessity, but the Souls Choice. And what an Honor is it to be
willing persons in such an hard case? If we submit willingly we have a Reward:
if not, a necessity of suffering however lies upon us, to allude to 1 Cor.
9.16, 17. David acknowledged that God put a special Honor upon him and his
People, when they offered willingly, 1 Chronicles. 9.14. How much greater Honor is
it, to offer our selves to the pleasure of God in a suffering-season?

3. This is evidently the Duty of the Day. Fear is on every side. The Fury of
Brutish Men is very high, many of our Brethren are already oppressed, and bear
it quietly. God calls us to resignation to his Will in all Providence, and
aloud by the Voice of his Word? And Refuge fails us: Why? that we may have no
possibility of Evading this Duty. And being its now seasonable it should be
beautiful and desirable in our Eyes, Eccles. 3.11.

4. If we resign to the Will of God, Faith shall be kept alive, and our hold of
our relation to, and interest in, God continued. Christ in the height of his
Sufferings could call God his God: and commit his Spirit confidently into his
hands, Psalm. 31.5.

5. If we survive and outlive the Storm, God will make us eminently Vessels of
Honor, 1 Pet. 5.7. What great persons were Abraham and Isaac, after they had
resolved themselves into the Will of God, Genesis 22.16, etc. Nay, the benifit
thereof extended to their Posterity for many Generations. What a blessed end
had patient resigned Job? James 5.11.

6. If we Die in this Frame, and Day, according to the Will of God, it shall be
no loss, but infinite advantage, Isa. 57.1, 2. See it in David, and Christ,
Psalm. 16.8, 9, 10. After Paul had submitted himself to the Will of God, and the
Lord Jesus, Acts 20.24. and 21.13. How confident was he at his Dissolution, and
in what a Tryumphant Frame do we find him, 2 Timothy 4.8. When proud, unbroken,
impatient Souls, Suffer and Die in Dread and Horror: the resigned Christian
shall Expire in Peace and Confidence.

Quest. How may a Gracious Person from whom God hides his Face, trust in the
Lord as his God. SERMON XXIX.
The Text is, Psalm. 42.11. Why art thou cast down O my Soul? And why art thou
disquieted within me? Hope thou in God, for I shall yet Praise him, who is the
health of my Countenance, and my God.
1. UPon the Proposal of this Case to me, I rather chose this Text than that in
Isa. 50.10. because I thought God and our selves were both to be considered, in
the just resolution of the Case before us; for we must as well look within, as
above our selves, and accordingly here we see, that David's first look was into
himself; and then his next look was toward his God. So that I thought this
Text most suited to the Case.

2. When, and upon what occasion this Psalm was Penned, I will not now enquire
into: but when ever it was, David was then under black dispensations of Divine
Providence, and under dreadful Consternations of Spirit, and put very severely
to it, how to Encourage and Support himself.

3. The Text may be considered. 1. As an History of. 1. David's troubles and
afflictions. 2. David's Sense and temper of Spirit under them, and concerning
them 3. Of the Course he took to help himself. 2. As a Doctrine, to teach Gods
Saints and Servants. 1. To what they are liable. 2. And by what and how they
are to be relieved and supported. 3. As a Directory.

4. In the Text then we have observable. 1. David's self Arraignment for
immoderate despondencies and dejections under the present hand of God upon him.
Why cast down? And why disquieted within me? 2. His self Encouragement and
Instruction: Hope thou in God. --

5. So that you see, David. 1. Cites himself to his own Court, to account for
his own disquietments and dejection, and here his scrutiny is severe and close.
2. He offers somethings to himself as a fit Course and expedient for self
redress. Hope thou in God, and 3. The remedying Proposal is closely argued and
urged. For I shall yet Praise him, etc. I shall have Cause, an Heart, and an
Opportunity to Praise God. Times and things will be better with me than now
they are. I shall have cause to Praise God; for he is the health of my
Countenance. I shall have an Heart to do it, for He is my God, and I
accordingly now avouch him to be such: I value him, and confide in him as such.
And I do hence infer that I shall have Opportunity and a Call for to Praise
[acknowledge and adore] him, in the Solemnities of his own House.

First, Let me then consider these words as they relate unto David; and give us
the History of David's Exercise and Self-Relief. And here,

1. The Patient or Afflicted Person was Holy David. A Man after Gods own Heart:
Enamoured on God; devoted to him, delighted in him, constant and cheerful in
his attendencies on God; exceeding sensible and observant of all Divine
approaches to him, and Withdrawments and Retreats from him, Thirsting and
Panting greatly after the Solaces and Entertainments of Gods House and Altars;
and bitterly lamenting the loss and absence of those Solemnities wherein he
formerly had so copiously and frequently pleased himself: afflicted mightily
with those derisions and reproaches which reflected so severely upon God
through him, though nothing could sour or abate his adoring and delightful
thoughts of God; yet it struck him to the heart to hear Men always saying,
where is thy God? Add hereunto, that David was a King, a Prophet, a type of
Christ, a Man of vast experiences and improvements, and such a peculiar
Favorite to God, as that he was encouraged to more than ordinary expectations
from him, of which he had great Seals and Earnests, and yet we see, he could
not be excused from great Storms and Agonies, and Anxieties of Spirit.

2. That which this good Man underwent, was a great dejection and disquietment
in his own Spirit, by reason of some great afflictions that befell him. Gods
Providence touched him in his dearest and most valuable Mercies; for he was an
exile from Gods Altars, Gods great Enemies touched him in that which lay nearest
to his Heart; for they Reproacht him with his God, and consequently, with and
for all his religious Hopes and Duties: thus striking at his God through him.
All this afflicted him the more, in that hereby great jealousies and suspicions
were arising of Gods deserting him, and dismal fears and thoughts of Gods
having hid his face from him. And he saw no likelihood in the posture and
presages of second Causes, that ever it would be better with him. And hence his
Spirit was (...) (a) (...) vet. edit. consternetis chad. par. conturbaris Sir.
co^^ristas me Arab. deijcis te v. 6.
bowed down and (...) (b) that is, disquieted within me (...) 70. tumultueris
adversum me Targ. conturbas me v. 6. Sir. Ar. stupidus es, and personas in me
ut ali^.
disquieted within him, he was as stripe of all Composures, Strength, and
Comforts. His Passions, they were apt to mutiny: his confidences, to decay, and
wither; and the serenity of his Spirit to decline. Sorrows encompast him like a
Cloud, pressed him down like a great Burden; bound him down like a Chain; came
in upon him like a Flood: and rusht in on him, like a dissolute and surprising
Host. And very difficult he found it to keep up his Religion in its just
Reputation with himself, whilst thus afflicted in it, and upbraided with it.

3. The Course he takes to help himself is this. 1. He surveys his troubles,
and takes the exact demensions of them, observing what impressions and effects
they had upon his own Spirit, and 2. He takes his Soul to task about them, as
being 1. Fittest to resolve the Case. 2. Every way responsible and accountable
for his resentments and deportment: and for the impressions and effects of
troubles. 3. Most capable of self correction, instruction and encouragement,
and consequently, of self redress, and most concerned therein. And 4. As that
which must be active too. David was confident of help from God: and this his
confidence is quickened and kept up by Arguments and Pleas: He knew no help
could be expected any where, but in and from God. And he concludes and argues,
that God could work and give it, because he was the God, and that he would
consider him in mercy, because he was his God. And these things must be
remembered, argued and revived upon his own Soul, and were so.

4. And with his own considerate and religious Soul this matter is debated
here. What! David's Soul? my Soul? A Soul, and therefore great in its Original,
Capacity and End! A Gracious Soul, and therefore near and dear to God,
encouraged by his promises and providence, to trust him, serve him, and to
cleave to him: What! David's Soul, fitted for God, and for self management,
converses and improvements! Why should this Soul be thus disquieted and cast
down? He was not so vain and idle, as to expect relief from Heaven, by so
engaging God for him, as to neglect himself, inward, as well as other work must
be performed.

5. Observe the manner of his d scoursing with himself, it is expostulatory. He
cites, and challenges, searches, and chides himself, and hints these things
unto himself. That 1. Something was attended to that it should not. 2. Some
thing was not attended to, that should. 3. That therefore all ought to be set
and kept right as to his inward thoughts and sentiments with reference to his
present Case and Cure. 4. And that because mistakes and rashness in such
important matters, are dangerous and sinful in their tendency, consequences and
effects. Hence then, 1. He observes his pressures, and the temper and behavior
of his Spirit under them: and he finds some trucklings of Spirit which he
dislikes and wonders at. 2. He is Solicitous to know the most that can be
found, alleged, and urged, to countenance and justify these disquietments and
dejections. 3. All this be searches after in order to a fair and an impartial
Trial; and in this Trial he concludes that nothing objected can hold weight. 4.
He is aware of other things that are to be produced for the suppression and
rebuke of his dejectedness, and for the revival and encouragement of his Soul,
through hope in God. 5. These things he is ready and willing to produce and
urge; and so, to adjust the whole concern. And 6. Hereupon he drives the thing
up to its utmost height; and turns a faithful and impartial self censurer and
instructour; that so, he may not be buffeted in the dark, and prove a sinful
Instrument in his own dejections and distress; nor he baffled by these his
Sorrows.

6. His Self-arraignment and Discourses being finished thus, he now proceeds to
Self-instruction and Encouragement, Grace in the Heart, and God in the Eye;
when Saints have dealt faithfully and closely with themselves, afford them no
small relief under their Pressures and Discouragements from what they feel.
Here then Observe, 1. What David advises himself unto: Hope thou in God. 2. How
he Argues and Enforces this his Counsel upon himself: For I shall yet praise
him.

1. The Counsel which he offers to himself, is this, viz. To Hope in God. He
would not look upon his Case as desperate: But, 1. Commit his Case and Soul to
God, and leave them wholly with him. 2. And so expect Protection and Redress,
from God, in doing thus. And what is Hope, but a desirous expectation of these
Mercies and Reliefs from God, which present Exigencies and Concerns may need
and call for, whereas Gods Name and Promises are our Encouragements thereto?
This David proposes to, and urges upon himself in his dejected frame of Spirit,
as his best Succor and Support; and as his choicest Refuge and Remedy: and he
was very apprehensive of this, That his Soul must be active herein, if he would
be benifited hereby. And hence, he suffered not his Spirit to be Idle, nor to
be guilty of any culpable application and improvement of that great (but often
times much abused) Truth: [We can do nothing of our selves, it is God alone must
help us.] But he turns Counselor and Commander, and becomes a strict
Inquisitor, and most impartial Judge, to his own Soul: and by the meek exercise
of all just Providence and Authority toward his own Spirit, he works himself
up to his Hope in God, by an Eye fixed there; and thence, and thus, expects his
help. And though he was deeply sensible of his own doleful State at present,
and very prone to aggrevate his own Calamity, and apt to give up all for lost;
yet he resolves upon all fit Enquiries after help; and with Authority and great
force of Argument, he here Commands, and so prevails upon himself to hope in
God. Such work requires good Consideration, great Resolution, and the just
exercise of all Authority over our selves.

2. His Arguments and Motives hereunto are impregnated with very great Sense
and Strength: and urged upon himself as the just Rate thereof. Hope thou in
God: For he is, 1. God. 2. Thy God. 3. The Health of thy Countenance. And, 4.
One whom thou shall (certainly, and for ever, Sym.) Praise as such. And, 5. Do
it Yet. viz. As lamentable and hopeless as thy Case appears at present, through
seeming difficulties or unlikely-hoods. God, and our Selves, well understood,
deeply considered, and skilfully urged and improved, give Gracious Hearts the
best Encouragements and Supports under the severest Accidents of Time. And they
will very strangely animate our Hopes in God, under our soarest Troubles and
Dejections. David, 1. Had Confidence in God. And, 2. Reasons for it. 3. And
Skill and an Heart to urge them. When he reviewed himself, he saw, that his
Soul was gracious, and so he knew God valued it: It was bent for praising God;
and so he knew, that he should have an opportunity, and cause to do it, through
some signal Favors from him: He had an Interest in God; and he would neither
lose it, nor neglect it: and he had great experience of Gods former Mercies;
and he would not forget them. And when he thinks on God, then Praises must be
thought on too, and every thing relating to it; and all the Divine Perfections,
within the Circumference of his Knowledge, must have their fresh Remembrances,
and powerful Sense Revived upon his own Heart: For he concludes, that, 1. God
is Eminent, and Infinite in all Perfection. 2. That his Eminence shall be
evident, and conspicuous in the Salvation and Relief of now Dejected David. 3.
And that most suitably to all the Circumstances and Pressures of his Afflicted
State. And that, 4. Rather much beyond, than any way beneath, his present Hope.
And hence he calls God, the Health of his Countenance. His Thoughts and Hopes
are in their highest Flights and Vigor. He looks upon God, as his Savior, Hope
and God, and judges God resolved and propence to appear and act accordingly on
his behalf. He looks for such illustrious Signals of Gods Favor and Respects,
as shall, 1. Embolden him, undauntedly to face his Enemies without any marks of
a dejected and disturbed Soul upon his Face. 2. Such as shall shame his
Enemies, and humble their contemptuous and proud Looks; and shame those
Insolences whereby they had upbraided him with his God; and make them readily
acknowledge, that there is no Rock like David's God, and that his Hope and Refuge
were not vainly fixed there. 3. Such, as should redeem his Holy Hopes and
Courses from Contempt and Scorn, and make his embittered Enemies to wish
themselves even in Despised David's Case; for David here expects Salvation, as
something visible, speedy and complete, even in the Land of the Living. Well
therefore might he say, Hope thou in God, thereby to redress and check his own
despondent Spirit.

7. And here, the State and Temper of David's Spirit is remarkable, for it was,
1. Sensible of Gods hand, and Man's upon it. 2. Observant of its own resentments
and deportment under its Grievances. 3. Therefore much conversant with it self.
4. Desirous of some Redress, but yet from God alone, and not only desirous, But
also, 5. Duly provident and industrious to obtain it; looking within to see its
Maladies; and above, to get Relief and Succor, for having Grace to act it, and
God to help it, and a Covenant of Promises to encourage and support it, it was
resolved, and at work, to Act most like its considerate and gracious Self; and
to make its best of God.

Secondly, Let us now consider these words, as they contain what is Doctrinal
to us: as giving us some Notices of our present State and Duty: of what we are
liable unto; viz. To be cast down and disquieted: and of what we are to do,
when exercised thus; viz. 1. To discourse our selves. And, 2. To urge our Hope
in God upon our selves, and to press upon our selves, what may enforce it, and
encourage it: For,

1. We find that all passages of Sacred Writ, are upon Record for our
Instruction and Advantage, Romans 15.4. and 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. And why not this
amongst the rest?

2. We are exhorted to take the Prophets, who have spoken in the name of the
Lord, for an example of suffering Affliction, and of Patience, James 5.10. And
such was David, Acts 2.30.

3. And in this Great and Exemplary Prophet, we have this Fourfold Mirror. 1.
A Mirror of the Calamities, whereto the best of Men may be exposed, viz. To be
cast down and disquieted: Dreadful Afflictions, and Dismal Apprehensions and
Constructions arising from them, and deep Resentments of them, are incident to
the holiest and best Men. I am troubled: I am bowed down greatly: I have Roared
by reason of the disquietness of my Heart: Thy Arrows stick fast in me, and thy
Hand presses me sore, Psalm. 38.2, 6, 8. I need not tell you what pressures
were upon the Spirit of the Lord Christ, and how they were resented by him. 2.
A Mirror of that peculiar work at home, which gracious Souls in their
Afflictions are to mind, Psalm. 77.6, 11. and 4.4. They must search into, and
commune with themselves about what lies upon them, and how it is born and taken
by them. 3. A Mirror of that redress and remedy whereunto they must repair,
when thus exercised and afflicted, Psalm. 94.19. and 56.3. Let me not be
ashamed, for I put my trust in thee, Psalm. 25.20. None but God, and nothing but
hope in him can give relief unto the troubled Soul. And then, 4. A Mirror of
that Grace and Wisdom which prompts and fits Men to Discourse themselves, and
to hope in God. Hope thou, for I shall yet -- let integrity and uprightness
preserve me, for I wait on thee, Psalm. 25.21. Here you may see the Holy poyse
and bent of gracious Souls. Sufferings, though never so manifold and mighty,
and continuing, will never bring the graceless Soul home, to it self or God.
Only great thoughts of God, and a due space of his relations and promises to
us, and of his interest in us, can make us bear up our despondent and afflicted
Spirits, by fixed hope in God; and bring us to discourse our selves to purpose.
The Power and Tendency of Holy Principles, and of gracious dispositions, are
here conspicuous and legible in my Text; take then the Sense thereof in this
comprehensive proposition following.

Doctr. When gracious Souls are cast down, and disquieted within themselves,
they should discourse themselves, and revive those thoughts, and such a Sense
of God upon themselves, as may encourage and enforce their hopes and confidence
in God, Psalm. 77.6, 10. Holy David, he is here a pattern to us all. For here
you see, that in the greatest Agonies and Conflicts of his Spirit, with what
attempted thus to bear and keep it down, David here. 1. Makes a right and
amiable representation of God to himself, he sets him always before him, (as
the Lord Jesus did, Acts 2.25.) and that 1. As God. 2. As his God. 3. As the
health of his Countenance. 4. As One that he should praise, and therefore he
expected the glorious appearances of this God for him. 5. As One who in his
great and gracious appearances for his Releif, would master all those
difficulties which any ways might threaten to obstruct the passages of his
desired and expected Succors to him. For I shall yet, ( i. e. let things be as
they will at present) praise him. 2ly, He thence expects great things. Such as
are matters of high praises and acknowledgments to his God. ((...)) laudabo.
Targ. Confitebor ei (vul. lat.) and infers them from these cheering
considerations of his God. 3ly, He improves what he discovers and infers, for
the fixing of his hope in God. 4ly, And all this is to rebuke and moderate his
(otherwise too extravagant) dejections and disturbances, arising from excessive
Sorrows, Fears and Cares. So that you see, that no sorrows or dejections must
banish or divorce us from our selves and God; and from just hopes in him. No
Calamities should lay gracious Persons Prostrate at their Feet. But they must
conflict and argue with themselves: and bring their Sorrows to the impartial
Test and Scrutinies, lest they promote their own distresses by sinful
negligences and inadvertencies: and make themselves to be the less receptive of
those Encouragements and Supports, which they might otherwise derive with ease
from him, who is their God, and under strong propensions and engagements to act
and to approve himself accordingly for their good. Good Men are too propense,
and apt to make their Cups more bitter than ever God intended they should be;
whilst they attend more unto the resentments of their afflicted, than to the
hopes, advantages and Principles of their gracious selves. We wrest Gods
dealings with us, and then we censure him, for what we bring upon our selves.
But Grace directs to better things, and prompts Men first to self-discourses
and debates about what is so very hard upon them, that so the malady with its
impressions and effects upon them, being well understood, the remedy may the
better be considered and improved by them; for as we can do nothing without
God: so he mistakes the proper state and methods of Divine Redresses and
Releifs, that looks for any thing from God, whilst he neglects himself But let
me show you the reach and purport of this Doctrine, in these few following
Propositions.

Proposi. I. No Man so Great or Good in this World, but he may fall under
pressing and uncomfortable Circumstances, Heb. 1.12. and 7.8. and Psalm. 34.19.
the arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison thereof drinks up my
Spirits, the terrors of God set themselves in battle array against me, Job.
6.4. We have here neither a continuing City nor resting Place, the troubles of
the Patriarchs, Saints, and Martyrs, yea, and of Jesus Christ himself, are a
full proof of this Truth.

Proposi. II. Though Men be Great and Good, yet may their Souls be cast down
and disquieted within them. My Soul refused to be comforted, my Spirit was
overwhelmed in me, Psalm. 77.2, 3. It Is hard and rare for the best Men, to keep
their Spirits composed and equal, when troubles urge them closely. The time
would fail me, and the limits of this discourse would be transgrest, should I
but show you from sacred writ, what passionate escapes might be observed from
Gods Worthies there.

Proposi. III. Good Men should therefore well discern, and weigh what troubles
and anxieties are upon them, and not increase their loads and sorrows, by being
strangers to themselves, Psalm. 77.6. 1 Cor. 10.13. Eccl. 7.14. 2 Cor. 12.7, 9.
Psalm. 119.28. and they should well distinguish too betwixt what God inflicts
upon them, and what they cause unto, and lay upon themselves; and sift their
troubles to the bottom, they must observe what it is that troubles them, and so
survey their sufferings, and not subject themselves to strange Confusions and
Amusements, Lam. 3.20. for it is not what we think of what afflicts us, but what
God really inflicts upon us, that we must mind. And they must carefully observe
in all their sorrows, what Ministers to grief; and what to shame, and what to
their Awakening and Refining: and what serves to prevent a greater mischief to
them, 1 Cor. 11.30.32, and to what use God may put their sufferings, as to the
Church and World; and to the unseen State, and then resolve it with themselves;
for what, how far, and why, they are, or ought to be dejected and disquieted.

Proposi. IV. What troubles and resentments by gracious Persons are observed,
should be discoursed by them, with their own Souls, Psalm. 4.4. they are to ask
themselves how these evils came upon them. Is it the immediate hand of God that
lays them on? if so, what have I done against the Lord my God? Have I
neglected or negligently managed any parts of public or private Worship: as
Prayer, Praise, Thanks, Hearing, Sacraments, or Sanctification of the Lords
Day? Have I dishonored God, by misrepresenting him to others, or to my self?
Have I reflected any dishonor upon my Christian Calling? Have I neglected the
exciting and improving of the Grace of God in me, in any of its Principles or
Functions? Or have I behaved my self unworthily or indecently toward others or
my self? Or is it by the Tongues or Hands of Men that God afflicts me? If so,
what instances of injuriousness, negligence, indiscretion, or immoderate
passion can I or others charge upon my self? What undue heats or ferments, have
they discerned in my Spirit, by rash or wrathful words or actions? If any
failures have been on my part; where, when, and how, and why were they
committed by me? If none of these are, have been, or can be charged upon me;
what do I undergo from God or Man, that Gods great Favorites have not
undergone before me? And why may not I repair unto the same Encouragements and
Consolations, which have Relieved and Supported them, when they have been
exercised as I am? What! can not I pledge the best Men, in the most bitter
Cups, but I must presently entertain dismal and undue thoughts of God, and make
censoriously the worst Constructions of what he lays upon me? For to think, or
say, that God deals unfaithfully or unkindly with me, is to conclude and utter;
what, neither the Name nor Love of God, nor the experiences of his best and
wisest Servants will allow of; therefore our calm and close debatings of these
matters with our selves, put us into a fair way to obtain Composures and Relief.

Proposi. V. Good Men when most disquieted and dejected, are then to discourse
their gracious Selves, Heb. 12.5. and to consider what is within them, as well
as what is laid upon them, Psalm. 44.17. they should remember whose, who, and
what they are by Grace; and so, repress the tumults and despondencies of their
own Spirits, for they that are Sanctified can never be forsaken of their God.

Proposi. VI. A revived Sense of God, of their Interest in him, and of their
expectations from him, afford great Succors and Supports to gracious Souls,
and ought to be pleaded and urged upon them by themselves, when all things look
dreadfully toward them, both within and about them, Hab. 3.17, 18. impatience
and despondency are best rebuked. Hereby, a Sense of God must be revived; for
as we think of God, so shall we value our relation to him; and fix and keep our
confidence in him, and proportionate our expectations from him, and it is to
this end that we have such glorious and great accounts of God in sacred writ,
as to his attributes of Power, Wisdom, Patience, Grace, etc. Riches and Honor
are with him, all Kingdom, Glory, and Power are ascribed unto him: and it is with
him, how things shall go with us, and in all the parts of his Creation. It is
Peace or War with us; serenity or disturbance in us; and Good or Evil toward
us, as God himself determines concerning us, Job 34.29. and he that works
all things after the Counsels of his own Will, is to be concluded and believed
to be as Good and Gracious, as he is either Wise or Great; for as Power is his
Majesty, and Holiness is his Glory; so Mercy is his Riches; and to him it is a
pleasure to be kind and bountiful; and a Name of Praise and Joy to be abundant
in Compassions and Remissions, Jer. 9.24. and 33.8, 9. Mic. 7.18. And yet this
is not all, but our relation to, and interest in him, must be revived in the
remembrances thereof upon our own Hearts, Deuteronomy. 33.29. Isa. 41.10. Jer. 3.4, 5.
Heb. 11.16. Hab. 3.18. Every relation is for relative purposes and designs, and
so affords us great Encouragements, Psalm. 23.1, 6. My God! the God of my Life?
I will say to God my Rock, why have thou forgotten me? Psalm. 42.8, 9. O my
Strength, to thee will I sing, for God is my Defense, and the God of my Mercy,
Psalm. 59.17. and 68.20. thus David encouraged himself in the Lord his God, 1 Samuel 30.6. and here the Foundation of our liveliest hopes is fixed; for as Gods
infinite perfection assures us that he can do all things, so his relation to
us, and our interest in him, assures us that he will be gracious to us, and
hereto may we safely trust; and in the Sense hereof may we address to God by
Prayer and Hope, Psalm. 5.2, 12. and 109.26. and 119.114. And then the sense and
value of what we are to look for, is to be lively too upon our heart. Slighty
and Contemptible Thoughts and Estimations of what we look for, will never
considerably stem the Tide, nor stop the Fluxes of our Sorrows and
Discouragements. Gods Favor is a valuable Blessing, and as the Root of all the
rest; his Face is glorious and delightful, when indeed it shines upon the Soul;
the Rays and Beams which this Gods Blessed Face diffuses and transmits, are
supplies of Grace for all the Duties of a dark and stormy Season, 2 Cor. 12.7,
9. Supports of Spirit under troubles, 2 Cor. 1.5. Col. 1.11, 12. deliverance
from them, when most of God may be discovered, and most Good brought to pass
thereby, Psalm. 34, 19. and great Advantages to Souls by such Exercises, whilst
they abide upon them, James 1.2, 12. Romans 5.3, 5. 2 Cor. 4.16, 18. Romans 8.18.
and so a consequent Emboldning of the Heart and Face toward God, others, and
themselves, Psalm. 86.16, 17. and 119.41, 42. and 109.25, 27.

Proposi. VII. Good Men can never settle and compose their own disturbed
Spirits, till they proceed to actual solid Hope in God, Psalm. 146.5, 8. Romans
4.18, 21. Here is the Souls only Anchor and Repose from the great God alone,
there it must expect great things; for nothing can be too great for him to give
or do, if once he be resolved upon it; from their God they may look for special
and peculiar Favors and Reliefs, in just and full agreements with all his
Covenant-Relations to them, and Engagements for them, Zeph. 3.17. Jer. 3.23.
Psalm. 68.20. and Deuteronomy. 33.26, 29. Isa. 25.9. And what have good Men to keep
their Spirits up, but hope in such a God? it is only his Omnipotence can weigh
against the difficulties; his Faithfulness, against the Improbabilities; and
his Grace and Promises, against the Jealousies and Disheartnings that arise
from the delays of their defined and expected Mercies; all other expectations
and encouragements are but vain; these hopes in God have their sure Footing,
Heb. 6.17, 20. Psalm. 9.10. and 119.38, 41. and 23.4. Their hope, as he is God,
is All-sufficient; as he is their God, he tenderly and compassionately cares
for them: and he thinks himself concerned, both to fulfill, and justify their
Hopes. And as he is thus theirs by Covenant, he will both seasonably and
effectually make their cheerful Looks to testify the absolute Satisfactions of
their Hearts in their Experienced Accomplishments of all his gracious Promises
to them. And as he is the health of their Countenance, so they account the
Sanctuary and Spiritual Unveylings and Returns of his Face, to be the Glory and
Salvation which they are most concerned, and carried out to look for, and to
Glory in, Psalm. 106.2, 4, 5. Here therefore they may safely trust, and rest
themselves, who otherwise, cannot but be as restless as Noah's Dove, whilst
from the Ark; and as discontented and distracted as wandering Cain, under the
Execution of Gods dismal Doom and Curse upon him. He only that is confident,
that God is trusty, and that so commits himself, and all, to God as such; and
this under great expectations, that God will keep and answer all his hopes and
trust: and that here stays and rests his Thoughts and Soul in this, that God is
certainly his Friend and God, and will accordingly befriend him, in the best
Season, and to the highest purpose and advantage. He I say, only can thus still
the Tumults of his own Spirit.

Proposi. VIII. Good Men's Hope in God should never be discouraged by any
difficulties or unlikelihoods in the way, Romans 4.18, 22. Seeing the Patron of
their Expectations is so great as God, so near as their God, and so much in
their Eye, of 1. Expectation, as the Health of their Countenance: And 2. Of
their Resolution and Design, as to make him the Object of their Praises, and
the Avouched and Adored Author and Giver of their Mercies. And 3. Of their
Affection and Delight, as no ways thinking of such joyful work as Praise, till
he appear; nothing can justify Dejections, where God concerns himself to help,
Psalm. 55.22. It is no great matter how things appear within, before us, or
about us, whilst God stands well affected toward us, and can be truly called
our Praise and God, Heb. 10.35, 37. Isa. 8.13. and 51.12, 13. Nothing can
change or hinder him; and why should any thing discourage His, whom Grace has
brought to trust in him, Romans 8.31, 39.

Proposi. IX. What ever Gracious Souls expects from God, they still determine
and refer all to his Praise and Service, Luke 1.72, 75. Psalm. 119.7, 17. and
116.7, 9. they neither desire, expect, nor use, any Salvation or Supports,
ultimately for themselves, Ezra 9.13, 14. Psalm. 56.12, 13. Gods Excellence is
observed in all, and his Glory is designed and pursued by all; and indeed God
is the End and Sweetness of all Mercies, Romans 11.36. And this was resolved
upon, by Holy David, as both his Sanctuary-Honour, his House-Enrichment, and
his Hearts delight. The Health of his Countenance must be the Inhabitant of his
Praises.

Thirdly, Let us now consider this Text as a Directory to guide us to, and in,
the Resolution of this Case before us. The Case is this,

How may a Gracious Person, from whom God hides his Face, trust in the Lord as
his God.

Now if you compare the Case and Text together, you will find them Parallel in
these particulars,

1. In the Persons. David, that Holy Person, was concerned in the Text; and a
Gracious Person is here concerned in the Case. That David was a Gracious
Person, none can doubt, that read and mind his Holy Breathings in the Psalms,
nay, they must conclude him to be greatly such; for what Raptures, Fervours and
Appeals, what Holy Agonies and Flights of Spirit: What Glorious Accounts of God
and Providence: And what Instances of Holy Confidence in God may you discern?

2. In their Cases. The One is cast down and disquieted; and Gods Face is
hidden from the other. Now Gods hiding of his Face insinuates mostly, some
distaste taken; and thus it hints the Cause, to be something neglected or
committed, or not well managed and performed, which therefore God cannot
approve of in any of his Favorites; for God dislikes all Nonconformity to his
Will, either in the matter, manner, principle, means or end, of any Instance of
Deportment, toward God, our selves, or others; though sometimes this hideing
of Gods Face may be for other purposes, not now to be Insisted on. The Soul is
cast down, and disquieted, says the Text: And thus we have the terrible
Impressions and Effects of this Ecclipsed Face of God upon the Spirit of a
Gracious Person; the Case is doleful, though Gods Design therein be Wise and
Merciful; for the sensible Tokens of Gods Gracious Face or Presence, may be,
and are, often times removed, or withheld to try the Soul; to awaken dormant
Principles and Graces to their most seasonable and advantageous Exercises: To
prevent some greater Mischiefs which would arise from Divine Consolations
unseasonably or unfitly placed: To make and to expose to public View some
Monuments of Signal Deliverances, Salvations and Supports; and to form some
Glorious Mirrours and Examples of Signal Patience and Submissions to the Will
of God: And all this may be done to serve more Glorious Purposes, than any Man
in Flesh can be aware of, and to do the Church and World, and the Concerns of
Gods own Name, more Service, than we can yet discern.

3. In their Course for Remedy and Redress. David here (after his Self-Enquiry
and Arraignment) applies himself to hope in God, to which, he argues and
confines himself by the revival of a due sense of God upon his own Spirit, and
a clear representation of God to himself, as his Salvation, Praise, and God;
this for the Text. Let us now compare the Case therewith; and here the Gracious
Soul is supposed to be upon the Enquiry, and Search, what to do, (when God has
hid his Face therefrom) that he may trust in the Lord as his God. Now Hope and
Trust are often Synonimous, and taken in Holy Scripture as expressive of the same
thing; and sure I am, that though they may be distinguished, yet they cannot be
divided each from other. No Man can Trust, but he must Hope; nor Hope, but he
must Trust, in God. Lay then the Case and Text together; and these things will
be Evident, 1. That the Gracious Person is concerned in both. 2. That God some
way or other hides his Face from both. 3. That God is yet the God of both, and
therefore to be eyed and owned, as such, by both. 4. That Hope or Trust in God
gives the best relief to both, when thus Afflicted, if fixed in God as their
God. 5. That this may be done, and must. 6. The great Enquiry and Concern of
both, is, How they may be done? Let me here Premise these things,

First, A Gracious Person is one that is changed and actuated by the Grace of
God; and so, prevailingly bent and set for him, Psalm. 14.3. One formed and
framed after that gracious Pattern from the Gospel-Mount, Tit. 2.11, 15. Ephesians.
4.23, 24 A Man of Holy Gracious Principles, Dispositions, Conversation, and
Designs. A Man radically after Gods own Heart, and formed to fulfill all Gods
Wills, relating to him in his Sphere and Province. He is (as David in the Text)
One that, 1. Well Observes, and much Converses with his own Soul. In all
Varieties and Stages of Conditions here, he makes his own Soul his continual
care and study, and strictly minds how all things go at home; you see here
David is a strict Enquirer into the Temper, Case and Cure of his own Soul. He
is One that, 2. Still looks higher then himself, in all that happens to, or
lies upon him. He knows his hopes and business are not confined within himself:
For he takes himself to be concerned with God, as well as with his own Soul. 3.
He is One that is restless, and sensibly uneasy to himself, till he look up in
God; and till his Spirit turn toward him, he runs not to Debauching
Recreations and Diversions to turn away his Troubles, nor to the Blandishments
and Protections, or supports of the World or Flesh. For these he knows, will
rather cheat and stupifie, than refresh, compose or heal, his wounded Spirit.
But he repairs to God, as to the most delightful and sure Sabbatisme and
satisfaction of his Inner-Man. 4. He is One who therefore has the highest
thoughts of God, and thinks it best and safest for him, to place his Confidence
in God as in the Rock of Ages. His Case, he thinks, cannot be desperate, though
never so intricate and frightful, whilst God may be engaged by him to be his
Friend and God. 5. He is One that in his Hopes and Exercises still keeps his
Eye upon the Praise and Service of his God, for all the Reliefs and Mercies
which he Desires, Requests, and Hopes for, have both their meet and cheerful
references to Gods Praise; and when he has cause and opportunity, he has an
Heart to Praise his God; and it is his greatest Aim, and Pleasure, and Ambition.
6. He is One that deals impartially with himself about his Troubles, but dares
not challenge God about them; nor Arraign him about even the severest of his
Providential Dispensations.

Secondly, God may be called the God of such a Gracious Person, as he is, 1.
That God to whom he is Devoted, Psalm. 50.3, 23. and resolved to serve and
please. Thou have avouched the Lord this Day to be thy God; to walk in his
Ways, to keep his Statutes, Commandments and Judgments, and to hearken to his
Voice, Deuteronomy. 26.17. And as he is, 2. That God in whom he places all his
felicity and satisfaction, Psalm. 73.25, 26. and the health of my Countenance;
my Portion, Lam. 3.24. the gladness of my Joy, Psalm. 43.4. And as he is, 3.
That God who has by Covenant Engaged himself to be his God, 2 Samuel 7.24. For
he has given his heart and hand, so to be the God of such a One, as never
utterly to neglect them here, 1 Pet. 3.12. Romans 8.28, 31, 39. Nor to reject
their Souls hereafter, Heb. 11.16. See Isa. 41.10. Heb. 6.17, 20. Romans 2.10. 2
Cor. 5.1, 9.

Thirdly, Gods hiding of his Face from a Gracious Person must be considered, as
to, 1. The Phrase. 2. The Thing.

1. As to the Phrase, 1. It is Scriptural, Job 34.29. Isa. 54.8. and 59.2. and
it frequently occurs in Sacred Scriptures. 2. It is Metaphorical and allusive
unto Men, who are said to hide, or turn away their Faces, when they will not be
seen, or spoken to, or conversed with, in any amicable, or serviceable ways;
whether in design and policy, or through distaste; strictly, God has no Face;
and so, cannot be said to hide it; and if you take Gods Face, for his presence
or his appearance, manifested by several Instances, and Symbals, and Tokens
thereof; then, in some respects Gods Face is never hid; for both his Works and
Providence declare the Universality and Nearness of it; and in some respects
again, it may be, has been, and is hidden, continually from some or other.

2. As to the thing, therefore, we are to understand by the hiding of Gods
Face, his removing or withholding of all, or any of those Notices, and Tokens,
whereby his merciful and delightful Presence with us, his gracious acceptance
of us to his Favor, and his Providential regards to us, are usually testified,
even sensibly to us, Isa. 64.7. Jer. 18.17. I will hide my Face from them, and
they shall be devoured; and many Evils and Troubles shall befall them, so that
they will say in that Day, are not these Evils come upon us, because our God is
not amongst us, And I will surely hide my Face in that Day, Deuteronomy. 31.17. And
now this is done in several ways and senses. As, 1. By Banishing gracious
Persons from his Sanctuary-presence, Psalm. 63.2. Dan. 9.17. And this was David's
Case, and a sore Affliction to his Spirit* and may be something of, but not the
main thing, as to the Case in hand. 2. By the intermission or suspension of
Gods Providence, Care and Mercies, as to those Instances and Effects, which
would make our Lives and Courses here, more sweet and easy to us, Psalm. 44.22,
26. Why hidest thou thy self in times of Trouble? Psalm. 10.1. How long will thou forget me, Lord, for ever? How long will thou hide thy Face from me? How
long shall I take counsel in my Soul, having Sorrow in my Heart Daily? How long
shall mine Enemy be Exalted over me? Psalm. 13.1, 2. Thus is God said to hide
his Face from the House of Jacob, Isa. 8.17. And thus when Providence treats
and uses us in this World; and most, or all our outward Comforts and Concerns,
are so perplexed, embittered and removed, as if our God would hereby tell us,
That he regards and minds us not, and will not be concerned for our outward
peace and welfare. Then is it, that God may be said to hide his Face; yet
neither is this the thing that is principally intended in my Case. 3. By Gods
denying and withholding, all probabilities and presages of relief, from either
Men or Things, and all sensible intimations of his own purpose to befriend us,
Psalm. 74.9, 11. I will show them the Back, and not the Face, in the Day of
their Calamity, Jer. 18.17. And, I hid my Face from them, and gave them into
the hand of their Enemies; so fell they all by the Sword, Ezekiel. 39.23. Thus,
when God withers every helpful Arm, defeats all Enterprises toward deliverance
and supports, and shuts up every Door of Hope, and by the whole visible Frame
and Posture of second Causes, looks toward us, and upon us as an angry
frowning God. Then is he said to hide his Face; but this is not what the Case
principally respects. And therefore, 4. God mainly hides his Face, when he
withholds those inward sensible tokens of Respects, which his Spirit usually
affords to Holy Souls, Psalm. 88.14. when he deals with us as if our Souls were
utterly, or very much despised and neglected by him. Thus God tells us, that he
will no more hide his Face from his People, because he had poured out his
Spirit upon the House of Israel, Ezekiel. 39.29. This is the Face of God indeed,
when his Spirit fills our Souls with all its Joys and Graces, and his Face is
hid indeed, when we have no sensible Refreshments and Recruits from that
Comforter the Holy Ghost, by whom all Correspondencies must be maintained
betwixt our God and us, and thus our Case mainly intends. We find a Man
recorded for his Patience, crying out, wherefore hidest thou thy Face, and
hold me for thy Enemy? Job 13.24. and when looks God more like an Enemy,
then when he denies all sensible illapses and recruits of inward Light, and
Life, and Joys? Is it not dreadful to have our Sanctuary clusters, to relish of
no Blessing in them? The Dews of Heaven are often in Holy Services and Doctrines
distilled upon us, and our Addresses thither have been often repeated and
renewed; but where is the Blessing and Success we look for? Our Souls we find
in our own Apprehensions, to be contracted, degraded, and benumbed, Corruptions
rage, and make their rude resistances to all our Sentiments and Convictions,
Conscience often quarrels with us, and when Gods Rods are on us, we sensibly
discern great discomposures in our thoughts: strange Mutinies and Tumults in
our Passions; uneasiness in our Spirits: and damp upon our Hopes, sadness on
our Hearts, and a strange readiness to resist all that God speaks and does, and
how can we imagine that Gods Heart and Face stand toward us.

Fourthly, Trusting in the Lord as his God in such a Case as this, takes in
abundance, and amounts to much, and these things it offers to the first
observant and considerate glance. 1. That the Object be trusty, and no
otherwise can he be, who is God the Lord. 2. That the Act be answerable to the
Object: for trust is to run parallel with trustiness* and 3. That this trusty
Object gives us allowance to put trust in him for every one that is able, and
that would be faithful upon his Promise and Engagement, will not Engage to be
Responsible for what might otherwise be committed to him, and hence this
passage is inserted here, the Lord his God. 4. That he be a Person qualified
and acceptable, who here attempts to place his trust in the Lord as his God,
and therefore here he is styled in the Case a Gracious Person.

Trust then, seems to be a compound of Faith and Hope, and it is that Repose
and Rest which both afford, until desire and expectation be accomplished by
that God, on whom this trust is terminated, so that in trust there are, 1. A
belief and sense of Gods existance, and of his gracious Nature, Heb. 11.6. Jer.
9.24. Mich. 7.18. for I must believe that there is a God, and that he is kind
and gracious, e're I can trust in him. 2. Credit given unto his Word and
Promises, as things clear, sure, and great, Heb. 4.2, 6, 17, 18. for these are
both the ground and test of steady and succesful trust in God, 2 Samuel 23.5.
Remember thy Word unto thy Servant whereon thou have caused me to Hope, Psalm.
119.49. what is Gods Ability and Faithfulness to me, unless he countenance my
trusting in him, and encourage me thereto? 3. A consequent expectation of those
things from him which he engages to perform and give; things suitable to
exigences and concernment as far as they agree with Gods Promises and Designs,
Psalm. 119.76. To. 4.18, 21. and 1 John 5.14, 15. For all that God promises, and
would have us to expect, is still with Reference to our welfare in its
subordination to His Glory and the Public Good, and all other Hopes are but
extravagant and presumptuous, if not reduced and conformed to this Test and
Standard. 4. An Acquiescence and Repose of Spirit in the thus fixing of this
expectation, Isa. 26.3, 4. for confident trust breeds satisfaction, and makes
Souls Patient and Serene, till the thing hoped for and desired, be brought to
pass, To. 8.24, 25. for all these inward tumults which arise within, from
pressing Jealousies, Griefs, Cares and Fears, are hereby stilled: and all vain
Shifts and Props rejected, and all committed to, and left with God, Phil. 1.20.
1 Pet. 4.19. and 2 Timothy 11.12. for here no reservations must be made, nor any
jealousies, bad surmises or suspicions, be any way Cherished or Indulged.

The Case explained and summed up is plainly this.

How may a Gracious Person [one Sanctified and Inprincipled by Grace] from whom
God hides his Face [gives him but little or no inward sense, nor outward
sensible notices of his wonted acceptance and regards] trust in the Lord [quiet
and satisfy himself with expectations of Gods Gracious acceptance of him,
complacence in him, and regards toward him] as his God [that God to whom he
has committed all, and is devoted to, and who will certainly regard and bless
him, as his true Favorite, and as one by Grace in Covenant with him?] And how
may he do it so as to abandon all disturbing Shifts and Cares elsewhere?

Direct. I. Let him retire into himself, and there Compose his Thoughts for
close and serious Work, Psalm. 4.4. and 77, 6. for here he will find a full, and
truly great employment for every Faculty and Thought. More here is requisite to
self Redress, than mere reading, Complaints or Prayer. Here is Work within him,
and above him. God and himself must now take up his closest, deepest, and most
serious thoughts and pauses, much here must be enquired into, remembered,
considered and debated, and the distracted, wandering, careless, inconsiderate
Soul, that is broken and scattered into wild and incoherent thoughts, is no
ways fit for this employment: nor can it without due recollection of it self,
proceed to argue down what lies upon it, as its Load and Burden. He that knows
nothing of himself as to his State and Temper, and as to those urgent
circumstances under which he lies, cannot know much of God; nor well discern
what fit and pertinent improvement may be made of Gods refreshing Name and
Promises. And he that through his negligence converses little with himself,
must know too little of his own affairs and straits, to make right applications
of Gods Promises and Memorials unto himself, so as to derive herefrom what is
fit to cherish and support him, Prove. 18.1. all must be set aside that may
distract, and summoned in, that may assist; and thought upon, that may relieve
him in this strait.

Direct. II. When thus retired and composed, let him discourse and mind his
gracious self, Ephesians. 2.10. Isa. 26.12. Grace in the Heart is a great pledge and
earnest, and gives us huge assurances of good things to come, 2 These. 2.16, 17.
God has set gracious Souls apart for his own self, Psalm. 4.3. and to the
highest Purposes and Endowments are they wrought and framed, 1 Pet. 2.9. Romans
9.23. and 2 Cor. 5.5. What clearer dawnings of a glorious day? And what more
hopeful token and presage of special Favor and Respects from God to us can we
imagine, than the participation of a Divine Nature, that never can be pleased
but when aspiring toward God, and that is insatiable till it get up to him?
What! a Soul created after God, and formed to his Praise, and bearing such
impresses of the Holy One! And yet determined to Dereliction and Destruction!
Oh how can these things be? Read but those Characters of God upon thy Spirit.
Mind the propensions and ascents of Heaven-born Principles, see but what
wonders Grace has wrought already. Has God assayed to tear thy Soul from
Satan's Paw? Has he transformed thy Spirit, and made it so much a resemblance
of his own Holiness and Wisdom? Has he advanced thine esteem of Holiness and
Heaven? Has he cast out thy rubbish, and raised in thee an Habitation for his
own Holy Name? And will he demolish and disrespect a Monument and Structure to
his own Praise? Why did God thus illuminate thine Eyes, inflame thy Heart with
Holy Fervours and so invigorate thy active Powers, as to enable thee to move
toward him, but that thou might attain to, and possess his highest Favors
and Endearments? Has it been ever thus with thee, that nothing can satisfy
thine Heart but Holiness, God, and Heaven? Why then has God thus cast his
Mantle over thee, but to attract and draw thy Soul to him? And has God put
these Principles, Instincts, and Propensions into thee, only to torment thee by
the unsatisfied enragements of an Holy Thirst? Is Grace so beautiful in
another? And is it the less valuable and observable, because God has implanted
it in thy own self? Art thou made restless and dissatisfied every where, but
under the influences and sensible smiles of Gods most gracious Countenance? And
does thy God impose upon thee, and only trifle with thee? Grace is a Principle
and Design; so truly Heavenly and Exalting, as that its Tendency proves its
Extraction, and manifests Gods Purposes to do thee good for ever. Let this thy
experience be observed; for who can think it likely that God should draw such
parallel lines upon thy Soul to his own Holy Will; and make thee such an Epistle
so manifestly written by his own Spirit; and yet, not allow thee to peruse thy
self, and to form what is wrought within thee, into such pertinent
Encouragements and Supports, as thy respective Agonies and Distresses may
require? And how can this be done, if no Survey be made, no Inventory taken and
considered of thine inward Worth and Riches? And certainly from what God works
with in a gracious Soul, may it infer great things determined to it, and
reserved for it; for who can think that God would rear an Habitation for
himself, and not Inhabit it? Or, raise a Temple (so magnificent and sumptuous
as the Holy Soul) and not fill it with his Glory? Ephesians. 2.22. and 2 Cor. 6.16.
see Ephesians. 1.17, 20. Acts 26.18. Had God designed to forsake thee utterly, would
he not have delivered and resigned thee up to a stupid and polluted Spirit?
Then had thou been so inapprehensive of the sinfulness of sin, the beauty of
Holiness, the pleasure of a well ordered Mind and Life, and of invisible
realities, as that thou would have easily received, and born the Image of the
Devil and the World upon thee. The thoughts and prospect of an eternal State
would never have reconciled thee so the Severities and Courses of true
Godliness: nor have made thee so ambitiouslly solicitous for Divine acceptance,
and the satisfactions and fruitions of that State where God is all in all, as
now they have done. Surely the Soul that is visited with the Dayspring from on
High, guiding its Feet into the way of Peace; and all this by the tender Mercy
of its God, and ought not so easily to give up all for lost, as to despair of
Light and Help, because of present Darkness, and of the Valley of the shadow of
Death. This white Stone, with such a New Name in it, is no small earnest, nor
an obscure sign, of everlasting Mercies and Endearments. God that has
Sanctified the Soul, has thereby signified his gracious Purpose to do it Good
at last; and never so to forsake it as to return no more. So then what Holy
Principles, Favors, Aims and Actions, God has brought thee to, and thence
encourage and fix thy trust in God.

Direct. III. Let him then well observe how far the Face of God is hid from him
indeed: lest otherwise his own condition, and Gods aspects and deportment
toward him, should be mistaken by him, Isa. 49.14, 16. and Psalm. 77.6, 10. How
often do Souls mistake God; and form or fancy great Discouragements and
Ecclipses, which rather rise and issue from themselves, than him? What if the
Brain or Body should be indisposed? What if some bold and wanton Expectations
or Desires, irregularly formed and cherished, come to nothing? Suppose some
Melancholic Christians (such have I known, and have rather pitied and
reproved, than cherished and commended them,) should Desire, Expect and Pray,
for some Miraculous illapses of strength and comforts on them; or Beg of God
some such Deliverances and Salvations, as suit not the ordinary stated Methods
of Gods Providence; or make their Requests to God for some Extatide Transports
and Enlargements, in a Duty: or Covet unfit degrees of Gifts, or Abilities for
Duties, (taking that to be Grace, which may be a gift consistent with a lost
Condition,) and suppose these things never acquested by them: must it thence
follow, That the Face of God is hid from them? Oh what a pass must God be at
with these Men's Souls; when they must take him for their Enemy, or for a
discontented and distasted Friend, unless he will (to humor them) transgress
the stated Methods of his Dealing with Men's Souls? If their Natural strength
and fervor do but decay through Age or Sickness, or other accidental
Weaknesses; or if God touch them in their Darlings here; as Interests,
Relations, Possessions; or cast them upon some unwelcome straits, though for
their good: Oh then they think him gone from them in deep Distaste and Wrath;
when as these things rather insinuate Demonstrations and Assurances of Gods
Faithfulness and Favor to them, than any hard Thoughts of, or bad Designs upon
them. See then, that you be sure that God hides his Face from you indeed,
before you proceed to infer Discouragements, or any ways to countenance your
own Despondencies, and any Jealousies or hard thoughts of God.

B^t yet it is to be acknowledged, That God sometimes does hide his Face indeed,
Isa. 64.7. And that either, 1. Totally, as to the Damned in Hell, so as never
to show it more to them again; but this is nothing to our present Case; or
else, 2. Partially, as to those on Earth, who are either, 1. Unconverted, or,
2. Converted Persons. The former are not here concerned, but the latter; and as
to Converted Persons, such as are truly Gracious; God is said to hide his Face
from them, when he removes his Candlestick from them, Rev. 2.5. or, when they
rather only see, than really feel, and are bettered by the Light: and are
scarce sensible of either Savor or Power in Gods Ordinances, or of any
Improvement in, or of themselves thereby: or when they have not any free
Intercourses with God in Holy Duties, but ever find themselves to be deadned
and straightened in the Addresses of their Spirits to God in his Holy Ordinances,
of which their Jealousies are increased, by their being Conscious to themselves
of much Barrenness, Wantoness and Ingratitude, under their
Sanctuary-priviledges: Or when they are terrified with Storms and Tempests in
their own Breasts, through pressing Fears and multiplied Distractions. But here
let them consult Gods Word and Providence, and their own Consciences together:
and thus debate this Matter with themselves: What makes thee think O my Soul,
that God now hides his Face from thee? Is it, what is, and has been, common,
either to Mankind, or to the Generation of the Just; or something peculiar to
my self, and unusual to others? Is it any thing that can make it Evident, that
I either yet was never truly Gracious, or that Gods Grace is now Extinct in me?
Have I an Heart for God; and has he none for me? Is any thing inflicted on me,
inconsistent with Gods Saving Love to me? Have my Afflictions Deadned me to God
and Holiness, or cut off the Entail of his Covenant-Favours upon me? Are there
noe Cases and Instances of Gods Eclipsed Face, parallel to, or much beyond, my
own, to be discerned in Abraham, David, Job, Lot, Christ, or others? See James
5.10. Heb. 5.7, 9. Job's Friends got nothing but Reproofs from God, for their
inferring Gods Contempt of him, from what God laid on him.

It is much to be Observed, That Gods dearest Favorites have had the sharpest
Exercises, and great Darkness and Disconsolateness on their Spirits, at
sometimes or other; for the sensible Comforts and Refreshments of Religion, are
seldom found the Daily Fare of the exactest walkers with God under Heaven; and
yet how often are these Eclipses greatned by their Fancies or Follies? And then
by their Misrepresentations of God to themselves, how often, and much, is he
Dishonored by them? But let these things be well considered by Gracious Souls;
1. God does not always, nor ever, totally hide his Face from them whom he has
Changed and Transformed through Grace. 2. That when at any time it is hid from
them, it is not hidden in so much Wrath, but that Mercy shall prevail at last.
3. Nor can it ever be so dark with them, but that some Remedies and
Refreshments may be had, from the Name, the Son, and the Covenant; and from
that, of God within themselves, which they ought not to undervalue, overlook,
or to deny; or to quit the Acknowledgments and Comforts of. Nay, I may boldly
say it, that at the worst, more of Gods Face does or may appear to them, and
shine upon them, than is at any time hidden from them. I mean more of that Face
which is discernable here on Earth; for otherwise, it is but very little of
Gods Face, that the best Men see at most in this World, if compared with what
is to be manifested in Eternity unto the Heirs of Glory. And therefore, is it
yet a shameful thing, both to be pitied and blamed in gracious Persons, that
every intermission or retreat of sensible Joys and Favors, shall so enrage
their Fears and Sorrows, as that Gods tenderness and faithfulness shall
presently be Arraigned: and his most gentle Discipline, heavily Censured,
strangely Agravated, extravagantly Resented, and most immoderatly Bemoaned by
them? Yea, and that before they have well understood what ails them, and unto
what degrees their so bemoaned Eclipse has reached? Come then my Soul, deal
fairly with thy Self and God, and tell me, what is it that God has now denied
thee? How far has God denied it? What of God is it, that thou once have seen,
but can not now? What hinders the present sight, or the recovery of what
before has been thy Strength and Joy? Do not mistake Gods Looks and Heart; nor
in a pet, charge God with what he is not guilty of: nor say too hastily; why
better with me formerly than now?

Direct. IV. Let him remove and shun, all that provokes God thus to hide his
Face, Isa. 59.1, 2. Lam. 3.39, 40. no Counsel nor Encouragement, will or can
avail that Soul for Trust or Conduct, which neglects its stated Work and Watch,
which God enjoins it to, and expects from it. The Spots and negligences of Gods
own People are displeasing to him: and he will turn his Face away from what he
loathes and hates. Many a dreadful frown and glance from God had David, when he
had defiled his Soul and Body with Lust and Blood. The matter of Uriah left
that blot and sting upon him, and to his Family, which made it evident how
unsafe it is, for even gracious Souls, to play the wantons, Complaints and
Prayers can neither expiate, nor commute for those miscarriages and neglects
which God forbids and hates: nor will it be found sufficient, that we make some
enquiries after God, or pathetical and mournful declamations against our
selves, if any sins lie near our hearts, and prove predominant in our
conversations. The Crimes whereby we have disgusted God must be repented of,
detested and rejected. He that would trust in God, and gain the views and
comforts of his Face, should thoroughly hate, deeply resent, and carefully watch
against what God can take no pleasure in, but has entered his protest against,
repent and do thy first Works, was grave and sober Counsel, Rev. 2.5. Begin
then with thy self, and end with God; and work thy self up to his Will, and
thou shall see his Face with Joy. Sin will raise Clouds and Storms, and cause
no small Eclipses of Gods Face, where ever it enters, is countenanced, and
prevails. An heavenly Mind and Life must be recovered, exercised, and
preserved; and practical resolutions must be renewed and kept in their
inviolable vigor, whither God sensibly smile or not upon us. Who ever mourns
not over, and watches not against what God abhors, will find his seeing Gods
Face with Joy, to be too strange and great a Miracle to be expected from him.
He that contemns the ways and will of God, can look for nothing but to be
contemned by him, 1 Samuel 2.30. the Laws of Peace and Favor must be kept. Sins
must be broken off by Righteousness and Repentance; or else Gods Face is to be
seen no more.

Direct. V. Let him consider well how far God is unchangeably the God of
gracious Souls, Psalm. 89.30, 34. Levit. 26.40, 45. the Tenor of Gods Covenant
is to be studied thoroughly, and well understood, to prevent extravagant or
defective trust. It Is true Gods promises are large, and his relation fixed,
Psalm. 84.11. Isa. 41.10. God will be so far always theirs, as to be ever
mindful of them, and of his Covenant with them, to be duly provident for their
good, so as to prevent all that may truly harm and ruin their resigned Souls
and Persons, Romans 8.28. and 2 Cor. 16.9. to be truly, though wisely
compassionate toward them in all their dejections and temptations, 1 Cor.
10.13. Mich. 7.18. Isa. 30.19. and 41, 17. He will neither over-burthen them,
over-work them, nor overlook them; and he will be always so far theirs, as to
exemplify the Power and Riches of his All-sufficient Grace and Goodness in
them, Romans 9.23. and 2 These. 1.10, 12. God will refine and save their Souls,
renew their Strength, and cloth them with his Righteousness and Salvations:
and give them such Encouragements and Supports as may be needful for their
present State and Work, Isa. 40.31. and 2 Cor. 4.16, 18. Col. 1.11, 12. and 1
These. 5.23, 24. Let them but act like gracious Persons, and all Grace shall
abound toward them, and he will see that their Integrity and Uprightness
preserve them, whilst therein they wait on him. Pardoned Sins, refined Souls,
accepted Services, Prayers and Persons, with great Victories, Tryumphs, and
Salvations at the last. Gods Spirit in them, his Presence with them, and his
Eternal Glory for them when time is folded up, and reckoned for: all these
shall joyfully convince them, in what respects, and to what purposes God is
immutably, and will be their God, Rom 8.31, 39. But if they look or hope that
God should be so far theirs, as to keep them from afflictions and the fiery
Trial: or to feast them continually with sensible consolations and clear views
of Heaven, and of his glorious Face, or immediately to give them what they ask,
at their discretion: or to prevent all manner of perturbations in their Souls,
and all distempers in their Bodies, Brains, and Fancies: or to redress
miraculously what may be cured and relieved otherwise, they have no promise for
this. For where has God engaged that Grace must do the Work that is consigned
to natural means; or that Miracles must effect what an established Course of
ordinary means may bring Men to? Even in the sealing Age, when Miracles were so
multiplied, we find that ordinary means were used in their just extent. Moses
must send for Jethro, Cornelius must send for Peter, Philip must turn
Instructor and Interpreter to the Eunuch. Manna must only be continued until
the Israelites could Plow and Sow. Why then should any one conclude that God
has hid his Face, unless unreasonable and extraordinary expectations be
accomplished? If Parts be weak: if Gifts be mean, if Memory be frail through
disadvantages of Age or Weakness, if passionate Fervours be abated through
those declensions which are entailed on Mortals by a settled decree: must we
infer from hence that God has hid his Face from us, and holds us for his
Enemies, unless he change the ordinary Course of Nature? And as to Soul
concerns and exercises: what if our Spirits be disquieted through the Soul or
expectation of sharp Trials and Distresses? What if Satan bluster in our Souls?
What if strange Suggestions like fiery Darts be cast into us? What if we be
strongly urged to such imaginations as God himself knows to be odious and
ungrateful to us? Must we from hence suspect or think that God disclaims us,
and renounces all his merciful relations and regards to us? Has God engaged
any where that our War with Satan shall end before we dye? Can militant
Christians be discharged from this warfare before they have finished their
Course? Whilst you resolve and strive you Conquer, and God abides your God,
till you give up the Cause, and fall in love with what your God abhors and
slights, see Heb. 4.14, 16. was not the great Jehovah, the God and Father of
the Lord Jesus Christ, as much in the extremities of his Agonies and Conflicts,
as either before, or after them? But he never was so much his God as to excuse
him from his bitter Cup, and his contest with the Devil and this World. The
same I may also say of Paul, 2 Cor. 12.7, 9. Gods Covenant, and not your
thoughts or hopes must tell how far.

Direct. VI. Let him consider and improve what God affords to help and quicken
trust in him, Psalm. 27.9. Romans 15.4, 13. God has his part, and Man has his,
to do; not that God needs him, but because he has laid him under Law unto
himself, and suited his remediating Duties to his Faculties and Circumstances.
Trust is a compounded Act and Duty, made use of assent, consent, and reliance,
and it respects veracity, goodness, and fidelity in the object trusted in. Let
then the gracious Soul look upon God as fit and willing to be trusted in: as
actually engaged and concerned for him, when he is his God, and as faithful,
when thus related and engaged. For God both can and will effect all that he
undertakes; yet he expects that gracious Souls shall fix their deepest thoughts
upon what he has given them to fix and raise their trust upon. Idleness does
no good, the thinking and industrious, and resolved Soul, thrives much, whilst
mere complainers cheat and dispirit themselves and trouble others, dishonor
God, and scandalize and dishearten Men. It is here as it is in Nature; God
feeds us, he clothes and keeps us: and we trust in him to do so for us; but if
we be not provident and diligent in the well ordering and improvement of the
helps and benefits, and instructions which God affords us in and by second
Causes: and so, expect that Manna come not only down from Heaven, but that it
also fall into our Mouths; we may easily turn this trust into presumption, and
starve our selves, in the midst of Manna round about us. So, he that expects
God should miraculously inspire trust into him, without the intervenient use of
his own faculties in the improvement of those helps which God affords, will
find such hopes and trust fitter to be rebuked and frustrated, than to be
gratified and fulfilled. He that would trust in the Lord as his God, is to
consider. 1. Whom he is to trust in, the Lord. 2. For what he is to trust in
him, that he may either see his Face again, or be supported and preserved under
the Eclipses of it. 3. Why he is to trust in him, because of his own
necessities, and Gods Power and Fidelity to help him: and the encouragements
God gives him. 1. Think then O gracious Soul, what a God thou have to trust in.
God All-sufficient, Genesis 15.1. and 17.1. Now Gods All Sufficiency lies (as far
as we can know it yet) in the vast reaches of his infinite Wisdom, In the
unboundedness of his Power, for it is Omnipotent, and in the Riches of his
Goodness, which knows no bounds in the expressions and efforts thereof, but the
inviolable harmony of his own Blessed Name and Nature, who works all things
after the Counsels of his own Will, and the Capacities of his Favorites, Ephesians.
1.11. God has an heart to do thee good, for he is Love, and Goodness is his
Nature and Delight, Jer. 9.24. and 1 John 4.16. Now Love is Communicative and
diffusive of it self in all such instances and expressions, as the Case and
Circumstances of the beloved object may require, Jer. 31.3. Hos. 2.19, 20.
Hence you may see Gods Paraphrase upon this attribute; and his most Copious
explication of it, in Exodus 34.6, 7. Love pities Favorites in their miseries
and self-bemoanings, Jer. 31.18, 20. Love helps them in their straits, Isa.
63.8, 9. Love supplies them in their wants, Phil. 4.19. Love hears their cries,
Phil. 4.6, 7. and 1 Pet. 3.12. Love emboldens, delivers, and preserves them,
and commands all within its Reach and Empire to befriend and serve them, to all
these purposes, and in all these ways that are most suitable to it self and
them, Isa. 61.1, 3. Can thou not therefore trust in him, who without any
violence or repugnancy to himself, is so propense to do thee good? Let then the
Love and Goodness of thy God come into thy fresh remembrances, and most lively
thoughts, that so thy trust in him may be encouraged and spirited hereby. How
greatly are we reconciled and quickened to place our confidence, where Love is
most predominate and natural? For thy great mercies sake, thou did not
utterly consume them, nor forsake them; for thou art a gracious and merciful
God. Now therefore our God, who keep Covenant and Mercy, let not all our
trouble (Hebr. weariness) seem little before thee, that has come upon us,
says Neh. 9.31, 32.

And as God has an heart to do thee good; so he has wisdom to contrive and
manage the means and methods of his purposed and free Goodness, Ephesians. 1.8. Now
to him that is able to keep you -- to the only wise God, Jude 24.25. and 1 Timothy
1.17. God guided the wandering Israelites under the Wilderness, Eclipses of his
Face, by the Skilfulness of his Hands, Psalm. 78.72. God best knows when to show
his Face, to what degrees, and how. He sees what ails, and what will help thee,
he is no stranger to thy gloominess and droopings; he understands wherein, how
far, and upon what accounts thou so lamentest his withdrawments from thee, and
what these manifestations of himself are, which will afford the best relief to
thee. He cannot overlook the proper Article of time, wherein those friendly
Aspects and Appearances which thou covetest so much, will most befriend and
serve thee, the best Men have a Complication of Soul Distempers in them, and
those Divine Discoveries which might relieve them in their droopings, may (when
desired by them, were they but then afforded) possibly make them proud or
careless. However, possibly God has not sufficiently served those purposes to
which thy doleful present exercise is directed: and so the birth might prove
too hasty to be perfect, were it produced when desired by thee. Job little knew
(and all his confident pressing Friends as little) what God was doing by those
so rigid usages whereto that Holy patient Person was exposed. God has more
Souls and things to mind than one, and he will make every part and instance of
his Grace and Goodness to harmonize each with other, and is it not more
desirable to every resigned Soul to God, to abide in this darkness for a while,
than to have the Course and Methods of Gods orderly proceedings disordered and
disturbed, for the mere pleasing of some precipitant desires? Let God alone,
and turn not a censurer of his dealings, till thou can comprehend his whole
Design upon his whole Creation, his Family, and on thy Self, and let it suffice
thee, that infinite Wisdom is concerned and engaged for thee: and trust him
more, for thou may safely do it, because he is, infinitely wiser than thy
self; and knows best when to hide, and when to show his Face.

God has Ability and Authority, as well as an Heart and Wisdom to relieve and
Favor thee, Jude 24. and 2 Cor. 9.8. He shall be holden up, for God is able to
make him stand, Romans 14.4. He is the God of Power, Job. 42.2. He can revive or
damp thy Spirit at his pleasure, Job 34.29. so that there can be no suspicion
of impotence or inability with him. He that made Heaven and Earth can succor
drooping Hearts, and he that revives this Sense of God upon him, will find his
trust in God more sweet and easy.

2. Think also what thou art now allowed to trust him with, and for, 1 Pet.
4.19. even with thy whole self: and with all that can concern the Church, the
World, and thee. Wisdom for Conduct, Power for due Deliverances, and
Protections, and Salvations, and Grace, and Comforts to bear thee up under
Burdens and Temptations; and to furnish thee to every good Word and Work: and
to carry thee safe to everlasting rest: and for the wise and happy issue of
every Duty, Burden, and Temptation, may thou firmly trust in God. But be
sure to trust to him for nothing (as far as thou can learn or know it) that
is unworthy of God to give, and unfit for thee to ask or have. But this you may
trust him for, that he hide nothing of that Face from thee, without which thou
can not be an holy and an happy Person: and that he lay nothing on thee unto
the prejudice of thy best affairs: and that he never be defective in ministering
those supplies to thee, which his own Glory, the credit of Religion, the
public Good, and the great Duties of thy Place and Station do require: And
that he never call the out to any thing beyond thy Strength and Furniture: but
that he suit thy Strength and Spirit unto the Work and Burdens of thy Place
and Day, 1 Cor. 10.13. God will not be offended at thee for such trust as this;
supposing thy devotedness, and thy due diligence and prudence in the choice and
using of all meet Subordinate means and helps, and thy fervent cries to him.

3 Think upon those Encouragements which God has given to this trust, Isa,
26.3, 4. Psalm. 112.7. thou have Gods Promises and Engagements, Heb. 6.17, 18.
and 2 Pet. 1.3, 4. Heb. 10.23, 24. Psalm. 119.75, 76. and these are certain,
suitable, large and precious; and the genuine product of infinite, generous,
and resolved Love. Thou have those near and dear Relations which God has
assumed and owns to thee, an Husband, Father, King, etc. Isa. 54.5, 10. 2 Cor.
6.18. Rev. 21.7. Thou have the exhibition of his own Son Jesus Christ, Heb.
10.19. and 23.4. and 14, 16. and 2.17, 18. John 6.39, 40. 1 Pet. 1.3, 21. Romans
8.32, 35. Thou have the earnest of the indwelling Spirit, Ephesians. 1.13, 14. and 2
Cor. 5.5. and of that new Nature which he has formed and cherished in thee, as
in 2 Timothy 1.7. Romans 8.15, 23, 28. thou have a sealed Covenant with Sacramental
confirmations, and experiences of prosperous trust both in others and thy self,
Psalm. 9.10. Romans 15.4. Dan. 3.28. Heb. 11.

Do then as David did: Infer from known experience all that may strengthen
regular Confidence; for thus did he, Psalm. 32.7, 10. and thus did Paul, 2 Cor.
1.8, 10. The Lord is my Shield and Strength: my Heart trusted in him, and I am
Helped, Psalm. 28 7. And thou have the Glory of thy God concerned in the
prosperousness of thy Trust, Ephesians. 1.12. Romans 4.20. And now to close up all;
Why such manifold Encouragements to Trust in God, if they were either Vain or
Needless? And how can any keep up their Trust in God, without their deep and
sober Thoughts about, and their intent and most deliberate Pauses on these
weighty things upon Record, which God has left, to Justify and Encourage your
Trusting in him? It is both Strange and Sad, to see many Christians come to
their Ministers with Complaints, or put up Bills for Prayers in Congregations:
and to desire Solemn Days to be set apart for them, whilst they rest only here:
as if they looked to be comforted and supported by some Charm or Miracle; they
look to be healed by a Word; and they neglect their own Work; they do not
search into themselves, that they may know whether or no, the Grace of God has
made them capable of Trusting in the Lord as their God. They bring not their
Calamities and Dejections to the Test, that they may clearly know under what
hand of God they are cast; and how far God has hid his Face from them; and how
far, not. God enters not into their close and serious Thoughts, that they may
plainly see and know what there is in him, to draw their Spirits forth to Trust
in him: Nor will they studiously revive that Sense of God upon themselves,
whereby their Trust in him may be Engaged, Established and Emboldned; and yet
they cry, What shall we do to Trust in the Lord as our God? Why Sirs, I will
tell you what to do, 1. See that your Interest in God be cleared up; this you
may know by the prevalency of your Desires, Pursuits and Satisfactions, and by
the Practical Resignments of your selves to him. 2. See what this Interest in
God refers, viz. Nothing is desperately lost at present: and all will be well
at last; and that all lies safe that can concern you, see Psalm. 23.1, 4. The
truth is, all that can be grateful, great and sure, may be inferred from hence.
3. Accommodate and apply what you infer, as skilfully and faithfully as you
can, to your distressing and discouraging Case and Circumstances; there are
Histories to tell us what God has done; and there are Doctrines to tell us,
what God is, and can do; and there are Precepts and Instructions to direct us,
what we are to do: in what Cases, upon what Grounds and Reasons, and to what
Ends and Purposes we may Trust in God; and God has given us marks to know what
Interest we have in him; and a Directory and Helps to get it, if we have it
not; and he has showed us fully and plainly what it is, and what at last it
will amount to, to want or have this Interest in himself; and when as we have
gotten it, he has taught us how to apply it fitly, and how to bear our Spirits
up in Hope and Trust thereby: and after all this, and much more, shall we be
negligent and lazy, and cry out like Fools and Drones, We know not how to Trust
in God, nor whether he be Ours or not? let us not thus abuse our selves.

4. Think on these Means and Helps, whereby we may attain to an Ability and
Faculty of Trusting in God: and let them be most Faithfully improved; such as
the Word, Sacraments, Sabbaths, Conferences, Meditation, upon the Word and
Works of God; but these need no Enlargements on them; and my Limits are
transgrest already.

READER, Expect not Accuracy here; I am very sensible of many Imperfections in
this Sermon; I am separated from my helps, having my Bible only, and my God, to
help me in my wandering Solitudes and Retirements; these things are what I have
discoursed with my own heart; and if some Censure them, others I hope will Pity
and Pray for me; and the God of Heaven accept and prosper these (though weak)
Endeavors.

I had some Inferences prepared, but because I would not be too tedious, I
forbear to add them, so as to Enlarge upon them. I will but mention these,

1st Infer. Hence it follows, That Humane Souls are Excellent and Capacious
Principles and Beings.

2d Infer. Graceless Sinners are under dark and dreadful Circumstances, when
God Afflicts, and hides his Face from them; they need not say, Why cast down --
so much? but rather, why not more?

3d Infer. Excellent is the Temper and Condition that Grace puts Men's Souls
into: in that they are enabled, prompted and directed, to such ways, to know
and help themselves.

4th Infer. Right and due Thoughts of God do mighty Service to the Gracious
Soul, in all the Eclipses and Distresses that do or can befall it.

Psalm. 42.11.

Infer. I. Man's Soul is a Noble and Capacious Being, Mark 8.36, 37. It is
called by Solomon, the [ Lamp, or] Candle of the Lord, searching all the Inward
parts of the Belly, Prove. 20.27. It is the great Treasure that ought to be
kept, and used well; for out of it are the Issues of Life, Prove. 4.23. Its Joys
and Bitternesses lie deep within it self, and they are not be intermedled with
by Strangers, Prove. 14.10. The Countenance of a Man is but the Index of his
Spirit: it is in the Soul that Joys and Sorrows Center and Seat themselves,
Prove. 15.13. Many Infirmities or Distresses may easily be undergone by a sound
Heart: but if the Spirit it self be wounded, how dreadful are its Wounds! Prove.
18.14. The Spirit of Man is Gods Vicegerent; and a great Mirror of himself;
and as it Accuses and Condemns, when it well understands and minds it self, so
it is the Vail and Representative of its God unto it self, in Romans 2.15. and 1
John 3.19, 21. It can (you see) both Summon in, and Search it self; It can both
Challenge and Discourse it self; It can Command, Reprove, Exhort, Encourage,
Enlarge, Restrain, it self; It can Arraign its Temper, Principles, Purposes,
Actions, Sufferings and Designs: and make it self Inquisitor, Judge, Jury,
Witness, and Executioner, to it self. It can look every way, and make both
Heaven and Earth, good things and bad, some way or other Serviceable to its own
Concern: and turn all the Memorials and Notices of its God, to
Self-improvements and Relief. It is capable of Moral Government, and of full
Joys and Sorrows, Congenial with its Contracted Principles, Temper and
Behavior, here; It is capable of Converse and Communion with its God; of Grace
and Comfort, Heaven or Hell. It can perceive its own Distresses and Concerns:
Enjoy the best things, and Improve the worst: and so Consider all things, as to
Accept, Refuse, Approve, Condemn; and so resolve upon, or wave a matter, as it
sees to be most fit; nor needs it to truckle under any thing but Guilt and
Wrath, when plunged thereinto by its own Folly and Neglect. The Text here shows
you what the Soul of Man can do; and if it be replied, That David's Soul it was
Gracious: and that Grace only brought it thus to be Disciplined and Tutoured by
it self: It Is Answered, That Grace can have no such effects on Stones and
Bruits, which Grace and diligent Care might make good use of: And all Souls
might do thus with, and by, themselves, did they not by Sin degrade themselves.
For all Souls have Imperative, Directive and Active Powers.

Infer. II. Graceless Sinners are under dreadful Circumstances when Troubles
comes upon them, Romans 2.8, 9. Isa. 50.11. and 57.20, 21. and 10.3. and 33.14.
For when their Miseries surprise and overflow them, should they then say, Why
so disquieted and cast down? They have that within them which will rather say,
Oh why disquieted no more, seeing there is so little ground of Hope from God? 1
These. 5.3. All is so Vile and Foul within them; and all so Frightful and
Amazing to them; whether they look within, about them, or above them, as that
the greatest wonder is, How they escape Distractions. Souls so neglected and
degraded, and every way Devoted to the Will and Service of the Devil! Such
manifold and mighty Sins abounding in and from them! and such great Wrath to be
Inflicted on them! such clear and numerous Presages of fearful Storms
approaching toward them! such an Inhabitant and Tyrant as Satan, to make them
do, be, lose and slight even any thing, but what they should! A God so much
Incenst against them, and every way so Resolved and Engaged to Ensnare and Ruin
them! And their own Spirits, amidst all this, so much estranged from, uneasy
in, so frightful to, and so much at variance with themselves (so as that they
never can be Reconciled to themselves again.) Why! should not these Souls be
disquieted and cast down, when Troubles come upon them, like Messengers with
these heavy Tidings from the God of Heaven, That they shall see his Face no
more? What Succor, Hope or Refuge, has the Dejected Soul, but God? What
Sanctuary is there for it, in its Storms and Chases, but the All-sufficient
Jehovah? And how can Mercy and Redresses be expected from him, whom they can no
way comfortably call their God, whilst as yet unconverted Persons? They have
neither Encouragement nor an Heart to seek him acceptably and successfully,
Prove. 1.24, 31. Their present Troubles are but the Harbingers and Foretasts of
Eternal and Unmixed Wrath to come. Providence serves the Writ, and gives the
Summons. Conscience confounds and holds the Prisoner fast, under the seizures
of Gods Providence. Justice draws up the Bill against them; and Vengeance fixes
them to their Wracks; and they have nothing left them but their Fearful
Expectations and Reproaches, Heb. 10.26, 31. Deuteronomy. 32.37. Let these Men Read,
Job 18.7, 21. and 27.8, 9.

Infer. III. Excellent is the Case and Temper of Gracious Souls, in 2 Cor.
1.12. Phil. 1.20. Isa. 41.10, 17. A good Heart within them: A clear Way before
them: A good God for them: A good Understanding of their Case and State: And
such Encouraging Refreshments and Supports, so ready for them at their Call,
when truly needful to them: What greater requisites than these can we mention
and propose unto our selves, to render our Condition easy, safe and happy,
here? What need we more, to calm and cheer up our disturbed Spirits with? Romans
8.31, 39. and 2 Cor. 12.7, 9. The God! my God! the health of my Countenance!
and, One that yet is to be praised by me? And therefore One that I must fully,
and may safely Hope in! Why may not these things bear a Gracious Spirit up, and
quicken and embolden it to bid defiance to all Attempts which Earth or Hell can
make, to ruin and unhinge it? The Gracious Soul, as such, is fit for any thing;
and it is Entitled to the greatest Blessings from its God, and in due Season
shall possess them; what God by Grace has made and brought it to, renders it
fit for Gods great Blessings and Supports: And what God promises, it may safely
trust to, and confidently rely upon. The Text here shows you what the Gracious
Soul can do; it can restrain it self from its immoderate Sorrows, by its
faithful dealing with it self; and by making a right Judgment upon whatever
does at any time befall it; and as there is something in it apt to raise Storms,
and vexatious Resentments of its Pressures and Afflictions: So are there
certain Principles, and a Seed of God within them; and that in God above them,
and before them, which will not always suffer their Sorrows and Dejections to
transgress their stated Bounds and Rules: because the composed and still Soul
is fittest for Communion with God, Hope in him, Service to him, and Consolation
from him. See here how narrowly David observed himself: How skilfully he
discoursed himself; how powerfully he restrained himself; and how readily he
could and did Enlarge, Encourage, and Exalt himself; you may discern in him,
that Grace will not admit of, nor Countenance any unfit Reflections upon God;
it will not fall heavily with its Censorious Carpings upon his Providence, nor
in an Angry Pet of Frowardness and Impatience, fall out with him: It threatens
no Revenge to Evil Men; it will not flee to Sinful Shifts and Refuges: neither
is any thing Chidden, Cited or Arraigned, but the disquieted and disturbed
Spirit; and yet even here, it is not so much Clamourous and Impatient, as it is
Inquisitive after, and resolved upon its Regular Self-redress. If any thing ail
it or afflict it, it minds the Grounds, the Measures, and the Effects thereof,
upon it self. Stupid indeed it is not; for it feels Gods Hand upon it.
Immoderate or Careless in its Griefs it will not be; for it will call its
Sorrows and it Self unto the Test and Bar, and there impartially examine all
its Pressures, its Sense of them, and its Behavior under them: nor will it
sullenly be neglectful of it self in Troubles; for it will urge it self to all
Just Observations and Improvements of its best Helps and Remedies: and when it
finds that only hope in God must bear it up, and succor it; Oh then how
copiously and closely is the Name of God considered by it? I shall yet Praise
him: the Health of my Countenance, and my God. If it be forced abroad (as Holy
David now was) to Sorrowful Wanderings, Solitudes, and Retirements; its very
Privacies shall be spent in pertinent Soliloquies; and so, be improved to its
own best advantage; and consequently be made to turn to very good account at
last. It is and will be provident for Soul-good, where e're it is, and what
ever it is called to undergo. And when upon impartial search, it finds (as it
will quickly do) that no Relief can be expected but from and by Hope in God;
how prevalent are its Gracious Principles and Instincts, in carrying it to look
much higher than it self for Help? Nor will it ever look upon its Case as
desperate and lost remedilesly, whilst there is room and ground for Hope in God
to help it; yet is it orderly and calm in its Procedures: for it first talks
with it self, and then looks up to God; and though it be difficult to disperse
and quell its Griefs and Sorrows when they are gathered to an head, yet Duty is
Duty, Hot or Cold; and it is not difficulty that can divorce the Gracious Soul
therefrom. It can find work in Storms and Trials, for all its Faculties,
Principles and Graces, and they must vigorously perform their Functions, to
serve those weighty Turns and Purposes which so much concern the exercised
Soul: And it well knows, and does consider it as wisely, that Storms and
Tumults of this Nature are never truly laid; nor the afflicted Soul refreshed
either by transient and hasty, or by hard Thoughts of God; and it is its
happiness and support, that it has a God to flee to, an Heart to Hope in him,
and to Praise him: and an Interest in God, and a Covenant of Promises from God,
to encourage Hope in God.

Infer. IV. O what Refreshments do a due sense and lovely Thoughts of God,
afford to Gracious Souls under their Troubles and Disquietments! 2 Timothy 4.18. O
let those passages be Read considerately, in Lam. 3.21, 36. It is in Gods
Gracious Name (so solemnly proclaimed in Exodus 34 6, 7.) that Gracious Souls
may Act themselves, when all things shake and fail about them, and their Hearts
tremble in them, Joel 3.16. Here is that Anchor which must stay the Soul, and
hold its Hope, when all the Seas of its Concerns and Thoughts are most sevearly
pressed and broken by Storms and Tempests in it, and about it. Good Thoughts of
God will make us cheerfully to endure Afflictions, and to Improve the worst
Condition, Psalm. 42.7, 8. and 43.1, 2. David here found Relief when all things
else proved Miserable Comforters to him. The Sorrows of Death compassed me
about: the Pains of Hell got hold upon me: I found Trouble and Sorrow; then
called I upon the Name of the Lord, O Lord deliver my Soul. And what was his
Encouragement? Gracious is the Lord, and Righteous: also our God is Merciful,
Psalm. 116.3, 7. And they that would cherish Hope in God, should not so much
resort to Sinai, as to Zion: and rather go to Gerizzim, than to Ebal, if they
would have such Thoughts of God as shall and will Encourage Hope in him. God
here was represented by David to himself, as His God, as the Health of his
Countenance, and as that God whom he should surely Praise: (whatever other Face
and Aspect were at present upon things) and by these things did he resolve
upon, awaken and refresh his Hope in God. If God be only set before our Eyes,
as Clothed with Vengeance; as an Inexorable and Severe Judge; and as upon the
Throne of Judgment, our Hopes will quickly turn to Desperation; and who can
possibly Hope in him, that takes him for his Enemy? But he that remembers and
minds God, as Love it self, as ready to Commiserate the Cases of his Afflicted
Servants: and as One waiting to be Gracious, and ready to Forgive, Hear, Heal
and Save: this Man gets presently upon the Wing, and freely throws himself, as
at the Feet of Mercy, and can more easily part with his Life, than with his
Hope in God, Job 13.15.

And now (to give no Check to your Patience by my Prolixity) let me close all,
and drive the matter home, if possibly I may, and Exhort you to these things,

Exhort. I. Keep up all Amiable and Attracting Thoughts of God, in all your
Troubles and Disquietments, Mic. 7.18, 20. Thus did this Gracious Person in my
Text. Have Mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindness: according to
the multitude of thy tender Mercies blot out my Transgressions, Psalm. 51.1. and
119.75, 76. Nothing can stint or bound Gods Mercies, nor check the Efforts, and
sensible Explications and Productions of Gods most Gracious Name, but the
culpable unfitness of your Souls to be receptive of his Royal Favors, Psalm.
85.8. Rejoice the Soul of thy Servant: for unto thee (O Lord) do I lift up my
Soul; for thou Lord art Good, and ready to Forgive: and plenteous in Mercy to
all them that call upon thee. O God, the Proud are risen against me. But thou
Lord art a God full of Compassion, and Gracious, Long-suffering, and Plenteous
in Mercy and Truth. O turn to me, and have Mercy upon me, Psalm. 86.4, 5, 14,
16. The Gracious Soul can never Justify its own Despondencies: for take it
under its severest Pressures from Evil Men and Things, (let it but Act still
like it self) and it has more causes for Consolation, than for Dejectedness, 2
Cor. 6.10. Think not that God forgets or hates thee, because thy bitter Cups
are not to be dispensed with. We are Troubled on every side, yet not
Distressed; Perplexed, but not in Despair; Persecuted, but not Forsaken; Cast
down, but not Destroyed, 2 Cor. 4.8, 9. Sing therefore (O ye Saints of his)
unto the Lord; give Thanks to the Memorial of his Holiness. For his Anger is
but for a Moment; in his Favor is Life: and Weeping may endure for a Night,
but Joy comes in the Morning, Psalm. 30.4, 5. And He that is our God, is the God
of Salvation, Psalm. 68.20. Think on him therefore as Infinitely Aimable, Trusty
and Compassionate; for were not his Fideliey, Inviolable, his Mercy and Grace
exceeding Rich, and his Compassionate Bowels deep, how could these Characters
of Excellence which he Imprints upon the Gracious Soul, be called his Image?
It Is Blaspemy against the Grace and Goodness of your God, and a flat
Contradiction to all the Endearing Accounts which he has given you of his
Grace and Clemency, for you to think him Careless or Cruel, Inaccessible and
Inexorable or False.

Exhort. II. Bless God for Jesus Christ, by whom we are brought to this Relief,
and our Hope in God, 1 Pet. 1.3, 9. For Christ brought in this better Hope, by
which we thus draw nigh to God, Heb. 7.19. By Christ we have access by Faith
unto this Grace wherein we stand, and Rejoice in hope of the Glory of God, and
can Rejoice in Tribulation, as knowing, what Excellent Fruits they are now made
productive of, Romans 5.1, 5. see Ephesians. 1.11. and let those Two Chapters Engage
your deepest and most serious Thoughts. I cannot now stand to open them, least
I should grow too large.

When Sin had torn us from our God, and set his Face against us; how Dismally
did all things look about, and toward us, then! the Face of God was Terrible:
the Thoughts of God were Frightful and Amazing: the Way to God was blockt up
from us: and the Majesty of God was no where visible, but in the Presages and
Effects of Dreadful Jealousies and Revenges: till Christ arose, a Prince and
Savior, sent from God, to give a Glorious Resurrection to our dead and buried
Hopes; there was enough to cast and keep our Spirits down, and to Disquiet us
for ever; Infinite Wisdom to contrive our Snares and Miseries: Insuperable
Power to bind and keep us to our Torturing Wracks: Inflexibe and Inexorable
Justice (as to us) incenst and prompted by deep and keen Resentments of our
Degeneracies and Defections, to call for Rigid Satisfaction; and to Demand the
Absolute Resignation of our All, unto Divine Revenges: and the Concerns and
Glory of Gods disturbed Government, rendering it needful, that Gods Violated
Laws by us, be fully Executed on us, to cut off all Relief and Hope from us:
and nothing in our selves to be discerned, but what must Justify Divine
Severities and Revenges on us; and fit us for, and vex us in, that Sea of Wrath
and Fury which we expected, and over which we hung: Surely such things as
these, could not but make us every way Hopeless, Helpless, and Disconsolate,
and Wrack our Spirits to the utmost with Disquietudes and Dejections. But our
Hope dawned when Christ was promised and prefigured; and made its Advances by
gradual discoveries, toward the Glorious shining of that more perfect Day,
wherein the Sun of Righteousness arose with Healing under his Wings, in Mal.
4.2. with Isa. 50.10. And when the Lord Redeemer came, our Hope and Trust in
God was taught by his Doctrine: Enjoined and Regulated by his Laws: Sanctified
and illustrated by his Practice: Purchased by his Blood: Ingenerated and
Cherished by his Spirit: Confirmed by his Exhibited and Sealed Covenant, and
all his Federal Relations to us: Enforced and Encouraged by his Intercession
with the Father for us: and its Accomplishment undertaken and secured to the
full, by his most Glorious Resurrection and Ascension, 1 Pet. 1.21. And its
Success is to be visibly and completely full at his Appearance, and his
Kingdom; and hence Christ is called, The Blessed Hope, Tit. 2.13. So that with
most Tryumphant Thankfulness and Joy may we Cry out, If God be for us, who can
be against us? He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all:
How shall he not with him also freely give us all things? Who is he that
Condemns, seeing it is God that Justifies; and Christ that Died; yea rather,
that is Risen again; who is even at the Right Hand of God; who also makes
Intercession for us? Who, or what, shall separate us from the Love of Christ?
shall Tribulation or Distress? etc. Romans 8.31, 39. And what Acknowledgments to
God can bear proportion to so great a Gift as this, whereby our Hope and Trust
in God is thus Revived and Exalted? Col. 1.21, 27. View but the Face of God in
Christ, and let that Name of Christ be studied by you, in Isa. 9.6, 7. and then
see what can any way discourage you from Hope, or Trust in God; the Smiles of
Majesty, and the Supplies of Grace, which we Expect and Covet, are all from God
in Jesus Christ, Phil. 4.19. Epes. 3.19, 21. Christ is himself our Hope, and
the great Anchor of it, 1 Timothy 1.1. Hebr. 6.18, 20. And it is by him that God
so Reconciles us to himself; as to Encourage and Accept our Hope and Trust in
him, 2 Cor. 5.18, 21. Both Comforter, and Comforts, are through him, John 16.7,
22. And he is the Patron and Exemplar of our Hope in God.

Exhort. III. Look to your selves, least any way your Hope or Trust in God be
starved or stifled, or trodden down by you, Judge. 20.21. 2 Pet. 3.11, 14. and 1
John 3.3. Phil. 2.12, 13. If God make great Provisions to countenance, sustain
and raise, this Hope and Trust in him; must it not be our care and work to bear
our Spirits up in the Liveliest Exercise thereof? Let then my Text be Viewed
again; and see therein, how your Work lies before you; see that you mind your
Souls, and be more Conversant therewith than ever; see what you have to Trust
to, your God, and the Salvations of his Face or Presence; see that your Hope
and Trust be suited to the Grounds and Object thereof. Observe the Timings of
your Duty; then most repair to this your Hope and Trust, when Troubles and
Discouragements press most severely on you; and let your Spirits be Argued and
Urged hereto, by a due Sense of God, and by Motives drawn from him.

Quest. How the Religious of a Nation are the Strength of it? SERMON XXX.
The Text is, Isa. 6.13. But yet in it shall be a Tenth, and it shall return,
and shall be eaten: as a Teil-Tree, and as an Oak whose substance is in them
when they cast their Leaves: so the Holy Seed shall be the Substance thereof.
The Prophet was sent with heavy Tidings to the People.

1. OF Spiritual Judgments like to befall them, blindness of Mind, and hardness
of Heart to which they should be left, (the most dreadful Plague on this side
Hell) verse 9.10.

2. Of Temporals to, verse 11, 12. until the Cities be wasted without
Inhabitant, etc. God many times seconds Spiritual Judgments with Temporal; they
that are under the former, can not be secure against the latter: they that are
insensible of the one may be made to feel the other. But lest it should make
the hearts of the few Righteous among them over sad, and should prove in the
event a temptation to despair, and deject instead of humbling them, he has a
more comfortable message put into his mouth; some glad tidings to balance the
evil. Saints sometimes tremble at those truths in which others are most
concerned, and wicked Men that should most fear them, least regard them. This
verse therefore brings a Cordial for the Saints, as the four former did a
bitter Dose for the ungodly among them. A gracious promise we have here of a
remnant to be left in the midst of; and after the dismal calamities before
threatened. But yet in it shall be a tenth, etc.

In it,] In the Land, mentioned verse 11, 12.

A tenth,] A definite number for an indefinite: a tenth, i. e. a small remnant,
a few in comparison of the whole Body of the Inhabitants. It was a severe
punishment among the Romans; when, for some great miscarriages in their Armies,
they would decimate the offending Legions, put every tenth Man to Death. But
here is a more sormidable severity, when God would destroy nine parts, and save
only a tenth, they that were cut off, should be far more than they that were
delivered.

It shall return and be eaten,] Either, as some, return from its Captivity, and
be Inhabited again, and fed upon again. Or, as others, it shall be eaten, i. e.
consumed, or removed, or burnt, the Hebrew Word will bear any of these
Interpretations; Returning then must signify, by an usual Hebraism, the
Iteration of the thing mentioned, the Repetition of the Judgment, and so to
return and be eaten, is to be eaten again, or consumed again, which here must
be understood of the remaining tenth. If we take it in this sense, it is not
unlike that of Zack. 13.8, 9. where two Parts are to be cut off, and die, and
the third to be left, and then that third Part is to be brought through the
fire. If we thus understand the words, the former part of the verse is rather a
threatening than a promise, which yet I conceive the whole to be; and so it is,
if we take this clause in the former sense.

As a Teil-Tree, and as an Oak whose substance is in them,] What the Trees here
mentioned are, whether the same with those that are so called with us, or any
other peculiar to those Countries, as expositors are not agreed, so we are not
much concerned to enquire. It is more material to see what is meant by
Substance, and their Substance being in them. (...) the word here rendered
Substance is translated by some statio, locatio, standing, or placing agreeably
to the Root, from whence it is derived by some statumen, Pagn. (...) Tremel.
Mercer.
by others, it is taken for the Trunk of the Tree; or, as our Margin, the
Stock, or Stem. The word is sometimes taken for a Statue, or standing Image;
sometimes for a Pillar, so Genesis 35.20. the Pillar of Rachels Grave, and
Absaloms Pillar, 2 Samuel 18.18. I take it in the second translation, for the
Stock or Body of the Tree, which yet is not much different from the last, the
Trunk or upright part of a Tree, being that which most resembles a Statue, or
Pillar.

Whose Substance is in it,] whose Stock, or Trunk is in the Tree, remains to
it, still abides and continues, and so it is opposed, to that which follows,
its casting its Leaves.

When they cast their Leaves, (...) in their casting; Leaves, is not in the
Original, but supplied by the Translators. Some take the word for a proper Name
of a Place, 1 Cron. 26.16. mention is made of a Gate belonging to the Temple
called Shallecheth, where they say there was a Cawseway leading up to the
Temple, which they suppose Planted with Trees on both sides, which not only
beautified the Place, but strengthened it, the Roots of the Trees knitting and
keeping up the Earth which had been there cast up to make the way. This may
have a good Sense, if the words in the Original will bear it. I conceive our
own Translation, (with which others agree) to be best, when they cast their
Leaves, and so the opposition is clear between the standing of the Stock and
the falling of the Leaves, and it notes the Strength, firmness, and lastingness
of the Tree it self, though it lose its present Beauty, and Verdure. The state
lie Trees may cast their Leaves, but then their Trunks continue firm, and
fast in the Earth, which may afterward Spring and Flourish afresh.

The Holy Seed,] Or, Seed of Holiness, by an usual Hebraism: so a godly Seed,
or Seed of God, Mal. 2.15. I doubt not but it is to be understood of the really
religious, or righteous among that People, who are indeed the only true Seed of
God, which others only seem to be.

Shall be the Substance thereof,] The Body of the People are here compared to a
Tree, the Holy Seed to the Stock or Stem of it, the rest to the Leaves. A Tree
in Winter casts its Leaves, the Sap retiring toward the Root, but yet still the
Stock remains firm, and unmovable, and the Sap that is in it will afterward
cause it to shoot forth a new: the Tree though bare, is not dead, it has lost
its Leaves, but not its Life. So when carnal Men, and common professors drop
away, like Leaves from a Tree, in the Winter of affliction; or, as withered
Bows and Branches, are broken off by the violence of persecutions, and storms
of worldly troubles; then the Holy Seed, the truly religious among them, are
like the Trunk of the Tree which is not blown down, nor rooted up, but still
continues, still lives, and is like to Flourish again. What is here spoken of
the Jews is not peculiar to them, but may likewise be affirmed of other
professing People, the great staple privileges of the Church, being the same
both in Jews then, and Gentiles now: The Seed of God is the Stock, whether Jews
or Gentiles be the Branches; there may be a change in the Branches, but not in
the Stock; that is still the same when wild Branches are grafted in, as it was
before the natural were cut off.

The Doctrine I observe from the words thus explained, is in answer to the
question propounded.

Doct. That the truly religious of a Nation are (under God) the strength of it.
What I shall say of this Doctrine may be reduced to these Heads; I shall show.

1. What we are to understand by the Religious of a Nation. 2: How, and in what
respects they may be said to be its strength. 3. Upon what accounts. 4. Make
application of it to practice.
1. Who are the Religious of a Nation.

1. Negatively.

1. I understand not the religious here in a Popish Sense, for those that are
under a religious Vow, or in a religious Order, this is an abuse of the word,
and a restraining it to those that know little of the thing.

2. I do not restrain it to any particular party, or way, or persuasion even
among those, who, as to their profession, are really of the true Religion.
Though I am far from so loose and extravagant a Charity, as to judge that Men
may be saved in any Religion whatever, if they do but live suitably to the
Principles, and Rules of that Religion, when there are so many false, so many
Idolatrous ones, so many which deny fundamental truths, or maintain damnable
errors: Yet, on the other side, I am not so uncharitable as to confine true
religiousness, and consequently final Salvation to any particular sect or sort,
or party of Men professing Christianity to the exclusion of all that dissent
from them. True Religion is more affection and Practice, than Doctrine, or
Nation, and is seated more in the heart than in the head. Men may be really
gracious, and so in truth religious in Gods account, who yet differ in some
things from others who are no less truly religious too. There is indeed but one
true Religion in the World, but in that, we must distinguish between principles
and conclusions, and those either nearer, or more remote, between fundamentals,
and superstructures, and those either which touch the foundation, or are
farther from it, between substance, and circumstances; things necessary or not
necessary, to the being, or to the well being of Religion. In some things they
that are wise, and godly, may differ without prejudice to the Salvation of
either. Every truth is not necessary to Salvation, nor is every error de facto
Damning. All Men's Light is not alike clear, nor are all Men's Minds equally
enlightened; some see more than others, and some more clearly; nor is every
degree of Light which shall be for the perfection of Saints hereafter,
necessary while they are here in order to their Salvation. There may be the
unity of Faith in the main, and of Love too, where yet there is some
disagrement about some things believed. It is confessed, that there is but one
way of Salvation, that of Faith and Holiness, from which whatever bypath of
error leads Men aside, they do at the same time carry them off from the end of
Faith, the Salvation of their Souls; whatever is inconsistent with either Faith
or Holiness, is inconsistent likewise with Salvation. But every difference, or
mistake about such truths as are not necessarily saving, must not presently be
looked upon as a false way, or an error certainly Damning. The way to Life is
called the narrow way, but is it therefore indivisible? Is there no Latitude in
it? may not Two, or Three, or Four, or Five, go abrest in it? Must all go in
the self-same Track or Path? May not several Paths be in the same great Road,
or run along by the side of it, and lead to the same place, which if sometimes
they decline a little from the Road, yet before the end, fall in again with it,
and for the main are parallel to it? It is as certain that truth is simplex,
error is multiformis, truth is but one, and error is various, and whatever in
the least deflects from truth must be a degree of error; as it is that there
can be but one perfectly strait Line between any two Points. But may not a Line
that divaricates a little from the strait one, and is so far crooked, run in
again to it? Does any Saint on Earth attain to the whole of truth, without any
mistake so much as in lesser things? Does any keep exactly to the strait Line,
so as never to take a crooked step, never in any thing to go off from it? Some
indeed may miss it in fewer things, some in more, and yet both, keeping to what
is necessary, hit it in the main. Some may go to Heaven more directly, and with
fewer wanderings, when others may go farther aside, and fetch a greater compass,
and yet at last arrive at it.

2. Positively, by Religious, I understand those.

1. Who as to the Doctrine of Christianity, hold the head, Col. 2.19. keep to
that only foundation which God has laid, the Lord Jesus Christ, though perhaps
they may build some things on it which are not suitable to it, Wood, Hay,
Stubble, 1 Cor. 3.12. such whose works shall be burnt, yet themselves saved,
though with difficulty, and as by Fire, verse 15. such I mean therefore as own
so much truth as is necessary to the Life of Faith, and Power of Godliness, and
maintain no error which is inconsistent with either.

2. Those who, as to the Practice of Christianity, fear God and work
righteousness, Acts 10.35. they that not only believe in Christ, but live in
obedience to him, not only have received Christ Jesus the Lord, but walk in
him. Col. 2.6. All true Religion consists in Faith, and Holiness, it is nothing
else but a glorifying God, by believing and obeying; a seeking Salvation in
that way, and method, in which alone God has determined to bring Men to it, i.
e. through sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the truth. 2 These. 2.13.
whoever therefore they are that do unfeignedly believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ, and live up to that Faith, are truly Religious, though in some lesser
things they may dissent from others, who have the same Faith, and practice the
same Holiness. So that from being thus religious, I exclude not only Atheists,
that have no Religion, Idolaters, damnable Heretics, and all those whose
principles are inconsistent with, or repugnant to the truth of the Gospel, and
so are of a false Religion; but even among those that profess the truth, I
exclude.

1. Those that are grossly ignorant, know not the first principles of
Christianity, understand not what they own, and pretend to believe.

2. Those that are profane, scandalous, vicious livers, despisers of them that
are good, persecutors of powerful godliness. These are not real Saints, but a
profane generation; the Seed of the Serpent, not of God. --

3. Hypocrites, masked professors, that make a show of Religion to serve a
carnal interest, that have a form of godliness, but deny the power of it. 2 Timothy 3.5. have unsound hearts though under never so smooth faces. In a word,
all those that are destitute of true Faith, and real Holiness, that allow
themselves in any way of known sins, whether more often, as the second sort, or
more secret and close as these last.

2. How, or in what respects the religious of a Nation are the strength of it.
In order to the stating of this, I shall premise one distinction: The Holy
Seed, or religious in a Nation may be considered, either,

1. As being actually in the World, and actually in a state of Grace; brought
into Christ's Fold, engaged in Gods ways, effectually called and sanctified.

2. Or, as being in the World, but not yet converted, though in Gods time to be
converted; elect unbelievers. He that is a sinner at present, may be a Saint in
time; a Publican may come to be an Apostle; nay a persecutor of the Saints may
be called to preach that Faith which once he destroyed, Gal. 1.23. They that
are Christ's Sheep by election, may in time, nay certainly must be so by actual
calling, John 6.37. All that the Father gives me, shall come to me. Or, as not
yet actually in being in the World, but in the loins of their Parents, whether
Saints or Sinners: God may have a Seed even among the Children of wicked Men;
and as sometimes he may pass by the Children of gracious Men, the Parents may
be a Seed of God, and Children not; so sometimes he may overlook the Parents,
and take the Children, the Parents may be wicked and the Children holy. God is
a Sovereign, and may choose where he will, and sometimes he pitcheth upon the
most unlikely Subjects; a wicked Ahaz may have a godly Hezekiah for his Son,
and a good Josiah a wicked Jehoiachim for his. This distinction I lay down,
because though I understand the Doctrine in the first place of the religious
actually in being among a People, yet not only of them, God sometimes acting
for a Nation with respect to those he is to have among them: This premised, I
come to show in what respect the godly may be said to be the strength of a
People, and this I shall by a little following the Metaphor in the Text. The
Holy Seed, is here called the Substance, or Stock of a People, so that in what
respect the strength of a Tree is in its Stock, in those, or several of them,
the strength of a People is in the Religion of them.

1. The Stock of a Tree is the most firm and durable part of it; when the
Leaves are shaken off, the Branches many of them dry, and withered, nay though
it be close Lopt, and all the Bows cut down, yet still it continues, and lives,
keeps its place, and retains its Sap. So it is with the truly religious at
least as to their Spiritual State (as we intimated in the explication of the
Text) when Hypocrites, and Temporaries drop off from the Body of Professors,
and quit their Stations in a Church, and their religious Profession, yet the
godly still continue, hold their own, keep their standing. They are all united
to Christ the Root, as well as to teach other in the Body, and as parts
together of the same Stock, and so are preserved, and continued in Life by Sap
derived to them from the Root, the constant supplies of the Spirit and Grace of
Christ. In this respect we may say, he that does the will of God abides for
ever, 1 John 2.17. and, they that have an Unction from the Holy One, abide in
him, verse 20, 27.

2. The Stock is that which propagates its kind, cut off all the Bows, and yet
the Stem will shoot forth again, send out new Leaves, and Fruit; and Seed, from
which other Trees will come. So here the righteous propagate their
righteousness, communicate to others, beget Children to God, are Spiritual
Parents, and have a Spiritual Offspring. How many Children come in upon their
Parents Covenant, not only as to outward privileges in the Church, but as to
real Grace? The promise is to them, and their Children, Acts 2.39. and as it
takes place in all of them as to Church Membership, so it does in many as to
Saintship. And besides how many are wrought on by their instruction, won by
their example, awakened by their admonitions, overcome by their persuasions?
How many have cause to bless God for religious Parents, religious acquaintance,
religious Instructors, (as well as godly Ministers) who have been instrumental
in their conversion? Thus when many particular Branches of righteousness are
plucked off as to their temporal State in this Life, yet the Holy Seed
continues, the Stock is pepetuated in a succession of righteous ones.

Men usually spare the Tree for the sake of the Stock, Isa. 65.8. As the new
Wine is in the Cluster, and one says destroy it not, a Blessing is in it; A
Man finds a Cluster or two of Grapes on a Vine, and by those few perceives that
there is Life in the Tree, and some hopes of more fruitfulness hereafter, and
therefore does not cut it down; so will I do says the Lord, for my Servants
sake, that I may not destroy them all, he spares the rest, or many of them,
does not destroy them all, for his Servants sake, for the sake of the righteous
among them, Job 22.30. according to marginal reading, The Innocent shall
deliver the Island, which suits best with the following Clause, it is delivered
by the pureness of my hands. Eliphaz tells Job before, what advantage he should
himself have by returning to God, and acquainting himself with him, verse 21.
from whom he supposes him to have departed, and to be estranged by sin; and
here he tells him what benefit should redound to others; his goodness should
not only do good to himself but keep off evil from them. For the better
understanding this, take two things by way of Concession, and a third by way of
Position.

1. I grant, that the religious part of a People may not always be active as
Men, in a natural or civil way, in delivering them, or keeping off evils from
them; they may have no proper and direct efficiency in it, for

1. Sometimes, they may want power and ability for it; they may be but few and
inconsiderable for Number: the Holy Seed may be very thin sown; there may be
but a few Grains of Corn among a great deal of Chaff, but a little Wheat among
abundance of Tares. Or, those that are may be weak, and low as to their outward
condition in the World, (for, not many mighty, not many noble, are called, 1
Cor. 1.26.) and so may be in ill case to contribute much by an active
concurrence to the help of others.

2. Sometimes, they may be simple, and unskiful in outward affairs, want that
Wisdom, and Worldly Policy, which might be needful in many Cases for the
warding of imminent dangers, or removing incumbent troubles. Not many wise Men
after the Flesh are called, as well as not many mighty, or noble. Saints may be
wise for their Souls, prudent and knowing in the Mysteries of the Kingdom of
Heaven, and yet but Babes in other things. The Wisdom they have is from above,
Jam. 3.17. and respects things above, and they may be mere Ignoramuses in any
thing else.

3. They may have no hand in public affairs, no share in the Government, nor
be entrusted or made use of by those that are in Power: they may be suppressed,
and brought into bondage by others, as the Israelites were in Egypt, and the
Jews in Babylon: they may be so much in suffering by others that they be in no
capacity of acting for them.

4. Sometimes, Gods Judgments upon a People may be such as no Instruments, and
so not the holiest Men among them can keep them off by any natural efficiency,
and all attempts in such a way may be in vain. Such was the destruction of the
Old World by the Flood, and of Sodom by Fire, and Brimstone, and of several
places by Inundations, Earthquakes, etc.

2. I grant, that sometimes the religious actually in being among a People may
not be able by any means to deliver them, or keep off the greatest evils from
them. for,

1. Sometimes, they cannot keep off such evils from themselves. Sometimes they
may suffer as deeply as any in the common Calamities of a Nation, and perish
themselves as to their outward condition, be crushed in the Ruins of the State
where they are. Jeremiah, and Baruch, could not hinder the destruction of
Jerusalem, nor prevent the Captivity of their Nation; but suffered themselves
in a great measure among them: And if we look to the external State of the best
in the World, how often does God destroy the perfect, as well as the wicked,
Job 9.22.

2. Sometimes the sins of a People may be such, that God will not pardon them
as to temporal punishments, nay, not to the godly themselves; even they may
have been pertakers with others in their Sins, or may have so provoked God
themselves, and sinned in such a way as to cause his Name to be blasphemed, so
that he is concerned in honor to bring some exemplary punishment upon them. So
it was with David, 2 Samuel 12. though he pardoned him as to the Guilt of Eternal
Death, saved his Soul, and spared his Life which was forfeited to Divine
Justice for the Murder of Uriah, that smart afflictions must come on him, the
Sword must never depart from his house, verse 10, and the Child begotten in
Adultery must dye, verse 10. and his Wives must be given to his Neighbors,
verse 11. so Psalm. 99.8. it seems to be spoken of Moses himself, and other
godly among the Israelites who died in the Wilderness, and were not permitted
to come into the Land of Promise, that God forgave them, yet took vengeance of
their inventions, and Jer. 14. as God would not hear the Jews Prayers for
themselves, verse 12. so, nor the Prophets Prayers for them, who is therefore
forbid to Pray for them, verse 11. and it is said expressly of the Sins of
Manasseh, and particularly the Innocent Blood to shed, that God would not
pardon them, 2 Kings 24.4. pardon them he did to Manasseh, who humbled himself
for them, so as to save his Soul and remit his temporal punishment in part, for
he brought him back from his Captivity, but to the Body of the People who had
been pertakers with him in them, and never repented of them, he would not
pardon them, but they must be destroyed, or go into Captivity. In this case the
religious of a Nation may not be able by all their Intercessions and with all
their righteousness to deliver any more than their own Souls, as is said of
Noah, Daniel, and Job, though so Eminently Holy, Ezekiel. 14.14.

3. Sometimes God may make a difference between the Holy Seed, and the Sinners,
in the same People, so as to Deliver the one, when he Destroys the other; so he
provided for Noah, when he Drowned the World, and saved Lot, when he Destroyed
Sodom, and the Christians at Pella, when Jerusalem was Sacked by Titus. God may
sometimes hide them, when he exposes others; cover their Heads in the Day of
Battails, when his Arrows are sharp in the Hearts of his Enemies. He may set a
mark upon them that Cry and Sigh for the Abominations of a Land, and Command
the Destroying Angel when he Slays others, Young and Old, and begins at the
Sanctuary too, yet not to come near them, Ezekiel. 9.4, 6. By what has been said,
it appears that the proposition is not Universal, That God always spares a
People for the sake of the Holy Seed among them, at least, that are not
Actually in Being. I add therefore,

3. By way of Position, That the Religious of a Nation, either that are, or are
to be, among them, are frequently, ordinarily the means of a Peoples
Deliverance, and when God spares the Sinners of his People, it is usually for
the sake of the Saints; and were it not for them, he would not have any respect
to the others, even as the Prophet would not have looked to the King of Israel,
had it not been for the presence of Jehosaphat, 2 Kings 3.14.

1. Sometimes Judgments may be kept off from a People for their sake. Had there
been but Ten Righteous in Sodom, God would have spared it, Genesis 18.32. And he
tells Jeremiah, Chap. 5.1. That if there were any in Jerusalem that Executed
Judgment, and sought the Truth, he would pardon it. Jeremiah himself there was,
and Baruch, and Ebimelech, and it may be some few others, but the generality
were Corrupt, and the Godly so few, that they were next to none; none to speak
of (as we say) as few in Jerusalem, proportionably, as in Sodom, in the time of
Abraham, and indeed, Isa. 1.10. it is compared to Sodom, and probably from this
reason, among others; and Jerem. 6.28. God calls them all grievous Revolters,
all Corrupters; the few Righteous Ones among them are otherwise provided for,
and they were a People whom God would not pardon, (as before was said) and in
Honor could not. And yet in another Case we find a City saved for the sake of
a Saint, Two Thousand was not Destroyed at Lots Entreaty, Genesis 19.21.

2. Sometimes Judgments may be deferred, and a Peoples Peace and Tranquillity
lengthned out, for the sake of the Religious among them. There was to be Peace
and Truth in Hezekiah's Days, though Dreadful Times to come after, Isa. 39.8.
And Josiah was to go to his Grave in Peace, and not see the Evil that should
come after his Death, 2 Kings 22.20. God takes away the Righteous from the Evil
to come, Isa. 57.1. Which implies, that God defers the Evil till he has taken
the Righteous, and secured them: It was a sign that Evil was coming on that
People, because the Righteous perished, and it was their Sin that they did not
Observe it; the Death of the Righteous was the Forerunner of Judgments which
were deferred while they Lived. While God has any Corn in the Field, he keeps
up the Hedges, but when that is once Housed, he breaks down the Fence, and lets
in the Beasts. He may not sweep a Land with the Beesome of Destruction, Isa.
14.23. for a time, because he may have some Jewels among the Rubbish, but when
he has picked them up, he defers no longer. Thus, though he would not spare
Sodom for Lots sake, yet he delayed its Vengeance till he was clear of it, Genesis
19.22. I can do nothing, says the Angel to him, till thou be come thither, i.
e. to Zoar. And God would not bring on the Deluge till Noah were safe in the
Ark. The Romans could not Conquer Jerusalem till the Christians were got out of
it; and the Judgment of Mystical Babylon is deferred till all Gods People be
gone out from her, Rev. 18.4.

3. Sometimes Judgments, though they do come upon a People, yet may, for the
sake of the Godly among them, be abated, and lessened, and mingled with Mercy.
So Matthew. 24.22. for the Elects sake, those Days (Days of great Tribulation,
verse 21.) shall be shortened. And in Rehoboams time, God would not utterly
Destroy them, but grant them some Deliverance, 2 Chronicles. 12.7. Partly because
they humbled themselve, and withal, verse 12. In Judah things went well, or, as
the Margin reads it, Yet in Judah there were good things, they were not yet
Universally corrupted, though they had much declined; there was still a stock
of Old Saints left, that did sincerely cleave to God. So, Isa. 10.23. when God
makes a Consumption determined in the midst of a Land, yet a Remnant shall be
left. Verse 22. And the Consumption Decreed shall overflow with Righteousness.
And, Amos 9.8. when God destroys the Sinful Kingdom, yet he will not utterly
destroy the House of Jacob. And, Verse 9. though he Sift the House of Israel,
yet not the least Grain shall fall to the Earth.

4. Sometimes God removes Judgments from off a People for the sake of the
Godly. So at least, in part, for the sake of Hezekiah, and Isaiah, and the rest
of the Faithful in Jerusalem. God delivered the Land from Senacherib, with the
Destruction of his Army, and himself soon after, when he had taken all the
Fenced Cities of Judah, Isa. 36.1. compared with Chap. 37.4. and 15.36, 38.
Only it is worth our Observing here, That God has in such Cases a respect to
his Saints, whether Dead, or Alive, or yet unborn; so in Delivering Judah out
of the hand of Senacherib, he had respect not only to the Righteous of a
Nation, then in Being, as Hezekiah, and Isaiah, etc. but to David, though long
since Dead, (having promised a Kingdom to be continued to his Posterity, he
would make good his word,) nay to those that were yet to come. Verse 31, 32.
The Remnant that is escaped of the House of Judah, shall again take Root
downward, and bear Fruit upward. For out of Jerusalem shall go forth a Remnant,
this Remnant were not only they that were then Living, and escaped Senacheribs
Fury, but many that were yet to come; all that escaped the present Danger were
not Godly, but yet Godly Ones were to be Born of them. And is it not great
Truth, that in all the Deliverances of that Nation, as God had a special regard
to Christ that was to proceed from them, according to the Flesh, so likewise to
the Elect he had, from Eternity, given to Christ, and which were to be in their
several Generations, and Successions, a Seed to serve him, Psalm. 22.30. Other
Instances might here be brought, but I shall meet with them under another Head.

4. The stock of the Tree is that for the sake of which the Tree is dressed,
and watered, and looked after; Men take care of the Trees so long as there is
Life in the stock; they do not only not grub it up, but prune it, and bestow
upon it what Cost and Labor is fit for it. Many a Blessing, both Temporal, and
Spiritual, comes upon a Nation for the sake of the Religious, in the midst of
it. Who watches, or waters a Vineyard, when all the Vines are Dead? When the
stem of the Vine is Alive, though many Branches be withered, they may lay open
the Root, and Dung it, and all the Labor they bestow upon it, is for the sake
of the Life they see in the Body of it. That God keeps his Vineyard, and waters
it every Moment, Isa. 27.3. It is because he sees Life in the Plants, though
there be little Fruit on the Branches.

1. Temporal good things. We find him sometimes bestowing upon others, for the
sake of the Godly that are with them; as he Blessed Laban, though an Idolater,
for Jacob's sake, Genesis 30.20. And Potiphar for Joseph's, Chap. 39.5. Peace and
Plenty he may afford to a People, that his own Servants may have their share of
it, for their Encouragement in Holiness. So, Jerem. 29.7. that Babylon had so
long Peace before its Downfall, it was, that Gods People in it might have Peace.

2. Spiritual. God gives the means of Grace, his Oracles and Ordinances, and
the offers of Salvation to a People, especially for the sake of those that
belong to him. It is no small Mercy to have an External Call, an offer of
Christ, to be brought into a Salvable Condition: if Men neglect their
Opportunities, forsake their own Mercys, lose the Benefit of them, it is their
own Fault; the Privilege is not less in it self. Now where God has none to
call Effectually, he does not use to send the Gospel; the Apostle Paul was
forbidden by the Holy Ghost to Preach the Word in Asia, Acts 16.6. and when he
would have gone into Bithynnia, the Spirit suffered him not, Verse. 7. and why
was it? But because God had not any People there who were as yet to be called
by his Grace: But he is sent into Macedonia, Verse 10. because there God had
work for him, several that were presently to be Converted by his Ministry. Had
not God had a Seed among the Macedonians, they might have still continued in
the same Darkness that the others were in. So likewise God continued Paul so
long at Corinth, and tells him that no Man should set on him to hurt him,
because he had much People in that City, Acts 18.10.

Quest. If it be asked, Why does God show such respect to others, for the sake
of the Godly? Not to mention other Reasons here, I will give but Two,

Ans. 1. In respect of the Godly which are to be gathered in, he does it, that
they may be gathered. Many Saints may be in the Loins of Wicked Men, (as has
been said) and should God cut off the Parents, the Children would never have a
Being, or should he not continue the means of Grace to them, how should those
that come of them be Converted? And therefore he keeps off such Evils from the
Parents, as might prevent either the Birth, or the Conversion of such as are to
be Born of them, and bestows upon them such Blessings and Privileges, as may
promote, and further it. He spares, and dresses the Tree, for the sake of the
Fruit he intends it shall bring forth.

Ans. 2. In relation to those that are already called, God shows kindness to
others for their sakes, that there may be time and opportunity for all the Work
he has determined to do, either in, or by them.

1. In them. A People may be spared, that they may be spared among them, and
share in their Deliverance, and the means of Grace may be continued to the Body
of a People, till God has wrought all that Grace in the hearts of his
Children, which he has designed for them. Should they fall with others, or
should the means of Grace be taken away, they should want them, and what were
lacking in their Graces would not be made up. God therefore usually continues
the Gospel to a People, so long as there are any among them to be called in, or
built up, and when he takes it away from a Nation, it is a sign it has done
all its work there which he sent it to do.

2. By them. That they may have opportunity for doing what God appointed them
to do. Were they taken off with others, they should not have time for their
Work, were they continually under Pressures, always loaded with Afflictions,
they might be disheartened in it, were the means of Grace gone, they might want
quickening to it; nay, should God take away the whole Set of Wicked Men from
them, they should want much matter for their Graces to work upon. Much of the
Grace of the Saints, respects their Enemies, Love to them, Meekness and
Gentleness in dealing with, Patience in bearing Injuries from them, Courage in
reproving their Vices, and Zeal in opposing, or hindering their Wickedness,
etc. And God may spare them sometimes, that they may be matter on which the
Graces of the Saints may be exercised, and thereby the Excellency of a true
Christian Spirit discovered.

3. On what account the Religious of a Nation may be said to be its strength,
or what Influence they have on the welfare, and security of a People; and this
will yet farther Evidence the truth of the Doctrine.

1. As they are Gods Favorites, his Children, his Jewels, Mal. 3.16. His
Treasure, Exodus 19.5. His Portion, Deuteronomy. 32.9. They are most nearly Related to
him, most dearly Beloved by him. And though several of these Titles are
Attributed to the Body of a People, yet they primarily belong to the truly
Religious among them, and either are given to the rest, with respect to them,
or only according to what they appear to be, though in reality they are not.
The Godly have the greatest Interest in God, as well as he has an Interest in
them, and therefore they can do most with him, and he does most upon their
account. Men will many times use their Servants well for their Childrens sake;
be kind to a stranger whom they know not, for the sake of a Friend whom they do
know: save their Bags, or Trunks, though little worth, if their Jewels or
Treasure be in them; and Princes will gratify whole Societies for the sake of
some particular Favorites. God is not less concerned for his Friends, and
Favorites, than Men are for theirs; and many a Boon (so to speak) he gives to
others, out of the respect he bears to them. Men are Ambitious of being great,
and those that have an Interest in Princes, to be Members of their Communities,
and Corporations, because they reckon the whole will fare the better for their
sakes, and many special Privileges may be Indulged them in Favor to such
Honorable Members. Why should they not Judge the same in the Case before us? Is
not God wont to do as much for those he Loves, as Men do for those they Love?
Happy is that Society where God has many Friends, if Men be but so wise as to
be Friendly to them. It is pity but that the Favorites of Heaven should be
their Favorites too. Abimelech King of Gerar, thought so (though an Heathen)
when he would make a Covenant with Isaac, because he saw that the Lord was him,
Genesis 26.28.

2. As they Improve their Interest with God for a People. They are they that
Intercede with God for them: stand in the Gap, and make up the Hedge, (Ezekiel.
22.30.) when by other means they cannot, yet by Prayer, that so God may not
destroy them. Thus Moses interposed with God for Israel, when under Gods great
displeasure, Psalm. 106.23. And Abraham Prayed for Abimelech's Household, Genesis
20. And Samuel for the Israelites, 1 Samuel 12.24. God forbid that I should Sin
against the Lord, in ceasing to Pray for you. And still the Religious part of a
People, are the Praying part of them, and thereby do most for them; they Pray
most, and best, and to best purpose.

1. Most. Psalm. 109.4. I give my self to Prayer, the Hebrew has only, [I
Prayer,] as if he had said, I am all Prayer, Prayer is my business, my whole
work. Prayer indeed is the very breath of the New Man, a Prayerless Person is
never a Religious One, no more than a Child can be Alive which does not Breath.
No sooner did Paul cease Persecuting the Godly, and came to be in the number of
them himself, but he fell a Praying, Acts 9.11. And generally, the most Eminent
in Holiness are most Eminent in Prayer, but still they that are really Gods
People, are a Praying People. Others may Pray by fits, but they constantly;
others may visit him in their trouble, and when his chastening is upon them,
Isa. 26.16. But they do it, even when the greatest Blessings are upon them;
others Cry to him when they need him most, but they even when they seem to need
him least; they Pray always, Ephesians. 6.18. Without ceasing, 1 These. 5.17. And
that not only for themselves only, but for others, for their Enemies, Matthew. 5.
And much more for their Neighbors, and those of the same Community with
themselves. And that not only,

1. Because they are themselves concerned in their welfare, as being of the
same Body, and so count it their Interest, the welfare of the whole, being the
welfare of the Members.

2. But because they love others, and pity them, and out of Compassion Pray for
them; they are Friends and Well-wishers to them, and would have them partake of
their Mercies; they grudg them not the Enjoyment of the greatest good things;
would have them be as good as themselves, as much in the Favor of God as
themselves, and every way as Happy, and therefore Beg that they may be so: It
grieves them to see the Misery of others, when they themselves are most secure,
most free from it.

3. They have tried Prayer most, both for themselves and others, and
experienced the sweetness and efficacy of it. They Pray because they have
Prayed, and their Prayers have not been in vain; and they Pray for others,
because they have been heard for others, as well as Pray for themselves,
because they have been heard for tthemselves.

2. They Pray best. Grace will out Pray nature. In Carnal Men Prayer is but the
Voice of Nature, or Conscience, but in the Godly it is the Language of Grace.
Others make Prayers, these only Pray Prayers. Others Pray either in their
Forms, or in their Gifts, or their Parts; these only Pray in the Holy Ghost,
Jude 1.20. And this too I understand not only of their Praying for themselves,
but likewise for others. For,

1. They have most to plead with God for others, or know best what to plead.
They that are best acquainted with the Word, have most Observed the Operations
of Gods Hands, Ps. 28.5. the Methods of his Providence, the Issue of his
various Dispensations in the World; those that are most Public Spirited, so as
to concern themselves most for the welfare of others, especially of Gods
People, and for the Glory of his Name, have most to plead with God on their
behalf; and so most Materials, and Furniture, for Prayer, and most Arguments
for Faith, to present to God in Prayer.

2. They have Faith to urge their pleas, they are indeed the only Persons that
have true Faith, and it is Faith especially makes Men plead with God, and
improve all the Arguments they can, so far as the Word, which is the ground of
Faith, will warrant them: so Moses pleads for Israel, Exodus 32.11, 12, 13. And
Jeremiah for the Jews, in the Case of the Famine, Chap. 14.7, 8. The more Faith
in Prayer, usually the more pleading in it. And this Prayer is always best,
because of the Faith that is Acted in it. The goodness of Prayer is not to be
Judged of by the Curiousness of the Composition, the Elegancy of the Style, the
Vehemence of the Expression, but by the workings of Faith. It is the Prayer of
Faith that is called for, and to which the promise is made, James 1.6.

3. They urge them with most fervency. There is a natural fervency in Prayer,
which arises from natural affections, excited and quickened by some pressing
trouble or distress; and there is a gracious fervency which proceeds from
Faith: nothing makes Men more earnest, and warm in Prayer than Faith does; the
more firmly a Man believe, the more importunately he asks; the greater hope he
has of prevailing, the more vehement he will be in begging. It was Jacobs
Faith made him so importunate in Prayer; that he wrestled with God, and would
not let him go unless he Blessed him, Genesis 32.26. for he had a promise of being
blessed, and all Nations in him, Genesis 28.13, 14. it was the Faith of that Promise
stirred up this Fervency. And Matthew. 15. that great example of importunity in
Prayer, the Syrophenician Woman, is no less an example of Faith, verse 28. O
Woman great is thy Faith. So that we may conclude, the religious of a People
Pray best, because both with true Faith, and spiritual Fervency.

3. They Pray to best purpose, with most success. If ever any Prayer be
effectual, it is the fervent Prayer of a righteous Man, Jam. 5.16. which is the
same with the Prayer of Faith, verse 15. when God abhors the Prayers of others,
he has respect to his; when the sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to
him, the Prayer of the upright is his delight, Pet. 15.8. He fulfills the
desires of those that fear him, he hears their cry and saves them, Psalm.
145.19. They Pray according to his Will, and he hears them, 1 John 5.14. They
having most Interest in God (as before) can prevail most with him, and get most
of him. The Favorites of a Prince will many times prevail with him, when the
Petitions of common Subjects, and much more of rebels, are rejected by him. The
prevalency of godly Men's Prayers is well known, and has been often experienced
by their Enemies themselves, Pharaoh himself believed it when he desired Moses
Prayers, Exodus 9.28. and Simon Magus when Peter's, Acts 8.24. such are conscious
to themselves of their want of an Interest in God, and their being obnoxious to
him, and that the truly godly are in favor with him, and therefore when their
hearts fail them, and they have not the Face to look up to God, they will beg
the Prayers of those that have, when they are in great distresses, or dangers,
on sick Beds, when Conscience teiseth them, Death looks grimly on them, Hell
gapes for them, and Heaven frowns upon them, then they must have some good Men
to Pray for them: they think God is ready to hear such when he is angry with
themselves. Thus, 1 Samuel 15.16. Saul would have Samuel come back, and worship
with him; he thought God was angry with him, and would not look to him, but
Samuel might be accepted. It was a good Testimony given by a Queen to the
efficacy of the Saints Prayers, when she professed her self more afraid of one
poor Minister in the Pulpit, than of a numerous Army in the Field. And a good
Bishop once told a great King concerning a godly Gentleman that was under some
disfavour for his plain speaking, that he had not a better Subject in his
Kingdom, being a Man that could have what he would of God. The Romans
themselves took notice of the prevalency of the Prayers of the Christian Legion
among them, in that great deliverance obtained by them in the time of the
Emperor Marcus. It is usually a sign of Mercy to a Person, or People, when God
opens, and enlarges the hearts of his Servants in Prayer for them: When God
intends to do them good, he puts it into the hearts of such to seek it for
them. When the time of the Jews return from their Captivity drew near, he set
Daniel at work to Pray for it, chap. 9.1, 2, 3. And it is as bad a sign when
the hearts of the godly are shut up, and straightened, so that either they drop
others out of their Prayers, or cannot be earnest with God for them; he does as
it were secretly forbid them to Pray for such, he hinders them by withdrawing
his Spirit from them: The Mercies he gives out to others, being frequently at
the request of his Saints, when he stops those requests, it is a sign he has
no Mercy for those for whom they were to be made: when a Petition is prevented,
it is a sign it should not have been granted. When God does not prepare his
Servants hearts, he does not incline his own ear, Psalm. 10.17. As on the other
side, when he intends to hear, he stirs up Prayer, even as Princes will
sometimes give a private intimation to those for whom they design a Favor, to
Petition them for it. To conclude this, the sum of all is, the Religious of a
Nation are upon this account the Strength of it, so that they Pray most, and
with best success for it.

3. As they are a means many times to stop the current of wickedness, which is
ready to overflow a Land with Judgments, and to bring swift destruction on it,
for they are thereby a means to prevent or lessen those Judgments. It is the
Sin of a People that lays them open to wrath, and he that would keep off wrath,
must endeavor to keep out sin; he that would hinder the effect, must obviate
the cause. It is the Devils damnable policy to draw Men into Sin, that he may
expose them to punishment; this he taught his Disciple Baalam, who taught the
Midianites to cast a stumbling block before the Children of Israel, to eat
things sacrificed to Idols, and commit fornication, Rev. 2.14. he could not
otherwise hurt that People than by setting God against them, and that he could
not do by any means, but bringing them to sin against him. None are greater
Enemies to a People, nor can go a readier way to ruin them (of which more
hereafter) than they that draw them into Sin, and thereby into Gods
displeasure: and on the other hand, none are greater Friends to them than they
that labor most to keep them from Sin, for that is the surest way to keep them
from suffering; or, in the words of Phineas in such a case, Jos. 22.31. to
deliver them out of the hand of the Lord, i. e. to keep them from falling into
it. Now who is it that hinders Sin most, and stops the Dam to prevent an
Inundation of it, but the religious part of a Nation? It is they that reprove
it, and bear their Testimony against it, and by their Authority (so far as they
are in a capacity) suppress it, and by their example discountenance it. None so
active, none so zealous in opposing Sin as they that are most Holy: They not
only fear it in themselves, but labor to prevent it in others, if it were in
their power, they would neither Sin themselves, nor let any else, though they
set themselves especially against the most crying Sins, and which are most like
to stir up wrath in God against a People: And when Sin is that for which
threatenings are denounced, and punishments inflicted, they that fear God among
any People, do most effectually keep off punishment by preventing Sin. To
prevent it therefore is their first care, and if that cannot be, they bewail
it, and mourn over it, Ezekiel. 9.4. they sigh and cry for the abominations of a
Land. So David beheld the transgressors, and was grieved, Psalm. 119.158. Rivers
ran down his Eyes because they kept not Gods Laws, verse 136. and Jeremiah,
chap. 13.17. wept in secret places, for the pride of his People. This is not a
direct, and formal stopping the course of Sin in a Land in respect of others;
yet it is a kind of check to it so far as it keeps Sin from being so general as
to overspread themselves: while they thus lay to heart the Sins of others, they
are not themselves partakers of them, nor sharers in the Guilt. These Sins are
not universal, when there are some that testify their dislike of them by their
sorrow for them. The more general Sin is, the more dangerous, and the more like
to bring on Judgments, when the godly themselves become guilty, though not by
commission of it, yet by not bewailing it, which is a degree of fellowship with
it. But when they mourn for Sin committed by others, they free themselves from
the guilt of approbation, or connivance at, or communion in it, and so may be
instrumental in keeping off, at least more general Judgments.

4. As they not only check the progress of Sin, but propagate goodness to
others, as well as promote it in themselves: this they do by their counsels,
admonitions, example. They make it their business not only to do good
themselves, but to make others good, and bring them to Holiness, as well as
keep them from Sin, and so not only themselves live in the exercise of these
Graces to which the promises are made, executing judgment, and seeking the
truth, Jer. 5.1. but they labor to gain others to the same gracious
conversation. Grace, wherever it is, is communicative, spreads it self what it
can; they that love God, see so much loveliness in him, that they would fain
persuade others to love him too: they that walk in his ways like them so well,
and find so much peace and pleasantness in them, and expect such a reward at
the end of them, that they are solicitous to get others into them: they know he
whom they serve is bountiful enough, and rich enough, there is Glory enough in
Heaven for all, John 14.2. Mansions enough in Christ's Fathers House for all,
and the multitude of Fellow Servants will neither hinder their Work, nor
diminish their Wages, nay they know that they that win Souls are wise, they
that turn many to righteousness shall shine as the Stars for ever and ever,
Dan. 12.3. and therefore they are desirous to be in the Number of them. It is
their design to advance Gods Name, and Glory, and they would have others help
them in the Work. And indeed God often makes use of not only Ministers in their
Preaching, but private Christians in their conversation, to promote the
conversion of Sinners, and commonly when he intends any great reformation among
a People, he makes use of those that are already gracious in carrying it on:
And godliness having the promises of the Life that now is, as well as of that
which is to come, 1 Timothy 6.8. so far as the religious part of a People promote
godliness, advance Religion among them, so far they are instrumental in
procuring their welfare, and keeping off their ruin.

5. Sometimes the religious of a Nation may have an influence upon its public
welfare, by doing some eminent service wherewith God is much pleased, and to
what he has a special respect, Psalm. 106.30. Princes stood up, and executed
judgment, and so the plague was stayed, and Numb. 25. Phineas has turned away
my wrath from the Children of Israel, while he was zealous for my sake among
them, that I consumed them not, and verse 13. he is said to make an atonement
for them by that Act: not that any thing done by a mere Man, can be a full
satisfaction to Divine Justice for a Man's own Sin, and much less can it for the
Sin of another, but however, as sometimes temporal evils inflicted upon Saints
themselves, because they have a respect to their Sins, though they are not
properly penal, yet in a larger Sense are called punishments, and sometimes
vengeance, Psalm. 99.8. thou wast a God that forgavest them, though thou tookest
vengeance of their inventions, Moses himself seems to be included, verse 6.7.
here was vengeance on those who yet were pardoned, which cannot therefore be
strictly such; so likewise some good the Saints do which is pleasing to God,
and accepted of him in Christ, on the performance whereof he turns away his
anger (thereby to show his approbation of what is done, and to encourage to
more) and this may in the same large Sense be called an atonement, though
properly it be not so. Yet this Act of Phineas has something in it that
resembles an atonement, and may on that account be so called, for his killing
Zimri and Cosbi was a fulfilling that Law, which required the Death of the
Parties offending on such a kind, and the holiness of God which had been
contemned by the transgressors, was in some measure vindicated, and in the eyes
of the People by their exemplary punishment. Another instance we have in
Joshuah, chap. 7. the Lord was angry with Israel for Achans trespass, verse 12:
Joshuah has him stoned to death, verse 25. and then verse 26. the Lord turned
from the fierceness of his anger. So, when there was a Famine in the Land for
Saul's killing the Gibeonites, 2 Samuel 21.1. David hangs up seven of his Sons,
verse 9. and then verse 14. the Lord was entreated for the Land. When such Sins
as are public defilements to a Land are not punished, the whole Land becomes
guilty, and usually is visited with some public judgment, but when they are
punished, that judgment is either prevented, or removed. No question but
Josiahs Zeal in reforming Religion, and destroying Idolatry wherewith the Land
was so universally polluted, had a great influence on the keeping off Gods
judgments from it while he lived.

6. Lastly, God may sometimes spare a People for the sake of his Children among
them, that they may be useful, and helpful to them in his work. This end God
had in sparing the Gibeonites, he intended they should be hewers of Wood, and
drawers of Water for his Sanctuary, and so assistant to the Priests, and
Levites in their Service. So, Isa. 61.5, 6. Strangers shall stand, and feed
your Flocks, and the Sons of Aliens shall be your Plowmen and Vine-dressers,
but ye shall be named the Priests of the Lord, Men shall call you the Ministers
of our God. Not that Saints are to be all Officers, or all Rulers, and carnal
Men their Slaves, and Drudges, (for as to their worldly State, worldly Men may
be above them, and they may owe subjection to them) but that they shall be in
their worldly Employments, and Callings, useful, and serviceable to the Saints
in the things of God, and either of their own accord, or as overruled by Divine
disposal, be assistant to them in maintaining and promoting the interest of
true Religion. God can make even Moab hide his outcasts, Isa. 16.3, 4. the
Earth helps the Woman, Rev. 12.16. Ahab favors a good Obadiah that may hide
the Lords Prophets, 1 Kings 18.3, 4. an Heathen Cyrus let go his Captives, and
build his City, Isa. 45.13. a Darius, an Artaxerxes, an Ahasuerus countenance
and prefer a Daniel, a Nehemiah, a Mordecai, public instruments of good to his
People, sometimes God may raise up such on purpose, as he did Cyrus, sometimes
preserve, and maintain them in their power, and places, for his Servants sake,
and that they may be helpful to them. Nay, sometimes he may so twist, and
combine the interest of worldly Men with the interest of his Children, that
they cannot promote their own, without helping on the others. Sometimes
religious, and civil Liberties may be both together struck at, so that if the
former go down, the latter will be ruined too, and then it is the Wisdom of
those that are not truly religious, yet to favor those that are, it being as
it were in their own defense, and for their own securities, and in such a case
God may help them out of respect to his own, and keep some from civil slavery,
that he may keep others from spiritual.

Use. 1. By way of information. If the religious of a Nation are the Strength
and Defense of it, then the same may be said of the religious of the World,
they are the substance of it, the support; the strength of it. The World it
self is preserved chiefly for the sake of the godly in it, the Holy Seed. The
World is a great Field, in which the good Grain bears but a small proportion to
the abundance of Tares, and that God does not pluck up the Tares, and burn
them, it is, lest the good Corn should be plucked up with them. What is Gods
end in preserving the World, and holding it up in its being; but the glorifying
himself in his several attributes, Wisdom, Power, Goodness, but especially his
Holiness in the Service he enables his Saints to do him, and his Grace is the
Salvation he affords them? that therefore he may have that Glory, it is needful
there should be a continuance of some to serve him, and that may be the
subjects of his Mercy and Grace, and they are this Elect, those Vessels of
Mercy whom he has before prepared unto Glory, Romans 9.23. The World therefore
shall stand so long as there be any of Gods Elect in it to be brought in by
actual conversion, or their Graces to be completed in further degrees of
Sanctification; but when the number of those whose Names are written in Heaven,
is filled up, and they themselves fitted for Heaven, then shall the end of all
things come. It cannot be thought that God would ever endure so much wickedness
as he sees in the World every day committed, or so long bear its manners with
so much patience, had he not a further design in it, viz. the gathering
together the whole Body of those he has given to Christ. He never made this
great Fabric for the lusts and pleasures of wicked Men, that they might enjoy
their ease, and gratify their senses, and devour their neighbors, but for his
own Glory; and he will have some still in it to glorify him by serving him,
and living according to his Laws, as well as he glorifies himself in saving
them, and were there none in it to serve him, he would not suffer others
continually to dishonor him; were it not for the Holy Seed he has scattered
abroad in it, he would soon set the Field on a Flame.

2. The Religious of a Nation are not its Enemies, not the troublers of a
Nation, not the Pests of a State, the disturbers of a Peace, as some count
them. Ahab indeed reviled Elijah as one that troubled Israel, 1. Kings 18.17.
but David would not have said so, he was a godly King, and had other thougts of
his godly Subjects, he calls them the excellent of the Earth, and his delight
was in them, Psalm. 16.3. the Jews said of the Apostles, Acts 17.6. that they
had turned the world upside down, but they were unbeleiving Jews that saw it.
The same Apostles were counted the Offscouring of all things, and the Filth of
the Earth. 1 Cor. 4.13. but it was by those that rather were such themselves.
The Idolatrous Heathens were wont to condemn the Christians as the cause of all
their public calamities that befell them, but they were Heathens that did so.
Yet sometimes we shall find wicked Men themselves under a conviction of the
contrary, and clearing them of this imputation; so Joash King of Israel calls
Elijah the Chariot of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof. Sometimes (as before)
they beg their Prayers; sometimes wish themselves in their condition, and
whatever they esteem them while they live, they would be like them when they
die, wicked Baalam would die the death of the righteous, Numb. 23.10. Thus
Conscience absolves whom Malice had condemned, and when Men come to be cool and
sober, they purge the godly from those crimes, with which while they were
heated with passion, or intoxicated with a concern for some contrary interest,
they had groundlesly aspersed them. True indeed, the Religious of a People
almost every where are the occasion of Divisions, and Distractions; and so was
Christ himself, Luke 12. he came to send Fire on the Earth, verse 49. and not
to give Peace, but rather Division, verse 51. nay, a Sword, Matthew. 10.34. to
set a Man at variance against his Father, etc. verse 35. And yet, nor Christ,
nor his Saints are really the troublers of the World, nor the direct, and
proper causes of those broyls and confusions which many times have been made on
their accounts, which indeed proceed from the lusts of the wicked, not the
Graces of the godly: Sinners cannot endure the Light of the Truth, nor the
power of Holiness in the Lives of Saints, and therefore quarrel with them, but
are those Saints to be blamed for such troubles as only accidentally, and by
reason of the corruptions of others arise on their doing but their Duty? Is a
Bridge to be blamed for troubling the Water, because keeping its place it stops
the Waters passage, and is the occasion of its swelling and roaring? Are Sheep
to be blamed for incensing the Wolves? Or Doves, for provoking the Hawks?
Truly, just such incendiaries are Gods Children in the places where they live,
they disquiet their Neighbors only by the good things they enjoy, which others
love and covet, and fain would get from them, or by the good they do which
wicked Men hate and fain would hinder in them. The quarrels of the ungodly
World with the Holy Seed among them, are but like that of Cain with Abel, he
slew his Brother, because his own works were evil, and his Brothers righteous,
1 John 3.12.

3. The Sinners of a Nation are really the weakness of it. It is they of
whatsoever Party, or Sect, or persuasion they are, that troubles any People,
and occasions their dangers, and procure their ruin. Righteousness exalts a
Nation, Prove. 14.34. it is Sin that is a reproach to it, that humbles it, and
brings it down. Wicked Men are they that betray Nations and Kingdoms, expose
them to Gods wrath, subject them to his judgments. Did Noah bring the Flood
upon the old World, or did the wicked of it by their wickedness? Did Lot bring
down Fire from Heaven upon Sodom, or did the Sodomites do it by their own
lewdness? Did Jeremiah by his Preaching, or Baruch, and Ebedmelech, and those
few other godly in Jerusalem, by their Praying, and Weeping, and Mourning,
bring on the Captivity of that People, or did not they themselves by their
Idolatry, their Profaneness, their Swearing, their Sabbath breaking, their
polluting Gods Ordinances, their shedding Innocent Blood, etc. were the
Apostles and primitive Christians the cause of the destruction of Jerusalem by
the Romans, or were not the unbelieving Jews by their rejecting Christ, and
persecuting those that adhered to him? I deny not but the Sins of the best of
Saints may sometimes contribute to the bringing down judgments upon others,
Jonahs Sin raised a Tempest upon the Mariners, chap. 1. and David numbering the
People brought the Plague upon them, 2 Samuel 24. God will not only manifest his
own Holiness by punishing them that are dearest to him, when they Sin against
him, but teach them more care, and watchfulness against Sin, when they find how
far the direful effects of it are extended unto others. And yet what is this to
the numerous instances on the other side? Which does ordinarily do most
mischief, the Sins of the truly godly which are fewer, and lesser, and mourned
over, and repented of, or the Sins of the profane, the Hypocrites, the
Impenitent? May we not say, that if the Sins of the one have slain their
Thousands, those of the other have slain their Ten-Thousands? The greatest
danger any can be in, is to be liable to the displeasure of God, who is Holy,
and cannot endure to behold iniquity, powerful, and able to destroy those that
offend him, can Arm, and Commission innumerable Enemies against them, raise the
Posse of Heaven and Earth upon them, let fly Thousands of Arrows at them, and
command what judgments he please to consume them; And who are they that do
ordinarily make a People naked, and lay them open to the Wrath, and Revenge of
God? Is it they that love God, or they that hate him? the obedient, or the
rebellious, they that please him, or they that provoke him, they that intercede
with him, or they they that defy him, they that mourn for the abominations of
a Land, or they that commit and encourage them, they that tremble at his
judgments, or that dare his vengeance; In a Word, they that hinder all the Sin
they can, or that hinder all the good they can, they that dare not be wicked,
or that will not be Holy?

4. It is the Interest of any People where God has a Seed of righteous ones,
to favor them, and make much of them. They are their best Friends that are
Gods Friends. They should favor them most whom God favors, of whose good
things they partake, for whose sakes they are preserved, receive many a mercy,
enjoy many a privilege, escape many a judgment. It is their interest to be kind
to those that have most interest in God, most power with him, and can get most
of him. What Society of Men but usually favors them most whom their Prince
favor most, and they think it their interest to do so? They know they may need
them, and many a good turn they may do them. They that are the greatest among
Men, and sit at the upper end of the World, may need the help of the Faith, and
Prayers of the meanest Saints, they may need them to interpose with God for
them, and ward off his blows, or remove his plagues; and when he has no
respect to a People for their own sakes, yet he may for the sake of his
Servants among them.

5. It is folly in any People to Persecute them that are truly Religious. That
is but to fall foul upon their Friends, and then they lie open to their
Enemies, or are indeed their own greatest Enemies: to pluck the Stakes out of
the Hedge, and turn the Vineyard into a Common: to pull up the Sluices, and then
there is nothing to keep out an Inundation of evils; to pull down the Pillars,
and then the House comes tumbling about their Ears: It is indeed but to dig
their own Graves, to make way for their own destruction, by destroying those
that are their preservers. For by this means they lose.

1. The benefit of the Saints Prayers. When Men go on maliciously to abuse, and
oppress the godly among them, God may refuse to hear even their Prayers for
them. The Jews persecuted Jeremiah, slandered him as a Traitor, Jer. 37.13.
smote him with their tongues, devised devices against him, and 11, 19. put him
in the Dungeon, and God would not hear his Prayers for them. Their posterity
persecuted the Lord Jesus Christ, and though his Prayers were heard, for many
of them converted, Acts 2. and afterward by the Preaching of the Apostles; yet
when they still persevered in their persecuting those very Apostles, their
Prayers could not prevail for them, but God gave them up first to hardness of
heart, and blindness of mind, Acts 28.26. and then to their Enemies Sword. Or,
God may stop the mouths of his Saints that they shall not so much as pray for
them, he may (as was before intimated) straiten them, and withdraw from them.
When they begin to open their lips for those whom he has appointed for
destruction. Nay, he may set their Hearts to pray against them, and thereby
hasten his judgments on them. It is true, Gods Children are commanded to pray
for their Enemies, and Persecutors, Matthew. 5.44. and there may be Mercy in
store with God for them, when what they do, they do as Paul did before his
conversion, 1 Timothy 1.16. ignorantly in unbeleif: Thus Stephen Prayed for those
that stoned him, Acts 7.6. Lord lay not this Sin to their charge, and Christ
for those that Crucified him, Luke 23.34. Father forgive them, for they know
not what they do. And yet Christ himself excludes the World out of his Prayer,
John 17.9. I pray not for the World, i. e. not for the reprobate World, or the
World in opposition to those his Father had given him. How often does David
pray against his Persecutors especially, Psalm. 69. and 109. though his Prayers
are generally prophetical, yet Prayers still they are, and how often do we
find, him and other Saints, Praying against Idolaters, Psalm. 97.7. haters of
Zion, 129.5. obstinate and hardened Enemies of Gods Truth, and Ways, and
People, see Psalm. 74. and 94. And though the Jews in Babylon were commanded to
pray for the Peace of the City, Jer. 29.7. yet that must be but a limited
command, they were to pray for the Peace of Babylon during its time, and so
long as it was to be the place of their abode, but they were not to pray for
its perpetual Peace and Welfare, for that had been to pray against the declared
mind of God in all those Prophesies which foretold its ruin, and indeed against
their own deliverance, which was to follow upon the beginning of Babylons
destruction, in the dissolution of that Empire. Nay, do we not find them
praying for Vengeance on it? Jer. 51.35. The violence done to me and my Flesh,
be upon Babylon shall Zion say, and my Blood upon the Inhabitants of Chaldea
shall Jerusalem say. Gods Children ought to pray for their own private Enemies;
nay, for those that at present are Enemies to the public Weal of Zion, as not
knowing who of them may come to be her Friends; (God may have a Seed among
them;) all have not sinned the sin unto death, though many may, for whom they
are expressly forbid to pray, 1 John 5.16. and if they knew in particular who
they were, they ought no more to pray for them, than for the Devil himself, (if
Austin may be believed) But certain it is they must not, cannot, dare not, pray
for the implacable, incorrigible Enemies of their Lord and Master. Nay, they
cannot pray for the exaltation of Christ's Kingdom, but they at the same time
pray for the downfall of such, whenever they pray Gods Will may be done, and his
Kingdom come. They pray for the confusion of those that obstinately oppose his
Will, and whose ruin must make way for the coming of his Kingdom, and so all
the Saints in the World are every Day Praying against the Malignant, hardened
Enemies, and Persecutors of Christ and his People. And is it not a Dreadful
thing to have the Prayers of Saints, of Thousands of Saints, of all the Saints
upon Earth against them? Those Prayers which shall not be lost, which will be
heard, and not one of them be in vain. See, Rev. 11. what power the Prayers of
the Saints have, Gods Witnesses even in their Sackcloth, Verse. 5, 6. what is
the Fire that proceeds out of their Mouths, but the Judgments they Denounce,
and by Prayer bring down upon the Antichristian World? No Army with Banners,
more Terrible, than a Company of Praying Saints. When Saints are full of
Prayer, Heaven is big with Vengeance; and their Prayers cannot go up so fast,
but Judgments will soon come down as fast.

2. They lose the help of the Saints, God, his Protection, and whatever Favor
he has been wont to show them, for the sake of his Saints. This follows upon
the former, and I shall meet with it again under the next use. To conclude this
therefore, The Enemies would fain, now as well as in former Ages, extirpate
Gods Seed from out of the Earth, their Language is, as the Jews was of Paul,
Acts 22.22. It is not fit that they should Live: They would have the Name of
Israel be no more in remembrance, Psalm. 83.4. But what would they get by that!
were the Holy Seed, the Plants of Gods Planting stub'd up, how soon would the
Vineyard be laid wast? If the Green Trees were out of the way, the Fire of Gods
Wrath would quickly consume the Dry: and what should hinder? Who should
Interpose with the Lord of the Vineyard? Who should say, Destroy it not, when,
alas! there were no Blessing in it? I dare say, had some Men their wish, it
would be the Blackest Day th^^ ever England saw, and it may be Blacker to none,
than to them (...) wish for it.

Use 2. EXHORTATION,

1. To the truly Religious, of all sorts and persuasions, I mean; ^et it appear
that you are indeed the Substance, and Strength of a Sinful Land; Act like
those that are so; do what you can to help a poor sinking Nation; stand in the
Gap, and make up the Hedge; and Labor to convince your Enemies themselves, that
you are their Friends, and the best they have too.

1. Intercede witb God for the Land. Improve all the Interest you have in
Heaven, to keep off approaching Destruction. And, to quicken you, consider,

1. You know not how far you may prevail with God, for the prevention of
National Judgments. When other means fail, yet Prayer may prevail. Human
Strength, and Human Wisdom, may be able to do little; the Power and Policy of
Enemies may be too hard for the Wisdom and Strength of the Godly; but when you
can do least your selves, you may Engage God, by Prayer, to do most. He is Wise
in Heart, and Mighty in Strength, Job 9.4. If he take your part, he can turn
about the Hearts of Enemies, disappoint their Devices, befool their Politics,
or, if need be, break their Power. Enemies are commonly the Instruments of Evil
brought upon a Land, yet they are but Instruments, God himself is the principal
Agent, Amos 3.6. they are the Rods in his Hand, the Scourges, which he uses,
or lays aside when he pleases. You may be helpful in diverting the Evils which
Enemies might do, though you touch not themselves, but Address to God, and set
him against them. You may do in this Case, as when you have to do with Men in
Civil things; if a Prince be offended with you, and like to punish you, though
what he does, he does by Ministers, and Officers, yet you do not fall a
quarrelling with them, but apply your self to the Prince, if he be pacified
toward you, his Officers dare not meddle with you, his Pardon is a Supersedeas
to all their Actions. Try what you can do with God, if he side with you, either
Men shall not desire to touch you, or not be able, if they would, to hurt you.
Think how many times have the Prayers of the Saints prevailed with God in the
like Cases. Moses's Prayers prevailed to deliver Israel, when the Egyptians so
closely pursued them. Exodus 14.15. Why Cryest thou unto me? and at other times,
Exodus 32. Numb. 14. Asa's Prayer prevailed against Zerah and his Ethiopian
Army, 2 Chronicles. 14.11, 12. and Jehosaphats against the Amonites, 2 Chronicles. 20.
And if Prayer has been so prevalent, why may it not be so still? It is an old
tried means, which has not used to fail; do not say, These were more Eminent
Saints, and so could do more with God by Prayer, than you can; but remember,
you have the same God to Pray to, that they had, and he delights as much in
Prayer now, as then he did, and can do as much for us, as the^^ he could: You
Pray with the same kind of Faith that they did, and your Faith is grounded on
the same Promises; they are still the same, and the Mediator who is to present
your Petitions to God is still the same, and his Interest in those that fear
him, and his Concern for them is still the same it was, and then why may not
Prayer now prevail as much as formerly, and do as much with God?

2. If you do prevail, it will be both your Honor and Comfort, to have been
Instrumental in keeping off Public Judgments, and procuring Public Mercies.
So far as your Prayers have been of use for the obtaining such Mercies, so far
they are your Mercies, and you will have comfort in them: Any Mercy is sweet
when obtained by Prayer, much more such as are of advantage to others, as well
as your selves. And it will be as Honorable, as Comfortable, to be the
Saviors of a Land, as Saints seem to be called, Obad. ult. The Repairer of
Breaches, and Restorers of Paths to dwell in, Isa. 58.12.

3. If you should not prevail for Public Deliverance, yet your Prayers shall
not be lost: They shall return into your own Bosom, Psalm. 35.13. in deliverance
for your selves, either God will separate you from others, you shall deliver
your own Souls, Ezekiel. 14.14. or if not, God will hide you in the ^^^ve, and
while you continue here, will Sanctify your Sufferings, make yo^ Rejoice in
Tribulation; it will be no small comfort to have done your Duty, and discharged
your Consciences, and to suffer without the Guilt of Negligence, and not
providing against Sufferings.

4. You will have little comfort in suffering in the common Calamities, if you
have not done your part to keep them off. If the breaking in of Wrath upon the
Land lie at your Doors; if a Nation be lost for want of your Praying, and
Wrestling with God for it. It would be sad Suffering with the Guilt of your own
Negligence, or Slothfulness, or Coldness, or Security, upon your Consciences,
and having your Hearts reproach you, and tell you that, had you stood in the
Gap you might have made up the Hedge; had you Prayed more, you and others might
have Suffered l^ss; Religion might have flourished, Ordinances have continued,
the Gospel continued; the Glory of God might not have departed, had you
labored to keep it.

5. If you that are Godly do not prevail, none else are like to do it, Others,
either Prey no^ (...) all, but wholly restrain Prayer before the Lord, or if
they do, yet ^g such as regard Iniquity in their Hearts, the Lord will ^r*
the^, Psalm. 66.18. Either their Guilt choaks their Prayers, or ^hey have not
the Face to look up to God with any Confidence, or the Wickedness of their
Lives way-lays their Prayers, their Sins intercept their Petitions, and hinder
any Gracious reception of them: the Sacrifices of such are an abomination to
the Lord, and are so far from making up the Breach, that they make it wider.

6. Lastly, Consider, How many there be that labor all they can to Ru^n the
Land. The Sinners of the Land are by far the greatest part of (...) Sin i^
^pread over all: And Sinners Act as if they were weary of (...) Mercies, weary
of their Liberties, weary of Christ and his Saints, of t^^ Gospel and
Ordinances as if they were all in a Plot against the Land, and resolved to try,
if could Sin it into Destruction, into its old Darkness and Spiritual Bondage:
How many are laying Designs against the Liberties, and Privileges, the Estates,
and Lives of others? How many are Oppr^^^^^, and Persecuting, and Molesting,
those that are Peaceable in the Land? And how, loud do so many Sins Cry in Gods
Ears* You had need Pray hard for Mercy, when Sin Cries so loud for Vengeance. Be
up then and doing, set Prayer against Sin; if others attempt to out-sin your
Prayers, do you labor to out-pray their Sins; do not think that a little cold
heartless Praying will prevent, or Obviat the consequents of so much Sinning.
When their be Armies of Enemies, and Armies of Sins, there needs an Army of
Prayers too.

2. Do not rest in Prayer, but hinder all the Sin you can, not only in your
selves, but in others, with whom you have to do, and over whom you have any
power; hinder it in your Families by Restraint, and Correction, in your
Neighbors and Friends, by Admonition and Reproof. So much Sin as you hinder,
so much you contribute to the Peace and Prosperity of the Nation. It is vain to
think of preventing Judgment, if you do not endeavor to hinder Sin, which
calls for it: though Punishment may not immediately follow at the heels of Sin,
Sentnce against an Evil Work may not be speedily Executed, Eccles. 8.11. yet so
long as Sin is spared, or connived at, it is all the while breeding Judgment:
the store of Sin adds to the Treasure of Wrath.

3. Do all the Good you can, it is your several places, not only your Personal,
but Relative Capacities, by Instruction, by Counsel, by Example, labor to
propagate Goodness to all, with whom you converse; while others are spreading
Sin, do you endeavor to promote Holiness. Commend the Ways of God to others,
by walking exactly in them your selves. Practice those things that are Lovely,
Philip. 4.8. That may be a means to make those love your Religion, who hitherto
never loved your selves. The more you do for the gaining of Souls, the more you
do for the good of the Nation: every Saint you are Instrumental to make, will
be a new Stake in the Hedge, a new Stone in the Wall, an addition to the
Strength and Security of the Land.

2. To Sinners. How many of those to whom this Exhortation is Addressed, will
Read it, I know not, and if they do, whether they will own themselves Sinners,
and count themselves concerned in what is said; but this I am sure of, that if
they are not Sinners, and Wicked, they are Saints, (these Two divide the Land,
all are either Godly or Ungodly, though there be different degrees among both,)
and if Saints they are, the former Exhortation will reach them; let them then
Act up to it, and show themselves Saints, let them appear, and stand up for the
Public Good, and Interpose with God for the preservation and welfare of their
Land: But, Sirs, if your Consciences give the lie to your pretensions, and tell
you, that you are not Saints, that you are Ungodly, you then are they to whom
in this Exhortation I am to apply my self. If the truly Religious be a Defense
to the Nation, do you accordingly carry your selves toward them; use them well,
make much of them, be kind to them, take heed of hurting them: Be so far
Disobedient for once, to your Father the Devil, as not Gratify him to your own
Undoing, by Maligning, Traducing, Opposing or Persecuting, those that fain
would Save you, and, under God, are your best Benefactors; do not hinder them
from being Godly, from Serving their Lord, and doing that whereby they are
preventing your Ruin, and promoting your Good. Take heed of touching them, or
meddling with them; if the Argument would move you, I would say, take heed of it.

1. For Gods sake. Who has an Interest in them, whose Jewels, whose Anointed
Ones, whose Children they are, and whose Image they bear, Psalm. 119.94. Mal.
3.16. Psalm. 105.15. If you do but own God as your Lord, or pretend to do so,
you should have some respect to those that belong to him; and they that have no
regard for Saints, have none for God himself; they that hate them that are
begotten, cannot love them that beget, 1 John 5.1. I know you will be ready to
say, they are not Saints, but a company of Factious, or Seditious, or
Hypocritical Persons, whom you oppose. I wonder what is become of all the
Saints, you dare not say you are such your selves, and all that are not like
you in Sin, though never so much of the same Judgment with you, you call
Hypocrites. Has God no true Servants left in the Land? or where must we look
for them? But what if the Dirt you throw upon the Factious, be found sticking
upon the Religious? What if the Wound you give the the Hypocrites, draw Blood
from the Saints? and those that you call the Enemies of the Nation, appear to
be the Friends of God? It cost Zebah and Zalmunna dear, for Killing those that
resembled the Children of a King, Judge. 8.18. Take heed of daring to put forth
your Hands against those that do but resemble the Children of God, least, when
you think not of it, they prove to have been so. But if this prevail not, as I
fear it will not, yet,

2. Take heed of Troubling Gods Holy Ones, for your own sakes: It is your
Interest and your Wisdom, (as before) no less then your Duty; for they can do
more for you, and more against you, then all the World besides. Genesis 20.7. God
bids Abimelech restore Abraham his Wife, for (says he) he is a Prophet, and he
shall Pray* for thee, and thou shall Live, he was concerned to use Abraham
well, when he might get so much by it: and if not, thou shall surely Die, thou
and all that are thine; his wronging Abraham should cost him dear. Consider,

1. Their Redeemer is strong, Jer. 50.34. who that is, the next words tell you,
the Lord of Hosts is his Name. It is dangerous meddling with any that have great
Friends and Allies; such may by their means be too hard for you, though in
themselves they be but weak. He that is a Kings Son may be but a Child, and so
but feeble himself, and not able to resist the force of One that is strong, and
violent, but he has a King for his Father, One that has a Sovereign Power,
and can Command Thousands, and by him he may prevail over a strong Enemy. The
Godly may be but weak, and mean, and contemptible, in themselves, but they have
a Friend, nay, a Father that is strong, the Lord of Hosts is their Redeemer,
One that can deal with you, overtop you, crush you, make you perish with the
very Rebukes of his Countenance, Psalm. 80.16. If he do but blow upon you, your
Breath goes out of you, you Die, and return to your Earth, Psalm. 146.4.

2. He will thoroughly plead their Cause, so it follows: Assure your selves God
will certainly do it, first or last, here or hereafter. Their Cause is his
Cause, he knows that for his Names sake they suffer Rebuke, for his sake they
are appointed as Sheep for the Slaughter, Psalm. 44.22. They suffer so many
unworthy things, however upon other pretenses, yet really because they belong
to him; so that if you strike at them, you strike at him, if you touch them,
you touch the Apple of his Eye, Zech. 2.8. Christ at the last Day will Judge you
according as your Carriage has been to his People, and Interprets all done, or
not done, to them, as done, or not done, to himself, Matthew. 25. God may for a
long time keep silence, and let you alone; but one Day will meet with you; be
sure in the other Life, it may be in this: and then, can you either,

1. Ward off his Blows, when he lays them on you? Can you withstand his Power,
grapple with Omnipotence? Cannot he bring those Evils upon you, which it is
impossible for you to keep off, or resist? The Lord will come with Fire, and
his Chariots like a Whirlwind, to render his Anger with Fury, and his Rebukes
with Flames of Fire, Isa. 66.15.

2. Or, Can you bear what he Inflicts? Can your Hearts endure, can your Hands
be strong, when he comes to deal with you? Ezekiel. 22.14. Alas you cannot stand
before the Messengers of his Wrath? How are you brought down with a little
Pain, or Sickness? A fit of the Stone, or Cholick, makes you almost Mad, and
how then will you endure, if God himself once take you to hand, if he fill you
with his Fury, and pour out his Wrath immediately upon your Souls?

Is it not then your Interest to favor Gods Saints, to take heed of meddling
with them to their hurt, when it is like, the conclusion, to be in your own?
when as they are your best Friends. So they may prove your most Formidable
Enemies, by Engaging God against you, who, when they suffer wrongfully, will
not fail to take their part, and be on their side, and though he use you for a
time, as Scourges in his Hand for the Correction of them, yet when he has done
with you, is then ready to throw you into the Fire, Isa. 10.12. Remember then,
that as the Religious of a Nation ordinarily do most good to them; so when they
are abused, and trampled upon, they do most hurt, because God pleads their
Cause, and espouses their Quarrel; many a Judgment they bring down upon their
Enemies, that is, God does for them: the Violence done to them, is severely
punished upon them that do it. How was Egypt Plagued for Isreal's sake, and the
Philistines, and others, after them, and the Babylonians after them all? Nay,
whoever hardened himself against them, and prospered? Gods Jerusalem is at one
time or other a Burdensome Stone, to all them that Burden themselves with it,
Zech. 12.3. The House of Jacob is a Fire, and the House of Joseph a Flame, and
the House of Esau as Stubble, Obad. 1.18. God takes notice of the least
Injuries done to his Children by their Enemies, nay, of their very Omissions,
and Neglects, Deuteronomy. 23.3, 4. The Moabite and the Ammonite were not to enter
into the Congregation of the Lord to the Tenth Generation, because they met not
the Children of Israel with Bread, and with Water, when they came out of
Egypt; and what then will become of them that grudg Gods Children Bread, that
robs them of their Spiritual Bread, and Water of Life? would take from them the
Allowance their Father has given them, and so would starve their very Souls.

3. Whoever showed Kindness to the Godly in vain? A Cup of Cold Water given to
a Disciple in the name of a Disciple, or because he belongs to Christ, shall
not wants its Reward: Christ takes the least Respect shown them, as done to
himself; Visiting the Prisoners, Clothing the Naked, Releiving the Poor, are
acceptable Offices, and usually followed with some Blessing even in this Life:
And I wonder, wherein are they that this Day Persecute Gods Children, the worse
for them? or for any Countenance they have shown them? Nor are they ever like
to be, if it be not their own fault, by stirring up Gods Jealousy, and pulling
down his Vengeance upon their own Heads. Were but Truth effectually believed,
what an alteration would it make upon the Spirits of Men? How would those that
are at present so unkind to the truly Religious, become their Friends, and
Favorers? And the Governors of Judah would say in their Hearts, the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem shall be my Strength in the Lord of Hosts their God,
Zech. 12.5.

Quest. Whether it be expedient, and how the Congregation may say Amen in
public Worship. SERMON XXXI.
The Text is, Neh. 8.6. And Ezra Blessed the Lord, the great God, and all the
^^ople answered, Amen, Amen.
OMnipotent and Eternal goodness never wants Instruments to deliver his Church
from slavery, or reform it from degeneracy. All the Empires and Emperors in the
World, have served the Kingdom of God, and been as Scaffolds set up about the
House of God, to be taken down when that is built up and finished. They have
been as Gibeonites and Nethamins to the Temple of the Lord. The Assyrian was
Gods Rod upon Isreal's Back. Persian was here Gods Shepherd, whose Spirit was
stirred up to raise up the Jews.

Alexander was a Servant, and the Romans have been but Gods slaves to do his
Will against their own.

The State of the Church at this juncture, was the end of a desolation, or
beginning of a reformation. The Jews had weathered out Seventy Years in
Captivity, wherein multitudes of them were wore off, a Remnant being left, God
raised up Cyrus, and moved him to set them free from Babylon, according to the
Prophecy of Isa. 45.1. Two Hundred and Ten Years before.

Many of the People through lazy worldliness or despondency, chose rather still
to lie among the Pots in Caldea, than return to Jerusalem to build their City
and Temple, though Cyrus gave them not only liberty by Proclamations, but
Accommodations for the Work. But God raised up the Spirit of Zerobabel,
Joshuah, Nehemiah, and Ezra, to carry it on.

This Ezra was a great Man of God, one of the great Synagogue, a Prophet, a
Scribe, a Priest. Some will have it, that as Jehoiakim cut and burnt the roll,
Jer. 36.23. So the Caldeans burned all the Books of the Law, and so Ezra
restored them as a Prophet by Revelation or his Memory, but this is false, for
Daniel 9.2. understood by Books, the expiration of the Seventy Years, and Cyrus
himself read the Prophecy of Isaiah, for Ezra 1.2. he says, the Lord charged
him to build his House at Jerusalem. But he was a Prophet, as he was directed
by Gods Spirit to compose this History of his, and a perfect Scribe living to
Malachi's time, he wrote the complete Old Testament, and made a perfect Copy.
But here he Officiates as a Priest, the Son of Seraiah, Ezra 7.1. from Phineas,
Eleazar, and Aaron, to serve the Lord. When they had neither Temple nor
Tabernacle; they set up the worship of the God of Heaven in theopen Heaven,
which was neither Typical nor Topical, but Natural and Evangelical Worship.

Upon the First Day of the Seventh Month, in a Pulpit, in the Street, (the
People meeting as one Man, Ezra 3.1.) he read the Law of God, and that
distinctly, giving the Sense of it, verse 8. from Morning to Noon, and all the
Congregation stood attentively, and at Noon probably he Dismissed them with a
Blessing according, to Numb. 6.23. Gods command.

B^^ ^re at the opening the Book, Praying to God, and praising him for his good
hand over them, and his good word before them; he Blessed the Lord, ere he
Blessed the People, and Ezra Blessed, etc.

In which words there is. 1. The Priests or Ministers Office, Blessing, And 2.
The Peoples Office, and all the People answered, Amen, Amen. 3. The great God,
in the midst of this great Congregation, the Object of the Priests Office, and
the Peoples also, whence this.

Doct. That it is a lawful and laudable Practice for People in the conclusion
of public Prayer, or Praising God to pronounce an Amen.

This will answer the Question, which is, whether it be expedient, and how the
Congregation may say Amen in public Worship? 1. I will explain what is meant
by Amen. 2. Show what warrant there is for the Practice. 3. Deduce some
inference from all.

1. Then there is Amen Substantive, and that is God himself, who is what he is,
Alpha and Omega, Truth it self, Isa. 65.16. he that blesses himself in the
Earth, shall bless himself in the God Amen, or of Truth. Jesus Christ is God
and the Amen, the faithful and true Witness, Rev. 3.14. he is that God in whom
we may bless our selves, his Being is of himself as God, and he gives being to
his Word, 2 Cor. 1.20. all the promises of God being in him; ye^, and Amen,
whether Hebrew or Greek, Old Testament or New, Promises in him they are
completed, and by him they are fulfilled.

2. There is Amen Affirmative, a Phrase used in the beginning of any momentous
Truth, as an asseveration, what is Amen, Matthew. 16.28. Luke 9.27. (...) or
verily. Our Savior has this Phrsae peculiar to himself, Amen, Amen, to give
confirmation to the Doctrine, and to raise our Attention and Faith, or to show,
that not only Truth is spoken, but by him who is Truth it self.

3. There is (...) or Optative Amen; which is as much as (...) let it be so,
Blessed be God by us, and Blessed be we of the Lord, or as Jer. 28.6. It is
expounded, Amen; the Lord do so, the Lord perform the words which thou have
spoken. This Amen was used to be set to when good was spoken, as 1 Kings 1.36.
when David commanded Solomon to be made King, Benaiah said Amen, the Lord do
so. Or when in Imprecations of evil, as Numb. 5.22. the Woman tried by the
Water of Jealousy, which sprinkled on the Curse, it blotted out the Curse if
she was Innocent, if Guilty, her Thigh presently rotted, she was to say Amen,
Amen; let it be so if I be Guilty, and let it be so if I be Innocent. So at the
end of the Curses, Deuteronomy. 27.10. and all the People shall say Amen, they are
loath to have the Curse come, therefore they are commanded there to say Amen;
but they need no command to Seal the Blessings with Amen, all are apt enough to
Believe and Wish them.

But here is a double Amen, which has the greater Emphasis, and requires
greater Attention and Intention of mind, as Neh. 9.5. Bless the Lord your God,
for ever and ever, and Blessed be his Glorious Name; which is exalted above all
Blessings and Praise; Ever and Ever, is answered by Amen, Amen; or let it be
ratified in Heaven, so on Earth. And the Jews say, that he that pronounces
this Amen, as he ought, is greater than he that Blesses in the Name of the
Lord; he that pronounces this Amen with all his might, the Gates of Heaven
fly open to him. But there are Three evil Amens; they call the 1. Abbreviated
in the first Syllable or Letter, and whoever so pronounces it, as to hasten
his Amen, his Days shall be soon passed. 2. There is Amen cut off in the last
Syllable suppressed. 3. There is the Pupillar or Orphan Amen, when it is
pronounced at random, impertinently and unseasonably, without Understanding,
Prayer, or Praise foregoing, and so there is no Father to beget Devotion in
them, and so it is an Orphan Amen, and his Children shall be Fatherless that
pronounces such a lifeless Word, and a Fatherless Amen. But he that with
knowledge and fervor pronounces this Amen, his Days shall be prolonged upon
Earth, as Buxtorff relates.

2. Now I am to give you some considerations and arguments for the use of this
Amen, and the manner of it, and they are Seven.

1. It is lawful and laudable publicly to use it, because it is connatural to
Prayer and Praise. I do not lay the lawfulness of it upon a Persian decree, or
a positive Injunction, set on things no ways connatural to the Action; for that
is forced Meat, and turns a Man's Stomach, and his Conscience. There is no need
for a Rubric by the Men of the great Synagogue, or a Canon to command a Man to
blush, when it is only the natural passion that will command it. So when the
heart is warm in Prayer with serious and earnest affections, a double Amen,
does as naturally flow from us, as Milk from a Mothers Breast to her Suckling,
and Amen comes from Amen, which signifies to Nurse, as if it were, if not the
Mother, yet the faithful Nurse of lively Devotion. Assent to Repetitions is
essential unto Prayer, and it is not signified publicly, but by our Amen. Not
that we are obliged to speak it always, and with a loud Voice, quantis arteriis
opus est si pro sono audiamur Tert. what Lungs had we need to have if God hear
us for our loudness? But when the heart is affected, we see here how the People
stood up, and lift up their hands to Heaven, naturally signifying they would
lift the Name of God with all their might; but they cast down themselves,
bowing down their Heads, and worshipping the Lord with their Faces to the
ground; who can hold his Breath from a groan or sigh, when matter and affection
meet together? The Israelites here could not withhold their hands, nor Hannah
hold still her Eyes when earnest in Temple Prayer, nor can a zealous heart hold
the Tongue from moving to an Amen, at the end of Prayer and Praise. There is no
Child of God that can say our Father, but lower or louder, he must and will say
Amen. The Jews in time of Incense called themselves mutes in deep silent
Prayer, when they praised God on Instruments, Semivocates, but when in open
Prayer and Praises, then they were Vocates in their Amens.

2. We have the practice of the Old and New Testament Beleivers for our
example. In Moses you had it in Numbers and Deuteronomy, and David often uses it
in the Psalms; yea, this double Amen, Psalm. 41.13. Blessed be the Lord God of
Israel from everlasting to everlasting, Amen and Amen. God was Isreal's God,
accepting their Praises, hearing Prayers, fulfilling promises, and this for
Ever and Ever, and be it Eternally ratified Amen and Amen to all Generations,
Psalm. 106.48. the same words are repeated with this exhortation, let all the
People say Amen, Hallelujah. And they had the same Praises and Petitions to
offer, therefore the same conclusion is suitable. So the Prophet Jeremiah
speaking of Gods Oath, to give Canaan to the Jews, says, Oh Lord Amen, or be it
so, Jer. 11.5. so Paul. 1 Cor. 14.16. how can the Idiot, the private Man, who
knows only his own private single Language, say Amen to Prayer or Praise in
another Tongue; which not only imports the custom, but the manner of saying
Amcn, to be with Faith and Understanding, Ephesians. 3.21. to him be Glory in the
Church by Christ Jesus throughout all Ages, World without end Amen. Yea, Jesus
Christ, a greater than Moses, Prophets and Apostles, adds this conclusion to
his perfect form of Petitions, in Matthew. 6. so in his Book of Revelations,
chap. 5, 14. the Four Beasts, and Four and Twenty Elders, who represented tho
whole Church of Jews and Gentiles together, cry Amen. Yea, that innumerable
Company of those Triumphing Souls, who had white Robes and Palms in their
Hands, as Victors over Temptations, with the Elders and Angels, fell on their
Faces, and worshipped God, saying, Amen. Blessing, and Glory, and Honor, and
Wisdom, and Thanksgiving, and Power, and Might, be unto our God for Ever and
Ever Amen, Rev. 7.12. So at the fall of Babylon, as the Voice of many Thunders
and Waters, the Church cries Amen Hallelujah. The Lord God Omnipotent Reigns,
and has Avenged the Blood of his Servants, Rev. 19.4. Yea, it lasts unto the
marriage of the Lamb, Rev. 22.20. still when the Bridegroom comes, the Church
cries Amen, come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

3. Amen, after Prayer and Praise, is the Man's consent, judgment, and
approbation of what is offered unto God, it is the setting to of our Seal to
all, and our putting our Hands to bear a part in the Praises, and to have a
share in the Petitions. It imports the desire of our Soul, which is, the
formality of Prayer; now all these are essential to these Duties, and the
pronunciation, is but the publication of our reward, Sense which is very
significant in public Worship, Hearing is but the formal Sense in conceiving
the Petitions, but Speech brings them forth, and is a more open profession, and
a more Masculine expression of Devotion, Lamen. 3.41. let us lift up our hearts
with our hands to God in the Heavens. When the heart is intensly elevated to
God, it carries the Hands and the Voice along with it, it Acts all the Body
from the Center, as Tertullian Phraseth it, bona conscientia eructat ad
superficiem, he lifts up his Soul, Psalm. 143.8. and Body too to God, as they
lifted up the Mincah, or Heav-Offering, and waved it before the Lord; the Soul
will work the body into Simpathy, when it is earnest indeed, that which made
the Veins of the Body to open their Mouths in drops of Blood, as Christ his
Prayer in his Agony did, Luke 22.44. will certainly make us open our Lips. Out
of the abundance of the Heart, the Mouth speaks, Luke. 6.46.

4. This Vocal Amen, is as it were the Epitome and sum of all our Petitions
and Praises to God, it is the Center which all those Lines are drawn toward. It
is all the Duty vertually reduced to one word and point. Yea, it is the
repeating and ecchoing, or redoubling of all over again. As the Mercury behind
the Glass, it reverterates the lively Image of all preceding Devotion. It is a
drawing the Arrow to the Pile by a strong ejaculation, qua toto cord deum
petimus, in Bellarmines Phrase; whereby the whole heart is darted up to God. It
is a stirring up our selves to take hold of God, Isa. 64.7. It is taking aim,
and directing our Prayer to him, and looking up; Psalm. 5.3. as if they would
hand up Gods Praises to him, and stand ready to receive his Mercies with open
Hands and Mouths. It winds up all together in one bundle; many are willing to
have God forgive their trespasses, but cannot so readily forgive others, we may
be free for God to give us daily Bounty and Bread, but cannot make it as Meat
and Drink to do his Will. Men will easily accept of Gods kindness; not so
roundly pay their tribute of Praises. Such cannot roundly Pray, nor say Amen.
Ah Lord, and Amen, are two long Prayers in few words, managed by the whole
Soul, and thus it is an Amen with an Hallelujah, when we seek God with all our
hearts, then we find him, Jer. 29.13.

5. Amen* rightly pronounced is an intense Act of Faith, or it involves a
strong Faith. The Hebrew Verb in Niphat, signifies to be firm, stable, and
strong, and in Hiphil, it signifies, to believe and trust, and indeed, we
cannot believe or trust to any thing but that which is stable, invariable, and
immutable. So that there are two Declarations made by this Amen. 1. That God is
firm and immutably true in himself and his word. 2. That we will not only
believe his Truth, but trust to his veracity, and build upon it; as the Prophet
does both, Jer. 11.5. this is a laying hold on Gods Strength, Isa. 27.5. as we
see Abraham, Genesis 15.6. he believed God, (...) Vehermen, Gods Truth is
believed, his veracity trusted to. Israel twisted about both these, as Abraham
did, he wrestled with God and prevailed. The Jews say, Amen habet tres nucleos,
has Three Kernels, the one is of an Oath, the Second of Faith, the Third of
Confidence, as Bunto says, on (...) When we have confessed our Sins, we do by
our Amen say, all is true, and we have deserved Gods displeasure, we beg pardon
of them, and so believe God has promised Pardon to the Penitent, we trust our
selves with God in Christ, and believe that he will Pardon our Sins, as all
others that cast themselves upon his promised Grace.

6. The unanimous pronunciation of Amen, is an assurance, that God will accept
our Praises, and answer our Prayers; So as the Soul comes off with Luther's
Vicimus, we have prevailed, Mark 11.24. what things soever ye desire when you
Pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them; nay, 1 John 5.15.
If we know that he hears us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the
Petitions we desired of him. We ought to believe we shall have them, either in
kind or value, and infinite Wisdom and Goodness, must be Judge in that Case
alone, Matthew. 18.19. if two of you agree on Earth, as touching any thing that
they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is in Heaven. If
any single Soul Pray in Faith, it shall be heard, much more, if two have a
Symphony, as the word imports, they shall be answered; how much more, when the
whole Congregation is in Harmony, and unanimously cries, Amen, when the whole
Congregation meets as one Man, Ezra 3.1. and the multitude of Beleivers are of
one Heart and Soul, Acts 4.32. God will say Amen to such Amens. They are as it
were a bath col, the Echo and Voice of God from the Mercy-Seat. Sanctorum vota
sunt oracula, Gods Spirit stirs up such Prayers, and they shall not be denied.

The Soul, like Luther, says, fiat voluntas mea, as Men make their Wills in the
Name of God, Amen; it shall be thus, for once let my Will Oh Lord be done.
Heavens Gate is open to this united Knock.

7. And lastly, This unanimous Amen of Faith, strikes terror on the Enemies of
the Church, whether Devils or Men. When the Romans had Conquered Philip and the
Grecians, and Flaminius caused Peace to be proclaimed to the Grecians; there
was such a Shout, says Plutarch, that the very Crows and other Birds, fell down
to the ground, the Air was so rent and shaken. And when the Church of God,
Terrible as an Army with Banners, gives her unanimous Voices of Amens; not only
Satan falls like lightning from Heaven, Luke 10.18. but Simon Magus, by Peter's
Prayer, is fetched down, when he attempted to fly in the Air, as if he had
been the Holy Dove, and Power of God; as Ecclesiastical Story relates. And
Socrates tells us, that upon Theodosius his Prayers, and his Armies, the
Barbarians Captain, was smitten with a Thunderbolt, and his Soldiers by Fire.
As the Turks Mined the Eastern Empire of the Romans by Fire, Smoke and
Brimston, i, e. by Guns and Gunpowder, Rev. 9.17. when the Church is united in
hearty Amens, it is like the Shout that the Israelites gave when God and his
Ark came into the Camp, which was such a great sound that the Earth rang. 1 Samuel 4.5. for then God is gone up with a Shout, Psalm. 47.5. to answer the
Prayers made for the Salvation of his People. This makes the hearts of their
Enemies to melt and tremble as the Philistines did. As Hierom expresses it, the
hollow Idols and their Temples, that were empty, did Echo and Rebound the
Churches Amens; so as their Fabrics shaked. Thus when the (Shophar) lovely
Trumpet sounded the Seventh time upon the Seventh day, Josh. 6.20. the Walls of
Jerico fell, and so shall the Gates and Walls of Babylon, by the Preaching of
the Gospel on the Lords Days, and the Prayers of the Saints. The united Breath
of Gods People, sends a blast upon their Enemies, the Trumpet blew, and the
People shouted, and Jerico fell down to the ground. Our Amens, must not drop
like a cold Bullet of Lead, out of the mouth of a Musket, bowing to the
ground, but they must be Fired by preparations of the Heart, and warm
affections, they must be Discharged and Shot off with the utmost valde of the
Soul, and fervency of the Spirit: Samuel Thundered in Prayer, and God Thundered
upon Isreal's Enemies. So David Prays, Psalm. 144.5. that God would bow the
Heavens and come down, etc. and Ps. 1.8, 9. he did bow the Heavens and come
down, and verse 13. the Lord Thundered in Heaven, the highest gave his Voice,
Hailstones, and coals of Fire. When Gods People can unite in one Voice, God
gives his Voice with them, and for them.

Use. The First Inference then, is of Reproof for our deep silence, and too
much neglect of this hearty Amen, which proceeds from these Four ill Causes.

1. From thence, whence all ill things come in upon us, even from Popish
ignorance and darkness. When Men grew dull and stupid, and neither understood,
or cared to understand, either the word of God to us, or ours to him in Prayer.
Religion was looked upon as a ((...)) a By-business, or troublesome, laborious,
and needless curiosity. It was enough to Believe as the Church Believed, and to
Pray as the Church Prayed, and so they devolved all their Devotions, on a pack
of idle Monks and Friars, whom they called Religious Omers, who should serve
God supererogate, and merit for them; yea, not only procure a freedom from
Purgatory and Pardons, but Paradise also for their Moneys. And as soon as their
Silver did chink in the Basin of the Priest, out springs the Soul from
Purgatory; as if the sound of Money was powerful in Purgatory, as true Amens
are in Heaven.

2. The Divisions among Christians of the reformed Religion, is another Cause
of this defect and neglect, 1 Cor. 14.26. when ye come together, every one has
a Psalm, a Doctrine, a Tongue, a Revelation, an Interpretation. One was for
Singing, another for Reading, a Third for Preaching; one for Prophesying,
another for Interpreting, the Apostle gives two Rules to oppose this and Women's
talking in the Church, let all things be done distinctly, and in order to
edification, natural decency forbids all confusion. In our days, some have such
Schismatical Phrases, Notions, and Doctrines in Preaching, Praying, and
Praising, that a sober Christian cannot say Amen. Some so zealous for Forms,
that nothing else must be a Prayer but the Lords Prayer; as if because Cyprian
calls it a Legitimate Form, all others were spurious, when it is the Sense that
is the Prayer; and not the words which are differently set down in Luke from
Matthew, as Chemitius well observes. Others are so vehement against all Forms,
that they would reduce all Devotion to an invisible Spirituality, as if they
had dropped their Bodies, and were crowded within the Vail, into the Triumphant
Quire of Spirits in Heaven. But certainly while we are in the Body, we ought to
glorify God with our Bodies as well as our Spirits, and with our Tongues as
the Bodies Instruments in public Worship. Verbo deus laudandus quia deus
verbum, says Lactan: God was made Flesh to speak to us, therefore we ought to
speak to him, Psalm. 16.9. the Tongue is Man's Glory as it differenceth us from
Beasts, so it make us Priests to God, Rev. 1.6. to offer up our own, and the
dumb Creatures Sacrifices of Praise to God, to him be Glory and Dominion for
ever, Amen.

3. Another rate of this defect, is the degenerating of Assemblies from their
first Constitution and Plantation. For these, as all Bodies contracted
defilements both in Ministers and People. Formality has overrun that Zeal,
Piety and Charity, which formerly burned among them. So that many Assemblies
are run down so into the Spirit of the World, that they differ little from
Papists. How have some Ministers been thrust in upon the Assemblies by a
secular hand, who never understood how to preach or pray a live Prayer, and
many Congregations full of such ignorance and profaneness, that the Arches and
Vaults in the Building, give as good an Echo as their dead Amens. One comes in
his Drink, another pipeing hot out of their Wordly Businesses, a Third in
huffing Finery and Bravery, to be gazed on; another is heavy laden with Sleep,
and comes for a Nap. How can they that are not concerned for Gods Glory, his
Church, his Word, the pardon of their Sins, nor think themselves beholden to
God for Daily-Bread, or that they need daily Grace, say either Our Father or
Amen, with any Sense. When either Ministers or People, Drink, and Swill, and
Swear, and roar with one another at the Tavern all the Week, and yet will be
the most Vocal and Loud in their responsals on the Lords Day, it turns Men's
Stomachs and Consciences from public expressions, as something to rankly of
Hypocritical Formality. That, with the wise Heathen in the Ship, when a Company
of wicked Persons cried and prayed, hold your peace sad he, least the Gods know
you are here, and so destroy us. D. Laer. Roaring at the Alehouse, and
bellowing at the Church, are both alike beastly and ugly to be heard.

4. Worldly Peace, Plenty and Prosperity, dirty and dull the Wheels of the
Soul, so as Activity and Fervency are Bird-limed. It Is unreasonable, yet too
true, that those Tenants who have the best Farms, pay God his Rent worst. When
Christians were kept warm by the Zeal of their Persecutors, they met in Caves
and Woods, with the hazard of their Lives; they had a Zeal for God and the
Gospel, they heard and Prayed as for their lives, and for the life of Religion
it might be their last Sermon or Prayer they might join in, and so they had a
fervent hearty love for one another, which made them not only seal their
Prayers with warm Amens, but they sealed one another also with an holy kiss,
not knowing whether they should ever see one another Faces again in the Flesh
or no, they fell on one another Necks, and kissed at parting, Romans 16.16.
another expression springing naturally from strong affection, truly Christian,
in those times, which if practiced in this dirty Age, would be perhaps proved
as well as judged, a piece of wretched carnality. But their Flesh was kept
under by poverty and persecutions, so as such filthy tentations were burnt up
by the love of God, and each other. And we have cause to fear, God has some
such Irons in the Fire to fear of that dead, yet proud Flesh, which in these
days is bred in the hearts of many professors. In the mean time this Flesh
hinders our very lips from closing in a sound Amen.

Use. 2. This then informs us, that if ever the Church recover primitive purity
and fervency, it must have such administrations, as 1. The whole Worship of
God, must be in a known Tongue, that so all may say Amen in the Congregation.
It is observed by Tertul. de Paenit. that Sack is the same in Latin, Greek, and
Hebrew; to which we may add, English also, to show all Nations are Sinners, and
need Repentance, and Humiliation in Sackcloth and Ashes, and so Amen is the
same in all Languages, that all Nations might have the same Intelligible
Language, in their Devotions especially. But the Papists will tell us that a
Jewel is of equal value in an ignorant Clowns hand, as it is off when in a
Skilful Lapidaries, a Petition to a Prince, is of the same efficacy in ones
hand, who can neither write nor read, as it is in a Scholars hand, and all is
true, if God did not read hearts, when Princes only read papers; God required
to be worshipped with an understanding Soul; nay, the Jesuits tell us the
unlearned do merit and obtain more, than they that understand, because they
have more humility and fervor: But it is a strange humility and fervency to
pass for a Grace, which is not an Act of an intelligent Man, it is so far from
Divine and Meritorious, that it is not an humane Act. Cajetan, more to the
plain truth, tells us, that Organs which are a distraction to the intelligent
Worshippers, were yet retained to promote the unlearned Men's Devotions; and
Charms though not understood, yet have power over Serpents and Devils, so that
Prayers and Praises in an unknown Language are with them, Enchantments upon the
only wise God, and their Devotion is rather the breath of an Organ, than the
breathings, and being filled with the Spirit.

2. This informs us also, that all public administrations are to be in the
matter of them intelligible, as well as in the form of Language. Ministers are
not to use overstudied Phrases, and singular Notions of their own Fancies,
which sometimes Men endeavor to pin upon their Auditors; Prayer is putting the
word and promises of God in suit, and therefore plain Scriptural Pleadings are
our best Arguments. Any unintelligible or doubtful expressions, do but lay a
Stumbling Block in the way, to hinder the hearers giving readily their Amen.
Therefore we must not only Pray with our own Spirits, but with the Peoples
understanding also, 1 Cor. 14.15. our Seal must be, and can be only set to Gods
Covenant, his trust goes before our Amen. So God promises to give his People
Pastors after his own heart, which shall feed them with knowledge and
understanding, without which our Sacrifices are but the offering up of Swines
Flesh, or cutting off a Dogs Neck.

3. All the Congregation must be unanimous, of one Heart, Sense, and Soul, or
else they can never meet and center in one Amen, but are in separation when
they are together. The Apostle tells us, that the variance of Husband and Wife,
causes their Prayers to be hindered, 1 Pet. 3.7. when Passion is up, Devotion
is down, or very opposite, like the Mountains of Blessing and Cursing, or
Samaria and Jerusalem, or Anah and Peninnah, scolding under the same Roof. But
the true Jerusalem is a City at unity with it self, Psalm. 122.3. one Lord, one
Baptism, one Bread, one Body, one Soul, one Spirit, one Heart, one Faith, and
one Request, viz. Zec. 14.9. that the Lord may be King over all the Earth, that
the Lord may be one, and his Name one. Which will be when God shall give his
People one heart, and one way, that they may fear him for ever, Jer. 32.39.
then there shall be as many Taches as Loops, and Sockets as Tenons, and all the
Tabernacle be one, Ex. 36.13. as the Jews when they Sacrificed, they compassed
the Altar round, so when they feasted they sat round, 1 Samuel 16.11. this
Symphony and Harmony, when it obtains, will make one Amen, when Gods Praises
and the Saints Prayers shall be all one, which will be when Christ's Prayer
shall be answered, John 17.11. Let them be one, as thou and I am one; all
heart-burnings shall cease, when all our Fire shall be only upon Gods Altar,
and unite in one pyramedal Flame aspiring and terminating in the pure Love of
God.

4. To all this, there must come in diligent attention, and intention of mind,
for else they cannot consent to all and every part; and as a Man who is to set
his Hand and Seal to an Indenture, will hear all the Conditions, that he may
know what he binds himself to, so we being to Seal all the Prayers with our
lips and heart, Amen had need mind what we Seal to. How do many Frisk and Air
their thoughts in Vanities, like a wanton Spanel from his Masters Walk, and
come in from this false sent to the Quest, with full cry, and a dirty Amen.
This only mocks Gods All-seeing Eye, and Hypocritical Colludes with the
Congregation. And when we consider how few hold pace with every Petition. The
Fourth Toletan Counsel that made a Canon against any using Hallelujah in Lent,
might have forbidden Amens also in public Congregations, considering that
Jejune attention and intention of mind, which accompanies the Devotions of the
generality. But when all Societies shall be intelligent, unanimous, intent and
affectionate, they may ought, and will say Amens, with Hallelujahs too, though
Lenten-Cannon, forbid both.

Use, 3. Is of Caution, to beware of all that which may hinder this powerful
Amen.

1. Then beware of all Sin, deliberate Sins dead our Faith and Spirits in
Prayer. Quantum a praeceptis tantum ab auribus dei distamus Tertul. de Ora.
Dom. We are always as much at a distance from Gods hearing us, as we are from
hearing his righteous precepts. If we regard Iniquity in our hearts, God will
not say Amen to our Prayers, nor can we do it in Faith. How can any say Amen
to, Deuteronomy. 27.15, 17. Cursed be he that worships Images, or removes his
neighbors Landmarks. For an unholy Person to say hallowed be thy Name, is to
Pray God to Sanctify himself upon him, and he that cannot have Charity to
forgive them that trespass against him, while he Prays God to forgive his
trespasses, he does interpretatively Pray that God would not forgive his Sins.

2. Take heed of too much Business, for that dusteth us with so many thoughts,
which not only choke the word, but stifle our Prayers, 1 Cor. 7.38. the Apostle
would have them (...) without cares, that they might serve the Lord without
distraction, (...). By these convulsive motions of distracting thoughts, which
pull us first on one hand, then on the other, the face of the Duty and the Soul
is very distorted, ill-favored, of an ill Scheme and Fashion; all the Beauty
of Duty is gone off, nor can the Soul well sit close to the Lord, and steady,
but sits tottering, half on, half off; no settled Frame of Spirit can be
maintained. First one business, then another, comes and pulls us off, to speak
with us, so as we are not at leisure to speak with God, as Cypr. Epist. 8.
says, it is strange we should think God should hear us, when we do not hear our
selves.

3. Beware of a lazy posture of the Body, for the Soul is drawn into consent
and sympathy with it, verse 5. here the Jews stood up to show their reverence
and attention to the word of God. They lifted up their hands, bowed down their
heads, and worshipped the Lord with their faces to the ground, here was exalted
Attention and Devotion, and most humble veneration, with intense affections,
and these could say, Amen, Amen. But to see one sit and hang down his head, and
hang his hat on his nose, or perhaps sleeping till he snore himself awake, and
then give a yawn or an idle Amen, any one without breach of Charity may think
him guilty of lazy Hypocrisy with detestation. This is a mocking of God,
giving the Congregation a flap with this Foxes tail, when they have cunningly
slept over the greatest part of the Prayer, and slipped out of the Congregation
without removeal. Irreligiosissimum est sedere nisi quod deo exprobamus quod
oration nos fatigaverit, as Tertul. de Or. do. says, It Is most indecent,
(without a good Reason) to sit at Prayer, for it is else, in effect, to tell
God, Prayer has tired us out.

Use 4. Is of Direction and Exhortation, how to keep up this Harmonious* Amen
in Public Assemblies.

1. Let Pastor and People never meet, but premise some solemn preparations of
Heart to meet the Lord. Rehoboam and most of the Kings of Israel, and their
People also, Sinned in this, That they prepared not themselves to set their
Hearts to seek the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 12.14. he fitted not his Heart, as the Hebrew
Word imports; it was no more fit to that Duty, then an Ass is to play upon an
Harp. We should never offer God that which cost us nothing; put off thy Shoes
from thy Feet, Vain Thoughts, and Vile Affections, and put on the Lord Jesus
Christ, e're you go into the Fathers Presence! A Worldly Spirit coming off from
common Employments, is not fit for Communion with God. A common Heart will
never be enclosed in any Duty, but runs wild of it self, and lies open to all
Incursions. Vzzah was smitten, though he touched the Ark out of a good
intention, but in an undue manner, 1 Chronicles. 15.13. He did it not in Judgment,
nor according to Gods Order and Appointment.

2. We must watch unto Prayer, Matthew. 26.41. for the Devil is there, as to
catch away the good Seed, so to catch us away by every wandering Thought, 1 Pet.
4.7. Peter and John were at Christ's Transfiguration in the Mount, Luke 9.32.
but were sadly heavy with Sleep. It is strange, when they should have been
taken up with Raptures and Ecstasies of Joy, that they should be so Drossie and
Drowsy. But how hard a matter it is for to watch with Christ One Hour in Duty.
Grief might make them heavy in the Garden, and yet Christ his Propassion, and
Sweating Drops of Blood, was enough to have put them into an Agony of
Compassion. But alas, neither the Garden, nor the Mount, is able to transport
us, or keep up Intention of Soul or Affection, unless God keep Fire on his own
Altar, and blow up our Spark into a Flame.

3. Our Intention cannot last long, our Actions depending on the Body, and
those Spirits, the finer Particles of the Blood, separated from it, by the
Alembick of the Brain. And as it is sometime e're they rise, so their height
and speed is soon over, and then we run down into Phlegm and Heaviness;
therefore in all Public Duties, (solemn Fastings excepted for humbling Soul
and Body) we ought not to be too Prolix, but to labor for strength, rather
then length, thick and short, as David's Panting, and Daniels Praying, Chap.
9.19. Oh Lord hear, Oh Lord forgive, Oh Lord hearken and do, defer not, etc.
When weighty Petitions are sent up for the whole Church, they draw Universal
Consent. Not that we ought, for Brevity (...) to confine all Prayer to the
Lords-Prayer, as if no Bushel was a Bushel, but (...) Standard; so to fall down
at this, and stand up against all others; whereas it is (...) diffused in
Sense, and so contracted in Words, that the Text may very well admi^ Comment in
Conformity to its Sense, and we need a more Comprehensive Mind then the Vulgar
have, to fill those words with.

4. When all is done, there is nothing done, but all to do, till we implore the
good Spirit of God, which he gave the Jews here, Nehem. 9.20. And he bad them
work, for his Spirit was with them, Hag. 2.4. And should remain among them,
when they Built the Temple, Luke 24.49. Christ bad his Disciples tarry at
Jerusalem, till they were Endued with Power from on High, there was no
Preaching or Praying without this Spirit of Grace and Supplication, Zech.
12.10. It is impossible, the Organs of our Bodies, or Faculties of our Souls,
should Praise God aright, unless this Spirt of God fill them, and blow them up.
He must, (...), Philip. 1.19. tune the Praise, and form the Prayer, in us; he
must (...), James 5.16. inlay it, and work it, both in and out, and he is the
Master of the Choice, to hold and keep us in Frame, as well as set us in, and
enable us to drive all our Petitions home and through, to a fervent Amen. Deus
solus docere potest ut velis se orari, as Tertul. says, None but God can teach
us how to Pray t^ God. That Spirit of Adoption that enableth us to say, Abba
Father, can only tea^^ us how to pronounce Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

