Another great and bloody PLOT AGAINST His Highness the Lord Protector, and the
Lords of his Honorable Council: with the Particulars thereof, and the manner
how a great and dreadful Blow should have been given on Christmas Day.

LIKEWISE, A List of the Names of some of the chief Conspirators; their Oath of
Secrecy touching Firelocks and Blunderbusses; and the several Examinations
and Confessions.

London, Printed for C. Horten, 1654.

The particulars of another great Plot against the Lord Protector, and a
Narrative of the Conspirators, extorted from them at their Examination, etc.
Among the rest of the great plots and Conspiracies, contrived by the
disaffected Spirits, since the Revolution of these Times, the very last carries
a special Memento, whereby the people of England by thinking of it, may lay
aside their disobedience, and put themselves into an holy Array, to meet the
Lord, and bless his Name, for these his Mercies vouchsafed to the Nations, in
making so happy and timely a discovery of this unlimited Conspiracy: For, as I
am informed, it extended to all in general, except those who should come in and
join with them; and not only the Lord Protector, and the Honorable Lords of
his Council; but also diverse members of Parliament, and Officers of the Army,
should have been exposed to the mercy of merciless men, and have suffered in
this bloody Assassination, had not Providence prevented it: For, it is said,
that they had entered into an Oath of Secrecy, to list men privately, and to
procure all such Arms as should make them formidable, in case of any
opposition; for which end, they had bought many Blunderbusses, Muskets,
Carbines, and Pistols, and had lodged them (as it is reported) in several
places both in London and Westminster, with a Resolution to have put a period
to the happy Constitution of this Government on Christmas day, by surprising
of the several Guards at White Hall, St. Jameses, the Mewes, and other places.
But one of the chief Conspirators being at last so extremely haunted with the
Furies of a guilty Conscience, took an occasion to reveal the same: In which
great Work, the true saying of a learned Author is verified; That when the
Conscience accuses, the Tongue confesses, the Eyes weep, the Hands wring, the
Heartakes, and the Voice cries; true it is, no part can be at ease.

Upon which discovery, dtvers were apprehended, and the Arms beforementioned
seized and taken.

Since which time, many Ship-Chandlers have been examined; and some Gunsmiths,
who confessed the number of Arms sold within the space of such a time; but to
whom, and for what use they could not tell.

And upon sufficient Evidence of their Innocence, they were discharged.

Great is the care of our prudent State to make a clear discovery of the depth
of the Design; and to find out the chief Fomentors thereof; to the end they may
be brought to condign punishment and be made fit Objects of Justice.

A List of the Names of some of the chief prisoners.
MR. Hales, Mr. Jackson, Mr. Smith, Mr. Gilbert, Mr. Ramsey, Mr. Lamb, W. Dent,
John Packer, John Bryan, Arthur Fox, Anthony James, W. Monk, Tho. Friar, Adam
Broughton, Nich. Broughton, W. Broughton Peter Rey, John Rey, W. Sperington, T.
Jeffery, W. Ogleston, W. Marshal, Tho. Andrews, Adrian Beal, G. Simpkin,
Cuthbert Roe.
And many others, who unadvisedly involved themselves in this Conspiracy; some
of which, as Report says, are Quakers, but I shall not affirm it for a truth,
til Time makes a further discovery thereof: Yet certainly, they must needs be
men unbyassed, that will presume to stigmatize their own persons with so heinous
a crime as to incur not only the merit of Justice, according to Law; but also
a perpetual Infamy from Posterity to Posterity. For know that the positive Law
of God is, That whosoever sheddeth blood, by man shall his blood be shed again:
and they who will not have their Truth their Protector, and willingly obey it,
it is just with God, they should have Falsehood their Tyrant, and so be
captivated, and enslaved.

Many are daily apprehended; which (as it has of late days been reported)
has caused a Gentleman that lay in Red Cross street to desert his Lodging, who
for some space of time had been there resident, and went by the name of a
Knight, but pretending himself to be the King of Scots, left a large score
behind him, for which [in time] there may come a just day of Reckoning.

FINIS.

